Stories of Repentant People
===========================

The ideal woman
---------------

Asiya was the wife of the Pharaoh who was arrogant, wicked and malicious
besides his bad beliefs and reprobate doings. The holy Qur'an describes
the Pharaoh that he was unjust, proud, criminal, bloods hedder and
tyrant. Asiya sat on the throne beside the Pharaoh as the queen of that
great count ry where everything was in her hand. Asiya was a ruler as
her husband was. She had great authorities and she could take whatever
she wanted from the treasury of the kingdom and the wealth of the
country. Of course, the life beside such a husband in that form of
government and power and that royal palace, which was full of servants,
slaves and retinue, was Alife full of pleasure, entertainment and
happiness.

But this young woman, who was powerful and in that fascinating
environment, one day heard the voice of the truth and the call of
reality via the messenger of Allah, Moses the son of Imran (ss). She
knew then the nullity of her belief, the falseness of her culture and
the ugliness of her husband’s deeds. The light of the truth shone in her
heart and inspite of that, she knew well that accepting this truth would
make her lose all what she had of power, position and wealth and even
she might lose herself and life too, inspite of all that, she did not
cling to her luxurious environment. She accepted the Truth and believed
in the divine religion and she submitted to Allah the Almighty. She got
ready to enter the field of repentance and to do good deeds to reform
her afterlife.

Repentance was not an easy and simple thing to Asiya. She must, for the
sake of repentance, leave all the affairs of her life and get prepared
for blame, scold and different kinds of torment from the Pharaoh and his
assistants. Nevertheless, she entered the field of repentance, faith,
guidance and good deeds. Her repentance cost the Pharaoh too much
because it was spread in the town that the wife of the Pharaoh, the
powerful queen, had given up the belief of her husband and believed in
the religion of Moses the messenger of Allah. All the means of tempting
and threatening by the P haraoh and his assistants did not affect her
because she had found the truth with her heart and mind and she
discovered the emptiness and falseness of the mirage reality of the
authority. She could not replace the light of the Truth with the
darkness of the untruth and the abyss of deviation. Yes! how could she
replace Allah with the Pharaoh, the Truth with the unTruth, light with
darkness, right with wrong, the afterlife with the worldly life, Para
dise with hell and happiness with wretched ness?

Thus Asiya insisted on faith, repentance and turning to Allah and on the
other side the Pharaoh insisted on taking her back to falseness and to
his company.

When the Pharaoh saw that all the means did not make any use with Asiya
to bring her back to his company, he became too angry and he felt that
he had been defeated before her steadfastness. He gave his command to
torture her and to crucify her and thus Asiya was hu ng with nails in
her hands and legs and then after severe torment she was sentenced to
death. The Pharaoh ordered his men to throw a big and heavy rock on her
body but Asiya was patient before all that for the sake of Allah. She
prayed Allah, under that cruel torment, to accept her repentance and her
turning to Him.

Thus we find the holy Qur'an giving the example of Asiya, the wife of
the Pharaoh, for all the human beings and the believing men and women as
an example of noble and virtuous man. It is because of her real
repentance, faith, jihad, patience, certainty, steadfastness and
determination so that no excuse remains for sinful persons in every
nation and atevery time. No sinful person, after this, can say that he,
in certain states and circumstances, has had noway to repent, turn to
Allah, believe and do good deeds. Allah has said,

***“And Allah sets forth an example to those who believe the wife of
Firon (Pharaoh) when she said: My Lord! build for me a house with Thee
in the garden and deliver me from Firon and his doing, and deliver me
from the unjust people.”*** Qur'an, 66:11

Asiya has got a high position of great ness, honor and dignity for her
repentance, faith, patience and straightness that the Prophet (S) has
said about her, “paradise has longed for four women; Maryam (Mary)
bint[^1] Imran, Asiya bint Muzahim the wife of the Pharaoh, Khadeeja
bint Khuwailid, the wife of the Prophet (S) in the worldly life and in
the afterlife, and Fatima bint Muhammad[^2].”

The repentance of Sha’wana
--------------------------

Mulla Ahmad an-Naraqi in his moral book Miraj as-Saada concerning real
repentance mentions a wonderful story about that. He says,

“Sha’wana was a young girl. She was a dancer and she had a nice voice.
She did not care for permissible or impermissible things. Whenever a
meeting of debauchery was held in Basra in which young people and
wealthy men gathered, Sha’wana was invited to delight them. She sang and
danced to move in those polluted people pleasure and joy. With Sha’wana,
there was a group of women and young girls.

One day while Sha’wana was going with her friends to a meeting of the
same meetings of her, she heard painful weeping and loud crying coming
from one of the houses. She was asto nished. She asked, “What is the
matter? What is that crying for?” She sent one of her friends to see
what the matter was. Her friend went but she did not come back. She sent
another one to that house but she did not come back too. She sent a
third woman to see what the matter was and she insisted on her to come
back and not to let her wait too long. She went and after sometime she
came back and said, “O my lady, this crying was of the sinful and
dissolute people.”

Sha’wana said, “It would be better that I my self go and see what is
there.” She approached that meeting and saw a preacher preaching the
people and talking to them about the hereafter and rec iting through his
speech this Qur’anic verse,

***“When it shall come into their sight from a distant place, they shall
hear its (hell) vehement raging and roaring. And when they are cast into
a narrow place in it, bound, they shall there call out for
destruction.”*** Qur'an, 25:13

When she heard this verse and knew its meaning with her Heart and soul,
she cried and said, “O preacher! I am one of the sinful women. I am
polluted with sins and now I feel shy and regretful. Will my repentance
be accepted by Allah the Creator?”

The preacher said, “Yes, your sins can be forgiven even if they are as
much as the sins of Sha’wana!” She said, “Woe unto me! I am Sha’wana. My
sins have become so much that I have become as an example to sinful
people. O preacher, since now I give up sins and become abstinent and I
will never attend the meetings of debauchery.”

The preacher said, “Allah is the most Merciful of the Merciful oneseven
to you.”

Thus Sha’wana repented in a real repentance and became one of the real
worshippers until her body, which had grown out of (the monies of) sins,
melted, her Heart suffered and crying and weeping pained her too much.
One day she looked at herself and said, “Ah! This is my life in this
world so how about my afterlife!” she heard from her inside a voice
saying to her, “Keep on worship and you will know how your afterlife
will be.”

Repenting in the battlefield
----------------------------

Nasr bin Muza him mentions in his book Waq’at (battle of) Siffeen that
Hashim al-Mirqal has go ne with a group of the Qur'an reciters to su ppo
rt Ameerul Mo’mineen (Imam Ali) (as) in the battle of Siffeen when he
saw a young man from the army of Mo’awiya reciting some verses of poetry
and challenging that Someone might fight him. He abused Imam Ali (as),
cursed him and dis praised him too much. Hashim al-Mirqal said to him,
“After this speech there is enmity and after this fighting there is
punishment. Fear Allah because you will return to Him and He will ask
you about this situation and what you have intended to do.” The young
man said, “I will fight you because your man (Imam Ali) does not offer
prayers as I have been told “O Hashim said that he had showed him the
Truth and proved to him the deception of Mo’awiya. When he knew the
truth, he apologized, repented, turned to Allah and joined the army of
Imam Ali (as)”.

The repentance of the Jew young man
-----------------------------------

Imam al-Baqir (as) said, “There was a Jew young man who often came to
the Prophet (S) until the Prophet (S) became familia r with him. The
Prophet (S) mights end him to do something for him or might send with
him a book to his people. The Prophet (S) missed him for some days and
he asked about him. It was said to him that the Jew had been in the last
day of his life. The Prophet (S) with some of his companions visited
him. The Prophet (S) had a charisma that who msoever he talked to
answered him. He called out the name of the Jew and the Jew opened his
eyes and said, “O Abul Qassim[^3], here I am!”

The Prophet (S) said, “Say: I bear witness that there is no god but
Allah and Muhammad is the messenger of Allah.” The young man looked at
his father and he did not say anything to him. The Prophet (S) asked him
again and he looked at his father who he did not say anything to him.
Then the Prophet (S) asked him for the third time to say the shahada.
The young man looked at his father and his father said to him, “If you
want, say the shahada and if you do not want, do not do.” The young man
said to the Prophet (S), “I bear witness that there is no god but Allah
and you are the messenger of Allah.”

After a moment the young man died. The Prophet (S) asked the young man’s
father to leave them alone and then he said to his companions, “Wash him
(do ghusl to the dead), enshroud him and then bring him to me tooffer
the prayer for him.” Then the Prophet (S) went out saying, “Praise be to
Allah who has saved by me a person from the hell today[^4].”

A nomad repenting of disbelief and polytheism
---------------------------------------------

Imam as-Sadiq (as) said that the Prophet (S) had said to his companions
during one of his battles, “A man will come to you from one of these
mountain passes. He has desisted from following Iblis since three days.”
It was not long until a Bedouin appeared. His skin had stuck to his
bones, his eyes had disappeared in his head and his lips had become
green because of eating legu mes. He asked about the Prophet (S) until
he met him. He said to the Prophet (S), “Offer Islam to me!” The Prophet
(S) said to him, “Say: I witness that there is no god but Allah and
Muhammad is the messenger of Allah.” The man said, “I witness.” The
Prophet (S) said to him, “You are to pray five times and to fast in
Ramadan.” He said, “I acknowledge.” The Prophet (S) said to him, “You
are to perform the hajj to the Kaaba, to pay the zakat and to do ghusl
of janaba[^5].” He said, “I acknowledge.” After that, the Bedouin with
his camel had fallen behind. The Prophet (S) stopped and asked about
him. Some people went back looking for him. They found that the hoof of
the camel had fallen into a hole of the rats and so the camel had fallen
to the ground. The neck of the Bedouin and the neck of his camel had
broken and they both were dead. The Prophet (S) ordered his companions
to erect a tent in which he washed the dead Bedouin and enshroud him.
The people heard that the Prophet (S) was moving here and there inside
the tent. When the Prophet (S) went out of the tent, his forehead was
sweating. He said, “This Bedouin died while he was hungry. He had
believed (in Allah) and his faith was not mixed with injustice. The
Houris[^6] hurried to him with the fruits of paradise filling his mouth.
This one (Houri) said, “O messenger of Allah, make me one of his wives”
and that one said, “O messenger of Allah, make me one of his wives[^7]!”

The repentance of shaqeeq al-balkhi
-----------------------------------

Shaqeeq was one of the wealthy people’s children. Once he went on trade
to the land of the Turks while he was a young boy yet. He entered into a
house of idols. He saw there an employee who had shaved his head and
beard and put on purple cloths. Shaqeeq said to the employee, “you have
Alive and knowing Maker. Worship Him and do not worship these idols
which neither harm nor benefit!”

The employee said to Shaqeeq, “If it is as you say, then He (the Maker)
is able to provide you with the means of subsistence in your country but
why you have toiled all the way for trading here?”

Shaqeeq considered too much and followed the way of asceticism.

Shaqeeq said, “I have asked seven hundred scholars about five things and
all of them have given the same answers. I asked, “Who is rational?”
They said, “A rational person is one who does not love the worldly
life.” I asked, “Who is good?” They said, “A good person is one who is
not deceived by the worldly life.” I asked, “Who is rich?” They said, “A
rich person is one who is satisfied with what Allah has given to him.” I
asked, “Who is poor?” They said, “A poor person is one who wishes to
have more and more.” I asked, “Who is stingy?” They said, “A stingy
person is one who does not give the right of Allah from his
properties[^8].”

The angels and the sins of the repentant
----------------------------------------

It has been mentioned that the angels asc end to the H eaven with the
sins of a person and when they submit them to the Guarded Tablet, they
find good deeds (written) instead of these sins and then they prost rate
themselves and say, “O our Lord, You know that we have written against
him (the sinful one) just what he has done.” Then Allah will say, “You
said the truth but my servant repented of his sin and interceded with me
by his tears and so I forgave his sin and granted him generously and I
am the Most Bounteous[^9].

A sinful one and the time-limit of repentance
---------------------------------------------

It has been mentioned that when Allah had cursed Iblis, Iblis asked
Allah to respite him and Allah respited him until the day of
resurrection. Allah said to him, “What will you do?” He said, “is wear
by Your loftiness that I will not go out of Your servant’s chest until
he dies.” The Lord said, “By My glory and loftiness, I will not prevent
my servant from repentance until he dies[^10].”

The sinful and the hope of repentance
-------------------------------------

It has been mentioned that Yazeed bin Marthad always cried and his tears
did not stop. When he was asked about that, he said, “If Allah has
threatened me if I committed a sin, He would imprison me in the
bathroom, it would make my tears not stop so how would it be where Allah
has threatened to imprison me in a fire which He has kindled for three
thousand years? He has kindled the fire for one thousand years until it
has become red and then for one thousand years until it has become white
and then for one thou sand years until it has become black. It is black
like the dark night[^11].” 1

The truthful one and the repentant one
--------------------------------------

It has been mentioned that Abu Umar al-Zujaji, who was a pious man, had
said, “My mother died and I inherited a house. I sold the house for
fifty dinars and I went to perform the hajj. When I arrived at Babylon,
one of the members of the caravan met me and said, “What is there with
you?” I said to myself, “Truthfulness is good.” I said to him, “Fifty
dinars.” He said, “Give them to me!” I gave him the pouch. He opened it
and he saw the fifty dinars. He said to me, “take them! I have been
taken by your truthfulness.” Then he got down of his sumpter and said to
me, “Ride it!” I said, “I do not want.” He insisted on me and I rode it.
He said, “I will follow you.” In the next year he joined me and he kept
to me until he died[^12].”

The neighbor of Abu Baseer
--------------------------

One has to take care of his neighbors in everything and has to be as a
kind brother to them. He has to care for their problems, comfort them in
their sorrows, help them in the different affairs of their lives and
support them in the disasters. But the neighbor of Abu Baseer was not of
this kind.

Abu Baseer said, “I had a neighbor who followed the rulers and therefore
he had got a plenty of money. He bought some songsters and he often made
meetings and drank wines. He always troubled me. I complained at him to
himself more than one time but he did not desist from his doings. When I
insisted on him, he said to me, “O man, I am afflicted and you are safe!
Would you please introduce me to your friend (Imam as-Sadiq (as))? I
hope that Allah may save me by you.” I was affected by his saying. When
I went to Abu Abdullah (Imam as-Sadiq) (as), I mentioned to him the
state of this man. He said to me, “When you go back to Kufa, the man
will come to you. Say to him, “Ja’far bin Muhammad (as-Sadiq) says to
you: give up all what you do and have and I assure paradise to you by
the will of Allah.” When I went back and told my neighbor of that, he
cried and said, “By Allah, did Ja’far say that?” I swore before him that
Imam as-Sadiq had said that. He said, “This suffices me” and left. After
some days he sent for me. I found him naked behind the door of his
house. He said to me, “O Abu Baseer, nothing remained in my house. I
have got rid of everything and now I am as you see.” I went to my
friends and collected to him what I could clothe him with. After a few
days, he sent for me that he was ill. I visited him and cured him from
time to time until he was about to die. I was sitting near him when he
was dying. He fainted for a moment and then he came to his consciousness
and said to me, “O Abu Baseer, your friend (Imam as-Sadiq) has carried
out his promise to us” and then he died. When I went to the hajj, I
visited Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as). I got permission and came into the
house. He said while my leg was in the courtyard and the other was in
the vestibule of his house, “O Abu Baseer, we have carried out our
promise to your friend[^13].”

The repentance of the thief
---------------------------

One night I have got the honor of offering the prayer in holy Qum behind
the great scholar and the lofty knowledgeable, the teacher of ethics the
deceased Hajji Redha Baha’uddeeni. After the prayer I said to this great
scholar, “I am in need of your advice and precious words.” He said, “Let
your hope be in Allah the Generous, the ever abundant giver. He does not
prevent anyone from His care and mercy. He Himself prepares the ground
and the means for the guidance and deliverance of His people.” Then he
mentioned to me a wonderful story narrated by a caravanner from A romiya
(north of Iran) who brought with him a caravan of pilgrims and travelers
to holy Mashhad every year. The caravanner said, “Traveling by cars has
recently started. A traveler at that time put his baggage with him in
the same place where he sat because the cars then were trucks. Travelers
sat in the place of baggage and furniture and beside them they
accumulated their baggage.

In one of the travels to visit the holy shrine of Imam ar-Ridha’ (as)
there were thirty travelers with me in the car. Our travel was decided
to be at the beginning of the following week. I saw Imam ar-Ridha’ (as)
in my sleep. He said to me with special kindness and love, “Bring with
you in this travel Ibraheem the thief who steals the pockets of people.”
I awoke astonishedly. I thought about the reason that had made Imam
ar-Ridha’ (as) ask me to bring this dissolute man who was famous of
debauchery and whose fame among people was too bad. I thought that this
dream was just one of the confused and untrue dreams. In the following
night I saw the same dream but nevertheless I paid no attention to it.
In the third night, I saw in my sleep Imam ar-Ridha’ (as) who was angry.
He said to me angrily, “Why did you not do what I have ordered you?”

On Friday I went to the quarter in which the wicked and dissolute people
often gathered. I saw this Ibraheem among them. I went near him and
greeted him. I invited him to visit the holy shrine of Imam ar-Ridha’
(as). He became astonished and said to me, “The shrine of Imam Ridha’
(as) is not fit to be visited by those who are polluted with sins. There
are many pious and pure lovers. Please exempt me from this travel.” I
insisted on him but he did not accept. Then he said to me sharply and
angrily, “I do not have the cost of travel. In fact, I have just thirty
rials and I have got them illegally. I have stolen them from a poor old
woman.” I said to him, “I do not want any fare from you for this travel.
I am responsible for your going and coming. You are my guest in this
travel.” Atlast, he agreed to come with me to Mashhad. It was decided
that the caravan would set out on Sunday.

We set out and our travel began. All the travelers were astonished at
the presence of Ibraheem, the thief, among them but no one of them dared
to ask such a question.

The car moved with all these travelers and their baggage to cross along
earthy way through mountains and valleys. We arrived near Zaydar. It was
unsafe area and it was the place of the Turkmen highwaymen. Suddenly we
saw that the way was closed by one of the wicked highwaymen. The car
stopped and the highway man got on. He shouted at the travelers, “Throw
all the money you have in this bag and do not try to resist because
definitely you will be killed.”

He took all the monies the driver and the travelers had and left the
car. The car moved and after several hours it reached Zaydar. It stopped
in front of a café. The travelers got down and sat at the side of the
way shadowed by a cloud of sorrow and pain because of what they had
faced. The unhappiest one among them was the driver who said, “No money
remained with me at all. I do not have even the price of gasoline and
the spending of the car; therefore it is too difficult for us to arrive
at our destination.” Then he burst into tears because of distress. But
suddenly and before the astonis hed eyes of the travelers Ibraheem, the
thief, got up and took a pouch of money out of his pocket and said to
the driver, “How much money did the highwayman take from you?” The
driver mentioned a certain amount and Ibraheem paid him that amount.
Then Ibraheem came to the travelers one by one and gave them the stolen
monies and then nothing remained in the pouch except thirty rials.
Ibraheem said, “These thirty rials are what have been taken from me.”
The all became astonished and asked Ibraheem where he had brought this
money from. He answered, “I was standing near the door of the car. When
the highwayman took the money from the travelers and put it in his
pocket, he became certain that he had succeeded. When he wanted to leave
the car, I stole the pouch from his pocket. He got down without feeling
anything. The car moved quickly to be far away from that place until we
arrived here. This is your money which has been stolen from you.”

The caravanner went on his speech saying, “I cried loudly. Ibraheem
said, “I broughtyour money back to you. Why are you crying now?” I told
him about what I have seen in my dream and said to him, “Now I
understand why Imam ar-Ridha’ (as) insisted on me to bring you with us.
He wanted to save us from the danger by you.” When Ibraheem heard this,
his condition changed strongly and he burst into crying. He kept on that
until we arrived at holy Mashhad and the gold dome of the holy shrine
appeared to us. There he said, “Tie my neck and hands with chains and
pull me in this manner to the holy shrine.” When we got down of the car,
we carried out his saying and pulled him in this manner to the holy
shrine. He was in a wonderful state of humbleness and submission during
our movement to the holy shrine. He repented in a wonderful repentance.
He threw the money of that unknown old woman in the holy shrine
(asalms). He beseeched Imam ar-Ridha’ (as) to intercede with Allah for
him to forgive his sins. The travelers envied him his guidance and
blessing. Our travel came to an end with the utmost happiness and
delight and we all came back to Aromiya except that repentant one who
remained to reside in the holy shrine.”

Repentance and beseeching
-------------------------

It has been narrated that once Imam as-Sadiq (as) was sitting in the
temple of Abraham (as) in the Kaaba when an old man, who had spent his
age in disobedience and sins, came. He looked at Imam as-Sadiq (as) and
said, “The best intercessor with Allah for the sinful you are!” He
caught the curtain of the Kaaba and recited:  
 “By the virtue of the grandfather[^14] of this man,

By the virtue of al-Abtahiy al-Hashimiy,

By the virtue of the revelation that has been revealed to him,

By the virtue of his guardian, the great hero[^15],

By the virtue of the two pure sons of Ali, and their mother, the
daughter of the pure benevolent,

By the virtue of all the Imams who have followed their grandfather’s
way,

By the virtue of al–Qa’im al-Mehdi,

O my Lord, forgive me, the sinful slave of Yours!”

Then a voice was heard saying, “O old man, your sins were great but we
have forgiven them all by the virtue of your intercessors. If you ask us
to forgive the sins of all the people of the earth, We will do except
for the killer of the she-camel (of Prophet Salih), the killers of the
Prophets and the killers of the infallible Imams[^16].”

The drunkard and repentance
---------------------------

Al-Faydh al-Kashani, who is a spring of virtues, knowledge, insight and
discernment, says in his valuable book al-Mahajja al-Baydha”, “Once a
drunkard gathered some of his drinking companions and gave four dirhams
to his servant and ordered him to buy some fruit for the meeting. The
servant passed by the door of Mansoor bin Ammar while he was asking the
people to help a poor man. He said, “Whoever gives him (the poor man)
four dirhams I will pray four prayers for him.” The servant gave the
four dirhams to the poor man. Mansoor said to him, “What do you want me
to pray for you?” The servant said, “I want to be free from my master.”
Mansoor prayed for him with that and said to him, “What is the other?”
The servant said, “May Allah compensate me my dirhams.” Mansoor prayed
for him and said, “What is the other?” He said, “May Allah accept the
repentance of my master.” Mansoor prayed for him and asked what the
other prayer was. The servant said, “May Allah forgive me, my master,
you and the people.” Mansoor prayed for him and then the servant went
back. His master asked him why he had been late and he told him of what
had happened. His master asked him with what mansoor had prayed for him.
He said, “I asked for freedom to myself.” His master said, “You are free
since now. What is the second thing?” The servant said, “I wanted that
Allah may compensate me for the dirhams.” His master said, “I give you
four thousand dirhams. What is the third thing?” The servant said, “That
Allah may accept your repentance.” The master said, “I repent and turn
to Allah since now. What is the fourth?” The servant said, “That Allah
may forgive me, you, the people and mansoor.” The master said, “This
fourth thing is not mine.” When he went to bed that night, he saw in his
sleep that as if a sayer said to him, “You have done your duty. Do you
think that I do not do mine? I have forgiven you, your servant, M ansoor
bin Ammar and all the present people[^17].”

Expensive weeping of the repentant
----------------------------------

It has been narrated that at the time of one of the saints there was a
young man who had spent his age in idleness, fancies and amusement
without paying any attention to his afterlife. Therefore, he was far
from pious and benevolent people and could not find a place among
notable and charitable people. When he was about to die, he reviewed the
list of his deeds and his past age and he did not find in the field of
his deedseven one branch to cling to it and he did not find in the
garden of his moralseven one flower to smell from it the fragrance of
good life. He wept from the depth of his heart and his tears fell down
over his face. He prayed his Lord regretfully and sorrily to apologize
of what he had committed, “O You, Who have the world and the afterworld,
have mercy on the one who has neither the world nor the afterworld.”
After his death, the people of the village became delighted and they
carried his corpse outside their village. They threw the corpse in a
dunghill and poured earth on it. In that night the saint saw in his
sleep that as if a sayer said to him, “Go to that place and wash the
corpse, enshroud it and bury it beside the pious people.” The saint
said, “He was famous of debauchery. What has given him this rank near
you so that he deserved Your pardon and forgiveness?” He heard the
answer, “He saw himself as destitute, he felt shy and cried so we had
mercy on him. Is there anyone asking us for rescue and we did not rescue
him?! Is there a needy one, who cried asking us to achieve his need, and
we did not respond to him[^18]?!”

Showing repentance and solving problems
---------------------------------------

Jabir al–Ju’fi, who is one of the reliable narrators to the Shia, has
narrated that the Prophet (S) had said, “Once three persons set out
wandering in the earth. While they were worshipping Allah in a cave at
the top of a mountain, a big rock fell down and closed the opening of
the cave. One said to another, “O men, by Allah, nothing will save you
from this calamity unless you confess truthfully before Allah. Come on!
Mention what you have done sincerely for the sake of Allah and mention
your sins!” One of them said, “O my Lord, You know that once I have
admired a beautiful woman and I have paid too much money to get her.
When I could get her and slept with her, I remembered the hell and then
I left her for fear of you. O Allah, save us from this rock!” The rock
cracked. The other one said, “O my Lord, You know that one day I have
hired some men to plow the field for half a dirham to each of them. When
they finished their work, I gave them their wages. One of them said, “I
have done a work of two persons. By Allah I do not take less than one
dirham.” He left his wage with me. I sowed with that half of a dirham in
my field. The field fruited too much. The man came and wanted his half a
dirham. I paid him ten thousand dirhams. O Allah, if You know that I
have done so just for fear of You, so save us from this rock!” The rock
was displaced Alittle and they looked ateach other. The third one said,
“O my Lord, You know that one day I have brought a vessel of milk to my
mother and father but they were sleeping. I did not put the vessel aside
for I feared that a vermin might spit out into it and I hated to wake
them up in order not to disturb them. I remained standing with the
vessel in my hands until they woke up and drank the mil k. O my Lord, if
You know that I have done this just for the sake of You, please save us
from this rock!” Then the rock was displaced and they could find their
way out.” Then the Prophet (S) said, “Whoever is truthful to Allah will
be saved[^19].”

The wonderful morals and the more wonderful end
-----------------------------------------------

The translator of the great book “Tafseer al-Mizan” Professor Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir al-Musawi al-Hamadani told me in holy Qum on Friday 16
Shawwal, 1413 A.H. at nine o’clock in the morning that, “In Jundab in
Hamadan (northwest Iran) there was a wicked man, who was drunkard,
called Ali Jundabi.

Although this man was not aware or interested in the religious facts and
he always associated with the dissolute and bad people, he had some good
aspects inside him. One day while he was sitting in a café in a
beautiful area out side the town and drinking tea with one of his
friends, a beautiful woman with her graceful body, bright face and rural
activeness drew his attention.

He often put on his head an expensive velvet cap. Suddenly he put off
his cap and put it under his foot. His friend shouted at him, “What do
you do to your cap?” He said, “Be calm and patient for Alittle!” after
some minutes, he bent, picked his cap from the ground and put it on his
head and then he said to his friend, “This was a beautiful married
woman. If she saw me with this cap and smartness, she might think that I
was more handsome than her husband and then her relation with her
husband might weaken for that; therefore I did not want to appear before
her with this beautiful cap so that her intimate relation with her
husband not to change into cool relation.”

In Hamadan there was a famous preacher called Sheikh Hasan who was used
to make “ta’ziya[^20]” during the days of Aashura. He was religious,
pious and respected by his people.

Sheikh Hasan said, “In the afternoon of one of the days of Aashura” I
went to Hasar, outside the city of Hamadan, to perform ta’ziya there. I
was late Alittle there and when I went back, I found the gates of the
city closed. I knocked at the gate and I heard the voice of Ali
al-Jundabi, who was drunk and had lost his mind, shouting, “Who are
you?” I said, “I am Sheikh Hasan the reciter of ta’ziya.” He opened the
gate and shouted at me, “Where have you been till now?” I said, “I went
to the village of Hasar to recite ta’ziya and to mention the disaster of
the ma ster of the martyrs (Imam Husayn) (as).” He said to me, “Recite
ta’ziya to me too!” I said, “Ta’ziya required listeners and a minbar.”
He said, “There is everything here.” Then he bowed and said to me,
“Ascend my back. It is the minbar and I am the list ener and recite to
me the calamity of al-Abbas[^21] (the moon (light) of the Hashemites)!”

I was afraid of him and I was obliged to do what he wanted. I ascended
his back and recited taziya. He cried too much and I was affected
unusually that I have never been affected in such away throughout my
life. When I finished reciting ta’ziya, this drunkard got up and a
wonderful change happened inside him.

After sometime and by the blessing of beseeching AhlulBayt (as) he
traveled to visit the sacred places in Iraq. He visited the holy shrines
of AhlulBayt (as) and then he resided in Najaf.

At that time, the religious authority of theShia was al-Mirza
ash-Shirazi, who had announced his famous fatwa on prohibiting tobacco.
He lived in Najaf. Ali al-Jundabi did not part with him in offering
congregational prayers at all. Ali’s place in the congregational prayers
was known and he kept on attending these prayers for a long time.

In one night between the prayers of Maghrib and Isha[^22] Mirza
ash-Shirazi was informed that one of the famous ulama had left to the
other world and he had said in his will that he wanted to be buried in
the corridor that was connected with the holy shrine (of Imam Ali);
therefore a tomb was dug there. After finishing Isha prayer it was said
to Mirza ash-Shirazi that that scholar had been struck with a poplexy
and then he recovered his consciousness. But suddenly they found Ali
al-Jundabi dead on his prayer rug in the same place where he offered the
congregational prayer behind al-Mirza. Al-Mirza ordered to carry Ali
al-Jundabi and bury him in that tomb which had been dug near the holy
shrine.

Repentance of the gravedigger
-----------------------------

It has been narrated that one day Ma’ath bin Jabal had come to the
Prophet (S) crying. He greeted the Prophet (S) and the Prophet (S)
replied to his greeting. Then the Prophet (S) asked him why he had been
crying and he said, “O messenger of Allah, at the door there is a young
man with a soft body, bright color and beautiful face. He cries for his
youth as a woman bereaved of her child. He wants to meet you.” The
Prophet (S) said, “O Ma’ath, let him come to me.” The young man came in,
greeted the Prophet (S) and the Prophet (S) replied to his greeting.
Then the Prophet (S) asked him why he had been crying and he said, “How
do I not cry while I have committed sins that if Allah punishes me for
some of them, He will throw me into the hell? I think that Allah will
punish me for them and He will not forgive me at all.” The Prophet (S)
said, “Have you associated with Allah anything else?” He said, “I seek
the protection of Allah from associating anything with my Lord!” The
Prophet (S) asked him, “Have you killed an innocent one?” He said, “No!”
The Prophet (S) said, “Allah will forgive you even if your sins are like
the mountains.” The young man said, “My sins are greater than the
mountains.” The Prophet (S) said, “Allah will forgive you even if your
sins are as much as the seven earths with their seas, sands, trees and
creatures.” He said, “My sins are greater than the seven earths and
their seas, sands, trees and creatures.” The Prophet (S) said, “Allah
will forgive you even if your sins are like the heavens and their stars
and like the Throne.” The young man said, “They are greater than that.”
The Prophet (S) looked at him angrily and said, “Woe unto you! Are your
sins greater or your Lord?” The young man fell down to the ground
saying, “Glory be to my Lord! There is nothing greater than my Lord. O
messenger of Allah, my Lord is greater than every great thing.” The
Prophet (S) said, “Is there anyone that forgives the great sin except
the great Lord?!” The young man said, “O messenger of Allah, no, by
Allah there is not.” Then the young man kept quiet. The Prophet (S)
asked him, “O young man, would you tell me about one of your sins?” He
said, “Yes, I would. I have been digging graves for seven years. I took
the dead out of their graves and took off their shrouds. One day a bond
maid from al-Ansar died. When she was buried and her family left and the
dark night came, I came to her grave. I dug out the grave and took her
out. I took off her shroud and left her naked at the edge of her grave.
When I left, the Satan began inciting me and saying, “Do you not see her
abdomen and white? Do you not see her thighs?” He still said to me so
until I came back to her. I could not control myself until I made love
with her and left her in her place. I heard a voice behind me saying, “O
young man, woe unto you from the Lord of the day of punishment where He
will stop me with you as you have left me naked among the dead, taken me
out of my grave, extorted my shrouds and left me impure until the day of
punishment! Woe unto your youth from the hell!” I do not think that I
will smell the fragrance of paradise forever!” The Prophet (S) said, “O
dissolute! Be away from me! I fear of being burnt in your fire. How near
to Fire you are!” The Prophet (S) kept on saying that until the young
man was taken away from the Prophet (S).

The young man went to Medina to supply himself with provisions and then
he went to the mountains to worship Allah there. He put on a coarse
garment, tied his hands to his neck and called, “O my Lord! This is your
slave Bahlool tied before You. O my Lord, You are the One Who knows me
well. I have slipped as You know. O my Lord! I have repented and come to
Your Prophet but he drove me away and made me fear more. O my Lord, I
pray You with your name, glory and great sovereignty not to disappoint
my hope! O my Lord! Do not annul my prayer and do not des pair me of
Your mercy!”

He kept on that for forty days and nights. The beasts cried with him.
When he spent forty days and nights, he raised his hands towards the
heaven and said, “O my Lord! What do You do to my need? If You have
responded to my prayer, forgiven my sin and decided to punish me, then
hasten to burn me with fire or with a punishment that perishes me in
this world or You save me from the scandal on the day of resurrection!”

Then Allah revealed to the Prophet (S),

***“And those who when they commit an indecency,” (Qur’an, 3:135)***

it means adultery (or do injustice to their souls) by committing a sin
greater than adultery like digging the graves and extorting the shrouds
of the dead “remember Allah and ask forgiveness for their faults” fear
Allah and hasten to repent “and who forgives the faults but Allah,”
Allah says, “O Muhammad, my slave has come to you repenting but you
rejected him. Where and to whom does he go? Whom does he ask to forgive
his sins except Me?” Then Allah said, “and (who) do not knowingly
persist in what they have done” do not keep on committing adultery,
digging the graves and taking the shrouds of the buried dead:

***“(As for) these, their reward is forgiveness from their Lord, and
gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them, and excellent is
the reward of the laborers.”*** Qur'an, 3:136

When this verse was revealed to the Prophet (S), he went out reciting it
and smiling. He said to his companions, “Who can show me the way to that
repentant young man?” Ma’ath showed the Prophet (S) the way. The Prophet
(S) with his companions went there. When they arrived at that mountain,
they went up looking for the young man. They found him between two rocks
offering prayer. His hands were tied to his neck, his face was blackened
and the edges of his eyelids were too harmed because of crying. He was
praying Allah and saying, “O my Master, You have created me so well and
have made me beautiful. I wish I knew what You will do to me! Will You
burn me in Fire or You will make me reside beside You? O Allah, You have
bestowed upon me too many blessings. I wish I knew what my end will be!
Will You hurry me to paradise or You will drive me to the hell? O my
Lord, my sin is greater than the heavens and the earth and than Your
great Throne! I wish I knew whether you forgive my sin or expose me with
it on the day of resurrection!” He still said that, cried and poured
earth over his head while the beasts had gathered around him and the
birds above him crying with his crying.

The Prophet (S) came near to him, untied his hands from his neck, wiped
the dust from his head and said to him, “O Bahlool, be delighted! Allah
has freed you from the hell.” Then the Prophet (S) said to his
companions, “Avoid sins in this way as Bahlool has done!” Then the
Prophet (S) recited to Bahlool what Allah had revealed concerning him
(Bahlool) and brought him the good news of being in paradise[^23].”

The repentance of fudhayl al-ayyadh
-----------------------------------

At the beginning Fudhayl was one of the highway men. He was the head of
a gang of thieves who attacked the trading caravans and robbed their
monies. But, nevertheless, Fudhayl had magnanimity and high
determination. He did not rob the baggage of women. He did not rob the
monies of poor and weak people in the caravans. And even the persons
whom he took their monies he left some money with them so that they
could reach their countries. He was not proud before anyone of people.
He gave up neither prayers nor fasting. As for the reason of his
repentance it has been said,

“He loved a woman but he did not succeed to marry her. Somet imes he
went near the house of that woman. He became exited and began crying
because of his love to her. One night a caravan passed by that place.
Among the people of the caravan there was a man reciting the Qur’an.
Fudhayl heard him reciting this verse:

***“Has not the time yet come for those who believe that their hearts
should be humble for the remembrance of Allah.”*** Qur'an, 57:16

When Fudhayl heard this verse, he came down from above the wall and
said, “O my Lord, Yes, it has come, it has come” He walked crying,
regretting, being confused and unknowing where to go. He reached some
ruins in which there were some people of one of the caravans. He heard
them saying, “Let us go from here. It is the time of leaving.” One of
them said, “No, it is not the time of leaving. Fudhayl is in the road
and he will attack the caravan and rob all what we have.” Then Fudhayl
cried, “O people of the caravan, it is the good news! This dangerous
thief and polluted robber has repented.”

After his repentance Fudhayl went every day looking for the people whom
he had robbed their monies and he begged them to pardon and forgive
him[^24].

Later on he became one of the real instructors and he worked in
educating the people. He had left wise maxims.

Three repentant Muslims
-----------------------

In the battle of Tabook some people did not join the Prophet (S); some
of the hypocrites and some of the faithful men among whom were Ka’b bin
Malik the poet, Marara bin ar-Rabee’ and Hilal bin Umayya al-Waqifi.

Ka’b said, “I have never been stronger than I was at that time when the
Prophet (S) went to fight (in the battle of Tabook) and I did never have
two sumpters to get her except on that day. I said to my self: I will go
to the battle tomorrow. I will go after tomorrow” I was strong but I
slackened. After the going of the Prophet (S) (and his army) I remained
(in Medina) several days. Every day I went to the market but without
having anything to do. I met Hilal bin Umayya and Marara bin ar-Rabee’
who both had not joined the Prophet (S) too. We agreed on that we would
come early to the market but without having any business. We always said
that we would go (to join the Prophet (S)) the following day and the day
after it until we were told that the Prophet (S) would come back. We
felt very sorry. When the Prophet (S) came, we received him to
congratulate him for safety. We greeted him but he did not reply toour
greeting and he turned away from us. We greeted our brothers (the
Muslims) and they also did not reply toour greetings. Our families knew
about that and they turned away from us. When we went to the mosque, no
one greeted us or talked with us. Our wives went to the Prophet (S) and
said to him, “We have known that you are angry with our husbands. Do we
separate from them?” the Prophet (S) said, “Do not separate from them
but do not let them sleep with you.”

When Ka’b and his two friends saw what happened to them, he said, “What
makes us remain here in Medina while the Messenger of Allah (S), our
brothers and our families do not talk with us? come on! Let us go to the
mountain and remain there until Allah accepts our repentance or we die
there.” They went to a mountain near Medina. They fasted. Their families
brought them food, put it aside and left without talking with them. They
remained such for many days crying day and night and praying Allah to
forgive them.

When it was too long, Ka’b said to his friends, “Allah has been angry
with us, the messenger of Allah has been angry with us, our brothers
have been angry with us and our families have been angry with us. No one
talks with us. Why do we not be angry with each other?” They separated
in the night and took oaths that no one of them should talk with the
other until Allah would accept their repentances. They remained so for
three days. Each one of them was in a certain side of the mountain
without seeing or talking with the others. In the third night while the
Prophet (S) was in the house of Umm Salama (his wife), this verse, which
announced the acceptance of the repentances of those three men, had been
revealed to him,

***“And to the three who were left behind, until the earth became strait
to them notwithstanding its spaciousness and their souls were also
straitened to them; and they knew it for certain that there was no
refuge from Allah but in Him; then He turned to them (mercifully) that
they might turn (to Him); surely Allah is the Oft-returning (to mercy),
the Merciful.”*** Qur'an, 9:118

Allah accepted their repentance when He knew the sincerity of their
intentions[^25].

Repentance of al-hurr bin yazeed ar-riyahi
------------------------------------------

At first al-Hurr bin Yazeed ar-Riyahi was not with Imam Husayn (as) but
then he became one of his most sincere companions and supporters.
Al-Hurr was a magnanimous man and the chief of the tribe of bani Riyah.
He did not believe in the weak saying “an ordered one is excused”;
therefore he  
 disobeyed the order of the emir ibn Ziyad[^26] and joined Imam Husayn
bin Ali (as) and he fought against the unjust army bravely and
determinedly until he was martyred.

Al-Hurr was one of the chiefs of Kufa (in Iraq) and of the notable
leaders of the Umayyad army. His family was one of the noble Arab
families. Therefore ibn Ziyad, the wali of Kufa, made use of this rank
of al-Hurr and appointed him as the leader and emir of an army of one
thousand knights and sent him to capture Imam Husayn (as) and bring him
to Kufa.

It has been mentioned that when al-Hurr had taken the book (the order)
of ibn Ziyad and gone out of the palace of ibn Ziyad, he heard a voice
calling out, “Be delighted to be in paradise O Hurr!” He turned and he
did not see anyone. He said to himself, “What is this good news?! I am
going to fight al-Husayn and I am brought good news of being in
paradise!”

Thus, al-Hurr was a man moving from the direction of intellect and he
did not look at the matter from its worldly side. He did not follow the
order of ibn Z iyad blindly and he was not among those who bought with
their faith worldly ranks and positions. He was unlike many of people
who whenever their ranks went higher their feet sank more into the sands
of the untruth and followed their tendencies and followed the
surrounding influences without distinguishing the right from the wrong
and the Truth from the untruth. He was not like those who considered
good whatever their leader considered good and bad whatever their leader
considered bad. Those people thought that a leader did not commit
anything wrong at all. They thought thatevery opinion the leader had
must be right. But al-Hurr was not of this kind. He thought before he
obeyed. His obedience was not blind roving in vacuum and darkness.

Al-Hurr set out from Kufa in the morning at the head of one thousand
knights towards the desert to meet Imam Husayn (as). When it was noon,
the caravan of Imam Husayn (as) appeared to them from far but thirst had
struck al-Hurr, his men and their horses then. There was no water in
that land and Imam Husayn (as) could do with his enemies by the weapon
of thirst and so he would gain an important victory without using the
sword or shedding blood. But he did not do that. Rather he faced the
enmity with love and said to his companions, “Al-Hurr is thirsty, give
him water! His men are thirsty, give them water and their horses are
also thirsty, water them!” His companions obeyed him and al-Hurr, his
men and their horses quenched their thirst. Al-Husayn (as) had expected
that he would face such a situation and so he had taken with him much
water. Then Imam Husayn (as) said to the caller (of Azan), “Call out for
the prayer!” Imam Husayn (as) said to al-Hurr, “Would you lead your
companions in offering the prayer?” Al-Hurr said, “No, but I offer the
prayer behind you.” This exalted morals and high politeness of one of
the leaders of the enemy army showed the strong determination and high
personality of this man. In this way al-Hurr resisted his tendencies and
high standing and became humble before Imam Husayn (as) and offered the
prayer behind him with one thousand of his knights.

This high politeness was a flash of success and the first step for
guidance in the end. He could control his tendent soul and this gave him
strength and determination to an extent that at the critic moment and in
front of thirty thousand warriors of the people of Kufa he felt strong
and determined that he refused toobey the order of the Umayyad
leadership and controlled the deviate motives that took him towards the
untruth.

As if he felt that there were two comparable powers inside him; one was
the power of politeness and the other was the power of understanding and
feeling. Each one of these two powers pulled him towards Allah the
Almighty and by the two powers together, he got great might and a
defeating power.

Al-Hurr’s prayer behind Imam Husayn (as) was the first glimpse of faith
he felt inside him and practiced in his conscience. That prayer was as
the first objection and indifference to the orders of the Umayyad
government by al-Hurr bin Yazeed ar-Riyahi.

The army of Kufa offered the prayer behind Imam Husayn (as) too. This
prayer was a sign of being Muslims and obeying the Prophet (S).

The people of Kufa offered prayers because they were Muslims and
followers of the prophet of Islam but nevertheless they failed the son
and guardian of the Prophet (S) and left him a idless and then killed
him. Is there such a contradiction among the other nations and peoples?

After Asr[^27] prayer Imam Husayn (as) made aspeech before the all. He
said,

“O people, if you fear Allah and give the right to its people, Allah
will be more pleased with you. We are the progeny of Muhammad and we are
worthier of this matter (the caliphate) over you than those who claim
what they have no right of and who rule over you with injustice and
aggression. If you refuse but to bear a grudge against us and to ignore
our right and if your opinion now is other than what your books and
messengers have had when they have come to me, I will leave you alone
and go back.” Al-Hurr said, “By Allah I do not know what books and
messengers you talk about!” Imam Husayn (as) said toone of his
companions, “O Aqaba bin Sam’an, take out the two saddlebags which have
the books (of the people of Kufa) sent to me!” Aqaba took out two
saddlebags full of books and he spread them before al-Hurr. Al-Hurr
said, “We are not among those who have written books to you. We are
ordered if we meet, we should not leave you until we take you to Kufa to
Ubaydillah bin Ziyad.” Imam Husayn (as) said to him, “(Our) death is
nearer to you than this matter.” Then he said to his companions, “Get up
and ride your sumpters.” They rode and waited until their women rode.
Imam Husayn (as) said to them, “Leave!” When they tried to leave, the
army of Kufa prevented them from leaving. Imam Husayn (as) said to
al-Hurr, “May your mother lose you, what do you want?” Al-Hurr said, “If
any one of the Arabs other than you said it to me, I would not refrain
from defaming his mother Whoever he was but, by Allah, I cannot mention
your mother except with the best of attributes as possible as I can.”
Imam Husayn (as) said to him, “Then what do you want?” Al-Hurr said, “I
want to take you to the emir Ubaydillah.” Imam Husayn (as) said, “By
Allah, I will never follow you.” Al-Hurr said, “By Allah, I will never
let you alone[^28]”.

Then some men of Kufa joined Imam Husayn (as). Al-Hurr wanted to
imprison them. Imam Husayn (as) refused and said, “I will protect them
from whatever I protect myself.” Then al-Hurr left them alone[^29].

They moved until they arrived at Kerbalawhere Umar bin Sa’d was the
leader of the army. When Umar bin Sa’d got ready to fight, al-Hurr came
to him and said, “May Allah rightyou! Will you fight this man (Imam
Husayn)?” Umar said, “Yes, by Allah, a fight in which heads should fall
and hands should scatter.” Al-Hurr said to him, “Will you not be
satisfied with one of the conditions he has offered?” Umar bin Sa’d
said, “By Allah, if it was up to me, I would but your emir (bin Ziyad)
has refused that.”

Then al-Hurr came, with a man from his people called Qurra bin Qays, and
stopped aside. He said, “O Qurrah, have you watered your horse today?”
Qurra said (to himself), “By Allah I thought that he wanted to withdraw
so that he would not attend the fight and he did not want me to see him
do that. I said to him, “No, I have not. I will go to water it now.”

Al-Hurr began to go nearer little by little towards Imam Husayn (as). A
man from his people called Muhajir bin Owss said to him, “O ibn Yazeed,
what do you want to do? Do you want to attack?” He kept silent and he
began shivering. The man said to him, “O ibn Yazeed, by Allah your state
is suspicious! By Allah, I have not seen you in such a state at all. If
it is said to me “who is the bravest one in Kufa I will not mention
anyone but you. What is the matter with you?” Al-Hurr said, “I am
choosing between paradise and hell. By Allah, I will never prefer
anything to paradise even if I am cut to pieces and then burnt.” Then he
beat his horse and hastened to join Imam Husayn (as).

Al-Hurr had believed in paradise, hell and the day of resurrection and
thus was the result of believing in the day of resurrection.

Men of understanding know well that at the time of crisis some moments
may come to man that form in his heart a hundred meetings of
consultation and speechers and preachers stand in every side of the
heart instead of the different tendencies mentioning their opinion on
the matter. Then man is in need of an ultimate power to give a final
decision and then to take him out of the circle of pondering and
thinking into the field of execution and this power is not found except
in the heroes and liberal people who carry out the requirements of faith
with wisdom and prud ence and omit the obstacles due to their faith in
their mission.

Abraham (as), the destroyer of the idols, was the only man who had faced
his enemies alone and after achieving his aim (destroying the idols),
his enemies knew his intention.

Thus was al-Hurr! He saw the both sides and the both ways clearly and so
he had nothing but to set about. This situation was in need of
determination to set about and al-Hurr had had determination and power.
He flew with the wings of determination and power towards Imam Husayn
(as) and escaped from his hunters.

When he became away from the influence of his enemies and the influence
of this worldly life and turned away from the pleasures of ranks,
leadership, worldly honor and the likes and nothing remained except his
rescue from plagues, he remembered that whoever followed the path of
Allah and the path of jihad would not be afflicted with plagueseven if
he died on the way and before reaching the destination because the
divine mercy would receive him and rescue him from death. Allah the
Almighty rescues His beloved people from death and death does not take
them from Allah the Almighty. Everyone chooses Allah, Allah will choose
him and he will be among the dwellers of the gardens of bliss.

Anyhow this liberal man could pass three difficult stages;  
 1. Coming out of the influence of the enemy and its army.

2. Coming out of the influences of the worldly life.

3. Coming out of the circle of plagues.

The love of the Truth became firm inside him and if they had cut him
into pieces, they would have not been able to shake his firm faith or to
turn him away from paradise which he had aimed at. Therefore, he said in
his reply to al-Muhajir bin Owss, “I am choosing between paradise and
hell” and he took an oath, “By Allah, I will never prefer anything to
paradise even if I am cut into pieces and then burnt.”

He beat his horse and hastened towards Imam Husayn (as). When he became
near the camp of Imam Husayn (as), he turned over his armor. The
companions of Imam Husayn (as) said, “This knight, whoever he is, has
come for safeguard.”

Ibn Tawooss, the historian, says, “then he beat his horse and hastened
towards al-Husayn (as) putting his hand on his head and saying, “O
Allah, I have turned to you. Turn to me for I have frightened the Hearts
of your guardians and the children of your Prophet[^30]!.”

At-Tabari says, “he joined al-Husayn (as) and said to him, “May I die
for you O son of the messenger of Allah! I am the one who has prevented
you from going back and kept step with you along the way and clamored
against you in this place. I swear by Allah Who there is no god but Him,
that I did not think that the people (Yazeed, ibn Ziyad and their
followers) would refuse what you had offered to them at all and they
would dare to fight you. I said to myself: I do not care toobey some of
their orders so that they will not think that I disobey them and they
will accept from Husayn the conditions he has offered to them. By Allah,
if I thought that they would not accept them from you, I would not do to
you what I have done. Now I have come to you turning to Allah and
repenting of what I have done and comforting you with my self until I
die before you. Do you think that my repentance will be accepted?”

Imam Husayn (as) said, “Yes, Allah accepts your repentance and forgive
you. What is your name?”

He said, “I am al-Hurr bin Yazeed.”

Imam Husayn (as) said, “You are (hurr) free[^31] as your mother has
named you. You are free inshAllah in this world and in the afterworld.
Get down[^32]!”.

Repentance of two brothers at the last hours of ashura
------------------------------------------------------

Repentance in Islam is returning the high standing to a sinful one near
Allah when repenting. Returning this high standing is achieved when a
sinful person himself repents with sincere intention and the others have
nothing to do in this concern. This way is always open before the sinful
because the divine religion is the religion of hope, the source of love
and the spring of mercy. Imam Husayn (as) was the mirror of the wide
mercy of Allah, mercy on people, mercy to lovers and mercy to enemies.
The very existence of Imam Husayn (as) flowed with love; his speech was
full of love and his condu ct was full of love. Since he had faced his
enemies, the army of Yazeed, on his way, he tried to guide them and
bring them to the straight path of Allah. He did everything he could to
guide and reform them.

He tried that before the war and du ring the war too by saying and
doing. He could save those, who were ready to be guided, from hell and
made them among the people of paradise. The last call of Imam Husayn
(as) to guide those who were ready to be guided was when he became alone
with no supporter when all his supporters had been martyred. He said,

“Is there any one to support us is there anyone to protect the women of
the messenger of Allah?”

This call was heard by Sa’d bin Harth al-Ansari and his brother Abul
Hutoof bin Harth. They waked up from their inadvertence. These two
brothers were from al-Ansar and from the tribe of al-Khazraj but they
had no good relat ion with AhlulBayt (as). In fact they were among the
enemies of Imam Ali (as) and from the Kharijites of al-Na hrawa n whose
motto was “judgment is only to Allah” and a sinful had no right of the
rule and government. Was Imam Husayn (as) sinful and Yazeed was not?!!

These two brothers left Kufa under the leadership of Umar bin Sa”d in
order to fight Imam Husayn (as) and kill him. They arrived at Kerbala.
When the day of Ashura came, they were with the army of Yazeed. The war
broke out and bloods were shed and they were still with the army of
Yazeed. When Imam Husayn (as) remained al one and aidless, they were
still with the army of Yazeed. But when Imam Husayn (as) called out this
call, they waked up and said to themselves: “Al-Husayn is the son of the
messenger of Allah and we look forward to the intercession of his
grandfather on the day of resurrection.” They left the army of Yazeed
and joined Imam Husayn (as). They defended Imam Husayn (as) and fou ght
against the army of Kufa bravely. They killed several enemy warriors and
they were wounded with many wounds until they were martyred[^33].

Allama Kamraei in his book “the element of courage[^34]” says, “When the
women and children heard the voice of al-Husayn calling for help: “Is
there any supporter to support us” they began crying and weeping loudly.
When Sa’d and his brother heard this painfulcall and the crying of the
women and children of AhlulBayt (as), they turned their horses and
hastened towards al-Husayn (as). Then they came to the field of fighting
and attacked the enemy army. They fought near Imam Husayn (as) and
killed some enemy warriors. They were wounded with many wounds and were
martyred in the same place.”

Every one should hear the wonderful story of these two brothers which
arouse in the soul expectation and hope of unexpected successes as it
has been with the Prophets.

Because of the speciality of the light of hope, every Prophet has got
some certain qualities that has connected him with the unseen and
breathed in him a new spirit that he has not been desperate until the
last breath. They did not consider the mere approaching a sin as a sin
and disobedience and they did not consider such a person as a sinful or
criminal unless he committed that sin. They hoped that the divine mercy
would appear on everyone to save him from keeping on sins because the
divine mercy is hidden from the all.

Prophet Ya’qoob (Jacob) (as) had suffered a bitter separation for many
yea rs until his eyes became white because of sorrow. He did not find
his son Yousuf (Joseph) nor did he get any news about him. In fact the
news came opposite to what he wished but he faced that news with
quietness and patience and at the same time he hoped his son to be live.
He expected his coming back and he always prayed Allah for that.

The spiritual change happened to these two brothers was a response to
the call of Imam Husayn (as) who hoped to guide those people even at the
last moment of his honorable life. And at last it became clear that the
light of guidance, which was hidden from people, could penet rate deeply
into the enemy army while their swords were still dripping with the
innocent bloods.

This change of these two brothers was one of the rarest things in the
world of existence on the one hand and on the other hand it was Imam
Husayn’s high spirit of hoping which made that wonderful change after
the enemies had tighten their control for twenty years and after
deviation, injustice and oppression had ruled during all that period.
But at last the light of guidance appeared as Joseph (as) had appeared
from behind the unseen.

There is a wonderful secret that Allah has confided to the human soul
and made it hidden from people. It is this very unknown secret that
arouses hope in the preachers and people of the truth and says to them:
do not despair of having an influence on people because the secret of
guidance hidden inside the souls of people is something hidden from all
the preachers and reformers for in every moment it is possible that a
change in the selves may take place and from behind the unseen a ray
from the light of guidance may appear.

“O my Lord, the changing of Your arrangements and the promptness of Your
accountings have prevented those, who know You, from trusting in a gift
(to be continuous) or feeling safe from misfortunes (to afflict them at
any time)[^35].”

The body is a shadow for the soul and a screen hiding the intellect and
the intellect in its turn is a screen on the power of mind in man. This
power of mind is also a screen on the soul that it covers and hides it.
And the most hidden thing is the secret hidden inside man which lies
behind one’s motives and tendencies. No any scientific power could reach
that site or discover that sec ret place. All the secret powers are
uncovered by one of the powers available in man. The first secret power
is intuition and intelligence. Intelligent people can read the intellect
and know what ideas there are in the minds of the others according to
their deportments, dialects, hand writings and miens.

The hidden mind is uncovered by the power of faith with the light of
physiognomy which is higher than the first uncovering power. As for the
hidden soul it can be uncovered by the light of Prophethood which is
higher and more powerful than all the uncovering powers but no one is
able to discover the secret of the soul and to know what happens in this
secret place. There is as pecial divine ray connected with the Sacred
Existence (Allah) and hidden by the “Position of Pride” and there is no
means between the mercy of Allah and His people. Every human being has a
special connection with his Creator and this connection is uncovered to
anyone so that preaching should be required continuously and reformers
and preachers remain expecting the continuous influence of their
speeches and preaches on the other side.

Saints and guiding people live with continuous hope and expectation
renewing one time after another. Their care leads them to guide people
and show them the right path. Therefore, the reasons of the spiritual
change are hidden to people and thus the high position of knowing Allah
is related to the state of depending (on Allah), hoping and expecting.
Whenever knowing Allah is deeper inside man’s heart, the spirit of
hoping becomes stronger and firmer in him and whenever the spirit of
hoping is strong, one becomes more knowing of the secrets of the
existence and expects new and delightful news day after another.

The higher souls are those which delve more into the secrets of the
existence and discover them little by little and get out of it new news.

Now the Muslim preachers should not be deprived of the spirit of hoping
and the difficulties and distresses should not make them despair because
the circumstances of this age are not more difficult than those of the
first age of the mission.

It is said that Sheikh Muhammad Abdu[^36] has said in one of his
meetings, “I feel desperate of reforming the state of the Islamic
nation.” A foreigner woman, who was present there, said to him, “I
wonder at hearing this inauspicious word of “despair” from the mouth of
one like this sheikh!” Sheikh Muhammad Abdu fel this mistake immediately
and acknowledged the right saying of that woman.

Imam Husayn (as) had the spirit of hoping more than all the other
guiding people and all the Prophets except his grandfather Prophet
Muhammad (S). He was like a falcon that flew to the highest tops and
highest places to discover the most distant secrets of the existence. We
have to listen to the call of hoping from the tongue of Imam Husayn (as)
to get the spirit of hoping which refreshes our souls.

Let the selves be sacrificed for you O Husayn! It is you whom we ask for
help in every distress! It is you who teach us the criterion of
truthfulness and the invitation to the truth so that we need neither the
sheikh of Egypt nor the chief of Egypt! It is you who teach people
lessons of sacrifice and redemption! All the others have learnt from you
and we have to learn from you the secrets of monotheism and divine
knowledge. Your high soul has reached a rank that no one has reached
even the Prophets! In your courtyard we smell the fragrance of the hope
of goodness and the light of guidance even if the swords eat from our
fleshes and drink from our bloods!

Your great intrepidity at those dark ages and in those dreary lands and
your coming to Kufa in that way and your great hope appearing in your
words are brimful springs from which we water our thirsty souls with
hope and expectation. You have said, “The command comes down from the
Heaven. Every day He is in (some fresh) business! If the fate has come,
so praise be to Allah and if the fate prevents hope”

“O my Lord, the changing of Your arrangements and the promptness of Your
accountings have prevented those, who know You, from trusting in a gift
(to be continuous) or feeling safe from misfortunes.”

And at last you closed your eyes away from this world hoping that those
of the longing hearts when passing by your tomb might wake up and the
breeze of life might blow over them and enliven their Hearts to set
about preaching and carrying out their duty to guide the people[^37] and
by that they might be able to attract the sinful and disobedient people
to the field of repentance and turning and lead those who have deserved
the torment of hell to the bl iss of Pa radise.

Repentance of Yousuf’s brothers
-------------------------------

When Yousuf’s (Prophet Joseph’s) brothers had traveled their third
travel to Yousuf (as), they said to him, “O chief, the aridness has
afflicted us and reigned in our lands. We have been in straits. We have
become unable to arrange the affairs of our livings. We have brought
scanty money to buy some wheat and you are more generous than to give us
(wheat) as much as our scanty money. Give usfull measure and be
charitable to us; surely Allah rewards the charitable.”

WhenYousuf (as) heard their speech, he became upset and knew that his
brothers and family were weak and distressed. He said to them something
they did not expect at all. He asked them first,

***Do you know how you treated Yousuf and his brother when you were
ignorant?”*** Qur'an, 12:89

His brothers became astonished at this question and they wondered how
the ruler of Egypt had known this matter, wherefrom he had known Yousuf
and his fate and how he had known that they had a brother whereas their
behavior did not show anything of that and no one knew their doing to
Yousuf except them only!

They were confused to reply and were pondering for sometime. The
memories of the previous travels crowded in their minds and they
remembered the sayings of the chief of Egypt before and his saying now
and they immediately said,

***“Are you indeed Yousuf?”*** Qur'an, 12:90

The chief of Egypt answered them,

***“I am Yousuf and this is my brother; Allah has indeed been gracious
to us; surely he who guards (against evil) and is patient (is rewarded)
for surely Allah does not waste the reward of those who do good.”***
Qur'an,12:90

Fright overcame the brothers and theyexpected thatYousuf (as) would
revenge himself on them severely.Yousuf (as) was so powerful in Egypt in
opposite to the weakness of his brothers away from their country. His
powerfulness and their weakness were incomparable with each other and
the result was clear to the brothers.

The brothers, according to the Religion of Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham)
(as), had deserved to be punished and according to the sentimental
account they were to be revenged on. As if the sky had fallen over them;
they became so upset and frightened. Fright had extorted from them every
power. They had nothing to do save to announce their last defense, save
to acknowledge their sin and to ask for pardon and forgiveness. They
said to him,

***“By Allah! now has Allah certainly preferred you over us, and we were
certainly sinners.”*** Qur'an, 12:91

They sat waiting for the reply to hear whatYousuf (as) would say or do
to them. They heard fromYousuf (as) what they had not expected at all.
He said to them,

***“(There shall be) no reproof against you this day; Allah may forgive
you, and He is the most Merciful of the merciful.”*** Qur'an, 12:92

Thus are the people of Allah! They have the spirit of pardoning and
forgiving. They do not think of revenge. They do not bear grudge against
anyone. They ask Allah to have mercy even on the enemies of Allah. Their
Hearts are full of love to the people of Allah.

Yousuf (as) said to his brothers after he had assured them not to be
punished or revenged, “Get up now and go back to your country. Take this
shirt of mine with you and cast it on your father’s face so that he will
recover his eyesight. Then you all come with him to live near me here in
Egypt.”

This was the second time when they went to their father with the shirt
of Yousuf (as). In the first time, the shirt was an evil portent and a
black sign involving death and separation. It was a disastrous letter to
the father Jacob (as). But in this time the shirt had the sign of life,
hope and meeting after separation. It had a letter of happiness and
delight for the father Ya’coob (Jacob).

The shirt of Yousuf (as), before, caused Ya’coob (as) to lose his
eyesight and causedYousuf (as) to be slave after been taken out of the
well but in this time the shirt caused the father to recover his
eyesight and to be happy and delighted.

That shirt had false blood but this shirt had a true miracle. What
difference between truthfulness and falseness there is!

For the third time the caravan of the brothers set out from Egypt
towards the land of Kan’an (Sham[^38]) but the hope reached the father
Ya’qoob faster than the caravan. Ya’qoob (as) said to the present ones
of his family,

***“I do indeedscent the breath of Yousuf: Nay, think me not a
dotard.”*** Qur'an, 12:94

The present ones moc ked at him and said,

***“By Allah! truly you are in your old wandering mind.”*** Qur'an,
12:95

This knowing old man did not answer them because he knew that the
intellectual level of his addressees was not able to perceive the facts.

Before no long the signs of the truthfulness of this old man appeared
and the caravan arrived with the good news of finding Yousuf (as). They
cast Yousuf’s shirt on the face of the father and he recovered his
eyesight. Then he turned to his children and said,

***“Did I not say to you that I know from Allah what you do not
know?”*** Qur'an, 12:96

The children of Ya’qoob asked their father to pardon them and to forgive
them and they asked him to pray Allah to forgive their sins. Ya’qoob
(as) pardoned his sons and promised them to pray Allah for them.

The sons of Prophet Ya’qoob (as) acknowledged their sins and repented of
them and turned to Allah. They apologized to their brother and father.
Yousuf (as) pardoned them and so did his father Ya’qoob (as) and they
both prayed Allah to forgive them and to have mercy on them.

Repentance of the island dweller
--------------------------------

It is related that Imam Zaynol Aabideen (as) has said, “Once a man has
traveled with his family by sea. The ship was broken and no one escaped
death except the man’s wife who floated on a piece of wood until she
reached an island in the sea. In the island, there was a bandit who had
not left a sin unless he committed it. In a moment, he saw a woman in
front of him. He raised his head and said to her, “Are you a human being
or a jinnee?” she said, “I am a human being.” He did not talk to her any
word more. He tried to make love with her. She became very upset and
frightened. He asked her, “Why are you upset?” She said, “I am afraid of
this” and she pointed at the Heaven. He said to her, “Have you committed
something like this before?” She said, “No, by His glory.” He said, “You
fear Him so much while you have not committed such as in. I have forced
you to do it. By Allah, it is me who should fear so much.” He left her
without committing anything and went back to his family thinking of
nothing except repentance and turning to Allah. While he was walking, he
met a monk in his way. The sun became hot.

The monk said to him, “Pray Allah to shade us with a cloud! The sun has
become hot.” The young man said, “I do not think that I have had a good
deed near my Lord. I do not dare to ask Him for anything.” The monk
said, “I pray Allah and you say amen.” The young man said, “Yes, I do.”
The monk began praying Allah and the young man said amen. In a short
time a cloud came and shaded them. They walked under the cloud for a
period of the day and then the way was divided into two. The young man
walked in his way and the monk took the other. The cloud moved above the
young man. The monk said to the young man, “You are better than me. It
has been responded to you and not to me. Tell me what your story is!” he
told him about his story with the woman. The monk said to him, “Allah
has forgiven you when you felt afraid of him. Be careful to what you do
in the future.”

Al-Asmaei and the repentant bedouin
-----------------------------------

Al-Asmaei says, “One day I left Basra after I have offered Friday
Prayer. I met a Bedouin on a she-camel with a bayonet in his hand. When
he saw me he said, “Who are you and where have you come from?” I said to
him, “I am from the tribe of Asma”. He said, “Are you the one who is
known as al-Asmaei?” I said, “Yes, I am.” He asked, “Where have you come
from?” I said, “From the House of Allah.” He said, “Does Allah have a
house?” I said, “It is the Kaaba; the inviolable House of Allah.” He
said, “What were you doing there?” I said, “I was reciting the speech of
Allah.” He said, “Does Allah have speech?” I said, “Yes. It is wonderful
speech.” He said, “Recite something of it to me!” I recited something
from the sura of ath-Thaariyat until I reached this verse,

***“And in the heaven is your sustenance and that which you are
promised.”*** Qur'an, 51:22

He said, “Is this the speech of Allah?” I said, “Yes, it is His speech
that he has revealed to His slave Muhammad (S).” When he heard this, as
if he was struck with a thunderbolt from the unseen. His state terribly
changed and he was affected by this speech from the bottom of his
inners. He threw his bayonet and sword on the ground. He slaughtered his
she-camel and distributed its meat among the poor and needy people. He
put off his suspicious cloths and said, “Do you think that Allah accepts
from one who has not served Him during his youth? “I said, “If He does
not accept, then why did He sent the Prophets with missions? They are
responsible for returning the fu gitive and guiding the shunner.” He
said, “Treat me with your medicine and cure my wound with your drugs.” I
recited to him the rest of the sura of ath-Thaariyat,

***“And by the Lord of the heavens and the earth! it is most surely the
truth, just as you do speak.”*** Qur'an, 51:23

When he heard that, he threw himself to the ground, cried with a very
great cry and ran towards the desert confusedly. I did not see him after
that until the season of the hajj. I saw him cling to the curtains of
the Kaaba while saying, “Who is like me while you are my Lord?! Who is
like me while You are my Lord?!”

I said to him, “You, with this speech and this doing, have prevented the
people of Allah from circumambulating (around the Kaaba).” He said, “O
Asmaei, the House is His House and the slave is His slave. Let me pray
and call on Him.” Then he recited some verses of poetry and disappeared
in the crowd. I looked for him but I could not find him. I worried for
that and lost my patience and began crying[^39].”

Truthfulness that causes repentance
-----------------------------------

Once there was a group of highwaymen in the desert looking for a
traveler or a caravan to rob their monies. Suddenly they saw a traveler
at a distance. They attacked him and said to him, “Give us all what you
have!” He said, “All what I have is eighty dinars. I have borrowed forty
dinars and I have to spend the rest on my living and my travel until I
reach my country.”

The chief of the robbers said, “Let him alone. The signs of wretchedness
and poverty appear clearly on him and he has no moneyexcept what is with
him.”

The man left and the robbers remained waiting for another prey. But this
traveler reached his country, paid his debt back and came back again in
the same way. He found the same robbers who said to him, “Give us all
what you have or we will kill you.” He said, “I had eighty dinars. I
paid forty of them for the debt and I have to spend the rest on my
living.” The chief of the robbers ordered his men to frisk him. They did
not find in his cloths save forty dinars. The chief said to him, “Tell
me the Truth. What made you, in spite of danger, say the Truth with no
fear?” he said, “I have promised my mother since my childhood not to say
but the Truth and not to pollute myself with lying.”

The highwaymen burst into laughter but their chief sighed and said, “How
strange! You have promised your mother not to say except the truth and
you have kept your promise till now but I have not kept the promise that
is between me and Allah where He has put us under the obligation toobey
Him and not to disobey Him!” Then he cried, “O my Lord, since now I will
carry out my promise with You. Repentance! Repentance! Repentance!”

Wonderful repentance
--------------------

At the time of the Prophet (S) there was a man living in Medina who had
the mien of gravity, benevolence and purity as if he was among the
believers and the benevolent people. But this man went out some nights
and away from the eyes of people to break into some houses to rob them.

One night and when he climbed up a wall of one of the houses he saw much
furniture in the courtyard of the house and there was no one in the
house except a young woman. He said to himself “I will win two
pleasures; stealing the furniture and enjoying this woman.”

At that moment the rays of the unseen shone in his heart and lit the way
to his mind. He sat in a corner pondering and then said to himself,
“Shall I not die after all these sins and disobediences? Will Allah not
receive me after my death and punish me for what I have committed? Shall
I find away on that day (of resurrection) to flee from the divine
punishment and torment? on that day I shall be afflicted with the wrath
of Allah and shall be burnt in the eternal fire of hell.”

After pondering he felt very sorry and went back home empty-handed. In
the morning he went out of his house with the appearance of the faithful
and the mien of the benevolent. He came to the mosque and sat near the
Prophet (S). Suddenly he saw that woman in the mosque. She came to the
Prophet (S) and said to him, “I am unmarried woman and I have a big
wealth. I have not intended to get married before but last night I
imagined as if a thief had come to my house. Although he did not steal
anything but he cause me to fear too much. Now I do not dare to live in
the house alone. If you please to choose me a husband!”

The Prophet (S) pointed at that thief and said to the woman, “If you
want to get married, I marry you now to that man.” She said, “I have no
objection.”

The Prophet (S) concluded the agreement of marriage between her and that
man and they both went to the house. He told her what had happened last
night and told her that he was the thief. He said to her that if he had
stolen the house and pleased himself with her for some moments, he would
have committed great sins and no doubt he would have pleased himself
with her for that night only but because he had remembered Allah and the
day of punishment and refrained from committing the sins, Allah had
willed to let him enter her house from the door and to live with her
happily forever[^40].

Repentance of Bishr al-Hafi
---------------------------

Bishr was a man of amusements and pleasures. One day Imam Musa bin
Ja’far al-Kadhim (as) passed by Bishr’s house in Baghdad and he heard
the voices of amusements, music and singing coming out of that house.
Then abondmaid came out carrying some sweeping and threw it in the
street. Imam al-Kadhim (as) said to the bondmaid, “Is the owner of this
house a free man or a slave?” She said, “He is a free man.” Imam
al-Kadhim (sa) said to her, “You are right! If he was a slave, he would
fear his Lord?”

When the bondmaid came into the house, her master, while he was at the
table of drinking, said to her, “Why did you come back late?” She said,
“A man said to me so-and-so” He went out bare-footed until he met Imam
al-Kadhim (as). He repented before him. He apologized and cried before
Imam al-Kadhim (as) feeling shy of his doings[^41].

The repentant will be in paradise
---------------------------------

Mo’awiya bin Wahab has narrated, “Once we left Mecca and with us there
was a worshipping old man who knew nothing about this matter[^42]. He
offered full prayers (instead of shortened prayers) in the travel. His
nephew, who was a Muslim, was with him. The old man became ill and I
said to his nephew, “Would you tell him the Truth so that Allah may save
him?” The others said, “Let him die as he is!” His nephew could not be
patient and he said to his uncle, “O uncle, The people have apostatized
after the Messenger of Allah (S) except some of them and the right (of
the Caliphate) and obedience were to Ali bin Abu Talib (as) after the
Messenger of Allah (S).” The old man breathed and said, “I am on this.”
Then he died.

When we came to Abu Abdullah (as), Ali bin as-sariy told him of this
story and Abu Abdullah (as) said, “He is a man of paradise.” Ali bin
as-Sariy said, “But he did not acknowledge thatexcept for a moment
before his death!” Abu Abdullah (as) said, “Then what do you want from
him? By Allah, he will be in paradise[^43].”

Repentance of Abu Lubaba
------------------------

When the battle of al-Khandaq came to an end and the Prophet (S) came
back to Medina, Gabriel came down to him at noon and ordered him to go
to fight the Jews of bani Quraydha who had broken their covenant with
the Prophet (S). The Prophet (S) ordered the Muslims to get ready and
tooffer Asr Prayer there. When the Prophet (S) blockaded the Jews, they
said to him, “Send us Abu Lubaba to counsel with him our affair.” The
Prophet (S) said, “O Abu Lubaba, go to your allies!” He went to them and
they said to him, “O Abu Lubaba, what do you see if we submit to
Muhammad?” He said to them, “Submit to him but know well that you will
be killed.” And he pointed to his throat. Then he felt sorry for that
and said, “I have betrayed Allah and His messenger.” He went to the
mosque, tied a rope around his neck and fastened it to the column of the
mosque which was called “the column of repentance” later on. He said, “I
will not untie the rope until I die or that Allah will accept my
repentance.” When the Prophet (S) was informed of that, he said, “If he
came to us, we would pray Allah to forgive him but as he has turned to
Allah so Allah is worthier of him.” Abu Lubaba fasted during the day and
ate in the night what could keep him alive only. His daughter brought
him food and untied him when needing to go to the water closet. Some
time later, Allah revealed to the Prophet (S) while he was in the house
of his wife Umm Salama that Abu Lubaba’s repentance had been accepted.
The Prophet (S) said to Umm Salama, “O Umm Salama, Allah has accepted
the repentance of Abu Lubaba.” She said to him, “O messenger of Allah,
let you tell him that!” The Prophet (S) said to her, “Let you do that!”
She took her head out of the room and said, “O Abu Lubaba, Allah has
accepted your repentance.” He said, “Praise be to Allah!” The Muslims
jumped to untie him but he said, “No, by Allah, until the messenger of
Allah unties me.”

The Prophet (S) came to him and said, “O Abu Lubaba, Allah has accepted
your repentance that if you are born today it will suffice you.” Abu
Lubaba said, “O messenger of Allah, do I pay all my money as charity?”
The Prophet (S) said, “No, you do not.” He said, “Two thirds of it?” The
Prophet (S) said, “No.” He said, “A half of it?” The Prophet (S) said,
“No.” Then he said, “One third?” The Prophet (S) said, “Yes, you
do[^44].”

Repentance of the blacksmith
----------------------------

The narrator of this story says, “One day I went to the market of the
blacksmiths in Basra and I saw one of them take a hot piece of iron with
his bare hands, put it on the anvil and his boy hammer it. I became
astonished at seeing that and how the flaming iron did not affect his
hands. I asked the blacksmith about that and he said, “Sometime
rainlessness had afflicted the city of Basra where people began dying of
hunger. One day a young woman, who was our neighbor, came to me and
said, “I am afraid that my children may die of hunger. Could you help us
with some food?” when I saw her beauty, I loved her. I suggested to her
to commit the sin. She felt shy and hastened to her house.

After some days she came to my house and said, “O man, I fear for my
children to die. Fear Allah and come to help us!” I asked her to make
love with her again but she felt shy and went out of my house.

Two days later she came to me and said, “I submit to you just to save
the lives of my orphan children but please take me to an empty place so
that no one can see us.” I took her to an empty place but when I wanted
to sleep with her, I saw her tremble terribly. I said to her, “What is
the matter with you?” She said, “You have promised to take me to an
empty place but I see that you want to commit the sin with me before
five lookers.” I said, “O woman, there is no one in this house. Where
are the five persons?” She said, “The two angels who are responsible for
me, the two angels who are responsible for you and Allah the Almighty
Who sees our doings. How can I commit this sin before all of these
ones?”

Her speech affected me too much that I began trembling and I did not let
myself be polluted with sin. I left her alone and helped her with food
until the time of barrenness elapsed. I saved her and her orphans from
death and so she prayed Allah for me with this prayer “O my Lord, as
this slave of Yours has put out the fire of his lust for the sake of
You, protect him from the fire of this world and the afterworld!” Thus
fire did not affect my body at all.”

Repentance of the people of Younus
----------------------------------

Sa’eed bin Jubayr and a group of interpreters say when mentioning the
story of the people of Prophet Younus (Jonah) (as), “The people of
Prophet Younus (as) lived in a land called Nineveh in Mosul (in Iraq).
They abstained from believing in Prophet Younus (as) who had invited
them to believe in Allah and monotheism and to refrain from committing
sins. He invited them for thirty-three years but no one believed in him
except two persons; one was called “Robil” and the other “Tanokha”.
Robil was from the house of Prophethood, knowledge and wisdom and he had
been a companion of Prophet Younus (as) since too long. Tanokha was a
weak man. He was ascetic and a sincere worshipper. He was a wood cutter
carrying firewood on his head and living out of his toils. When Prophet
Younus (as) saw that his people did not respond to him and did not
believe, he became angry and complained that to Allah. He said, “O my
Lord, you have sent me to my people while I was thirty years old and I
kept on inviting them to believe in You and in Your mission and I
threatened them of Your wrath and punishment but they disbelieved in me,
denied my Prophethood and dis paraged my mission. They threatened me and
I feared that they would kill me. O my Lord, inflicts your torment on
them for they are unbelieving people.” Allah revealed to Prophet Younus
(as), “There are fetuses, children, old men, old women and weak persons
among your people and I am the Fair Judge. My mercy has preceded My
wrath. I do not punish the children for the sins of the adults of your
people. I like to be patient with them and to wait for their repentance.
I have sent you to your people to be a keeper to them; to pity them with
mercy, to treat them with the magnanimity of Prophethood, to be patient
to them with the prudence of the mission and to be to them as the curing
doctor who fully knows their medicines. Then you asked me out of your
(misestimation) to bring down torment upon them out of your impatience.
My slave Noah was more patient with his people, better in his
companionship with them and more serious in excusing them than you so I
became angry for his anger and responded to him when he called on me.”

Prophet Younus (as) said, “O my Lord, I have become angry with them for
the sake of You and I prayed You against them because they disobeyed
You. By your glory, I will not be kind to them at all and I will not
look at them with pity after they have disbelieved in me and denied my
prophethood. My Lord, bring down your torment upon them for they do not
believe forever.” Allah the Almighty said, “O Younus, I respond to your
request. I will afflict them with torment. A severe torment will come to
them on Wednesday, the middle of Shawwal after the sunshine. Tell them
of that!”

Robil stayed with his people in their village. When the month of Shawwal
came, Robil cried loudly at the top of the mountain, “I am Robil, who is
kind and Merciful to you. This is the Month of Shawwal. It has come to
you and your Prophet, the messenger of your Lord Younus has told you
that Allah has revealed to him that torment would afflict you on Friday
the middle of Shawwal After the sunshine and Allah will not fail in His
promise. See what you will do!”

They said to him, “O Robil, what do advise us to do? You are knowing and
wise and you are kind and merciful to us.” Robil said to them, “I see
that when the dawn of Wednesday comes, you should separate the children
from their mothers and begin crying and weeping, the young and old of
you. Pray Allah, repent, turn to Him and say “our Lord, we have been
unjust toourselves and we have disbelieved in Your Prophet. We have
turned to You and repented of our sins. If you do not forgive us, surely
we will be among the losers and the punished. O You, the most Merciful
of the merciful ones, Accept our repentance!”

All the people agreed to do as Robil had advised them. When Wednesday
came, Robil left the village to where he could hear their cries. When
the sunshone, a yellow, dark and terrible storm blew with roaring and
rustling. When the people saw that, they began crying and clamoring so
loudly. They repented and asked Allah to forgive them. The children
began crying wanting their mothers. When it was noon and the doors of
the Heaven were opened and the wrath of the Lord calmed down, the
Merciful lord had mercy upon them, responded to their prayers, accepted
their repentance and forgave their sins. When the people of Younus saw
that the torment had been turned away from them, they came down from the
tops of mountains towards their houses. They joined their women and
children and thanked Allah for turning His wrath a way from them[^45].

Repentance of the young prisoner
--------------------------------

Sheikh as-Sadooq mentions that Imam as-Sadiq (as) has said, “One some
prisoners of war had been brought to the Prophet (S). He ordered them to
be killed except one of them. The prisoner said to the Prophet (S), “O
Muhammad, may my father and mother die for you! Why did you set me free
from among the others?” The Prophet (S) said, “Gabriel has told me from
Allah the Almighty that you have had five aspects that Allah and His
messenger like; jealousy of your women, generosity, good manners,
truthfulness and courage.” When the man heard this, he became a Muslim
and he became a sincere believer. He fought with the Prophet (S) so
bravely until he was martyred[^46].

Repentance of one of tyrant’s assistants
----------------------------------------

Abdullah bin Hammad narrates that Ali bin Abu Hamza has said, “I had a
friend from the clerks of the Umayyads. One day he asked me to take
permission to him to come to Abu Abdullah (Imam as-Sadiq) (as). I asked
permission and Abu Abdullah (as) permitted him to come. When he came in,
he greeted Abu Abdullah (as) and sat down. Then he said, “May I die for
you! I have worked in the divan of the Umayyads and I have got much
money instead. I was indifferent to its legality or illegality.” Abu
Abdullah (as) said, “If the Umayyads had not found people writing to
them (clerks), collecting taxes, fighting for them and attending their
congregational prayers, they would have not extorted our right. And if
the people had left them alone, they would have not found anything
except what they had had in their hands.” The clerk said, “Do I have an
exit from this situation?” Imam as-Sadiq (as) said to him, “Will you do
as I say to you?” He said, “Yes, I will.” Abu Abdullah (as) said to him,
“Get rid of all what you have got from their divan. Whoever you know,
pay his money back to him and whoever you do not know, give his money as
charity and I assure you that I will intercede for you with Allah to
take you to paradise.” The clerk kept silent long and then said, “May I
die for you! I will do!”

Ibn Abu Hamza added, “The young man (the clerk) went back with us to
Kufa. He did not leave anything of his pro pert ies unless he got rid of
it even his clothes which were on him. I collected some money for him.
We bought him some cloths and gave him some money to spend on his
living. After some months he fell ill. We visited him from time to time.
One day I visited him but he was dying. He opened his eyes and said to
me, “O Ali, your friend (Imam as-Sadiq) has carried out his promise to
me.” Then he died and we prepared the affairs of his funerals. Later on,
I went to Abu Abdullah (as). When he saw me, he said, “O Ali, we have
carried out our promise to your friend (the clerk).” I said, “You are
right, may I die for you! By Allah, this is what he has said to me
before his death[^47].”

Wonderful repentance
--------------------

One day I went to perform preaching in the city of Bandar Abbas (south
Iran) which was the centre of the governorate of Hormozgan. It was the
anniversary of the birth of Imam al-Mehdi (as) on that day and the night
was of Friday. It was decided that we should recite Du’a[^48] Komayl at
the end of the meeting.

As I have learnt Du’a Komayl by heart, so I could recite it even in the
darkness. The meeting had special spiritual environment and the morale
of the attendants was high.

A few moments before reciting Du’a Komayl by Heart, a young man, who was
about twenty years old and whom I had not seen before, gave me a letter
in my hand.

After Du’a Komayl had finished and I went home, I opened the letter and
read it. I wondered too much at it. It was written in it: “I was not
from the people who attended such meetings. Last year about midday, one
of my friends told me by the telephone that he would come to me at four
o’clock in the afternoon to go together to a certain place. He came to
me and while we were in the car, I asked him, “Where are you going to?”
He said, “My parents have traveled for some days and our house is empty
now. I want us to be alone for sometime. I have invited two beautiful
young women. They are in the house now and ready for us to sleep with
them. He took me toone of the rooms and he went to another. When I came
into the room and wanted to sleep with the young woman, I remembered
that I had read a poster concerning your pro gra m of preaching where it
had been writt en in it “Du’a Komayl in the night of Friday”. I knew
that this Dua” had been said by Ameerul Mo’mineen (as) but I had never
attended such meetings before. During that satanic state I felt too shy
of Ameerul Mo’mineen (as) where it had overcome me until I hated myself.
I got up, went towards the door and fled from the house. I was still
confused wand ering in the streets until the night came. I came to the
mosque and sat behind you immediately in the darkness of the mosque. I
began crying ashamedly since the beginning of the Du’a until its end. I
prayed Allah to prepare the affairs of marriage for me to save me from
being polluted with sins. It was no more than two or three months after
that when I got married to a girl from a noble and honorable family
after a suggestion offered by my father and mother. I had not seen a
beautiful one like her at all. Now I feel that this grace is due to the
blessing of refraining from that sin and due to participating in the
Du’a of Ameerul Mo’mineen (as). Since the beginning of this year I have
attended all the meetings and I have written this letter to you to know
the many advantages of such meetings especially for the youth.”

Repentance due to a meaningful sentence
---------------------------------------

One day one of the students of Allama Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi said to
allama al-Majlisi, “I have a neighbor polluted with sins. Most nights he
holds meetings of amusement and diversion with his friends in his house
which bother me and the other neighbors. He is proud and conceited and I
fear to enjoin him to do the right and to forbid him from the wrong and
I cannot change my house with another.”

Allama Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi said to him, “When you invite him to
have dinner with you one night, invite me too so that I can talk to him
and that Allah may have mercy on him and make him refrain and repent of
his bad doings.”

The faithful man invited his proud neighbor and he accepted his
invitation. Allama Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi attended the meeting too.
Some moments of silence passed and suddenly the proud man, who was
astonished at seeing Allama al-Majlisi there, said addressing Allama
al-Majlisi, “What do you say about this life, clergymen?” Allama
al-Majlisi said, “Would you please tell us what you yourselves say about
this life and what you want?” He said, “I and my likes have too much
speech about it that we say and keep to. For example if one eats from
another one’s food, he must observe the right of that food. He should
not betray him (the man who gives the food) at all.” Allama al-Majlisi
asked him, “How old are you?” He said, “Sixty years.” Al-Majlisi said to
him, “During these sixty years have you not eaten from the blessings and
food of Allah? Have you observed His right even for one time?” The proud
man woke up of his inadvertence. He bowed his head ashamedly and his
tears fell down. He left the meeting but he could not sleep until the
morning. In the morning he came to his neighbor and asked him about the
religious scholar who was in his house last night. His neighbor said to
him, “He was Allama Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi” and gave his address. He
went to Allama al-Majlisi and repented before him. Then he became one of
the benevolent and virtuous people of that time.

Could you change the fate?
--------------------------

Allama Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi was interested too much in the matter of
enjoining the right, forbidding the wrong and refraining from sins. In
his quarter some proud, dissolute and low persons lived. They did not
refrain from drinking wine, gambling and holding meetings of amusement,
diversion and the likes.

Allama al-Majlisi often enjoined them to do the right, forbade them from
doing the wrong and advised them to abstain from sins and to worship
Allah. But this behavior of al-Majlisi made the chief of these villains
and his men angry; they waited for an opportunity to get rid of him.

One day they met one of al-Majlisi’s students. He was good-Hearted,
sincere and pure. They said to him, “Empty your house of your wife and
children on the night of Friday, serve us dinner and invite Allama
al-Majlisi too. Beware that no one should know about this meeting;
otherwise it will be bad for you!”

Everything was alright and al-Majlisi thought that this sincere student
had invited him to dinner.

The villain persons had agreed to gather in the house of that man at the
beginning of the night and to bring with them a female dancer. When
Allama al-Majlisi would come and the table would be served, the dancer
would appear with a mandolin and a tambourine in her hands and she would
dance before the all. Then one of the villains would go to tell the
neighbors at the same time so that they would come to see by themselves
al-Majlisi in such a bad meeting. They would do that in order to
dishonor al-Majlisi before people and thus they would get rid of him.

When al-Majlisi came into the house, he did not see the owner of the
house but instead he found a group of the villain and mean personss
itting in the room. He perceived, due to his insight, that there was a
plot against him. Before no long a female dancer appeared from behind
the curtains with a mandolin and at ambourine in her hands. She began
dancing and singing. She sang this verse of poetry:

“Do not leave me alone in the place of the virtuous,

if you do not accept save with that, then change your fate!”

Al-Majlisi, who was a man of Gnosticism and love to the Lord, began
crying and repeating the saying of the singer (dancer) while turning
sincerely to Allah the Almighty: “If You do not accept save with that,
then change your fate!”

Suddenly the dancer c overed her face and hair, threw the mandolin and
the tambourine to the ground and prostrated herself before Allah with
tears and she said, “O my Lord, I have repented and turned to You” The
others woke up from their inadvertence and began crying when they saw
this scene. They bowed to kiss the hand of that old man (al-Majlisi) and
they repented of all their sins.

Wakefulness of ar-Rasheed’s son
-------------------------------

The author of Abwab al-Jinan, al-Wa’idh as-Sabzuwari in his book
Jami’an-Norayn, p.317 and ayatollah an-Nahawandi in his book Khazeenatul
Jawahir, p.291 mentioned that Haroon ar-Rasheed, the Abbasid caliph, had
a good son with a pure nature as a pearl coming out of a polluted shell
and salty water. This son loved the meetings of the ascetics and
worshippers and due to associating with these people his Heart turned
away from the pleasures of this worldly life and he hated the authority
and the throne of kingdom of his father. He paid much attention to
purify his heart from the dirt of worldly lusts and satanic tendencies.
He did not wear but simple and cheap woolen cloths. He always associated
with the virtuous and benevolent people. His heart loved purity, humane
aspects and bright Truth. He often visited the graveyards to take
lessons and always cries bitterly there.

One day the vizier of Haroon ar-Ra sheed was present in the meeting when
this son of Haroon, who was called Qassim and surnamed as al-Mu’taman,
came to the meeting. The vizier Ja’far al-Barmaki laughed. Haroon
ar-Rasheed asked why he had laughed and he said, “I laughed at this boy
who has exposed you before the public. I wish you had no such a son!
Look at his state, cloths, behavior and his sitting with the poor and
needy!”

Haroon said, “He has the right to do that because we have not given him
any position or high rank yet. It would be better to appoint him as the
wali on one of the provinces.” He ordered his son to sit beside him and
he began advising him then said to him, “I want to entrust you with one
of the provinces. Which one do you want?”

He said, “O father, leave me alone! I like to worship Allah more than to
involve in the rule. Consider that you have not had this son!” His
father, Haroon, said to him, “Is it not possible to worship Allah
besides the rule? You have to accept the position on one of the
provinces and I will appoint a good vizier to you to help you in
managing the affairs of the rule and then you can practice your worship
and obedience.”

Haroon ignored or feigned in attention that the rule was the legal right
of the infallible Imams and the guardians of Allah and it was not
permissible to accept the emirate or any position in the government from
the unjust and oppressive rulers who had extorted the caliphate and
consequently the verdicts of Allah could not be executed in such an
extorted government and noworship would be accepted by Allah in such
government. Accepting the emirate that is granted by unjust rulers and
tyrants is considered as a great sin if it is illegal.

Qassim said, “I do not accept this at any cost and I do not accept any
emirate in your government.” Haroon said, “You are the son of the caliph
and the ruler over the great state and it does not fit you to sit with
the poor or associate with the common people. This causes me disgrace
before the public and the notables.” Qassim said, “You too, by your
doings, shame me and disgrace me before the saints and the virtuous
people” The advice of Haroon and the attendants in the meeting was of no
use and Qassim insisted on his situation but he kept silent before their
sayings.

Then they entrusted him to be the wali of Egypt and the attendants of
the meeting congratulated him for that. When the night came, he fled
from Baghdad to Basra. In the morning they looked for him every where
but they could not find him.

A man from Basra, called Abdullah al-Basri, says, “I had a house in
Basra whose wall was damaged. One day I went looking for a worker to
mend the wall. I passed by the mosque and I found a young man busy
reciting the Qur'an and putting a shovel and a basket in front of him. I
asked him, “do you work?” He said, “Yes, I do. Allah has created us to
gain permissible livelihood by the toil of our hands and the sweat of
our forehead.” I said to him, “I want you to come with me to my house to
mend a damaged wall.” He said, “First how much is the fee?” I said, “I
pay you one dirham.” He said, “Alright!”

He went with me and began working until the sunset. I saw that he had
worked as much as the work of twelve men so I wanted to give him more
than one dirham but he refused and said, “I do not take more than one
dirham.” In the next morning I went to look for him but I did not find
him. I asked about him and it was said to me that he did not work except
on Saturdays.

When Saturday came, I went early to the mosque and I found him there. I
took him with me to the house. He began working. When it was time for
prayer, he stopped working, washed his hands and legs and offered the
obligatory prayer. When he finished his prayer, he continued his work
until the sunset. I gave him his fee and he left. Since the wall was not
completed yet, I waited until the next Saturday. I went to the same
place but it was said to me that he had been ill since two or three
days. I asked about his house and it was said to me that he lived in the
old quarter in a ruined place. I went and saw him sleeping in the
sickbed. I sat beside him and put his head in my lap. He opened his eyes
and said, “Who are you?” I said, “I am the man for whom you have worked
for two days. I am Abdullah al-Basri.” He said, “I knew you. Do you want
to know me?” I said, “Yes, who are you?” He said, “I am Qassim the son
of Haroon ar-Rasheed.”

I got up from my place and began shaking because of fear. My face turned
pale. I said to myself, “If Haroon knew that his son had worked for me,
he would punish me severely and would tear down my house!” Qassim
noticed my fear and said, “Do not fear! I have not introduced my self to
anyone except you. If I did not see the signs of death, I would not tell
you that too. I want you, when I leave this world, to give this shovel
and basket to the one who will prepare a grave to me and give this
Qur'an that was my entertainment to the people of the Qur'an.” He gave
me a ring and said to me, “My father appears to the public on Mondays.
If you go to Baghdad, please go to him on that day, put this ring before
him and say to him that his son Qassim has left this world. He says to
you: since you have a great ability to collect monies in this world, add
this ring to your wealth and answer (Allah) instead of me (Qassim) on
the day of resurrection because I cannot tolerate punishment.” He said
that and tried to get up but he could not. He wanted to get up again but
he could not. He said to me, “O Abdullah, please help me because Ameerul
Mo’mineen (as) has come to me!” I helped him to get up but suddenly his
soul left this world as if he was a ray of light that lit and went out.

Repentance of the magus
-----------------------

The great jurisprudent and famous philosopher Mulla Ahmad an-Naraqi says
in his book Taqdees, “One day Prophet Moses (as) went to Mount Toor and
on his way he saw an old man from the Magi who worshipped the fire. The
Magus, who had been polluted with disbelief and deviation, said to
Prophet Moses (as), “Where do you want to go and with whom you want to
talk?” Prophet Moses (as) said, “I want to go to Mount Toor in the sea
of an-Noor to talk to Allah the Almighty and to beg Him and to ask Him
for forgiveness because of your sins and disobediences and I want to
apologize to Him for that.” The Magus said, “Could you take my letter
with you to your god?” Prophet Moses (as) said, “What letter?” He said,
“Say to your god that your magus slave says to you: you have to feel shy
of yourself before all these creatures. If it is you who provide me with
the means of subsistence, stop it. I do not want your favor for neither
you are my god nor am I your slave.”

Prophet Moses (as) became very angry at the saying of this ignorant and
stupidold man. He became annoyed because of these impolite words and
said to himself, “I am going to talk to my Lord and it is not fit to
mention such speech in His sacred presence. If I want to regard the
sanctity of that place and the sanctity of the Lord, I have to ignore
such silly speech.”

Moses (as) went to the mount and began talking to Allah while shedding
tears. He was alone with Allah the Almighty in a state that could not
happen to any other on the earth. When his confidential talk with his
Lord finished and he wanted to come back to the city, he was called, “O
Moses, where is the letter of My slave?” Moses (as) said, “I feel shy to
tell You what he has said. You know what obscene words that disbeliever,
who worships the fire, has said!” It was said to him, “Go, as My deputy,
to that angry slave, greet him and say to him kindly, “If you are
ashamed and you think that My being your god is ashame to you, I do not
consider you as shame or disgrace to Me and I have never intended to be
your enemy any time! If you do not want us, We want you with all dignity
and respect and if you do not want My subsistence, I do give you from
the table of My generosity without considering it as a favor on you. My
blessings and subsistence are for the all, My mercy and generosity are
infinite and My existence iseternal.”

People are like children living on the table of His generosity and
favor. It is like a kind mother who suckles her children. Yes, one of
the children may become angry and refuse to suck from the breast of this
kind mother but she does not cut her relation with this child. She tries
to put her breast into the child’s mouth to suckl either milk. The child
may turn its head or close its mouth but the mother kisses its mouth and
says to it kindly and mercifully, “O my dea r c hil d, do not turn your
face away from me. Look at this breast which is full of delicious milk.
Put it in your mouth. It is for you.”

When Prophet Moses (as) came back from Mount Toor in an-Noor valley, he
met that Magus in his way and mentioned what Allah had said to him. The
words of Allah affected the Heart of the magus and that divine speech,
which was full of mercy and kindness, cleaned his heart and soul from
the dirt of disbelief and disobedience. This answer was as a warning
where the magus lived in the darkness of disbelief and deviation and
then the light of this answer shone inside his soul.

The magus felt shy of himself and bowed his head towards the ground and
began wiping his tears with his sleeve. Then he raised his head and said
sadly while his eyes were shedding tears, “O Moses, you have set fire to
my Heart! You have burnt my soul! What is this answer you have brought
to me from my Lord?! how could I dare to send such a letter to my Lord?!
My face has blackened. Woe unto me! O Moses, please offer to me faith
and teach me the truth!” He began talking to Allah, “O my Lord, how
deviate I have been! Take my soul and relieve me from this great
remorse!” Then Prophet Moses (as) taught him the principles of faith and
divine knowledge. The magus acknowledged them, repented of his sins and
then his soul left to the otherworld.

Repentance and peace with the truth
-----------------------------------

In the year 1331 (solar calendar of hijra), when I was nine years old
and the religious authority of the Shia at that time was great ayatollah
Sayyid al-Boroujerdi, a wonderful story of the stories of repentance
took place that I think I have to mention here in this book.

There was a man living in a quarter in the south of Tehran. He was
proud, strong and arrogant where most of the villain and proud persons
were afraid of him and no one of them dared to dispute with him or to
face his dagger. He did not refrain from committing any vice like
drinking, gambling, taking bribes by force, causing terror, fright,
oppression etc.

He was at the peak of his powerfulness and pride when a ray of the
divine mercy and care lit inside his heart. He changed all his
properties into money. He put the money in a bag and came with it to the
city of Qom to announce his repentance. He went to great ayatollah
Sayyid al-Boroujerdi and said to him, “I have gained all this money in
the bag illegally and now I do not know the real owners of it. It has
become too heavy to me and so I have brought it to you to guide me and
to show me the path of repentance and turning to Allah.”

Ayatollah al-Boroujerdi loved the meetings with such people who had good
Hearts. He said to him, “It is not enough to get rid of this money only.
You have to put off all your cloths except the underwear and then you
can go back to your city. At once the man put off his cloths an put them
before ayatollah al-Boroujerdi. He asked him permission to leave,
greeted him and turned towards the door to leave.

When ayatollah al-Boroujerdi saw that the man was a real repentant, his
tears fell down and he called him to come back. He gave him five
thousand tomans (Iranian currency) from his own money, embraced him
warmly and farewelled him after praying Allah for him. When the man went
back to Tehran, he was too humble and full of love to Allah and to His
people. He began working with these five tho usand tomans to live
honestly. His life became better and better. Every year he paid the
fifth of his profits to the poor and needy people besides his charities
to them. He began attending the religious meetings and then he himself
established a meeting in Tehran.  
 It happened that when the first religious lecture was held in this
meeting, I was twenty-six years old and I was studying in the Hawza of
Qom and I often went to Tehran in Muharram, Safar and Ramadan to preach
in the meetings and mosques there.

I got acquainted with him through these religious meetings. One of my
acquaintances told me about this man’s repentance and what had happened
to him near ayatollah al-Boroujerdi. I made friends with him for a long
time. In the year 1367 (solar calendar of hijra) he fell ill and sent
for me to visit him. I decided to visit him on Friday but in the night
of Friday (Thursday evening) ateleven o’clock his wife told me that he
had died in his bed.

His family and relatives, who had been there half an hour before his
death, said that he had began talking with the Master of the Martyrs
Imam Husayn (as). He said to him, “I have repented of all my previous
bad deeds and I have put on the dress of your servants and I have served
sincerely in your meetings. I have recommended in my will that a third
of my wealth should be given to the Treasury of Charitable Loans to be
spent on marrying the youth. I have no wish in my life save to see your
bright face in this last moment of this world and to die on this.” Then
he breathed a deep and comfortable breath, greeted Imam Husayn (as)
while smiling and left this world.

[^1]: ‘Bint’ means daughter of.

[^2]: Al-Khisaal, p.195.

[^3]: Abul Qassim is the surname of Prophet Muhammad (S).

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6 p.26.

[^5]: Janaba is major ritual impurity.

[^6]: Houri is any of the virgins of the Muslim paradise, promised as
wives to believers.

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 68 p. 282, al-Khara’ij wel-Jara’ih, p.184.

[^8]: Rawdhaat al-Jannaat, vol.4 p.107.

[^9]: Rooh al-Bayan, vol.2 p.179.

[^10]: Ibid., p.181.

[^11]: Rooh al-Bayan, vol.2 p.225.

[^12]: Ibid., p.235.

[^13]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 47 p.145-146.

[^14]: Prophet Muhammad (S).

[^15]: Imam Ali (as).

[^16]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 94 p.20.

[^17]: Al-Mahajja al-Baydha”, vol.7 p.267.

[^18]: Manhaj as-Sadiqeen, vol.8 p.110.

[^19]: Noor ath-Thaqalayn, vol.3 p.249.

[^20]: Ta’ziya is special speeches, lectures and ceremonies per formed
during Aashura” (the tenth day or the first ten days) in Muharram, the
first month of the Islamic calendar during which the anniversary of the
battle of Kerbala and the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (as) and his
household and companions was.

[^21]: He was Imam Husayn’s brother.

[^22]: Maghrib is sunset (prayer) and Isha isevening (prayer).

[^23]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6 p.23.

[^24]: Tathkiratul Awliya”, p.79.

[^25]: Tafseer al-Safi, vol.1 p.738.

[^26]: Ubaydillah bin Ziyad was the wali of Kufa appointed by Yazeed bin
Mo’awiya the Umayyad caliph.

[^27]: Asr means afternoon.

[^28]: Al-Irshad by al-Mufeed, p.224-225.

[^29]: Tareekh of at-Tabari, vol.3 p.308.

[^30]: Al-Malhoof, p.160.

[^31]: Hurr in Arabic means free or noble.

[^32]: Tareekh of at-Tabari, vol.3 p.320.

[^33]: The Imam of the martyrs (Peeshwaaye shaheedan), p.394.

[^34]: Unsur Shaja’at, vol.3 p.169.

[^35]: From the Du’a of Arafa by Imam Husayn (as), Mafateeh al-Jinan.

[^36]: He is an Egyptian Islamic propagandist.

[^37]: The Element of Courage (Unsur Shaja’at), vol.3 p.170.

[^38]: Sham: now Damascus but then encompassed Syria, Jordon, Lebanon
and Palestine.

[^39]: Tafseer Kashful Asrar, vol.9 p.319.

[^40]: Asrar al-Mi’raj, p.28.

[^41]: Rawdhaat al-Jannaat, vol.2 p.130.

[^42]: That thePropohet (S) had died, many Muslims apostatized and the
caliphate was Imam Ali’s right.

[^43]: Usool Al-Kafi, vol.2 p.441.

[^44]: Tafseer al-Burhan, vol.2 p.155.

[^45]: Tafseer As-Safi, vol.1 p.767. We have mentioned it in summary.

[^46]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 71 p.384.

[^47]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 47 p.382.

[^48]: Supplication.


