Summary
=======

We have discussed in the previous pages some of the bad morals and not
all of them. In fact what we have mentioned is some examples of those
vices that sometimes make man lose this life and suffer in the
afterlife.

If man’s inward is polluted with the other part of vices, he will be
changed into the worst of beasts and he will be resurrected on the day
of resurrection with this animal morals. these vices are; imitating the
foreigners, keeping on ignorance, corruption in generation and
corruption in economics, heresy, pride, laziness and weakness, thieving,
murdering, prohibited imitation, suspecting the others, scrupling,
meanness and lowness, causing sedition, talebearing, polytheism, wide
expectations, recklessly hastiness, hard-Heartedness, stubbornness, vain
arguing, singing, disagreement and separation, hatred, bad fanaticism,
greediness, spying on the defects of people, stinginess, adultery, envy,
being undutiful to one’s parents, wife, children and other people...etc.

If we want to discuss all these subjects in details by the help of the
Qur’anic verses and noble traditions, we will need to write several
books and volumes. These items must be understood in full by reviewing
the interpretations of the Qur'an and the famous books of Hadith and
ethics.

In this chapter we try to review in a hurry the previous subjects and
matters to end our research with them.

In one of the chapters of this book we have talked about the material
and moral blessings which Allah has granted to man and then the ground
has been prepared for man to make use of these divine blessings and
gifts in the way of obedience and worship. We have seen that sins,
crimes and disobediences are the results of using these divine blessings
and gift sin ways other than what Allah has created them for. Using
these blessings in away other than what Allah has determined leads man
towards deviation and then he goes away from his Merciful Creator.

In a nother place, we have discussed the fact of repentance and turning
to Allah and said that repentance and turning to Allah are to put the
divine blessings and gifts in their actual ways as Allah has determined.
In other words, repentance is regretting on the one hand and repairing
what has been destroyed before on the other hand and on a third hand to
turn towards the future and to walk in the way of reforming oneself and
the others.

In another place, we have referred to the fact that whatever man was
polluted with sins he was just like a sick man where all the doors of
cure and recovery were available near Allah and they all were open to
that sick man so he should not despair and neglect his state. He should
know and believe that Allah accepts repentance from His people and His
great power and mercy include the state of the repentant sinful easily
and save him from what he has been in and all his sins whatever great
they are can be forgiven and covered by Allah. But a repentant sinful
must pay all the rights of the others back to them and must pay all the
legal dues mentioned in the Qur’an to their deservers. He must perform
his missed obligations, repair his previous bad deeds and short comings
and determine sincerely to give up sins and disobediences forever.

In an important part of this book, we have referred to the Qur’anic
verses and noble traditions concerning the matter of repentance and
showed in a special part the stories of the repentant persons especially
that some of these stories have not been heard by people. And at the end
of this book we have discussed the way of reforming the repentant with
the help of the Qur’anic verses and the traditions of the Prophet (S)
and the infallible Imams (as) under forty titles of moral and Qur’anic
concepts.

I think that the persons, who have involved in sins and disobediences,
should read this book themselves or the preachers and speechers of
Friday Prayer may show to the attendants of their meetings the summaries
of the subjects mentioned in this book that they may be useful to the
listeners and specially the sinful ones who want to repent and turn to
Allah.

One, who is responsible for guiding people and instructing them, should
not despair of his task or slacken in his duty. A preacher must be like
the Prophets and the saints who have been as kind fathers to the deviate
people. They have treated them with kindness and love and considered
them as their children. They have guided them to the path of good and
benevolence and explained to them the divine verdicts of lawful and
unlawful things, human ideals and good manners in a sphere full of love,
peace and respect. In this way they have armed themselves with patience
and perseverance until they have carried out their aims.

The leader of the knowers, guardian of the lovers and commander of the
believers Imam Ali (as) has confirmed to the guides, the preachers and
(the spiritual doctors) not to despair of curing their patients.

The most important factor of attracting the divine mercy in this life
and in the afterlife is to love people, to treat the sinful kindly and
mercifully and to bear pains and tired ness in order to attract them to
the fort of repentance.

It has been narrated that once a man said to the Prophet (S), “I like my
Lord to have mercy on me.” The Prophet (S) said to him, “Have mercy on
you rself and have mercy on the people of Allah and then Allah will have
mercy on you[^1]!”

From among the creatures of Allah there are the sinful persons who have
been involved because of several reasons into sins and disobediences and
they should not be driven away or treated rudely and harshly. One should
treat them as if they were sick. The sick person, who asks us to cure
him, really deserves to be treated kindly and leniently. We have to
invite him and if he does not come, then we should go to him, talk to
him with utmost kindness and leniency and show to him the dangerous
effects of sins in this life and in the afterlife and that the mercy and
care of Allah have not stopped for even a moment throughout his life. We
remind him of that and encourage him that Allah may help him to repent
and return to the path of the truth. Being patient and perseverant to
guide a sinful person and to make him repent and turn to Allah is better
than all the other deeds and its reward will be more than the reward of
all the other good deeds.

Ameerul Mo'mineen (as) has said, “Once the Messenger of Allah (S) sent
me to Yemen and said to me, “O Ali, do not fight anyone until you invite
him to believe. By Allah, if Allah guides a man at your hand, it will be
better to you than all what the sun has shone and set on and you will be
his guardian, O Ali[^2].”

O Allah, we have nothing to turn towards You with save the tears of our
eyes and we have no weapon save supplication and no hope save expecting
your mercy! O Allah, make us succeed to achieve the real repentance and
turning to You! Our Lord, nourish our life with benevolence, right ness,
piety and worship, reform our state with servitude and obedience to You,
keep the remain of our old safe from open and hidden sins and make our
life and death as the life and the death of Muhammad (S) and his blessed
progeny (as)!

22 Muharram, 1421 A.H.

[^1]: Kanzol Ummal, tradition no.4154.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 21 p.361.


