Al-Wahhabia and Its Founder
===========================

The Wahhabi sect was founded by Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab ibn Suleiman
al-Najdi (1111 - 1206 AH.). After obtaining fundamental religious
training he developed a special interest in books on false Prophets such
as Musailama al-Kathab, Sajah al-Aswad al-An'si and Tulaiha al- Assadi.
In the early period of his scholarship his father and tutors became
aware of his deviant thinking and this led them to warn people of him by
saying: “This man will go astray and will mislead those whom Allah wish
to keep distant [from Him] and torment.”

In 1143 AH. Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab called upon the people of Najd to
follow his new doctrine. However, his father and religious teachers
rehmently opposed him and publicly refuted his ideas. Consequently, his
mission remained unpopular until his father's death ten years later. At
that time he resumed his preaching and a small group of villagers
followed him. Most of the villagers were, however, incensed by this and
tried to kill him.

He was thus, forced to flee to another town, Uyayna, where he won the
favour of its ruler by marrying his sister. He remained there preaching
his new doctrines until the indignant population drove him out. In
al-Daria in eastern Najid he finally found permanent refuge.

As a historical footnote it should be remembered that this was the land
of the false prophet Musailama and the birthplace of the *rada* or
apostatsy movement after the Prophet's death. Ibn Abdul Wahab's ideas
fell on fertile ground in the town of al-Daria and its ruler, Muhammad
ibn Saud, and most of its inhabitants converted to the new doctrine.

At that time Ibn Abdul Wahab behaved as if he had absolute monopoly over
ijtihad, i.e. the ability to arrive at logical deductions on religious
questions. In reality however, Ibn Abdul Wahab lacked the basic
prerequisites that could qualify him to the rank of *ijtihad*. This was
the opinion of his brother; Sulaiman, who knew him closely and authored
a book refuting his brother's invocation and demonstrating its
falsehood. His book includes the following passage which concisely sums
up the Wahhabia and its founder:[^1]

At present people are plagued by someone who claims to follow the Holy
Quran and *al-Sunna* (the Prophet Tradition) and dares to deduce from
their teachings paying no heed to any opposition. Because anyone who
opposes him [he calls] a heretic although he possesses none of the
qualifications of the *mujtahedeen* - and, I swear by Allah, not even
one tenth of one of these qualifications. In spite of this, his
teachings have attracted many simpletons. To Allah we belong and shall
return.

[^1]: Sulaiman ibn Abdul Wahab, Al-Ra'd ala al-Wahhabia, p. 7; Ibid.,
Fitnat al-Wahhabia, p. 5; Mahmoud Shukri al-Aloosi, Al-Sawa'ik
al-Ilahiafi al- Ra'd ala al-Wahhabia.


