Sources of Wahhabi Thought
==========================

The Wahhabi sect classified doctrines into two categories. The first
category includes all those doctrines based on a text in the Quran or
the Prophet Tradition. They claimed that such doctrines can be derived
from these two sources directly and without resorting to the logical
deductions of religious scholars regarding their meaning - even if these
sources happen to be the Prophet's Companions, early Muslims or other
scholars.

The second category includes all doctrines which are not based on a
Quranic or Prophetic text, and in such cases the Wahhabis claim that
they defer to the teachings and jurisprudence of Imam Ahmed ibn Hanbal
and Ibn Taimia.

Regretably, they failed in both categories by falling into
contradictions and making gross errors of judgment as the following
points show:

1. They relied entirely on interpretations based on the literal meaning
of the texts, and thus they contradicted basic tenets and *ijam*, the
consensus of religious scholars. This is why the Egyptian religious
scholar of the last century, Muhammad Abdo, described them as worse than
those who follow others blindly because they “believe that the literal
meanings must be endorsed and adhered to without paying heed to the
basic tenets on which religion is based.”[^1]

2. They contradicted Ahmed ibn Hanbal clearly and openly in pronouncing
as blasphemers and heretics Muslims who disagreed with them though none
of Ibn Hanbal's religious decrees support this. According to Ibn Hanbal,
only a Muslim who intentionally refuses to perform obligatory prayers
can be called a blasphemer or heretic.

Similarly, no support for this Wahhabi belief can be found in the works
of Ibn Taimia. Indeed, Ibn Taimia opposed such thinking. He maintained
that “whoever approved of those in agreement with him and condemned
those who opposed him, created schisms in the ranks of Muslims, labeled
those who disagreed with him regarding points of opinion and logical
deduction as heretics, and approved waging was on them is a person who
seeks to divide and create discord.” This description by Ibn Taimia fits
the Wahhabis completely.[^2]

3. If the Wahhabi doctrine on visiting shrines is endorsed then Imam
Ahmed ibn Hanbal and all his followers are idolators who must be
denounced and their lives and possessions legally forfeited. This is in
view of a report by none other than Ibn Taimia that Imam Ibn Hanbal
wrote a treatise on visiting the shrine of Imam al-Hussain ibn Ali (the
grandson of the Prophet) at Kerbala with specific instructions for
visitors. Ibn Taimia commented on this that «people at the time of Imam
Ahmed [ibn Hanbal] frequented [the shrine].»[^3]

But the Wahhabi creed considers making a journey to a shrine for the
purpose of visiting it a form of idolatry which deserve the extreme
punishment of loss of life and possessions. In effect, they condemned
Imam Ahmed, his contemporaries and early Muslims who practiced this
ritual and condoned it as idolators who must be put to death and their
possessions confiscated. Furthermore, this Wahhabi decree must also
extend to the Prophet Companions who approved or performed this ritual.
Their claim to be followers of Imam Ahmed is thus unfounded.

The same argument applies also to their belief regarding asking for the
Prophet's intercession. According to this, whoever asks for the Prophet
intercession after the Prophet's death is committing a cardinal
idolatry. They argue that by performing such an act, a person treats the
Prophet as an idol and worships him instead of Allah. According, they
considered killing such a person and confiscating his possessions a
religious duty.[^4]

This Wahhabi doctrine runs contrary to the practice of asking for the
Prophet's intercession performed by a large number of his prominent
Companions and early Muslims - whose requests, the subjects of these
intercessions, were usually granted. Ibn Taimia has confirmed this in
his book *Al-Ziara* on the bases of evidence by several authorities
including al- Baihaqi, al-Tabarani, Ahmed ibn Hanbal and Ibn Abi
al-Dunia.[^5] Nevertheless, Ibn Taimia chose to go against these
authorities by banning the call for intercession. Unlike the Wahhabi,
however, he refrained from calling it a cardinal act of idolatry.

To repeat, if the Wahhabi doctrine regarding intercession is endorsed
then all the Companions and early Muslims who practiced it must be
considered idolaters who deserve to be put to death. Not only those are
idolaters, according to the Wahhabi, but also anyone who knew about this
practice and refrained from opposing it and condemning those who
performed it as heretics. These also must be executed and their
possessions forfeited. In the final analysis, all early Muslims deserve
such a sentence leaving none whom the Wahhabi could regard as the model
to emulate.

[^1]: Muhammad Abda, Al-Islam wa al-Nasrania, 8th edition, p. 97.

[^2]: Ibn Taimia, Majmi'at Fatawa ibn Taimia, vol. 3, p. 399.

[^3]: Ibn Taimia, Ra's al-Hussain, p. 209.

[^4]: Al-San'ani, Tat'hear al-I'tiqad, p. 7.

[^5]: Ibn Taimia, Al-Ziara, vol. 7, pp. 101-106.


