The Wahhabi doctrine on the Prophet Companions
==============================================

1. As indicated earlier, the Wahhabi effectively charged most of the
Prophet Companions with idolatry and heresy because they continued,
after the Prophet's death, to allow asking for his intercession and
visiting his tomb. They also included in this category all those who
condoned this practice or knew about it and did not brand it as an
idolatry and heresy which is punishable by death and loss of
possessions.

This is their true doctrine which contradicts their claim of holding the
Prophet's Companions in the highest position.

2. The Wahhabi went further than this by directly attacking the
Companions who followed the Prophet. Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab, the
founder of the Wahhabi sect, asserted that:

.. a group of Companions who fought with the Prophet, prayed, paid alms,
fasted and made pilgrimage with him were, in fact, heretics and distant
from Islam.[^1]

3. It is unsurprising, therefore, for the Wahhabi writers and scholars
to go to an extreme in defending Yazid ibn Muawiya[^2] whose deeds
altest to his animosity to the Companions. It was Yazid's army who
sacked al-Medina at al-Hara battle in which countless Companions were
murdered and their women raped. It is reported that in the aftermath of
this one thousand unwed girls became pregnant.

Before that, Yazid's soldiers had committed the atrocious crime of
murdering eighteen members of the Prophet Household at Kerbala including
his grandson, al-Hussain, a number of his brothers, and their sons
including children and newborn infants.

During the reign of Yazid also, Mecca was sacked and Al-Kaba set on
fire. In spite of these, the Wahhabi applaud Yazid in their writings
which can only mean that they condone his deeds. They also blatantly
ignore the documented accounts confirming that Yazid did not perform
obligatory prayers and drank alcohol. For these transgressions alone,
they should have declared him a heretic in accordance with Imam Ahmed's
teachings which they claim to follow. Instead of this they praise Yazid
and condemn all those who ask for the Prophet's intercession including
the Companions as heretics.

[^1]: Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab, Al-Ra'sal al-A'mlia al-Tisa', p. 120.

[^2]: He is the second Umayyid Caliph appointed by his father Muawiya as
his successor.


