The Wahhabi and Muslim: The Wahhabi bida'(corruption)
=====================================================

The Wahhabis believe that they are the only true Muslims because they
uphold divine unity while other Muslims are idolaters who deserve to
lose their lives and possessions. According to them, a person must not
be considered a Muslim even if he pronounces *al-Shahadatain*, the two
testimonies, that there is no God but Allah and Muhammad is his apostle
if he also believes that he could be blessed by visiting the Prophet's
mosque and ask for his intercession.

They maintain that any Muslim who professes such beliefs is an idolater
whose idolatry is a worse kind than that of Pre-Islamic people who
worshipped idols and planets.

In his book *Kashful al-Shubuhat*, Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab called all
Muslims, with the exception of his followers, idolaters about 24 times.
Other labels he used to describe them were: heretics, idols' worshippers
apostates, anti-divine unity, enemies of divine unity, Allah's enemies
and perfidious Muslims in 20 different parts of the same book. His
followers copied him in this practice.[^1]

It is essential to ask here if this doctrine was truly based on a
consensus of learned scholars or is it a Wahhabi *bida'* or corruption?
Ibn Hazim, the well- known Sunni scholar, asserted that «a Muslim can
not be called a heretic or a sinner on the bases of his opinions whether
made in the form of a doctrine or a religious decree. After mentioning
numerous religious scholars who endorsed this viewpoint he concluded
that it was the consensus of all Companions who commented on it.»[^2]

According to Ibn Taimia only the Khawarij judged other Muslims to be
heretics on the bases of their sins and learned opinions or
deductions.[^3] As such, the Wahhabis have no precedent supporting this
*bida'* except the infamous Khawarij.

[^1]: Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab, Al-Ra'sal al-A'mlia al-Tisa', p. 79;
Ibid., Fatih al-Majeed, pp. 40-41; Ibid., Arba' al-Quaid; Ibid., Kashful
al-Shubuhat; al-San'ani, Tat'hear al-I'tiqad, pp. 7,12,25.

[^2]: Ibn Hazim, Al-Fasil, vol. 2, p. 247; Al-Sharani, Al-Yawaqeet wa
al- Jawahir, ch. 58.

[^3]: Ibn Taimia, Majmut Fatawa, vol. 13, p. 20.


