The Wahhabi and the Khawarij
============================

Surprising, there are many similarities between the Wahhabi and the
Khawarij which distinguish them from the rest of the Muslim. Some of
these common points follow.

1. The Khawarij disagreed with all Muslims by maintaining that whoever
commits a cardinal sin is a heretic. The Wahhabis copied them by
equating heresy with committing what they considered to be sins.[^1]

2. The Khawarij decreed that if committing cardinal sins become common
in a Muslim land then it deserved to be considered *dar harb*, literally
a land of war and those who live in it forfeit their lives and
possessions.

This is also the Wahhabi's verdict on the nation of Islam if they
believe that it is permissible to travel to the Prophet's tomb and the
shrines of pious men and ask for their intercession with Allah, though
they worship only Allah and perform good deeds.

It is clear from the previous two points that the Wahhabis are more
disruptive and evil than the Khawarij While the khawarij based their
verdict of heresy on deeds that all Muslims agreed on being cardinal
sins, the Wahhabis chose acts which are not actually sins but favourable
deeds performed by devout early Muslims including the Prophet's
Companions.

3. The Wahhabis and the Khawarij are similar in their strict application
of religion and their ossified interpretations of its doctrines. Thus
when the Khawarij read the Quranic verse: «Judgment belongs to Allah»
they said that whoever allowed resort to settlement is an idolator.
'There is no judgment but Allah's' became their slogan. And though it is
indisputable it was misapplied to justify their deviant ways. This
attitude illustrates their ignorance of Islam and rigid thinking since
the principle of settlement of dispute through adjudicator or
third-party intervention was established by the Holy Quran, the
Prophet's Tradition and the deeds of the Companions and early Muslims.
It is also supported by common logic.

Similarly, the Wahhabis interpreted the following verses:

***«You alone we worship and You alone we pray for help».***[^2]

***«Who is he that can intercede with Him but by His own
permission».***[^3]

***No intercession shall avail with Him but that which He Himself
allow».***[^4]

To mean that anyone who justifies visiting the Prophet's Mosque or the
shrines of pious Muslim and ask for their intercession is an idolator.
They considered such acts as tantamount to worshipping the Prophet or
those pious Muslims instead of Allah. Accordingly, they declared that
there is no deity but Allah and there is no intercession except His.

While these heated declarations are indisputable, the intentions behind
them are open to suspicions. The Wahhabis chose to ignore the tradition
established by the Companions and early Muslims regarding the legality
of visiting the Prophet's Mosque and other shrines and asking for
intercession.

4. Ibn Taimia observed that the deviant group the Khawarij was the first
*bida'* or corruption in Islam because its followers judged other
Muslims as heretics and legalized killing them.[^5]  
 It can be added that the Wahhabia, and for the same reason, is the last
*bida'* in Islam.

5. Some of the Prophet's comments on the rise of the Khawarij and their
deviation from Islam also apply to the Wahhabis. Consider, for example,
the Prophet's saying that: «a group of people shall emerge from the east
who reads the Quran without understanding it. They shall deviate from it
like an arrow missing its target. Shaving the head shall be their
distinguishing characteristic.»[^6] In commenting on this saying,
al-Qastalani said that «'due east' means east of al-Medina such as Najid
and further.»[^7]

Najid is the birthplace of Wahhabia from which it spread to other
places. Also, shaving their heads was one of the Wahhabis' established
tradition which was mandatory for all their followers including women.
None of the deviant groups who predated them was known to impose it.
Some of the religious scholars who witnessed the rise of this movement
maintained that there is no need to write books to refute the Wahhabia
because it is sufficient to repeat the Prophet's saying that 'Shaving
the head is their distinguishing characteristic,' since none has done it
before them.[^8]

6. The Prophet described the Khawarij as «those who will slaughter
Muslims and leave the pagans unharmed.» This also applies to the
Wahhabis who fought only Muslims. Their scholars and books also call for
waging war on other Muslims only.[^9]

7. Al-Bukhari reported that Ibn Omar described the Khawarij as «having
applied verses revealed regarding pagans to the believers.»[^10] Ibn
Abbas is reported to have said on the same subject:

Don't be like the Khawarij who interpreted some [verses] of the Quran to
apply to the faithful. Those verses were revealed regarding followers of
other divine messages and pagans. The Khawarij were ignorant of their
meanings and as a result they killed [Muslims] and looted their
possessions.

The Wahhabis followed suit by applying verses revealed in the case of
idolaters to the believers.

8. We can now imagine the following dialogue between a Sunni and a
Wahhabi:

-The Wahhabi: The Hanabila [i.e. followers of Imam Ibn Hanbal] books are
also ours. Which of these books do you disapprove of? If you indeed have
something against them then you must cite their books and not their
critics!

-The Sunni: What do you think of the Karamita? [a dissident group formed
during the Abbasid rule].

-The Wahhabi: They are pagans and idolaters.

-The Sunni: But they claim adherence to the Prophet Household's
doctrines and that their books are also theirs. But the books of the
Prophet Household contain nothing but words of enlightenment and truth.

-The Wahhabi: The Qaramita were liars and historians have demonstrated
their heresy and falsification.

-The Sunni: Then you accept evidence presented by historians?

-The Wahhabi: Yes! Imam al-Shafi said that the historian's methodology
in relying on multiple sources is better, in his opinion, than the
acceptance of a single source by the narrators of the Prophet's
Tradition.

-The Sunni: Then you must accept what the historians considered as
evidence of the Wahhabi heresy. A person's deed may be held as evidence
against him or her even if he denies doing it. And when the Qaramita
legalized murdering Muslims and stealing their possessions no doubt
regarding their heresy remained. This also applies to your Wahhabi
masters.

-The Wahhabi: (was angry and speechless).

- The Sunni then added: What is your opinion of the description of the
Khawarij as heretics who shall be punished with Hell's fire?

-The Wahhabi replied: The consensus is that the Khawarij deviated from
the true path and thus incurred Allah's wrath. But the Khawarij were put
to rout at the Nahrawan battle and the Wahhabis do not belong to them!

-The Sunni said: Why do you think the Khawarij deserved Allah's wrath?
was it because of the inadequacy of their prayers and fasting?

-The Wahhabi: No!

-The Sunni: Was it then because of their devotion, or recital of the
Quran or paying lipservice to the truth?

-The Wahhabi: No!

-The Sunni persisted: Why then? Tell me!

-The Wahhabi stammered and could not manage a reply.

-The Sunni: There is one and only one reason for incurring Allah's wrath
and that is legalizing the slaughter of innocent Muslims and the theft
of their possessions after calling them heretics and also whoever makes
the claim that he is the only true Muslim. Anyone who commits such deeds
and makes such claims deserves the same fate.

[^1]: Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahab, Kashful al-Shubuhat; Al-San'ani,
Tat'hear al-Itiqad.

[^2]: The Quran 1:5.

[^3]: The Quran 21:28.

[^4]: The Quran 34:23.

[^5]: Ibn Taimia, Majmut al-Fatawa, vol. 13, p. 20.

[^6]: Saheeh al-Bukhari, Kitab al-Tawheed, part 57 No. 7123.

[^7]: Al-Qastalani, Irshad al-Sari, Dar al-Fikr, vol. 15, p. 626.

[^8]: Zaini Dahlan, Fitnat al-Wahhabia, p. 19.

[^9]: Ibn Taimia, Majmut al-Fatawa, vol. 13. p. 32.

[^10]: Saheeh al-Bukhari, Kitab Istitabat al-Murtadean, part 5.


