The Wahhabi and the Ghulat (Extremists)
=======================================

The *Ghulat* or extremist are those who went to extremes in exalting a
person or persons to the extent of raising him or them above the ranks
of ordinary human beings.

At the same time of the rise of Wahhabia in Najid, another person was
preaching a new doctrine which renewed much of what has disappeared of
the beliefs of the first *Ghulats* who deified Imam Ali and other
members of the Prophet Household. His teachings were similar to those of
Ibn Abdul Wahab in labeling his opponents as heretics. He actually went
further than the Wahhabia founder by attacking most of the Prophet's
Companions and calling them heretics.[^1]

The name of that man was Shaikh Ahmed al-Ihsaie (died 1241 AH.) His
followers were thus known as al-Shaikhia. He was succeeded by Khathim
al-Rashti who established his headquarters at Kerbala in southern Iraq.

The Wahhabi's attitudes toward this movement is interesting. As history
report, the Wahhabis attacked Karbala where al-Rashti and his followers
resided. As their custom in all their military campaigns, the Wahhabis
sacked the city, slaughtering thousands of innocent men, women and
children and looting and destroying houses and shops.

But they guaranteed al-Rashti's personal safety and declared that anyone
entering his house shall be safe. This special treatment of this group
and their leader unveils the true nature of the Wahhabi and exposes the
falsehood of their claim of opposing idolatry and defending divine
unity.

At this point, it may be useful to compare this position with a similar
one by Ibn Taimia, whom the Wahhabis claim to follow, toward another
extremist group, namely the Yazidis. The Yazidis exalted Yazid ibn
Muawiya whose un-Islamic deeds were enumerated earlier. A branch of this
sect was named al-Adawia after Udai ibn Musafir whom they exalted along
with Yazid.

Ibn Taimia who was a contemporary of this sect maintained an
inexplicably untypical attitude toward this group. Famed for his extreme
opinions and fierce attacks on Islamic sects swiftly judging them to be
deviant and heretic, he wrote a letter to this group addressing them as
faithful Muslims. In this civil and well-wishing letter we find none of
his offending style and usual labels which he used in communicating with
or writing on other Islamic groups such as the Asharia, the Imamiya
Shia, the Zaidis, Mutazila, Murajia and others.

His letter to this group begins as follows:[^2]

From Ahmed ibn Tairnia to whoever receives this letter of the Muslims
who belong to the Sunna and follow the exemplary, blessed, and learned
shaikh Udai ibn Musafir al-Umawi. Allah has mercy on him and all those
who follow his path.. May Allah lead them to His path and obey Him and
His Prophet.

This shows that Ibn Taimia considered this deviant group as Sunni Muslim
in variance with the consensus identifying them as extremists, heretics
and idolaters who did not worship only Allah.

[^1]: Hamaion Hima'yati, Al-Wahhabia: Nakd wa Tahleel, p. 24.

[^2]: Ibn Taimia, Al-Was'ia al-Kubra, p. 5.


