Whom does the Wahhabi serve?
============================

Muslims are obliged to give first priority to upholding Muslims'
interest. But do the Wahhabis actually adhere to this principle? Did
they ever oppose colonial and imperialist plots against Muslim
countries? What contributions did they make to counter the imperialist
and Zionist interests in Muslim countries? And finally is it true that
they are loyal to Western powers and have helped them to gain access to
Muslims' resources, and thus compromising their sovereignty and dignity?

It is clear to every Muslim that the Wahhabis have faithfully served
Western interests in Islamic countries. Furthermore, history of this
group since the early days of its founder reveal not the slightest
concern for developing Muslim communities through fighting poverty and
illiteracy and upholding the rule of sharia and justice. Instead the
Wahhabis concentrated on labeling Muslims as heretics and idolaters who
deserve to be put to death and their possessions looted. Nothing catches
their interest and fires their enthusiasm except finding a grave which
they believe must be destroyed or attacking anyone who asks the Prophet
for intercession with Allah.

Under this banner they launched a vicious campaign against Muslims,
murdering, looting and spreading discord and schism. But the safety of
Muslim countries and communities against foreign attack was never one of
their concerns. Thus, the Wahhabi princes and religious leaders turned a
blind eye to the occupation of Jerusalem, the fate of Bosnian and
Lebanese Muslim and the American hegemony over Islamic countries and
exploitation of their oil resources.

At the same time they are outraged by the tomb of Hamza ibn Abd al-
Mutalib which the Companions visited and prayed at and by the shrine of
the Prophet's grandson, al-Hussain ibn Ali which the Companions and
early Muslims travelled long distances to visit it - and even during the
lifetime of Ahmed ibn Hanbal as mentioned earlier. It is also pertinent
to wonder why those Wahhabis are not moved by the embargo imposed on the
Libyan people as they were by the gifts they found at the Prophet's
tomb.

It is regrettable that so much of their time, effort and financial
resources have been squandered on trivial issues which attract and
deceive only the simple-minded. Why the Wahhabis choose to focus on such
issues can be answered in the following points:

**First**, their minds are closed and their thinking is rigid and
superficial. As their writings and arguments indicate, they appear to be
incapable of any profound thoughts.

**Second**, they fail to take into consideration basic facts about human
nature and current developments in human societies. This is clearly seen
in their disregard of religious, social sciences and scientific research
and their total devotion to secondary and trivial issues which have no
significance for the present times.

**Third**, their blunt language, strong criticism and obtuse viewpoints
indicate that they hold no good intentions for the Islamic nation and
its welfare.

**Fourth**, their open loyalty to Islam's enemies is a fact requiring no
further proof. It is now clear to all that the Wahhabis are subservient
to the West more than any other faction. As a result of this blind
loyalty, the invading Zionist and imperialist forces have found it easy
to penetrate Islamic countries and to destroy or plunder their resources
and subjugate their populations.

The Wahhabis have given these foreign powers all the support they needed
to realize their selfish objectives. This support has also made possible
the establishment of the Zionist entity in the heart of the Muslim
nation, and they continue to give it direct and indirect support.

The Wahhabis have also consistently helped pro-West regimes to put down
liberation movements and to suppress the Islamic reawakening movement
which has given them and other unpopular regimes a strong cause for
worry.


