8) How Will The Change On The Appointed Day Occur?
==================================================

Now we have reached the last question, which is about the manner through
which we can form an image about what will be accomplished at the hands
of this individual in terms of a decisive victory for justice and an end
to the existence of transgression that he is faced with?

The limited answer for this question is related to the knowledge of the
time and the phase in which al- Mahdi (peace be upon him) is supposed to
emerge to the world, as well as the possible assumption regarding what
peculiarities and close relations, might characterize that phase so as
to be able to draw, in that light, the shape that the operation of
change would take and the path that it would follow.

But as long as we do not know anything concerning that phase, its
environment nor its circumstances, we cannot scientifically predict what
would take place on the appointed day, although we can imagine or give
certain assumptions in this respect, which are founded on theoretical
bases and not on realistic grounds.

There is one basic assumption which we can adopt in the light of the
previous narratives we mentioned earlier, as well as in the light of the
great operations of change in the course of history, namely the
appearance of al-Mahdi (peace be upon him) after a great gap which will
result in a shocking decadence and a crisis is civilization. This gap
will give the opportunity for the message to expand and the decadence of
civilization will prepare the psychological atmosphere for its
acceptance.

However, this decadence in civilization is not a mere incident that will
occur suddenly in the history of human civilization, but a natural
result of a contradiction in a history that is cut off from Allah the
Exalted, that cannot reach a decisive solution of the end of its course,
so that its fire will burn leaving nothing in its path and the light
will then appear to establish Divine Justice on earth.


