Introduction
============

Not only is al-Mahdi (the Guided One) a materialization of an Islamic
belief of a spiritual nature, but a model to a particular goal which
humanity has been striving to achieve, as well as a form to a natural
inspiration, through which people came to realize - in spite of their
different faith and means of access to the unseen - that there is an
appointed day on earth, when the Divine messages will be fulfilled in
all their great significance and final aim, when the exhausting march
which humanity took in the course of history will lead to stability and
security, after a long struggle.

However, the awareness of this expected future is not limited to those
who believe in the unseen from a religious angle, but it has extended to
others and has even been reflected in those ideologies which strongly
denied the existence of the unseen and any of its aspects, such as
dialectical materialism, that interpreted history in terms of
contradictions, but at last admitted the fact that there was an
appointed time in which these contradictions would be resolved when
peace and harmony would prevail on earth.

Thus we find that the psychological experience of this awareness, which
humanity has undertaken in the course of time, is one of the widest and
most commonly held among people.

So, if religion strengthens this awareness by reaffirming that at the
end of matter, the earth will be filled with justice after having been
filled with injustice and tyranny, it is in reality providing it with
its objective value and turning it into a decisive belief in human
destiny, which is not only a source of consolation but of generosity and
strength.

A source of generosity, since belief in al-Mahdi is in reality belie f
in the protest against all forms of oppression and tyranny although they
still prevail in the world.

It is also a source of strength and a refutation that cannot dwindle,
since it is a ray of light that is continually struggling against
despair within people and keeping the flame of hope ablaze within their
hearts in spite of the gloomy conditions and the might of oppression
under which they live, because the appointed day confirms the fact that
justice can challenge a world filled with transgression and tyranny,
that it can shake its foundations, and rebuild it anew; that oppression
is only an unnatural condition, regardless of its power and extent in
the different corners of the world. that it will eventually be defeated;
that the ultimate defeat of oppression while on the summit of its glory,
brings great hope before every persecuted individual and every oppressed
nation, in tipping the balance and rebuilding the world.

If the idea of al-Mahdi is older and wider than Islam, the detailed
outlines, which the latter has fixed for it, have proved more
satisfactory to all those ambitions that have been seeking its
realization since the dawn of history as well as a more generous gift
and a stronger prediction for the feelings of those who have been
persecuted and op pressed in the course of history. This is because
Islam has turned the idea from the unseen into reality, and from an
aspiration for a saviour the world would produce in the distant and
unknown future into the conviction that he actually exists looking
forward with other people to that day and the right circumstances that
would make it possible for him to assume his great role.

Thus, al-Mahdi (peace be upon him) is no longer an idea waiting to be
materialized nor a prophecy that needs to be substantiated, but a living
reality and a particular person, living among us in flesh and blood, who
is sharing our hopes, suffering, sorrows and joys, actually witnessing
all the sufferings, sadness and transgression that exist on the surface
of the earth, who is affected with all this from near or far, who is
waiting for the appropriate moment when he can stretch his hands to
every oppressed and needy person and eradicate the tyrants.

However, it has been decreed that this expected leader is not to reveal
anything concerning his life or person to other people, although he is
living amongst them, waiting for the appointed moment.

It is obvious that thinking in terms of these Islamic inductions narrows
the gap of the unseen between the oppressed people and the expected
saviour and reduces the psychological distance between him and them, no
matter how long the expectation may last.

So, when we are supposed, as far as we are concerned, to consider the
idea of al-Mahdi as actually designating a particular living person who
is observing events like we are, it is to inspire us with the fact that
the idea of the unconditional protest against all sorts of transgression
and tyranny, which al-Mahdi stands for, has already materialized in the
expected dissident leader who will emerge, paying no homage to the
transgressors, as it has been mentioned in the *hadith* (tradition), and
that by believing in him we are in reality believing in this unyielding
and living protest and participating in it.

Indeed lots of *ahadith* ( traditions) are constantly urging those who
believe in al-Mahdi to expect release from suffering and be prepared for
his coming, which is a consolidation of that spiritual bond and
emotional tie between them and the dissident leader and every value he
stands for both of which could not have existed had he not actually
materialized as a contemporary living person.

Thus we come to realize that this materialization has given a new
impetus to the idea and made it a source of strength and generosity of a
higher degree in terms of what any dissident individual finds of comfort
consolation and relief from the pains that he has to suffer under
tyranny and deprivation, when he comes to feel that his Imam and leader
shares them with him, since the latter is a contemporary person and not
an idea to be realized in the future.

However, the above mentioned materialization has led many people, who
found it hard to believe or assume, to take negative attitudes even
regarding the idea of al-Mahdi.

Since they all wonder if the idea of al-Mahdi actually designates a
living person who has coexisted with all these consecutive generations
for more than ten centuries, who will continue to do so until the time
comes for him to emerge on the surface, how can such a human being live
all this long and yet be immune from the laws of nature which compel any
person to pass by the phase of old age and decrepitude and from there to
his death. Is not such a matter impossible from an existential point of
view?

Also, why should Allah show all this desire for this particular person -
for whom the laws of nature would be obstructed - and endeavours to
prolong his life and preserve him for the appointed day. has humanity
become barren from yielding capable leaders? Why should not that day
come when a leader will be born at its dawn and grow up like anyone else
and gradually assume his role until the earth be filled with justice
after having been filled with injustice and transgression?

They also wonder if al-Mahdi is the name of a particular person, who is
the son of the eleventh Imam of the family of the Prophet (*Ahlul
Bayt* - peace and blessing of Allah be upon them), born in the year 256
A.H. whose father died in the year 260 A.H. This means that he was very
young when his father died, not exceeding the age of five, which is too
early for him to have completed his religious and intellectual education
at the hands of his father. Therefore how and by what means could he
personally be prepared to assume that great role from religious,
intellectual and scientific angles.

Moreover, if the leader is ready why should he wait all these hundreds
of years? Is not what the world has witnessed of afflictions and social
disasters enough to justify his appearance on its surface for the
establishing of justice on earth?

They also wonder how can we believe in his existence even if we were to
assume that this could be possible? Can anybody admit the validity of a
hypothesis of this kind when it is not actually supported by any
conclusive legal or scientific evidence? Should some narratives
(*ahadith*) related to the Prophet ( blessing and peace of Allah be upon
him and his progeny), of which we doubt the authenticity be enough for
us to approve such a hypothesis?

As far as the role that this individual is going to play on the
appointed day is concerned they wonder how a single person can assume
this great decisive role in the world, while we know that however great
an individual is, he cannot create history nor lead it into a new phase;
whereas the seeds of any historical movement ripen under certain
objective circumstances and their coming together. and the sublimity of
the individual is the factor which selects him to shape these objective
circumstances and provide the required solutions?

They also wonder how we can imagine what this individual would achieve
of enormous change and decisive victory for justice and its message
against the realities of injustice, oppression and tyranny in spite of
what they have of power and influence and what they possess of means of
destruction as well as what they have achieved of high standards in
scientific, political, social and military capabilities.

Questions in this connection recur often in one form or another, however
the true motives behind them are not only intellectual, since they have
also a psychological source expressed in terms of the fear that
dominates the world and the meagerness of all opportunity of change from
the roots.

Therefore, doubts deepen and questions increase, the more one becomes
aware of the harsh reality that has prevailed in the world in the course
of time. Thus failure, meagerness and the weakness that the human being
is subject to lead him to feel under a psychological pressure whenever
he attempts to imagine the tremendous change of the world which would
relieve it of its contradictions and historical oppression and would
provide it with a new structure based on justice and truth. This
pressure makes the individual doubt the whole concept of change and
leads him to refuse it for one reason or another.

As far as we are concerned, we are going to deal with all these
questions in sequence answering each one briefly due to the limits
provided by these pages.


