1) How Was This Long Life Granted To Al-Mahdi?
==============================================

In other words, is it possible for a man to live for many centuries, as
is the case with the Expected Leader, for the change of the world, whose
age must be actually one thousand one hundred and forty years, or
fourteen times the average age of an ordinary person who would pass
through the phases of life from childhood to old age normally.

The word possibility here has one of the three following meanings,
namely. Practical possibility, scientific possibility and philosophical
or logical possibility.

I mean by practical possibility that a task is feasible in a manner that
enables me, you or a third person to perform it, such as taking a
journey across the ocean, reaching the depth of the sea or going to the
moon , all of which are practically possible since they have actually
been performed by people in one way or another.

By scientific possibility I mean that there are some tasks that neither
I nor you nor a third person can practically perform with the means that
are accessible to present civilization. However there is nothing in the
alterable trends of science which can indicate a justification for the
rejection of the possibility of these tasks and their occurrence
conforming to certain special circumstances and means.

For example, there is nothing in science that could deny the possibility
of travelling to Venus, because all its existing trends indicate the
possibility of such a task, although that is still not possible for me
or you Since the difference between going to the moon and travelling to
Venus is only one of degree. The latter representing a stage of
overcoming some relative difficulties stemming from the fact that the
distance is longer. From this we deduce that it is scientifically
possible to travel to Venus even if it is still not feasible from a
practical angle.

Contrary to that is the idea of travelling to the sun in distant space
since it is scientifically impossible, meaning that science would never
entertain the possibility of this task, for one cannot assume
scientifically or empirically the possibility of inventing that
preventive armour that could protect the body against the heat of the
sun which is like an enormous kiln constantly burning with a degree
impossible to imagine.

By logical or philosophical possibility I mean that there is nothing in
the intellect, conforming to what it knows of previous laws - (preceding
the experiment) - that could justify the rejection of a task nor decide
that it could not occur.

Say, for example, the grouping of three oranges into two equal parts,
this is logically impossible, since the intellect knows - before
carrying out such an experiment - that three is an odd number, thus it
is impossible to divide it into two equal parts, first it would turn
into an even number, which would be a contradiction, which is impossible
in logic.

But if a man were to be exposed to fire, or if he were to go to the sun
without burning, that would not be impossible from a logical point of
view, since there is no contradiction in the assumption that heat does
not penetrate into a body of lower temperature from one of higher
temperature.

That would only run contrary to the experiment which proved that h eat
actually penetrates into a body of lower temperature from one of higher
temperature until both bodies get an equal temperature.

Therefore, we come to realize that logical possibility has a wider scope
than scientific possibility and that the latter is wider than practical
possibility.

There is no doubt about the logical possibility of the prolongation of
human life for some thousands of years, because that is not impossible
from an abstract intellectual point of view, also there is no
contradiction in an assumption of this sort, since life as it is
understood does not fathom sudden death and no one can dispute this
fact.

Also, there is no doubt or controversy that this prolonged life is not
possible from the practical aspect, as is the case in going down to the
depths of the ocean or ascending to the moon. That is because science
with what it owns of modern means and instruments, that were made
available by concomitant human experiments, cannot prolong human life
for hundreds of years, this is why we find that even those among people
who are more eager about life and more able to utilize scientific
possibilities can only live to the extent of what is usual.

As far as Scientific possibility is concerned, there is nothing in
science, nowadays which could justify the denial of that fact from a
theoretical point of view. This inquiry is in reality related to the
nature of the physiological interpretation of the phenomenon of old -age
and decrepitude among people.

Does this phenomenon indicate a natural law that compels the tissues of
the human body and its cells to harden gradually and become less
efficient in the performance of their task once they have reached the
summit of their growth, until they die at a particular moment, even if
we were to isolate them from the influence of some external failure?

Or is this hardening of the bodily tissues and cells and the lack of
efficiency in the performance of their physiological tasks a result of
their struggle against certain external factors, such as microbes or
poison that penetrate the body from an excess in food or from the heavy
work that the person might perform or any other factor.

Now this is the question that science has to find an answer to, y et
many answers present themselves on a scientific level in this respect.

If we are to consider the scientific point of view that tends to
interpret old-age and the weakness that goes with it, as a result of
reactions against some external factors, it means that it is
theoretically possible, once we have isolated the tissues that compose
the body from these influences, to prolong life to the extent of
surpassing the phenomenon of old-age and even overcoming it.

On the other hand, if we consider the other point of view which sees
old-age as a natural process with regards to the living tissues and
cells, it will mean that they hear within themselves the seed o f their
own ultimate death, once the phase of old-age has been completed.

I say: If we take this point of view into consideration it should not
mean that there is no flexibility in this natural law, rather the
assumption of its existence shows that it is in fact flexible, Since we
find in our everyday life, in addition to what has been found by
scientists through the experiments that they carry out in their
laboratories, that old - age as a physiological phenomenon has no fixed
time, since a man can be very old and yet possess tender limbs, with no
trace of old- age appearing on him as has been mentioned by some
doctors. Moreover some scientists take advantage of this flexibility and
prolong the life of some animals by a hundred times their natural age,
by creating certain circumstances and factors that delay the process. of
old-age.

Thus it has been proved scientifically that this process can be
postponed, by creating specific circumstances and factors, even if this
experiment has not been carried out by science on a particular
complicated creature such as the human being, owing to the difference in
the difficulty of carrying it out on the human being and other
organisms.

This means that, from a theoretical point of view, science, with all its
alterable orientations, has never had any objection to the prolongation
of human life, whether old-age has been interpreted as the product of a
struggle and close contact with some external influences, or as a result
of a natural process of the cells and tissues that leads them towards
their death.

Thus we deduce that the prolongation of human life and its survival over
many centuries is possible logically as well as scientifically but it is
still impossible from a practical angle, and that nevertheless
scientific progress has a long way to go before realizing this
possibility.

In light of what has been discussed we shall deal with the age of
al-Mahdi (peace be upon him) and what has been surrounding it of wonder
and surprise.

Thus we notice that since the possibility of this prolonged life has
been confirmed both logically and scientifically, science is in the
process of gradually transforming the theoretical possibility into a
practical one. There is no room left for wonder except the remoteness of
the probability that al-Mahdi might have preceded science in this
transformation, before that the latter could have, in its evolutionary
course, reached the standard of actual capacity for such a
transformation, which would make him equal to that person who had
preceded science in discovering the cure for cancer.

The question now is - How could Islam which determined the age of the
Expected Leader - have preceded science in the field of this
transformation?

The answer is that this is not the only field in which Islam preceded
science. Has the Islamic *shari'ah* (revealed law) as a whole not come
before science and the evolution of human thought by many centuries? Did
it not promulgate certain symbols that submitted plans to be put into
practice, which man could achieve only after hundreds of years of his
independent activity?

Did it not formulate certain regulations perfect in wisdom, the secrets
of which were realized by man only after a certain length of time? Did
the Divine message not reveal mysteries about the universe, that could
never have occurred to people's minds, which science came later to
confirm and support?

So, if we are convinced by these facts why then should we regard as too
much that the sender of this message - the Exalted - anticipates science
in determining the age of al- Mahdi?

Here I mentioned only those aspects of precedence that we can notice in
a direct manner, we can also include the aspects of precedence mentioned
in the Divine message, for example, when it informs us about the night
journey which the Prophet undertook from al-Haram Mosque to al-Aqsa
Mosque. If we are to understand this journey within the frame of natural
laws, we will find that it shows that these laws were utilized in a way
that science could achieve only after hundreds of years.

Therefore, the same Divine knowledge which enabled the Messenger (peace
and blessing of Allah be upon him and his progeny) to undertake this
fast motion before science could achieve it, has also enabled his
designated successors to have a prolonged life before science could
realize such a project.

Certainly, this prolonged age that Allah, the Exalted, has bestowed on
the Expected Saviour may see m rather strange, if it is considered
within the limits of the everyday in people's lives and what has been
achieved by the experiments of scientists. But is the decisive and
transformative role which has been prepared for this Saviour not strange
within the limits of the ordinary in people's lives and what they have
experienced of historical evolution?

Has he not been entrusted with the task of changing the world and
rebuilding its civilization on the basis of justice and truth? Why
should we disapprove if the preparation of this great role is
characterized by strange and unusual aspects, such as the prolongation
of the Expected Leader's age? For this remoteness of those aspects and
their unusual aspects, however great they are, cannot surpass the
remoteness of the great role that has to be achieved on the appointed
day?

Therefore, if we approve the validity of that unique role from a
historical angle in spite of the fact that there has never been in the
history of humanity a role similar to it, why should not we also approve
that prolonged age which is still unique in our ordinary life?

I wonder if it is a coincidence that only two individuals should carry
out the task of emptying human civilization of its corrupt elements and
rebuilding it, which means that they must have been of an excessive age
many times superior to our ordinary lives. The first is Nuh (Noah) who
had assumed his role in the humanity's past. The Qur'an mentioned that
he had lived among his people for nine hundred and fifty years. His role
was to reconstruct the world after the Great Flood.

The other one is al-Mahdi, who is to assume his role in the future, who
has lived among his people until now for more than a thousand years. It
has been ordained that he will reconstruct the world on the appointed
day.

Why then should we accept Noah, who must have reached a thousand years
at least, and yet reject al-Mahdi?


