2) The Miracle And The Long Life
================================

Up to now we have seen that the prolongation of life is scientifically
possible. But let us suppose that it is not, that the process of old-age
and decrepitude is quite rigid, that it cannot either now or in the long
run overcome nor alter its conditions or circumstances - what will this
mean? It will mean that the prolongation of human life - as is the case
of Noah, or al-Mahdi - runs contrary to the natural laws which science
confirmed thanks to modern instruments of experimentation. Thus this
condition becomes a miracle that has hindered the applicability of a
natural law under a certain circumstances, in order to preserve the life
of a particular individual whose role is to cherish the Divine message.

Yet this is not the only miracle of its kind, nor is it remote from a
Muslim's faith, which derives from the Qur'an and the sunnah. Moreover
the process of old-age is no more rigid than is the process of the
passage of heat from a body of higher temperature to another of lower
temperature until both of them become equal. This had occurred in the
case of Ibrahim (peace be upon him) when the only way to preserve his
life was by hindering that process, when it was said to the fire in
which he was thrown:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْنَا يَا نَارُ كُونِي بَرْدًا وَسَلَامًا عَلَىٰ إِبْرَاهِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We said, "O fire be cool on Ibrahim and keep him*** ***safe."
(Qur'an, 21:69)***

So, he emerged from it safe and unharmed. There are also other cases
where natural laws were hindered to protect some of the prophets or
Proofs of Allah on earth. When the sea was split for Musa (Moses), when
the Romans were misled in thinking they had caught 'Isa (Jesus) or when
Muhammad (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him and his progeny) left
his house, while it was surrounded by the troops of Quraysh who were
waiting for hours to attack him but Allah, the Exalted, hid him from
their eyes while he was walking in their midst. All of these cases show
a hindrance of the laws of nature to protect an individual, whom the
Divine wisdom wished to preserve. Therefore, why not include here the
process of old-age and decrepitude?

From this we can deduce a general notion, which is that whenever the
preservation of the Prophet's life (the Proof of Allah on earth) depends
on the hindrance of a natural law, and the prolongation of his life
comes to be necessary for the performance of his task, Divine care then
intervenes by delaying the process so that the task of that individual
can be accomplished. On the other hand, once the Divine mission of that
individual has been fulfilled he either dies naturally or as a martyr
depending on what is determined by natural laws.

Thus we find ourselves confronted with the present question in
connection with this general notion: How can the process be obstructed?
How can the necessary correlation that exists between natural phenomena,
be sundered? Does it not contradict science, which discovered the
existence o f that natural law or process and defined that necessary
correlation on experimental and deductive bases?

The answer is that science has already solved the problem by giving up
the idea of necessity as far as natural laws are concerned. To clarify
this we can say that science discovers natural laws through systematic
observations and experiments. For example, when the occurrence of a
natural phenomenon is followed another one, we deduce from this a
natural law which is: that whenever the first phenomenon comes into
existence it is automatically followed by another phenomenon.

However, science does not propose a necessary correlation between the
two phenomena stemming from their nature, since necessity is an
invisible condition that experimentation and the instruments of
scientific and inductive inquiry cannot demonstrate. Therefore, the
logic of modern science emphasizes that natural law - as it is defined
by science - does not indicate a necessary correlation, but an
uninterrupted connection, between two phenomena. But when the miracle
occurs and separates one from the other, it does not mean that their
correlation was sundered.

The truth of the matter is that the miracle, in its religious sense, has
become, in the light of modern scientific logic, more understandable
than before, under the classical view of causal correlation. This old
view assumed that every two phenomena, in which one is followed
automatically by the other must have a necessary correlation, which
means that it is impossible to separate one from the other. However,
this correlation has been transformed thanks to modern scientific logic
into a law of correlation or of consecutive succession between two
phenomena without the hypothesis of invisible necessity.

Thereby the miracle becomes an exceptional condition with regard to this
connective succession without running against a necessity or leading to
an impossibility.

So, in the light of the logical foundation of induction we agree with
the modern point of view which says that induction does not demonstrate
the existence of a necessary correlation between two phenomena. We find
that it shows that there is a common interpretation for the consecutive
connection between the two. Since this common interpretation can be
formed on the basis of the assumption of subjective necessity, it can
also be formed on the assumption of a wisdom that made the Creator of
the universe to continuously combine some particular phenomena with
others. The same wisdom sometimes calls for exception; thus a miracle
occurs.


