7) Can An Individual Assume This Role?
======================================

Now we have reached another question in this series which is: Can an
individual, however great he may be, achieve this great role? Is not
such an individual only that one who is selected by circumstances and
faced with the realization of their movement?

The idea here, is related to a particular view of history which
interprets the latter on the basis that man is only a secondary factor
in it, while the objective strength that surrounds him is the
essentials. In this sense the individual can only be, in the best of
situations, the intelligent expression to that essential factor

However, we had already made it clear, in other chapters of our printed
books, that history is made up of two poles: The first one being man and
the second the material strength that surrounds him. Thus, while this
material strength, the circumstances of production and nature affect
man, the latter also exerts an influence upon them Moreover, there is no
evidence for the assumption that the movement starts from material
conditions and ends up with man, except when there is an evidence for
the contrary, since both factors interact in time.

Therefore, within this framework, an individual can be more than a
parrot in the historical trend, especially when we take into account his
relation with heaven, since the latter intervenes, then, as a guiding
power to this historical trend that has been the case in the history of
all the prophets, especially the last one since by virtue of the
relation of his message with heaven, the Prophet Muhammad (peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him and his progeny), assumed by himself the
reins of the historical movement and started a civilized expansion which
the objective circumstances that existed around him, could not bring
about in any case, as we have already mentioned in the introduction of
*al-Fatawa al-wadihah.*

Therefore, what had been achieved at the hands of the Great Messenger
could occur also at the hands of the Expected Leader from among his
progeny whom he announced and whose role he hinted at.


