Foreword
========

Praise be to Allah Who favored the faithful when He raised up among them
an Apostle of their own. Peace be upon His Apostle (S.A.W.A.)[^1] who
possessed a great character and invited to the way of his Lord with
wisdom and good advice, and disputed with people in a manner that is
best. Allah May bless the Prophet's household whom He purified with a
thorough purification, and made the reward of His Apostle's message the
love for his relatives. Allah May be pleased with the Prophet's
Companions who believed in him, honored him, helped him, and followed
the light that was sent with him, and they are felicitous.

A few years ago, I came across a book entitled *Khilafat va
intikhab* (Caliphate and Election).[^2] In the dedication of the book he
says,

“It was written: for the devotees, who endeavor in search of the truth.
And for clergies, scientists, researchers, students; and for the youths
who have not relied on the sayings and writings of historians, heretics,
and orientalists for cognition and understanding the high position and
status of the Prophet's Companions, and who are not caught in the net of
hypocrisy nor have they fallen into their deceptive and foul traps.”[^3]

   
 Apart from these rhetorics, every researcher, who wants to know the
truth about the past, must consult the sayings and writings of
historians, heretics, orientalists, traditionists, interpreters,
conformers and opponents, and follow what is the best of them.
Supporting their own ideas, or refuting their opponent's creeds, the
Sunnite and Shi'ite writers have written many books. Here we are not
going to analyze all of them, but we wish to clarify the subject, to the
extent that suffices the above-mentioned book, for 'the devotees who
endeavor in search of the truth and original ideals of Islam'. We all
worship one God, believe in one faith, follow one Prophet, recite one
Qur'an and pray towards one Qibla. Small differences in views should not
spoil or destroy our unity and Islamic relationship.

Of course, the unity and solidarity does not prevent us to know the
truth about our faith or understand the Islamic fundamentals and
customs, so we must try to settle the doubts of our brothers. We also
hope that the believers, who are searching for the true and original
Islam, listen to the words of both sects and follow the best of them. 

Before dealing with the issue of caliphate, we will give a summary of
the Prophet's life, because it is difficult to discuss about someone's
successor without knowing him. This summary is mainly based on Ibn
Hisham's *al-Sirat al-nabawiyya*,[^4] unless stated otherwise.  
  

[^1]: (S.A.W.A.) = Sall Allahu 'alayhi wa alihi.

[^2]: 'Abd al-Rahman Salimi, Khilafat va intikhab, 'aqida ahl sunnat
piramun khilafat, Mashhad, 1384, published by the author.   

[^3]: Ibid, 1.

[^4]: Ibn Hisham (d. 218/833), al-Sirat al-nabawiyya, ed. Mustafa
al-Saqqa, et al. Egypt, 1335/1936; Alfred Guillaume, The Life of
Muhammad, a translation of [Ibn] Ishaq's Sirat Rasul Allah, London,
1955.


