The Aftermath of the Rebellion
==============================

   
 Raising the flag of opposition against the then caliph the first civil
war practically initiated in Islam. 'The one community' of Islam divided
into different sects. The enmity between the Muslim sects, which began
during the early caliphate, has continued up to now. Muslims kill their
Muslim brethren and ignore their non-Muslim enemies. The rebellion made
the cursed tree in the Holy Qur'an, which the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) saw in
his vision,[^1] increase.

'Ali's victory at Basra spurred Mu'awiya to action. Soon after his
arrival in Kufa, 'Ali sent Jarir b. 'Abd Allah al-Bajali, the former
governor of 'Uthman in Hamadan, as an envoy to Mu'awiya with
instructions to convey his letter to him and to ask him only for the
reply, while indicate him to understand that 'Ali would not accept him
as a governor.[^2]

Mu'awiya dilatorily responded, “Let us consider, and I will explore the
view of the people of Syria.” He immediately wrote to 'Amr b. al-'As the
primary accused in 'Uthman's murder. 'Amr followed the invitation. He
was sure that he could now strike a bargain, which would satisfy his own
wishes. It would be Egypt for life or no deal. 'Amr swore allegiance to
Mu'awiya on the basis that he would back the Umayyad in thier fight
against 'Ali, while Mu'awiya would help him regain Egypt and guarantee
him lifetime possession.[^3]

The alliance between Mu'awiya and 'Amr b. al-'As constituted a
formidable political force. 'Amr was a master of planning, and playing
on political scenarios. Mu'awiya needed him. He knew he could trust 'Amr
at this stage since 'Ali would never make a deal with him at Mu'awiya's
expense.

Having gained broad allegiance in Syria, Mu'awiya hoped to draw some of
the religious aristocracy in the holy cities to his side by a campaign
of letters. 'Amr advised him against it but he insisted. Mu'awiya,
however, could get the backing of a member of 'Umar's family without
having to deceive him with false promises. 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Umar the
threefold murderer, had been after his pardon, granted an estate near
Kufa by 'Uthman. When 'Ali came to Kufa, 'Ubayd Allah discretely asked
him for amnesty through some mediators, but 'Ali opposed his pardon.

Malik b. al-Ashtar, one of the mediators, informed 'Ubayd Allah, and he
promptly fled to Mu'awiya.[^4] He tried to induce him to accuse and
denigrate 'Ali in public, but 'Ubayd Allah would not do so.[^5] He,
however, participated as one of the leaders of Mu'awiya's army in the
battle of Siffin. A client warned him that Mu'awiya was intentionally
exposing him to mortal danger. If he were to win, Mu'awiya would get the
rule, and if were killed, he would get rid of him. His wife, Bahriyya,
also told him that he would certainly be killed and this is what
Mu'awiya wanted. 'Ubayd Allah insisted on obeying his emir; and he was
killed.[^6]

The Kufans were less united in their support of war. When 'Ali appealed
to them, “March against the enemies of God, march against the remnants
of the confederates (*Ahzab*), the murderers of Immigrants and the
Helpers, Arbad b. Rabi'a stood up and shouted, “Do you want to make us
march against our Syrian brothers and kill them for you? By God, we
shall not do that.”[^7] 'Adi b. Hatim al-Ta'i advised 'Ali to give
another chance to letters and messengers before marching.[^8]

Others were urging 'Ali to speed up his campaign before the enemy was
fully prepared. 'Abd Allah b. Budayl b. Warqa' representing the
Prophet's Companions, turning to people, asked, “How could
Mu'awiya pledge allegiance to 'Ali when 'Ali has killed Mu'awiya's
brother, Hanzala , his maternal uncle, al-Walid and his grandfather,
'Utba in a single stand?”[^9] In Syria, the preparations for war also
went ahead. Abu Muslim al-Khawalani took the bloody shirt of
'Uthman which Umm Habiba, Mu'awiya's sister had sent from Medina and
toured the garrison towns in Syria with it, inciting the people to
revenge.[^10]

'Ali set out from Nukhayla probably early in Dhu al-Hijja 36/657. When
his army put up their camp, they found the watering place at the
Euphrates occupied by Abu al-A'war and the Syrians, who prevented them
from reaching the water. They looked for another watering place nearby
but could not find one. As they complained to 'Ali, he sent Sa'sa'a b.
Suhan to tell Mu'awiya that he had come not wishing to fight him before
proper warning, summons and argument; Mu'awiya's cavalry and foot
soldiers had, however, started to fight them and now they were
preventing his men from obtaining water.

He asked Mu'awiya to order his companions to give them access to the
water until they had fully considered their conflict. However, if it
pleased Mu'awiya, he could let his men fight it out about the water
rather than the matter for which they had come. Mu'awiya consulted his
advisers, and al-Walid b. 'Uqba urged him to deprive the enemy of water
as they had done with 'Uthman. Al- Walid claimed that 'Uthman had been
kept without cold water and food for forty days.[^11]

'Ali did not have to rouse his men into action. After they had been
without water for a day and night, al-Ash'ath b. Qays came to him asking
for permission to attack and requesting that 'Ali order Malik b.
al-Ashtar to join him with his equestrians. 'Ammar b. Yasir got up and
shouted among the people. A great number of men came to him. Then he
said, “By God, even if they defeat us and chase us as far as the palm
trees of Hajar[^12] again we are right and they are wrong.”[^13]

Twelve thousand men volunteered, and they swooped down on Abu
al-A'war and his men. Malik b. al-Ashtar had personally killed seven and
al-Ash'ath five.[^14] At first, they said they would not allow the
Syrians to get water. 'Ali ordered them, however, to take their needful
and return to their camp.[^15]

For two days, the armies stayed facing each other. Then 'Ali called for
Abu 'Amra and some other of his companions and told them to argue with
Mu'awiya and discover his view. Abu 'Amra appealed to him not to split
the unity of this community and not to shed their blood in common
strife. Mu'awiya interrupted his discourse. “Why don't you recommend
that to your master?” Abu 'Amra replied, “My master is not like you. My
master is the one most entitled among the creation to this matter by his
excellence, religion, early merit in Islam, and close kinship with the
Apostle of God.” Mu'awiya asked, “What does he say then?” Abu 'Amra
replied, “He orders you to fear God and to respond to the summons of
your cousin to what is right. That is soundest for you in your worldly
affairs and best for your end.” Mu'awiya, “Shall we allow 'Uthman's
blood to be spilled for nothing? No, by God, I shall never do
that.”[^16]

There was now daily skirmishing until the end of Dhu al-Hijja. At the
beginning of Muharram 37 a truce was agreed for the month in the hope
that a peaceful settlement might be reached. Again, envoys went back and
forth between the two camps. The discussion did not go any better than
the previous time. As the sun set on the last day of Muharram,
'Ali ordered Marthad b. al-Harith to proclaim to the Syrians that they
had failed to respond to his summons to the Book of God and persisted in
their falsehood. The time for the battle had arrived.[^17]

During the first seven days of Safar, prominent leaders on both sides
were dispatched to fight each day, with only small retinue, as in a
tournament. The all- out battle of Siffin began on Wednesday, Safar 8.
The day had evidently gone well for Mu'awiya. The princes of the
Umayyad family preferred to let others do the fighting in revenge for
their relative. Mu'awiya asked 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Umar to take the command
of his heavily armed elite, the *shahba'* and to lead the attack. 'Ubayd
Allah b. 'Umar, surprised that he was chosen for the task, felt that
some member of the Umayyad family, who were the prime claimants for
revenge, would have been more appropriate.

He went ahead, however, in spite of warnings from his client and his
wife and he was killed. The tide turned, and the Syrians were pushed
back to their camp. Mu'awiya fled from his pavilion and sheltered in one
of the tents of his army.[^18] Elsewhere on the battlefield, that day
'Ammar b. Yasir, who was above ninety years old, was killed fighting for
'Ali. People cried the Companion of the Prophet was killed. The
Messenger of God had predicted that 'Ammar would be killed by the rebel
group.[^19]

An appeal by Mu'awiya that one of his relatives seeks a duel among the
Quraysh of Iraq was also met with derision by al-Walid b. 'Uqba and
Marwan. Mu'awiya's brother 'Utba b. Abi Sufyan, however, proposed a duel
with Ja'da b. Hubayra. 'Utba went out in the morning and called for
Ja'da to come forward. They were both ready to fight. 'Utba gathered all
his men and horses and came forward with a retinue of Sakun, Azd, and
Sadif. Ja'da prepared with every means at his disposal. They met, and
for a while, the men stood firm. Ja'da himself fought that day, but
'Utba became frightened, abandoned his equestrians, and fled speedily to
Mu'awiya.[^20]

After a crucial, but indecisive battle, fighting continued through the
night, which was remembered as the night of the rumble (*laylat
al-harir*). The fighting was now mostly by sword, and the number of dead
mounted. 'Ali won the battle at that night and recovered many of the
dead from his army.[^21] When the morning came, the balance seemed to be
moving in 'Ali's favor. Toward noon, some of the Syrians facing the
center of 'Ali's army raised the copies of the Holy Qur'an tied to the
heads of their lances.[^22]

The fighting stopped. 'Ali exhorted his men to continue fighting. He
told them that Mu'awiya, 'Amr  and their chief supporters were not men
of religion and the Qur'an, but were raising it for deception and fraud.
From many of the Qur'an readers view, however, the appeal to the Holy
Qur'an proved irresistible.[^23] Facing open mutiny, 'Ali gave in to
their demand that he recall Malik b. al-Ashtar, who had advanced far
towards the Syrian camp and sensed victory nearby. Malik b.
al-Ashtar refused at first to respond and had to be warned that the army
would abandon him.

His reproaches to the men that they were relinquishing the battle as he
was hoping for victory and allowing themselves to be deputed for worldly
motives were answered with curses. 'Ali had to restore order by
affirming that he had accepted that the Holy Qur'an be made the judge
between the two parties.[^24]

As the implication of Mu'awiya's proposal became evident, however, a
substantial minority dissented. A group of about four thousand of men of
insight and pious worshippers objected to the principle of arbitration.
They evidently realized that Mu'awiya was not sincerely submitting to
the Holy Qur'an but intended a game of political wheeling and dealing
between two representatives of the opposing parties, which would allow
him to hold on to power.

Another, smaller, group abstained from either backing or opposing the
proposal. The group opposed to the arbitration came to 'Ali and demanded
that he resume the war. 'Ali was in favor of this. Those in favor of
arbitration, however, insisted that the proposal was only right, fair
and just. The opponents of the arbitration (the Kharijites) went away in
anger. Some left for Kufa before the agreement was signed. Others stayed
on, saying, “Perhaps he will repent and turn back.”[^25]

The radical opponents of the arbitration decided to choose a leader
among them. They pledged allegiance to 'Abd Allah b. Wahb al-Rasibi,
known as Dhu al-Thafanat, on Shawwal 10, 37. They went to Jisr
al-Nahrawan, east of the Tigris and invited the Basran to meet them
there. After the Kharijites left Kufa, 'Ali's followers offered him a
renewed oath of allegiance on the basis that they would be friends of
those he befriended and enemies for those he took as enemies.[^26]

'Ali stipulated adherence to the Book of God and the *Sunna* of the
Prophet in the oath. Rabi'a b. Shaddad al-Khath'ami, who had fought for
him in the Battle of Camel and Siffin suggested, “On the *Sunna* of Abu
Bakr and 'Umar.” 'Ali objected that if Abu Bakr and 'Umar had been
acting on anything but the Book of God and the *Sunna* of His Messenger,
they would have been remote from the truth. The formula of the new oath
of allegiance for 'Ali matched the invocation that the Prophet (S.A.W.A)
made for him at Ghadir Khumm: “O God! Be the friend of him who is his
friend, and be the enemy of him who is his enemy.”[^27]

It was about this time that 'Ali had the *hadith* of Ghadir Khumm
proclaimed in public. He appealed to the crowd assembled on the square
(*rahba*) in front of the mosque of Kufa asking those who had heard the
words the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) at Ghadir Khumm. Thirteen Companions came
forward and witnessed that they had heard the Prophet say, “O God! Be
the friend of him who is his friend, and be the enemy of him who is his
enemy.”[^28]

'Ali was eager to set out on the campaign as quickly as possible, before
Mu'awiya could gather all his forces. He moved north via Shahi and
Dabaha to the east bank of the Euphrates and al-Anbar. He had received
disturbing news about the murder of 'Abd Allah b. Khabbab b. al-Aratt,
his pregnant wife and Umm Sinan al-Saydawiyya by the Kharijites. His men
turned to him, pleading that they could not leave their families and
property behind at the mercy of such people and they urged him to fight
them first. 'Ali sent to the Kharijites demanding the surrender of the
murderers. If they did so he would leave them alone until he had fought
the Syrians in the hope that they would change their minds in the
meantime and return to the course of right.

They answered defiantly that all of them had killed these people and all
considered the shedding the blood of 'Abd Allah b. Khabbab and his wife
and that of any of 'Ali's partisans as licit. 'Ali asked them by what
right they considered it licit for them to leave their community, to
draw their swords against their own people, to investigate their views,
and to spill their blood. He gave Abu Ayyub al-Ansari a banner of safe
conduct for anyone wishing to surrender. Some went to 'Ali and some left
the battlefield. Others insisted on their beliefs and were ready to
fight 'Ali. He gave the order to let the Kharijites attack first.

Many of the Kharijite leaders were killed. Four hundred wounded were
found among the dead in the battlefield. 'Ali ordered them to be handed
to their tribes for medical care. On 'Ali's side, only ten or less men
were killed. 'Ali wanted to proceed immediately from al-Nahrawan to
Syria. His men complained that their arrows were used up, their swords
dulled, their spearheads had fallen off their lances, and urged him to
return to Kufa so that they might restore their equipment and replenish
their forces. Within days, his armies melted away, leaving but a few of
the leaders with him. 'Ali realized that he had lost control over them
and entered Kufa, abandoning the campaign.[^29]

Mu'awiya was pleased, when they informed him that 'Ali had turned off
his route to Syria in order to subdue the rebels in his own rank, and
was pleased and waited for further development. He called al-Dhahhak b.
Qays and instructed him to attack the Bedouin Arabs loyal to 'Ali.
Al-Dhahhak crossed the desert and attacked the pilgrims returning from
Mecca, and robbed them of their belongings. 'Ali appealed to the Kufans
to avenge the blood of their compatriots. Hujr b.'Adi caught with
al-Dhahhak near Tadmur. They fought for a while, and nineteen Syrians
were killed as against two men of Hujr. In the cover of the night, the
Syrians fled.[^30] This type of ordinary attack, highway robbery, and
murder now became a regular feature of the raids that Mu'awiya
dispatched into 'Ali's territories, marking a new low in the character
of inter- Muslim warfare.

Mu'awiya chose Busr b. Abi Artat al-'Amiri to lead a new raid into
Arabia. Moving towards Medina, Busr stopped at every watering place to
seize the camels belonging to the local tribes and had his men raid them
while spearing their horses, along which they led. When they reached the
next watering place, they would release the camels which they had and
seize the fresh ones available there. As Busr entered Medina, he
delivered a blistering sermon of vituperation and menaces to the
Helpers, threatening them all.

From Medina, he moved on to Mecca, killing and looting on the way. While
passing through the territory of the Banu Kinana, Busr chanced upon the
two minor sons of 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas, 'Abd al-Rahman  and Qutham.
He had entrusted his two sons to a man of Kinana so that they would
experience life in the desert in accordance with custom among the noble
families of Quraysh. When Busr seized the two boys and threatened to
kill them, their Kinani guardian took his sword and went out to face
Busr. Mu'awiya's general angrily questioned him, “We did not want to
kill you, so why do you expose yourself to being killed?”

The man answered, “Yes, I shall be killed in protection of my guest.
That will pardon me better before God and the people.” Then he struck at
the captors with his sword until he was killed. Busr had the two boys
led before him and slaughtered them with a knife. A group of the women
of Kinana came, and one of them told the savage, “You kill the men, but
what for do you kill the children? By God, it was not the practice for
them to be killed either in the Time of Ignorance or in Islam. By God,
surely a regime which can find strength by only killing the meek, the
humble, and the tottering old, by denying mercy and cutting the bonds of
kinship is a regime of evil.” Busr shouted, “By God, I wish to put the
sword among you.” Though challenged by the women to do so, he refrained,
recalling that his master had declared Kinana off limits for him.[^31]

Reports of brutal savagery of Mu'awiya's general now forced 'Ali to act.
Jaria b. Qudama set out from Kufa with a thousand men and recruited
another thousand in Basra. Afterwards 'Ali sent another two thousand men
under Wahb b. Mas'ud al-Khath'ami to join Jaria in Hijaz. 'Ali gave
restrict instructions not to harm Muslims or non-Muslims protected by
treaty, not to confiscate property or riding animals even if their own
mounts were worn out and they were forced to continue on foot, and to
perform their prayers regularly. Jaria moved quickly through the Hijaz
to Yemen passing by the towns, the fortified places and stopping
nowhere. He pressed on the Hadhramawt in pursuit of Busr b. Abi Artat.
On his pursuit, Busr immediately fled leaving Hijaz.[^32]

The outrages committed by Busr in his raids of Arabia produced shock in
Kufa and aided 'Ali in his efforts to mount a new offensive against
Mu'awiya. The Kufans blamed each other for their past inaction. A group
of the nobles came to see 'Ali and urged him for the campaign to Syria.
In preparation for his campaign, 'Ali had written to Qays b. Sa'd b.
'Ubada, now governor of Azarbayjan to proceed speedily to Kufa. A large
number of Muslims assembled there now submitting to his command and
ready to move against the mutineer the son of the mutineer ('*asi* *b*.
'*asi*). 'Ali was delaying departure merely in expectation of Qays'
arrival.[^33]

On Ramadhan 19, 40/January 26, 661, as he entered the mosque of Kufa to
perform the Morning Prayer, 'Ali was met by 'Abd al-Rahman b. Muljam
Muradi, a Kharijite from Egypt with the words, “The judgment belongs to
God, 'Ali, not to you.” 'Ali b. Abi Talib was struck on the head with a
poisoned sword.[^34]  
    
 Alas, 'Ali was assassinated at a time when his fortune, after lengthy
crisis following Siffin, the failed arbitration and al-Nahrwan, seemed
on the ascendant. The mood in Kufa and Basra had changed in his favor as
Mu'awiya's vicious conduct of war, especially in Busr's Arabian
campaign, had revealed the true nature of his reign. Experience had so
far shown that whenever Syrians and Iraqis met in a battle in roughly
equal terms, the Syrians usually gave way, first. The Iraqis, resuming
the war with the bitter resolve of outwitted political underdogs, might
well have triumphed militarily this time.

The loyalist believed that he was the best of Muslims after the
Prophet and the only one entitled to rule them. He died on Ramadhan 21,
40. Before his death, he advised the faithful and his sons, “O sons of
'Abd al-Muttalib, you should not shed blood of Muslims shouting the
Commander of the Faithful (*Amir al-Mu’minin*) has been killed. Beware;
do not kill because of me except my killer. See, if I die with this
stroke, then strike him one stroke for his stroke and do not
mutilate the man, for I have heard the Messenger of God say, 'Avoid
dismembering even though it may be a rabid dog'.”[^35]

[^1]: The Messenger of God saw in his vision that Abu Sufyan's sons or
the sons of Hakam b. Abi al-'As go up his pulpit like the monkeys. He
was much annoyed and God revealed this verse ﴾We did not appoint the
vision that we showed you except as a test for the people and the tree
cursed in the Qur'an. We deterred them, but it only increases them in
great rebellion.﴿ (Q: 17/60). For more details about the Umayyads or the
Hakamids as the cursed tree, see Ibn Abi al-Hadid, 9: 220; Ibn
Kathir (d. 774/1373), Tafsir al-Qur'an al-'azim, ed. Muhammd Husayn
Shams al-Din, Dar al-kutub 'ilmiyya, Beirut, 1419/1998, 5: 85; Suyuti,
al-Durr al-manthur, 4: 191.

[^2]: Nasr b. Muzahim Minqari (d. 212/827), Waq'at siffin, ed. 'Abd
Al-Salam Muhammad Harun, Cairo, 1382, reprint in Qumm, 1403, 29 – 30.

[^3]: Ibid, 39-40; Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 71.

[^4]: Ibid, 79.

[^5]: Miqari, 82 – 3.

[^6]: Ibn Sa'd, 5: 12.

[^7]: Minqari, 95; Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 77.

[^8]: Minqari, 98.

[^9]: Ibid, 102.

[^10]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 76.

[^11]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3264-68; Miqari, 160-2.

[^12]: A village near Medina or a town in the Yemen. See Yaqut, 4:
953-4.

[^13]: Ya'qubi, 2: 189.

[^14]: Minqari, 174.

[^15]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3269; Minqari, 162.

[^16]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3270-2; Minqari 186-8.

[^17]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3277-9; Minqari, 200-2.

[^18]: Ibid, 306-7.

[^19]: Ibn Sa'd, 3: 190;  Ya'qubi, 2: 188; Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 92;
Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3321.

[^20]: Minqari, 462-4.

[^21]: Minqari, 369.

[^22]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 98.

[^23]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3329; Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 99.

[^24]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3329-3332.

[^25]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 112.

[^26]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3367.

[^27]: See above, 34.

[^28]: Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 4: 370.

[^29]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3385-6.

[^30]: Abu Ishaq Ibrahim Thaqafi (d. 283/896), al-Gharat, ed. Mir Jalal
al-Din Husayni (Muhaddith) Urmawi, Tehran, 1395, 2: 416-26; Baladhuri,
Ansab, 3: 197-9.

[^31]: Thaqafi, 2: 614 – 16.

[^32]: Ibid, 2: 621 - 633.

[^33]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 238.

[^34]: Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani (d. 356/967), Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, ed.
Sayyid Ahmad Saqar, Dar al ma'rifa, Beirut, n.d., 41; al-Mufid, Kitab
al-irshad, 12.

[^35]: Nahj al-Balagha, 2: 80.


