The Merits of the Companions
============================

   
 The author of the above-mentioned book has attributed some merits to
the Companions and has devoted a chapter to “Abu Bakr in the shade of
the Qur'an”[^1], another one to “Proof of Abu Bakr's caliphate in
traditions and narrations”[^2] which we review them as follow:

He narrates the verse ***﴾If you do not help him, then Allah has already
helped him when the faithless expelled him, and one of the two when the
two of them were in the cave, he said to his companion, do not grieve;
Allah is indeed with us. Then Allah sent down His composure upon
him.﴿*** (Q: 9/40), and mentions that God has honored Abu Bakr in this
verse.[^3]

We should say that this verse is not an admiration, but rather a
narration. It refers to the emigration of the Messenger of God
(S.A.W.A.) when he had left his house for Medina, he returned to Abu
Bakr, he picked him up and they proceeded towards the cave of Thaur.
Those who were looking for the Prophet climbed up to the cave. The
voices were not far off; they were still approaching the cave. Abu Bakr
felt grief. The Prophet (S.A.W.A.) looked at him and said***,*** ***﴾”Do
not grieve; Allah is indeed with us.” Then Allah sent down His composure
upon him.﴿*** (Q: 9/40). The two of them stayed in the cave for three
days. Then they left for Quba' near Medina.[^4]

Of course, accompanying the Prophet is a great merit and honor, but more
meritorious than he, is 'Ali who was continuously with the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) from his early childhood, and would follow him “like a young
camel following in the footprints of its mother”.[^5]

He believes the verses ***﴾The God-fearing shall be spared it. He, who
gives his wealth to purify himself,﴿*** (Q: 92/17-18) refer to Abu
Bakr.[^6] Quoting the verse ***﴾Indeed the noblest of you in the sight
of Allah is the most God-fearing among you.﴿*** (Q: 49/13) he concludes
that Abu Bakr is the most God-fearing among the Companions.[^7]

Abu Bakr himself confessed before his death, “I wish I had not committed
three acts. I wish I had not broken into Fatima's house even if it had
been closed to us for fighting. I wished I had not burned
al-Fuj'at (al-Fujah) al-Sullami alive. I wish I had killed him or made
him free. I wish, on the Saqifa day, I had submitted caliphate to
'Umar or Abu 'Ubayda, so as one of them had been emir and I had been his
vizier.” Then he added, “I wish I had asked the Prophet (S.A.W.S.) about
the matter of caliphate; to whom did it belong so as the people did not
argue about it?” [^8]

He ignored the great sin of his commander, Khalid b. Walid, when he
ordered the execution of a Muslim, Malik b. Nuwayra, and married his
widow at the same night.[^9] We wonder how such a man could be more
God-fearing than one who never worshipped any god but the One God and
never committed any sins, neither in the Time of Ignorance nor after the
advent of Islam.

Quoting the verse ***﴾Allah was certainly pleased with the faithful when
they swore allegiance under the tree.﴿*** (Q: 48/18); he says that Abu
Bakr was among those who swore allegiance under the tree.[^10]

The pledge of Good Pleasure (*al-ridhwan*) took place under a tree in
Hudaybiya; there were at least seven hundred men present there;[^11] and
Abu Bakr was one them. God says ***﴾O you who have faith! Obey Allah and
obey the Apostle, and do not render your works void.﴿*** **(**Q: 47/33).

Elsewhere He says ***﴾Say, 'I do not ask of you any reward for it except
the affection for [my] relatives.'﴿*** **(**Q: 42/23). May God be
pleased with whom His Apostle's daughter, Fatima is displeased?[^12] God
knows best.

He says the verse ***﴾Let the well off and the opulent among you not
fail to give the relatives and the needy, and to those who have
emigrated in the way of Allah.﴿*** (Q: 24/22) refer to Abu Bakr.

It is true. This verse refers to Abu Bakr and his nephew, Mistah b.
Uthatha b. al-Muttalib b. 'Abd Manaf. The latter had been among those
who cast doubt on the fidelity of 'A’isha during the affair of her
absence from the camp of Muslims. Abu Bakr, deeply offended by his
conduct, vowed that he would no longer provide him as he had done in the
past, even after Mistah formally repented of his mistake. The Holy
Qur'an, however, commanded him not to neglect his duty towards his needy
nephew and to pardon him. It is a reminder, not an approval.

He believes the verse ***﴾O you who have faith! Should any of you desert
his religion, Allah will soon bring a people whom He loves and who loves
Him, [who will be] humble towards the faithful stern towards the
faithless.﴿*** (Q:  5/54) is concerned with Abu Bakr.

As we saw above[^13] it was 'Ali b. Abi Talib about whom, in the battle
of Khaybar, the Prophet said, “If Allah wills, tomorrow I will give the
standard to a man who is an assailant not a runaway, he loves Allah and
His Apostle; and Allah and His Apostle love him. He will not come back
until Allah conquers by his means”.

He says the verse ***﴾Will you kill a man for saying, “My Lord is
Allah.”﴿*** (Q: 40/28) refers to Abu Bakr.[^14]

The whole story is ***﴾And Pharaoh said, 'Let me slay Moses, and let him
invoke his Lord. Indeed I fear he will change your religion, or bring
forth corruption in the land.' Moses said, 'Indeed I seek the protection
of my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant one who does not believe in
the day of Reckoning'. Said a man of faith from Pharaoh's clan, who
concealed his faith, will you kill a man for saying, “My Lord is Allah”
while he certainly brings you manifest proofs from your Lord.﴿*** (Q:
40/26-28). 

The text clearly implies that these verses are about Moses and Pharaoh,
not about Muhammd (S.A.W.A.). Moreover, Abu Bakr never concealed his
faith. When he became a Muslim, he showed his faith openly and called
others to God and to His Apostle.[^15] The only man among Quraysh who
concealed his faith and never showed it openly was Abu Talib, but it is
not concerning him, either.

  The author relates some traditions concerning the merits of Abu
Bakr and 'Umar.

  Before discussing the proof of Abu Bakr's caliphate in traditions and
narrations, it is necessary to say that fabricating traditions began
even during the Prophet's life. 'Ali b. Abi Talib says, “Certainly what
is current among the people is right and wrong, true and false,
repealing and repealed, general and particular, definite and indefinite,
exact and surmised. Even during the Prophet's days false saying had been
attributed to him so much so that he had to say in his sermon that,
'whoever attributes falsehood to me makes his abode in Hell'.”[^16]

After the year of the community ('*am* *al*-*jama'a*),[^17] at the end
of his letter Mu'awiya wrote to his tax collectors. “When this letter
from me reaches you, summon the people to relate the merits of the
Companions and the first caliphs. Do not let any Muslim relate anything
about 'Ali b. Abi Talib without bringing something that contradicts this
about the Companions. This I like better and it pleases me more, it
invalidates Abu Turab's claim and those of his Shi'ite in a more
definitive way and it is for them more difficult to bear than the
virtues and merits of 'Uthman.”

Mu'awiya's letters were read out to the people, and many fabricated
reports concerning the merits of the Companions without any grain of
truth were related. The people went out of their way in relating reports
in this vein until they spoke thereof in glowing terms from the pulpits.
The teachers in the schools were instructed to teach their young pupils
in a vast quantity of these until they related them and studied them
just as they studied the Qur'an, and until they taught these to their
daughters, wives and servants. God knows how long they persisted to this
activity.[^18]

'A’isha, as it is well known, championed her father's right to the
succession of the Prophet and backed the caliphate of his appointed
successor, 'Umar. In the election of the *shura* after the murder of
'Umar, she clearly preferred 'Uthman to 'Ali. She soon became, however,
a vocal critic of 'Uthman's conduct as caliph and her agitation against
him contributed to the outbreak of open rebellion. When 'Uthman was
murdered by the rebels and they raised 'Ali to the caliphate, she
immediately turned against him, claiming the revenge for the dead
caliph.

After the defeat of her Umayyad alliance in the Battle of Camel, she
withdrew from active politics. However, she never criticized
Mu'awiya for the public cursing of 'Ali b. Abi Talib in the
congregational prayers. She ignored Mu'awiya's bribing, cheating,
bribing extorting, frightening, and murdering his way through his reign
and appointing his impious son Yazid to his succession. When they killed
her brother Muhammad b. Abi Bakr, put him inside the carcass of a
donkey, and burned, she only cursed Mu'awiya and 'Amr b. al-'As in the
*qunut* of her prayers and she did not criticize them openly.[^19]

 The burial of al-Hasan b. 'Ali in Medina provoked fighting between the
Hashimite and the Umayyad. Al-Hasan had instructed his family before his
death to bury him with his grandfather if they did not fear evil. When
they proposed interring him next to the Prophet, Marwan interfered,
declaring, ”'Uthman will not be buried in Hashsh Kawkab and al-Hasan
here.” The Banu Hashim and Bau Umayya assembled, each group with their
supporters, brandishing their weapons. Abu Hurayra, this time taking the
side of the Prophet's family, asked Marwan, “Will you prevent al-Hasan
b. 'Ali from being buried in this place when I have heard the Messenger
of God say about him and his brother al-Husayn b. 'Ali  that they are
the two lords of the youth of the inmates of Paradise?”

Marwan told him, “Leave us alone. The *hadith* of the Prophet would be
lost if nobody but you and Abu Sa'id Khudri had preserved it. You have
become a Muslim only at the siege of Khaybar.” Abu Hurayra protested
that he had indeed accepted Islam in Khaybar, but from then on, he
stayed constantly with the Prophet and knew everyone whom he loved and
whom he hated, for whom he prayed and whom he cursed. However,
'A’isha taking the side of Bau Umayya, said, “The apartment is mine. I
shall not permit anyone to be buried in it.” Al-Hasan b. 'Ali then was
buried in Baqi' al-Gharqad.[^20]

On fabricating traditions, it is worth narrating the following anecdote
from Ibn Hibban: Yahya b. Ma'in and Ahmad b. Hanbal once came together
in the mosque of al-Rusafa, where a storyteller (*qass*) preached to the
people. He used to say, “Ahmad b. Hanbal and Yahya b. Ma'in once related
to me, on the authority of 'Abd al-Razzaq, from Ma'mar, from Qatada,
from Anas. That the Messenger of God is reported to have said, “He who
says *la ilah illa Allah* causes a bird to be created from every word;
its beak is made of gold and its plumage of pearls.” Ahmad and Yahya
looked at one another and asked each other, “Did you really transmit
this tradition?” They both swore that, they had never heard it until
that moment. They waited until the storyteller had finished and
collected his money.

Then Yahya beckoned to him and asked him to draw nearer. Thinking that
another coin would come his way, he did so and Yahya asked him, “Who
related this tradition to you?” Yahya b. Ma'in and Ahmad b. Hanbal was
the answer. Then he said, “But I am Yahya b. Ma'in and this man is Ahmad
b. Hanbal and we have never heard this mentioned as a prophetic
tradition. If you have to tell obvious lies, do not bother us with
them.”

“Are you really Yahya b. Ma'in?” the storyteller asked. “Yes.” “I have
always heard that Yahya b. Ma'in is stupid,” the man proceeded, “and I
have never set eyes on him until this moment.” Yahya said, “But how do
you know I am stupid?” The storyteller replied, “As if there were in the
whole world no other Yahyas or Ahmads except you two! I have written
down from seventeen different people called Ahmad b. Hanbal apart from
this man here.” Then Ahmad b. Hanbal wrapped his face in the sleeve of
his cloak and said “Let him be.” With wicked glee, the storyteller
watched them go.[^21]

Regarding this preliminary, we will discuss the merits of the
Companions.

 1.  Hudhayfa said, that the Messenger of God had said, “I do not know
how long I will live among you, so you should follow Abu Bakr and
'Umar after me.”[^22]

The Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.), from the beginning of his mission to
the end of his life continuously appointed 'Ali b. Abi Talib to his
succession.

a) When the Warning Verse (Q: 26/214) came down, he invited his nearest
kinsfolk and called them to God. The men remained silent and 'Ali,
though the youngest, said, “O Prophet of God, I will be your helper in
this matter.” The Messenger of God (S.A.W.A) laid his hand on the back
of 'Ali's neck and said, “This is my brother, my executer and my
successor among you. Hearken to him and obey him.”[^23]

b) In A.H. 9, while the Messenger of God with his Companions was making
for the Byzantines (Tabuk), he left 'Ali behind to look after his
family. The hypocrites spoke evil of him, saying that he had been left
behind because he was a burden to the Prophet and he wanted to get rid
of him. On hearing this, 'Ali seized his weapons and caught up with the
Messenger of God when he was halting in al-Jurf, and repeated to him
what the hypocrites were saying. The Prophet (S.A.W.A) replied, “They
lie. I left you behind because of what I had left behind, so go back and
represent me in my family and yours. Are you not content, 'Ali, to stand
to me as Aaron to Moses, except that there will be any prophets after
me?”[^24]

c) On his return from the Farewell Pilgrimage, he stopped at Ghadir
Khumm to communicate God's revelation (Q: 5/67) to the pilgrims who
accompanied him before they dispersed. Taking 'Ali by the hand, he
declared, “He of whom I am the master (*mawla*) this man, 'Ali, is also
the master.” He pleaded, “O God, Be the friend of him who is his friend,
and be the enemy of him who is his enemy; support whom he supports him
and desert whom he deserts. Then Gabriel came down and revealed this
verse,

***﴾Today the faithless have despaired of your religion. So do not fear
them, but fear Me. Today I have perfected your religion for you, I have
completed My blessing upon you, and I have approved Islam as your
religion.﴿*** (Q: 5/3.).

Then 'Ali received in his tent, the congratulations of the Muslim men
and women who greeted him with the title of the Commander of the
Faithful (*Amir al-Mu'minin*), among them was 'Umar b. al-Khattab.[^25]

2.     Qays b. 'Ubada said that 'Ali b. Abi Talib  had said, “Once the
Messenger of God was ill for some days and nights. At the time of the
call to prayer, he told me to say Abu Bakr to lead the prayers. When he
(S.A.W.A.) died, we considered the prayer is the standard of Islam and
the pillar of the faith. Therefore, we were pleased for our world with
someone whom the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) was pleased for our faith. And we
pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr.”[^26]

While the Prophet's illness began and grew more serious, despite the
fact that he could barely lift himself off the ground through weakness,
he arose and decided to go to the mosque. 'Ali  took his hand and
al-Fadhl took the other. He leaned on them both and his feet dragged a
trail along the ground because of his weakness. When he came out into
the mosque, he found Abu Bakr had already got to the *mihrab*. He
indicated with his hand that he should withdraw and Abu Bakr withdrew.
The Messenger of God took his place. He said the *takbir* and began the
prayer, which Abu Bakr had begun before without taking any account of
what he had already performed.[^27]  
 The Prophet (S.A.W.A) did not let Abu Bakr continue leading the
communal prayers. How did he tell 'Ali to say Abu Bakr to lead the
prayers at this time?

In the Guardian Verse (Q: 5/55), God implicitly refers to 'Ali b. Abi
Talib  as the successor to the Prophet.[^28] The Prophet does not speak
out of his own desire and it is not reasonable to, contrary to his
previous will, say, “You should follow Abu Bakr and 'Umar after me.”
Moreover, 'Ali b. Abi Talib and Banu Hashim did not swear allegiance to
Abu Bakr after the Prophet's death. 'Umar and his companions took charge
of securing the pledge of allegiance of all residents in Medina.

They rushed towards the house of Fatima, who was bereaved of her
father's death, and the Companion al-Zubayr with some of the other
Emigrants had assembled there. 'Umar came to the house and told, “By
God, I will set the house on fire, unless you come out and swear
allegiance to Abu Bakr.” Then he broke into the house. Fatima came out
and told them, “By God, you should go out of my house, or I will unveil
my hair and bewail before God.”[^29]

Fatima lived a short time after her father: seventy-five or forty days.
She made a will to be buried secretly at night, in order to prevent her
enemies' attendance.[^30] If 'Ali b. Abi Talib had swore allegiance to
Abu Bakr his house would not have been rushed and set on fire.

3.     Jubayr b. Mut'im said that, “Once a woman came to the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) and consulted him about a business. He told her to come
later. She asked, 'If I come and cannot see you (if you were dead), whom
may I confer with then?' He said, 'If you cannot find me, then discuss
with Abu Bakr'.”[^31]

This tradition and the preceding ones are contrary to the previous
statements of the Messenger of God who appointed 'Ali b. Abi Talib as
his successor.[^32]

4.    'Ali b. Abi Talib  said that, the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) had said,
“Abu Bakr and 'Umar are the two lords of the old of the inmates of
Paradise, except the prophets and the messengers.”[^33]  
 The author himself knows that the Paradise inmates are the young and
the old will become young while in the Paradise.[^34] This is an
inexpertly fabricated tradition, imitating the famous one; al-Hasan and
al-Husayn are the two lords of the youth of the inmates of
Paradise.[^35]

5.   'Ali b. Abi Talib  said that, “The best of the comm-unity after its
Prophet are Abu Bakr and then 'Umar.”[^36]

'Ali b. Abi Talib openly criticizes the caliphs before him. In
*Shiqshiqiyya* Sermon[^37] he says, “By Allah so and so [the son of Abi
Qahafa] dressed himself with it [the caliphate] and he certainly knew
that my position in relation to it was the same of as the position of
the axis in relation to the hand-mill. The floodwater flows down from me
and the bird cannot fly up to me. I put a curtain against the caliphate
and kept myself detached from it.

Then I began to think whether I should assault or endure calmly the
blinding darkness of tribulations wherein the grown up are feeble and
the young grew old and the true believer acts under strain until he
meets Allah. I found that endurance thereon was wiser. Therefore, I
adopted patience although there was mote in the eye and suffocation in
the throat”. He never believed in them. During the election (*shura*),
'Uthman had twice pledged without hesitation that he would follow the
Book of God, the *Sunna* of His Prophet, and the practice of Abu
Bakr and 'Umar, while 'Ali had cautiously stated that he would do so to
the limit of his ability.[^38]

After the Kharijites left Kufa, 'Ali's followers offered him a renewed
oath of allegiance on the basis that they would be friends of those he
befriended and enemies for those he took as enemies. 'Ali b. Abi Talib
stipulated adherence to the Book of God and the *Sunna* of the Prophet
in the oath. Rabi'a b. Shaddad al-Khath'ami suggested, “On the *Sunna*
of Abu Bakr and 'Umar.” 'Ali b. Abi Talib objected that if Abu Bakr and
'Umar had been acting on anything but the Book of God and the *Sunna* of
His Messenger, they would have been remote from the truth.[^39]

If 'Ali b. Abi Talib believed that Abu Bakr and 'Umar were the best of
the community after its Prophet, during the election (*shura*), he could
pledge that he would follow the practice of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and he
would not lose his chance for caliphate. In addition, he would not
object Rabi'a b. Shaddad al-Khath'ami, who had suggested, “On the
*Sunna* of Abu Bakr and 'Umar”. The Prophet (S.A.W.A.) addressing Abu
Bakr said, “You are my Companion in the cave and on the
*hawdh* (Heavenly Water).”

This is another imitation of *thaqalayn* tradition: “Indeed, I have left
among you the Book of God and the offspring of my family (*ahl
al-bayt*). Do not try to outdo them, for then you will be destroyed.”
[^40]

6.    Abu Sa'id Khudri said that he had heard the Messenger of God say,
“Certainly the most benevolent to me in actions and wealth is Abu Bakr.
If I were to take a friend (*khalil*), I would take Abu Bakr as my
friend. All the doors leading to the Mosque should be blocked except for
Abu Bakr's.”[^41]

When the Messenger of God instituted brother-hood between his fellow
Emigrants and the Helpers in Medina he said, “Let each of you take a
brother in God.” He himself took 'Ali by hand and said, “This is my
brother.” Therefore, the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and 'Ali became
brother.[^42]

a) It is interesting that the Prophet could choose a brother, but he
could not choose a friend.

b) The Prophet ordered that all private doors leading to the mosque be
blocked except for 'Ali. He said, “O 'Ali, no one is allowed to enter
the mosque while he is impure (*junub*) except me and you.”[^43] There
are many other traditions in this effect.[^44]  

Therefore, it is a more reasonable version, and it is confirmed by the
verses, ***﴾Indeed Allah desires to repel all impurity from you, O
People of the Household, and purify you with a thorough
purification.﴿*** (Q: 33/33).

And ***﴾Should anyone argue with you about them, after the knowledge
that has come to you, say come, let us call our sons and your sons, our
women and your women, our souls and your souls, then let us pray
earnestly, and call down Allah's curse upon the liars.﴿*** (Q: 3/61).
Here, God considers 'Ali b. Abi Talib as the soul of the Prophet.

7.     'A’isha said that she had heard the Messenger of God say, “It
does not behoove a community to lead their prayers anyone else while Abu
Bakr is among them.”[^45]  
 See on Abu Bakr leading communal prayers, above, (page 37).

8.     Anas b. Malik said that the Messenger of God had said, “The
kindest to my community among them is Abu Bakr.”[^46]

Abu Bakr would have been the kindest to the community among them, if he
had not broken into Fatima's house.[^47] If he had not disinherited the
Prophet's daughter from her father's inheritance.[^48] If Fatima had
been happy with him when she died.[^49] If he had not made Khalid b.
Walid murder Malik b. Nuwayra, and he had punished Khalid who married
Malik's widow at the same night he killed her husband. If he had not
burned al-Fuj'at (or Fujah) al- Sullami alive;[^50] and if….

9.     'Abd Khayr said that he had heard 'Ali say (while he was
preaching) on the pulpit, “Would you like to inform you of the best man
of the community after its Prophet?” Then 'Ali named Abu Bakr. Again, he
said, “Would you like to inform you of the second?” This time, he named
'Umar.[^51]  
 We discussed 'Ali's attitude towards the caliphs before him (page 159).

10.   'A’isha said, “The Messenger of God told me during his illness,
'call your father and your brother to me so that I may write a letter.
For I fear that someone will have wishful fancies and someone will say,
I am more worthy, but God and the faithful refuse anyone but Abu
Bakr'.”[^52]

If Abu Bakr had had such a letter it would have shown it to the people
in Saqifa, and he would not have offered people to accept 'Umar or Abu
'Ubayda as the caliph.[^53] Moreover, he did not wish he had asked the
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) about the matter of caliphate: to whom had it
belonged, as the people had not argued about it.[^54]

11.     The Messenger of God said, “Regard for my Tr-adition (*Sunna*)
and the Traditions of the divinely and rightly-guided caliphs, take the
Traditions and hold on to them with your wisdom teeth.”[^55]

The man who fabricated this tradition did not know that the term 'the
divinely and rightly guided caliphs' had not been used during the
Prophet's life. It was initiated later during the Umayyad or
'Abbasid caliphs to distinguish them from the first four ones; moreover
the Prophet (S.A.W.A) said, “When you come to me at the heavenly waters
(*hawdh*), then indeed I will ask you about two important things
(*thaqalayn*) which I have left behind. Take care how you follow me with
regard to the Book of God and the offspring of my family (*ahl
al-bayt*). Do not try to outdo them, for then you will be
destroyed.”[^56]

11.     The Messenger of God said, “Abu Bakr is blessed, 'Umar is
blessed, 'Uthman is blessed, 'Ali is blessed, Talha is blessed,
Zubayr is blessed, 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf is blessed, Sa'd b. Abi
Waqqas is blessed, Sa'id b. Zayd is blessed and Abu 'Ubayda b.
al-Jarrah is blessed.”[^57]

As we discussed before, the pledge of Good Pleasure (*al-ridhwan*) took
place under a tree in Hudaybiya; there were at least seven hundred men
present there not only ten.[^58]  
  

[^1]: Salimi, 18-21.

[^2]: Ibid, 22-28.

[^3]: Ibid, 18.

[^4]: See above, 16f.

[^5]: See Nahj al-balagha, 1: 417.

[^6]: Salimi, 18.

[^7]: Ibid, 19.

[^8]: See above, 72.

[^9]: See above, 67, note 1.

[^10]: Salimi, 19.

[^11]: See above, 25.

[^12]: See al-Maqdisi, 5: 20.

[^13]: See above, 26.

[^14]: Salimi, 21.

[^15]: Ibn Hisham, 1: 266.

[^16]: Nahj al-balagha, 1: 449.

[^17]: See above, 120.

[^18]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, 11: 45.

[^19]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3406.

[^20]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 297-8.

[^21]: Ibn Hibban al-Busti (d. 354/965), Kitab al-majruhin, ed. Mahmud
Ibrahim Zayid, Beirut, n.d., 1, 85.

[^22]: Salimi, 22.

[^23]: See above, 11 f.

[^24]: See above, 30.

[^25]: See above, 34 f.

[^26]: Salimi, 23.

[^27]: See above, 37.

[^28]: See above, 46, note 1.

[^29]: See above, 65 f.

[^30]: See above, 69.

[^31]: Salimi 23.

[^32]: See Q 5: 55 and 46, note 1.

[^33]: Salimi, 24.

[^34]: Ibid, 24.

[^35]: See above 151 f.

[^36]: Salimi, 24.

[^37]: Nahj al-balagha, 1: 34.

[^38]: See above, 83.

[^39]: See above, 111.

[^40]: See above, 35.

[^41]: Salimi, 25.

[^42]: See above, 17.

[^43]: Sibt b. al-Jawzi (d. 654/127), Tadhkira al-khawass, ed. al-Sayyid
Muhammad Sadiq Bahr al-'Ulum, Beirut, 1401/1981, 46-47.

[^44]: See e.g. Tirmidhi, 4: 471, no. 3732; Qadhi Nur Allah Shushtari,
Ihqaq al-haqq wa izhaq al-batil, ed, Sayyid Mahmud Mar'ashi, Qumm, n.d.
5: 540-584.

[^45]: Salimi, 25.

[^46]: Ibid, 26.

[^47]: See above, 66.

[^48]: See above, 68 f.

[^49]: See above, 69.

[^50]: See above, 72.

[^51]: Salimi 26.

[^52]: Ibid, 26.

[^53]: See above, 63.

[^54]: See above, 72.

[^55]: Salimi, 27.

[^56]: See above, 35.

[^57]: Salimi, 27.

[^58]: See above, 25.


