The Extremists and Misinterpretation of the Holy Qur’an
=======================================================

   
 The above-mentioned writer says,  
 “A group of the extremists (*ghulat*) believe that the Holy Qur'an is
misrepresented. Some chapters and verses on 'Ali's guardianship and
succession have been left out. They do not believe in the Holy Qur'an
compiled by 'Uthman and say that he changed and misrepresented it
according to his wish. For example, they say the Confederates Chapter
(*Sura al-Ahzab*) which contains 73 verses now had 286 verses before
compiling. The Hijr Chapter (*Sura al-Hijr*) which has 99 verses now
contained 190 verses before. All the missing verses are those concerning
'Ali's guardianship (*wilayat*).

An unidentified Holy Qur'an has been found in India that contains a
Chapter of Light (*Sura al-Nur*) other than this Chapter of Light (*Sura
al-Nur*). It has seven verses and they think it is the Chapter of
guardianship of 'Ali b. Abi Talib and the Imams after him. The
extremists say that the Prophet gave the perfect and reliable written
text, which was written by 'Ali b. Abi Talib himself, to Fatima. It was
three times greater in extent than the ordinary Holy Qur'an. This is the
same copy, which inherits one Imam to the other one. Finally it reaches
*al-hujja* (the Hidden Imam) and he will interpret it for the people of
the end of the time.”[^1]

*Ghulat* [extremist] are those who exaggerate or go beyond all bounds,
particularly in reverence for certain individuals notably 'Ali b. Abi
Talib and the 'Alids and consider them incarnation of the Deity. What
heads of the sects are to be called *ghulat* [extremists] depends on the
point of view of the writer, but as a rule, those who adopted such
notions originally foreign to Islam as incarnation (*hulul*),
metempsychosis (*tanasukh*) etc., are considered *ghulat*.[^2]

We (Shi'ite) say that our belief concerning those who exceed the bonds
of belief (*ghulat*), and those who believe in delegation (*mufawwadha*)
is that they are deniers (*kuffar*) of Allah, Glory be to His name. They
are wickeder the Jews, the Christians, the Fire-Worshippers, the
Qadarites or the Kharijites (*Haruriya*), or the heretics (*ahl
al-bid'a*) or those who hold views, which lead astray (*al-ahwa
al-madhilla*).[^3]

Imam 'Ali b. Musa al-Ridha, the eighth Imam, says that the Prophet said,
“Do not exalt me to a higher rank than I deserve, since Allah, Glory be
to His name, made me His servant before he made me His Messenger.”

He narrates it through his father, Musa b. Ja'far al-Kazim, from his
father, Ja'far b. Muhmmad al-Sadiq, from his father, Muhammad b. 'Ali
al-Baqir from his father, 'Ali b. al-Husayn, from his father, Husayn b.
'Ali, from his father, 'Ali b. Abi Talib, from the Messenger of God
(S.A.W.A.) narrated. He, Glory be to His name, says in His Book,

***﴾It does not behoove any human that Allah should give him the Book,
judgment and prophet-hood and then he should say to the people, 'Be my
servant instead of Allah.' Rather [he would say], 'Be a godly people,
because of your teaching the Book and because of your studying it.' And
he would not command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords.
Would he call you to unfaith after you have been Muslims.*** ***﴿***(Q:
3/79-80).

'Ali b. Abi Talib says, “Two groups have corrupted themselves concerning
me: the extremist friends and the negligent enemies. I seek absolution
to Allah in respect of exceeding and exalting our position higher than
we are, an absolution similar to that of Jesus, the son of Mary, from
the Christians, as Allah, Glory be to His name, says,

***﴾And when Allah said, “O Jesus son of Mary! Were it you who said to
the people, 'Take me and my mother for gods besides Allah'?” He said,
“Immaculate are you! It does not behoove me to say what I have no right
to say. Had I said it, You would certainly have known it. You know
whatever is in my self, and I do not know what is in Your Self. Indeed,
You are Knower of all that is Unseen. I did not say to them anything
except what You had commanded me to say,*** ***'Worship Allah, my Lord
and your Lord.' Moreover, I was a witness to them so long as I was among
them. But when You had taken me away, You Yourself were watchful over
them, and witness to all things.”﴿*** **(**Q: 5/116-117).

Allah also says, ***﴾The Messiah son of Mary, is but an apostle.
Certainly, other apostles have passed before him, and his mother was a
truthful one. Both of them would eat food.﴿*** (Q: 5/75). That is they
eat and they excrete like ordinary people. Thus, whoever claims deity
for the prophets; or claims divinity or prophet-hood for Imams or
Imamate for non-Imams, we disown them in this world and in the
Hereafter.[^4]

It is related from Zurara that he said, “I said to Imam Musa b. Ja'far
al-Kazim that a man from among the descendents of 'Abd Allah b. Saba' is
a believer in the doctrine of delegation (*tafwidh*), and Imam said,
'What is delegation (*tafwidh*)?' I said according to him (the man from
among the descendents of 'Abd Allah b. Saba') Allah, the Mighty and
Glorious, created Muhammad and 'Ali b. Abi Talib and then delegated the
matter of (creation) to them, and these two created and gave sustenance,
and caused life and death.” The Imam said, “He, the enemy of Allah, has
lied. When you return to him recite him the verse of the Thunder
Chapter (*Sura* *al-Ra'd*) ***﴾Have they set up for Allah partners who
have created like His creation, so that the creations seemed confusable
to them. Say Allah is the creator of all things, and He is the One, the
All-paramount.﴿*** (Q: 13/16).

Concerning the delegators (*al-mufawwidha*), the extremists
(*ghulat*) and their like Imam said, “O God! Do not include us among
them who curse them.”[^5]

Concerning the extent of the Holy Qur'an, our belief is that the Holy
Qur'an, which Allah revealed to His Prophet Muhammad, is the same as the
one between the two boards (*daffatayn*), but it is the same extent in
the hands of people.[^6]

The Shi'ite belief concerning the perverting or misinterpretation  of
the Holy Qur'an -that is omitting part or parts of it- is that it has
never occurred. The Holy Qur'an, which now is in the hands of Muslims,
is just the same as revealed to Prophet (S.A.W.A). Most of the Shi'ite
scholars has stipulated it including: Ibn Babawayh in his *I'tiqadat
al-Imamiyya,* Tabrisi in *Majma' al-bayan*, Shaykh Ja'far Kashif
al-Ghita' in his *Kashf al-ghita*, 'Allama al-Shahshahani in his
*al-'Urwa al-wuthqa* , and al-Mawla Muhsin[Faydh] al-Qasani in his two
books (*al-Wafi* and '*Ilm al-yaqin*).[^7]

Some Scholars have attributed the notion of not perverting the Holy
Qur'an to great Shi'ite '*Ulama'* and experts like al-Shaykh al-Mufid,
al-Shaykh al-Biha'i and Qadhi Nur Allah Shushtari and others. Generally,
we say no Shi'ite expert, who has written a book on Imamate, has
stipulated perverting the Holy Qur'an.[^8]

However, our Sunnite brethren have a different view. 'Umar says, “Part
of what He sent down was the passage of stoning; we read it, and we were
taught it, and we needed it. The Messenger of God (S.A.W.S.)  stoned
(adulterers) and we stoned them after him. I fear that in time to come
men will say that they find no mention of stoning in God's book and
thereby go astray by neglecting an ordinance, which God has sent down.
Then we read in what we read from God's book, 'Do not desire to have
ancestors other than your own for it is infidelity to do so**.'** [^9]

However, we see neither 'the stoning passage', nor 'the ancestors' verse
in the Holy Qur'an.  Ibn Abi Maryam narrated from Ibn Abi Luhay'a from
Ibn Abi al-Aswad, from 'Urwa b. al-Zubayr from 'A’isha who said, ”*Sura
al-Ahzab* (confederates) was read 200 verses during the Prophet's time,
but when 'Uthman was collecting the Book, he could not find more than we
are reading now.” Isma'il b. Ja'far also narrated from al-Mubarak b.
Fudhala, from 'Asim b. Abi al-Nujud, from Ziz b. Hubaysh who said that
'Ubayy b. Ka'b had asked him, “How many verses are there in *Sura al-
Ahzab*?” He answered 72 or 73 verses. 'Ubayy said it was the same extent
as *Sura al-Baqara*, in which the 'stoning passage' was read.[^10]

The baseless calumnies, which the Sunnite ascribes to the Shi'ite, are
countless. Among those who have judged the Shi'ite creeds without
studying and knowledge, are Fakhr al-Din al-Razi. Commenting the verse
***﴾Allah effaces and confirms whatever He wishes.﴿*** (Q: 13/39), he
says the *Rafidhi*s (the Shi'ite) say that *al*-*bada'* (emergence of
new circumstances which cause a change in an earlier ruling) for God is
permitted and *bada'* means that God ordains something, but something
else happens, that is against His knowledge.”[^11] O! Allah You are
Immaculate. This is nothing, but a fabrication.[^12] Alusi, commenting
the verse ***﴾eat and drink until the white streak becomes manifest to
you from the dark streak at the crack of dawn.﴿*** (Q: 2/187) says, “The
Shi'ite permit themselves to begin their [Ramadhan] fast from the
sunset.”[^13]

I wonder whence Alusi has gotten this fascinating information and
knowledge, and for this argument to what document, he has attested. He
lived in Baghdad, the Shi'ite settlement from the old times up to now,
and the Holy Shrines are near Baghdad, there are few people who cannot
find the Shi'ite there; he could get true information from them. Truly,
it is surprising that a learned man like Alusi cast baseless accusation
on the Shi'ite. By God, this accusation and the likes are but division
between Muslims, which only their enemies exploit it and govern
them.[^14]  
  

[^1]: Salimi, 58-60.

[^2]: See Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam, H.A.R. Gibb and J.H. Krammers
(eds.), 3rd imprssion, E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1991, 110.

[^3]: Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, known as al-Shaykh al-Saduq (d. 381/991),
I'tiqadat al-Imamiyya (A Shi'ite creed), trans. Asaf A.A. Fyzee.,
revised edition, Tehran, 1404/1982, 87-88.

[^4]: Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, known as al-Shaykh al-Saduq (d. 381/991),
'Uyun akhbar al-Ridha, ed. Sayyid Mahdi al- Husayni al-Lajwardi, Qumm,
1378, 200-201.

[^5]: Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, I'tiqadat, 90-92.

[^6]: Ibid, 77.

[^7]: al-Sayyid Abu al-Qasim al- Musawi al-Khu'i, al-Bayan fi tafsir
al-Qur'an, Qumm, 5th edition, 1394/1974, 218-219.

[^8]: Ibid, 219.

[^9]: See above, 61.

[^10]: al-Suyuti, Jalal al-Din Abd al-Rahman (d. 911/1105), al-Itqan fi
'Ulum al-Qur'an, ed., Muhammad  Abu al-Fadhl Ibrahim, 2nd edition,
Cairo, 1387/1967, 1: 234.

[^11]: al-Razi, 19: 66.

[^12]: al-Khu'i, 548.

[^13]: al-Alusi, 2: 67.

[^14]: Ibid, 559-560.


