Conclusion
==========

   
 We   Muslims, Shi'ite and Sunnite, are both from the tribe of Islam. We
all worship the one God, believe in one faith, follow one Prophet,
recite one Holy Qur'an and pray towards one Qibla. Small different views
should not spoil or destroy our unity or correlation. We should
co-operate and be united to regain our lost grandeur, not cast baseless
accusation and dispute to lose our power. Allah says ***﴾And obey Allah
and His Apostle, and do not dispute, or you will lose heart and your
power will be gone. And be patient indeed Allah is with the patient.﴿***
(Q: 8/46).

Here is an example of the disgraceful behavior of Christians towards
Muslims in the former Andalusia.

At Gandía, where the movement (of mob violence towards the Muslims of a
Moorish quarter in Andalusia) began, it would seem Christians took broom
and branches, dipped them into irrigation channels and by general desire
converted the Mudejars[^1]  into Christians at a stroke. Such new
Christians could perhaps count themselves lucky. In Polop, the Mudejars
took refuge in a castle and held out there for a few days. They finally
agreed to surrender and accept baptism, and in return, the
Christian rebels promised to leave them alone.

When the baptism was complete, 600 of those who had been in the castle
were put to death, a procedure that the rebels were pleased to point
out, “More souls in heaven and more money in our pockets.” (No doubt
from the valuables, which they stripped from the corpses). Nobody could
imagine that the conversions effected during this terrifying outbreak of
intercommunal violence were voluntary. Those Mudejars who had asserted
that they had not of their own free would become Christians, and who had
accordingly returned to their Islamic faith, were told that if they did
not return to Church the penalty for apostasy was death and the
confiscation of their property

. From this time onwards, from 931/ 1525 or 932/1526, nobody could
openly live as a Muslim in any part of the Iberian Peninsula.
Mudejar Spain ended in 906/1501-907/1502. Islam certainly continued to
exist, but it was an underground faith.[^2]

Today many Muslim countries are subjected to Christian or Jew governors.
The Zionists govern Palestine and the Farther Mosque (*masjid al-aqsa*).
The Americans have occupied Afghanistan and Iraq. They imprison and kill
Muslims, exploit their natural sources and rule over their people. Is it
not time yet for those who have faith that their hearts should be
humbled for Allah's remembrance and hearken to Allah, Who says,
***﴾Indeed this community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord,
so be wary Me.﴿*** (Q: 23/52).

[^1]: Muslims living permanently as a subject of one of the
Christian kingdom of the Iberian Peninsula.

[^2]: L. P. Harvey, “The political, social and cultural history of the
Moriscos”, in Salma Khadra Jayyusi (ed.), The Legacy of Muslim Spain,
Leiden, 1992, 221-222.


