The Succession to the Prophet of God
====================================

   
 The Prophet's death was unbelievable for some Muslims. A man arose in
the name of Allah; he united the scattered and disunited Arabia, which
had never experienced tranquility since then. He made a government based
on faith. He abolished the civil war among the tribes of Arabia and
succeeded peace for it. How would such a great man die? 'Umar got up
among the Muslims assembled at the gate of the mosque and said, “Some of
the hypocrites claim that the Apostle is dead, but by God he is not
dead. He has gone to his Lord as Moses the son of 'Imran went before,
and was hidden from his people for forty days, returning to them after
it was said that he had died. But by God the Apostle will return as
Moses returned and will cut off the hands and feet of the men who claim
that the Apostle is dead.”[^1]

Nevertheless, the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.) had departed to the
dominion of his Lord, and he was not among his people any more. He was
the “Seal of the Prophets” or the “Last of the Prophets” and there was
no prophet after him. Who was the leader of the community after him?

The Sunnites believe that,  
      “Caliphate is offspring of the society and all of the four
rightly-guided caliphs came to power by people's votes. Islam has
entrusted the election of the caliphs and the control of the community
to a council of the learned and devoted Muslims, thus the Messenger of
God did not explicitly appoint his successor. Had he designated one,
people would have put in doubt about him, or they might not have
accepted him so they would have apostatized. God wanted to prevent
people from apostasy; therefore, He did not appoint one (though some
became apostatized).

The successor would be the same as a prophet who is raised up by God;
however, Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) was the 'Last of the Prophets'. Had he
designated a successor, he would have deprived people of their own
rights and it would have led to the reign of tyrants and God would have
been responsible for it.”[^2]

When Abu Lu'lu'a Fayruz assassinated 'Umar b. al-Khattab and Hafsa heard
her father thinking of putting no one as the caliph after his death, she
told him, “If you had a shepherd looking after your sheep and if he had
left his duty, you would have regarded him as a waster, so consider
people becoming worst.” [^3] While some sheep cannot be left without a
shepherd, how could the Messenger of God leave his community without a
leader?

We believe that 'Ali b. Abi Talib was the only man among the Prophet's
Companions who neither worshipped any idols nor committed any sins in
his life during the paganism and Islam. He was the first man who
believed in the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.) and prayed with him.[^4]
From his early childhood, he was continuously with the Messenger of God
(S.A.W.A.) and would follow him “like a young camel following in the
footprints of its mother”.[^5]

He was the most meritorious, the most pious, the most learned, the
noblest, the bravest, and the nearest man and kinsfolk to the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) among his Companions. The Messenger of God took him as his
brother and God identified him as the soul of the Prophet.[^6]

He was one of the Household of the Prophet (*ahl al-bayt*) whom God
purified with a thorough purification, ***﴾Indeed Allah desires to repel
all impurity from you, O People of the Household, and purify you with a
thorough purification**.**﴿*** (Q: 33/33).[^7]

Thus, the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A) appointed him as his successor and
his executor. He proclaimed it explicitly and implicitly in many cases,
therefore we believe him as the immediate successor to the Prophet.

God raised the prophets to preach the word of Allah and guide people to
the straight path; to establish a government was subordinate. Muhammad
(S.A.W.A.) was the Messenger of God whether he was under the pressure
and torture of Quraysh in Mecca, or he was the religious and political
leader of his community in Medina. Jesus who was wandering in plains and
mountains and did not have a permanent residence was a prophet, as
Solomon who ruled a vast and unique kingdom was. 'Ali b. Abi Talib was
the immediate successor to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.), whether he was in
power, or deprived of it.

 This is the dispute between the Shi'ite and the Sunnite. Now we need an
arbiter to make judgment between us, an arbiter whom both of us accept
and believe in. Moreover, who is better than God and His apostle? God
says***,*** ***﴾O You who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle
and those vested with authority among you.  In addition, if you dispute
concerning anything refer it to Allah and the Apostle, if you have faith
in Allah and the Last Day. That is better and more favorable in
outcome**.**﴿*** (Q: 4/59).

 So, let us consider what God and his Apostle say about the past
prophets' successors in general and about Muhammad's successor in
particular.[^8]

The Holy Qur'an places great emphasis on the duty of all Muslims to
maintain the bonds of blood relationship. ***﴾Indeed Allah enjoins
justice and kindness, and generosity towards relatives, and He forbids
indecency, wrong and aggression. He advises you, so that you may take
admonition**.**﴿*** (Q: 16/90).

It contains specific instructions about the maintenance of kinship ties
and inheritance as well as stories and statements about the succession
of the past prophets and their families, matters, which cannot be
relevant to the succession to the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.)

In the story of the past prophets, as it is related in the Holy Qur'an,
their families play a prominent role. The families provide vital
assistance to the prophets against the adversaries among their people.
After the death of the prophets, their descendants became their
spiritual and material heirs. The prophets ask God to grant them the
help of members of their family and they pray divine favor for their kin
and their offspring.

The prophets of Banu Isra'il were in fact all descendents of a single
family from Adam and Noah down to Jesus. ***﴾Indeed Allah chose Adam and
Noah, and the progeny of Abraham and the progeny of 'Imran above all the
nations; some of them are the descendents of the others, and Allah is
All-hearing, All-knowing**.**﴿*** **(**Q: 3/33-4**).**

After narrating the story of Moses, Isma'il and Idris, the Holy Qur'an
adds**,** ***﴾They are the ones whom Allah has blessed. From among the
prophets of Adam's progeny, and from [the progeny of] those We carried
with Noah, And from among the progeny of Abraham and Israel, and from
among those We guided and chose**.**﴿*** **(**Q: 19/58)**.**

The chain of the prophets and their families is described with more
detail in the following verses. ***﴾And We gave him Isaac and Jacob and
guided each of them. And Noah We had guided before, and from his
offspring, David and Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses and Aaron -thus do We
reward the virtuous- and Zechariah, John, Jesus, and Ilyas, -each of
them among the righteous- and Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah and Lot -each We
graced over all the nations- and from among their fathers, their
descendants and brethren. We chose them and guided them to the right
path. That is Allah's guidance: with it, He guides whomever He wishes of
His servants. Nevertheless, were they to ascribe any partners [to
Allah], what they used to do would not avail them. They are the ones
whom We gave the Book, the judgment and prophet-hood. So if these
disbelieve in them, We will have certainly entrusted them to a people
who will never disbelieve in them**.**﴿*** (Q: 6/4-89)**.**

Abraham was the patriarch of the prophets of Banu Isra'il. All later
prophets and transmitters of the scripture among them were of his
descendants, ***﴾Certainly We sent Noah and Abraham and We ordained
among their descendents, Prophet-hood and the Book**.**﴿*** (Q: 57/26).

In the face of the opposition of Banu Isra'il, Moses implored his Lord
to grant him the help of his brother Aaron, ***﴾Appoint for me a
minister from my family, Aaron my brother. Strengthen my back through
him, make him my associate in my affair, so that we may glorify You
greatly, and remember You greatly**.**﴿*** (Q: 20/29-34). God responded
to his prayer, ***﴾Certainly, We gave Moses the Book and We made Aaron,
his brother, accompany him as a minister**.**﴿*** (Q: 25/35).

When the angels announced to Abraham the imminent birth of his son
Isaac and, after him his grandson Jacob, his wife Sarah doubted the good
news in view of their advanced age. However, the angels reminded her of
her elevated rank as the spouse of Abraham. ***﴾His wife, standing by,
laughed as We gave her the good news [the birth] of Isaac, and Jacob
after Isaac. She said, 'O,*** ***my! Shall I an old woman, bear
[children], and [while] the husband of mine is an old man? That is
indeed an odd thing!' They said 'Are you amazed at Allah's dispensation?
 [That is] Allah's mercy and His blessing upon you, Members of the
household.'*** ***﴿*** (Q: 11/71-73).  
    
 Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) was not different from his precedent prophets,
***﴾A precedent of those We have sent from among Our Apostles before
you, and you will not find any change in Our precedent**.**﴿*** (Q:
17/77).

Insofar as the Holy Qur'an expresses the thoughts of the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.), it is evident that he could not have considered Abu Bakr his
natural successor or have been pleased by his succession. Yet he could
not have seen his succession essentially other than in the light of the
narrations of the Holy Qur'an about the succession of the earlier
prophets, just as he saw his own mission as a prophet, the resistance of
his people with which he met, and former prophets as related in the Holy
Qur'an.

These earlier prophets considered a supreme divine favor to be succeeded
by their offspring, or close kin for which they implored their Lord. The
eminent position of the families and the descendents of the past
prophets and the parallelism often observed between the history of the
former prophets in the Holy Qur'an and that of Muhammd (S.A.W.A.) should
arise from expectations of a distinguished place reserved for his
family. The kin of the Messenger of God are mentioned in various
contexts, sometimes probably in a wider sense than that of his family.

This order is addressed to the Prophet in Warning Verse (*aya
indhar*),[^9] and in the following verse, ***﴾Say I do not ask of you
any reward for it, except the affection for [my] relatives**.**﴿*** (Q:
42/23). There is also the verse of the 'mutual imprecation' (*mubahala*)
(Q: 3/61). The Prophet (S.A.W.A) came with 'Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and
Fatima to discuss a delegation of Christians from Najran. In this verse,
God identifies 'Ali as the soul of the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.).
Moreover, He refers to 'Ali, as the successor to the Prophet, in the
Guardian Verse (*aya wilayat*) as follow, ***﴾Your guardian is only
Allah, His Apostle, and the faithful who maintain the prayer, and give
the*** **zakat***** while bowing down**.**﴿*** (Q: 5/55). [^10]

The Prophet (S.A.W.A.) usually appointed commanders and ordered them to
raid to the polytheist tribes or he sent representatives to the kings
and invited them to Islam, but he never sent Abu Bakr for a delegation.
He only once entrusted him with the “Renunciation Chapter” to proclaim
it to the people in Mecca, while God sent down the Gabriel and ordered
the Prophet that he or a man of his own should proclaim it.[^11]

These are the reasons why we believe 'Ali b. Abi Talib  is the immediate
successor to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.), however, our brother disapproves
them.  
  

[^1]: Ibn Hisham, 4, 305; Tabari, Ta'rikh, 4, 1815 f. 

[^2]: Salimi, 5-6.

[^3]: Muslim b. Hajjaj (d. 261/875), Sahih, kitab al-imara, bab
al-istikhlaf wa tarkuhu, ed. S. 'A. M. Al al-Shaykh, Riyadh, 1419, no
12[4714].

[^4]: See Ibn Hisham, 1: 262; Tabari, Ta'rikh, 3: 1160; Ibn Athir, 2:
57.

[^5]: See Nahj al-balagha, 1: 417.

[^6]: See aya mubahala. (Q: 3/61).

[^7]: See al-Haskani, 2: 18-140 for the isnads the 'People of Household'
(ahl al-bayt) referring to Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn; moreover, the pronoun referring to them is the masculine
plural (kum), while in the preceding part of the verse the pronoun is
the feminine plural (kunna). This change of gender in the last part of
the verse  from kunna to kum is evidently referring to the five People
of the Mantle (ahl al-kisa)': Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn.  

[^8]: For writing this part, I owe in large measure to Professor Wilferd
Madelung's invaluable work, The succession to Muhammad,  A study of the
early Caliphate, Cambridge, 1997. 

[^9]: See, Q 26: 214-216.

[^10]: For this verse concerning 'Ali, see e.g. Muqatil b. Sulayman (d.
150/767), Tafsir, ed. 'A. M. Shihata, Beirut, 1424, 1: 486;
Baladhuri (d. 279/822) , (Kitab jumal min) Ansab al-ashraf, ed. S.
Zakkar, and R. Zirikli, Beirut, 1417/1996, 2: 381; Tabari (d. 310/923),
Tafsir Tabari: Jami' al-bayan 'an ta'wil ay al-Qur'an, Beirut,
1420/1999, 4: 628-9.; Jassas (d. 370/981), Ahkam al-Qur'an, ed. 'Abd
al-Salam Muhammad 'Ali Shahin, Beirut, 1415/1994, 2: 557; Suyuti (d.
911/1505), al-Durr al-manthur fi al-tafsir bi al-ma'thur, ed. Muhammad
Amin Damaj & Co., Beirut, n.d. 3: 99.  

[^11]: See Ibn Hisham, 4: 190; Ya'qubi, 2: 76


