Concord and Discord
===================

   
 Originally, we, Shi'ite and Sunnite Muslims, are both from the tribe of
Islam and we have many things in common. Our beliefs originate from the
Holy Qur'an and the Apostle of God's traditions and customs narrated by
his purified household and his trusted Companions, however, we have some
divergence of views about interpreting a few verses of the Holy Qur'an
and understanding the meaning of some traditions and customs of the
Prophet (S.A.W.A). In spite of this divergence, we should not dispute
and lose our power; rather we could listen to each other's word and
follow what is the best of it.

The author of the above-mentioned book, *Khilafat va
intikhab* (Caliphate and Election), rejects some of Shi'ite views, which
we will quote, and then we will answer his objections. He writes:  
 “The ink and parchment (*qirtas*) tradition which is related in
Bukhari's *Sahih* is baseless. Although this ludicrous story is found in
many collections of traditions, it seems unreliable and untrue. Some
religious sects and nations, which rose up secretly in later times;
fabricated it and some naïve and thoughtless Muslims included it in
their books. In many occasions the Messenger of God said, “The Book of
God and my practice are enough for your guidance and bliss.” Why did he
[the Prophet] want to write something contradictory to his previous
sayings?  ”**Heaven be praised, a monstrous calumny**!” The Messenger of
God is immune and immaculate from inconsistency.”[^1]

We say, Many Sunnite and Shi'ite scholars have narrated this tradition
in their canonical and historical books: including San'ani in
*al-Musannaf*, Bukhari in *Sahih*, Ibn Sa'd in *Tabaqat* *al-kubra,*
al-Mufid in *Kitab al-irshad* and so forth. It is so well attested by
different *isnad*s that it does not seem possible to reject it; however,
our brother devoted seven pages refuting it. He says, “Some of the naïve
and thoughtless Muslims included this fabricated tradition in their
books.”[^2]

Moreover, he considers that the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) wished to write a
will contrary to his previous sayings and customs, God says, ***﴾Nor
does he speak out of [his own] desire: It is just a revelation that is
revealed [to him]**.**﴿*** (Q: 53/3-4). In the last hours of his life,
the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.) wanted to write a document for his
people, after which they would never go astray. It is the natural right
of every one to make a testament. If he wanted to repeat his former
sayings, it was based on God's order, ***﴾And admonish, for admonition
indeed benefits the faithful**.**﴿*** (Q: 51/55). ***﴾So admonish, for
admonition is indeed*** ***beneficial**.**﴿*** (Q: 87/9).

Concerning the Guardian Verse (*aya wilayat*), he writes, ”according to
Shi'ite  belief, while 'Ali was bowing down in his prayer, a beggar came
to the mosque and asked for help. 'Ali gave him his ring for charity;
and this verse came down concerning him. They believe that the term
'guardian' (*wali*) in this verse refers to 'leadership' which is
exclusive to God, the Messenger of God and the faithful, and the concept
of 'while bowing down' is 'Ali, since he gave alms while he was bowing
down. Our exegetists and traditionists have not preserved it. From our
(the Sunnite) point of view it is not the case.[^3]

It concerns all the Immigrants and the Helpers, since the pronoun is in
the plural form (*alladhina*), figuratively speaking, although we can
sometimes use it for singular nouns, there is no reason here to ignore
its real meaning. The phrase 'while bowing down' does not have a real
and practical meaning, since alms giving during saying one's prayers
renders it invalid; its real meaning is ﴾those who are humble**.**﴿.[^4]

We say many Sunnite and Shi'ite exegetes and traditionists including,
Muqatil b. Sulayman, Baladhuri, Jassas, Tha'alibi,[^5] Suyuti,[^6] as
well as all Shi'ite ones have narrated this verse as concerned with
'Ali. Had he consulted the exegetical and traditional literature he
would not have said, “Our exegetes and traditionists have not preserved
it.” The plural pronouns are used for singular nouns on other occasions
in the Holy Qur'an.

During the Battle of Dhat al-Riqa', a man of Banu Muharib called
Ghaurath (or 'Amr b. Jihash of Banu Nadhir) went to the Messenger of God
(S.A.W.A.) as he was sitting with his sword in his lap, and asked to be
allowed to look at it. The Prophet (S.A.W.A.) gave it to Ghaurath (or
'Amr) and he began to brandish it intending to strike him, but God
frustrated him. He said, “Aren't you afraid, Muhammad?” “No, why should
I be?” “Aren't you afraid of me when I have a sword in my hand?” “No,
God will protect me from you. Then he returned the Apostle's sword to
him. God sent down, ***﴾O you have faith! Remember Allah's blessing upon
you. When a people (*****qawmun*****) set out to extend their hands
against you, but He withheld their hands from you**.**﴿*** ***(Q:
5/11).***[^7]

In this verse, God uses 'a people' (*qawmun*) for a singular noun,
Ghaurath or 'Amr b. Jihash. In another verse, ***﴾Indeed Abraham was a
nation (*****ummatan*****) obedient to Allah**.**﴿*** (Q: 16/120). He
uses 'a nation' (*umma*) for a singular noun, Abraham. He also, uses a
plural pronoun for a singular noun in *aya mubahala* (Q: 3/61), when He
speaks of 'our' women; Fatima was the only woman present at *mubahala*.

He writes, “Giving alms during saying one's prayer renders it void and
null.”  
**God is Gracious**! He knows the Islamic laws and gives decrees what is
right and what is wrong but God and His Apostle do not know it!         
                   
                  
 He says, “leadership (*wilayat*) is not derived from guardian (*wali*),
concerning this verse***,*** ***﴾O you who have faith! Do not take those
who take your religion in derision and play, from among those who were
given the Book before you, and the infidels, as friends
(*****awliya*****)**.**﴿*** (Q: 5/57).” It means friend, companion,
spouse and boss. Here it is impossible that 'guardian' would mean
'leader'; for no believer thinks of making the Jews or
Christians 'caliph', but it is probable to make them friends.[^8]

Regarding the meaning of the word *wali*, a term may have different
meanings in different occasions. For avoiding such a mistake, God has
used the exclusive word '**only**' in this verse (Q: 5/55). He says,
your guardian is **only** Allah, His Apostle and …” If it meant
companion, friend, spouse and boss, the use of the word '**only**' would
be unnecessary. We may have many friends and companions other than Allah
and His Apostle.

In the next verse (Q: 5/57), *awliya* means friends, but they are two
different verses with different concepts, however, if we accepted it as
'leader' or 'emir' we would not go beyond the expectations. God orders,
***﴾O you who have faith, obey Allah and obey the Apostle, and those who
vested with authority among you, and if you dispute concerning anything,
refer it to Allah and the Apostle, if you have faith in Allah and the
Last Day.﴿*** (Q: 4/59).

***﴾And obey Allah and His Apostle, and do not dispute, or, you will
lose heart and your power will be gone.﴿*** (Q: 8/46). Unfortunately, we
ignored God's ordinance and began to fight each other. Due to weakeness
of Mulsims, the Europeans could defeat them in Andalusia and uproot
Islam in the Iberian Peninsula in Europe. The Jews occupied
Palestine and now they govern the Farther Mosque (*Masjid al-Aqsa*) the
first Muslim Qibla. They imprison, torture and kill our Muslim brethren
and we remain silent. The American Christians have occupied
Afghanistan and Iraq, and they rule over the Muslim people in those
counteries.

He adds, “All the nouns in this verse Q: 5/57 are in the plural form,
while 'Ali b. Abi Talib is only one man; it is unreasonable to say a
group of people are our enemy and 'Ali alone is our supporter.”[^9]

Verses Q: 5/55 & 57 are two different ones with two different meanings.
Even so, as we said before, we can use plural pronouns for singular
nouns.  
 He continues, “Well, giving alms 'while bowing down' is a story, but
how could one say their prayers 'while bowing down'?”[^10]

 We think it is a misprint, perhaps he means how one give alms while
bowing down.  
 Again, he says, “Supposing that he gave *zakat*, but he was not a
wealthy man and he did not have the definite kinds of properties which
*zakat* is levied on. He did not keep more than one meal at home, much
less for gold and silver which *zakat* is levied on.”[^11]

'Ali b. Abi Talib  was a Muslim and the bravest warrior in Islam. His
share in spoils of war and public treasury was not less than the one of
other Muslims.  Moreover, he possessed the fertile estate of Fadak up to
the caliphate of Abu Bakr.[^12] He possessed plant grooves, which he
dedicated to his offspring.[^13] He had also dug several springs from
under the ground and brought under cultivation many barren and
uncultivated lands. Thereafter he gave up rights over them and dedicated
them as trust for the Muslims. When he left the perishing world, he
owned nothing. He could earn his living well, but he preferred others to
himself. He gave food, for the love of Allah to the needy, the orphan
and the prisoner.

The term *zakat* does not mean necessarily a tax, which is levied on
definite kinds of property, and it is distributed to eight categories of
persons. The giving away of the worldly possessions was regarded as a
particularly pious act (see Q **13**: 22). The term *zakat* also means
virtue in general as well as, with an almost means of perceptible
translation of meaning (see Q: 86/14) and pious gift (see Q: 7/75). The
same word, that denotes righteousness and virtue, can therefore also use
for benevolence and charitable gifts.[^14] Moreover, Qurtubi says, “This
verse indicates that, we can use *zakat* for recommended charity, since
'Ali gave his ring while bowing down.”[^15]

He says, “It is obligatory to give alms to Muslims not to unbelievers.
How could the beggar know that he should take the ring? 'Ali could not
speak in his prayers.”[^16]

 This verse says nothing about the beggar's creed. Whence does the
writer judge that he was an unbeliever? Although 'Ali did not speak to
him, the beggar knew (perhaps by sign) that he gifted him the ring and
he took it.

He believes that “by accepting this story, it would mean that giving
*zakat* is obligatory or at least recommended while bowing down, because
God has praised it, however as we know there is not such an obligation
in our law.”[^17]

Only religious jurists (*mujtahid*s) can give decrees about religious
acts. We cannot judge from the outward of the Holy Qur'an. For example,
in the story of Joseph in the Holy Qur'an, we recite, ***﴾When Joseph
said to his father, 'Father, I saw eleven planets, the sun, and the
moon: I saw them prostrating themselves before me.'﴿*** (Q: 12/4).

Waiting in agony and grief for a long time, Jacob's sons told their
father that Joseph is yet alive and he is the governor over all the land
of Egypt. Jacob said my son is yet alive. I will go and see him before I
die. Jacob and all his seed came to Egypt. Joseph saw them, ***﴾And he
seated his parents high upon the throne, and they fell down prostrate
before him. He said, 'Father, this is the fulfillment of my dream long
ago, which, my Lord has made come true.'﴿*** (Q: 12/100).

Should we prostrate before our sons or our parents when we see them? No,
we are nor allowed to do so, because, prostration is only for Allah.
Then he says, “The phrase 'and gives *zakat* while bowing down' is
grammatically in simple present tense and it means that the believers
should give *zakat* as far as they are alive, but this event happened
only once. Moreover, all the traditionists, including Ibn Hajar and
others, believe that it is a weak tradition.”[^18]

The clause 'that maintains the prayer, and gives zakat while bowing
down', is an adjective for the noun 'the faithful'.[^19] Moreover, there
are other verses in the Holy Qur'an in simple present tense, referring
to one special occasion, e.g. ***﴾And among the people is he, who sells
his soul seeking the pleasure of Allah, and Allah is most kind to [His]
servants.﴿*** (Q: 2/207). God sent down this verse concerning 'Ali,[^20]
whom the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) put to sleep in his bed on the night of his
departure to Mecca.

Another verse is ***﴾They fulfill their vows and fear a day whose ill
would be widespread. They give food, for the love of Him, to the needy,
the orphan, and the prisoner. [Saying] 'We feed you only for the sake of
Allah. We do not want any reward from you or any thanks.'﴿*** (Q:
76/7-9). All these verses are in the simple present tense and all of
them concern 'Ali. We explained the traditionists and the exegetes'
views previously.[^21] Ibn Hajar is one traditionist not all of them.

He believes that “accepting this story is belittling 'Ali and the
importance of the prayer. It is narrated that they pulled an arrow out
of 'Ali's leg while he was saying his prayers and he did not notice it,
because he was praying to his God. How could he see a beggar come to the
mosque and give him his ring while bowing down?”[^22]

This event shows 'Ali's maximal love for Allah. While he maintains
prayers to Allah, he sees and feels nothing except Him, but when he
hears Allah's Name, he can do nothing but gladdening the heart of whom
who prays to Allah.

He says, “The exclusive word 'only' is used when someone is in doubt
about something, while this verse came down when the Prophet was still
alive and there was no disagreement among Muslims. A caliph is a deputy
to the Prophet, then, there was no need for a caliph. Here, “your
guardian is only…” means “your friend is only…”[^23]

One should appoint their successor while they are alive, not after their
death.  
    
 Now Let us come back to the point of issue: that is the succession to
the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.). We learned God's attitude toward the
last prophets and their successors in general and His attitude toward
Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) and his offspring in particular. We also remember
the Prophet's emphasis on the Holy Qur'an and on the offspring of his
family (*ahl al-bayt*). He also said, “People, I am a way mark for you.

When you come to me at the heavenly waters (*hawdh*), then indeed I will
ask you about two important things (*thaqalayn*) which I have left
behind. Take care how you follow me with regard to them, for God has
informed me that they will never scatter until they meet me. Indeed, I
have left among you the Book of God and the offspring of my family (*ahl
al-bayt*). Do not try to outdo them, for then you will be
destroyed.”[^24]

Let us see what his people did after him.Let us see what his people did
after him.Let us see what his people did after him.Let us see what his
people did after him.Let us see what his people did after him.

[^1]: Salimi, 63 - 69.

[^2]: He believes that 'Abd al-Razzaq b. Hammam San'ani, Ibn Sa'd,
Bukhari, and many other scholars who preserved this tradition were naïve
and thoughtless Muslims. We wonder whether he belittles these famous
traditionists from his own point of view or from the Sunnite's
viewpoints; despite the divergence of views, we respect and honor all
the scholars, who endeavored and preserved the traditions of the
Messenger of God for Muslims.

[^3]: Salimi, 29.

[^4]: Ibid, 29 f.

[^5]: Tha'alibi, (d. 875/1470), al-Jawahir al-hisan fi tafir al-Qur'an,
ed. Ali Muhammad Mu'awwadh & Ahmad 'Abd al-Mawjud, Beirut, 1418/1997, 2:
396.

[^6]: For this verse concerning 'Ali, see e.g. Muqatil b. Sulayman, 1:
486; Baladhuri, Ansab, 2: 381; Tabari, Tafsir Tabari: 4: 628-9.; Jassas,
2: 557; Suyuti al-Durr al-manthur, 3: 99.

[^7]: Ibn Hisham, 3: 216.

[^8]: Salimi, 30.

[^9]: Ibid, 30 f.

[^10]: Ibid, 31.

[^11]: Ibid, 32.

[^12]: 'Ali says, “All that we had in our possession under this sky was
Fadak, but a group of people felt greedy for it and other party withheld
themselves from it. Allah is, after all, the best arbiter.” See Nahj
al-balagha, 2, 73.

[^13]: “This is what the slave of Allah, 'Ali b. Abi Talib, has laid
down about his property, in pursuance of seeking Allah's pleasure so
that He may by virtue of it give me entry into Paradise and accord me
peace. It will be administrated by al-Hasan b. 'Ali. He would take a
suitable portion of it for his livelihood and spent it on charity. If
something happens to al-Hasan and al-Husayn survives, he will administer
it accordingly. In the charitable estate of all the progeny of
Fatima have the same rights as the progeny of 'Ali. I have laid down
administration  on the sons of Fatima in order to seek pleasure of Allah
and the nearness to His Apostle in due regard for his honor and
consideration of his kinship. It is obligatory on him who administrates
it that he retains the estate as it is and spends the usufruct as he has
been ordered and instructed. He should not sell the seedlings in the
plantations of these villages till the land changes its face by turning
them into plants.” (See Nahj al-balagha, 2: 22-23).

[^14]: A. Zysow, “Zakat”, in Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition.

[^15]: Qurtubi (d. 671/1273), al-Jami' li-ahkam al-Qur'an, Dar al-kutub
al-'Arabi, Cairo, 1387, 3: 2315.

[^16]: Salimi, 32.

[^17]: Ibid, 32 f.

[^18]: Ibid, 33.

[^19]: Abu al-Baqa' 'Abd Allah al-'Ukbari (d. 616/1219), Imla' ma min
manna bihi al-Rahman, ed. Ibrahim 'Utwa 'Iwadh, Egypt 1969, 1: 219.

[^20]: Al-Haskani, 1: 123; al-Razi, Fakhar al-Din (d. 606/1210),
al-Tafsir al-kabir, ed. M. 'A. M. Mustafa, Cairo, n.d., 5: 223 f.

[^21]: See above, 46, note 1.

[^22]: Salimi, 33.

[^23]: Ibid, 34.

[^24]: All Hadith collections have preserved hadith thaqalayn (two
important things) as 'the Book of God and my offspring' (ahl al-bayt),
e.g. Ibn Hanbal (d. 241/855), Musnad, Dar Sadir, Beirut, n.d., 3: 14,
17; 4: 367; 5: 182; Darimi (d. 255/869), Sunan, ed. Dr. Mustafa
al-Dhahabi, Dar al-hadith, Cairo, 1420/2000, 2: 432; Muslim b.
Hajjaj (d. 261/875), 7: 122 f; Tirmidhi, al-Jami' al-sahih (Sunan) ed.
M. H. Nassar, Beirut, 1421/2000, 5: 662, No. 3786; Tabarani (d.
360/971), al-Mu'jam al-kabir, ed. Hamadi 'Abd al-Majid al-Slafi, Dar
Ihya' al-turath al-'Arabi, Beirut, & Maktab Ibn Taymiyya, Cairo,
1420/1999, 3: 65 f; al-Hakim al-Naysaburi, 3: 110.  Only Malik b.
Anas (d. 179/796) in his Muwatta' (ed. Muhammad Fu’ad 'Abd al-Baqi,
Cairo, 1951) mentions 'the Book of God and the customs of His
Apostle'.            


