Abu Bakr’s Caliphate
====================

   
 It was a Monday morning, when the people of Medina heard of the Apostle
of God's death. They rushed toward the mosque. 'Umar addressed the
Muslims assembled at the gate of the mosque and denied the death of the
Prophet. He threatened the hypocrites who claimed that the Messenger of
God had died with punishment after he returned from his temporary
absence. 'Abbas, the Prophet's uncle contradicted 'Umar and urged people
to proceed with burying the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A) as if it were as
they were saying (that the Prophet was not really dead), it would be
easy for God to open his tomb and bring him out.[^1]

Later Abu Bakr arrived, and having looked at the Prophet's body
contradicted 'Umar, too and silenced him by reciting this verse,
***﴾Muhammad is but an apostle, apostles have passed before him. If he
dies or slain, will you turn back on your heels.﴿*** (Q: 3/144).

The Prophet's close kin: 'Ali, 'Abbas and his two sons Fadhl and Qutham,
and two of his clients: Usama and Shuqran took charge of washing the
Prophet's body. Aws b. Khawali, a Medinan veteran of the Battle of
Badr adjured 'Ali to let him join. He gave him permission to enter. 'Ali
drew the Apostle's body on his heart, and 'Abbas and Fadhl poured the
water over him. While 'Ali washed him, having drawn him towards his
breast and said, “Dearer than my father and my mother, how sweet you are
alive and dead!” After they had washed the Prophet's body, they wrapped
him in three garments: two of the Suhar made and a stripped mantle
wrapped the one over the other.

There were two gravediggers in Medina, the Emigrant, Abu 'Ubayda, who
followed the Meccan practice, and the Helper, Abu Talha b. Zayd b. Sahl,
who dug according to the Medinan practice, making a niche (*lahd*).
'Abbas called two men and sent one of them to Abu 'Ubayda and the other
to Abu Talha. Abu 'Ubayda could not be found, but the one sent to Abu
Talha found him and thus he dug the grave with the niche according to
the Medinan practice.

Then, the people came to visit the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A), praying
over him by companies. No one led the funeral prayers. Had Abu Bakr been
present in the funeral, he would have wished to lead the funeral prayers
as the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) had done for his martyred Companions, but it
is doubtful whether Abu Bakr and 'Umar even went to pay their last
respects to the Prophet (S.A.W.A). The washing of the body and digging
the grave took place on Monday. His close kin decided to bury him in his
house. While they were ready to bury him, the bed was inclined at the
foot end and was lowered from there into the grave and buried. 'Ali,
'Abbas, Fadhl, Qutham and Shuqran descended into the grave and buried
the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.).[^2]

The Meccan Emigrants ran off busily engaging in their political
machinations. Only the Helpers showed some concern, and Aws b.
Khawali was allowed to join the kin. The Meccan Abu 'Ubayda could not be
found, because he was occupied with Abu Bakr and 'Umar scheming to seize
power.

While people had assembled at the gate of the mosque discussing the
Prophet's death, someone came to Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and told them that
the Helpers with their noble men had assembled at the Saqifa (Hall) of
Banu Sa'ida. 'Umar suggested that they go to 'our brethren' the Helpers.
On the way there, they met two 'upright' men[^3] of them who told them
about the plotting of the Helpers and advised them to turn back and
settle their own affairs, but 'Umar insisted on proceeding. They took
Abu 'Ubayda with them. We are not sure whether these three (or four)
Emigrants at the Saqifa assembly act spontaneously or according to a
concentrated plan.

The fundamental account about the assembly at the Saqifa, in which the
succession of Abu Bakr to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) was decided, goes back
to 'Abd Allah b. 'Abbas. He narrated that on the last pilgrimage led by
'Umar that is in Dhu al-Hijja 23 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf visited 'Abd
Allah b. 'Abbas at Mina. Moreover, he reported him that a man approached
the caliph and addressed him, “What are you going to do about a man who
says, 'By God, if 'Umar to die, I would swear allegiance to So-and-so.
By God, the oath of the allegiance for Abu Bakr was merely a precipitate
deal (*falta*) which then was carried out'.”

When they returned to Medina at the end of Dhu al- Hijja on the Friday
'Umar sat on the pulpit and prayed God as was fitting and said, “I am
about to say to you something which God has willed that I should say and
I do not know whether perhaps it is my last utterance.” He continued,
“God sent Muhammad and sent down the scripture to him. Part of what He
sent down was the passage of stoning; we read it, and we were taught it,
and we heeded it.

The Messenger of God (S.A.W.S.)[^4] stoned (adulterers) and we stoned
them after him. I fear that in time to come men will say that they find
no mention of stoning in God's book and thereby go astray by neglecting
an ordinance, which God has sent down. Then we read in what we read from
God's book, 'Do not desire to have ancestors other than your own for it
is infidelity to do so.' I have heard that someone said, 'If 'Umar were
dead I would hail So-and-so. Do not let a man deceive himself by saying
that acceptance to Abu Bakr was a precipitate deal which was carried
out. Admittedly, it was that, but God averted the evil of it.

He who accepts a man as ruler without consulting the Muslims, such
acceptance has no validity for either of them: they are in danger of
being killed. What happened was that when God took away His Apostle
(S.A.W.S.) the Helpers opposed us and gathered with their chiefs in the
Saqifa of Banu Sa'ida; and 'Ali and al-Zubayr and their companions
withdrew from us; while the Emigrants gathered to Abu Bakr.”

“I told Abu Bakr that we should go to our brothers the Helpers, so we
went off to go to them when two honest fellows met us and told us of the
conclusion the people had come to. They asked us where we were going,
and when we told them, they said that there was no need for us to
approach them and we must make our decision. I said, 'By God, we will go
to them', and we found them in the Saqifa of Banu Sa'ida. In the middle
of them was a man wrapped up. In answer to my inquiries, they said that
he was Sa'd b. 'Ubada and that he was ill.

When we sat down their speaker pronounced the *shihada*, and praised God
as was fitting and then continued, 'We are God's Helpers and the
squadron of Islam. You, O the Emigrants, are a family of ours, and a
company of your people has come to settle'. ('Umar) said, 'and lo, they
were trying to cut us off from our origin and wrest authority from
us.'[^5] When he had finished I wanted to speak, for I had prepared a
speech in my mind, which pleased me much. I wanted to produce it before
Abu Bakr and I was trying to soften a certain asperity of this; but Abu
Bakr said, 'Gently, 'Umar!' I did not like to anger him and so he spoke.
He was a man with more knowledge and dignity than I was, and by God, he
did not omit a single word, which I had thought of, and he uttered it in
his inimitable way better than I could have done.

He (Abu Bakr) said, 'All the good that you said about yourselves is
deserved, but the Arabs will recognize authority only in this clan of
Quraysh, they being the best of Arabs in blood and country. I offer you
one of these two men: accept which you please.' Thus saying he took hold
of my hand and that of Abu 'Ubayda who was sitting between us. Nothing
he said displeased me more than that. By God, I would rather have come
forward and have had my head struck off -if that were no sin- than rule
over a people of whom Abu Bakr was one.

One man of the Helpers said, 'I am the rubbing post and the fruitful
propped-up palm. Let us have one ruler and you another, O Quraysh.'
Altercation waxed hotter and voices were raised until when a complete
breach was to be feared. I said, 'Stretch out your hand, Abu Bakr.' He
did so and I paid him homage; the Emigrants followed and then the
Helpers. (In doing so) we jumped on Sa'd b. 'Ubada and someone said that
we had killed him. I said, 'God kill him'.”[^6]

'Umar concluded, “By God, we did not find any case stronger than for the
oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. We feared that if we left the people
without any pledge of allegiance they might, after our departure,
suddenly make a pledge we would then have either to follow them in with
which we were not pleased, or to oppose them, and evil would have
resulted.”[^7]

'Umar judged the outcome of the Saqifa assembly to be a precipitate deal
(*falta*) because of the absence of most of the prominent Emigrants,
including the Prophet's own family and clan, whose participation was
vital for any legitimate consultation. That the Emigrants at that time
joined Abu Bakr was an obscurity on 'Umar's part. Aside from Abu Bakr,
'Umar and his friend Abu 'Ubayda certainly none of the prominent Meccan
Companions was present at the Saqifa meeting.

Another reason for 'Umar to criticize the Saqifa, as a *falta* was its
turbulent and undignified end, as he and his followers jumped upon the
sick Khazraji leader Sa'd b. 'Ubada in order to teach him a lesson for
daring to challenge the sole right of Quraysh to rule! This break-up of
the meeting indicates that, the Helpers could not all have been swayed
by the wisdom and the eloquence of Abu Bakr's speech and have accepted
him as the best choice for the succession. There would have been no
sense in beating up the Khazraji chief if every body had come around to
swearing allegiance to 'Umar's candidate. Moreover, many of the Helpers
failed to pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr at the Saqifa assembly. They
shouted, “We will not swear allegiance to any one but 'Ali”[^8]

'Umar's justification of the quick election of Abu Bakr, in what
amounted to a *falta*, because of the danger that the Helpers might
otherwise have swore allegiance to someone with whom the Emigrants would
not have been pleased, raises another question. The Helpers might have
put forward 'Ali that worried the few Emigrants present at the
Saqifa and induced them to act without proposing a broad consultation of
all the concerned. Both Abu Bakr and 'Umar were present at Ghadir
Khumm and heard the Prophet's will and famous sentence concerning 'Ali,
and they greeted him with the title of the Commander of the
Faithful (*Amir al-Mum’nin*), nevertheless Abu Bakr in his speech did
everything to avoid the case of 'Ali being raised. He based the right of
Quraysh to rule, not due their relationship to the Prophet but solely on
the claim that all the Arabs would obey them.

Abu Bakr wished to continue the commonwealth founded by the Messenger of
God (S.A.W.A) and expand its authority over the Arabs and, as far as
possible, beyond Arabs. If it was not to fall apart, the Prophet must
have a political successor and he decided to be the man who succeeds the
Prophet. He also recognized that he would have to neutralize potentially
strong opposition in order to realize his ambition.

Most obviously the Prophet's family (*ahl al-bayt*), who had been
accorded a rank above the rest of the Muslims by the Holy Qur'an, would
have to be prevented from putting forward their claim. The initiative of
the Helpers gave him the opportunity he was looking for. He provoked the
*falta* by proposing two candidates for election in a maneuver to have
proposed himself. He was well aware that neither of the two candidates
had a chance of being accepted. When 'Umar offered Abu Bakr the
handshake of allegiance, he did not hesitate a moment to accept. He had
what he wanted.

In Medina, 'Umar took charge of securing the pledge of allegiance of all
residents. He dominated the streets with the help of the Aslam and then
the 'Abd al-Ashhal of Aws who, in contrast to the majority of Khazraj,
quickly became vigorous champions of the new regime. Then they rushed
towards the house of Fatima, who was bereaved of her father's death, and
the Companion al-Zubayr with some of the other Emigrants had assembled
there. 'Umar came to the house and told, “By God, I will set the house
on fire, unless you come out and swear allegiance to Abu Bakr.”[^9] Then
he broke into the house. Fatima came out and told them, “By God, you
should go out of my house, or I will unveil my hair and bewail before
God.”[^10]

Crucial for Abu Bakr was gaining the allegiance of the Meccan Quraysh.
With the loyalty of the Helpers in doubt and many of the Arab tribes
deserting, only Mecca, the former enemy city, which had submitted to the
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) just two years before, could now save the Islamic
commonwealth. The Islamic state was henceforth, to be based on the rule
of Quraysh over all Arabs. Their right to rule in the name of Islam
derived from the claim that the Arabs would not obey anyone else.

The Meccan had thus little reason to question the continuation of the
Islamic government in principle or to long for their former state of
independence. Abu Bakr had safeguarded their innate right by thwarting
the ambitions of the Helpers. The Helpers with whose backing the
Messenger of God (S.A.W.A) had been able to humiliate them, would be put
to their proper place and become like the rest of Arabs, subject to
Quraysh.

The two most powerful clans of Quraysh, Makhzum and 'Abd Shams were
given preference. Among Abu Bakr's commanders in the *ridda* wars, were
'Ikrima b. Abi Jahl of Makhzum and Yazid b. Abi Sufyan of Umayyad, sons
of the two former leaders of Meccan opposition to the Prophet. Yet their
dominant position under Abu Bakr is put in proper relief by the complete
exclusion of the Helpers from leadership and the greatly reduced role of
the early Emigrants.

When Abu Bakr later laid plans for the conquest of Syria, he appointed
Khalid b. Sa'id b. al-'As. The reason for this was that he was an
Umayyad. When he was dismissed because of 'Umar's strong representations
against him, Abu Bakr replaced him by the Umayyad Yazid b. Abi Sufyan.
It is evident that the caliph intended to give the 'Abd Shams a stake in
the conquest of Syria. With the Muslim armies mostly under the command
of the Meccan aristocracy, Medina was virtually at the mercy of the
Prophet's recent enemies.

Abu Bakr's resolute rejection of 'Umar's demands for the dismissal, or
at least censure, of Khalid b. Walid for his un-Islamic execution of
Malik b. Nuwayra,[^11] may have been motivated by more than just the
recognition of his superior quality as a military leader. Yet Abu Bakr
could also be greatly confident that the Meccan leaders would
co-operate, realizing that they profit more than any one else from the
Quraysh caliphate in the name of Islam.

It was the declared intention of Abu Bakr to follow as caliph the
policies and practices of the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A) in every
respect, but following the practice and precedents set by the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) in every respect was most difficult to maintain in his
treatment to the Prophet's kin, the Banu Hashim.

It was evident that the primary purpose of establishing caliphate rule
on a sound basis was inconsistent with maintaining the privileged status
of the Prophet's household (*ahl al-bayt*), of applying the Qur'anic
rules of inheritance to them, and to continuing to pay their Qur'anic
share of the war booty and the *fay'.* Abu Bakr's solution was both
radical and ingenious. When Fatima came to claim her inheritance from
the Prophet (S.A.W.A), and in particular, his land in Fadak and Khaybar,
he told her that he had heard the Prophet say, “We [the prophets] do not
leave heirs, whatever we leave is alms (*sadaqa*).

The family of Muhammad can eat from this property.” Abu Bakr's
initiative reply implied, not only had the Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
disinherited his family, he had also specifically affirmed that after
his death his family should, if needed, accept alms, which he had
strictly forbidden them during his life because of their status of
purity. As recipients of alms like ordinary Muslims, there was also no
longer any justification for paying them their Qur'anic share of booty
and *fay'*.

While the Prophet's daughter and kin were thus disinherited and demoted
from their rank of religious purity, his widows were treated
comparatively better. To 'A’isha, as Muhammad's wife and daughter of his
successor, belonged the first place. Abu Bakr granted her some lands in
the 'Aliya quarters of Medina and in Bahrayn.[^12] Abu Bakr's policy of
isolating the Banu Hashim proved a full success. The Banu Hashim found
them in a situation strangely reminiscent of the boycott that the pagan
Meccans organized against them.[^13] Fatima lived a short time after her
father: seventy-five or forty days.[^14] By the time of Fatima's death,
Abu Bakr's victory seemed complete. Yet the news of it and of her secret
burial at night, in order to prevent the caliph's attendance, must have
shocked him.                    

The election of Abu Bakr, in the Saqifa, had no foundation in the Holy
Qur'an and the practice of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.).

1. The Holy Qur'an implicitly refers to 'Ali b. Abi Talib as the
*wali* of the faithful[^15] and the Messenger of God explicitly had
appointed him as his successor in many occasions,[^16] especially in
Ghadir Khumm, about two months before his death,[^17] therefore Abu
Bakr did everything to avoid the case of 'Ali being raised in the
Saqifa.

2. Abu Bakr's argument in the Saqifa about the privilege of Quraysh ”as
they being the best of the Arabs in blood and country”[^18] had no basis
in the Holy Qur'an and the customs. During the Prophet's mission, the
majority of Quraysh were his harshest enemies and the Holy Qur'an
obviously condemned polytheists. The Emigrants, those who left their
homes to join the Prophet (S.A.W.A) in Medina in support of the cause of
Islam, were greatly praised in the Holy Qur'an, given hope for God's
mercy. ***﴾Indeed those who have become faithful and those who have
migrated and waged jihad in the way of Allah, it is they who expect
Allah's mercy, Allah is All-forgiving, All-merciful.﴿*** (Q: 2/218).

By the Emigrants, the Holy Qur'an meant not only the Meccan Quraysh
Emigrants, but also equally Bedouin tribesmen and others who joined the
Prophet from all over Arabia. Nowhere in the Holy Qur'an were the
Emigrants given a preferred rank over the Helpers. Moreover, God
says***,*** ***﴾O humankind! Indeed, We created you from a male and a
female, and make nations and tribes that you identify with one another.
Indeed the nobler of you in the sight of Allah, is the most God-fearing
of you.﴿*** (Q: 49/13).

3. It was not based on seniority. Abu Bakr's father, Abu Qahafa, was
older than his son was.

4. It was not based on meritocracy; here we refer only to one tradition
out of innumerable traditinons on 'Ali's merits. While Mu'awiya was in
pilgrimage, he saw Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas. He took his hand and said, “O Abu
Ishaq! These battles prevented us from the pilgrimage, and we were about
to forget its practices (*sunna*s). Now get up and circumambulate so
that I can follow you.” As Mu'awiya finished circumambulting, he took
Sa'd with him to his council chamber, and seated him on his seat.

Then he began speaking evil of 'Ali and cursing him. Sa'd said to him,
“Have you brought me to your house and seated me on your seat to speak
evil of 'Ali and curse him? By God, he possessed three virtues that if I
had one of them it would be worthier to me than all the properties under
the sun”. During the raid on Tabuk, the Prophet told him, “Are you not
content, 'Ali, to stand to me as Aaron to Moses, except that there will
be any prophets after me?”

On Khaybar Day, concerning 'Ali, he told, “If Allah wills, tomorrow I
will give the standard to a man who is an assailant not a runaway, he
loves Allah and His Apostle; and Allah and His Apostle love him. He will
not come back until Allah conquers by his means.” If it were about me,
it was better for me than all that is under the sun. If I were the
Prophet's son-in-law and I had children like 'Ali's children, it would
be worthier to me than all the things under the sun. I will not enter a
house with you from now on. Then he shook his mantle and went out.[^19]

5. Before his death, Abu Bakr said, “I wish I had not committed three
acts. I wish I had not broken into Fatima's house even if it had been
closed to us for fighting. I wished I had not burned al-Fuj'at or
al-Fujah al-Sullami alive. I wish I had killed him or made him free. I
wish, on the Saqifa Day, I had submitted caliphate to 'Umar or Abu
'Ubayda, so as one of them had been emir and I had been his vizier.”
Then he rose up his hands and said, “I wish I had asked the Prophet
about the matter of caliphate; to whom did it belong so as the people
did not argue about it?”[^20]

6. The Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.) had not appointed Abu Bakr his
successor. People first thought that the Prophet had appointed him, but
'Umar said before he died, “If I appoint a successor, one who was better
than I [Abu Bakr] did so; and if I leave them, one better than I [the
Prophet] did so.[^21] Moreover, in the Saqifa, Abu Bakr himself proposed
'Umar and Abu 'Ubayda as the Prophet's successor.

Thus, what was the reason for Abu Bakr's election? 

Abu Bakr was a clever politician, he had decided no doubt well before
the Prophet's death to be his successor. It was a close co-operation
between Abu Bakr and 'Umar initiated in the lifetime of the Messenger of
God (S.A.W.A). Their daughters, 'A’isha and Hafsa were the Prophet's
wives and kept their fathers informed about every move and secret
thought of their husband, the Prophet. It was 'A’isha and Hafsa, who
informed their fathers of the Prophet's serious illness, which kept him
away from leading the communal prayer in the mosque.[^22] Abu Bakr and
'Umar were also aware of Quraysh's enmity towards the Messenger of God
(S.A.W.A.) and 'Ali. The assembly in the Saqifa gave them the
opportunity to make their wishes true and seize power. They argued
everything in Saqifa, but the God and His Apostle's will about the
succession to the Prophet.

The author says,  
 “It is curious that among one hundred and twenty four thousand [*sic*]
people present at the Ghadir Khumm all had become extinct and deceased
during this year; even no one existed to mention the story of Ghadir
Khumm to the people assembled in the Saqifa.”[^23]

Before answering this question, we would better review these verses from
the Holy Qur'an, ***﴾He said, “Indeed We tried your people in your
absence, and the Samiri***[^24] ***had led them astray.” Thereupon
Moses returned to his people, indignant and grieved. He said, “O my
people! Did not your Lord give you a true promise? Did the promise [of
my absence] seem too long to you? Or did you desire that your Lord's
wrath should descend on you, and so you failed your tryst with me.”﴿***
(Q: 20/85-86).

Then, ***﴾He said, “O Aaron! What kept you, when you saw them going
astray, from following me? Did you disobey my command?” He said, “O son
of my mother! Do not hold my beard! I feared lest you should say, you
have caused a rift among the Children of Israel, and did not heed my
word”.﴿*** (Q: 20/92- 94).

Therefore, it is not curious. When the Samiri made a golden calf, the
Children of Israel turned against God and made for the calf; even no one
said, “Our Lord is Allah the All-beneficent.” In the Saqifa the
Helpers shouted, “We will not swear allegiance to any one, but
'Ali.”[^25] Thereupon altercation waxed hotter and voices were raised.
They jumped on the Helper's leader, Sa'd b. 'Ubada, and they were about
to kill him. They threw the scene into turmoil and no one could express
his idea. It was in such a situation that these three Emigrants could
forward their plot.   

He also says, “If 'Ali had any reason for his caliphate based on the
Holy Qur'an or Ghadir tradition or if he thought he was appointed by God
or His Apostle, he would not disobey them. He should follow the Prophet
who proclaimed his mission by himself, without any fear of the
Polytheists. He was as forward-looking as the Messenger of God that he
did not find it convenient to draw sword against his enemies. 'Ali
always obeys God's orders. 'Ali does not disregard the compulsory
duties. 'Ali does not fear the human beings. 'Ali does not …”[^26]

Yes, brother, you are right, but let us first tell a story from
*Sahihayn*: ”A wolf abducted two boys, each the son of a different
woman, and only one survived the ordeal. The two women then went to
Dawud, each claiming the survivor was her son. Dawud was about to award
the child without further ado to the older and more insistent of the
woman, when Sulayman proposed that the object of the dispute be bisected
and one half be awarded to each of the claimants. The suggestion was
accepted by the older woman, but rejected by the younger, who renounced
her claim rather than seeing harm come to the child. The veracity of her
claim and the falsity of her rival's thus became apparent.”[^27]

'Ali's love for Islam was not less than the mother's love for her child.
About his background in Islam, he says, “You know my position of close
kinship and special relationship with the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A).
When I was, only a child he took me over. He used to press me to his
chest, lay me beside him in his bed, touch his body with mine and make
me smell his sweet smell. He used to chew a thing and then fed me with
it. He found no lie in my speaking, nor weakness in my act.

From the time his weaning, Allah had put a great angle with him to take
him along the path of high character and good behavior throughout day
and night, while I would follow him like a young camel following in the
footprints of its mother. Every day he would show me in the form of a
banner some of his high traits and commanded me to follow it. Every year
he used to go in seclusion to the hill of Hira' where I saw him but no
one else saw him. In those days, Islam did not exist in any house except
that of the Messenger of God and Khadijah while I was the third after
those two.

I used to see and watch the effulgence of divine revelation and message,
and smelt the scent of prophet-hood. When the revelation descended on
the Messenger of God (S.A.W.A.), I heard the moan of Satan. I said, “O
Messenger of God what is this moan?” He replied, “This is the moan of
Satan who has lost all hopes of being worshipped. O 'Ali you see all
that I see and you hear all that I hear, except that you are not a
prophet.”[^28]

When the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) died, the decisive dangers were threatening
Islam. The liars Musaylama al-Hanafi and al-Aswad al-'Ansi claimed to be
prophets. The hypocrites inside Medina and the new converted tribes
outside Medina were looking for an opportunity to rise up against Islam
and annihilate it. 'Ali b. Abi Talib faced with two problems: The
problem of losing his legitimate right and the problem of vanishing
Islam. He realized that Islam was more important than his right.
Therefore, he renounced his claim rather than seeing harm to Islam. He
found that endurance thereon was wiser. Therefore, he adopted patience
“although there was mote in the eyes and suffocation in the
throat”.[^29]

[^1]: al-San'ani, 5: 433 - 5; Baladhuri, Ansab, 2: 243.

[^2]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 2: 245.

[^3]: They were 'Uwaym b. Sa'ida and Ma'an b. 'Adi who were opponents to
Sa'd b. 'Ubada and friends to Abu Bakr. See Ibn Abi al-Hadid (d.
656/1258) Sharh Nahj al-balagha, ed. Muhammad Abu al-Fadhl Ibrahim,
reprint Qumm, 1404.  6: 6.

[^4]: (S.A.W.S.) = Sall Allah 'alayhi wa sallam.

[^5]: The Helpers, unlike many of the Arab tribes involved in ridda,
were firm in their Muslim faith; no doubt considered their allegiance to
the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) as lapsing on his death. Expecting the political
community founded by the Prophet to fall apart, they met to restore
their control over their own city. This is why they met without
consulting the Emigrants. They assumed that the Emigrants, having no
longer any good reason to remain in Medina, would return home to Mecca.
Those who might wish to remain would presumably accept the rule of the
Helpers. The suggestion that the Helpers and the Emigrants should each
choose a leader for themselves was evidently meant as a fair compromise
proposal rather than a devious plot to split the Muslim community. See
Madelung,  31.

[^6]: Ibn Hisham, 4: 306-310; Guillaume, 683-688.

[^7]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 4: 1823.

[^8]: Ibid, 4: 1818.

[^9]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 4: 1818.

[^10]: Ya'qubi, 2: 126.

[^11]: Malik b. Nuwayra was the tax collector of his people. Upon the
Prophet's death, he did not hand over to Medina the camels, which he had
collected as sadaqa, but instead he gave them back to his
fellow-tribesmen. When Abu Bakr learned of Malik's deed he was furious,
and had Khalid b. Walid promise before God that he would kill Malik if
he could lay hand on him. As Khalid was advancing through the Najd,
having conquered some rebellious tribes, one of his detachments came
upon a group of Yarbu'is among whom, was Malik b. Nuwayra. The Yarbu'is
offered no resistance, declared that they were Muslims, and were taken
to Khalid's camp at Butah, where they were executed as rebels. Some of
the captors, chiefly the Helper Abu Qatada, tried to prevent the
execution by arguing that the captives were inviolable, since they had
declared themselves Muslims and performed the ritual prayer. Khalid,
however, disregarded these arguments, ordered the execution, and married
Malik's widow. When 'Umar learned Khalid's conduct, he pressed Abu Bakr
in vain to punish him, or at least to dismiss him. Eventually Abu Bakr
openly forgave Khalid after having heard his version of the story. (See
Ibn Athir, 2: 358-9; Ella Landau-Tasseron, “Malik b. Nuwayra”, in
Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition.)

[^12]: Ibn Shabba, 1: 187

[^13]: Madelung,  44.

[^14]: On Fatima's funeral, 'Ali addressing the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) said,
“O the Apostle of God, peace be upon you from me and from your daughter
who has come to you and who has hastened to meet you. Certainly, your
daughter would apprise you of joining your umma (community) for
oppressing her. You ask her in detail and get the news about the
position. This has happened when long time had not elapsed and your
remembrance had not disappeared. See Nahj al-balagha, 1:443.

[^15]: See above, 46.

[^16]: See above, 11-12, 26, 30.

[^17]: See above, 34.

[^18]: See above, 63.

[^19]: Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 7: 341.

[^20]: Tabari, Ta’rikh, 4: 2140 - 41.

[^21]: Ibn Athir 3: 65.

[^22]: See above, 37.

[^23]: Salimi, 44.

[^24]: Cf. The Old Testament, Exodus 32.

[^25]: See above, 64.

[^26]: Salimi, 45.

[^27]: Bukhari (d. 256/870), hadith 3427; Muslim b. Hajjaj (d. 261/875),
hadith 1720; cf. The Old Testament, I Kings 3: 16-28.

[^28]: Nahj al-balagha, 1: 416- 417.

[^29]: Ibid, 1:33.


