‘Uthman’s Caliphte
==================

   
 While 'Uthman was a successful merchant, before his election in 23/644
he had, at no time displayed any qualities of public leadership. Among
the six members of the electoral council, he was the only one who had
never been entrusted by the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) or the first two caliphs
with leading a raid or an army.

Before the election, he had no political ambitions and can hardly even
have thought of himself as a potential candidate for supreme reign. Yet
he was put forward as the only counter-candidate to 'Ali. As twice the
Prophet's son-in-law, he could better rival 'Ali's close kinship ties
with the latter than could the rest. Quite unprepared for his office, he
ascended the pulpit after his election and apologized, “O people, we
have not been orators. If we live, the oration will come to you in
proper shape, God willing.”[^1]

During the election, 'Uthman had twice pledged without hesitation that
he would follow the Book of God, the *Sunna* of His Prophet, and the
practice of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, while 'Ali b. Abi Talib had cautiously
stated that he would do so to the limit of his ability.[^2] The
unabashed favoritism towards his close kin that he showed from the
beginning of his reign stood in marked contrast to this commitment. He
granted his cousin Marwan b. al-Hakam[^3] the war booty (*khums*) of
Ifriqia and gave his close relatives money from the treasury. He also
took the sums of money and borrowed money from the treasury saying, Abu
Bakr and 'Umar left what belonged to them of this money, but I take it
and distribute to my kin.[^4]

Shortly after his accession, he deposed 'Umayr b. Sa'd al-Ansari,
governor of Hims, Qinnasrin and Upper Mesopotamia, at his request and
turned these provinces over to Mu'awiya. This meant a substantial
increase in Mu'awiya's power, which enabled him later to challenge and
defy 'Ali. 'Uthman also dismissed 'Amr b. al-'As as the governor of
Egypt and appointed his own foster-brother 'Abd Allah b. Sa'd b. Abi
Sarh.[^5] 'Abd Allah killed seven hundred men for one man, but 'Uthman
only dismissed him and did not reproach him.[^6] In 25/695, he replaced
Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas, whom he had appointed the previous year, as the
governor of Kufa with a transgressor (*fasiq*)[^7] like
'Umayyad al-Walid b. 'Uqbas b. Abi Mu'ayt his maternal brother.

He committed wine drinking. He performed praying out of time and one
morning he performed four postures (*rak'a*s) in his prayer instead of
two and said, “I am drunk, if you wish I can perform more.”[^8] When
Walid b. 'Uqba had to be disposed because of, misconduct in the year
30/650, 'Uthman replaced him with another Umayyad, Sa'id b. al-'As b.
Abi Uhayha.[^9]'Uthman also granted the estate of Fadak, which the
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) had bestowed to his daughter Fatima, and Abu Bakr and
'Umar had confiscated it as a *sadaqa,* as an endowment for the benefit
of Muslim community, to Marwan b. al-Hakam his cousin and his
son-in-law, as land concession.[^10]

From 30/650, dissatisfaction and resistance were manifested throughout
most of the empire. 'Uthman's generosity was now restricted to his kin,
who seemed to dominate him. The prominent Companions of the *shura* more
and more lost their influence over him. At the same time, his arrogant
mistreatment of several of the earliest Companions, Abu
Dharr al-Ghifari, 'Abd Allah b. Mas'ud and 'Ammar b. Yasir provoked
outrage among the pious, as well as among their tribes and clans of
Quraysh, to whom they were affiliated and who were liable for their
protection.

Among Quraysh 'Amr b. al-'As was the first to agitate in Medina against
the caliph after his removal from the governorship of Egypt. Another
prominent Companion who fell out with 'Uthman was 'Abd Allah b.
al-Arqam al-Zuhri, a former secretary of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.).
'Umar had put him in charge of the public treasury (*bayt al-mal*) and
thought highly of him. Under 'Uthman, he continued his office until
'Uthman sent draft and ordered Ibn Arqam to pay 'Abd Allah b. Khalid b.
Asid the caliph's nephew and brother-in-law 300'000 *dirham*s and each
of his companions 100'000. Ibn Arqam found the amount excessive and
returned the draft. When the caliph reprimanded him, calling him
“treasurer of us”, he answered that he had considered himself treasurer
of the Muslims and resigned, suspending the treasury keys on the
pulpit.[^11]

Among the electors, the most active was Talha. He wrote letters to the
provinces inciting revolt and made common cause with the rebellions
during the siege of 'Uthman's palace. When he later came to Basra for
revenge for the blood of 'Uthman, 'Abd Allah b. al-Hakim al-Tamimi
showed him his earlier letters to him, and he acknowledged having
written them.[^12] 'A’isha also wrote letters to the provinces stirring
up rebellion, although, after the murder of 'Uthman, she denied it.[^13]

During the final siege of 'Uthman's palace 'A’isha decided to leave,
together with Umm Salama, for pilgrimage. In the hope that her presence
in Medina might hold back the rebels, 'Uthman sent Marwan and 'Abd
al-Rahman b. 'Attab b. Asid to persuade her to stay for the sake of his
safety. Having completed her preparations for the trip she told angrily
that she wished 'Uthman were in one of her travel sacks so she could
take it along and cast him to the sea.[^14]

'Ali clashed with 'Uthman in particular on questions of the religious
law. As the Prophet's cousin and his son-in-law, he evidently saw
himself as responsible for the preservation and execution of the norms
of the Holy Qur'an and the Prophet's practice. At the beginning of the
'Uthman's reign, he protested against the pardon of 'Ubayd Allah b.
'Umar for the murder of Jufayna and al-Hurmuzan. He threatened to carry
out the legal punishment when he could lay his hands on him.[^15]

He insisted that the legal punishment for wine drinking be applied to
al-Walid b. 'Uqba b. Abi Mu'ayt and when others hesitated to flog the
caliph's half-brother, he himself carried out the flogging.[^16] The
relationship between 'Ali and 'Uthman was, however, not entirely
antagonistic. Among the members of the electoral council, 'Ali was
'Uthman's closest kin. His kinship ties made 'Ali a natural mediator
between the opposition and 'Uthman. When the general discontent reached
dangerous levels in the year 34/659, a group of Meccan and other
Companions asked 'Ali to speak to, and admonish 'Uthman. 'Ali thus
addressed him, as representative of the people, but 'Uthman was not yet
prepared to heed his warnings.[^17]

A year later, when the Egyptian rebels camped at Dhu Khushub, 'Uthman
asked 'Ali to meet them at the head of a delegation of the Emigrants
while also sent the Medinan Companion Muhammad b. Maslama at the head of
a group of the Helpers. 'Ali b. Abi Talib and Muhammad b. Maslama
persuaded the rebels to turn back by promising them, in the name of the
caliph, redress of their grievances and agreeing the act as
guarantors.[^18]

He was to see 'Uthman once more as the Egyptian rebels returned to
Medina, outraged by 'Uthman's letter ordering the punishment of the
rebel leaders. The Egyptians intercepted the letter.[^19] 'Ali b. Abi
Talib and Muhammad b. Maslama as guarantors of 'Uthman's promises felt
obliged to intervene and came jointly to see 'Uthman. When 'Ali informed
the caliph of the rebels' new grievance, 'Uthman swore that he had no
knowledge of the letter. While Muhammad b. Maslama accepted his word,
adding that this was the work of Marwan, 'Ali insisted that 'Uthman
receive the Egyptians himself and put his excuse to them.

Reminding him of his kinship ties, the caliph pleaded with him to go out
to speak to them. The Egyptians were admitted and they stated their
grievances. 'Uthman again denied any knowledge of the letter and both
'Ali b. Abi Talib and Muhammad b. Maslama attested that he was speaking
the truth. The Egyptians now demanded that he resign if an official
letter with his seal could be sent without his knowledge, but the caliph
affirmed that he would not take off a garment with which God had clad
him. As the turmoil broke out, 'Ali stood up and left, followed by
Muhammad b. Maslama. The Egyptians also left and continued their
siege.[^20]

Talha was the one toughest against 'Uthman during the siege.[^21] When
Talha prevented the delivery of drinking water to the besieged caliph,
'Ali became angry. He talked to Talha and saw it that water was
delivered.[^22] Looking down from his balcony 'Uthman greeted a group of
the rebels among whom he saw Talha. As they failed to return the
greeting, he addressed Talha and told him that he did not think he would
live to see the day when he should greet Talha and he did not return the
greeting.[^23]

On Thursday, Dhu al-Hijja 17, the peace was broken. The act of
aggression, opening the civil war, came from the palace. Among the
rebels on that day was Niyar b. 'Iyadh Aslami, an aged Companion of the
Prophet, who called for 'Uthman and, when the caliph looked down from
his balcony, lectured him demanding his abdication.[^24] Abu Hafsa
al-Yamani, an Arab freedman of Marwan dropped a rock on him, killing him
instantly. The rebels sent to 'Uthman demanding the surrender of the
murderer. The caliph once more protected Marwan, asserting that he did
not know the killer.

The next day, Friday Dhu al-Hijja 18, 35/ June 17, 656, was 'the
battle-day of the palace' (*yawm al-dar*), and 'Uthman was slain.

Deserted by all but his wife, Na'ila, he faced the inevitable end at
peace with himself. Yet he must have felt he himself had to bear a large
share of the blame for the disaster. The cancer in the body of the
caliphate, which he had nurtured and proved unable to excise because of
his doting love for a corrupt and rapacious kin, destroyed him. It was
to continue to grow and to sweep away the Islamic meritocracy. 'Uthman's
successor, Mu'awiya, turned it, as predicated by a well-known prophecy
ascribed to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.), into traditional despotic kingdom.  
  

[^1]: Ibn Shabba, 3: 957-8; Baladhuri, Ansab, 6: 130.

[^2]: Ibid, 128; Tabari, Ta'rikh, 5: 2793.

[^3]: Marwan b. al-Hakam b. Abi al-'As was 'Uthman's cousin. Hakam b.
Abi al-'As accepted Islam on the day of the conquest of Mecca. He used
to walk after the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and make faces at him. The Prophet
had exiled him from Medina to Ta'if and Marwan was born there. 'Umar and
Abu Bakr did not let them to come to Medina and stay there, but 'Uthman
returned them to Medina. (See Baladhuri, Ansab, 6: 255f; Ibn 'Abd
al-Barr al-Qurtubi (d. 463/1071) al-Isti'ab fi ma'rifat al-ashab, ed.
al-Shaykh Muhammad 'Ali Muhammad Mufawwadh, Beirut, 2002, 1: 414f).

[^4]: Ibn Sa'd, 3: 47.

[^5]: 'Abd Allah b. Sa'd b. Abi Sarh first accepted Islam and he was a
secretary to Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) The Prophet dictated ”al-kafirin” to
him, but he changed it to ”al-zalimin”, he dictated ”'azizun hakim”, he
wrote ”'alimun hakim” and so on. Then he apostatized and fled to
Quraysh. He claimed that he could say what Muhammad could. The verse
﴾Who is a greater wrongdoer than he is who fabricates a lie against
Allah, or says, it has been revealed to me while nothing was revealed to
him.﴿ (Q: 6/93) came down about him. At the conquest of Mecca, the
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) had ordered him to be killed even if he was found
beneath the curtains of Ka'ba, but 'Uthman, his foster brother, asked
the Prophet to grant him immunity, and he was saved. (See above 28, note
1; Baladhuri, Ansab, 1: 454).

[^6]: al-Maqdisi, Mutahhar b. Tahir (writing in 355/966), Kitab al-bad'
wa al-ta'rikh, ed. Clement Huart, Paris, 1916, 5: 201.

[^7]: In the verse ﴾Is someone who is faithful (mu'min) like someone who
is transgressor (fasiq)? They are not equal.﴿ (Q: 32/18), the faithful
refers to 'Ali and the transgressor refers to Walid b. 'Uqba. See
Haskani, 1: 572.

[^8]: Ibn Athir, 3: 107.

[^9]: Ibid, 105-7.

[^10]: Ibn Qutayba Dinawari (d. 276/889), al-Ma'arif, ed. Tharwat
'Ukasha, Cairo, 1960, 195.

[^11]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 6: 173.

[^12]: Ibid, 3: 28.

[^13]: Ibid, 6: 224.

[^14]: Ibid, 192 f.

[^15]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 5: 2796 f.

[^16]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 6: 145.

[^17]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 2937.

[^18]: Ibid, 6: 2969-71.

[^19]: Ibid, 6: 2992.

[^20]: Ibid, 6: 2992-5.

[^21]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 6: 125.

[^22]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 2979; Baladhuri, Ansab, 6: 188.

[^23]: Ibid, 6: 195.

[^24]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3004.


