‘Ali’s Caliphate
================

   
 'Ali b. Abi Talib was in the mosque when he received the news of
'Uthman's murder. He soon left for home, where he was pressed by
Companions visiting him to accept the pledge of allegiance.[^1] At first
he refused, and then insisted that any pledge should be made in public
in the mosque.[^2] Talha and al-Zubayr were of the first prominent
Companions who pledged allegiance.[^3]

'Ali personally abstained from putting pressure upon anyone to do
homage. When Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas was brought, and asked to pledge of
allegiance, he answered that he would not do so before the people had
given their pledge, but assured 'Ali that he had nothing to fear from
him. 'Ali gave orders to let him go.[^4] Then 'Abd Allah b. 'Umar was
brought. He also said that he would pledge allegiance only after the
people were united behind him. 'Ali asked him to provide a guarantor
that he would not abscond; Ibn 'Umar refused. Now Malik b.
al-Ashtar [al-Nakha'i] said to 'Ali, “This man is safe from your whip
and sword. Let me deal with him.” 'Ali answered, “Leave him, I will be
his guarantor. By God I have never known him other than ill-natured, as
a child and as an adult.”

Ibn 'Umar's stand was, however, hostile to 'Ali. He left for Mecca to
join the opposition.[^5] 'Ali also invited Usama b. Zayd to pledge
allegiance, but Usama, while assuring 'Ali that he was the dearest
person to him, excused him on grounds of the commitment he had made to
the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) never to fight anyone confessing, “There is no
god but Allah”. When 'Ali asked Muhammad b. Maslama to pledge allegiance
he, too, excused himself stating that the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) had ordered
him, if there was conflict among the people, to break his sword and stay
at home.[^6]  
    
  

[^1]: See Nahj al-balagha, 1: 40 (At that moment the crowd frightened
me. It advanced towards me from every side like the mane of a hyena so
much so that al-Hasan and al-Husayn were being crushed and both of the
ends of my shoulder garment were torn).

[^2]: Tabari, Ta'rikh, 6: 3066.

[^3]: Ibid, 3068.

[^4]: Ibid, 3068.

[^5]: Baladhuri, Ansab, 3: 8

[^6]: Ibid, 3: 9.


