9: Repentance (baraat)
======================

This chapter contains 129 verses arranged in sixteen sections. They are
all fromÂ  Madina except for the two final verses which date from the
Farewell Pilgrimage to Mecca (as does Chapter 110 on [Divine] Support).
This chapter was revealed after The Table 5 and the expedition to Tabuk
on the road to Damascus which

occurred in A.H. 9 / 630 A.D., or two years before the Prophet's death
(VI, XIII).

The alternate title of Dispensation (OR Release) comes from V.I, while
the main one of Repentance (which is preferred by the great commentator
Ibo-Kathir) is to be found in VV. 5,11 and 103. The battle of Hunayn
which occurred in the year 8 / 630 is discussed in sections XIII & XIV.

There is no invocation to this chapter since it is really a continuation
of the previous one on Booty 8, and the first verse invokes God's name.
It strongly advises us against associating other deities in our pure
worship of God Alone or the sin of idolatry, as it is called, and
against trusting treacherous neighbors. Associators

should not visit mosques(III), while priests and clergy are called
unnecessary since God can be approached directly; likewise God has no
son (V). Charity is another theme which is discussed (VII-VIII),
especially its use in missionary effort (VIII).

We also read biographical details about the Prophet's suffering during
his Transfer or the Hijra from Mecca to Yathrib, which was then to be
called Madina (the Enlightened City \`-Al-Madina Al- Munawwara-or the
Prophets City'\`).

We likewise learn about his troubles in imposing a draft or military
service, especially on the rich (VII) and the nomads (XI-XII) which are
described in an especially vivid manner. Dissension had been stirred up
by hypocritical agitators and draft dodgers who went out among the
fickle desert folk. The Migrants or refugees

similarly had their troubles in settling down in his new capital of
Madina. The ending is one of the last sections in the whole Qur\`an to
be revealed.
