2: the Cow (baqarah)
====================

This chapter of 286 verses is arranged in forty sections. It, as well as
Chapter 3 and Chapters 29-32 inclusive, begin with the mystic initials "
A. L. M. "It dates from the first year after the Hijra or Transfer from
Mecca to Madina, or around the year 623 A.D. It was revealed before
Chapter 8 Booty, except for verse 281 (xxxvii) which was revealed at
Mina, a suburb just east of Mecca, during the Farewell Pilgrimage
shortly before the Prophet passed away. The title is taken from the Cow.
Or the Golden Calf, the story of which appears in section vii below and
which Moses wanted the Children of Israel to sacrifice to God Alone.

Because the chapter is quite long, it continues through two and a half
of the thirty Parts into which the Qur'an is traditionally divided, and
comprises more than one-tenth of the whole text of the holy Book. The
chapter mostly concerns legislation promulgated during the Madinese
period. It begins with the majestic invocation to the Book which
announces the first section, and then proceeds to describe disbelievers
and those arrogant persons who take it upon themselves to dictate to
others concerning religion. There is a parable on The Gnat" in section
III. and we proceed to the story of Adam's creation in IV.

Prayer is discussed in V, and we are told in vi that intercession is not
acceptable because God's face is to be found everywhere. The Direction
of Prayer, or our qibla, is dealt with in XVII-XVIII and prayer itself
once more in XXXI. Section XIX instructs us that we should simply strive
to meet God Alone. Abraham is introduced to us at Mecca (XV) while his
signs appear in XXXV.

Fasting, the month of Ramadan and God's care are other themes discussed
here (XXIII). Food is mentioned in XXI; virtue and retaliation in XXII:
the Pilgrimage appears in XXV. Charity is prescribed in XXXVI-XXXXVII,
and we are told to favor the genteel poor who do not go around begging
in public. Death and wills are treated in XXII; waste and bribery in
XXIII. There is legislation against liquor and gambling in XXV, the loan
business in XXXVIII, while the matter of debts and loans is handled in
XXXIX Then follow such matters as orphans. the sin of associating others
with our worship of God Alone, menstruation (XXVIII), marriage, oaths,
divorce, nursing mothers and widows (XXX).

In Part III of the Qur'an, towards the end of this chapter, we are
offered the It great vision of God's Seat or Throne, which embraces
Heaven and Earth, and are admonished to observe tolerance (XXXIV). The
chapter ends with a statement of the Islamic creed, given as this is
generally recited by Muslims (XI).
