5: the Table (maidah)
=====================

This chapter of 120 verses arranged in sixteen sections was revealed at
Madina (except for V.3, which was announced after the stay at \`Arafat
during the Farewell Pilgrimage in the 10th year of the Hijra or March
632 A. D.). The chapter comes after [Divine] Support 110 and before
Dispensation 9 in the sequence of revelation. It is called The Table
from section XV towards the end, where Jesus' disciples asked for the
rules governing food, and he was challenged to have a table sent down
from Heaven.

The chapter starts out like The House of \`Imran 3, with important
statements on Islam as a religion, so as to consolidate the nascent
Islamic community.

This begins by considering behavior during Pilgrimage (I), a subject
which is sumed in XIII. Food, marriage (I), and washing before prayer
(II) come next; also oaths, liquor and gambling (XII) Good and evil
(XIII) are moral issues which are likewise discussed. Judicial procedure
is recorded (VI) while Mosaic law is mentioned in vii. Adam's sons Cain
and Abel were participants in the first murder (V), although they are
not named in the Qur'an. Theft (VI) and wills (XIV) are other matters
discussed.

Christians are addressed and we are told that Christ is not God (III).
Jesus himself is discussed in vii; as well as Christians, the Trinity
and the figure of Christ again in X. The Jews are mentioned in XI but we
are advised that Christians are closer than they are to Islam. Jesus'
miracles are described in XV and we are informed how Jesus himself
rejected Godhood at the end of section XVI which closes the chapter.
