Narrations:
===========

1- Anas Bin Maalik, a companion of the Holy Prophet SAWW was quoted as
saying that Fatah Al-Mobin is Hodaibiyah. (Sahih Al- Bokhari, Kitab
Al-tafsir)

2- Again Anas Bin Maalik in more detail narrates: that when we returned
back home from Hodaibiyah, in a state of shock and grief   as our
sacrifices were not allowed to be brought to the House of Allah, at that
moment the very first verse of this chapter was revealed on the Holy
prophet (PBUH) and he was informed that he had been gifted a manifest
victory by Allah. That was why the holy prophet SAWW remarked: “A verse
had been revealed which is most beloved for me than the whole world.”
(Sahih Al-bokhari hadith No;4834)

3-    Jabir’s Narration:

Another famous companion of the Holy prophet (PBUH) Jabir Ansari, was
quoted as saying that we never regarded victory except on the day of
Hodaibiyah. (Tafsir Al-tabari Vol.3 ,Pg.93).

4-    Dhahak, a famous commentator states that the first verse… means we
have given you the victory without war and definitely there is a victory
in peace. (Thalabi, Tafsir Kashf wal bayan , Beirut: Vol.9, Pg.42)

5-    Omar’s Objection:

Authentic sources show that Omar bin Al-khattab, a companion of the Holy
Prophet (PBUH), was quite upset at the peace treaty and its terms. He
exclaimed in extreme grief and indignation: “ O messenger of Allah! Are
you not the true Prophet of God?

He replied: Why not?

Then Omar asked:

“Are we on the right path and they on the wrong one?”

He replied:  “yes”.

Omar asked: Is it not a fact that our martyrs are in paradise and their
slain ones are in hell?”

The Holy Prophet (PBUH) replied: Why not?

Omar then said: Why should we submit to this humiliation and return
without observing Umrah or Allah decides the matter through war?

Prophet Mohammed (PBUH) replied: I am the servant of Allah and his
Messenger. I can never violate His command. He will never destroy me. He
is my helper.

Omar posed more questions to the Prophet (PBUH): Did you not promise
that we would visit Allah’s house and perform “tawaf?”

He replied: yes indeed, I did promise but I did not promise that it will
happen this year. For sure we will visit the house and perform tawaf.

Omar kept quiet but his grief and doubts were never erased. He went to
Abu bakr and repeated the same questions to him as he posed to the Holy
Prophet (PBUH). He was also reported to have said: I never gave way to
any doubt since I embraced Islam, but on this occasion I could not avoid
it. (From Sahih Bukhari and Maarif al- Quran of Mufti Shafi)

6- Zohri’s narration:

Zohri, a clergy in Umayyad dynasty, used to say that there is no
victory in the history of Islam bigger than the peace pact of
Hodaibiyah. The broken

relationship with Infidels of Mecca restarted and they were getting
closer to Muslims; and within the period of three years a large number
of them embraced Islam.

Shobi, another scholar and narrator, held the same view. He would
believe that even the victory of Muslims in the battle of Khyber and the
Oath delivered by the companions of the Holy Prophet (PBUH) were due to
the results of the peace pact of Hodaibiyah.


