War and peace in Islam
======================

With the help of all these revelations of chapter 48 of the Holy Book
and the authentic interpretations you can easily draw the result that
the real victory in Islam and the Holy Quran is Peace and not War. Many
battles were fought and won by Muslims but none of them were given the
name of victory. Only the battle of Khyber was considered to be near
victory in which only 93 Jews were killed. So there was no way to divert
this divine message and to say that the term Fatah al-Mobin, open
victory, encourages battles with the Jews of Khyber that happened just
one month after the peace pact of Hodaibiyah; or it refers to the
conquest of Mecca that happened in 8 Hijra, after two years for there is
nothing to support these assumptions.

You can also draw this result that the real Islam never allowed its
followers to defeat their enemies with might and power, nor does it give
them the authority to capture their land and make them slaves. Islam was
spread with high spirituality in its message, reality and attraction in
its teachings. If, in Islamic rule an infidel gave the testimony in the
oneness of God and the Prophethood of Prophet Mohammed (SAWW) during the
war, his life would be safe. It did not mean compulsion but it was a
subsequent way to save his life as he was compelled to die as a prisoner
of war.

Omar was not ready to accept these realities. He raised very strong
objections against the peace pact of Hodaibiyah, showed his suspicion
and doubts about the Holy Prophet (SAWW) and his promises and termed the
peace Pact of Hodaibiyah as a defeat. Thus, you can easily understand
the nature of advances the Muslims made during his caliphate as his
views about humiliation and defeat were infact a shining victory in the
eyes of Allah and His Prophet (PBUH). This bright victory was spreading
its message like the sun beneath the mountains of Hodaibiyah and its
rays were spreading peace from the Arabian Peninsula to the whole world,
forever.

This message of peace should never contradict with Jihad. The reason was
that unlike Christianity Islam gave the people the right to defend
themselves. You can not wage a war against anyone irrespective of his
religion but you can defend yourself against his invasion. The Holy Book
will guide us to the right path: “And fight in the way of Allah with
those who fight you and do not exceed as Allah does not like those who
used to exceed.” (2: 190)

A commonly accepted rule among the followers of progeny of the Holy
Prophet (SAWW) was that it is not just to initiate war against the enemy
in the absence of the Holy Prophet (SAWW) or infallible Imam.

In the light of this concept we would say that if someone exceeds the
limits and starts violating it or he punishes innocent people,
civilians, children and women then he would be guilty in accordance with
the Holy Book.  So where you like would to place suicide attacks in
Islam in which innocent people fall target?  How could you justify
hijacking children and women and slaughtering humans by Taliban like a
herd of cattle? Forcing the people to have beard and the women to stay
in their houses and lashing them on mere suspicion might be the Islam of
Sufi Mohammed or American sponsored Islam but not the real Islam. Islam
of the Prophet Mohammed

(PBUH) raised his voice for the education of man and woman, while the
Islam of Sufi Mohammed would never allow women to acquire knowledge.

Similarly one can never justify invading other countries based on the
mere suspicion that some terrorists might take shelter there. One has no
right to station ones’ forces in other countries for the safety of ones’
people at the cost of billions of other lives.  If you are keen to
establish law and order then find only the guilty one, put aside your
fighting, forgive and forget; as did the Holy Prophet (PBUH). In the
light of this preaching how would you justify an operation in which
millions of people were forced to leave their houses and pass their
lives in the camps as refugees while the real culprits are never
executed nor arrested? The Holy Prophet (PBUH) and Muslims were forced
to leave their homes, their lives were in danger and their belongings
were taken by the infidels of Mecca but the Holy Prophet SAWW instead of
taking revenge kept his people and his rival busy in negotiations which
was finalized in the form of a peace pact in Hodaibiyah. So we should do
the same, if we want to follow His way, the only way that is leading
towards peace. If you can not achieve your goal by war then you can
achieve it by peace.


