Chapter 45:  Jalal al-Din Dawwani
=================================

A. Life and Works
-----------------

Mohammad bin As‘ad Jalal al-Din was born in 830/1427 at Dawwan in the
district of Kazarun, of which his father was the Qadi. Having received
early education from his father and then from Mahjwi al-Ari and Hassan
bin Baqqal, he studied theology under Muhyi al-Din Ansari and Hammam
al-Din at Shiraz, where he ultimately became professor at the *Madrasat
al-Aitam*. In a short time he became famous for his knowledge and
learning, attracting students from far and wide. It was in recognition
of his literary and academic fame that he received admission into the
Cour of Hassan Beg Khan Bahadur (Uzun Hassan), the then Turkish ruler of
Mesopotamia and Persia. He ultimately rose to the eminent position of
the Qadi of the Court, which position he retained under Sultan Mantiq
Ya‘qub as well. He died in 907/1501 or 908/1502, and he was buried in
his native village Dawwan.[^1]

Tusi revived the tradition of philosophical disciplines during the
Mongol period; Dawwani did the same during the Ottoman period. Whereas
the former gave a fresh impetus to the study of ibn Sina by writing
commentaries on some of his works and by defending him against his
detractors, the latter on his *Hayakil-i Nur* and elaborating his
illuminative philosophy *(hikmat-i ishruq)* in his own works. Both are
revivalists, but they differ in their approach to the truth. The one is
a true Avicennian, the other a faithful Suhrawardian. Brockelman has
enumerated 70 of his extant works,[^2] of which the important ones are
listed below:

1. *Sharh ‘Aqa’id-i ‘Adudiyyah*, Istanbul, 1817.

2. *Sharh Tahdhib al-Mantiq wa al-Kalam*, 1264/1847.

3. *Al-Zaura*, cairo, 1326-1908.

4. *Risalah fi Ithbat al-Wajib al-Qadimah wa-al-Jadidah.*

5. *Risalah fi Tahqiq Nafs al-Amr.*

6. *Risalah fi Ithbat alpJoauhar al-Mufariq.*

7. *Risalah fi ‘Adalah.*

8. *Risalah fi-Hikmah.*

9. *Sharh al-Hayakil.*

10. *Anmudhaj al-‘Ulum.*

11. *Al-Masa’il al-‘Asr fi al-Kalam.*

12. *Akhlaq-i Jalali*, translated into English under the title of *The
Practical Philosophy of the Mohammadan People*, by W.F. Thomson, London,
1839.

B. Ethics
---------

Dawwani was commissioned by Sultan Hassan Geg to revise the ethical
treatise of Tusi with the express aim of “correcting and completing” it
from the illuminative *(ishraqi)* point of view. The structure of
*Akhlaq-i Jalali* is basically the same as that of *Akhlaq-i Nasiri*,
but in the execution of the work Dawwani has artistically ornamented it
with the Qur’anic verses, precepts of the Prophet and his Companions and
the moving utterances of the mystics. He not only abbreviated and
simplified Tusi’s treatise but also amplified and elaborated it at
places in the light of the philosophy of illumination; besides he added
much by way of literary adornment.

Following ibn Miskawaih, Tusi regards ultimate happiness *(sa‘adat-i
quswa)* as the *summum bunum* of life. His concept of ultimate happiness
because of its reference to the heavenly *(qudsi)* element is
intrinsically different from the Aristotelian concept of happiness.
Dawwani goes a step further and identifies the moral with the religious
ideal. It is with reference to God intended vicegerency that the Qur’an
distinguishes right from wrong, evaluates knowledge and appreciates
power; therefore, vicegerency of God *(khilafat-i ilahi)* and not
ultimate happiness should be the inspiring ideal of the “noblest
position of man in the universe as determined by God and not by man
himself, which is that of the vicegerency of God.

What entitles man to this high office of responsibility? Dawwani finds
the answer in a saying of the Caliph ‘Ali. Man, according to this
saying, occupies a middle position between the angels and the brutes.
The former have intellect without desire and ire. They have no
temptations, nor freedom of choice; being perfect by nature, they are
above morality. The latter, on the other hand, have desire and ire
without intellect, and thus, being incapable of controlling their
irrational impulses, are below morality. Man has both.

He can, however, rise above the angels by sub-ordinating desire and ire
to intellect, and can also sink below the brutes if desire and ire
enslave his intellect. The brutes can be excused for want of intellect,
but not man. The excellence of man’s perfection is enhanced by his
natural temptation and deliberate resistance to evil; the angels have
been spared the painful processes of conflict, deliberation, and choice.
Thus, man alone is a free, responsible and, therefore, moral being, and
his right to the vicegerency of God is established on this very
ground.[^3]

How is this vicegerency to be accomplished by man? Quoting the Qur’anic
verse, “Whosoever gains wisdom, verily he gains great good.” Dawwani
holds that mature wisdom *(kikmat-i balighah)* is the royal road to this
exalted position. By mature wisdom, being a happy blend of theory and
practice is essentially different from the Socratic dictum: Knowledge is
virtue. The Greeks were interested in ascertaining the speculative
principles of morals; the practical aspect of ethics was quite alien to
their temperament.

Mature wisdom can be acquired through intellectual insight as well as
through mystic intuition. Both the philosopher and the mystic reach the
same goal through different ways. What the former “knows,” the latter
“sees,” there being complete harmony between the findings of the two.

Influenced by the Qur’anic doctrine of moderation[^4] no less than the
Aristotelian doctrine of the mean, Dawwani holds that the mean
constitutes the good in all matters. But it is determined not by
“reason” and “prudence,” as held by Aristotle, but by the divine Law.
Reason can at best determine the form of morality, the content whereof
must come from the divine Code. Since the path of moderation is
difficult to tread, Dawwani has identified it with the bridge over hell
*(pul sirat)* – a bridge which is narrower than a hair and sharper than
a sword.

Moral struggle pre-supposes that all dispositions *(khulq)*, whether
innate or acquired, are capable of modification and change. Constant
instruction and discipline and punishment, as evidenced by experience,
can change the wicked into the virtuous. By these means the evil is
greatly reduced, if not completely eradicated. And since a person does
not know beforehand that a particular evil disposition would resist all
attempts to modify and change it, it is in consonance with the dictates
of both reason and religion that he should exert his utmost for its
modification.

To Plato, virtue was the moderation of human nature as a whole.
Aristotle assigned to each virtue the place moderation would give it. Be
he could go no further than this. The Greeks “systematized, generalized,
and theorized,” but the accumulation of positive knowledge based on
patient, detailed, and prolonged observation was altogether “alien to
their temperament.” This weakness of the Greek genius was removed by a
rather practical and penetrating mind of the Muslims,[^5] who classified
ethics as a “part of practical philosophy.” With ibn Miskawaih, the
first Muslim moralist, the emphasis shifted from broad generalizations
to individual differentiation and specification of virtues. He not only
determined seven, 11, 12 and 19 species[^6] of wisdom, courage,
temperance, and justice respectively – the four cardinal virtues of
Plato – but also developed an attractive theory of the causes and cures
of mental diseases, a process which culminated in al-Ghazālī with a
shift from an intellectual to a mystic outlook.[^7]

Ibn Miskawaih had worked out the details of Plato’s theory of virtue,
but with Tusi the problem was that of improving and completing the
Aristotelian theory of vice. He emphasized for the first time that
deviation from the equipoise is not only quantitative but also
qualitative, and, thus, added perversion *(rada’at)* as the third
generic cause of vice[^8] to the Aristotelian excess and deficiency of a
state. Tusi also set the seal of completion on practical philosophy by
including domestics and politics in his ethical treatise in order to
meet the deficiencies of the ethical work of ibn Sina *(Kitab
al-Taharat)* and of that of Farabi. Lastly, Tusi revolted against the
ascetic ethics of al-Ghazālī. Asceticism, for him, is the negation of
moral life, for man is by nature a social being as is indicated by the
word for man in Arabic, *insan* (associating), and body is not an
obstacle but an instrument of the soul for attaining the perfection it
is capable of.[^9]

Nevertheless, he recognizes asceticism as a necessary stage in the
development of mystic consciousness, of which he has had no personal
experience. Inspired by the illuminative philosophy of Shihab al-Din
Maqtul, Dawwani finds complete harmony between philosophy and mysticism.
What the mystic “sees,” the philosopher “knows,” and the latter “knows,”
the former “sees.” He, therefore, gave a Qur’anic bias to the ethics of
Tusi.

C. Politics
-----------

Following Tusi, Dawwani too has used *Siyasat-i Mudun* more in the sense
of the science of civics than in the modern sense of politics. The
origin, function, and classes of society and the need of a government
headed by a just king are the same for Dawwani as for Tusi. Monarch is
held to be the ideal form of government, in which king is the second
arbitrator of justice, the first being the divine Law. After reproducing
the general principles of distributive and corrective justice from
*Akhlaq-i Nasiri*, Dawwani adds ten moral principles of his own, which
ought to be observed by a king in order to ensure efficient
administration of justice.

In the first place, the king should invariably consider himself to be
the aggrieved party while deciding a case, so that he may not wish for
the aggrieved what is abhorrent to him. Secondly, he should see that the
cases are disposed of quickly, for justice delayed is justice denied.
Thirdly, he should not indulge in sensual and physical pleasures which
ultimately bring about the ruin of a State in their wake. Fourthly,
royal decision should be based on clemency and condescension rather than
on rashness and wrath. Fifthly, in pleasing people he should seek the
pleasure he should seek the pleasure of God. Sixthly, he should not seek
the pleasure of the people by displeasing God. Seventhly, he should
render justice if decision is left to his discretion, but forgiveness is
better than justice if mercy is begged of him. Eighthly, he should
associate with the righteous and lend ears to their counsels. Ninthly,
he should keep everyone to his rightful place and should not entrust
high office to the low-born people. Lastly, he should not be content
with personal abstention from injustice, but should conduct the affairs
of the State that none under his authority is guilty of this offence.

D. Metaphysics
--------------

Like Tusi and others, Dawwani’s cosmology consists of the gradual
emanation of ten intellects, nine spheres, four elements and three
kingdoms of nature. The active intellect, the intellect of the sphere of
the moon, bridges the gap between the heaven and the earth.

Quoting the Prophet’s saying that intellect is the noblest of all the
created things, Dawwani identifies the first intellect *(‘aql-i awwal)*
with the original essence of Mohammad. It conceives the idea of all
things past, present, and future, just as a seed potentially contains
roots, branches, leaves, and fruit. The spheres which are stationary in
nature, but changeable in qualities, control the destiny of the material
world. Fresh situations come into being through the revolutions of the
spheres, and every moment the active intellect causes a new form into
existence to reflect itself in the mirror of elemental matter. Passing
through the mineral, vegetative and animal states, the first intellect
finally appears in the form of acquired intellect *(aql-i mustafad)* in
man, and, thus, the highest point having coalesced with the lowest, the
circle of being is completed by the two arcs of ascent and descent.

The first intellect is like the seed which sprouted into twigs,
branches, and fruit, reverts to its original form of unity possessing
collective potentiality. This circular process takes the form of motion
*(harkat-i wada‘i)*, in growing bodies of increasing or decreasing their
magnitude, and in the rational soul that of the movement of thought. All
these motions are, in fact, shadows of the divine motion proceeding from
God’s love for self-expression, which in mystic terminology is called
the flashing of Self upon Self.[^10]

Dawwani’s metaphysical treatise, *al-Zaura* is a critical evaluation of
*Kalam* and of the teachings of the spiritual leaders, the philosophers,
and the mystics, from the illuminative *(ishraqi)* point of view. He
fully appreciates the utility and importance of the first three
disciplines but takes serious notice of the inconsistency with Islam of
some of the issues raised by them. He believes that philosophy and
mysticism both ultimately lead to the same goal, yet he cannot shut his
eyes to the eminence and superiority of the latter over the former.
Mysticism, in his view, is free from doubt and uncertainty because it is
due to divine grace and is, therefore, nearer to prophethood.[^11]

Bibliography
------------

Jalal al-Din Dawwani, *Akhlaq-i Jalali*, Lucknow, 1916; *al-Zaura*, MS.
No. Ar. h. 2 95A, Panjab University Library, Lahore; W. F. Thompson,
*The Practical Philosophy of the Mohammadan People*, London, 1890; A. M.
A. Shushtery, *An Outline of Islamic Culture*, Bangalore, 1938; R. Levy,
*An Introduction of Sociology in Islam*, London, 1933; D. M. Donaldson,
*Studies in Muslim Ethics*, London, 1953; *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, vol.
2, London, 1913 – 28; E. G. Browne, *A Literary History of Persia*,
1953, vol. 3 London, 1920; ‘Abd al-Salam Nadawi, *Hukama-i Islam*,
Azamgarh, vol. 1, 1953, vol. 2, 1956; C. Brockelmann, *Geaschiecte der
Arabischen Litteratur*, 2nd edn., Leiden, 1943, *Suppl.*, 1937.

[^1]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, vol. 1, p. 933.

[^2]: Geshichte der Arabischen Litteratur, Suppl., vol. 2, 1937, pp. 306
– 09.

[^3]: Akhlaq-i Jalali, p. 24.

[^4]: Qur’an, 2:190, 5:2.

[^5]: Briffault, The making of Humanity, p. 192.

[^6]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, pp. 15 – 20.

[^7]: Mazan al-‘Amal, pp. 83 - 91.

[^8]: Akhlaq-i Nasiri, p. 114.

[^9]: Ivanow, Tasawwurat, p. 92.

[^10]: Akhlaq-i Jalali, pp. 258 – 59.

[^11]: Al-Zaura, p. 116.


