Chapter 48:  Sadr al-Din Shirazi
================================

**Sadr al-Din Shirazi (Mulla Sadra)**[^1]

A. Life and Works
-----------------

The intellectual activity revived in Persia during the Safawid period,
some features of which we have discussed in previous chapters, “The
School of Ispahan,” found its culmination in Sadr al-Din Shirazi known
to his compatriots as Akhund Mulla Sadra and to his disciples as simply
Akhund or as *Sadr al-Muti’allihin*, i.e. the foremost among the
theosophers. This figure, about whom the whole intellectual life of
Persia has revolved in the past three and half centuries and who is one
of the major expositors of Islamic intellectual doctrines in the Shi‘ah
world, has remained until today almost completely unknown outside
Persia, even in other Muslim countries. Many have heard of his name, and
nearly all travellers to Persia since the Safawid period, who have been
interested in the intellectual life of the country, have recognized his
importance have been impressed by his fame,[^2] yet no one outside a
group of his disciples in Persia, who have kept his school alive until
today, has done justice to his doctrines in presenting them to the world
at large.

Mulla Sadra, whose complete name is Sadr al-Din Mohammad, was born in
Shiraz in about 919/1571,[^3] the only son of Ibrahim Shirazi. A member
of the famous Qawam family of Shiraz, Ibrahim held the post of a vizier
and was a powerful political and social figure in his native city. The
young Sadr al-Din exhibited his exceptional intelligence from childhood
and was given the best possible education in Shiraz.

Having completed his early studies, he became intensely interested in
the intellectual sciences *(al-‘ulum al-‘aqliyyah)*, especially
metaphysics, and, therefore, left Shiraz for Ispahan which was at that
time the capital and major seat of learning in Persia. In Ispahan he
studied first with Baha’ al-Din ‘Amili, learning the transmitted
sciences *(al-‘ulum al-naqliyyah)* from him and later with Mir Damad who
was his most famous master in the intellectual sciences.[^4] Within a
few years he became himself a recognized master in all the branches of
formal learning especially in *Hikmat*[^5] in which he soon surpassed
his own teachers.

Not satisfied simply with formal learning, Mulla Sadra left the worldly
life in general and retired to a small village named Kahak near Qum
where he spent 15 years in asceticism and purification of his soul
until, as he claims in his introduction to the *Asfar*, he became
endowed with the direct vision of the intelligible world. He now came to
“see” through illumination *(ishraq)* what he had previously learned
theoretically from books.

Having reached both formal and spiritual perfection, Mulla Sadra
returned once again to the world. Meanwhile, Allahwirdi Khan, the
Governor of Shiraz, had built a large *madrasah* and invited Mulla Sadra
to return to Shiraz as the head of the new school. Akhund accepted the
offer and returned to his native city, making the school of Khan the
major centre of intellectual sciences in Persia.[^6] He remained there
until the end of his life spending the last period of his terrestrial
existence entirely in teaching and writing.

Despite his extreme piety which is shown by the fact that he made the
pilgrimage to Mecca seven times on foot – he died in Basrah in 1050/1640
during the seventh journey – Mulla Sadra was often molested by some of
the exoteric *‘ulama’* who could not accept his gnostic interpretation
of the doctrines of the faith and who denounced him publicly on more
than one occasion. It was only the influence of his powerful family that
made it possible for him to continue his teaching activities.

Mulla Sadra’s life, then, can be divided into three distinct periods:
the period of childhood and schooling in Shiraz and Ispahan, the period
of asceticism near Qum at the end of which the composition of the
*Asfar* was begun, and the period of teaching and writing which
represents the result and fruition of the other two periods. His life is
itself the testimony of one of the main aspects of his wisdom, that in
order to be effective theoretical knowledge must be combined with
spiritual realization.

The writings of Mulla Sadra, nearly all of which were composed in the
last period of his life, are almost without exception of great merit and
have been among the main sources from which the later generations of
theologians, philosophers, and gnostics have drawn their inspiration.
All his writings concern religious sciences or metaphysics, theodicy or
*Hikmat*,[^7] and are in a very clear and fluent style making them more
easily understandable to the reader than the writings of his
predecessors like Mir. Damad.[^8] Since Mulla Sadra’s writings are
nearly completely unknown outside Persia, we take this opportunity to
list the works which, according to the leading living authorities and
the best historical evidence, were written by him.[^9]

The works dealing with metaphysics and intellectual sciences include:
*al-Asfar al-Arba‘ad, al-Mabda’ w-al-Ma‘ad, Sirr al-Nuqtah* (possibly
not authentic), *al-Shawahid al-Rububiyyah*, his most lucid and masterly
work, *al-Hikmat al-‘Arshiyyah*, glosses upon the *Hikmat al-Ishraq* of
Suhrawardi Maqtul, commentary *(sharh)* upon the *Hidayah* of
Athiri,[^10] glosses upon the metaphysical parts of ibn Sina’s *Shifa’*,
*Fi Ittihad al-‘Aqil w-alMa‘qul, Fi Ittisaf al-Mahiyyah w-al-Wujud, Fi
Bad‘ Wujud al-Insan, Fi al-Tasawwar w-al-Tasqid, Fi al-Jabr w-al-Tafwid,
Fi Huduth al-‘Alam, Fi Hashr, Fi Sarayan al-Wujud, fi al-Qada’
w-al-Qadar, Fi Tashakhkhus, al-Masa’il al-Qudsiyyah, Iksir al-‘Arifin,
al-Waridat al-Qalbiyyah, al-Qawa‘id al-Malakutiyyah, Hall al-Mushkilat
al-Falakiyyah*, introduction to *‘Arsh al-Taqdis* of Mir Damad,
*al-Mazahir*, glosses upon *Rawashih al-Samawwiyyah* of Mir Damad,
*Khalq al-A‘’mal, Kasr al-Asnam al-Jahiliyyyah, al-Mizaj, al-Ma‘ad
al-Jismanim, Tanqiyah* in logic, *diwan* of poems in Persian, and
answers to various questions on philosophy.

The works that are primarily concerned with the religious sciences
include the Qur’anic commentary: *Mafatih al-Ghaib, Asrar al-Ayat*,
commentary upon a large number of the verses of the Qur’an, commentary
upon a few prophetic *Ahadith fi Imamah*, glosses upon the Qur’anic
commentary of Baidawi, glosses upon the Khwaja Nasir al-Din al-Tusi and
upon Qushji’s commentary upon the *Tajrid* (of doubtful authenticity),
glosses upon the commentary of the *Lum‘ah*, commentary upon the *Usul
al-Kafi* of Kulaini, one of the four major sources of Shi‘ah Law,[^11]
*Mutashabih al-Qur’an*, and a Persian treatise called *Sih Asl* on the
soul and its destiny.[^12]

Mulla Sadra composed also several quatrains in Persian, a few of which
are mentioned in the traditional sources and some appear in his own
handwriting on the first page of his commentary upon the *Hidayah*.[^13]
They deal mostly with the Sufi doctrine of the unity of Being *(wahdat
al-wufid)*, which may be considered to be the central theme of Mulla
Sadra’s doctrinal formulations. For example, in one of the quatrains he
says,

The Truth is the spirit of the universe and the universe of the body,
And the orders of the angels are the senses of the body,
The heavens, elements, and compounds are its organs,
Lo! Unity is this, and the rest nothing but rhetoric.

In dividing the writings of Mulla Sadra into the intellectual and the
religious ones, we do not in any way wish to imply that these two
categories are completely separated in his view. On the contrary, one of
the major achievements of Mulla Sadra consisted in uniting and
harmonizing religion and the intellectual sciences. All of his works,
even in philosophy, are replete with the Qur’anic verses in support of
his conclusions, and all of his religious works, even the Qur’anic
commentaries, are full gnostic and intellectual interpretations. One can
only say that some of Akhund’s writings are concerned more with
religious questions and others more with intellectual ones.

Likewise, among the above-mentioned works some are more gnostic in
character and others are presented in a more discursive language,
although they all bear the fragrance of gnostic doctrines. Among
writings which are of a more gnostic vein one may mention *al-Shawahid
al-Rububiyyah, al-‘Arshiyyah, Asrar al-Ayat*, and *al-Waridat
al-Qalbiyyah*, and among those which are presented in a more discursive
language are the *Sharh al-Hidayah* and the commentary upon the
*Shifa’*.

Without a doubt the most important work of Mulla Sadra is the *Asfar
al-Arba‘ah*. It is comparable in dimension and scope to the *Shifa’* and
the *Futuhat al-Makkiyyah* and in a way stands midway between the
Peripatetic encyclopedia of ibn Sina and the compendium of esoteric
sciences of ibn ‘Arabi. The title of *Asfar* itself has been the cause
of much difficulty to the few Orientalists who are acquainted with the
book. The word *Asfar* is the broken plural for *safar* meaning journey
as well as *sifr* meaning “book” from the Hebrew *sefer*. So it was that
Gobineau considered the work to be a series of four books.”[^14]

Both views are, however, erroneous. Actually, *asfar* means journeys but
not the account of travels in the ordinary sense of the word as Gobineau
understood it to be. As Mulla Sadra himself mentions in his introduction
to the book, the *Asfar* consists of the following four stages or
journeys of initiatic realization *(suluk)*: (1) the journey of the
creature or creation *(khalq)* towards the Creator or the Truth
*(Haqq)*, (2) the journey in the Truth with the Truth, (3) the journey
from the Truth to creation with the Truth, and (4) the journey with the
Truth in the creation. This monumental work is, therefore, an account of
the stages of the journey of the gnostic, systematized in a logical
dress.

In content, the first book of the *Asfar* deals with Being and its
various manifestations, the second with the simple substances, i.e. the
intelligences, souls, and bodies and their accidents including,
therefore, natural philosophy, and the third with theodicy, and the
fourth with the soul, its origin, becoming and end. All these topics are
treated in detail taking into account the voluminous.[^15] In a sense,
this vast *opus* is the culmination of a thousand years of contemplation
and thought by Muslim sages as well as the foundation of a new and
original intellectual perspective which issues forth from within the
matrix of the Muslim tradition.

B. Sources of Mulla Sadra’s Doctrines
-------------------------------------

According to Mulla Sadra, there are two forms of knowledge: that derived
from formal instruction *(al-‘ilm al-suwari)* and that which comes from
intellectual intuition *(al-‘ilm al-ladunni)*. The first is acquired in
school with the aid of a teacher, and the second based upon a greater
degree of certainty than the first, is the science possessed by the
prophets and saints through the purification of the soul and the
catharsis *(tajrid)* of the intellect.[^16] There are then, according to
this view, two sources for Mulla Sadra’s ideas, one formal and in a
sense historical, i.e. manifested in history before him, and the other
spiritual and invisible. Regarding this second source, which may be
called his “guardian angel” or “hidden Imam,” the source of all inner
illumination, we have little to say except to emphasize its importance
in Mulla Sadra’s view.

It was the first category that we are primarily concerned here. There
are five principal elements which are clearly detectable in the new
analysis brought about by Mulla Sadra; they are also found, though less
explicitly, in the doctrines of the Safawid sages before him. These
elements include the philosophy of Aristotle and his followers, the
doctrines of the Neo-Platonic sages, especially Plotinus whose *Enneads*
the Muslims considered to be a work of Aristotle, the teachings of ibn
Sina, the gnostic doctrines of ibn ‘Arabi, and the principles of the
Islamic revelation, especially the more esoteric teachings of the
Prophet and the Shi‘ah Imams.[^17]

Among these sources the last two are of particular importance. Mulla
Sadra created a new school of *Hikmat*, on the one hand, by putting the
intuitions of the gnostics and especially of ibn ‘Arabi and his
followers into a logical dress and, on the other hand, by drawing out
the philosophical and metaphysical implications of the teachings of the
Imams especially as contained in the *Nahj al-Balaghah*, creating
thereby for the first time what may be called a distinctly Muslim school
of *Hikmat* based especially upon the inspired doctrines which form the
very basis of Shi‘ism.

Mulla Sadra, like Suhrawardi, held in great esteem the pre-Socratic
philosophers and sages of Greece, both historical and mythological, and
regarded Thales, Anaximander, Agathedemon, Empedocles, Pythagoras,
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle as the last group of sages in the ancient
world to have possessed wisdom in its entirety. He, like many other
Muslim Hakims, considered Greek philosophy not to have started with
Aristotle but to have ended with him and believed all the later Greek
sages to have been masters of various arts and sciences other than
metaphysics.[^18]

For Mulla Sadra, therefore, Greek philosophy was essentially the wisdom
of the Hebrew prophets inherited, systematized, and later in part
forgotten by the Greeks, a wisdom which was integrated into the Muslim
intellectual perspective and brought to full fruition in the light of
the Islamic revelation. That is why Mulla Sadra wishes to reject some
aspects of the teachings of either the Peripatetics or the
Illuminationists he appeals so often first to the Qur’an and the Hadith
and then to those fragmentary sayings of the pre-Socratic philosophers
with which the Muslims were acquainted.

C. Mulla Sadra’s Method and the Characteristics of His School
-------------------------------------------------------------

The particular genius of Mulla Sadra was to synthesize and unify the
three paths which lead to the Truth, viz. revelation, rational
demonstration, and purification of the soul, which last in turn leads to
illumination. For him gnosis, philosophy, and revealed religion were
elements of a harmonious ensemble writings. He formulated a perspective
in which rational demonstration or philosophy, although not necessarily
limited to that of the Greeks, became closely tied to the Qur’an and
sayings of the Prophet and the Imams, and these in turn became unified
with the gnostic doctrines which result from the illuminations received
by a purified soul.[^19]

That is why Mulla Sadra’s writings are a combination of logical
statements, gnostic intuitions traditions of the Prophet, and the
Qur’anic verses. Through the symbolic interpretation of the sacred text
he demonstrated the gnostic quality of the esoteric meaning of
revelation and through intellectual intuition he made rational and
discursive thought subservient to the universal truths of gnosis. In
this fashion he achieved that synthesis of science and revelation in the
light of gnosis and in the general perspective of Islam towards which
Farabi and ibn Sina – the latter particularly in his Qur’anic
commentaries – had aimed and which Ghazli, Suhrawardi and the whole
chain of sages extended from the Saljuq to the Safawid period had sought
to achieve from various points of view.[^20]

In metaphysics or, more generally speaking, *Hikmat* itself, Mulla Sadra
is credited with founding the third major school of Muslim “philosophy,”
the first two being the Peripatetic school, the greatest exponent of
which in the Islamic world was ibn Sina, and the Illuminationistic or
*ishraqi* school founded by Suhrawardi Maqtul.[^21] Mulla Sadra adopted
certain principles from each school as, for example, the hylomorphism
from the Peripatetics and the gradation of Being and the celestial
archetypes from the Illuminationists. Moreover, he added certain
principles drawn from the teachings of the Sufis like ibn ‘Arabi such as
the continual becoming of the substance of the world and unity of Being
which had never appeared as principles of any school of *Hikmat* and
were never systematized in the logical language of the Hakims before
Akhund’s time. That is why Mulla Sadra is often credited with founding a
new and original form of wisdom in the Muslim world is usually called
*al-Hikmat al-Muti’aliyyah* as distinguished from *al-Hikmat
al-Masha’iyyah* (Peripatetic philosophy) and *al-Hikmat al-Ishraqiyyah*
(Illuminationist theosophy).[^22]

D. Division of the Sciences
---------------------------

Before discussing the basic features of Mulla Sadra’s doctrines it is
useful to consider his conception of the relation of the sciences to one
another and especially the meaning and significance accorded to
*Hikmat*. In the introductory chapter of the *Asfar*, he divides the
sciences, following the Peripatetics, into theoretical wisdom consisting
of logic, mathematics, natural philosophy, and metaphysics and practical
wisdom consisting of ethics, economics and politics.[^23]

In the treatise *Iksir al-‘Arifin*, he outlines a somewhat more complete
and in a way more original division of the sciences.[^24] According to
this scheme, the sciences *(‘ulum)* are either of this world *(dunyawi)*
or of the other *(ukhrawi)*. The first is divided into three categories:
the science of words *(‘ilm al-aqwal)*, the science of acts *(‘ilm
al-af‘al)* and the science of states of contemplation or thought *(‘ilm
al-ahwal* or *afkar)*.

The science of words comprises the sciences of the alphabet,
word-construction, syntax, prosody, poetics, and the meanings of terms
in logic. The science of acts consists of what belongs to various
material objects from which the arts of weaving, agriculture, and
architecture come into being, what is of a higher degree such as the art
of writing, the science of mechanics, alchemy, etc, what belongs to
providing a living for the individual and the society from which the
sciences of family, law, politics, and the *Shari‘ah* are created, and,
finally, what belongs to the acquisition of spiritual and moral virtues
and the casting away from evil from which the “science of the path”
*(‘ilm al-tariqah)*, i.e. Sufism, comes into being. As for the science
of thought, it consists of the sciences of logical demonstration, the
science of arithmetic, the science of geometry including astronomy and
astrology, and the sciences of nature including medicine and the various
sciences dealing with minerals, plants, and animals.

The sciences of the other world which are not accessible to the ordinary
intelligence of men and are not destroyed with the death of the body
include the knowledge of angels and intellectual substances, the
knowledge of the Preserved Tablet *(lauh al-mahfuz)*, and the knowledge
of the Exalted Pen *(al-qalam al-a‘la)*, i.e. of the divine decree and
of the first determination of the divine essence which Mulla Sadra,
following the earlier Sufis, calls also by the name of the reality of
Mohammad *(al-haqiqat al-Mohammadiyyah)*. These sciences also include
the knowledge of death, resurrection, and all that pertains to life
hereafter.[^25]

Among the pursuits with which man can occupy himself in this life, none
stands in as exalted a position as *Hikmat* the divisions of which we
have outlined above. And among its branches none is as important and
principled as metaphysics or the science of the principle of things, so
that this branch of knowledge alone is often considered worthy of being
called *Hikmat*. Mulla Sadra defines this science as “coming to know the
state of the essence of beings as they are, to the extent of human
capacity” or “ a man’s becoming an intellectual world (microcosm)
corresponding to the objective world (macrocosm),” or, to quote still
another definition, “the comprehension of universals and catharsis from
the world of matter.”[^26]

The above definitions imply that *Hikmat* is a purely intellectual form
of knowledge in which the knower himself undergoes a certain
transformation in the process of knowing and his soul becomes a mirror
in which the cosmic hierarchy is reflected. With such a conception then
it is no wonder that Mulla Sadra spent so much of his life in teaching
and writing about *Hikmat* only and regarded all the other sciences as
its subsidiaries.

E. Principles of Mulla Sadra’s Doctrines
----------------------------------------

In discussing the basic principles of *Hikmat* as understood and
expounded by Mulla Sadra, we have chosen to mention those major
principles of his thought which distinguish him from his predecessors
and which are the characteristic elements of his metaphysics. The
doctrines of the Peripatetic and Illuminationistic schools as well as
the ideas of ibn ‘Arabi and his followers form the common background for
the metaphysics of Mulla Sadra.

There are four topics in each of which Mulla Sadra has departed from
earlier philosophical perspectives and which form the principles of his
whole intellectual vision. These four subjects concern (1) being and its
various polarizations, (2) substantial motion or the becoming and change
of the substance of the world, (3) knowledge and the relation between
the knower and the known, and (4) the soul, its faculties, generation,
perfection and final resurrection. We shall consider these questions in
the above mentioned order, emphasizing in each case the particular
complexion given to these subjects by Mulla Sadra.

### 1. Unity and Polarization of Being

The cornerstone of Mulla Sadra’s doctrines is the principality and the
unity and gradation of Being. As we have already mentioned,[^27] one of
the major points of contention among Muslim philosophers and theologians
concerned the question whether Being or the quiddities *(mahiyyat)* of
things are principal. We saw that the Muslim Peripatetics like the Sufis
believed in the principality of Being, i.e. the objective reality of
Being independent of mental abstractions and considered the quiddities
to be nothing but accidents, while the Illuminationists beginning with
Suhrawardi Maqtul and followed by Mulla Sadra’s own teacher, Mir Damad,
developed a “metaphysics of essences” and held the opposite view that
existence is an accident and that the essences are principal. In this
debate Mulla Sadra sided definitely with the Peripatetics and Sufis in
accepting the principality of Being, and opposed the Illuminationists.

On the question of unity and gradation of Being, however, Mulla Sadra
departed from peripatetic teachings completely. In the view of the
Muslim Peripatetics the being of each thing is in essence different and
distinct from other beings while it is principal with respect to its own
quiddity. According to Akhund, however, Being is the same reality in all
realms of existence, it is a single reality but with gradations and
degrees of intensity. Just as we say the light of the sun, the light of
a lamp, or the light of a glow-worm and mean the same subject, i.e.
light, but with different predicates, i.e. under different conditions of
manifestation, so in the case of Being, the being of God, of a man, of a
tree, or of a heap of earth are all one Being or one reality but in
various degrees of intensity of manifestation.[^28]

Moreover, Being, no matter where it manifests itself, appears always
with its attributes or armies *(‘asakir)*, as they are traditionally
called, such as knowledge, will, power, etc.[^29] A stone, because it
exists, is a manifestation of Being and, therefore, has knowledge, will,
power, and intelligence like men or angels. However, since at the level
of a stone the manifestation of Being is very weak, these attributes are
hidden and not perceptible.[^30]

The various beings in the world of manifestation are limitations of the
one reality or Being. These limitations are abstracted by the mind and
become the forms of quiddities *(mahiyyat)* of things, and when
transposed into the principle domain, they become the Platonic ideas or
archetypes. Unlike Being which is objectively real and in fact is the
reality of the cosmos, the *mahiyyat* are accidents of Being abstracted
by the mind without having a reality independent of Being. Even the
archetypes *(al-a‘yan al-thabitah)* possess a form of Being which in
this case is God’s knowledge of them.

What distinguishes the earthly manifestation of things from their
celestial archetypes is not a gradation of the *mahiyyat* from more
subtle to more gross modes of existence, as certain followers of the
Illuminationist school believe. Rather, it is the intensity of Being
which determines the level of existence of each creature. If the light
of Being shines upon the form or quiddity of a man with a greater
intensity than now, he will become the man of the intermediate world
*(barzakh)* and if the intensity is greater still he will become the
celestial man identified with his heavenly archetype.

Absolute Being itself, which is the proper subject for metaphysics, is
above all limitations and, therefore, above all forms or *mahiyyat*,
above all substances and accidents. It is the “Form of forms” and the
Agent of all acts. By manifesting Itself longitudinally *(tuli)* It
brings into being the various orders of Being from the archangels to
terrestrial creatures and by manifesting itself latitudinally *(‘ardi)*
It creates the various members of each order of Being.[^31] Being is the
reality of all things so that the knowledge of anything is ultimately
the knowledge of Its being and, therefore, of Being itself. Likewise,
the archetypes exist eternally through God’s knowledge without which
they would have no share whatsoever in Being.

Since Being is unity in multiplicity and multiplicity in unity,[^32] it
partakes of logical distinctions and divisions while remaining in
essence indivisible and above all polarizations. Mulla Sadra goes into
great detail about the various divisions and categories of Being and in
fact most of the first book of the *Asfar* is concerned with them. We
mention here a few of the division which Akhund discusses with great
rigour in his writings, especially in the monumental *Asfar*.

One division of Being is into connective being *(al-wujud al-irtibati)*
and self-subsistent being *(al-u‘ujud al-nafsi)*. Connective being is
that which connects a subject with a predicate as in the statement, “Man
is a rational animal.” Self-subsistent being is one which stands
independently by itself and is not simply the means of connecting two
terms. This category of being which exists in itself is in turn divided
into three kinds: that which is objective existence is not the quality
of something else and is called substance *(jauhar)*, that which is the
quality of something else and is called accident *(‘ard)*, and, finally,
that which has need of no cause outside itself, i.e. the Being of God.
From another point of view Mulla Sadra considers the being of all things
other than God to be the connective being *(wujud al-rabit)* and only
the Being of God to be Being *per se*.[^33]

Another division of Being adopted by Mulla Sadra is that of the
necessary *(wajib)*, possible *(mumkin)*, and impossible *(mumtani‘)*
beings which nearly all the Muslim philosophers and many theologians
coming after ibn Sina and following his example, have accepted.[^34] If
the intellect considers a being and finds that the meaning of being is
essential to it, i.e. lies in its essence, and that there are no causes
outside it which have brought it into being, that being is called the
Necessary Being. If it has need of a cause outside itself it is called
possible being. Moreover, the attribute of possibility pertains to its
quiddity as well as to its being. The possibility of its quiddity
concerns its relation to *its particular being*, and the possibility of
its being pertains to its relation to *the Necessary Being*. The *being*
or existence of each object, therefore, depends upon the being of God
and the knowledge of anything upon the knowledge of the root or
principle of its own being. Since the root or basis of the Necessary
Being is unknowable, the knowledge of the being of things remains also
unknowable to us and it is only the quiddities or *mahiyyat* which we
can know.

These quiddities, as already mentioned, are the limitations placed upon
being and abstracted by the mind. The intellect in perceiving any object
immediately analyses it into being and quiddity, the latter consisting
of the limit determination of the former. It is only in the case of the
Divine Being that such an analysis cannot be made because Absolute Being
has no *mahiyyah*. One can say that It is without *mahiyyah* or that Its
Being and *mahiyyah* are identical.

The quiddities in themselves are only mental concepts without a separate
objective existence so that the effects produced by things come from
their being and not from their quiddity. Likewise, cause and effect are
categories of being which in one case becomes the cause and in the other
the effect of things.

The *mahiyyat* are either particular or universal; the latter either
exist before or are abstracted by the intellect from particulars.[^35]
The universals which exist independently of all particulars are the
archetypes of Platonic ideas upon the reality of which Suhrawardi Maqtul
had insisted against the view of the Peripatetics. Mulla Sadra likewise
criticizes Aristotle and ibn Sina for considering the Platonic ideas to
be nothing but the forms of things impinged upon the divine intellect.
He insists upon the reality of the archetypes in a spiritual world that
is completely independent of the world of particulars as well as of all
mental images formed in the human mind.[^36]

Akhund praises Suhrawardi Maqtul and accepts fully the reasons he had
given for the existence of the Platonic ideas or “masters of the
species” *(arbab al-anwa‘)*. There is a spiritual man in the spiritual
world who is the real cause for the activities and ontological qualities
of the terrestrial man; likewise in the case of other species each has
an intelligible idea or archetype which governs all the activities and
life of that species on earth.

The archetype is in essence one with its particulars but differs from
them in characteristics which arise from the substance or “matter” of
the particulars. The archetype appears different in each stage *(taur)*
of manifestation while in the realm of reality it is one and the same
truth. The beings of this world are the reflections and shadows of the
archetypes so that they are like them and share in their reality and at
the same time are different from them in being less real and farther
removed from the source of Being.

One of the principles for which Akhund is famous is called *imkan
al-ashraf* or “the possibility of that which is superior.” According to
this principle, just as each being in treading the path of perfection
passes through various stages from the lowest to the highest, so it is
necessary that for each imperfect being in this world there be degrees
of being in the higher stages of the cosmic hierarchy, since each being
has descended from the divine Principle through intermediate states of
being. For example, the being of man on earth in his present state of
imperfection necessitates the being of man in the intermediary world of
souls, and the latter the being of the spiritual man in the intelligible
world. According to this principle, therefore, the very existence of
quiddities in their earthly state of souls or the world of inverted or
reflected forms *(al-amthal al-mu‘allaqah)* and these in turn
necessitate their existence in the spiritual world of simple
intellectual substances.

After showing the *mahiyyat* are in reality limitations of being, Mulla
Sadra goes on to assert that the logical distinction made by Aristotle
and all the later philosophers between substance and the accidents which
together form the ten categories concerns only the *mahiyyat*; Being
properly speaking, is neither substance nor accident but above both.
When we say of a thing that it is such and such a substance or that its
particular quality and quantity are its accidents we refer only to its
*mahiyyahi* and not to its being.

The relation of cause and effect, however, contrary to that of substance
and accidents, concerns only the being of things.[^37] All things in the
universe have a cause and an effect and since everything is a
manifestation of Being, every effect is but an aspect of its cause and
cannot in essence differ from it. That is why the well-known principle
that from unity only unity can issue forth, *ex uno non fit nisi unum*,
must be true. From the divine essence which is simple and one, only a
simple being can issue forth. Mulla Sadra calls the first manifestation
of the divine essence extended being *(wujud al-munbasit)*, the first
intellect, the sacred effusion *(faid al-muqaddas)* or the Truth of
truths *(haqiqat al-haqa’iq)* which he considers to be one in essence
but partaking of degrees and stages of manifestation.[^38]

He divides reality into three categories: of the divine essence, of
“Absolute Being” which he identifies with extended being, and of
relative being which that of the creatures is.[^39] The cause of all
things, therefore, is extended being which in turn the first
determination of the divine essence. God is, thus, the Cause of causes
and the Ultimate Source of all effects to be seen in the universe,
because all causes and effects arise from the beings of things and all
beings are in reality the stages of the One Being.

To terminate our discussion of the polarizations of Being in cosmic
existence we must also consider the question of form and matter. On this
question Mulla Sadra sides with the Peripatetics and is against the
Illuminationists in accepting the theory of hylomorphism. In his view,
however, matter is not limited to the corporeal domain. Rather, it is
the aspect of potentiality which manifests itself in all the realms of
existence according to the conditions of that particular realm. Bodies
have a matter belonging to the corporeal world, and souls *(anfas)*, a
matter conformable to the subtle world of the psyche, moreover, in each
world matter is a lower degree of being of the form with which it is
united and for that reason accompanies it in all realms of existence
until the highest realm which is the world of pure intelligences
*(mujarradat)*. That is why, as Akhund expresses it, matter has love for
form which forever compels it to seek union with it (form). Only in the
intelligible world, which is also called the *‘alam al-jabarut*, are the
spiritual realities completely separated from and free of all species of
matter, even the most subtle.

### 2. Substantial Motion

The question of potentiality leads to that of motion because motion, as
Aristotle said, is becoming actual of that which is potential. Mulla
Sadra rejects the possibility of sudden change from one substance to
another which the Peripatetics accepted along with gradual change.
Rather, he considers all change to be a form of motion and introduces
the idea of substantial motion *(al-harakat al-jauhariyyah)*,[^40] which
is another of the well-known principles associated with his name, as a
basis of his whole outlook from which he goes on to prove the creation
of the world in time, bodily resurrection and many other doctrines that
will be discussed in the course of this chapter.

It is well known that the Muslim Peripatetics, following Aristotle,
limited motion to only four of the ten categories, i.e. quantity
*(kam)*, quality *(kaif)*, place *(makan)*, and substance,[^41] the last
understood only in the sense of generation and corruption. Ibn Sina
rejected completely substantial motion in any sense other than
instantaneous coming into being and passing away and argued that since
the essence of a thing depends on its substance, if that substance were
to change; its essence would also change and lose its identity.[^42]

Following the Sufis, Mulla Sadra considered the world to be like a
stream of water which is flowing continually and believes motion to be
nothing but the continuous regeneration and re-creation of the world at
every instance.[^43] According to him, it is not only the accidents but
the substance of the universe itself that partakes of motion and
becoming, i.e. continuous re-creation and rebirth.[^44] In order to
prove this assertion, Akhund makes use of several arguments. For
example, he writes that it is an accepted fact that accidents have a
need of a substance upon which they depend for their being and
properties. Their subsistence depends upon the subsistence of their
substance and their creation and regeneration upon its creation and
regeneration. Therefore, every change which takes place in the accidents
of a body must be accompanied by a corresponding change in the
substance; otherwise the being of the former would not follow the being
of the latter. Or, in other words, since the effect must be the same as
its cause, the cause or substance of a changing accident must itself be
changing.

In addition, it is known that all beings in the universe are seeking
perfection and are in the process of becoming and change in order to
overcome their imperfections. Since divine manifestation never repeats
itself, God creates new theophanies at every moment in order to remove
imperfections and bring new perfections to things. The matter of each
being, therefore, is continuously in the process of wearing a new dress,
i.e. being wed to a new form, without, however, casting away its older
dress. It is only the rapidity of this change that makes it
imperceptible and guarantees the continuity and identification of a
particular being through the stages of substantial motion.

According to Mulla Sadra, each body consists of matter and two forms:
one, the form of the body which gives matter dimensions and the
possibility of accepting other forms, and the other the form of the
species *(surah nau‘iyyah)* which determines the species and identity of
the body. Each of these two forms is at every instant changing, and
matter is taking on new forms at every moment. Moreover, at each stage
of substantial change the totality of a being which itself consists of
form and matter may be considered to be the matter of the aspect of
potentiality for the next stage the actualized aspect of which then
becomes the form.

The power or force which motivates this change in nature which is a
force hidden within the cosmic substance. In fact, since Being comes
before nothingness, motion in this world comes before rest through the
force immanent in the cosmos. Needless to say, this motion is limited to
the degrees of cosmic existence in which matter is present, i.e. to
corporeal and subtle manifestation, and does not extend to the world of
pure intelligences or archetypes which are beyond all change.

Substantial motion itself has also the two aspects of change and
permanence. Each form has two faces, one in the world of archetypes and
the other in nature, the first permanent and the second in continuous
renewal. The substance of the world itself is, therefore, the
intermediary between permanence and change; it possesses two aspects,
one which is continuously in motion and the other, which Mulla Sadra
identifies with the intelligences, above all change.

Time, for Akhund as for Aristotle, is the quantity of motion, which, in
a world of continuous substantial motion, becomes an inherent feature of
cosmic existence.[^45] It is, more specifically, the measure of the
substantial motion of the heavens but not the measure of their rotation
as held by the Peripatetics. The heavens, according to Mulla Sadra, are
in continuous contemplation of the perfection of their beloveds, i.e.
the universal intellects which at every instant cause a new form to be
projected upon the essence of the universal souls. The cause of
celestial motion is, therefore, the desire to reach perfection, a goal
which, because of its limitlessness, makes celestial motion endless. The
heavens are in continuous creative worship, their motion being a sign of
their contemplation of the divine by means of the intelligences, and
their causing generation and growth in nature through their illumination
being a sign of their act of creation. The whole world, therefore, both
in its gross and subtle domains, partakes of substantial motion, and
time is the measure of this motion as it occurs in the heavens where it
is most regular as well as regulatory.[^46]

Mulla Sadra makes use of the principle of substantial motion to explain
many of the most intricate problems of metaphysics and physics including
the relation between permanence and change which we have already
mentioned, the creation of the world, the creation of the soul, and
various eschatological questions. This principle can, therefore, be
regarded as one of the distinguishing features of his doctrinal
formulation.

As to the question of creation Akhund opposes the simple creation *ex
nihilo* of the theologians who believe the world to have been brought
into being in time from utter nothingness. Likewise, he rejects the view
of the Peripatetics who believe the world to have been created only in
essences or in *principio* but not in time and the view of Mir Damad
about *al-huduth al-dahri*.[^47] Mulla Sadra believes that creation is
in time *(al-huduth al-zamani)* because through substantial motion the
being of the universe is renewed at every moment or, more explicitly;
that the world is created at every instant, so that one can say that the
being of the world depends upon its non-being at a previous moment.
Where he differs from the theologians is that his conception of creation
*ex nihilo* is complementary to the view that the archetypes of the
world of creation exist changelessly in the intelligible world and that
the world is connected with its divine origin through a permanent
hierarchy.

This hierarchy begins with the first determination of the essence which
Akhund, following the Sufis, calls the reality of Mohammad.[^48] This is
followed by the pure intelligences which are completely separated from
matter and potentiality, the last of which is the giver of forms to the
universe and the governor of the world of generation and
corruption.[^49] This last intellect is like a mill that grinds out new
forms at every moment to feel the *hyle* of the world. It governs the
world according to divine decree and gives revelation to prophets an
inspiration to saints. Following the intelligible hierarchy there is the
world of cosmic imagination or inverted or reflected forms or the
purgatory between the intelligible and the material domains and,
finally, the visible universe. The world is, therefore, created in time
in the sense that its being is renewed after a moment in which it “was
not”; at the same time it is the terminal state of an immutable
hierarchy which through the subtle and angelic realms of being relates
the visible cosmos to its divine source.

### 3. Divine and Human Knowledge

From what we have already said, it is clear that for Mulla Sadra
knowledge forms the very substance of cosmic manifestation itself and is
moreover the gate to and means of salvation for the soul. Like all other
gnostics Akhund considers knowledge and being, or, from another point of
view, the knower and the known,[^50] to be essentially the same and
identifies the being of things with God’s knowledge of them.[^51] God
knows His own essence and His essence is none other than His being, and
since His Being and essence are the same, He is at once the knower, the
knowledge, and the known.

In the case of pure intellects or forms that are completely divorced
from matter also, the intellect and the intelligible are the same, the
difference in the two instances being that, although knowledge of the
intellects is identical with their being, it is not identical with their
quiddities, since their being surpasses their quiddities, whereas in the
case of God’s knowledge is identical both with Being and quiddity, since
God’s quiddity is the same as His Being.[^52]

Mulla Sadra rejects the Peripatetic notion that God’s knowledge of
things is the projection of their forms upon His essence as well as the
idea followed by many Illuminationists that God’s knowledge is the
presence of the very forms of things in His essence. Rather, he uses the
gnostic symbol of a mirror and considers the divine essence a mirror in
which God sees the forms or essences of all things and in fact, through
the contemplation of these forms or archetypes in the mirror of His own
essence, He brings all things into being. Moreover, since the forms of
all creatures, universal as well as particular, are reflected in His
essence, God has knowledge of every particle of the universe.[^53]

Mulla Sadra divides knowledge *(‘ilm)* into acquired *(husuli)*
knowledge and innate *(huduri)* knowledge and, like the
Illuminationists, divides the latter category into the knowledge of a
thing in itself, of a cause of its effect, and of an effect of its
cause. Perception is for him a movement from potentiality to actuality
and an elevation in the degree of being in which the perceiver or knower
rises from his own level of existence to the level of existence of that
which is perceived through the union between the knower and the known
which characterizes all intellection.

As for acquired knowledge or the knowledge of the human soul of things
other than itself, it is not a reflection of the forms of things upon
the soul and the soul does not have a passive role in the act of
knowing. Rather, since man is a microcosm composed of all degrees of
existence, his knowledge of things comes from the contemplation of these
forms in the mirror of his own being much like divine knowledge with the
difference that God’s knowledge leads to objective existence *(al-wujud
al-‘aini)* of forms, while man’s knowledge leads only to their mental
existence *(al-wujud al-dhihni)*. Otherwise, man’s soul has a creative
power similar to that of God; its knowledge implies the creation of
forms in the soul – forms the subsistence of which depends upon the soul
as the subsistence of the objective universe depends upon God.[^54]

According to Mulla Sadra, mental existence or the presence in the mind
of forms that yield knowledge of things as well as knowledge of itself
is above the categories of substance and accidents and is identical with
Being Itself. The knowledge that the soul has of things is just like the
illumination of the light of Being. This knowledge established the form
of that which is perceived in the mind, as Being establishes and
manifests the forms and quiddities of things externally. Moreover, it
repeats in an inverted order the degrees of cosmic manifestation. Just
as cosmic existence originates from the divine essence through the world
of the intelligences and consists of the degrees of cosmic souls,
bodies, forms, and matter, so knowledge begins from the senses, then
rises to the level of the imagination, apprehension, and finally
intellection ascending the scale of Being to the summit from which the
whole of universal manifestation has descended.

### 4. Soul, Its Origin, Becoming and Entelechy

Another of the important changes which Mulla Sadra brought about in the
formulation of *Hikmat* was the emphasis he laid upon the importance of
psychology or the science of the soul *(‘ilm al-nafs)* above and beyond
what Peripatetic philosophy had accorded to it. Moreover, he removed the
discussion of psychology from physics or natural philosophy and made it
a branch of metaphysics and a study that is complementary to the science
of the origin of things.[^55]

The soul *(nafs)*, according to Mulla Sadra, is a single reality which
first appears as the body *(jism)* and then through substantial motion
and an inner transformation becomes the vegetative soul, then the animal
soul, and finally the human soul. This development occurs from within
the substance of the original body without there being any effusion from
the heavenly souls or the active intellect.[^56] The substance of the
human sperm is at first potentially a plant, and then as it grows in the
womb it becomes actually a plant and potentially an animal. At birth, it
is actually an animal and potentially human, and finally at the age of
adolescence it is actually human potential either an angel or a disciple
of the devil.[^57]

All these stages lie hidden within the first substance or germ which
through substantial motion traverses the degrees of being until it
becomes completely divorced from all matter and potentiality and enjoys
immortality in the world of pure intelligences.[^58] The soul is,
therefore, brought into being with the body but it has spiritual
subsistence independent of the body.[^59] Or, to be more precise, the
soul at the beginning “is” the body which through inner transformation
passes through various stages until it becomes absolutely free from
matter and change.

The soul in each stage of its journey acquires a new faculty or set of
faculties. As a mineral it has the faculty of preserving its form and as
a plant, the faculties of feeding, growth, and the transformation of
foreign substances into its own form. As an animal the faculties of
motion and various forms of desire are acquired, and as a higher animal
it develops in addition to the external senses the inner faculties of
memory and imagination.[^60] Finally, in man the five inner faculties:
*sensus communis (hiss al-mushtarik)* which perceives forms,
apprehension *(wahm)* which perceives meanings, fantasy *(khayal)* which
preserves forms, memory *(dhakirah)* which preserves meanings and the
double faculty of imagination *(mutakhayyilah)*, and thought
*(mutafakkirah)* which in the first case governs the sensible and in the
second the intelligible domains, are also acquired.[^61]

Throughout its development it is the same single soul which in one case
appears as sight, in another as memory, and in yet another as desire.
The faculties are not something added to the soul but it is the soul
itself, or, in a more esoteric sense, being itself which appears in
various forms in each case.[^62] The soul passes through this stream of
becoming – this world – and the parts of its course are marked by the
archetypes or Platonic ideas that distinguish one species from another.
It wears a new dress and a new guise at each point of the stream but the
traveller is throughout one and the same.[^63]

Although the enumeration of the inner faculties of Mulla Sadra is
essentially the same as that made by previous Muslim authors borrowing
it from Aristotle, there is one point in which Mulla Sadra departs from
the Peripatetics completely. It is well known that Aristotle considered
only the universal intellect to be immortal and the Muslim Peripatetics
like ibn Sina accorded immortality only to the intellectual part of the
human soul. Mulla Sadra, following certain Sufi and hermetic teachings,
asserts that the faculty of imagination enjoys also a form of
immortality or at least existence independent of the body. He considers
the universe to consist of three domains: the intelligible world, the
sensible world, and an intermediate world *(barzakh)* of imagination
which is macrocosmic as well as microcosmic.

The faculty of imagination in man as well as in some of the higher
animals is, according to Akhund, a microcosmic counterpart of the cosmic
imagination and has the power of creating forms. Upon the death of the
body, this faculty, like the intellectual part of the soul, enjoys a
form of life of its own and may in fact lead the soul to the
intermediate world if it is the dominant element in the soul.

Mulla Sadra, like other Sufis, compares the soul to the cosmos on the
one hand and to the Qur’an on the other, identifying the higher states
of being of the soul with the esoteric meanings of the Qur’an.[^64]
There are seven degrees of existence for the soul as there are seven
heavens and seven levels of interpretation of the Qur’an. These degrees
he enumerates as nature *(tab‘ah)*, soul *(nafs)*, intellect *(‘aql)*,
spirit *(ruh)*, secret *(sir)*, hidden secret *(khafi)*, and the most
hidden state *(akhfa)* which is that of perfect union with God.[^65]
Each corresponds to a state of being, the totality extending from the
life of nature or the senses to the divine life of union with God.

According to Mulla Sadra from another point of view the soul has two
faculties, the practical *(‘amali)* and the theoretical *(‘ilmi* or
*nazari)*, which the latter at first is dependent upon the former but
later becomes completely independent. The practical faculty consists of
four stages: making use of the Law *(Shari‘ah)* of various religions
sent to guide mankind, purifying the soul from evil qualities,
illuminating the soul with spiritual virtues and the sciences, and
finally, annihilating the soul in God, beginning with the journey to God
and then in God and finally with God.[^66]

As for the theoretical faculty it, too, is divided into four stages: the
*potential* or *material* intellect *(‘aql al-hayulani)* which has only
the capability of accepting forms, *habitual* intellect *(‘aql
al-malakah)* which knows only simple and preliminary truths such as the
truth that the whole is greater than its parts, the *active* intellect
*(‘aql bi al-fi‘l)* which no longer has need of matter and concerns
itself solely with intellect demonstrations and is either acquired or
bestowed as a divine gift and finally the *acquired* intellect *(‘aql
al-mustafad)* which is the active intellect that has been united with
the divine origin of all existence and is the highest degree attainable
by man and the purpose of cosmic existence. These stages are also
road-marks upon the path trodden by the soul without implying any form
of multiplicity; the soul remains the one traveller traversing all these
stages on the road to perfection, the fruit and end of which is union
with God.

Mulla Sadra deals with eschatology in great detail in many of his works
and departs completely from the usual philosophical language in the
treatment of this subject. His language is primarily that of the Qur’an
and the hadith and of the gnostics. According to Akhund, the relation of
this world to the next is like that of the mother’s womb to this world.
While the child is in the mother’s womb he is actually in this world as
well, but being separated from this world does not know of its
existence. Likewise, man, while in this world is also in the next but
the majority of people are unaware of the invisible world. Only the
gnostics “see” the other world while they are here on Earth and that is
because for them terrestrial existence has become transparent.

Akhund divides cosmic being into five classes each of which has a
destiny and an end proper to its nature:[^67] the pure intelligences
separated from all potentiality, the intelligences which govern the
heavens, the various psychic entities belonging to the world of the
imagination such as the *jinn* and certain parts of the human soul,
animal and vegetable souls, and, finally, minerals and elements. The
separated intelligences subsist forever in the divine essence and are
never separated from it. As for the rational soul *(al-nafs
al-natiquah)*, it is either perfect, as the souls of the heavens and of
some men, and, in both cases, returns to God, or else it is imperfect.
In the latter case it is either devoid of all desire for perfection as
in the animals and those human beings who have committed much evil in
this life, or it is desirous of perfection like many persons who, having
chosen the wrong path, realize their mistake and wish to be guided
towards the Truth.
In the former case the soul, like other psychic entities belonging to
the intermediary world, after separation from the body becomes united
with the forms of the intermediary world of imagination *(‘alam
al-mithal)*;[^68] in the latter case the soul suffers after its
separation from the body until it is finally purified and united with
God.

Plants are either used as food by men and animals and, therefore, share
in their destinies, or have an independent existence, in which case,
after the end of their terrestrial existence, they join their archetypes
in the world of pure forms. Likewise with minerals and the elements,
they too become united with their intelligible counterparts after their
terrestrial existence terminates. In fact, these terrestrial beings are
united with their archetypes even while they are on Earth, but only the
gnostics are aware of this reality.

As for man’s bodily resurrection on the Last Day, Mulla Sadra considers
it to be one of the great mysteries of metaphysics revealed only to
those who have reached the highest stage.[^69] He accepts bodily
resurrection which he interprets in a particular fashion. It is known
that man’s individuality and distinguishing characteristics come from
his soul and not from his body because the substance of the body changes
every few years without in any way destroying the unity of human beings.
Of the faculties of the soul, however, intellection and imagination are
innate to it, while the vegetative and animal faculties such as the
external senses and passions are received by it through the body.

According to Akhund, in the next world all souls will receive the power
to create external forms as prophets and saints do here in this world.
For example, each soul can create the pleasure received through sight
from within itself without the need of what appears to us here as an
external organ. In other words, the organs of the body which appear as
“external” to the soul are created from within the soul in the next
world so that the resurrection of the soul is really complete with body
according to all the meanings we can give to the word “body.”

Difference between paradise and hell lies in that the souls in paradise
have the power to bring into being all the forms that are beautiful and
pleasant, all the flowers and *houris* of paradise, while the impure
souls in hell have only the power to bring into being ugly and
unpleasant forms and are in fact forced to suffer by the very forms they
will have created. Mulla Sadra adds, however, that ultimately the pains
suffered in the inferno will come to an end and, as ibn ‘Arabi had said,
the fires of hell will freeze and all will return to the divine origin
of things.[^70]

F. Significance of Mulla Sadra and His Influence
------------------------------------------------

As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, the importance of
Mulla Sadra lies not only in rekindling the lamp of learning and
reviving the intellectual sciences fully for the first time in the
Muslim World after the Mongol invasion, but also for uniting and
harmonizing revelation, gnosis, and philosophy together. Some authors
have criticized Mulla Sadra for taking certain principles from ibn
‘Arabi, Farabi, and Suhrawardi Maqtul and have, therefore, refused to
accept his “originality.” But as Aristotle has said so justifiably,
there is nothing new under the sun. One cannot create metaphysics of
one’s own as if the metaphysics were a mechanical invention. The
principles have always been and always will be the same. What determines
the originality of author in a traditional civilization like that of
Islam is his ability to re-interpret and reformulate the eternal
verities in a new light and thereby create a new intellectual
perspective.

Regarded in this way, Mulla Sadra must certainly be considered to be one
of the most significant figures in the intellectual life of Shi‘ah
Islam. Coming at a moment when the intellectual sciences had become
weakened, he succeeded in reviving them by co-ordinating philosophy as
inherited from Greeks and interpreted by the Peripatetics and
Illuminationists before him with the teachings of Islam in its exoteric
and esoteric aspects. He succeeded in putting the gnostic doctrines of
ibn ‘Arabi in a logical dress. He made purification of the soul a
necessary basis and complement of the study of *Hikmat*, thereby
bestowing upon philosophy the practice of ritual and spiritual virtues
which it had lost in the period of decadence of classical civilization.
Finally, he succeeded in correlating the wisdom of the ancient Greek and
Muslim sages and philosophers as interpreted esoterically with the inner
meaning of the Qur’an.

In all these matters he represents the final stage of effort by several
generations of Muslim sages and may be considered to be the person in
whom the streams, which had been approaching one another for some
centuries before, finally united.[^71]

More specifically, Mulla Sadra was able to harmonize his doctrinal
formulation with the teachings of Islam in such a way as to over-come
all the major difficulties which the Peripatetic philosophers met in the
face of the teachings of the Qur’an and for which al-Ghazālī criticized
them so severely.[^72] Of particular significance was his divorcing
metaphysics to a large extent both from Ptolemaic astronomy and
Aristotelian physics. While in Europe, Galileo, Kepler, and Newton were
destroying the homogeneity of Aristotelian cosmology and physics and in
this way weakening the medieval Christian world-view which was closely
linked with it, Mulla Sadra, through his doctrine of substantial motion
and through considering the science of the soul to be independent of
physics, separated metaphysics to a large extent from medieval natural
philosophy.

This separation, although perhaps not of immediate significance in the
11th/17th century Persia, which was still immune from European ideas,
became of great importance in the later centuries. As the modern
scientific world-view became more and more accepted in Persia during the
Qajar period, the separation brought about by Akhund between metaphysics
and natural philosophy helped to preserve the traditional wisdom in the
face of attacks by modernists whose only weapon was modern scientific
theories connected with the world of matter. In this way also, Akhund
rendered great service to the Muslim intellectual sciences and helped
their preservation until today.

There is no doubt that nearly the whole of the intellectual life of
Persia during the past three and half centuries has centred on Mulla
Sadra. Of his immediate students, Mulla Muhsin Faid, ‘Abd al-Razzaq
Lahiji, and Qadi Sa‘id Qumi, all of whom are among the leading figures
of Shi‘ah Islam, we need say little here for they have already been
discussed in a previous chapter.[^73] It need only be added that these
men in turn produced a generation of students who extended the teachings
of Akhund far and wide.[^74] In the Qajar period, after a short interim
of anarchy caused by the Afghan invasion, the school of Mulla Sadra was
once again revived, the most famous of its members being Jaji Mulla Hadi
Sabziwari, Mulla ‘Ali Nuri, author of one of the most important
commentaries upon the *Asfar*, Sheikh Ahmad Ahsai’i, founder of the
Sheikhi movement and the commentator upon Mulla Sadra’s *Masha‘ir*,
Mulla ‘Ali Mudarris Zunuzi, author of a significant work *Bada’i‘
al-Hikam* in Persian and glosses upon the *Asfar*, and Mohammad Hidaji,
also the author of a commentary upon the *Asfar*.[^75]

The influence of Akhund is to be met with wherever the traditional
school of *Hikmat* is still preserved and taught in Persia.[^76] All the
adherents of this school have regarded Mulla Sadra as their master and
it is no exaggeration to say that Akhund stands along with Farabi, ibn
Sina, al-Ghazālī, Nasir al-Din Tusi, Suhrawardi Maqtul, and ibn ‘Arabi
among the principal formulators of the Muslim intellectual sciences and,
though not well known outside Persia, is no less a figure than his more
famous predecessor.[^77] In him the many spiritual streams of the
earlier centuries met and united in a new river which has watered the
intellectual soil of Persia during the past four centuries; his
teachings are as alive today as they were at the time of their
formulation.

Bibliography
------------

Ja‘far ‘Ali Yasin, *Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi Mujaddid al-Falsifah
al-Islamiyyah*, al-Ma‘arif Press, Baghdad, 1375/1955; Sayyid Jalal
al-Din Ashtiyani, *Hasti az Nazar-i Falsafih wa ‘Irfan*, Khurasan Press,
meshed, 1379/1959; Mohammad Hussain Fadil-I Tuni, *Ilahiyat*, University
Press, Teheran, 1333 Solar; Comte de Gobineau, ‘*Les religions et les
philosophies dans l’Asie central*, les Editions G. Gres et Cie., Paris,
1923; M. al-Khudairi, “Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi,” *Risalat al-Islam*, No.
2, 1950, pp. 212 – 18, No. 3, 1951,m pp. 318 – 27, Murtada Mudarrisi
Chahardihi, *Tarikh-i Falasifih-Islam*, 2 vols., ‘Ilmi Press, Teheran,
1336 Solar; Jawad Muslib, *Falsafi’i ‘Ali ya Hikmat-i Sadr
al-Muti’allihin*, vol. 1, University press, Teheran, 1337 Solar onwards
(this work is a translation and commentary of the *Asfar* in Persian of
which only the first of the several volumes has appeared so far);
Hussain ‘Ali Rashid, *Dou Filsuf-i Sharq wa Garb*, Parwin, Ispahan, 1334
Solar; Sadr al-Din Shirazi, *al-Asfar al-Aarga‘ah*, ed. Mohammad Hussain
Tabataba’i, vols one and two, Da’ir al-Ma‘arif al-Islamiyyah, Qum,
1378/1958 onwards (this is a projected nine-volume edition of the
*Asfar* with various commentaries of which three have appeared so far);
also Teheran, lithographed edition, 1282/1865; *Asrar al-Ayat*, Teheran,
lithographed edition, 1322/1904; *Hashiyah ‘ala Sharh Hikmat al-Ishraq*,
Teheran, lithographed edition, 1316/1898; *al-Mabda’ al-Ma‘ad*, Teheran,
lithographed edition, 1314/1896; *Mafatih al-Ghaib*, Teheran,
lithographed edition; *al-Masha‘ir*, Teheran, lithographed edition,
1315/1895; *Sharh Ilahiyat al-Shifa’*, Teheran, Lithographed edition,
1303/1885; *SharhUsul al-Kafi*, Teheran, lithographed edition;
*al-Shawahid al-Rububiyyah*, lithographed edition, 1286/1869; *Kasr
Asnam al-Jahiliyyah*, ed. M. T. Danish Pazhuh, University Press,
Teheran, 1340 Solar; *Sih Asl*, ed. S. H. Nasr, University Press,
Teheran, 1340 Solar; S. J. Sajjadi, *The Philosophical Vocabulary of
Sadr* *al-Din Shirazi*, University Pressm, Teheran, 1380/1960; S. H.
Nasr, “Mulla Sadra dar Hindustan,” *Rahnama’yi Kitab*, vol. 4, Dai, 1340
Solar; Akbar Sairafi, *Tarikh-i Falasifih-i Islam*, Danish Press,
Teheran, 1315 Solar; Mohammad Hussain tabataba’i, “Musahibih-i Ustad
‘Allamih Tabatabi’i ba Professor Henri Corbin dar Barih-i Shi‘ah,”
*Salanih-i Maktab-i Tashayyu‘*, No. 2, Qum, 1339 Solar; Abu ‘Abd Allah
al-Zinjani, *al-Filsuf al-Farsi al-Kabir Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi*,
al-Mufid Press, Damascus, 1936; M. Horten, *Das Philosophische System
des Schirazi*, Strassburg, 1913.

[^1]: This chapter has been written with the invaluable help of Hajj
Mohammad Hussain Tabataba’i, one of the leading authorities on the
school of Mulla Sadra in Iran today, the author of the 20-volume
Qur’anic commentary al-Mizan and the editor and commentator of the new
edition of the Asfar.

[^2]: Comte de Gobineau, one of the most observant of travellers who has
visited Persia during the past few centuries, was quite aware of Mulla
Sadra’s significance although not quite well acquainted with his ideas,
for in a well-known passage he writes, “Le vrai, l’incontestable metite
de Moulla Sadra reste celiui pue j’ai indique plus haut: c’est d’avoir
ramine, rejeuni, pour le temps ou il vivait, la philosphie antique, en
lui conservant les moins possible de ses forms avicenniques...”
Gobineau, Les religions et les philosophies dans l’Asie central, Les
Editions G. Gres et Cie, Paris, 1923, p. 102.

[^3]: The date of Mulla Sadra’s birth was unknown until quite recently
when in preparing the new edition of the Asfar, Tabataba’i collected a
large number of handwritten manuscripts of the work. On the margin of
one of the manuscripts dated 1197/1782 with marginal notes by Mulla
Sadra himself, the authenticity of which cannot be doubted, there
appears this statement, “This truth was revealed to me on Friday, the
seventh of Jamadi al-Ula 1037 A.H. when 58 years had passed from (my
life)...” Therefore, the date of his birth can be established as
979/1571 or 980/1572. For the traditional accounts of the life of Mulla
Sadra and his works, see M.B. Khunsari, Raudat al-Jannat, Teheran,
lithographed edition, 1306/1888,vol. 2, pp. 331 – 32; M.A. TABRIZI,
Raihanat al-Adab, Sa‘di Press, Teheran,1331/1912, vol. 2, pp. 458 – 61;
Mir Khwand, Raudat al-Safa,Teheran, lithographed edition, 1270/1853,
vol. 8, p. 120; T. Tunikabuni, Qisas al-‘Ulama’, ‘Ilmi Press, Teheran,
1313/1895, pp. 329 – 33, and Agha Buzurg Tihrani, al-Dhari‘ah al-Gharra
Press, najaf, 1355/1936, on dealing with various writings of Akhund. As
for secondary sources see M. Mudarrisi Chahardihi, tarikh-i Falasifih-i
Islam, ‘Ilmi Press, Teheran, 1336 Solar, vol, 1, pp. 179ff; A. A.
Zinjani, al-Filsuf al-Farsi al-Kabir Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi, al-Mufid
Press, Damascus, pp. 212 – 18, no. 3, 1951, pp. 318 – 27; J. ‘Ali Yasin,
Sadr al-Din al-Shrazi Mujaddid al-Falsifat al-Islamiyyah, al-Ma‘arif
Press, 1375/1956,andthe introduction by M.R. mazaffar, in the new
edition of the Asfar, Da’ir al-Ma‘arif al-Islamiyyah, Qum 1378/1958. For
an account of the life and doctrines of Mulla Sadra in European
languages,see Gobineau, op. cit., pp. 91 – 103; E. G. Browne, A Literary
history of Persia, University Press, Cambridge, 1924, Vol. 4, pp. 429 –
30; and m. Horten, Die Philosophie des Islam, Verlag Ernst Rheinhardt,
Munchen, 1924, pp. 57ff. Also Browne, A year Amongst the Persians, Adam
& Charles, London, 1950, pp. 141 – 43.

[^4]: Concerning Baha’ al-Din ‘Amili and Mir Damad, see the preceding
chapter. To know the names of the masters of a Hakim is important
because learning Hikmat from “within” is impossible without a master for
the majority of even of those who are gifted to pursue it. One can learn
certain ideas from books alone but to really understand what Hikmat
means and what the various authorities meant by various expressions
there is a need of a master who himself learned the doctrines from
another master and so on going back to the early masters. The Hakim is,
therefore, as insistent upon the authenticity of his chain of masters as
a verifier of hadith is about the ismad of a tradition or a Sufi master
about the isilsilahi or chain of his tariqah.

[^5]: We have already discussed in detail in previous chapters the
meaning of this term as used here, i.e. a combination of gnosis,
illuminationist and Peripatetic philosophy which is neither theology nor
philosophy as currently understood but theosophy in the proper and
original sense of the term and not in its present usurpation by various
pseudo-spiritualist groups.

[^6]: The Khan school which is one of the most beautiful edifices of the
Safawid period had fallen into ruins for some years when about ten years
ago the Bureau of Archaeology of the Persian Government undertook the
task of repairing it. It is now operating once again as a madrasah for
traditional learning.

[^7]: He in fact criticizes ibn Sina for having spent his time composing
works on other sciences like mathematics and medicine.

[^8]: The story is told in most of the traditional sources mentioned
above that Mulla Sadra once asked Mir Damad why he was respected by all
the religious authorities while Akhund, despite his powerful family, was
molested so much by some of the ‘ulama’. Mir Damad answered that
although they were both saying the same thing, he hid his ideas within
so many difficult expressions that only the elite would be able to
understand them while Mulla Sadra wrote so clearly that anyone with a
knowledge of Arabic could detect the trend of his ideas.

[^9]: See also Raihanat al-Adab, pp. 458 – 61, where 50 works by him are
mentioned, and A. A. Zanjani, op cit., pp. 19 – 22 where he mentions 26
metaphysical and philosophical and 17 religious works some of which are
of doubtful authenticity. Refer also to J. ‘Ali Yasin, op. cit., pp. 58
– 62, where 26 works are named.

[^10]: The Kitab al-Hidayah dealing with the complete cycle of Hikmat,
i.e. logic, natural philosophy, and metaphysics was composed by the
seventh/13th century Persian author, Athir al-Din Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar
al-Abhari, it soon became one of the basic books of instruction in the
madrasahs. The tenth/16th century commentary upon it by Kamal al-Din
Mibudi was the best known before Mulla Sadra composed his own commentary
upon it.

[^11]: The Usul al-Kafi was also commented upon by Majlisi as we have
mentioned in the previous chapter. The commentary of Mulla Sadra which
is of a more intellectual nature is one of the most important Shi‘ah
works written in the Safawid period and is perhaps his most significant
religious composition.

[^12]: The unpublished treatise the manuscript of which exists in the
Majlis Library (MS. 103) in Teheran is the only known prose work of
Mulla Sadra in Persian, all the other above mentioned writings being in
Arabic.

[^13]: The manuscript of the Sharh al-Hidayah in the Mishkat Collection
at Teheran University, MS. 254, is in Mulla Sadra’s own handwriting,
several quatrains appear in the opening pages which are without doubt
his own.

[^14]: E.G. Browne, op. cit., vol 4, p. 430.

[^15]: The 1282/1865 Teheran lithographed edition with the commentaries
of Sabziwari on the margin runs over 1,000 large pages and the new
edition by Mr. Tabatabai’i with running commentary by himself and
several other Hakims of the Qajar period including Sabziwari and Mulla
‘Ali Nuri is planned in nine 400-page volumes of which three have
appeared so far. The Asfar which is used in graduate school of
theological faculty in Teheran University is taught over a three year
period and then only a part of the First Book is covered. It is said
that Haji Mulla Hadi Sabziwari, the greatest Persian Hakim after Mulla
Sadra, taught the complete Asfar to his advanced disciples over a six
year period.

[^16]: Mulla sadra, Mafatih al-Ghaib, al-Miftah al-Thalith, al-Mashhad
al-Thamin.

[^17]: See the preceding chapter in which the formative elements of
Shi‘ah intellectual life leading to Mulla Sadra and of the Safawid sages
have been discussed.

[^18]: See Asfar, Teheran, lithographed edition, 1282/1865, Book 2,
Section 4. Mulla Sadra writes that these pre-Socratic philosophers
actually spoke in a symbolic language (ramz) and implied by their theory
that the world was composed of a single element, the doctrine of the
unity of Being or wahdat al-wujud which is the basis of the gnostic
doctrines of ibn ‘Arabi. Mulla Sadra, in fact, identifies the water of
Thales with the nafas al-Rahman or the breath of the Compassionate which
the Sufis consider to be the ultimate substance of the universe. These
early Ionians who are considered by some today to be the founders of the
modern quantitative sciences of nature appear to the Muslims in a
different light as expositors of universal gnosis and those whom, as
Mulla Sadra writes, “have adopted the light of Hikmat from the lamp of
prophecy.”

[^19]: For an account of the relation of Mulla Sadra to Shi‘ism and his
success in unifying the three above-mentioned elements, see M. H.
Tabataba’i, “Musahibih-i Ustad ‘Allamih Tabataba’i ba Professor Henri
Corbin dar Barih-i Shi‘ah,” Salanih-i Maktab-i Tashayyu’, No. 2, 1339
solar, pp. 61 – 64. This is one of the most important works written
recently by a Shi‘ah authority on the general perspective of Shi‘ism and
the various sciences developed by the Shi‘ahs, and is the result of a
series of meetings between him and H. Corbin in which the latter posed
several basic questions about the spiritual attitude of Shi‘ism and the
relation between Shi‘ism and Hikmat and Sufism. The book was written in
answer to H. Corbin’s questions and contains a wealth of precious
knowledge about the intellectual life of Shi‘ism.

[^20]: It may at first seem surprising that Mulla Sadra wrote a treatise
against those who called themselves Sufis. But if we consider the social
and political conditions of the later Safawid period in which Sufism was
greatly disdained by political authorities and much of it had become
body without a soul, we can perhaps understand some of the motifs for
Mulla Sadra’s attack on it. However, the “Sufis” whom Mulla Sadra
attacked were not the Sufis proper but those who were seeking to destroy
the exoteric truths and bring about social anarchy in the name of
esotericism that they themselves did not possess. Otherwise, there is
not the least doubt of Mulla Sadra’s connection with Sufism – although
he preferred to use the name gnostic (‘arif) rather than Sufi – nor can
one doubt in any way to the gnostic quality of his doctrines.

[^21]: See the chapter of Suhrawardi Maqtul.

[^22]: If we have translated Hikmat as philosophy in one case and as
theosophy in the other, it is because the meaning of the term includes
both the wisdom belonging to the rational and mental plane or philosophy
and the wisdom which transcends the level of the ordinary human mind and
which, properly speaking, belongs to the angelic order and cannot be
called philosophy as the term is currently understood in European
languages.

[^23]: See J. Muslib, Falsafih-i ‘Ali ya Hikmat-i Sadr al-Muti’allihin,
vol. 1, Unversity Press, Teheran, 1337 Solar, p. 3.

[^24]: Sadr al-Din Shirazi, Rasa’il, Teheran, lithographed edition,
1302/1884, pp. 279 – 86.

[^25]: Mulla Sara adds at the end of this discussion that the causes for
the difference of view among various schools regarding different
sciences are four in number: (1) differences in the science of unity
leading to the creation of sects like the atheists, etc., (2) the
science of prophecy leading to separation between Muslims, Christians,
Jews, and other religious groups, (3) the science of Imamate leading to
division between the Shi‘ahs and Sunnis, and, finally, (4) the science
of jurisprudence leading to the creation of various schools and
interpretations of law. Mulla Sadra adds that the main cause of
multiplicity lies in misunderstanding the science of unity and the
science of the soul or the science of the beginning and end of things.
Rasa’il, pp. 287 – 88.

[^26]: J. Muslih, op. cit., pp 1 – 2.

[^27]: See Chapter 19 on Suhrawardi Maqtul.

[^28]: Mulla Sadra regards light as a perfect and intelligible example
of the unity and gradation of Being and praises the Illuminationists on
this point. See the first of the Asfar.

[^29]: See Seyyed Hossain Nasr, “The Polarisation of Being,” Pakistan
Philosophical Journal, vol. 3, no. 2, October 1959, pp. 8 – 13.

[^30]: The doctrine of the unity and gradation of Being in Mulla Sadra
is not new, it was expressed clearly five centuries before him by ibn
‘Arabi. Mulla Sadra, however, was the first person to give it a logical
dress and introduce it as a principle of Hikmat as distinct from pure
gnosis which does not concern itself with various logical distinctions.

[^31]: I dividing the hierarchies of universal existence into
longitudinal and latitudinal orders Mulla Sadra follows the scheme of
ishraqi angelology, which was discussed in the chapter on Suhrawardi
Maqtul.

[^32]: What distinguishes the gnostics from the Hakims in this subject
is that the former formulate the illuminations they receive which differ
depending upon the degree of their inner realization. One gnostic in a
certain state of contemplation (hal) may have been aware of only the
creatures or multiplicity as a reflection of unity, another of only God
or unity, and a third of unity in multiplicity. The Hakims, however,
from a theoretical and more logical point if view, do not take
particular perspective of the traveller upon the path (salik) into
consideration and have even criticized some of the gnostics for
considering multiplicity to be completely unreal.

[^33]: By this latter distinction, Mulla Sadra implies the difference
which exists, or at least used to exist, in European languages between
Being and existence. All creatures exist but only in the case of God can
one, properly speaking, say that He “is.” See Seyyed Hossein Nasr “The
Polarisation of Being,” op. cit., pp. 8 – 13.

[^34]: See ibn Sina, Kitab al-Shifa’ (Ilahiyyat), Teheran, lithographed
edition, pp. 291ff.

[^35]: The feature which distinguishes particulars from one another and
determines all other qualities in them is, according to Mulla Sadra,
their degree of being.

[^36]: Mulla Sadra writes that it was Hermes who learnt about the truth
of the “Platonic ideas” when he became illuminated by the light of the
intelligible world and separated from the world of the senses. In this
state Hermes met an illuminated figure in the spiritual world who taught
him all the sciences and when he asked the figure who he was, the figure
answered, “I am thy perfect nature (ana taba‘aka al-tam),” Asfar, p.
121. For a study of the rich symbolism of “perfect nature,” which means
the celestial or angelic part of the human soul, see H. Corbin, “Le
recit d’initiation et l’hermetisme en iran,” Eranos Jahrbuch, vol. 17,
1949, pp,. 121 – 88.HHHHHHHHH

[^37]: For the general discussion on cause and effect, see J. Muslih,
op. cit., pp. 85ff.

[^38]: It is this “simple being” or the supreme intellect which the
Sufis before Mulla Sadra identified with the reality of Mohammad. See
ibn ‘Arabi, La sagesse des prophetes, tr. T. Burckhardt, Albin Michel,
Paris, 1955, pp. 181ff.

[^39]: According to a principle – which is another of the well-known
doctrines formulated by Mulla Sadra and is called basit al-haqiqah kull
of al-ashya’, i.e., Truth in its state of simplicity contains all things
– the divine essence in its state of simplicity and “contraction”
contains all realities within itself. This is indeed a direct
consequence of the principle of the unity of Being; it if there is but
one Being and the whole universe is nothing but Being, the universe and
all its realities are contained in a state of “contraction” in that One
Being.

[^40]: See J. Muslih, op. cit., p. 100. This distinction may seem to
differ from what was said previously. But it must be remembered that the
divine essence cannot be limited to Being, which is its first
determination as well as the principle of universal manifestation. It is
this distinction to which Akhund is referring here.

[^41]: Mulla Sadra placed a lot of emphasis upon this point that he
discussed it not only in the First Book of the Asfar but in many other
chapters of the work and nearly all of his other books as well. See also
H. A. Rashid, Dau Filsuf-i Sharq wa Gharb, Parwin Press, Ispahan, 1334
Solar, pp. 50ff. and J. Muslih, op. cit., pp. 128ff. Mulla Sadra in the
second Book of the Asfar and other places insists that he is not the
first among the Hakims to have introduced this idea but that the
pre-Socratic philosophers had indicated although not explicitly the
existence of substantial motion. Moreover, he gives the Qur’anic verses
such as “Do ye create it or are We the Creator? We mete out death among
you, and We are not to be outrun, that We may transfigure you and make
you what ye know not” (51:59 – 61, Pickthall’s translation) in support
of his view.

[^42]: See ibn Sina, Danish-Nameh-i ‘Ala’i (Tabi‘iyyat), University
Press, Teheran, 1331/1912, pp. 3ff. Aristotle also in De Generatione et
Corruptione (319b, 31 – 320a, 2) divides motion into the four categories
of quantity, quality, place, and substance and speaks of substantial
change as one of the processes which characterize the sub-lunary region.
But the substantial change Aristotle means only generation and
corruption and for that reason later Muslim philosophers did not even
apply the term “motion” to it and considered motion to belong only to
the categories of quantity, quality, locomotion, and posture. Mulla
Sadra, however, considers substantial motion to be an inner
transformation of things somewhat in the alchemical sense in which there
is not simply a coming into being and a passing away but a process
through which a new state of being is reached. Moreover, substantial
change for the Aristotelians is sudden and instantaneous while for
Akhund it is gradual like other forms of motion. Also, substantial
change in the Aristotelian sense is limited to the sublunary region,
while for Mulla Sadra the whole of gross and subtle manifestation
partakes of substantial motion. Akhund’s conception of substantial
change therefore cannot be identified with that of Aristotle and should
not be confused with it because of similarity in terminology. For an
analysis of Aristotle’s doctrine of motion, see also H. A. Wolfson,
Crescas’ Critique of Aristotle, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
1929, pp. 512ff.

[^43]: Ibn Sina, Shafa’ (Tabi‘iyyat), pp. 43 – 44.

[^44]: The idea that God annihilates and re-creates the world at every
moment is one that is shared by the majority of the Sufis. Jalal al-Din
Rumi expresses it: “Every moment the world is being renewed, and we
unaware of its perpetual change. Life is ever pouring in afresh through
the body it has the semblance of continuity.” R. A. Nicholsan, Rumi,
Post and Mystic, George Allen Unwin, London, 1950, p. 117. See also T.
Burckhardt, Introductio to Sufi Doctrine, tr. D. M. Matheson, Sheikh
Mohammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1959, chap. 4.

[^45]: Substantial motion is essentially a rebirth because it always
means the attainment of a new state of Being.

[^46]: From what we have said above it is clear that in Mulla Sadra’s
view motion is principal, for it is an inherent characteristic of
corporeal and even subtle existence, and time is subservient to it
contrary to the view of many previous philosophers who considered motion
to be subservient to time. Mulla Sadra’s conception of time as the
quantity of substantial motion, which is itself the renewal of cosmic
existence, bears much resemblance to the doctrine of Abu al-Barakat
al-Baghadadi for whom also time is the measure or dimension of
existences. See S. Pines, Nouvelles etudes sur Awhad al-Zaman Abu’l
Barakat al-Baghdadi, Librairie Durlacher, Paris, 1955, Chap. 2.

[^47]: In Fasl 33 of the first book of the Asfar, Akhund writes that all
bodies are limited within the four dimensions of length, breadth, depth,
and time, and are differentiated by the division inherent in time, while
their unity is preserved through celestial archetypes or Platonic ideas.

[^48]: See Chapter 47.

[^49]: See Mulla Sadra, al-Waridat al-Qalbiyyah, Rasa’il pp., 243 – 49.

[^50]: The world of change here as in the case of Suhrawardi Maqtul
means the whole visible universe and not only the sublunary region of
the Aristotelians. According to Mulla Sadra, the difference between the
sublunary region composed of the four elements and the heavens composed
of ether lies only in that the matter of the heavens is more subtle than
the gross matter of the terrestrial environment and is governed by pure
souls that are free from the passions of earthly souls.

[^51]: The principle that the intellect, intelligence, and the
intelligible are one (ittihad al-‘aqil w-al-ma‘qul) is another point in
which Mulla Sadra opposed the previous Muslim philosophers. This
principle, which was accepted by the Neo-Platonists, was rejected by ibn
Sina (see Isharat, Haidari Press, Teheran, 1379/1959, vol. 3 pp. 292 –
93) and other Peripatetics. Akhund, while acknowledging his debt to
Porphyry and earlier Greek philosophers (see his Rasa’il, p. 319),
considered himself the first among Muslims to have reinstated this
principle which is made a cornerstone of his intellectual edifice.
Actually, Afdal al-Din Kashani and before him Abu al-Hassan ‘Amiri in
his Kitab al-Fursul fi al-Ma‘alim al-Ilahiyyah had accepted this
principle (see M. Minosie, “Az Kaza’in-i Turkiyyah,” Revue de la Faculte
des Lettre, Universite de Teheran, vol. 4, no. 3, Mars 1957, p. 50) but
it was Mulla Sadra who first systematized this principle and
demonstrated it clearly. For a discussion of the principle of the union
of the intellect and the intelligible, see Asfar, pp. 277ff.

[^52]: “God’s knowledge of things is identical with their being” (Mulla
Sadra, al-Shawahid al-Rububiyyah, Teheran, lithographed edition,
1236/1820, p. 36).

[^53]: See Mulla Sadra, Sharh al-Hidayah al-Athiriyyah, Teheran,
lithographed edition, 1315/1897, pp. 308 – 09.

[^54]: See his Rasa’il p. 240, where he quotes the Qur’anic statement
that “not a particle of dust in the heavens and earth is hidden from
God’s knowledge” as support and consequence of his conception of divine
knowledge.

[^55]: Akhund adds that in the case of prophets and saints, the creative
power of the soul becomes so great that like God Himself it can even
create objective and external forms.

[^56]: The whole of the fourth book of the Asfar is devoted to the
science of the soul where the soul takes on a meaning totally different
from the quasi-material substance of the Aristotelians. Mulla Sadra
often speaks of the complete science of things as mabda’ w-al-ma‘ad, the
origin and end, and has even a book by this name. He identifies the
science of mabda’ with theodicy and metaphysics and that of ma‘ad with
psychology and eschatology.

[^57]: The view of Mulla Sadra regarding the growth and perfection of
the soul resembles the alchemical view in which the power to reach
perfection is considered to lie within matter itself and not outside it.

[^58]: Mulla Sadra, al-Shawahid al-Rububiyyah, pp. 152ff.

[^59]: That is why Akhund writes that “the first seed of the universe
was the intellect and the last stage is also the intellect which is the
fruit of the same tree” (ibid., p. 165.)

[^60]: This principle which In Arabic is called jismaniyat al-huduth wa
ruhaniyat al-baqa’ is another of the doctrines for which Mulla Sadra is
famous.

[^61]: We have not enumerated these faculties in detail because Mulla
Sadra follows the earlier Muslim authors especially ibn Sina on this
point. See Chapter 66 on “Natural History” regarding the various
faculties.

[^62]: Al-Shawahid al-Rububiyyah, pp. 134ff.

[^63]: By emphasizing the immanent aspect of the development of the
soul, Mulla Sadra does not forget the transcendent factor, for in the
treatise Iksir al-‘Arifin he writes the Arch-angel Israfil blows life
into the body and gives it the power of sensation and motion, that
Mika’il enables the body to assimilate food and sends it its sustenance,
that Jibril gives it instruction regarding the revelation and acts of
worship and finally that ‘Izra’il enables the soul to abstract forms
from matter and to separate itself from the body. Rasa’il, pp. 306 – 07.

[^64]: Concerning the traditional conception of cosmic becoming, see A.
K. Coomaraswamy, “Gradation and Evolution,” Isis, 35, 1944, pp. 15 – 16;
38, 1947 – 48, pp. 87 – 94. As for the unity of the soul which form the
gnostic point of view is identified with the divine essence or self, see
A. K. Coomaraswamy, “On the One and Only Transmigrant,” Journal of the
American oriental Society, June 1944, No. 3, pp. 19 – 43.

[^65]: According to a famous hadith of the Prophet, accepted by the
Shi‘ahs and the Sunnis alike, the Qur’an has seven levels of meaning the
last known only God. It is from the esoteric interpretation of the
revealed book that Mulla Sandra and Sufis before him have drawn the
gnostic doctrines inherent and hidden in the Islamic revelation as they
are in all other revelations.

[^66]: Iksir al-‘Arifin, Rasa’il, p. 295. This terminology is a very old
in Islam, it was adopted by the early Sufis from the traditions of the
Prophets and Imams.

[^67]: Al-Shawahid al-Rububiyyah, p. 140.

[^68]: Mulla Sadra, Risalah fi-al-Hashr, Rasa’il pp. 341 – 58.

[^69]: In the case of animals, after death they join the masters of
their species (rub al-nau‘) or archetypes except the higher animals who
have the faculty of imagination developed in them. They have an
independent existence in the world of cosmic imagination without,
however, being distinct individually as in the case of people.

[^70]: See Mulla Sadra, al-Mabda’ w-al-Ma‘ad, Teheran, lithographed
edition, 1314/1896, pp, 272ff. He criticizes both the naturalists who
deny the existence of the soul after death and the Peripatetics who
accept only the resurrection of the soul but not of the body.

[^71]: This esoteric view expressed in his commentary upon the Usul
al-Kafi as well as in the Asfar was one most attacked by the exoteric
‘ulama’. The religious perspective which appeals essentially to the
sentimental or passionate aspect of human nature must insist upon
“eternal” punishment and reward in order to have its laws accepted in
human society. Only the exoteric view meant for the saintly and
appealing to the contemplative aspect of man, can take into
consideration the relatively of heaven and hell with respect to the
divine essence without in any way denying the reality of “eternity” of
reward and punishment in the life hereafter with respect to human
existence here.

[^72]: For the background leading to Mulla Sadra, see chapter 47 on “The
School of Ispahan in this work. See also Mulla Muhsin Faid, al-Mahajjat
al-Baida’, vol. 1, Islamiyyah Press, Teheran, 1379/1959, introduction by
Sayyid Mohammad Mishkat , pp. 10 – 23, in which the background leading
to Mulla Sadra as well as the distinguishing principles of his own
doctrines is discussed.

[^73]: It will be remembered that al-Ghazālī in his al-Munqidh min
al-Dalal considered the philosophers to be infidel on three points:
their rejection of resurrection of bodies, their limiting God’s
knowledge to universals, and their belief in the eternity of the world.
See. W. Montgomery Watt, The Faith and Practice of al-Ghazālī, George
Allen & Unwin, London, 1953, p. 37. From what we have discussed of Mulla
Sadra’s doctrine it is clear that he accepted the resurrection of
bodies, God’s knowledge of particulars, and creation of the world in
time though not quite in the sense as that of the theologians.

[^74]: Mulla Sadra’s doctrines were especially influential in India to
which country one of his disciples by the name of Mohammad Salih Kashani
migrated – after reaching a wild sate of ecstasy during one Mulla
Sadra’s lessons –and where he attracted many disciples. The works of
Mulla Sadra have continued to be taught in the Islamic schools of the
Indian sub-continent, especially his Sharh al-Hidayah which came to be
known by the author’s name as Sadra. Many glosses have been written on
it by various philosophers and scholars in India such as Mohammad Amjad
al-Sadiqi (d. 1140/1727), Mulla Hassan al-Lakhnawi (d. 1198/1783),
Mohammad A‘lam al-Sindili (d. 1250/1834), and ‘Abd al-‘Ali Bahr al-‘Ulum
who lived in the 13th/19th century. Numerous manuscripts of these and
other glosses on the Sharh al-Hidayah are to be found in such libraries
as the Raza Library of Rampur and the Khuda Basksh Library in Patna (see
the Catalogue of Arabic and Persian Manuscripts in the Oriental Library
at Bankiput, vo. 20 (Arabic MSS), Bihar and Orissa, 1936, MSS. No. 2351,
2386, 2371 – 78).

[^75]: See Chapter 47 on “The School of Ispahan.”

[^76]: For a list of the names of Mulla Sadra’s disciples in the Qajar
period, see Raihdnat al-Adab and Gobineau, op. cit., pp. 103ff.

[^77]: Iqbal’s statement that, “It is, moreover, the Philosophy of Sadra
which is the source of the metaphysics of early Babism” (Development of
Metaphysics in Persia, London, 1908, p. 175) is true only in a negative
sense in the same way as the doctrine of the Rhenish mystics might be
considered to be the source of the Protestant revolt during the
Renaissance.


