Chapter 49:  Ibn Khaldun
========================

A
-

The consideration of ibn Khaldun’s political philosophy within the
context provided by a work on the history of Muslim philosophy, and in a
chapter concluding the history of Muslim political philosophy in the
classical period, must face and attempt to clarify the complex problem
of the precise character of the political aspect of ibn Khaldun’s new
science of culture, and its theoretical and practical implications when
contrasted with the various philosophic practical sciences and Muslim
legal sciences that share the same subject-matter.

In this attempt, the investigator is faced with the dilemma that,
although ibn Khaldun shows intimate acquaintance with these
philosophical and legal disciplines and with the writings of his
predecessors on them, he does not present himself in his major work
either as a philosopher or as a writer on legal matters, does not choose
to continue either the Greek and Muslim tradition of political
philosophy or any of the traditional Muslim legal sciences, and does not
make a direct or thematic contribution in the form of a treatise on any
of these disciplines. He considers his main contribution to be an almost
wholly new science based on natural philosophy yet advancing beyond
traditional natural philosophy by using certain conclusions of natural
science to construct a complete science of culture.

The investigation of culture inevitably led ibn Khaldun to the
investigation of the phenomenon of government, which is both a
constituent part and the “form” *(surah)*, i.e. the organizing
principle, of culture. The third section of Book One of the “History” is
devoted to this subject, and its title indicates the various problems
which it investigates, “On States, Kingship, the Caliphate, and
Sovereign Ranks, and the States Occurring in These – Containing
Fundamental (Propositions) and Supplementary (Inquiries).”[^1] Since
government is the form of culture as a whole, we also find extensive
discussions of this subject in all the other sections of Book One,
including the section on the sciences. This treatment of political
matters is not, however, an independent discussion and is not based on
premises of its own but forms an integral part of the science of
culture.

Ibn Khaldun himself distinguishes his new science, and his investigation
of political matters within the scope of this science, from the
traditional political science or political philosophy of his Greek and
Muslim predecessors and also from the Muslim legal sciences. After
recapitulating the substance of his own investigation of politics, an
attempt will be made in this chapter to understand how he characterizes
his new endeavour and justifies his departure from the well-established
philosophical and legal traditions. We shall find that what appears at
first to be an effort simply to distinguish between the science of
culture and political philosophy and the legal sciences, progressively
takes the form of a critique of, first, certain propositions, and,
secondly, of the entire subject-matter of political philosophy and of
dialectical theology though the critique of the latter discipline is
less pronounced and more implicit.

In this connection, ibn Khaldun raises a number of problems crucial for
understanding the character of both his own sciences of culture and of
the entire history of Muslim political philosophy and dialectical
theology. In attempting to explore some of these problems, we have
restricted ourselves to the issues that are indispensable for a fuller
understanding of ibn Khaldun’s position and have presented them in a
perspective that seems to us to serve this purpose best. In
characterizing the political thought of his predecessors, ibn Khaldun
does not pretend to be an impartial historian, he assumes the role of a
severe critic. The criticism is not based on blind faith or love for
contention, but on certain theoretical and practical considerations.

B
-

In the section devoted to political authority and institutions,[^2] ibn
Khaldun remains loyal to the specific character of his new science. He
begins with, and thereafter repeatedly recalls, the premises he had
posited for the science of culture as a whole.[^3] The dominant theme of
his discussion of political life is the explanation of the natural
causes, powers, properties, stages, and accidents inherent in the
properties of the human soul, and how they leadoff necessity to the
formation of political life and subject it to certain natural and
necessary laws of human association.[^4]

Like culture as a whole, political life is considered by ibn Khaldun to
be a generated natural being. The methods he follows in determining its
characteristics are, therefore, adopted from natural science in general,
and from biology in particular.[^5] Genetically, he follows the
development of political life through its various stages: how it is
generated, grows, reaches its maturity, sickens, and dies. In biology,
the efficient cause of this movement is taken to be the soul and its
temper *(mizaj)*. In culture, ibn Khaldun considers the efficient cause
of the movement to be a specific property of the human soul, i.e. social
solidarity *(‘asabiyyag)* which is a combination of the natural feeling
for one’s relatives and friends, and of the need for defence and
survival. It cements a group together, dictates the need for a ruler,
leads to conflicts with other groups and generates the power of conquest
leading to victory over others, its initial power determines the extent
of this conquest, and the fulfilment of appetites and desires, finally,
weakens it and leads to the disintegration of political power.[^6]

This genetic method is supplemented by the analytical method through
which ibn Khaldun distinguishes and compares the various forms of
political power, and the institutional arrangement within each form.
Apart from the purely natural regime in which a tyrant or small bands or
groups give free rein to their appetites , there are two major types of
regimes: (a) rational regimes in which the appetites are ordered by the
agency of human reason for the sake of a more peaceful and permanent
enjoyment of worldly things, and (b) regimes of divine Law in which
prophet-legislators, through the power of their souls to communicate
with the “unseen” (explained in the sixth premise), posit laws which
order the affairs of men and the enjoyment of both worldly things and
things of the soul useful for man’s welfare in the world to come. This
inquiry is supplemented with a description of the various institutional
arrangements and offices in both types.[^7]

Throughout this discussion, ibn Khaldun insists that his treatment of
political life is not to be confused with the treatment of political
life in the Islamic legal sciences which aim at determining the legal
prescriptions to be followed by adherents to the Islamic Law, with the
sayings of popular wisdom which do not explain the nature of political
life, or with political science or political philosophy which aims
primarily at determining how man ought to conduct himself to achieve
happiness and perfection.

In summarizing the Third Book of the *Laws*, al-Farabi informs us that
Plato explained that all the *nomoi* are subject to generation and
corruption and regeneration, and that he explained the growth of cities,
the development of the arts, and the origins and development of
governments.[^8] In this context, al-Farabi employs the two central
terms which have come to be associated with ibn Khaldun’s new science,
i.e. *‘umran* and *‘asabiyyah*.[^9] Since al-Farabi indicates that
generation and corruption are inherent in *all* the *nomoi* and in all
cities all the time (i.e. they occurred in the past, occur now, and will
occur in the future), he is also alluding to the fact that Muslim
governments and laws are equally subject to these natural laws.

The context within which this and similar discussions occur, however,
indicates that, for the political philosophers, the explanation of the
natural origins and the generation and corruption of regimes is not an
independent inquiry but a subservient branch of the art of legislation
and, ultimately, of political science; its aim is to provide the
legislator with the necessary knowledge upon which to base his decisions
in laying down such laws as are appropriate to the particular group for
which he is legislating under particular circumstances.

In contrast, the immediate and apparent context within which ibn
Khaldun’s inquiry into political affairs is pursued is not the art of
legislation or political science, but the science of culture which he
develops as an independent science. His major contribution consists in
pursuing this inquiry with relative freedom from the art of legislation
and of political science or the art of determining how men ought live,
and in elaborating all the natural properties and concomitants of
political life necessitated by man’s natural constitution. Furthermore,
he is the only Muslim thinker who has shown, explicitly and in detail,
that Muslim history and Muslim regimes are indeed subject to these
natural laws of generation and corruption, and, therefore, has insisted
that the proper understanding of Muslim history pre-supposes the natural
understanding of the essential properties of man and human association
in general.

C
-

In defending the legitimacy of his new inquiry into political matters,
ibn Khaldun does not attempt to present it as a new version of political
philosophy or as a substitute for, but rather to explain the distinction
between the new inquiry and the established practical philosophic
sciences. This distinction is made on the ground of certain basic
differences which ibn Khaldun invokes at appropriate places in the
course of his inquiry. The examination of these differences will shed
light on the fundamental character of both Muslim political philosophy
and ibn Khaldun’s new science of culture.

Immediately after formulating the basic principles of the new
science,[^10] and asserting its relative independence and newness, ibn
Khaldun sets out to show that “it does not belong to the science of
rhetoric, for the subject of rhetoric is convincing speeches, useful in
attracting the multitude toward a certain opinion or turning them away
from it.”[^11] “Nor does it belong to the science of ‘political
government’ *(siyasat al-madaniyyah)*, for political government is the
administration of the household or the city as is obligatory *(bima
yajib)* according the requirements of ethics and wisdom so that the
multitude be made to follow a course leading to the protection and
preservation of the (human) species. Thus, its subject differs from the
subject of these two arts which are perhaps similar to it.”[^12]

Only after having stated this difference does ibn Khaldun proceed to
suggest that the new science “is, as it were, newly discovered.” This
suggestion is offered reluctantly on the ground that he could not find
it in the works of the Greek wise men available to him, a fact which
seemed to him to be in need of some explanation, “The Wise men perhaps
were concerned in this with the fruits (of the sciences), and the fruit
of this (science) is, as you saw, in (the correction of historical)
reports only. Even though its problems in themselves and in their proper
spheres are noble, its fruit is the rectification of (historical)
reports which are weak (or not significant: *da‘if*). That is why they
deserted it.”[^13]

Ibn Khaldun’s claim for the relative independence and newness of his
science seems thus to be intimately related to his success in
distinguishing it, and setting it apart, from rhetoric and political
science, or to his success in showing that it does not belong to either
of them. This he does through delimiting the subject-matter of these two
disciplines by emphasizing their ends or results or “fruits,” i.e.
imparting certain opinions to the multitude and governing it according
to the requirement of ethics and wisdom. The direct fruit of the science
of culture, in contrast, is not convincing the multitude or making it
follow an ethical or wise course or way of life (which in turn requires
the knowledge of what the ethical virtues are, the practical wisdom of
the legislator and the ruler, and the ability to convince the
multitude), but simply the understanding of the nature and properties of
man and human association or culture, an understanding which is pursued
with the specific aim in rectifying historical reports.

The science of culture is not an art concerned with how man ought to
live, how society is to be rightly governed, or how the multitude is to
be convinced, but a scientific inquiry into how man actually lived in
the past, and the natural causes determining the modes of human
association ad necessitating the activities and ways of life pursued in
the diverse human societies about which we possess historical reports,
in order to be able correctly to judge the soundness or falsity of these
reports.

This leads ibn Khaldun to a second distinction between the science of
culture and political science with respect to the inherent character of
their subject-matters and, consequently, to their conclusions. It was
shown that the premises of the science of culture are drawn exclusively
from the conclusions demonstrated in the natural sciences. Subsequently,
ibn Khaldun claims the same natural and necessary character for the
entire subject and for the conclusions of this science. In contrast,
political science, having as its objective the right conduct of
government according to the requirement of ethics and wisdom, does not
restrict itself to these natural and necessary premises, but is
concerned further with what is ethically or philosophically good for
human society, and seeks to convince the multitude of the necessity or
obligation of accepting it.

Ibn Khaldun insists that such matters cannot claim the natural and
necessary character of the subject-matter of the science of culture.
Because political science is concerned primarily with how man ought to
live and how human society ought to be governed, it upholds principles
which are not, strictly speaking, natural or necessary (i.e. grounded in
the science of Plato’s and al-Farabi’s treatment of the laws, is
subsidiary and accidental to their attachment to these other principles.

Ibn Khaldun does not then restrict himself to distinguishing between the
new science and the traditional political science, to justifying the
need for the new science of culture, and to showing that it has a
relatively independent and legitimate subject-matter of its own; he
makes, and repeats, certain observations about traditional political
science which are not necessarily called for as far as his immediate
task is concerned. At first sight, these observations seem to present
traditional political science under unfavourable light, to suggest
certain fundamental theoretical disagreements between ibn Khaldun and
Muslim political philosophers, and to prove the superior character of
the new science as compared to the traditional political science. Yet
ibn Khaldun’s own modest estimate of the “fruits” of the science of
culture is a warning against accepting these conclusions at their face
value. In order to explore his intention, we must first understand the
issues involved.

The central issue which ibn Khaldun repeatedly invokes in this
connection is the proof of the “necessity” of prophecy, and of the
Prophetic religious Law, adduced by Muslim political philosophers. Upon
the first reference to this issue, ibn Khaldun cites what is mentioned
by wise men in their proof of the necessity of prophecies, what is
mentioned in the fundamentals of jurisprudence *(Usul al-Fiqh)* in
proving the necessity of languages, and what the jurists *(fuqaha)*
mention “in the justification of legal prescriptions through their
purposes.”[^14]

In all of these disciplines, the jurists attempt to present a natural
proof for the necessity of a legal or conventional prescription, and
they seem to argue as follows: men must co-operate in society,
therefore, they necessarily need a ruler who must be a prophet, men by
nature need to express their intentions, therefore, they necessarily
need the easier method of doing this, which must be a language, must
preserve their species and their social life uncorrupted, therefore,
they must abstain from adultery, murder and injustice. The necessity of
prophecy thus appears to be based on the same kind of argument and,
consequently, to have the same status, as the necessity of language, and
of the injunctions against adultery, murder, and injustice.

Now, all these have some basis in nature. But they cannot be traced
directly or exclusively to nature, and they are not produced by nature
in a necessary manner. They are, rather, the product of human convention
and law, or of a divine Law. That they are not strictly speaking,
natural or necessary, becomes evident when we consider the diversity of
languages and differences and conflicts among the various legal
arrangements (including those claiming divine origin) in different
communities. The mistake of these jurists consists in beginning with the
nature of man and society, showing the need for some such conventions
and laws, and concluding that this is sufficient proof or the
exclusively natural and necessary character of conventions and laws.

While the proof of the “necessity” of prophecy shares in this general
mistaken way of argumentation, it is in a class by itself, and we need
to follow ibn Khaldun’s regulation of it more closely. According to him,
the philosophers begin with the demonstration of the necessity of a
government and a ruler. This demonstration he accepts as valid and
adopts as the first premise of his science. However, “The philosophers
*(Falasifah)* make an addition to this demonstration when attempting to
establish prophecy by rational argument, and that it is a natural
property of the human being. Thus, they confirm this demonstration (i.e.
the indispensability of the ruler) up to its conclusion and that
humanity cannot escape being under restraining and reconciling rule
*(kukm wadi‘)*.

Then they sat, after that, ‘That rule comes to be by a (divine or
religious) Law *(Shar‘)* imposed by God and introduced by one (member)
of the human species distinguished from them (i.e. the rest) by the
special (properties) of His guidance with which God entrusts him in
order that submission to him and acceptance from him take place, so,
that ruling among them be completed without disacknowledgement or
(angry) reproach.’ This proposition by the philosophers *(hukama’)* is,
as you see, not demonstrable, since existence and human life may become
complete without that (Law and prophet) by (virtue of ) what the ruler
imposes by himself or by (virtue of) the (social) solidarity
*(‘asabiyyah)* by which he is enabled to conquer them (i.e. his
subjects) and make them follow his path.

Thus the People of the Book and the followers of the prophets are few
compared to the Magians who have no (revealed) Book, for they (the
latter) form the majority of the inhabitants of the world. Despite that,
they possessed States and monuments in addition to (simply) having
lived, and they still have these to this epoch in the intemperate
regions of the north and the south, in contrast to human life in
confusion and without a restraining and reconciling (ruler) at all, this
is impossible. By this becomes plain to you their mistake concerning the
obligatory (character) of prophecies, and that it (this obligation) is
not rational; rather, it is apprehended by the Law, as is the doctrine
of the ancestors of the community.”[^15]

On the surface ibn Khaldun’s argument is extremely simple, if not naive.
The supposed demonstration of the philosophers is based on the minor
premise that every ruler must rule with a divine Law.[^16] This is
evidently false, since a ruler can rule by virtue of royal authority
alone, and even a simpleton knows that there have been innumerable rules
without divine authority. This simple fact could not have escaped the
notice of the philosophers on this level.

D
-

There are two possible philosophic approaches to the study of man and
society: the first, which is characteristic of ibn Khaldun’s science of
culture, is through the natural sciences, the second, which is the
characteristic approach of the Greek and Muslim political philosophers,
is through a consideration of the end of man. Since the end of man, his
perfection or happiness, pre-supposes the understanding of the place of
man within the cosmos of which he is a part, this latter approach comes
after metaphysics or divine science *(‘ilm ilahi)* in the order of the
investigation.[^17] The first approach is based exclusively on natural
science and does not admit any premises that cannot be demonstrated
therein. It can, therefore, be properly called a “natural” science of
politics. The second approach is based on metaphysics or the science of
divine things and can, therefore, be called meta-natural or “divine”
politics.[^18]

The comprehensive works of ibn Sina, which ibn Khaldun specifically has
in mind in discussing the issue, present us with two features
significant for understanding ibn Khaldun’s exposition.

(1) They all include two discussions of political matters, the first
coming at the end of the natural sciences (in the sections corresponding
to Aristotle’s *De Anima)*, and the other at the end of the divine
science.[^19] Ibn Sina’s works thus point to the fact that both
“natural” and “divine” political sciences owe their origin to the
philosophers. Yet in studying ibn Sina’s “natural” version of political
science, we come to realize the significant difference between him and
ibn Khaldun: ibn Sina restricts himself here to the natural foundations
of man’s political life and does not proceed to develop a full-fledged
science of society or politics on that foundation alone. He seems thus
to suggest that these natural foundations are not sufficient for
understanding the full scope of man’s political life and cannot offer
the proper directives concerning how he is to conduct himself as a
political animal. Such an undertaking will have to wait until after the
completion of divine science, or, as ibn Khaldun explains, it needs
“additional” arguments which cannot be presented prior to the
investigation of the world and of the place of man within it.

(2) Further, in his “Parts of Rational Sciences,” ibn Sina specifies
that the aim of the practical part of philosophy or wisdom is not the
attainment of certainty about existents, but “perhaps” of opinions and
not opinions simply but opinions for the sake of realizing the
good.[^20] In addition, that part of political philosophy which deals
with political government studies all classes of governments, good and
bad, those based on kingship as well as those based on prophecy and
divine Laws.[^21] Although political philosophy may favour the political
government based on prophecy, it transcends any particular class of
political arrangements. These issues, however, are not raised in the
exposition of the “divine” version of political philosophy in his
comprehensive philosophic works, instead, he purports here to offer not
a discussion of the total subject of political philosophy or the various
classes of opinions and action in all political regimes, but what
appears to be rational justification, or the “obligatory” character, of
a specific class of political regimes, i.e. that which is originated by
a prophet-legislator.

The final four chapters of the *Shifa’*, for instance, indicate that ibn
Sina would treat the proof of prophecy, and the prophet’s call to God
and the return to Him, prayers and their utility in this world and the
next, the foundation of the city and the household, and legal
prescriptions relating to them (discussed within the framework of
prophetic legislation) and successors to the Prophet (Caliphate and
Imamate) and other matters relating to governments and ethics.[^22] The
whole discussion is, thus, centred on prophecy and pre-supposes its
“obligatory” character.

Ibn Khaldun’s first and foremost observation on the total scope of the
subject-matter of “divine” political science is that it is not natural
*(tabi‘i)* or necessary *(daruri)*, by which he means the same thing and
it is fundamentally this: Considering the natural constitution of man as
a political animal, we do not find the revelation, divine governments,
and the concern with resurrection and reward and punishment, to be
necessary conditions of his survival, for the formation of society, and
for the continued existence of both. Religion does not belong to those
requirements that form the indispensable minimum for the existence and
preservation of society, it is not the sufficient condition, nor even
one of the sufficient conditions, required for social life in order that
may exist and continue.

Man’s natural constitution and the character of society do not make it
absolutely mandatory upon man to be a member of a religious community
and to obey the prescriptions of a divine Law.[^23] Given human nature,
prophecy and revelation are possible phenomena. Supposing that a prophet
does come and that he possesses, in addition, the ability to rule, to
command obedience, and to legislate, there will come to exist a divine
Law. And given certain climatic and other conditions, his Law must
include certain opinions, such as that prophecy is necessary. These
opinions are *legally* “obligatory” or binding upon the followers of
that Law; the source of this obligation is not human nature and the
nature of society, or unaided human reason, but a specific divine
revelation and a specific divine Law.

Thus, what induces ibn Khaldun to reject the natural and necessary
character of religion and divine Laws, and, consequently, of the whole
subject-matter of “divine” political science, is not merely that divine
government, like man-made language and injunctions against adultery,
murder and injustice, is conventional or legal in character.[^24] For,
despite their conventional character, it could be shown that, unlike
divine government, all the rest are necessary conditions for the
existence and preservation of any society,[^25] and that the authority
of unaided human reason is sufficient to prove that. (Ibn Khaldun says,
for instance, that the authority of human reason is “sufficient” for
“forbidding injustice.”[^26]) Divine government is not only legal
convention, it does not even belong to those legal conventional
arrangements that form the indispensable minimum required for the
existence and preservation of society and which can be said, therefore,
to be natural and necessary convention.

Ibn Khaldun’s second major observation is that the premises and,
consequently, the conclusions of “divine” political science are not
rationally demonstrable *(burhani)*, i.e., unaided human reason cannot
achieve certainty concerning such subjects as the obligatory character
of divine revelation and the divine Law, the necessity of believing in
the opinions about God, resurrection, and reward and punishment, or the
necessity of performing the actions prescribed in a divine law, such as
worship. The authority for the obligatory character of these opinions
and actions is the divine law itself. Divine Laws, however, command and
do not demonstrate (at least not rationally) the necessity of holding
the opinions and of performing the actions commanded.

So far as human reason is concerned, these commands remain
undemonstrated, i.e. they continue to hold the status of belief or
opinions. Whether these opinions are true or false, generally accepted
or not, practically good and useful or bad and harmful, or whether they
are preferable or objectionable, is not here the issue; rather, it is
the obligation (set up by those who pretend to have shown that these
opinions are rationally obligatory) does not impose itself on human
reason. The only obligation that seems to be convincing is the legal
obligation set up by divine Laws. Unlike demonstrated conclusions,
undemonstrated opinions do not by themselves compel the assent of human
reason; in order to be accepted, they need an additional force, which in
this case is provided in divine Laws.

We are not in a better position to understand the reason why ibn Khaldun
distinguishes at the outset between his new science of culture, on the
one hand, and the practical philosophic sciences, the legal sciences and
popular wisdom, on the other, and why, in discussing the six premises of
the new science, he distinguishes between what can be demonstrated and
what cannot be demonstrated within the sciences of nature. Only in the
science of nature are we able to arrive at demonstrated conclusions
about what is natural and necessary for man and society. The conclusions
of all these other sciences are undemonstrated opinions.

This is also the case with the conclusions of the divine science or the
science of divine beings. The fact that “divine” political science is
based on premises derived from divine science deprives all of its
conclusions of their demonstrable character. This is also the reason why
ibn Khaldun mentions rhetoric as the first of the practical philosophic
sciences. Since the practical sciences deal with opinions, and opinions
do not compel assent immediately, an art is needed which is capable of
convincing men to accept certain opinions and to reject others. This is
precisely the function of rhetoric. In the practical sciences, the
philosophers do not follow the method of demonstration; they are not,
strictly speaking, philosophers but rhetoricians.[^27]

E
-

Ibn Khaldun’s critique of “divine political science presents a curious
paradox: it defends religion against the mistakes of theologians and it
defends philosophy against the mistakes of philosophers. His defence of
religion consists in establishing revelation and divine Laws as the
exclusive source for beliefs in the substance of the doctrines relative
to prophecy and divine government, yet he objects to every kind of
theology or the effort to prove these doctrines rationally. His defence
of philosophy consists in the bold assertion that, in as far as reason
is concerned, the political doctrines purporting to support religion
cannot claim a status higher than that of undemonstrated opinions, and
he exposes the philosophers who claimed that they were presenting
properly a philosophical support or defence of religious doctrines, or
had succeeded in turning philosophy into a rational theology. From this
it appears that ibn Khaldun’s critique is not directed against
philosophy, but against theology, not against philosophers as
philosophers, but against philosophers in their role as theologians,
dialecticians, and rhetoricians.

This critique is based on the distinction between religion or, more
specifically, religious beliefs and practices based on a particular
revelation and divine Law, and philosophy or, more specifically, the
body of scientifically demonstrated conclusions based on rational
inquiry. It is characteristic of ibn Khaldun that he upholds the
legitimacy of both religious knowledge and scientific philosophic
knowledge in their proper spheres, and contests the theoretical
legitimacy of all disciplines that occupy an ambivalent position between
the two and profess to demonstrate their agreement. Such disciplines,
which according to him belong to sophistry and rhetoric rather than
either to religion or scientific philosophy, are primarily the
dialectical theology of the Mutakallimun and the political theology of
the philosophers.

Religiously, ibn Khaldun identifies himself with the early Muslims or
the pious ancestors who rejected all attempts at rational justification
of religious beliefs and practices as unnecessary, if not dangerous,
“innovations.” But since these pious ancestors were innocent of the
philosophic sciences, they could not be considered his true precursors.
Philosophically, he supports his position, not only on the basis of the
requirements of scientific demonstration, but by invoking the authority
of the philosophers who followed the method of verification
*(muhaqqiqun)*. He thus shows a predilection for pure religion and pure
philosophy over against any kind of theology which is necessarily a
confused mixture.

It is noteworthy that in the crucial passage where ibn Khaldun
criticizes the divine science and the political theology of the
philosophers, he mentions al-Farabi and ibn Sina but not ibn Rushd.[^28]
Of Muslim philosophers, it was precisely ibn Rushd who (like ibn
Khaldun) was a recognized religious judge *(qadi)* and a philosopher who
criticized al-Farabi and ibn Sina for imitating the dialectical
theologians, and who wrote the most celebrated treatise on religion and
philosophy the main theme of which is the defence of the legitimacy of
religion and philosophy in their proper spheres, and which is a
devastating attack upon the combination of religion and philosophy in
the form of theology.[^29]

It is not possible here to enter into the historical and doctrinal
developments that led to ibn Rushd’s new attitude towards theology. For
our immediate purpose we need only note that in this decisive respect
ibn Khaldun is following in the footsteps of one of the most illustrious
Muslim predecessors. Therefore, his position could not be construed to
be anti-philosophic or based on any lack of understanding of the
intentions of al-Farabi and ibn Sina. To understand his specific reasons
for criticizing them, we must now analyze his treatment of Muslim
dialectical theology *(Kalam)*, and of the divine science and political
theology of the “philosophers.”

“Dialectical theology,” says ibn Khaldun, “involves arguing for the
beliefs of faith with rational proofs, and answering the innovators who
deviate in (their) beliefs from the ways of the ancestors and the
followers of orthodoxy.”[^30] The beliefs of faith consist of such
things as the attributes of God, the truth of revelation and prophecy,
the angels, the spirits, the *jinn*, resurrection, paradise, hell, etc.
Unlike things that have rationally ascertainable natural causes, these
are ambiguous matters, the reality of which reason cannot ascertain.
Therefore, it must be left to the divinely-ordained legislator (the
Prophet) to determine them and teach them. The general run of believers,
like the deaf and the blind, must accept the authority of their fathers
and teachers, and since they cannot establish the truth of these
matters, they must follow the general accepted opinions about them,
based on the command of their prophet-legislator.[^31]

More important, however, is the fact that these beliefs are not
theoretical assertions but part of a way of life within a system of
divine government intended for the happiness of the believer. Their
purpose is not mere knowledge or belief or assent or faith. Perfection,
according to the legislator, consists of “perfect faith” or the habit
firmly rooted through practical repetitive action (worship, obedience,
and the submissiveness), until believers possess the established
attribute moulding their souls. Beliefs are not primarily intended to be
known, but to “be possessed,” their purpose is not knowledge, but
practical utility, their end is not theoretical perfection, but the
happiness promised by the legislator.[^32]

The proper function of dialectical theology is to defend beliefs with
rational arguments, but since this is not necessary for faith, it is
only useful when these beliefs are endangered by innovators. At that
time, dialectical theology had a useful function to perform. Once
innovators are suppressed (rational argument being one of the tools used
in this fight),[^33]dialectical theology has no further reason to exist;
indeed, it can be harmful, since it gives the impression that rational
arguments are somehow necessary for accepting beliefs. This is false
both because (except in the case of rational attacks upon them) beliefs
do not need rational support and because that rational support offered
by dialectical theology is only dialectical, sophistical, or rhetorical
(i.e. based on common opinions), it has no scientific value.[^34]

While discussing the emergency of dangerous innovations, ibn Khaldun
notices a certain identity of origin and a certain parallelism between
the opinions of the innovators (the Mu‘tazilites and the Shi‘ites) and
the writings and opinions of the philosophers “which are in general at
variance with the beliefs of the divine Law.”[^35] He indicates that
innovators in Islam studied the works of the philosophers. But it seems
also that the philosophers in turn took notice (e.g. in their rational
proof of the obligation of having successors or Caliphs to the
Prophet)[^36] of the opinions of the innovators or of the Mu‘tazilite
and Shi‘ite theologians, and presented identical or similar opinions, or
that philosophers presented themselves to the Muslim community in the
guise of Muslim theologians purporting to give a rational support for
certain Muslim beliefs and more specifically of those beliefs, held by
the heterodox minorities, which were closer to their own views.

Be this as it may, ibn Khaldun was also aware of the radical difference
between the content and the ultimate intentions of the views of the
philosophers and those of theologians of all shades. That is why he
devotes special chapters to the exposition of divine science and of the
philosophy centred on this divine science.

In contra-distinction to all dialectical theologians, philosophers
suppose that “all” existence can be apprehended by “mental contemplation
and rational syllogisms.”[^37] It thus appears that they include all
“spiritual” being in their contemplation; hence, they purport to give
(in divine science) a rational, syllogistic knowledge of God, the soul,
resurrection, etc., or of the religious beliefs revealed and commanded
by the prophet-legislators. Unlike dialectical theologians, however,
philosophers do not begin with religious beliefs revealed and commanded
by the prophet-legislators. Unlike dialectical theologians, however,
philosophers do not begin with religious beliefs as revealed by the
prophets and attempt to elucidate them or support them rationally; their
position is that reason can know these matters independently of
revelation. Being philosophers, they also believe that the rational
syllogistic knowledge of these matters of superior to divine revelation
and, therefore, must be made the final judge of the correctness of
revelation, or that “the rectification of the beliefs of faith is
through contemplation, not though tradition (hearing: *sam‘)*, for they
(i.e., the beliefs) belong to the apprehensions of the intellect.”[^38]

But philosophy does not content itself with presenting theoretical
knowledge as a superior alternative to the religious belief; philosophy
is also a way of life, and the philosophers contend that true happiness
consists of complete theoretical knowledge, or “the apprehension of all
existents...through this contemplation and those demonstrations,”
together with the improvement of the soul and the acquisition of the
virtues (all of which can be known and established by the sole agency of
reason. In contrast to the religious way of life and the happiness of
the philosopher “is possible for the human being even if no divine Law
comes down.” For the lovers of wisdom, the blessed life means
theoretical knowledge and living according to the dictates of reason,
and eternal suffering means ignorance.[^39]

In presenting the content of their theoretical knowledge and of their
way of life, however, philosophers have committed grave errors, not only
from the more apparent standpoint of religion, but also from the
standpoint of philosophy itself. Philosophy says that scientific
knowledge has to conform to certain conditions and that scientific
demonstration is possibly only within the limited range of what can be
humanly experienced and known. Yet philosophers in general, and
al-Farabi and ibn Sina in particular, seem to speak about all sorts of
“spiritual” matters: the One, the source of all beings, the emanation of
beings, the states of the soul after departing from the body, its return
to the source joining the active intellect, and resurrection.

Further, they present these matters in a manner suggesting that they are
the philosophical parallels to, or the true meaning of, religious
beliefs and even “that the joy resulting from this apprehension is
*identical* with the happiness promised (by the
prophet-legislator).”[^40] Yet their great master, Plato, had said, “As
to divine (things), no certainty can be realized concerning them;
rather, they are spoken of in accordance with what is most fitting and
proper” – he means “opinion.”[^41]

Since Plato was indeed the great master of al-Farabi and ibn Sina in
their exposition of divine matters, and the *Timaeus*[^42] and the
*Laws* were their models, we are faced again with question why the
philosophers, including Plato, should find it necessary or useful to
speak profusely concerning matters of which one cannot achieve
certainty; why, having done this, al-Farabi and ibn Sina did not
indicate clearly that they were only giving the most fitting and proper
“opinions” about these matters, and why, finally, they gave the
impression that these opinions were the equivalents or the fitting
interpretations of religious beliefs – in short, why they presented
fitting opinions in the guise of demonstrated conclusions on religious
beliefs. The exploration of this theme is an indispensable pre-requisite
for a sound understanding of Muslim political philosophy. For the
present, we shall restrict ourselves to the following observations with
the intention of clarifying ibn Khaldun’s position.

In this section on “divine science” *(‘ilm ilhai)* in the “Enumeration
of the Sciences,” al-Farabi divides this science into three parts: the
first two examine existents as existents and the principles of the
demonstrations of particular theoretical sciences (logic, natural
science and mathematics), respectively. The third part examines
incorporeal existents, their number, order, and progression to the most
perfect One, explains the attributes of this last and perfect
incorporeal existent, explains “that this which has these attributes is
the one which must be believed to be God,” makes known the descending
order of existents beginning with Him, explains that the order of the
existents involves no injustice or irregularity, and finally “sets out
to refute corrupt opinions” about God.[^43]

The relation between political science, treated by him in the following
chapter and the last function of divine science is not immediately
clear, although the inclusion of dialectical theology *(Kalam)* as part
of political science leaves no doubt as to the political importance of
the opinions of the citizens concerning incorporeal existents. In his
strictly political writings, on the other hand, he does set up a
detailed theology for the inhabitants of the city.[^44] But there he
does not speak about the relation between this theology and the
examinations conducted in divine science. We conclude that al-Farabi
leaves the problem of the relation between divine science and political
theory set up for the inhabitants of the city ambiguous, at least in his
more public writings.

At first sight, ibn Sina appears to have followed a different course. In
all of his works that deal with the whole subject-matter of philosophy,
he presents the conclusions arrived at in divine sciences as making
“obligatory” the existence of the prophets, the legislation of divine
Laws, and even the contents of the beliefs and practices legislated in
these Laws.[^45] It is true, as ibn Khaldun observes, that ibn Sina
begins his second version of political science with a recapitulation of
the conclusions arrived at in the first (natural) version of political
science and seems to be building the “obligatory” character of prophecy
and divine Laws upon that natural basis; but ibn Khaldun correctly notes
that the “proof” of the obligatory character of prophecy and divine Laws
is not based on the nature of man as explained in *De Anima*, but on the
additional examinations conducted thereafter in divine science.

Ibn Sina’s presentation of his political theology is indeed based on
rational considerations, but not on the rational consideration of the
nature of man as in *De Anima*; rather, it is based on the attributes of
“the First Cause and the angels.” Being what divine science has
presented the First Cause and the angels to be, it is obligatory that
they should send prophets and divine Laws.[^46] Since divine science is
a rational science, the obligation set up here seems to be rational, not
legal; God and the angels are not bound by Laws but by their very
nature. Thus, ibn Khaldun is again justified in interpreting this
rational obligation to mean natural necessity, and in wondering why God
and the angels do not uniformly act in accordance with what is purported
to be their very nature, why they have not fulfilled their obligation to
the overwhelming majority of mankind and why only on rare occasions have
there been prophets and divine Laws.

Ibn Sina seems indeed to argue in the context that the realization of
prophecy is necessary as a preparation for the existence of the “good
order” or of man’s possible perfection, a perfection which he assumes to
have become evident as the proper end of man in divine science, but this
raises the further question whether prophecy and divine Laws, as they
are known to exist, are preparations for this type of perfection. We
are, thus, forced to note that despite the apparent clarity of his
presentation of the relation between his divine science and his
political theology, ibn Sina leaves many questions unanswered, or that
his presentation is as ambiguous as that of al-Farabi. There is, thus,
ample justification for ibn Khaldun’s criticism. Following Plato, he
explains that these ambiguities follow from the fact that in divine
science itself the philosophers have not attained, or at least have not
presented, certain knowledge, but only fair and fitting opinions.
Therefore, their political theology has the same character.

Ibn Khaldun raises this issue in the most acute and critical fashion, he
reveals that the philosophers, in presenting fair opinions and
undemonstrated conclusions concerning the way to theoretical perfection
and happiness, could only defend them by means of dialectical and
rhetorical arguments, and, dialectical theologians, they do in fact
assume the same role as the dialectical theologians when presenting and
defending these opinions. In taking his bearings on these matters, ibn
Khaldun distinguishes between philosophy properly so-called, i.e. the
philosophic sciences which do in fact pursue the method of demonstration
and about the conclusions of which, when properly arrived at, there can
be no doubt, and philosophic theology (the greater portion of divine
science) and political theology (or “divine” political science) which
are in fact the philosophic versions of dialectical theology *(Kalam)*.
He accepts the former (i.e. logic, natural science, mathematics), while
rejecting the latter.[^47]

Ibn Khaldun’s theoretical reason for this rejection is justified but
cannot be considered sufficient. For granting that ultimately the
theology and divine political science of the philosophers are in fact
likely images and opinions presented in the guise of rational beliefs,
it remains to be shown that these images and opinions are not only
contrary but in fact inferior to the religious beliefs of the community
in which they were being propagated. From the standpoint of
demonstrative science, religious beliefs and philosophic or rational
opinions enjoy the same status – they are all opinions. The quotation
from Plato, however, indicates that opinions are not all alike: they can
be distinguished as being more or less fitting or proper. The
philosophers hold, in effect, that their rational opinions are more
fitting or proper than religious beliefs and that their way of life,
their virtues, and their happiness are more truly such than the way of
life, the virtues and the happiness, pursued on the basis of divine
Laws. Ibn Khaldun is silent on this subject; he does not attempt a
direct refutation of this contention.

Instead, he explains that the philosophic way of life contradicts the
religious way of life which is based on faith and obedience to the
commands of a prophet-legislator, that the content of the happiness
pursued by the philosopher, and that the attempt to equate or harmonize
the two is an impossible task and one which is fraught with danger for
the religious community – it breaks the protective wall around it, leads
to doubts and scepticism about the beliefs of faith, and turns the
faithful away from the tasks appointed for them by their
prophet–legislator.

The philosophers were not justified in preaching their opinions to the
Islamic community. Whatever their intention about reforming the beliefs
of the Islamic community might have been, they had only sown confusion
in the minds of the faithful, and led to the emergence of mistaken
notions about the distinct purposes of religion and of philosophy. Their
own way of life and their own happiness are of no concern to the
religious community, and since they assert they can pursue this way of
life and attain happiness regardless of the existence of divine Laws and
of a religious community, they had no compelling reason to sow the seeds
of confusion and dissension within the religious community and endanger
its peace.

Political life, as practiced in all human communities, has to take into
account the nature of all men, and should be directed to the common good
of the multitude. This requires a ruler and a law based on the rational
understanding of their common needs and interests in this world, or a
divine Law based on their common good in this world and the next. But in
every case, it is mandatory that the ruler and the law should set up
opinions and actions in the forms of commands to be obeyed without
qualification. The philosophic life, however, transcends all established
laws. The real “meaning” of political science, “according to the wise
men” themselves, is to lead a way of life in which “they dispense with
rulers altogether,” their “virtuous city” is not an association of men
subject to commands serving their common interest, and they talk about
it as a supposed or hypothetical city whose realization is highly
improbable.[^48]

The philosophic life is then radically different from the ordinary
political life of the citizens. It requires rare natures and rarely
accomplished arts. The philosopher is essentially a solitary being, and
the best he can hope for are few kindred spirits within a vast majority
of men leading different ways of life and pursuing different ends. Since
he needs to live in a political community, ibn Khaldun offers him this
opportunity, but within clearly defined limits: he is not to interfere
in the political life of the community in his capacity as a philosopher,
not to attempt to reform the opinions of this community, not to
communicate his opinions or propagate his way of life among the
multitude, and he is to relinquish his role as a theologian and as a
divine politician. He should restrict himself publicly to practicing the
demonstrative sciences (logic, natural science, mathematics) and the
useful arts (e.g. medicine, music and jurisprudence). But, above all, he
should, like ibn Khaldun, uphold in no uncertain terms the Law of his
community and obey it. The philosopher must present himself to his
community in the guise of an ordinary citizen.

F
-

For certain thinkers, polemic is a method of examination and
investigation, a way of entering into a dialogue with their
predecessors, and a means of uncovering what lies behind or beyond the
garb with which their predecessors chose to clothe their thought or in
the manner in which they expressed it. When, in addition, this polemic
is presented to the reader to draw attention to the theoretical
difficulties encountered by the author and his proposed direction for
finding a solution, and to an audience which the author intends to
convince to accept or reject certain opinions or a course of action, the
polemic necessarily gains a formal complexity difficult to comprehend
without a sustained attention to the diverse, and perhaps conflicting,
purposes which is designed to serve. Ibn Khaldun’s polemic against ibn
Sina is an instructive example.

Muslim philosophers, dialectical theologians, and mystics, like the
jurists, the pious leaders of the community, and the common run of
Muslims seem to accept the superior character of the opinions and
actions legislated by prophets in general and their own Prophet in
particular. The unsophisticated Muslim believes in the opinions of the
Prophet and performs the actions commanded by him because of his faith
in their divine origin, his expectation of rewards, and his fear of
punishment in the world to come, the pious leaders of the community
defend and promote, by exhortation, example, and threat of punishment,
communal obedience and devotion to the beliefs and the way of life of
their community, the jurists formulate and elaborate the prescriptions
of the Law of their community, the mystics devote themselves to
practical exercises designed to facilitate the institution of the
verities beyond the beliefs and legal prescriptions designed for the
common run of Muslims, the dialectical theologians protect the beliefs
and the ways of life of their community against rational doubts and
attacks, and the philosophers attempt to present an additional rational
ground for the coming of the prophet and the setting up of the opinions
and actions he commands.

Ibn Khaldun, too, presents himself as the defender of Muslim beliefs and
the Muslim way of life. But, instead of choosing to join the apparent
consensus of all the parts of the community, or to re-establish such a
consensus where it is lacking through harmonizing apparently conflicting
views, he labours to make implicit conflicts explicit, to show that the
apparent consensus conceals some fundamental differences, and to
intensify these conflicts and differences by a show of vigorous
partisanship. He is the partisan fighting for the simple,
unsophisticated beliefs and the way of life of the common run of
Muslims, and for the undiluted, unexplained, and unsupported faith,
against the useless and dangerous efforts of mystics, dialectical
theologians, and philosophers, to defend, explain and support Islam.
What were the fruits of the victory, so intensely coveted by him?

On the scientific and theoretical plane his immediate aim is to
disentangle the confusion between dialectical theology, mysticism and
philosophy. This confusion or mixture *(khalt)*, as we learn from his
account, reigned in these disciplines in his time, and those primarily
responsible for it were the “modern” school of dialectical theology and
the later extreme rational mystics.[^49] This objective is achieved
through the reassertion of the legal character of dialectical theology
and mysticism. Both must accept the beliefs and the way of life of the
community and unquestionable basic axioms, they should make no
pretension to extra-legal or properly rational knowledge of the nature
of things: dialectical theology is to restrict itself to the defence of
the beliefs and practices of the community when these are questions, and
mystics should keep their supposedly intuitive achievements to
themselves.

Since this confusion has been harmful to philosophy (it was in danger of
losing its distinctive character and of becoming a tool of dialectical
theology and mystical exercises), philosophers should contribute to it
by presenting themselves to non-philosophers in the guise of dialectical
theologians and mystics, as ibn Sina had done: philosophy is to exercise
greater circumspection.

What induced the philosophers to present a rational support for prophecy
and divine Laws was no doubt the realization that a community living in
accordance with such Laws is superior to other communities – to
communities without God or gods, without concern for the welfare of the
soul, and without hope of a life to come. This has a demonstrative
rational foundation (it is shown in the science of nature that the soul
is higher than the body), and it is at the basis of ibn Khaldun’s
division of regimes into “rational regimes” and “regimes of Law.”

But to say that the soul is higher than the body, that prophecy is
possible, and that a regime without a divine Law, and to say that
prophecy and prophetic Laws are obligatory, or that reason can prove or
support the commands, the beliefs, and the virtues, set up by a
legislator – these are two radically different things: the former set of
propositions has solid support in the investigation of the nature of man
and society, the latter has no such support.

A strictly natural, rational, and demonstrative approach to man and
society is then faced with the dilemma that, while it can attain
certainty about the necessity of society, the need for a ruler, and the
preservation of peace through a minimal practice of justice, it can
attain no such certainty about morality, virtues, or rules of conduct.
Morality and virtues of character are not, strictly speaking, natural or
necessary; they have no natural basis, no ground in nature. There is not
a single universally valid rule of conduct. Rational morality has no
secure foundation or justification in nature, and rational moral laws
are not essential to man’s nature or to the nature of society.[^50]
There can, consequently, be no theoretical science of ethics or politics
except in the extremely limited sense developed by ibn Khaldun in his
science of culture.

But although not simply natural, rational, and universal, morality,
virtues ad general rules of conduct are not simply against nature.
Society, to flourish and to be preserved, requires the common pursuit of
practical ends, and these require in turn a morality and virtues readily
accepted and commonly agreed upon by all, the majority or the better
part of society. This is not the morality of the philosopher. The
philosopher sees human perfection in theoretical knowledge. Theoretical
activity has its own immediate reward. The rewards of the practice of
moral virtues, in contrast, are neither evident nor immediate. They must
be based on less evident rewards, such as glory or honour, or future
rewards such as happiness promised to the just and the virtuous in the
world to come.

The philosophic study of ethics and politics, if it is intended to go
beyond the perfection and the happiness reserved for the philosopher and
possible only through philosophic way of life or the life of theoretical
activity, has to assume the character of a practical discipline and to
have as its object the generally acceptable opinions about goodness and
happiness, e.g. that moderation is good, that the pleasures of the soul
are superior to the pleasures of the body, or that the future rewards of
virtue are preferable to the immediate rewards of vice. The aim of such
a practical philosophy, however, is not knowledge but action, i.e. the
practical pursuit and realization of the good.

Yet philosophy, since it does not rule in cities, lacks the practical
implementation of what it considers fair and fitting; therefore, the
need for a ruler, a legislator, a law, and a tradition as instruments
for the execution of moral duties and obligations. It is thus not
philosophy, but the legislator, the legal prescriptions, and the
embodiment of the law in the traditional way of life of the community
that are the efficient cause which forces the citizens to lead a
virtuous way of life. The law, and not practical philosophy or reason,
is what redeems that lack of ground or necessity in nature: it supplies
the justification, the obligation, and the authority that compel the
citizens to hold fast to fair and fitting opinions entailing the
renunciation of their natural and compelling desires which opinion alone
is unable to achieve.

Divine Laws revealed to prophet-legislators have the additional force of
being based on the belief in their divine origin, in the over-powering
will of God, and in the certainty of the rewards and punishments in the
world to come, they are thus the most efficient laws and offer the most
compelling ground for accepting as valid what cannot be demonstrated by
nature and reason.

The attempt to offer a natural and rational explanation of the beliefs
embodied in these Laws, as practised by dialectical theology, mysticism,
and philosophy, is unwise and dangerous. It may, in certain cases,
strengthen the faith of the believers in the commands of a divine law,
but it may also weaken that faith by bringing to light certain
discrepancies between these commands and what is rationally most fitting
and proper. Since, ultimately, there is no naturally or rationally
demonstrative and compelling ground for these commands, the multitude
will be made aware of this fact and this will lead to the loss of
unquestioned faith in them and since the multitude are incapable of
knowing or pursuing the human perfection attainable by theoretical
activity, they will pursue sham and pseudo-scientific activities: the
citizens will lose their civic or religious virtues without finding the
happiness reserved for the true philosopher.

Ibn Khaldun’s theoretical consideration of the nature of man and society
thus results in a practical teaching aimed at the protection of the
Muslim religious community and its divine Law against the confusion and
disruption resulting from the vulgarization of philosophy. This
practical teaching is founded on the consideration of the respective
character of rational morality and the law, but in recommending it to
the Muslims of his time, ibn Khaldun supports it by the more acceptable
authority of the Prophet, the pious ancestors, and the consensus of the
leaders of the community, i.e. he presents it as a legal injunction.
Whatever the theoretical status of his critique of the social role of
philosophy may be, his practical recommendation to the faithful must be
obeyed because of its legal character.

Ibn Khaldun did not consider the critical issue for the Muslim community
of his time to be the rational justification or support of its divine
Law. Indeed, he thought that this issue was a luxury which his community
could not afford because it was faced with problems that involved its
very existence. Long periods of cultural decline and disintegration were
threatening to dissolve the fabric of society. What the community and
its leaders needed most was clarity concerning the elementary and
natural foundations of human association or culture and the
understanding of the natural and necessary conditions without which no
society can exist at all. Muslims had for centuries lived as members of
a religious community under the aegis of the divine Law until they came
to forget other forms of social life and the fact that religion and the
Law cannot continue to exist except when based on a solid foundation of
social solidarity, royal authority, and other indispensable natural
conditions.

The Prophet and the early Muslims were clearly aware of that and acted
accordingly. But in ibn Khaldun’s time, this was no more the case.
Therefore, he set out to teach his compatriots and co-religionists the
telling lessons of history, and his new science of culture and his
investigation of the natural basis of political life within this science
were intended to explain to his readers those elementary, indispensable
natural conditions which Muslims and their rulers need to consider if
they are to succeed in preserving their religious community and divine
Law. They may not need philosophy to explain and support their religion
and Law, but they are in desperate need of it for understanding the
natural foundation of their religion and Law, and this in turn is an
indispensable condition for preserving their way of life.

Bibliography
------------

Al-Farabi, *Talkhis Nawamis Afatun* (“Compendium Legum Platonis”), ed.
Franciscus Gabrieli, The Warburg Institute, London, 1952; *Isha’
al-‘Ulum* (La statistique des sciences), ed. Osman Amin, Dar al-Fikr
al-‘Arabi, cairo, 1949; *Ara’ Ahl al-Madinat al-Fadilah*, Brill, Leiden,
1895; ibn Sina, *Aqsam al-‘Ulum al-‘Aqliyyah*, Matba‘ah Hindiyyah,
Cairo, 1326/1908; ibn Rushd, *Fasl al-Maqal*, ed. L. Gauthier;
*Maqaddimat Ibn Khuldun*, ed. E. M. Quatremere, Paris, 1858; Muhsin
Mahdi, *Ibn Khaldun’s Philosophy of History*, George Allen & Unwin,
London, 1957.

[^1]: Q. 1 278ff. Cf. Book Four, Part Four, Chapter 46 for
bibliographical information about ibn Khaldun’s works and other works
cited in the footnotes. Complete bibliographical information will be
given in this chapter only for works not already cited.

[^2]: Q 1, 278, 2, 201

[^3]: Q 1, 278: 5 – 7, 337 – 38, 398:3, 415:5, 2, 126.

[^4]: Q 1, 247 – 48, 291:15 – 16, 293, 294:16 – 18, 299 – 300, 309, 336
– 38, 342; 2 19:4 – 5, 65ff, 93ff, 106 – 07, 128.

[^5]: Q. 1 299 – 300, 305 – 06, 309ff.

[^6]: Q 1, 291:15 – 16, 293, 294:16 – 18, 299:14, 331:1 – 2, 342; 2,
93ff , 108ff.

[^7]: Q. 1, 342ff; 2, 126ff.

[^8]: Talkhis Nawamis Aflatun (“Compendium Legum Platonis”), ed.
Franciscus Gabrieli (“Corpus Philosophorum Medii Aevi, Corpus
Platonieum, Plato Arabus,” Vol. 3), London, The Warburg Institute, 1952,
pp. 16 – 18.

[^9]: Ibid., pp. 17:4, 18:2 and 6, 24:10, 33:13, 41:6.

[^10]: Q. 1, 61; cf. above, Chap. 46.

[^11]: Cf. Q. 3, 322, where ibn Khaldun refers to the flowing prose used
“in rhetorical (speeches) and prayer, and encouraging and frightening
the multitude,” and also 324 where he indicates the political use of
such rhetorical speeches.

[^12]: Q. 1, 62:3 – 10.

[^13]: Q. 1, 63:5 – 8.

[^14]: Q. I, 63 – 64.

[^15]: Q. 1, 72:7 – 73:5.

[^16]: Q. 1, 345 – 46.

[^17]: Ihsa’ al-‘Ulum (La statistique des sciences), ed. Osman Amin (2nd
ed., Cairo, Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabi, 1949), pp. 102ff.

[^18]: In al-Farabi’s “Enumeration of the Sciences,” political science
(which includes the art of jurisprudence and the art of dialectical
theology) comes at the end immediately following divine science.
Following the same scheme, all of ibn Sina’s comprehensive philosophical
works relegate political science to the very end to be treated as an
ancillary to divine science. This argument is based on the consideration
that the subject of divine science includes the study of “spiritual”
beings, and is, thus, in a position to correct the false opinions about
them in the city, and that, for ibn Sina in particular, the “branches”
(furu‘) of divine science are concerned with the study of revelation,
miracles, resurrection, and reward and punishment; cf. al-Farabi, Ihsa’,
pp. 99 – 101; ibn Sina, Aqsam al-‘Ulum al-‘Aqliyyah (The Parts of
Rational Sciences) in Tis‘ Rasa’il, Cairo, Matba‘ah Hindiyyah,
1326/1908, pp. 112 – 16. A political science concerned with the opinions
and actions of a religious community must, therefore, follow the study
of the principles of these opinions and actions in divine science. Ibn
Khaldun, who clearly saw the close relation between divine science and
the “divine” version of political philosophy, adopts, as we shall
indicate, an equally critical attitude towards both.

[^19]: Uyun, pp. 40 – 46, 59 – 60; cf. pp. 16 – 17; Isharat, pp. 119 –
37, 176 – 222; Najat, pp. 157 – 93, 284, 38: “Nafs,” Shifa’, pp. 157 –
268, “Siyasah,” Shifa’ (La sociologie et la politique dans la
philosophie d’Avicenne”) ed. Mohammad Yusuf Musa (“Memorial Avicenne”
1), cairo, Institute Francais d’Archeologie Orientale, 1952, pp. 8 – 27.

[^20]: Aqsam al-‘Ulam, p. 105.

[^21]: Ibid., pp. 107 – 08. This philosophic discussion of the prophetic
regime, according to ibn Sina, is contained in Plato’s works on the
nomoi.

[^22]: “Siyassah,” Shifa’, pp. 8ff.

[^23]: For a more detailed discussion of this problem, cf. Leo Strauss,
“The Law of Reason in the Kuzar” in Persecution and the Art of Writing,
Glencoe, Illinois, Free Press, 1952, pp. 95 – 141, and Natural Right and
History, Chicago, the University of Chicago Press, 1953, pp. 156 – 64.

[^24]: Cf. above, pp. 966 – 67.

[^25]: Not that a particular language, etc., is necessary, but the some
language is necessary.

[^26]: Q. 1, 346:4 – 5.

[^27]: Cf. above, p. 965; Q. 3, 73.

[^28]: Q. 3, 213.

[^29]: Fasl al-Maqal (Traite decisf), ed. L. Gauthier, 3rd ed., Alger,
Editions Carbonel, 1948, pp. 20ff.

[^30]: Q. 3, 27:1 – 3.

[^31]: Q. 3, 29 – 30.

[^32]: Q. 3, 31 – 35.

[^33]: Al-Farabi , Ihsa’, pp. 108 – 13.

[^34]: Q. 3, 40 – 42, 45 – 49.

[^35]: Q. 3, 40, cf. also 41

[^36]: Q. 1, 345 – 46.

[^37]: Q. 3, 210:2 – 5, 211:15 – 17.

[^38]: Q. 3, 210:5 – 6. Here we see another similarity between the
philosophers and the innovating theologians (the Mu‘tazilites): the
latter sought to “understand” and “interpret” religious beliefs through
reason.

[^39]: Q. 3, 210:7 – 8, 211 – 12.

[^40]: Q. 3, 121, 213 – 18.

[^41]: Q. 3, 215:12 – 13.

[^42]: The quotation from Plato apparently refers to Timaeus 28C; cf.
Rosenthal’s translation of Q. vol, 3, p 252, n 1029.

[^43]: Isha’, pp. 99 – 101.

[^44]: Cf., e.g., Ara’ Ahl al-Madinat al-Fadilah (“Der Musterstaat”),
ed. Fr. Dieterici, Leiden, E. J. Brill, 1895, pp. 5ff.

[^45]: “Siyasah,” Shifa’, pp. 12ff Conisder the frequent repetition of
wa-yajibu (and it is obligatory) through the text.

[^46]: Ibid., p. 9:8 and passim.

[^47]: Q. 3, 212 – 20.

[^48]: Q. 2, 127.

[^49]: Q. 3, 121 – 24.

[^50]: Since the attack of al-Ghazālī and ibn Rushd on ibn Sina, the
latter’s star declined, especially in western Islam. To attack ibn Sina
was fashionable, not only in theological, but in philosophical circles
as well. The significance of ibn Khaldun’s attack, however, consists in
uncovering those fundamental, bitter, and practically dangerous
philosophical truths which philosophers before him, precisely because
they identified themselves with the philosophers, could not utter.


