Chapter 44:  Sheikh Ahmad Sirhindi
==================================

A. Life and Studies
-------------------

Sheikh Ahmad Sirhindi, better known as Mujaddid Alf Thani, was the son
of Sheikh ‘Abd al-Ahad Makhdum, who was a devout Muslim always anxious
to derive spiritual enlightenment from saints. Sheikh ‘Abd al-Ahad
Makhdum met Sheikh Allah Dad at Ruhtas and Sayyid ‘Ali Qawam at Juanput.
He learned a great deal from both and then returned to Sirhind and lived
there until his death in 1007/1598. A great master of all the branches
of contemporary knowledge, he taught the prevalent textbooks on
philosophy and religion to his students extensively. He was also an
acknowledged authority on jurisprudence.

Besides, he taught mysticism to those who were eager to learn it, using
*‘Awarif al-Ma‘arif* and *Fusus al-Hikam* as his texts. He was an ardent
reader of ibn ‘Arabi and was an authority on his teachings. He
acknowledged ibn ‘Arabi’s superiority in philosophy and spiritual
insight, but he never followed him if he found him deviating from the
Sunnah. He was such an ardent and close follower of the Holy Prophet and
his teachings that he never left a *sunnah* (tradition) unpracticed. He
loved the devotees of Khuwaja Baha’ al-Din Naqshband of Bukhara called
the Naqshbands,[^1] and his son inherited this love and devotion to them
from him.

Sheikh Ahmad was born in 971/1563 at Sirhind. His name was Ahmad and his
surname was Badr al-Din. From his father’s side, he descended from the
Caliph ‘Umar. In his early childhood he was sent to a school where in a
short time he learned the Holy Qur’an by heart. Then for a long time he
was taught by his father. Later he went to Sialkot and there covered
some more courses under the guidance of Kamal Kashmiri. He also studied
some works on Hadith from Ya‘qub Kashmiri, a great scholar of the time.
By the young age of 17 he had mastered a great deal of Islamic sciences
and had begun teaching them to others.

He visited Agra where he met some great men of learning including Abu
al-Faidi. After some time he accompanied his father to Sirhind. On his
way home, he was married to the daughter of a noble named Sheikh Sultan
of Thanesar. On his return to Sirhind he stayed with his father and
through his help established spiritual relationship with the Qadriyyah
and Chishtiyyah schools of mysticism. Through the training received from
his father, he learned the fundamentals of Sufism. In his studies too he
had been greatly influenced by his father. He could not go on a
pilgrimage to the Holy Land in his father’s life-time, although he
yearned to do so. He was anxious to serve his father during his life and
could not leave him alone.

After his father’s death in 1007/1598 he started on this long cherished
pilgrimage. On his arrival at Delhi, he heard of the reputation of
Khuwaja Baqi Billah as a saint from a friend, Maulana Hassan. He went to
him promptly and was well received. The Khuwaja inquired of him about
his intended pilgrimage and then wished him to stay with him for a week
or so. He was greatly impressed by the spiritual attainments of the
Khuwaja that he made up his mind to become his disciple. The Khuwaja was
very fastidious in taking anyone as his disciple but he immediately
accepted the Mujaddid as his follower and focused his entire attention
upon him. The Mujaddid’s heart became the seat of the praise of Allah
and he made rapid progress in spiritual knowledge. Under the Khuwaja’s
guidance he was able to complete his Naqshbandi training in a few
months. He was warmly congratulated and was invested with a gown as a
symbol of the completion of his training. He went back to Sirhind and
began to teach people. After the Khuwaja’s death he used to go to Delhi
at the *‘urs*[^2] of the late chief.

B. The Shari‘ah
---------------

An important period of his life is that between 1028/1618 and 1032/1622.
One year of this period was spent in the prison of Gwalior and the other
three with the Emperor Jahangir and his army. His increasing popularity
aroused the jealousy of his rivals who poisoned the ears of the Emperor
and reported him to be dangerous both to the Emperor and the State. The
Emperor had faith only in the ascetics and hermits. He could not
tolerate a widely popular Sufi in his land. Perhaps Asaf Jah and some
other nobles had a hand in this intrigue against the Mujaddid. The
matter was worsened still by his refusal to bow before the Emperor on
the ground that it was against the tenets of Islam, with the result that
he was imprisoned at Gwalior. He was released a year later, but he had
to stay for a further period of three years with the army as a *detenu*.
Two years before his death he was allowed to go to his home at Sirhind.
There he died on the morning of the 28th Safar 1034/10th December 1624.

Some hold that the Sheikh’s release was due to the fact that the Emperor
had at last become his disciple and had repented of his action of the
previous year, but others hold that the above view was not borne by
facts.

It was the crying need of the time that there should appear a man who
might have the boldness to oppose the worship of the Emperor by refusing
to bow before him, and, thus revive the true spirit of Islam and the
extirpate heresy. He fearlessly faced the displeasure of an absolute
monarch and chose to go into imprisonment rather than renounce his own
beliefs and principles. He stood firm as a rock against the tide of the
Mughul heresy introduced by the Emperor’s father, Akbar the Great. He is
called the Mujaddid because he started the movement of purifying Islam
and restored its traditional orthodoxy. His courageous stand against
anti-Islam practices resulted in a religious renaissance in India.

The method adopted by him to achieve his purpose was equally bold. He
trained groups of disciples and sent them to all the Muslim countries
and to the various cities of India to propagate what he regarded as the
spirit of Islam. He especially asked them to make people realize the
importance of the Sunnah and prepare them to counteract the forces of
heresy and to observe and to make others observe the tenets of Islam.
His letters to the great men of the Muslim world was given wide
publicity. In them he discussed problems connected with Islam and its
revival. He pressed the people to follow the Sunnah rigidly and to
uproot heresy. He brought numerous noblemen and courtiers to his fold,
and in this way tried to change the attitude of the Emperor and his
Court.

The Mujaddid strictly adhered to religious practices and sanctioned by
the Holy Prophet and was very hard upon those who coined excuses to
violate them. He was an authority of *Fiqh* and Tradition. His knowledge
was encyclopedic and he was endowed with critical insight in matters of
religion. His views on mystical revelation and illumination, pantheism,
pre-destinarianism, sectarianism, and Sufism are very important. Sheikh
Ahmad’s reforms can be easily divided into three categories: (1) call to
the Muslims to follow the Sunnah and discard heresy *(bid‘ah)*, (2)
purification of Islamic mysticism (Sufism) from the practices and
thoughts which had crept into it through non-Muslim influences and (3)
great emphasis on the Islamic Law.

### 1. Heresy and the Mujaddid’s Opposition to It

Heresy implies an innovation. The *‘ulama’* (theologians) had divided it
into two categories, namely, the good innovation *(bid‘at-i hasnah)* and
the bad innovation *(bid‘at-i sayyi’ah)*. The Mujaddid says he can find
no beauty, benefit or light in either. In many of his letters he is at
pains to tell his correspondents that all heresy is reprehensible. He
quotes many sayings of the Holy Prophet in denouncing it. He symbolizes
every kind of heresy with dust, dirt, and pitch darkness and regards it
as misleading. Those who practice heresy do so for lack of foresight and
insight. The Holy Prophet said that heresy misleads people and uproots
the Sunnah itself. When a heresy creeps into religion, it deprives the
believers of traditional practice. He was of the opinion that Islam is
complete in itself; heresy is a useless appendage of it.

Even if it appears right, it is in fact a blot on their fair face of
Islam. Any approval of a heresy of disavowal of the completeness of
Islam. In the course of time, the Sunnah would disappear, and heresy
would prosper. Respect shown to an upholder of heresy is to deal a blow
to Islam. Heresy is a cutting axe to religion and the Sunnah is a
guiding star. To strengthen Islam heresy must be uprooted. “May it
please the Lord,” said he, “to show the *‘ulama’* that no heresy is
good.”

### 2. Reforms in Sufism and the Nature of Sufistic Perfection

“If the contemporary Sufis are just, they should not follow their
leaders but the Sunnah. They should never uphold heresy on the pre-text
that their Sheikhs did so.”[^3] If a heresy appears in the guise of an
inspiration, it is immediately accepted by the people as a long lost
truth. For the long conversations and commentaries of the Sufis had been
tending away from the religious law *(Shari‘ah)* and a time came in the
history of Sufism when the Sufis began to proclaim that Sufism and the
religious Law were poles apart. They did not show the respect that the
law deserves. They regarded it as formal and ineffective and, as a
result, religion and its values suffered much at their hands, though
very few knew the harm that was being done. This attitude of the
Mujaddid elicited an unqualified praise from Iqbal for him. Speaking of
him he says, “He was the guardian of the Muslim faith in India whom God
had given a timely warning.”

The Mujaddid said, “The Sheikhs who in their state of insensibility
*(sukr)* praise infidelity and induce men to wear the Brahmanical
thread[^4] are to be excused because they are not themselves. Those who
follow them consciously in these matters are not to be excused because
they do so while they have their senses.”[^5] The rectitude of
speculative knowledge depends on its being in concord with theology, and
the smallest departure from it is insensibility. According to him,
someone asked Khuwaja Naqshband to define the Sufistic institution. He
replied that the ultimate end of Sufism is achieved when the rational
knowledge becomes revelational or inspired, and the abstract becomes
concrete. He did not say that we should seek something over and above
the revealed law. The non-essentials that a Sufi meets on his way to
Sufistic perfection lose their importance when he reaches his
destination. The Law alone is then seen as real. The Prophet received it
through a messenger but the Sufis get it by direct inspiration from
God.[^6]

The Caliph ‘Umar was highly incensed when he was told that Sheikh ‘Abd
al-Kabir Yamani was of the view that Allah has no omniscience. He did
not attribute this remark to the Sheikh’s insensibility or
unconsciousness. He rather though it to be an infidelity, even if it was
committed by the Sheikh with a view to being denounced by the world,[^7]
as public denunciation was considered by some Sufis to be contributive
to Sufistic perfection. “The true aim of Sufistic institution is to
attain sound faith, which depends upon spiritual tranquility without
which salvation is impossible. When this tranquility is reached, the
heart becomes unconscious of everything but God.”[^8]

### 3. Significance of the Shari‘ah

The divine law is connected with the soul and the spiritualization of
the soul depends upon obedience shown to it alone. The Sufi learns this
after his perfection.[^9] While still on their way to Sufistic
perfection, many Sufis flounder on this mysterious road. One should
never lose sight of the divine Law whenever one’s beliefs and deeds are
involved.[^10] The Naqshbandi Sheikhs have sub-ordinated revelation to
the divine Law *(Shari‘ah)* and with them intuition and inspiration are
subject to the divine decrees. Ecstasy should not be given priority to
the divine Law. The Naqshbandis are never influenced by the senseless
and exaggerated discourses of the Sufis. They never uphold ibn ‘Arabi’s
*fass*[^11] against the explicit verses of the Qur’an *(nass)*.[^12]

The light of God which is revealed on occasional flashes to others is to
them constantly illuminating. Everything but His name is erased from
their hearts, and even if they try for ages they can think of nothing
but Him.[^13] The touchstone of the Sufistic revelations and intuitions
should be the commentaries of the Sunnite theologians, for even the
adherents to heresies and all those who go astray regard the Holy Qur’an
and the Sunnah together as the fountainhead of their beliefs. They
misinterpret them only because of their perverted mentalities.[^14] The
Sufistic discourse which is congruous with the Sunnite interpretations
is agreeable, while that which is otherwise is not. Upright Sufis never
transgress the limits set by the divine Law even in their ecstatic
discourses, dealings, and philosophies. Whenever a Sufi in his ecstasy
or transport opposes the Law, his revelation is a mirage. It should be
interpreted and explained correctly.[^15] Perfection comes through meek
submission to God, which implies submission to His Law. This is the best
of faiths in the eyes of the Lord.[^16]

You can tell an imposter from a sincere believer by their respective
attitude to the divine Law. A truly faithful Sufi never transgresses the
Law in spite of his insensibility and ecstasy. Despite his claim, “I am
the True One,” Mansur Hallaj used to offer five hundred *rak‘at*[^17]
every morning in submission to God even while he was chained in a prison
cell. It is as difficult for an imposter to observe the tenets of the
Law as to remove the Mount Caucasus from its place.[^18]

According to the Mujaddid, the only duty performed by the theologians
*(‘ulama’)* is to issue decrees while it is the people of Allah (saints)
who do the real work. An attempt at internal purification is to enable
one to observe the divine tenets, one who is busy only in internal
purification to the extent of neglecting the divine Law is an infidel
and hence his revelations and intuitions are like those of an obstinate
sinner. The way of uprightness is through divinity and the sign of the
real internal purification is the sincere observation of and submission
to the divine Law is an infidel and hence his revelations and intuitions
are like those of an obstinate sinner.

The way of uprightness is through divinity and the sign of the real
internal purification is the sincere observation of and submission to
the divine Law. The restoration of the Sunnah and the obligatory prayers
is the best of worships and will be rewarded in heaven.[^19] The
Naqshbandi devotees dislike the mystical revelation that contradicts the
Law and denounce the senseless wrangling of the Sufis. They do not like
dancing and listening to music. They do not like loud recital of God’s
name for He is supposed to be ever with them. With them guidance and
discipline depend upon one’s submission to and acknowledgement of the
prophetic institution; it has nothing to do with external trappings such
as the cap or the genealogy of the Sheikh as is the case with the other
sects.[^20]

C. Existential or Experiential Unity
------------------------------------

**C. Existential or Experiential Unity (*****wahdat al-Wujud*** **or**
***wahdat al-Shuhud*****)**

In order to understand the rift somehow created between Islam and Sufism
one must ponder over the philosophical aspect of pantheism. Pantheism
was the real bane of Islam. The Mujaddid knew its fallacy and he was one
of those who denounced it vehemently. He based his stand on the training
he had received from his father and his Sheikh, Khuwaja Baqi Billah. The
State of pantheism was revealed to him shortly after he had adopted the
Naqshbandi way of approach to reality. He was anxious to understand the
mysticism of ibn ‘Arabi. The light of God and of His attributes dawned
upon him and this, according to ibn ‘Arabi is the ultimate end of
Sufism.

For years he kept thinking that he had reached the state in which he had
realized the ultimate, but all of a sudden this state vanished. Then he
came to realize that union with God is only experiential and not
existential; God is not and cannot be one with anything. God is God and
the world is world. All that the Sunni theologians said in this respect
was true. As the Mujaddid had loved pantheism much in the earlier stage
of his life, he was rather uneasy at this change. Yet, with the new
revelation, the veil was lifted and the reality appeared to him in its
true form. This world is merely a *mark* of the existence of its
Creator, and it merely *reflects* the various attributes of the Lord. It
does not *consist* of these attributes. A pseudo revelation, he thought,
like erroneous deductions in religious matters, may not be denounced,
but it must not be followed, lest others be misled.

With the followers of ibn ‘Arabi, pantheism is the final stage of
Sufistic perfection, while in reality it is nothing but one of the
states experienced by every devotee. After the devotees have passed this
preliminary state, they walk on the right Path. Khwaja Naqshband says
that all that is heard or seen or known is a veil. It must be negated
with the word “none” *(la)*. “I had accepted pantheism,” says the
Mujaddid, “as it was revealed to me and not because I was directed to it
by someone else. Now I denounce it because of the right revelation of my
own which cannot be denied, although it is not compulsory for others to
follow...”[^21] The presence of the One means that the Sufi sees nothing
except the One. The pantheist acknowledges the presence of the One in
everything and thinks all besides it as nothing, yet the very same
non-entity is regarded by him as the incarnation of the One.

Pantheism is not at all essential, because sure knowledge is possible
without it, and sure knowledge does not entail the denial of the
existence of others. The sight of the One is in no way a denial of the
existence of the others. The prophets never preached pantheism, nor did
they ever call the pluralists infidels. They invited people to the
oneness of Being. No prophet ever preached that creation is an
incarnation of the Creator. Their aim was to inculcate faith in the One
Lord who is unique and has no like.[^22]

D. Revelation and Intuition
---------------------------

Only the Qur’an and the Sunnah are to be trusted. The duty of the
theologians is simply to interpret these fundamental sources and not to
add anything to them. The mysticism of the Sufis and their revelations
and inspirations are to be accepted only if they conform to them,
otherwise they are to be rejected. The promise of God is to unveil
Himself to His good people in the hereafter and not here. The
revelations and “lights” of which the Sufis are so proud are nothing but
their own mental projections and fantasies in order to console
themselves.

The open sight of God is absolutely impossible to people in this world.
“I am afraid the beginners would be discouraged if I were to point out
the drawbacks of these revelations and ‘lights,’ but if I remain silent,
the true and the false shall remain undistinguished. I insist that these
‘lights’ and revelations must be judged with reference to the revelation
of God on the Mount of Sinai, when Prophet Moses prayed for the sight of
Him. Who can bear the sight of Him?”[^23]

“Abundance of miracles is not the sign of a devotee’s spiritual
superiority. A person who has no miracle to his credit may possibly be
superior to others in certain respects. Sheikh Shaihab al-Din Suhrawardi
says, “Miracles are a boon from God to render the faith firm, but the
man who has been gifted with a firm faith does not require them; it is
enough for him that his heart praises and remembers Him.”

Miracles can be divided into two categories. Those of the first category
comprise the transcendental knowledge of God and His attributes. These
are beyond the sphere of rational inquiry and are revealed only to a few
of His favourites. The second category is concerned with revelation
about creation and information concerning this universe. Unlike the
former, even imposters can have a share in the latter. The people having
miracles of the first category have more chances to reach God than those
having miracles of the second, but to the common man, the latter are
more acceptable.”[^24]

Ibn ‘Arabi is reported to have said that some pious devotees were
ashamed of their miracles at their death-beds. Why should they have been
so if the miracles were the only true touch stone of a pious devotee’s
superiority? Numerous saints are unaware of their position and status
but as they are not prophets they do not need the awareness of their
position. Saintly men can invite people to the religion of their prophet
without miracles. Their real miracle is to purify the souls of their
disciples. The soul being immaterial, they have to turn their attention
away from materialism. These people even without miracles are the
sureties of peace and prosperity in tis world.

The distinction between a true and a false devotee is that the former
adheres strictly to the Law, and the latter adheres to his own whims.
The man whose company inspires you to be more attentive to God is a true
devotee.[^25] Not even a prophet is safe from the evil designs of the
devil. If a devotee is tempted by Satan he should judge his inspiration
by its accord to the tenets of the religion of his prophet. If anywhere
the divine Law is silent and the Satan’s “inspiration” cannot be proved
right or wrong, the “inspiration” should be regarded as questionable.
The divine tenets are silent in matters which are superficial, and,
therefore, may neither be accepted nor rejected.

Sometimes, without any attempt on the part of the Satan to mislead us,
we have false inspirations as in dreams. These false inspirations ar the
creations of our own fancy.[^26]

E. The Religious Law
--------------------

According to the Mujaddid, religious Law has three aspects: knowledge,
actions, and fidelity. To acquire these aspects of the law it is
necessary to win the pleasure of God which excels all blessings. Sufism
and Gnosticism help in purifying one’s soul by completing the important
aspect of infidelity. They have no end in view but this. Ecstasy,
“intoxication,” and “illumination” are by-products of Sufism. They are
not its ends. They are merely fantasies and projections in order to
please the beginners. After passing these on his way, the Sufi has to
surrender to the divine will, which is his real destination. One among
thousands achieves pure fidelity. Blind men take the by-products for the
principle articles and are, therefore, deprived of the truth. A Sufi has
to experience these states before his acquisition of the truth.[^27]

The Mujaddid himself experienced these intermediate states for years,
and ultimately achieved the goal of fidelity. Those who think the Law
superficial and regard gnosis as the right Path are misled. They are
content with the states, the means and ignore the end.[^28] The straight
Path is the path of the Holy Prophet whose guidance the best. Internal
purification completes the external and is not contradictory to it. When
we submit devoutly to God’s beloved, the Holy Prophet, we become His
beloved.[^29]

Submission to the Prophet’s tradition (Sunnah) is the real bliss, while
opposition to it is the cause of all disasters. Hindu *sadhus* or
ascetics undergo much privation but all in vain, for it is not in
accordance with the true Law. The most that such ascetics can achieve is
some material gain which is transitory. The devotees of the religion Law
are like dealers in diamonds who work less but gain more.[^30]

On the completion of a Sufi’s life, real pleasure is derived from the
performance of obligatory prayers, while in the beginning non-obligatory
prayers are more pleasant.[^31]

The states of ecstasy, gnosis, and “illumination” are good if they are
subservient to the law; otherwise, they are misleading. If not weighed
in the balance of the Law, they are worthless.[^32]

The Sufistic conduct helps one to abide by the divine Law. It controls
one’s lower passions and undermines their influence. It is neither
antagonistic nor equivalent to the religious Law. It is rather
subservient to it.[^33]

Some people are punctilious in the observance of the form of Law, but
they ignore its intrinsic truth and worth and regard salvation as their
only aim. Some people achieve the truth but assert that they have
achieved it through their own effort and not through the help of the
divine Law and not of the spirit of it. Either group is ignorant of its
intrinsic virtues and is deprived of the divine guidance. True
theologians alone are heirs to the prophets.[^34]

Those who regard a saint *(wali)* superior to a prophet are senseless
and are not fully aware of the attributes of prophethood which is
superior to saint ship *(wilayah)* in all respects.[^35]

The Mujaddid was a great religious enthusiast. The movement that he
started in religion is still continued by his followers in various parts
of the Muslim world. His heritage is indispensable for a modern
reconstruction of religious thought in Islam. He was a Sufi but he did
not think of Sufism as the sole aim of life. For him it was merely a
means to an end, the end being complete and unconditional adherence and
fidelity to the Qur’an and the Sunnah. For an essentially just estimate
of his teachings one must consider him with reference to his times. His
books are a valuable record of his practice and thought. He gave us a
treatise on Sufistic perfection, but the best of him is found in three
volumes of letters. The total number of letters in all these volumes is
535. With some exceptions, these are arranged in their chronological
order. Five of his letters have been lost. They prove beyond doubt that
the encyclopedic knowledge he had, and make a pleasant and enlightening
reading.

Bibliography
------------

• Sheikh Ahmad Sirhindi, *Maktubat-i Mujaddid*, Newal Kishore, Lucknow;
Burhan Ahmad Faruqi, *Mujaddid’s Conception of Tawhid*; M. Farman,
*Hayat-i Mujaddid*, Board for Advancement of Literature, Lahore, 1958;
M. Ikram, *Raud-i Kauthar*: Jahangir, *Tuzak*, Newal Kishor, Lucknow;
Ahmad Hussain Khan, *Jawahir Mujaddadiyyah*; Badruddin Ibrahim*m*,
*Hadrat al-Quds*; Khuwaja Kamal al-Din, *Raudat al-Qayyumiyyah*; M.
Amin, *Maqamat Ahmadiiya*; Mohammad Hassan, *Maqamat Imam Rabbani*.

[^1]: Devotees of Khuwaja Baha’ al-Din Naqshband of Bukhara are called
the Naqshbandis.

[^2]: ‘Urs, a gathering to celebrate the death anniversary of a holy
man.

[^3]: Maktubat-i Mujaddid, Book 2, Letter No. 23.

[^4]: A thread worn by the Brahmans around the neck.

[^5]: Maktubat-i Mujaddid, Bok 1, Letter No. 23.

[^6]: Ibid., Letter No. 30.

[^7]: Ibid., Letter No. 100.

[^8]: Ibid., Letter No. 161

[^9]: Ibid. Letter No. 172.

[^10]: Ibid., Letter No. 220.

[^11]: Fass, reference to Fusus al-Hikam by ibn ‘Arabi.

[^12]: Nass, an explicit verse of the Qur’an.

[^13]: Maktubat-i Mujaddid, Book 1, Letter No. 243.

[^14]: Ibid., Letter No. 286.

[^15]: Ibid., letter No. 289.

[^16]: Ibid., Book 2, letter No. 42.

[^17]: A rak‘at is the unit of a formal Islamic prayer and consists of
praying in four different positions, standing, kneeling, sitting and
falling down in adoration. Each prayer consists of several units.

[^18]: Maktubat-i Mujaddid, Book 2, Letter No. 95.

[^19]: Ibid., Letter No. 87.

[^20]: Ibid., Book 1, Letter No. 221.

[^21]: Ibid., Letter No. 31.

[^22]: Ibid., Letter No. 272.

[^23]: Ibid., Letter no. 217.

[^24]: Ibid., Letter No. 293.

[^25]: Ibid., Book 2, Letter No. 92.

[^26]: Ibid., Book 1, Letter No. 107.

[^27]: Ibid., Letter No. 36.

[^28]: Ibid., Letter No. 40.

[^29]: Ibid., Letter No. 41.

[^30]: Ibid., Letter No. 114.

[^31]: Ibid., Letter no. 137.

[^32]: Ibid., Letter No. 207.

[^33]: Ibid., Letter No. 210.

[^34]: Ibid., Book 2, Letter No. 18.

[^35]: Ibid., Book 1, Letter No. 251.


