Finality of Prophethood
=======================

The Islamic Information and News Network (IINN) is happy to announce
that the Islamic book, Finality of Prophethood, by Syed Abul A'la
Maududi, a renowned scholar from Pakistan, will be made available
electronically. We will insha Allah bring it out in parts due to its
length. That Muhammad (S.A.W.) is the last Messenger and Prophet of
Allah is a simple fact for any Muslim. The book gives a detailed study
why.

The book is under copyright by The Islamic Publications Limited, 13-E,
Shah Alam Market, Lahore (Pakistan). It may be purchased from major
Islamic bookstores in the U.S.A. If you happen to own the book and
notice any typographic or other errors in the computer copy, please
notify us by email at:

MUSLIMS@ASUACAD.BITNET The obvious omissions from the book are the two
maps which we could not produce in ASCII format and a few Arabic
phrases. The Arabic phrases however have been transliterated into the
text. M.I. Zahid January 5, 1994 The Finality of Prophethood by S. Abul
A'la Maududi Foreword Of all the conspiracies hatched against Islam in
modern times, the most dangerous is a false claim to Prophethood made in
the beginning of this century. This claim has been the main cause of
wide spread mental chaos amongst the Ummah for the last sixty years.

Like all other schisms, the root cause of this mischief is that the
Muslims are generally ignorant of their religion. Had they been truly
imbued with its knowledge and developed a clear understanding of the
article of faith relating to the finality of Prophethood, it would have
been well-nigh impossible for any false claimant to Prophethood to take
root and thrive among the people of Islam after the last ministry of
Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him).

At this juncture the most perfect and effective remedy for eradicating
this evil is to educate the maximum number of people in the best
possible manner about true faith in the finality of the Prophethood of
Muhammad (peace be upon him) and stressing the importance and value of
this article of faith in the religion of Islam. It is also imperative
that all doubts and skeptical notions about the final ministry of
Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) should be dispelled through reason
and logic.

This booklet has been prepared to serve this very purpose. Readers who
find it useful should take a step further and extend their full
co-operation in the propagation of its contents. This booklet ought to
reach all literate people and they having studied it themselves should
read it out to the non-literate. It is hoped that a study of this
booklet will not only immunize people who have not been contaminated
with this malady but would also make the truth manifest to the
right-minded persons among those who have received some of its germs.
However, those who have fallen victim to falsehood and are impervious to
all reason--for them, hope and salvation lies only with Allah.

Abul A'la Maududi Lahore: February 12, 1962. In the Name of Allah, the
Most Merciful and the Most Beneficent Finality of Prophethood by S. Abul
A'la Maududi "O people ! Muhammad has no sons among ye men, but verily,
he is the Apostle of God and the last in the line of Prophets. And God
is Aware of everything." (Surah Al Ahzab: 40) This verse has been
revealed in the fifth Ruku' (para or passage) of Surah al-Ahzab. In this
Ruku' Allah has provided answers to all those objections raised by the
hypocrites, which had given rise to a storm of calumnies, slander and
mischief in respect of the marriage of Holy Prophet Muhammad (peace be
upon him) with Hadrat Zainab (may Allah be pleased with her).

These hypocrites argued that Zainab was the wife of an adopted son of
the Holy Prophet and by this connection she stood in the position of the
Prophet's daughter in-law. Hence, after her divorce from Zaid, the
Prophet had taken his own daughter-in-law as wife. In order to refute
this allegation Allah told clearly in verse 37 that this marriage had
Divine sanction behind it and was made to serve as a lawful precedent
for Muslim men to marry the wives of their adopted sons after they had
been divorced by their husbands. Later in verses 38 and 39, Allah
affirmed that no power could hinder the Prophet from discharging a
Divine obligation. The Prophets are ordained to fear God, not the
people.

It has been an invariable practice of the Apostles to transmit the
Divine message without any extraneous care and to perform the duties
enjoined upon them by Allah without fear or hesitation. Afterwards a
verse was revealed which extinguished the basis of all objections. In
the first place, they had charged "You have taken your daughter-in-law
as wife, in contravention of your own law that the wife of a son is
forbidden to his father." In refutation of this charge it was affirmed
by the Almighty: "Muhammad had no sons among ye men..." thereby making
absolutely clear that the man whose divorced wife was taken into wedlock
by the Prophet being not his real son; the act, therefore did not imply
violation of it.

The argument of their second charge ran thus: "Admitted that the
adopted son is not the real one, and on that basis a father might
lawfully marry the divorced spouse of his adopted son, but where was the
compulsion for the Prophet to do so?" Allah affirmed in answer to this
charge: "But, verily, he is the Apostle of Allah". The implication is
that it was Allah's mandate to the Holy Prophet to wipe out all
prejudices and declare all taboos that pagan custom had unnecessarily
imposed upon the people, as lawful.

In this respect the Prophet's action was unequivocal and left no room
for doubt. (see footnote 1, below.) In order to lay particular emphasis
upon this point Allah observes: (Khatim Al-Nabbiyeen) "And he is the
last in the line of Prophets," which means that no messenger nor even a
Prophet charged with the mission of carrying out reforms in the sphere
of Law or society which might have been omitted (God forbid) during the
lifetime of Muhammad (PBUH) will ever succeed him. Since Allah ordained
the ministry of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) to be final, it was, therefore,
imperative that he should accomplish the task of uprooting this pagan
custom.

Later the point has been further emphasized in the revelation (Wa Kan
ul-Allahi Be-kulle Shai-in 'Aleema): "God is Aware of everything." The
true import of this revelation is that Allah deemed it best to remove
this pagan custom through the agency of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) and that
Allah only could take cognisance of the harm that the perpetuation of
this infidel custom would have entailed. Allah was well aware that the
line of Prophethood ended in Muhammad (PBUH) whose precedent the whole
ummah would follow, and had he not done away with this custom, there
would arise no man comparable in status to Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) who
could accomplish the task.

And suppose a reformer had arisen in later times who would break this
custom, his act would not have constituted a universal or permanent
precedent for Muslims of all ages and all countries to follow. No other
person that follows will embody the Divine sanctity which attaches to
the person of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). Hence the precedent of no man but
Muhammad has the potential of wiping out the idea of all pagan customs
from the souls of men for all times to come. footnote 1. At this point
those who deny the finality of Muhammad's Prophethood (PBUH) demand to
know the tradition in which this allegation has been reported.

This query in fact lays bare their ignorance. The Holy Qur'an furnishes
answers to the charges of the mischief-mongers at several points without
actually mentioning the charge. In each case, however, the relevant text
bears unmistakable evidence as to which allegation is being answered. In
the present case also the answer contains the substance of the question.
The use of the conjunctive word "but" at the end of the first sentence
presupposes that part of the question had yet to be dealt with.

The second sentence, therefore, furnishes answer to the remaining part
of the question. The first sentence had revealed to the objectors the
answer to their charge that 'Muhammad had married his daughter- in-law.'
However, the second point of the question "where was the compulsion for
the Prophet to do so" still called for an answer. This answer was
provided by the next sentence in the text. "But verily, Muhammad is the
Apostle of God and last in the line of Prophets of God." The point may
be further explained by taking an illustration from ordinary
conversation. Someone says "Zaid had not risen, but that Bakr has stood
up."

Now this conveys the sense that Zaid has not risen, but the matter does
not end there, as it gives rise to the query, "If Zaid has not risen,
who has stood up then?" The subordinate clause of the above sentence
"but Bakr has stood up" supplies an answer to this query. It is the same
in the above case. The Verdict of the Text of the Qur'an A group who has
raised the heresy of a new prophethood in modern times explains the
meaning of the idea of the "Finality of Prophethood" as the 'Stamp of
Prophethood' thereby implying that all prophets who would succeed
Muhammad (PBUH) will bear his stamp and will attain to prophethood by
his seal alone.

No one, in other words, who does not bear the seal of Muhammad (PBUH)
will attain the status of Prophethood. But the context in which the term
"the last in the line of Prophets" has been revealed in the Holy Qur'an
leaves no scope for such speculation. If indeed the term "last in the
line of Prophets" does bear the meaning intended by this group, then
this term is surely out of place in the context in which it has been
revealed. Furthermore, when the term is charged with this meaning it
distorts the whole purpose of the revealed verse.

In this verse God refutes the charge and dispels doubts created by the
mischievous people about the marriage of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) with
Zainab (may Allah be pleased with her), the divorced wife of the
Prophet's adopted son, Zaid. Does it stand to reason to make a sudden
interpolation in this context of the point that Muhammad (PBUH) was the
'seal of Prophets' and that Allah had delegated to him the authority of
attesting the bonafides of succeeding prophets ? This interpretation
bears no connection with the context-not the least even and is contrary
to the purpose of Divine argument against the heretics.

If this interpretation were true the non- believers might well have
argued: "There is no hurry in doing away with this custom now. You might
safely leave this task for your successor prophets who will bear your
stamp." According to a second interpretation of the idea of the finality
of Prophethood advanced by this group it is said that the term "Last in
the line of Prophets" means the "exalted Prophet." They further explain
that the line of Apostles will continue, though the excellence of
Prophethood has been culminated in the person of Muhammad (PBUH). This
interpretation is no less defective and harmful than the other one.

It hardly bears any relation to the context and, in fact, conveys a
contradictory sense of the verse. Taking this thread of argument the
infidels and hypocrites would have plausibly pointed out, "Sir, there
will be other prophets after you, howsoever inferior in status compared
to you, to fulfil the Divine mission, why must you take it upon yourself
to remove this custom also?" The Dictionary Meaning of the Word
'Khatam-al-Nabiyyin' It is evident that the text can bear one meaning
and it is that Khatam-al-Nabiyyin stands for the Finality of Prophethood
with a clear implication that the prophethood has been culminated and
finalized in Muhammad (PBUH). It is not only the context that supports
this interpretation but also the lexicography.

According to Arabic lexicon and the linguistic usage Khatam means to
affix seal; to close, to come to an end; and to carry something to its
ultimate end. Khatama al-'Amala is equivalent to 'Faragha min
al-'Almali' which means 'to get over with the task.' 'Khatama al-Ina'
bears the meaning 'The vessel has been closed and sealed so that nothing
can go into it, nor can its contents spill out.' 'Khatam-al-kitab'
conveys the meaning 'The letter has been enclosed and sealed so that it
is finally secured.' 'Khatama-'Ala-al-Qalb' means 'The heart has been
sealed so that it cannot perceive anything new nor can it forswear what
it has already imbibed.'

'Khitamu-Kulli-Mashrubin' implies 'the final taste that is left in the
mouth when the drink is over.' Katimatu Kulli Shaiinn 'Aqibatuhu wa
Akhiratuhu means "The end in the case of everything denotes its doom and
ultimate finish." Khatm-ul-Shaii Balagha Akhirahu conveys the sense, "To
end a thing means to carry it to its ultimate limit."

The term Khatam-i-Qur'an is used in the similar sense and the closing
verses of Qur'anic Surahs are referred to as Khawatim. Khatim-ul-Qaum
Akhirhuum means "The last man in the tribe." (Refer to Lisan-ul-'Arab;
Qamus and Aqrab-ul- Muwarid). (see footnote 2, below.) For this reason
all linguists and commentators agree that Khatam-ul-Nabiyyin means 'The
Last in the line of Prophets.' The word Khatam in its dictionary meaning
and linguistic usage does not refer to the post office stamp which is
affixed on the outgoing mail.


