Supplement 8
============

Among the great virtues of Islam is the command to do good and the
prohibition to do evil. The good should be preserved and the evil should
be discarded. In short, Islam is actually composed of a series of
commands and prohibitions. Allah the most Knowing, the Most Merciful,
did not decree any law and regulations but for the good and benefit of
his creatures.

The prohibition was decree because of its evil implications to
humanity. The evils were created to test the human conscience and
challenge their freewill in choosing between right and wrong. All the
commands and prohibitions from Allah as transmitted through His Prophet
Muhammad (PBUH) was intended to purify the human soul in order to live a
pure and clean life adored by Allah (SWT) and human beings. Orderliness
One of the teachings of Islam is about orderlin.

Discipline, regulation, management, planning and all other terms
relating to organization are mostly considered as alien to Islam. On the
contrary, Islam exhorts people to live in orderliness and to put the
right thing in the right place. The foundation of Islamic order rests on
two main principles, the crucial faith in one Allah (God) and the
oneness of humanity. All the frame works were laid down in the Qur'an
and the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) applied himself to working out the
essential details of that order. One of the great values taught by Islam
in this regard is to make use of the time left to humanity.

The Qur'an and the Sunnah (Prophetic traditions) mentioned about time,
day, week, month, year and century. People are lost if they did not
spend the time available to them during this life for good things. It is
a great loss if people have to waste the valuable time they have at
their disposal for useless activities. It is true that life should be
enjoyable but not at the expense of human resources and values which are
essential for the continuation of their well-being.

Allah the Most Knowing had created time and space suitable for human
activities for they can attain achievements in life. There are times for
work, study, recreation, resting and even celebration. All are parts of
activities in worshipping Allah (SWT) and serving His cause. The Qur'an
says that Allah (SWT) had created the day for earning and night for
resting and enjoyment.

He created the sun, the moon and all outer-space objects so that man on
the earth can fix the time and arrange the calendar. By having standard
time and standard calendar and the movements of astronomical objects,
people are able to regulate their timetable in choosing the right moment
for them in doing business and carrying out their activities.

Islam prescribes certain times for the daily prayers, certain month for
the obligatory fasting and certain time in one's life time for
performing the Hajj or pilgrimage which indicates that the religion
brought by Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) places the life of Muslims in
systematic order. For every move and occasion made by Muslims there is a
rule governing it, be it in the form of advice, spiritual guidance or
practical directive. If all these directives are followed and understood
properly, people will have high discipline and a well-managed life.
Islam encourages people to think correctly before taking any decision.
This means planning.

There are many verses in the Qur'an admonishing against doing things
unthinkingly and jumping to conclusions. The Prophet (PBUH) also showed
a good example in fulfilling promise and staying true to treaty,
agreement or contract made between parties. As a man of honour he always
remained true to the principles agreed in the treaty, depicting his high
discipline and inclination of doing everything in proper order.

Friendliness Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) was a warmhearted and faithful
friend. He loved his companions. He extended greeting to those he knew
and to those he did not know. He treated all people around him with
kindness and affection. He was very courteous to all those who met him.
He never contradicted anybody who is not opposed to the teachings of
Islam. He treated equally the humble and the lofty. He claimed no
distinction and lived amongst his companions as if he was not their
leader.

Neighborliness He regarded the neighbors as brother and sisters because
of their closeness and living in the same vicinity. He once smelt the
aroma of the soup cooked by his wife. He told her to give some of it to
the neighbours who also smelt it. He said it was not right a Muslim to
sleep with a full stomach after having had a good meal but let his
neighbour starve.

He laid down the foundation for a friendly relation and co-operation
among neighbours exemplifying that living as a neighbour, one has one's
right and responsibility. In regard to the rights of a neighbour, the
Prophet (PBUH) said: "Gibreel (PBUH) used to advise me to take good care
of the neighbour until I thought he would make him my heit." (Bukhari
Kitab Al Adab No. 28 and Muslim Kitab Al Bir No. 146)Goodwill He was a
good exemplar to those who subscribe to a harmonious society. Islam
exhorts people not to violate the rights of others and injure their
interest, but should positively cooperate with each other and establish
a mutual relationship and social cohesion.

To safeguard the unity and solidarity of the nation and to achieve the
welfare and well-being of the community, Muslims have been enjoined to
avoid mutual hostility, social dissension, backbiting one another, and
hurting others with their hand or tongue. Islam as brought by the
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) exhorts Muslims to visit the sick, to help to
the needy and assist the weak. Islam makes no discrimination on the
basis of race, colour or language. Its appeal is to the entire
humanity.

Respect for Women The Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) brought changes for the
betterment of womens conditions. Woman is recognized by Islam as a full
and equal partner of man in the procreation of humankind. He is the
father, she is the mother, and both are essential for life. Her role is
no less vital than his. By this partnership she has an equal share in
every aspect; she is entitled to equal rights; she undertakes equal
responsibilities, and in her there are many qualities and so much
humanity as there are in her partner. She is equal to man in bearing
personal and common responsibilities and in receiving rewards for her
deeds.

She is equal to man in the pursuit of education and knowledge. Islam
enjoined the seeking of knowledge upon Muslim, it makes no distinction
between man and woman, who is entitled to freedom of expression as much
as man is. Her sound opinions are taken into consideration and cannot be
disregarded just because she is a female. Islam grants woman equal
rights to contract, to enterprise, to earn and possess independently.
Her life, her property, her honor are as sacred as those of man. Islam
has also given woman a share of inheritance. Before Islam, she was not
only deprived of that share, but was herself considered as property to
be inherited by man.

Statesmanship When Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) arrived at Madinah, he
initiated the formation of an Islamic state. After establishing
politics, brotherhood and the authority of the state of Madinah, he
began negotiations with various tribes around the city and made treaties
with them. When the Makkan unbelievers launched a series of attacks on
Madinah, Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) was able to confront them, and when the
Makkans were finally defeated in the battle of Al-Khandaq (Trenches), he
was able to make truce with them at Hudaibiyah for ten years. This
treaty was a masterpiece of practical statesmanship on the part of
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH).

His diplomacy in sending and receiving envoys to and from the various
chiefs of tribes and foreign rulers, his fairness in conducting
judiciary, and his general pardon at the liberation of Makkah, was
another proof of his lofty statesmanship. The State he established in
Madinah was not a matter of chance. It was the very nature of his
mission that he would establish a state to enforce the way of Allah.
People might accept a new faith but it would take time to change their
habits, custom and ways of life.

And even if a small group of people succeeded in changing their ways of
life there would be many others who would not let these people practice
their belief and try to stop them by force. So the Islamic State became
an urgent necessity to protect the Islamic way of life. The State
founded by Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) was built physical force, as every
state must necessarily be, to fulfill its function of stopping
aggression and oppression. A democratic system in Islam is expressed
through the term shura (council).

The Qur'an translation reads: [ And those who respond to their Lord and
keep up prayer and their affairs [of government] by counseling among
themselves and who spend out of what We have given them.] (Qur'an 42:
38) References: Abdul Hamid Siddique, The life of Muhammad. Beirut: Dar
El Fath. Afzalur Rehman, Muhamma, Blessing for Mankind. London: The
Muslim Schools Trust London. Ministry of Religious Affairs Pakistan,
Universality of the Prophet's Message. Mohammed Hussein Hikal, Hayat
Mohammed. Cairo: Dar Al Ma'arif.

Messengers of Allah (PBUT) Below are the names of the 25 Rasul
(Messengers of Allah) Adam(PBUH); (Peace be upon him) Idris(PBUH). Nuh
(Noah)(PBUH). Hud(PBUH). Saleh(PBUH). Lut (Lot)(PBUH). Ibrahim (Abraham)
(PBUH). Ismail (Shmael) (PBUH). Ishak (Isaac) (PBUH). Ya'kub (Jacob)
(PBUH). Yousuf (Joseph)(PBUH). Shuaib (PBUH). Harun (Aaron) (PBUH). Musa
(Moses) (PBUH). Dawood (David) (PBUH).

Sulaiman (Solomon) (PBUH). Ayub (Job) (PBUH). Zulkifl (Ezekiel) (PBUH).
Yunus (Jonah) (PBUH). Elyas (Elijah) (PBUH). Al-Yasa' (Elisah) (PBUH).
Zakariyah (Zechariah) (PBUH). Yahya (John) (PBUH). Isa (Jesus) (PBUH).

Muhammad (PBUH) Remembering Allah (SWT) at all times. When starting to
do something Bism-illah When intending to do something in future
Insha-Allah When in pain and distress Ya-Allah When expressing
appreciation Masha-Allah When thanking someone Jazak-Allah Khayran When
awakening from sleep La-ilaha-illallah When thanking Allah or When
sneezing Alhamdu-lillah When someone else sneezes Yar-Hamuk-Allah When
repenting of a sin Astagh-Firullah When taking oath Wallah/Billah When
someone supplicates Ameen When death message is received
Inna-Lillahi-wa- inna-ilaihi Raji-ounWe wish to acknowledge and thank
the collective efforts by the following in producing this booklet:

Ustad Rifyal Ka'bah Haji Mohd. Yuni bin Awi Imam Yakub Yusuf Vadia
Abdul Rahim bin Raub Ustazah Habsah Hashim Fatimah Mohammed Norzah Yusof
Rasheedah Amoo
In the Name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful


