Prophet Muhammad's (saws) Last Sermon
=====================================

[This sermon was delivered on the Ninth Day of Dhul-Hijjah 10 A.H. in
the 'Uranah valley of Mount Arafat' in Mecca.] After praising and
thanking Allah the Prophet (saws) said: "O People, lend me an attentive
ear, for I know not whether after this year I shall ever be amongst you
again. Therefore listen to what I am saying very carefully and take
these words to those who could not be present here today. O People, just
as you regard this month, this day, this city as Sacred, so regard the
life and property of every Muslim as a sacred trust. Return the goods
entrusted to you to their rightful owners.

Hurt no one so that no one may hurt you. Remember that you will indeed
meet your Lord, and that he will indeed reckon your deeds. Allah has
forbidden you to take usury (interest), therefore all interest
obligations shall henceforth be waived. Your capital is yours to keep.
You will neither inflict nor suffer any inequity.

Allah has judged that there shall be no interest and that all the
interest due to Abbas ibn 'Abd'al Muttalib [the Prophet's uncle] be
waived. Every right arising out of homicide in pre-islamic days is
henceforth waived and the first such right that i waive is that arising
from the murder of Rabiah ibn al Harithibn. O People, the unbelievers
indulge in tampering with the calender in order to make permissible that
which Allah forbade, and to forbid that which Allah has made
permissible.

With Allah the months are twelve in number. Four of them are holy,
three of these are successive and one occurs singly between the months
of Jumada and Shaban. Beware of Satan, for the safety of your
religion.

He has lost all hope of that he will be able to lead you astray in big
things, so beware of following him in small things. O People, it is true
that you have certain rights with regard to your women but they also
have rights over you. Remember that you have taken them as your wives
only under Allah's trust and with His permission. If they abide by your
right, then to them belongs the right to be fed and clothed in kindness.
Do treat your women well and be kind to them for they are your partners
and committed helpers.

And it is your right that they do not make friends with anyone of whom
you do not approve, as well as never to be unchaste. O People, listen to
me in earnest, worship Allah, say your five daily prayers, fast during
the month of Ramadhan, and give your wealth in Zakat. Perform Hajj if
you can afford to.

All mankind is from Adam and Eve, an Arab has no superiority over a
non-Arab nor a non-Arab has any superiority over an Arab; also a white
has no superiority over a black nor a black has any superiority over a
white - except by piety and good action. Learn that every Muslim is a
brother to every Muslim and that the Muslims constitute one brotherhood.
Nothing shall be legitimate to a Muslim which belogs to a fellow Muslim
unless it was given freely and willingly. Do not therefore do injustice
to yourselves. Remember one day you will meet Allah and answer your
deeds.

So beware: do not stray from the path of righteousness after I am gone.
O People, no prophet or apostle will come after me, and no new faith
will be born. Reason well, therefore, O People, and understand my words
which I convey to you. I leave behind me two things, the Qur'an and my
Sunnah and if you follow these you will never go astray. All those who
listen to me shall pass on my words to others and those to others again;
and may the last ones understand my words better than those who listen
to me directly. Be my witness, O Allah, that I have conveyed Your
message to Your people."


**Mohammed The Prophet**

By Prof. K. S. Ramakrishna Rao, Head of the Department of Philosophy,
Government College for Women University of Mysore, Mandya-571401
(Karnatika). Re-printed from "Islam and Modern age", Hydrabad, March
1978. In the desert of Arabia was Mohammad born, according to Muslim
historians, on April 20, 571. The name means highly praised.

He is to me the greatest mind among all the sons of Arabia. He means so
much more than all the poets and kings that preceded him in that
impenetrable desert of red sand. When he appeared Arabia was a desert --
a nothing. Out of nothing a new world was fashioned by the mighty spirit
of Mohammad -- a new life, a new culture, a new civilization, a new
kingdom which extended from Morocco to Indies and influenced the thought
and life of three continents -- Asia, Africa and Europe.

When I thought of writing on Mohammad the prophet, I was a bit hesitant
because it was to write about a religion I do not profess and it is a
delicate matter to do so for there are many persons professing various
religions and belonging to diverse school of thought and denominations
even in same religion. Though it is sometimes, claimed that religion is
entirely personal yet it can not be gain-said that it has a tendency to
envelop the whole universe seen as well unseen.

It somehow permeates something or other our hearts, our souls, our
minds their conscious as well as subconscious and unconscious levels
too. The problem assumes overwhelming importance when there is a deep
conviction that our past, present and future all hang by the soft
delicate, tender silked cord. If we further happen to be highly
sensitive, the center of gravity is very likely to be always in a state
of extreme tension. Looked at from this point of view, the less said
about other religion the better. Let our religions be deeply hidden and
embedded in the resistance of our innermost hearts fortified by unbroken
seals on our lips.

But there is another aspect of this problem. Man lives in society. Our
lives are bound with the lives of others willingly or unwillingly,
directly or indirectly. We eat the food grown in the same soil, drink
water, from the same the same spring and breathe the same air. Even
while staunchly holding our own views, it would be helpful, if we try to
adjust ourselves to our surroundings, if we also know to some extent,
how the mind our neighbor moves and what the main springs of his actions
are.

From this angle of vision it is highly desirable that one should try to
know all religions of the world, in the proper sprit, to promote mutual
understanding and better appreciation of our neighborhood, immediate and
remote. Further, our thoughts are not scattered as appear to be on the
surface.

They have got themselves crystallized around a few nuclei in the form
of great world religions and living faiths that guide and motivate the
lives of millions that inhabit this earth of ours. It is our duty, in
one sense if we have the ideal of ever becoming a citizen of the world
before us, to make a little attempt to know the great religions and
system of philosophy that have ruled mankind. In spite of these
preliminary remarks, the ground in these field of religion, where there
is often a conflict between intellect and emotion is so slippery that
one is constantly reminded of fools that rush in where angels fear to
tread. It is also not so complex from another point of view.

The subject of my writing is about the tenets of a religion which is
historic and its prophet who is also a historic personality. Even a
hostile critic like Sir William Muir speaking about the holy Quran says
that. "There is probably in the world no other book which has remained
twelve centuries with so pure text." I may also add Prophet Mohammad is
also a historic personality, every event of whose life has been most
carefully recorded and even the minutest details preserved intact for
the posterity.

His life and works are not wrapped in mystery. My work today is further
lightened because those days are fast disappearing when Islam was highly
misrepresented by some of its critics for reasons political and
otherwise. Prof. Bevan writes in Cambridge Medieval History, "Those
account of Mohammad and Islam which were published in Europe before the
beginning of 19th century are now to be regarded as literary
curiosities." My problem is to write this monograph is easier because we
are now generally not fed on this kind of history and much time need be
spent on pointing out our misrepresentation of Islam.

The theory of Islam and Sword for instance is not heard now frequently
in any quarter worth the name. The principle of Islam that there is no
compulsion in religion is well known. Gibbon, a historian of world
repute says, "A pernicious tenet has been imputed to Mohammadans, the
duty of extirpating all the religions by sword." This charge based on
ignorance and bigotry, says the eminent historian, is refuted by Quran,
by history of Musalman conquerors and by their public and legal
toleration of Christian worship. The great success of Mohammad's life
had been effected by sheer moral force, without a stroke of sword.

But in pure self-defense, after repeated efforts of conciliation had
utterly failed, circumstances dragged him into the battlefield. But the
prophet of Islam changed the whole strategy of the battlefield. The
total number of casualties in all the wars that took place during his
lifetime when the whole Arabian Peninsula came under his banner, does
not exceed a few hundreds in all. But even on the battlefield he taught
the Arab barbarians to pray, to pray not individually, but in
congregation to God the Almighty.

During the dust and storm of warfare whenever the time for prayer came,
and it comes five times a every day, the congregation prayer had not to
be postponed even on the battlefield. A party had to be engaged in
bowing their heads before God while other was engaged with the enemy.
After finishing the prayers, the two parties had to exchange their
positions.

To the Arabs, who would fight for forty years on the slight provocation
that a camel belonging to the guest of one tribe had strayed into the
grazing land belonging to other tribe and both sides had fought till
they lost 70,000 lives in all; threatening the extinction of both the
tribes to such furious Arabs, the Prophet of Islam taught self-control
and discipline to the extent of praying even on the battlefield. In an
aged of barbarism, the Battlefield itself was humanized and strict
instructions were issued not to cheat, not to break trust, not to
mutilate, not to kill a child or woman or an old man, not to hew down
date palm nor burn it, not to cut a fruit tree, not to molest any person
engaged in worship.

His own treatment with his bitterest enemies is the noblest example for
his followers. At the conquest of Mecca, he stood at the zenith of his
power. The city which had refused to listen to his mission, which had
tortured him and his followers, which had driven him and his people into
exile and which had unrelentingly persecuted and boycotted him even when
he had taken refuge in a place more than 200 miles away, that city now
lay at his feet. By the laws of war he could have justly avenged all the
cruelties inflicted on him and his people.

But what treatment did he accord to them? Mohammad's heart flowed with
affection and he declared, "This day, there is no REPROOF against you
and you are all free." "This day" he proclaimed, "I trample under my
feet all distinctions between man and man, all hatred between man and
man." This was one of the chief objects why he permitted war in self
defense, that is to unite human beings. And when once this object was
achieved, even his worst enemies were pardoned.

Even those who killed his beloved uncle, Hamazah, mangled his body,
ripped it open, even chewed a piece of his liver. The principles of
universal brotherhood and doctrine of the equality of mankind which he
proclaimed represents one very great contribution of Mohammad to the
social uplift of humanity. All great religions have preached the same
doctrine but the prophet of Islam had put this theory into actual
practice and its value will be fully recognized, perhaps centuries
hence, when international consciousness being awakened, racial
prejudices may disappear and greater brotherhood of humanity come into
existence.

Miss. Sarojini Naidu speaking about this aspect of Islam says, "It was
the first religion that preached and practiced democracy; for in the
mosque, when the minaret is sounded and the worshipers are gathered
together, the democracy of Islam is embodied five times a day when the
peasant and the king kneel side by side and proclaim, God alone is
great."

The great poetess of India continues, "I have been struck over and over
again by this indivisible unity of Islam that makes a man instinctively
a brother. When you meet an Egyptian, an Algerian and Indian and a Turk
in London, it matters not that Egypt is the motherland of one and India
is the motherland of another." Mahatma Gandhi, in his inimitable style,
says "Some one has said that Europeans in South Africa dread the advent
Islam -- Islam that civilized Spain, Islam that took the torch light to
Morocco and preached to the world the Gospel of brotherhood. The
Europeans of South Africa dread the Advent of Islam. They may claim
equality with the white races.

They may well dread it, if brotherhood is a sin. If it is equality of
colored races then their dread is well founded." Every year, during the
Haj, the world witnesses the wonderful spectacle of this international
Exhibition of Islam in leveling all distinctions of race, color and
rank. Not only the Europeans, the African, the Arabian, the Persian, the
Indians, the Chinese all meet together in Medina as members of one
divine family, but they are clad in one dress every person in two simple
pieces of white seamless cloth, one piece round the loin the other piece
over the shoulders, bare head without pomp or ceremony, repeating "Here
am I O God; at thy command; thou art one and alone;

Here am I." Thus there remains nothing to differentiate the high from
the low and every pilgrim carries home the impression of the
international significance of Islam. In the opinion of Prof. Hurgronje
"the league of nations founded by prophet of Islam put the principle of
international unity of human brotherhood on such Universal foundations
as to show candle to other nations." In the words of same Professor "the
fact is that no nation of the world can show a parallel to what Islam
has done the realization of the idea of the League of Nations." The
prophet of Islam brought the reign of democracy in its best form. The
Caliph Caliph Ali and the son in-law of the prophet, the Caliph Mansur,
Abbas, the son of Caliph Mamun and many other caliphs and kings had to
appear before the judge as ordinary men in Islamic courts.

Even today we all know how the black Negroes were treated by the
civilized white races. Consider the state of BILAL, a Negro Slave, in
the days of the prophet of Islam nearly 14 centuries ago. The office of
calling Muslims to prayer was considered to be of status in the early
days of Islam and it was offered to this Negro slave.

After the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet ordered him to call for prayer
and the Negro slave, with his black color and his thick lips, stood over
the roof of the holy mosque at Mecca called the Ka'ba the most historic
and the holiest mosque in the Islamic world, when some proud Arabs
painfully cried loud, "Oh, this black Negro Slave, woe be to him. He
stands on the roof of holy Ka'ba to call for prayer." At that moment,
the prophet announced to the world, this verse of the holy QURAN for the
first time.

"O mankind, surely we have created you, families and tribes, so you may
know one another. Surely, the most honorable of you with God is MOST
RIGHTEOUS AMONG you. Surely, God is Knowing, Aware." And these words of
the holy Quran created such a mighty transformation that the Caliph of
Islam, the purest of Arabs by birth, offered their daughter in marriage
to this Negro Slave, and whenever, the second Caliph of Islam, known to
history as Umar the great, the commander of faithful, saw this Negro
slave, he immediately stood in reverence and welcomed him by "Here come
our master; Here come our lord."

What a tremendous change was brought by Quran in the Arabs, the
proudest people at that time on the earth. This is the reason why
Goethe, the greatest of German poets, speaking about the Holy Quran
declared that, "This book will go on exercising through all ages a most
potent influence." This is also the reason why George Bernard Shaw says,
"If any religion has a chance or ruling over England, say, Europe,
within the next 100 years, it is Islam". It is this same democratic
spirit of Islam that emancipated women from the bondage of man.


