Supplement 9
============

Sir Charles Edward Archibald Hamilton says "Islam teaches the inherent
sinlessness of man. It teaches that man and woman and woman have come
from the same essence, posses the same soul and have been equipped with
equal capabilities for intellectual, spiritual and moral attainments."
The Arabs had a very strong tradition that one who can smite with the
spear and can wield the sword would inherit.

But Islam came as the defender of the weaker sex and entitled women to
share the inheritance of their parents. It gave women, centuries ago
right of owning property, yet it was only 12 centuries later , in 1881,
that England, supposed to be the cradle of democracy adopted this
institution of Islam and the act was called "the married woman act", but
centuries earlier, the Prophet of Islam had proclaimed that "Woman are
twin halves of men. The rights of women are sacred. See that women
maintained rights granted to them."

Islam is not directly concerned with political and economic systems,
but indirectly and in so far as political and economic affairs influence
man's conduct, it does lay down some very important principles to govern
economic life. According to Prof. Massignon, it maintains the balance
between exaggerated opposites and has always in view the building of
character which is the basis of civilization. This is secured by its law
of inheritance,

by an organized system of charity known as Zakat, and by regarding as
illegal all anti-social practices in the economic field like monopoly,
usury, securing of predetermined unearned income and increments,
cornering markets, creating monopolies, creating an artificial scarcity
of any commodity in order to force the prices to rise. Gambling is
illegal. Contribution to schools, to places of worship, hospitals,
digging of wells, opening of orphanages are highest acts of virtue.
Orphanages have sprung for the first time,

it is said, under the teaching of the prophet of Islam. The world owes
its orphanages to this prophet born an orphan. "Good all this" says
Carlyle about Mohammad. "The natural voice of humanity, of pity and
equity, dwelling in the heart of this wild son of nature, speaks." A
historian once said a great man should be judged by three tests: Was he
found to be of true metel by his contemporaries ? Was he great enough to
raise above the standards of his age ? Did he leave anything as
permanent legacy to the world at large ?

This list may be further extended but all these three tests of
greatness are eminently satisfied to the highest degree in case of
prophet Mohammad. Some illustrations of the last two have already been
mentioned. The first is: Was the Prophet of Islam found to be of true
metel by his contemporaries? Historical records show that all the
contemporaries of Mohammad both friends foes, acknowledged the sterling
qualities, the spotless honesty, the noble virtues, the absolute
sincerity and every trustworthiness of the apostle of Islam in all walks
of life and in every sphere of human activity. Even the Jews and those
who did not believe in his message,

adopted him as the arbiter in their personal disputes by virtue of his
perfect impartiality. Even those who did not believe in his message were
forced to say "O Mohammad, we do not call you a liar, but we deny him
who has given you a book and inspired you with a message." They thought
he was one possessed. They tried violence to cure him. But the best of
them saw that a new light had dawned on him and they hastened him to
seek the enlightenment. It is a notable feature in the history of
prophet of Islam that his nearest relation,

his beloved cousin and his bosom friends, who know him most intimately,
were not thoroughly imbued with the truth of his mission and were
convinced of the genuineness of his divine inspiration. If these men and
women, noble, intelligent, educated and intimately acquainted with his
private life had perceived the slightest signs of deception, fraud,
earthliness, or lack of faith in him, Mohammad's moral hope of
regeneration, spiritual awakening, and social reform would all have been
foredoomed to a failure and whole edifice would have crumbled to pieces
in a moment.

On the contrary, we find that devotion of his followers was such that
he was voluntarily acknowledged as dictator of their lives. They braved
for him persecutions and danger; they trusted, obeyed and honored him
even in the most excruciating torture and severest mental agony caused
by excommunication even unto death. Would this have been so, had they
noticed the slightest backsliding in their master?

Read the history of the early converts to Islam, and every heart would
melt at the sight of the brutal treatment of innocent Muslim men and
women. Sumayya, an innocent women, is cruelly torn into pieces with
spears. An example is made of "Yassir whose legs are tied to two camels
and the beast were are driven in opposite directions", Khabbab bin Arth
is made lie down on the bed of burning coal with the brutal legs of
their merciless tyrant on his breast so that he may not move and this
makes even the fat beneath his skin melt.

"Khabban bin Adi is put to death in a cruel manner by mutilation and
cutting off his flesh piece-meal." In the midst of his tortures, being
asked weather he did not wish Mohammad in his place while he was in his
house with his family, the sufferer cried out that he was gladly
prepared to sacrifice himself his family and children and why was it
that these sons and daughters of Islam not only surrendered to their
prophet their allegiance but also made a gift of their hearts and souls
to their master?

Is not the intense faith and conviction on part of immediate followers
of Mohammad, the noblest testimony to his sincerity and to his utter
self-absorption in his appointed task? And these men were not of low
station or inferior mental caliber. Around him in quite early days,
gathered what was best and noblest in Mecca, its flower and cream, men
of position, rank, wealth and culture, and from his own kith and kin,
those who knew all about his life. All the first four Caliphs, with
their towering personalities, were converts of this period. The
Encyclopedia Brittanica says that "Mohammad is the most successful of
all Prophets and religious personalities".

But the success was not the result of mere accident. It was not a hit
of fortune. It was a recognition of fact that he was found to be true
metal by his contemporaries. It was the result of his admirable and all
compelling personality. The personality of Mohammad! It is most
difficult to get into the truth of it. Only a glimpse of it I can catch.
What a dramatic succession of picturesque scenes.

There is Mohammad the Prophet, there is Mohammad the General; Mohammad
the King; Mohammad the Warrior; Mohammad the Businessman; Mohammad the
Preacher; Mohammad the Philosopher; Mohammad the Statesman; Mohammad the
Orator; Mohammad the reformer; Mohammad the Refuge of orphans; Mohammad
the Protector of slaves; Mohammad the Emancipator of women; Mohammad the
Law-giver; Mohammad the Judge; Mohammad the Saint. And in all these
magnificent roles, in all these departments of human activities, he is
like, a hero.. Orphanhood is extreme of helplessness and his life upon
this earth began with it; Kingship is the height of the material power
and it ended with it.

From an orphan boy to a persecuted refugee and then to an overlord,
spiritual as well as temporal, of a whole nation and Arbiter of its
destinies, with all its trials and temptations, with all its
vicissitudes and changes, its lights and shades, its up and downs, its
terror and splendor, he has stood the fire of the world and came out
unscathed to serve as a model in every face of life. His achievements
are not limited to one aspect of life,

but cover the whole field of human conditions. If for instance,
greatness consist in the purification of a nation, steeped in barbarism
and immersed in absolute moral darkness, that dynamic personality who
has transformed, refined and uplifted an entire nation, sunk low as the
Arabs were, and made them the torch-bearer of civilization and learning,
has every claim to greatness.

If greatness lies in unifying the discordant elements of society by
ties of brotherhood and charity, the prophet of the desert has got every
title to this distinction. If greatness consists in reforming those
warped in degrading and blind superstition and pernicious practices of
every kind, the prophet of Islam has wiped out superstitions and
irrational fear from the hearts of millions.

If it lies in displaying high morals, Mohammad has been admitted by
friend and foe as Al Amin, or the faithful. If a conqueror is a great
man, here is a person who rose from helpless orphan and an humble
creature to be the ruler of Arabia, the equal to Chosroes and Caesars,
one who founded great empire that has survived all these 14 centuries.
If the devotion that a leader commands is the criterion of greatness,
the prophet's name even today exerts a magic charm over millions of
souls, spread all over the world. He had not studied philosophy in the
school of Athens of Rome, Persia, India, or China. Yet, He could
proclaim the highest truths of eternal value to mankind. Illiterate
himself, he could yet speak with an eloquence and fervor which moved men
to tears, to tears of ecstasy. Born an orphan blessed with no worldly
goods, he was loved by all.

He had studied at no military academy; yet he could organize his forces
against tremendous odds and gained victories through the moral forces
which he marshaled. Gifted men with genius for preaching are rare.
Descartes included the perfect preacher among the rarest kind in the
world. Hitler in his Mein Kamp has expressed a similar view. He says "A
great theorist is seldom a great leader. An Agitator is more likely to
posses these qualities. He will always be a great leader. For leadership
means ability to move masses of men.

The talents to produce ideas has nothing in common with capacity for
leadership." "But", he says, "The Union of theorists, organizer and
leader in one man, is the rarest phenomenon on this earth; Therein
consists greatness." In the person of the Prophet of Islam the world has
seen this rarest phenomenon walking on the earth, walking in flesh and
blood. And more wonderful still is what the reverend Bosworth Smith
remarks, "Head of the state as well as the Church, he was Caesar and
Pope in one; but, he was pope without the pope's claims,

and Caesar without the legions of Caesar, without an standing army,
without a bodyguard, without a palace, without a fixed revenue. If ever
any man had the right to say that he ruled by a right divine It was
Mohammad, for he had all the power without instruments and without its
support.

He cared not for dressing of power. The simplicity of his private life
was in keeping with his public life." After the fall of Mecca, more than
one million square miles of land lay at his feet, Lord of Arabia, he
mended his own shoes and coarse woolen garments, milked the goats, swept
the hearth, kindled the fire and attended the other menial offices of
the family.

The entire town of Medina where he lived grew wealthy in the later days
of his life. Everywhere there was gold and silver in plenty and yet in
those days of prosperity many weeks would elapse without a fire being
kindled in the hearth of the king of Arabia, His food being dates and
water. His family would go hungry many nights successively because they
could not get anything to eat in the evening. He slept on no soften bed
but on a palm mat, after a long busy day to spend most of his night in
prayer, often bursting with tears before his creator to grant him
strength to discharge his duties.

As the reports go, his voice would get choked with weeping and it would
appear as if a cooking pot was on fire and boiling had commenced. On the
very day of his death his only assets were few coins a part of which
went to satisfy a debt and rest was given to a needy person who came to
his house for charity. The clothes in which he breathed his last had
many patches. The house from where light had spread to the world was in
darkness because there was no oil in the lamp. Circumstances changed,
but the prophet of God did not. In victory or in defeat, in power or in
adversity, in affluence or in indigence, he is the same man, disclosed
the same character.

Like all the ways and laws of God, Prophets of God are unchangeable. An
honest man, as the saying goes, is the noblest work of God, Mohammad was
more than honest. He was human to the marrow of his bones. Human
sympathy, human love was the music of his soul. To serve man, to elevate
man, to purify man, to educate man, in a word to humanize man-this was
the object of his mission, the be-all and end all of his life. In
thought, in word, in action he had the good of humanity as his sole
inspiration, his sole guiding principle. He was most unostentatious and
selfless to the core. What were the titles he assumed? Only true servant
of God and His Messenger.

Servant first, and then a messenger. A Messenger and prophet like many
other prophets in every part of the world, some known to you, many not
known you. If one does not believe in any of these truths one ceases to
be a Muslim. It is an article of faith. "Looking at the circumstances of
the time and unbounded reverence of his followers" says a western writer
"the most miraculous thing about Mohammad is, that he never claimed the
power of working miracles."

Miracles were performed but not to propagate his faith and were
attributed entirely to God and his inscrutable ways. He would plainly
say that he was a man like others. He had no treasures of earth or
heaven. Nor did he claim to know the secrets of that lie in womb of
future. All this was in an age when miracles were supposed to be
ordinary occurrences, at the back and call of the commonest saint, when
the whole atmosphere was surcharged with supernaturalism in Arabia and
outside Arabia.

He turned the attention of his followers towards the study of nature
and its laws, to understand them and appreciate the Glory of God. The
Quran says, "God did not create the heavens and the earth and all that
is between them in play. He did not create them all but with the truth.
But most men do not know." The world is not illusion, nor without
purpose.

It has been created with the truth. The number of verses inviting close
observation of nature are several times more than those that relate to
prayer, fasting, pilgrimage etc. all put together. The Muslim under its
influence began to observe nature closely and this give birth to the
scientific spirit of the observation and experiment which was unknown to
the Greeks. While the Muslim Botanist Ibn Baitar wrote on Botany after
collecting plants from all parts of the world, described by Myer in his
Gesch.

der Botanikaa-s, a monument of industry, while Al Byruni traveled for
forty years to collect mineralogical specimens, and Muslim Astronomers
made some observations extending even over twelve years. Aristotle wrote
on Physics without performing a single experiment, wrote on natural
history, carelessly stating without taking the trouble to ascertain the
most verifiable fact that men have more teeth than animal. Galen, the
greatest authority on classical anatomy informed that the lower jaw
consists of two bones, a statement which is accepted unchallenged for
centuries till Abdul Lateef takes the trouble to examine a human
skeleton.

After enumerating several such instances, Robert Priffault concludes in
his well known book The making of humanity, "The debt of our science to
the Arabs does not consist in starting discovers or revolutionary
theories. Science owes a great more to Arabs culture; it owes is
existence." The same writer says "The Greeks systematized, generalized
and theorized but patient ways of investigation, the accumulation of
positive knowledge, the minute methods of science, detailed and
prolonged observation, experimental inquiry, were altogether alien to
Greek temperament. What we call science arose in Europe as result of new
methods of investigation, of the method of experiment, observation,
measurement, of the development of Mathematics in form unknown to the
Greeks.

That spirit and these methods, concludes the same author, were
introduced into the European world by Arabs." It is the same practical
character of the teaching of Prophet Mohammad that gave birth to the
scientific spirit, that has also sanctified the daily labors and the so
called mundane affairs. The Quran says that God has created man to
worship him but the word worship has a connotation of its own. Gods
worship is not confined to prayer alone, but every act that is done with
the purpose of winning approval of God and is for the benefit of the
humanity comes under its purview. Islam sanctifies life and all its
pursuits provided they are performed with honesty, justice and pure
intents.


It obliterates the age-long distinction between the sacred and profane.
The Quran says if you eat clean things and thank God for it, it is an
act of worship. It is saying of the prophet of Islam that Morsel of food
that one places in the mouth of his wife is an act of virtue to be
rewarded by God. Another tradition of the Prophet says "He who is
satisfying the desire of his heart will be rewarded by God provided the
methods adopted are permissible." A person was listening to him
exclaimed 'O Prophet of God, he is answering the calls of passions, is
only satisfying the craving of his heart.

Forthwith came the reply, "Had he adopted an awful method for the
satisfaction of his urge, he would have been punished; then why should
he not be rewarded for following the right course." This new conception
of religion that it should also devote itself to the betterment of this
life rather than concern itself exclusively with super mundane affairs,
has led to a new orientation of moral values. Its abiding influence on
the common relations of mankind in the affairs of every day life, its
deep power over the masses,

its regulation of their conception of rights and duty, its suitability
and adaptability to the ignorant savage and the wise philosopher are
characteristic features of the teaching of the Prophet of Islam. But it
should be most carefully born in mind this stress on good actions is not
the sacrifice correctness of faith. While there are various school of
thought, one praising faith at the expense of deeds, another exhausting
various acts to the detriment of correct belief, Islam is based on
correct faith and righteous actions. Means are important as the end and
ends are as important as the means. It is an organic Unity. Together
they live and thrive. Separate them and both decay and die. In Islam
faith can not be divorced from the action. Right knowledge should be
transferred into right action to produce the right results.

How often the words came in Quran -- Those who believe and do good
thing, they alone shall enter paradise. Again and again, not less than
fifty times these words are repeated as if too much stress can not be
laid on them. Contemplation is encouraged but mere contemplation is not
the goal. Those who believe and do nothing can not exist in Islam. These
who believe and do wrong are inconceivable.

Divine law is the law of effort and not of ideals. It chalks out for
the men the path of eternal progress from knowledge to action and from
action to satisfaction. But what is the correct faith from which right
action spontaneously proceeds resulting in complete satisfaction. Here
the central doctrine of Islam is the Unity of God.

There is no God but God is the pivot from which hangs the whole
teaching and practice of Islam. He is unique not only as regards his
divine being but also as regards his divine attributes. As regards the
attributes of God, Islam adopts here as in other things too, the law of
golden mean. It avoids on the one hand, the view of God which divests
the divine being of every attribute and rejects, on the other, the view
which likens him to things material.

The Quran says, On the one hand, there is nothing which is like him, on
the other , it affirms that he is Seeing, Hearing, Knowing. He is the
King who is without a stain of fault or deficiency, the mighty ship of
His power floats upon the ocean of justice and equity. He is the
Beneficent, the Merciful. He is the Guardian over all. Islam does not
stop with this positive statement. It adds further which is its most
special characteristic, the negative aspects of problem.

There is also no one else who is guardian over everything. He is the
meander of every breakage, and no one else is the meander of any
breakage. He is the restorer of every loss and no one else is the
restorer of any loss what-so-over. There is no God but one God, above
any need, the maker of bodies, creator of souls, the Lord of the day of
judgment, and in short, in the words of Quran, to him belong all
excellent qualities. Regarding the position of man in relation to the
Universe, the Quran says: "God has made subservient to you whatever is
on the earth or in universe. You are destined to rule over the
Universe."

But in relation to God, the Quran says: "O man God has bestowed on you
excellent faculties and has created life and death to put you to test in
order to see whose actions are good and who has deviated from the right
path." In spite of free will which he enjoys, to some extent, every man
is born under certain circumstances and continues to live under certain
circumstances beyond his control. With regard to this God says,
according to Islam, it is my will to create any man under condition that
seem best to me.

cosmic plans finite mortals can not fully comprehend. But I will
certainly test you in prosperity as well in adversity, in health as well
as in sickness, in heights as well as in depths. My ways of testing
differ from man to man, from hour to hour. In adversity do not despair
and do resort to unlawful means. It is but a passing phase. In
prosperity do not forget God. God-gifts are given only as trusts.

You are always on trial, every moment on test. In this sphere of life
there is not to reason why, there is but to do and die. If you live in
accordance with God; and if you die, die in the path of God. You may
call it fatalism. but this type of fatalism is a condition of vigorous
increasing effort, keeping you ever on the alert. Do not consider this
temporal life on earth as the end of human existence. There is a life
after death and it is eternal. Life after death is only a connection
link, a door that opens up hidden reality of life.

Every action in life however insignificant, produces a lasting effect.
It is correctly recorded somehow. Some of the ways of God are known to
you, but many of his ways are hidden from you. What is hidden in you and
from you in this world will be unrolled and laid open before you in the
next. the virtuous will enjoy the blessing of God which the eye has not
seen, nor has the ear heard, nor has it entered into the hearts of men
to conceive of they will march onward reaching higher and higher stages
of evolution.

Those who have wasted opportunity in this life shall under the
inevitable law, which makes every man taste of what he has done, be
subjugated to a course of treatment of the spiritual diseases which they
have brought about with their own hands. Beware, it is terrible ordeal.
Bodily pain is torture, you can bear somehow. Spiritual pain is hell,
you will find it almost unbearable.

Fight in this life itself the tendencies of the spirit prone to evil,
tempting to lead you into iniquities ways. Reach the next stage when the
self-accusing sprit in your conscience is awakened and the soul is
anxious to attain moral excellence and revolt against disobedience. This
will lead you to the final stage of the soul at rest, contented with
God, finding its happiness and delight in him alone. The soul no more
stumbles. The stage of struggle passes away.

Truth is victorious and falsehood lays down its arms. All complexes
will then be resolved. Your house will not be divided against itself.
Your personality will get integrated round the central core of
submission to the will of God and complete surrender to his divine
purpose. All hidden energies will then be released. The soul then will
have peace.

God will then address you: "O thou soul that art at rest, and restest
fully contented with thy Lord return to thy Lord. He pleased with thee
and thou pleased with him; So enter among my servants and enter into my
paradise." This is the final goal for man; to become, on the, one hand,
the master of the universe and on the other, to see that his soul finds
rest in his Lord, that not only his Lord will be pleased with him but
that he is also pleased with his Lord. Contentment, complete
contentment, satisfaction, complete satisfaction, peace, complete peace.
The love of God is his food at this stage and he drinks deep at the
fountain of life.

Sorrow and defeat do not overwhelm him and success does not find him in
vain and exulting. The western nations are only trying to become the
master of the Universe. But their souls have not found peace and rest.
Thomas Carlyle, struck by this philosophy of life writes "and then also
Islam-that we must submit to God; that our whole strength lies in
resigned submission to Him, whatsoever he does to us, the thing he sends
to us, even if death and worse than death, shall be good, shall be best;
we resign ourselves to God."

The same author continues "If this be Islam, says Goethe, do we not all
live in Islam?" Carlyle himself answers this question of Goethe and says
"Yes, all of us that have any moral life, we all live so. This is yet
the highest wisdom that heaven has revealed to our earth." Azmat N.
Khan


