What Is Said About the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh)
==============================================

III&E Brochure Series; No. 12(published by The Institute of Islamic
Information and Education (III&E)) In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent,
The Merciful During the centuries of the crusades, all sorts of slanders
were invented against Prophet Muhammad (pbuh). But with the birth of the
modern age, marked with religious tolerance and freedom of thought,
there has been a great change in the approach of Western authors in
their delineation of his life and character.

The views of some non-Muslim scholars regarding Prophet Muhammad, given
at the end, justify this opinion. But the West has still to go a step
forward to discover the greatest reality about Muhammad and that is his
being the true and the last Prophet of God for the whole humanity. In
spite of all its objectivity and enlightenment there has been no sincere
and objective attempt by the West to understand the Prophethood of
Muhammad (pbuh). It is so strange that very glowing tributes are paid to
him for his integrity and achievement but his claim of being the Prophet
of God has been rejected explicitly or implicitly. It is here that a
searching of the heart is required, and a review of the so-called
objectivity is needed.

The following glaring facts from the life of Muhammad (pbuh) have been
furnished to facilitate an unbiased, logical and objective decision
regarding his Prophethood. Up to the age of forty, Muhammad was not
known as a statesman, a preacher or an orator. He was never seen
discussing the principles of metaphysics, ethics, law, politics,
economics or sociology. No doubt he possessed an excellent character,
charming manners and was highly cultured. Yet there was nothing so
deeply striking and so radically extraordinary in him that would make
men expect something great and revolutionary from him in the future.

But when he came out of the Cave (HIRA) with a new message, he was
completely transformed. Is it possible for such a person of the above
qualities to turn all of a sudden into 'an impostor' and claim to be the
Prophet of Allah and invite all the rage of his people? One might ask:
for what reason did he suffer all those hardships? His people offered to
accept him as their King and he would leave the preaching of his
religion. But he chose to refuse their tempting offers and go on
preaching his religion single-handedly in face of all kinds of insults,
social boycott and even physical assault by his own people.

Was it not only God's support and his firm will to disseminate the
message of Allah and his deep-rooted belief that ultimately Islam would
emerge as the only way of life for humanity, that he stood like a
mountain in the face of all opposition and conspiracies to eliminate
him? Furthermore, had he come with a design of rivalry with the
Christians and the Jews, why should he have made belief in Jesus Christ
and Moses and other Prophets of God (peace be upon them), a basic
requirement of faith without which no one could be a Muslim?

Is it not an incontrovertible proof of his Prophethood that in spite of
being unlettered and having led a very normal and quiet life for forty
years, when he began preaching his message, all of Arabia stood in awe
and wonder and was bewitched by his wonderful eloquence and oratory? It
was so matchless that the whole legion of Arab poets, preachers and
orators of the highest calibre failed to bring forth its equivalent. And
above all, how could he then pronounce truths of a scientific nature
contained in the Qur'an that no other human being could possible have
developed at that time? Last but not least, why did he lead a hard life
even after gaining power and authority?

Just ponder over the words he uttered while dying: "We the community of
the Prophets are not inherited. Whatever we leave is for charity." As a
matter of fact, Muhammad (pbuh) is the last link of the chain of
Prophets sent in different lands and times since the very beginning of
the human life on this planet. Read the following writings of the
Western authors: "If greatness of purpose, smallness of means, and
astounding results are the three criteria of human genius, who could
dare to compare any great man in modern history with Muhammad? The most
famous men created arms, laws and empires only. They founded, if
anything at all, no more than material powers which often crumbled away
before their eyes.

This man moved not only armies, legislations, empires, peoples and
dynasties, but millions of men in one-third of the then inhabited world;
and more than that, he moved the altars, the gods, the religions, the
ideas, the beliefs and souls. . . his forbearance in victory, his
ambition, which was entirely devoted to one idea and in no manner
striving for an empire; his endless prayers, his mystic conversations
with God, his death and his triumph after death;

all these attest not to an imposture but to a firm conviction which
gave him the power to restore a dogma. This dogma was twofold, the unity
of God and the immateriality of God; the former telling what God is, the
latter telling what God is not; the one overthrowing false gods with the
sword, the other starting an idea with words. "Philosopher, orator,
apostle, legislator, warrior, conqueror of ideas, restorer of rational
dogmas, of a cult without images; the founder of twenty terrestrial
empires and of one spiritual empire, that is Muhammad. As regards all
standards by which human greatness may be measured, we may well ask, is
there any man greater than he?"

Lamartine, HISTOIRE DE LA TURQUIE, Paris, 1854, Vol. II, pp. 276-277.
"It is not the propagation but the permanency of his religion that
deserves our wonder, the same pure and perfect impression which he
engraved at Mecca and Medina is preserved, after the revolutions of
twelve centuries by the Indian, the African and the Turkish proselytes
of the Koran. . . The Mahometans have uniformly withstood the temptation
of reducing the object of their faith an devotion to a level with the
senses and imagination of man.

'I believe in One God and Mahomet the Apostle of God' is the simple and
invariable profession of Islam. The intellectual image of the Deity has
never been degraded by any visible idol; the honours of the prophet have
never transgressed the measure of human virtue, and his living precepts
have restrained the gratitude of his disciples within the bounds of
reason and religion." Edward Gibbon and Simon Ocklay, HISTORY OF THE
SARACEN EMPIRE, London, 1870, p. 54. "He was Caesar and Pope in one; but
he was Pope without Pope's pretensions, Caesar without the legions of
Caesar: without a standing army, without a bodyguard, without a palace,
without a fixed revenue; if ever any man had the right to say that he
ruled by the right divine, it was Mohammed, for he had all the power
without its instruments and without its supports."

Bosworth Smith, MOHAMMAD AND MOHAMMADANISM, London, 1874, p. 92. "It is
impossible for anyone who studies the life and character of the great
Prophet of Arabia, who knows how he taught and how he lived, to feel
anything but reverence for that mighty Prophet, one of the great
messengers of the Supreme. And although in what I put to you I shall say
many things which may be familiar to many, yet I myself feel whenever I
re-read them, a new way of admiration, a new sense of reverence for that
mighty Arabian teacher." Annie Besant, THE LIFE AND TEACHINGS OF
MUHAMMAD, Madras,1932, p. 4. "His readiness to undergo persecutions for
his beliefs, the high moral character of the men who believed in him and
looked up to him as leader, and the greatness of his ultimate
achievement - all argue his fundamental integrity.

To suppose Muhammad an impostor raises more problems than it solves.
Moreover, none of the great figures of history is so poorly appreciated
in the West as Muhammad." W. Montgomery Watt, MOHAMMAD AT MECCA, Oxford,
1953, p. 52. "Muhammad, the inspired man who founded Islam, was born
about A.D. 570 into an Arabian tribe that worshipped idols. Orphaned at
birth, he was always particularly solicitous of the poor and needy, the
widow and the orphan, the slave and the downtrodden. At twenty, he was
already a successful businessman, and soon became director of camel
caravans for a wealthy widow. When he reached twenty-five, his employer,
recognizing his merit, proposed marriage.

Even though she was fifteen years older, he married her, and as long as
she lived, remained a devoted husband. "Like almost every major prophet
before him, Muhammad fought shy of serving as the transmitter of God's
word, sensing his own inadequacy. But the angel commanded "Read." So far
as we know, Muhammad was unable to read or write, but he began to
dictate those inspired words which would soon revolutionize a large
segment of the earth: "There is one God." "In all things Muhammad was
profoundly practical.

When his beloved son Ibrahim died, an eclipse occurred, and rumours of
God's personal condolence quickly arose. Whereupon Muhammad is said to
have announced, "An eclipse is a phenomenon of nature. It is foolish to
attribute such things to the death or birth of a human being." "At
Muhammad's own death an attempt was made to deify him, but the man who
was to become his administrative successor killed the hysteria with one
of the noblest speeches in religious history: "If there are any among
you who worshipped Muhammad, he is dead. But if it is God you
worshipped, He lives forever." James A. Michener, "ISLAM: THE
MISUNDERSTOOD RELIGION," in READER'S DIGEST (American edition), May
1955, pp. 68-70.

"My choice of Muhammad to lead the list of the world's most influential
persons may surprise some readers and may be questioned by others, but
he was the only man in history who was supremely successful on both the
religious and secular level."

Michael H. Hart, THE 100: A RANKING OF THE MOST INFLUENTIAL PERSONS IN
HISTORY, New York: Hart Publishing Company, Inc., 1978, p. 33.
INTRODUCTION OF III&EM The Institute of Islamic Information and
Education (III&E) is dedicated to the cause of Islam in North America
through striving to elevate the image of Islam and Muslims by providing
the correct information about Islamic beliefs, history and civilization
from the authentic sources. Enquiries are welcome. For more information
please contact: The Institute of Islamic Information and Education P.O.
Box 41129 Chicago, IL 60641-0129 U.S.A. Reprinted with the permission of
World Assembly of Muslim Youth (WAMY), P.O. Box 10845, Riyadh 11443,
Saudi Arabia.


