The Prophet of Islam - His Biography
====================================

[Taken from Introduction to Islam by Muhammad Hamidullah (Centre
Culturel Islamique, Paris, 1969), with some changes to make it more
readable. The changes are marked by pairs of brackets like around this
paragraph. Dr. Hamidullah's present address is: 9 Beaver Court, Wilkes
Barre PA, 18702, USA.] IN the annals of men, individuals have not been
lacking who conspicuously devoted their lives to the socio-religious
reform of their connected peoples. We find them in every epoch and in
all lands. In India, there lived those who transmitted to the world the
Vedas, and there was also the great Gautama Buddha; China had its
Confucius; the Avesta was produced in Iran.

Babylonia gave to the world one of the greatest reformers, the Prophet
Abraham (not to speak of such of his ancestors as Enoch and Noah about
whom we have very scanty information). The Jewish people may rightly be
proud of a long series of reformers: Moses, Samuel, David, Solomon, and
Jesus among others. 2. Two points are to note: Firstly these reformers
claimed in general to be the bearers each of a Divine mission, and they
left behind them sacred books incorporating codes of life for the
guidance of their peoples.

Secondly there followed fratricidal wars, and massacres and genocides
became the order of the day, causing more or less a complete loss of
these Divine messages. As to the books of Abraham, we know them only by
the name; and as for the books of Moses, records tell us how they were
repeatedly destroyed and only partly restored. Concept of God 3. If one
should judge from the relics of the past already brought to light of the
homo sapiens, one finds that man has always been conscious of the
existence of a Supreme Being, the Master and Creator of all. Methods and
approaches may have differed, but the people of every epoch have left
proofs of their attempts to obey God.

Communication with the Omnipresent yet invisible God has also been
recognised as possible in connection with a small fraction of men with
noble and exalted spirits. Whether this communication assumed the nature
of an incarnation of the Divinity or simply resolved itself into a
medium of reception of Divine messages (through inspiration or
revelation), the purpose in each case was the guidance of the people. It
was but natural that the interpretations and explanations of certain
systems should have proved more vital and convincing than others.

3/a. Every system of metaphysical thought develops its own terminology.
In the course of time terms acquire a significance hardly contained in
the word and translations fall short of their purpose. Yet there is no
other method to make people of one group understand the thoughts of
another. Non-Muslim readers in particular are requested to bear in mind
this aspect which is a real yet unavoidable handicap.

4. By the end of the 6th century, after the birth of Jesus Christ, men
had already made great progress in diverse walks of life. At that time
there were some religions which openly proclaimed that they were
reserved for definite races and groups of men only, of course they bore
no remedy for the ills of humanity at large.

There were also a few which claimed universality, but declared that the
salvation of man lay in the renunciation of the world. These were the
religions for the elite, and catered for an extremely limited number of
men. We need not speak of regions where there existed no religion at
all, where atheism and materialism reigned supreme, where the thought
was solely of occupying one self with one's own pleasures, without any
regard or consideration for the rights of others. Arabia

5. A perusal of the map of the major hemisphere (from the point of view
of the proportion of land to sea), shows the Arabian Peninsula lying at
the confluence of the three great continents of Asia, Africa and Europe.
At the time in question. this extensive Arabian subcontinent composed
mostly of desert areas was inhabited by people of settled habitations as
well as nomads. Often it was found that members of the same tribe were
divided into these two groups, and that they preserved a relationship
although following different modes of life.

The means of subsistence in Arabia were meagre. The desert had its
handicaps, and trade caravans were features of greater importance than
either agriculture or industry. This entailed much travel, and men had
to proceed beyond the peninsula to Syria, Egypt, Abyssinia, Iraq, Sind,
India and other lands.

6. We do not know much about the Libyanites of Central Arabia, but
Yemen was rightly called Arabia Felix. Having once been the seat of the
flourishing civilizations of Sheba and Ma'in even before the foundation
of the city of Rome had been laid, and having later snatched from the
Byzantians and Persians several provinces, greater Yemen which had
passed through the hey-day of its existence, was however at this time
broken up into innumerable principalities, and even occupied in part by
foreign invaders. The Sassanians of Iran, who had penetrated into Yemen
had already obtained possession of Eastern Arabia.

There was politico-social chaos at the capital (Mada'in = Ctesiphon),
and this found reflection in all her territories. Northern Arabia had
succumbed to Byzantine influences, and was faced with its own particular
problems. Only Central Arabia remained immune from the demoralising
effects of foreign occupation.

7. In this limited area of Central Arabia, the existence of the
triangle of Mecca-Ta'if-Madinah seemed something providential. Mecca,
desertic, deprived of water and the amenities of agriculture in physical
features represented Africa and the burning Sahara. Scarcely fifty miles
from there, Ta'if presented a picture of Europe and its frost. Madinah
in the North was not less fertile than even the most temperate of
Asiatic countries like Syria.

If climate has any influence on human character, this triangle standing
in the middle of the major hemisphere was, more than any other region of
the earth, a miniature reproduction of the entire world. And here was
born a descendant of the Babylonian Abraham, and the Egyptian Hagar,
Muhammad the Prophet of Islam, a Meccan by origin and yet with stock
related, both to Madinah and Ta'if. Religion 8. From the point of view
of religion, Arabia was idolatrous; only a few individuals had embraced
religions like Christianity, Mazdaism, etc. The Meccans did possess the
notion of the One God, but they believed also that idols had the power
to intercede with Him. Curiously enough, they did not believe in the
Resurrection and Afterlife.

They had preserved the rite of the pilgrimage to the House of the One
God, the Ka'bah, an institution set up under divine inspiration by their
ancestor Abraham, yet the two thousand years that separated them from
Abraham had caused to degenerate this pilgrimage into the spectacle of a
commercial fair and an occasion of senseless idolatry which far from
producing any good, only served to ruin their individual behaviour, both
social and spiritual. Society

9. In spite of the comparative poverty in natural resources, Mecca was
the most developed of the three points of the triangle. Of the three,
Mecca alone had a city-state, governed by a council of ten hereditary
chiefs who enjoyed a clear division of power. (There was a minister of
foreign relations, a minister guardian of the temple, a minister of
oracles, a minister guardian of offerings to the temple, one to
determine the torts and the damages payable, another in charge of the
municipal council or parliament to enforce the decisions of the
ministries. There were also ministers in charge of military affairs like
custodianship of the flag, leadership of the cavalry etc.).

As well reputed caravan-leaders, the Meccans were able to obtain
permission from neighbouring empires like Iran, Byzantium and
Abyssinia - and to enter into agreements with the tribes that lined the
routes traversed by the caravans - to visit their countries and transact
import and export business. They also provided escorts to foreigners
when they passed through their country as well as the territory of
allied tribes, in Arabia (cf. Ibn Habib, Muhabbar). Although not
interested much in the preservation of ideas and records in writing,
they passionately cultivated arts and letters like poetry, oratory
discourses and folk tales.

Women were generally well treated, they enjoyed the privilege of
possessing property in their own right, they gave their consent to
marriage contracts, in which they could even add the condition of
reserving their right to divorce their husbands. They could remarry when
widowed or divorced. Burying girls alive did exist in certain classes,
but that was rare. Birth of the Prophet 10. It was in the midst of such
conditions and environments that Muhammad was born in 569 after
Christ.

His father, 'Abdullah had died some weeks earlier, and it was his
grandfather who took him in charge. According to the prevailing custom,
the child was entrusted to a Bedouin foster-mother, with whom he passed
several years in the desert. All biographers state that the infant
prophet sucked only one breast of his foster-mother, leaving the other
for the sustenance of his foster-brother. When the child was brought
back home, his mother, Aminah, took him to his maternal uncles at
Madinah to visit the tomb of 'Abdullah.

During the return journey, he lost his mother who died a sudden death.
At Mecca, another bereavement awaited him, in the death of his
affectionate grandfather. Subjected to such privations, he was at the
age of eight, consigned at last to the care of his uncle, Abu-Talib, a
man who was generous of nature but always short of resources and hardly
able to provide for his family.

11. Young Muhammad had therefore to start immediately to earn his
livelihood; he served as a shepherd boy to some neighbours. At the age
of ten he accompanied his uncle to Syria when he was leading a caravan
there. No other travels of Abu-Talib are mentioned, but there are
references to his having set up a shop in Mecca. (Ibn Qutaibah,
Ma'arif).

It is possible that Muhammad helped him in this enterprise also. 12. By
the time he was twenty-five, Muhammad had become well known in the city
for the integrity of his disposition and the honesty of his character. A
rich widow, Khadijah, took him in her employ and consigned to him her
goods to be taken for sale to Syria.

Delighted with the unusual profits she obtained as also by the personal
charms of her agent, she offered him her hand. According to divergent
reports, she was either 28 or 40 years of age at that time, (medical
reasons prefer the age of 28 since she gave birth to five more
children). The union proved happy. Later, we see him sometimes in the
fair of Hubashah (Yemen), and at least once in the country of the 'Abd
al-Qais (Bahrain-Oman), as mentioned by Ibn Hanbal.

There is every reason to believe that this refers to the great fair of
Daba (Oman), where, according to Ibn al-Kalbi (cf. Ibn Habib, Muhabbar),
the traders of China, of Hind and Sind (India, Pakistan), of Persia, of
the East and the West assembled every year, travelling both by land and
sea. There is also mention of a commercial partner of Muhammad at
Mecca.

This person, Sa'ib by name reports: "We relayed each other; if Muhammad
led the caravan, he did not enter his house on his return to Mecca
without clearing accounts with me; and if I led the caravan, he would on
my return enquire about my welfare and speak nothing about his own
capital entrusted to me."

An Order of Chivalry 13. Foreign traders often brought their goods to
Mecca for sale. One day a certain Yemenite (of the tribe of Zubaid)
improvised a satirical poem against some Meccans who had refused to pay
him the price of what he had sold, and others who had not supported his
claim or had failed to come to his help when he was victimised. Zuhair,
uncle and chief of the tribe of the Prophet, felt great remorse on
hearing this just satire. He called for a meeting of certain chieftains
in the city, and organized an order of chivalry, called Hilf al-fudul,
with the aim and object of aiding the oppressed in Mecca, irrespective
of their being dwellers of the city or aliens. Young Muhammad became an
enthusiastic member of the organisation.


