Supplement 10
=============

Later in life he used to say: "I have participated in it, and I am not
prepared to give up that privilege even against a herd of camels; if
somebody should appeal to me even today, by virtue of that pledge, I
shall hurry to his help." Beginning of Religious Consciousness 14. Not
much is known about the religious practices of Muhammad until he was
thirty-five years old, except that he had never worshipped idols. This
is substantiated by all his biographers.

It may be stated that there were a few others in Mecca, who had
likewise revolted against the senseless practice of paganism, although
conserving their fidelity to the Ka'bah as the house dedicated to the
One God by its builder Abraham. 15. About the year 605 of the Christian
era, the draperies on the outer wall of the Ka'bah took fire.

The building was affected and could not bear the brunt of the
torrential rains that followed. The reconstruction of the Ka'bah was
thereupon undertaken. Each citizen contributed according to his means;
and only the gifts of honest gains were accepted. Everybody participated
in the work of construction, and Muhammad's shoulders were injured in
the course of transporting stones. To identify the place whence the
ritual of circumambulation began, there had been set a black stone in
the wall of the Ka'bah. dating probably from the time of Abraham
himself.

There was rivalry among the citizens for obtaining the honour of
transposing this stone in its place. When there was danger of blood
being shed, somebody suggested leaving the matter to Providence, and
accepting the arbitration of him who should happen to arrive there
first. It chanced that Muhammad just then turned up there for work as
usual. He was popularly known by the appellation of al-Amin (the
honest), and everyone accepted his arbitration without hesitation.
Muhammad placed a sheet of cloth on the ground, put the stone on it and
asked the chiefs of all the tribes in the city to lift together the
cloth.

Then he himself placed the stone in its proper place, in one of the
angles of the building, and everybody was satisfied. 16. It is from this
moment that we find Muhammad becoming more and more absorbed in
spiritual meditations. Like his grandfather, he used to retire during
the whole month of Ramadan to a cave in Jabal-an-Nur (mountain of
light). The cave is called Ghar-i-Hira' or the cave of research. There
he prayed, meditated, and shared his meagre provisions with the
travellers who happened to pass by. Revelation 17. He was forty years
old, and it was the fifth consecutive year since his annual retreats,
when one night towards the end of the month of Ramadan, an angel came to
visit him, and announced that God had chosen him as His messenger to all
mankind.

The angel taught him the mode of ablutions, the way of worshipping God
and the conduct of prayer. He communicated to him the following Divine
message: With the name of God, the Most Merciful, the All-Merciful.Read:
with the name of thy Lord Who created,Created man from what clings,Read:
and thy Lord is the Most Bounteous,Who taught by the pen,Taught man what
he knew not. (Quran 96:1-5) 18.

Deeply affected, he returned home and related to his wife what had
happened, expressing his fears that it might have been something
diabolic or the action of evil spirits. She consoled him, saying that he
had always been a man of charity and generosity, helping the poor, the
orphans, the widows and the needy, and assured him that God would
protect him against all evil. 19.

Then came a pause in revelation, extending over three years. The
Prophet must have felt at first a shock, then a calm, an ardent desire,
and after a period of waiting, a growing impatience or nostalgia. The
news of the first vision had spread and at the pause the sceptics in the
city had begun to mock at him and cut bitter jokes. They went so far as
to say that God had forsaken him. 20.

During the three years of waiting. the Prophet had given himself up
more and more to prayers and to spiritual practices. The revelations
were then resumed and God assured him that He had not at all forsaken
him: on the contrary it was He Who had guided him to the right path:
therefore he should take care of the orphans and the destitute, and
proclaim the bounty of God on him (cf. Q. 93:3-11). This was in reality
an order to preach. Another revelation directed him to warn people
against evil practices, to exhort them to worship none but the One God,
and to abandon everything that would displease God (Q. 74:2-7).

Yet another revelation commanded him to warn his own near relatives (Q.
26:214); and: "Proclaim openly that which thou art commanded, and
withdraw from the Associators (idolaters). Lo! we defend thee from the
scoffers" (15:94-5). According to Ibn Ishaq, the first revelation (n.
17) had come to the Prophet during his sleep, evidently to reduce the
shock. Later revelations came in full wakefulness. The Mission 21. The
Prophet began by preaching his mission secretly first among his intimate
friends, then among the members of his own tribe and thereafter publicly
in the city and suburbs.

He insisted on the belief in One Transcendent God, in Resurrection and
the Last Judgement. He invited men to charity and beneficence. He took
necessary steps to preserve through writing the revelations he was
receiving, and ordered his adherents also to learn them by heart. This
continued all through his life, since the Quran was not revealed all at
once, but in fragments as occasions arose. 22.

The number of his adherents increased gradually, but with the
denunciation of paganism, the opposition also grew intenser on the part
of those who were firmly attached to their ancestral beliefs. This
opposition degenerated in the course of time into physical torture of
the Prophet and of those who had embraced his religion. These were
stretched on burning sands, cauterized with red hot iron and imprisoned
with chains on their feet. Some of them died of the effects of torture,
but none would renounce his religion. In despair, the Prophet Muhammad
advised his companions to quit their native town and take refuge abroad,
in Abyssinia, "where governs a just ruler, in whose realm nobody is
oppressed" (Ibn Hisham).

Dozens of Muslims profited by his advice, though not all. These secret
flights led to further persecution of those who remained behind. 23. The
Prophet Muhammad [was instructed to call this] religion "Islam," i.e.
submission to the will of God. Its distinctive features are two: A
harmonius equilibrium between the temporal and the spiritual (the body
and the soul), permitting a full enjoyment of all the good that God has
created, (Quran 7:32), enjoining at the same time on everybody duties
towards God, such as worship, fasting, charity, etc.

Islam was to be the religion of the masses and not merely of the elect.
A universality of the call - all the believers becoming brothers and
equals without any distinction of class or race or tongue. The only
superiority which it recognizes is a personal one, based on the greater
fear of God and greater piety (Quran 49:13).

Social Boycott 24. When a large number of the Meccan Muslims migrated
to Abyssinia, the leaders of paganism sent an ultimatum to the tribe of
the Prophet, demanding that he should be excommunicated and outlawed and
delivered to the pagans for being put to death. Every member of the
tribe, Muslim and non-Muslim rejected the demand. (cf. Ibn Hisham).
Thereupon the city decided on a complete boycott of the tribe: Nobody
was to talk to them or have commercial or matrimonial relations with
them.

The group of Arab tribes called Ahabish, inhabiting the suburbs, who
were allies of the Meccans, also joined in the boycott, causing stark
misery among the innocent victims consisting of children, men and women,
the old and the sick and the feeble. Some of them succumbed yet nobody
would hand over the Prophet to his persecutors.

An uncle of the Prophet, Abu Lahab, however left his tribesmen and
participated in the boycott along with the pagans. After three dire
years, during which the victims were obliged to devour even crushed
hides, four or five non-Muslims, more humane than the rest and belonging
to different clans proclaimed publicly their denunciation of the unjust
boycott. At the same time, the document promulgating the pact of boycott
which had been hung in the temple, was found, as Muhammad had predicted,
eaten by white ants, that spared nothing but the words God and Muhammad.
The boycott was lifted, yet owing to the privations that were undergone
the wife and Abu Talib, the chief of the tribe and uncle of the Prophet
died soon after.

Another uncle of the Prophet, Abu-Lahab, who was an inveterate enemy of
Islam, now succeeded to the headship of the tribe. (cf. lbn Hisham,
Sirah). The Ascension 25. It was at thIs time that the Prophet Muhammad
was granted the mi'raj (ascension): He saw in a vision that he was
received on heaven by God, and was witness of the marvels of the
celestial regions. Returning, he brought for his community, as a Divine
gift, the [ritual prayer of Islam, the salaat], which constitutes a sort
of communion between man and God.

It may be recalled that in the last part of Muslim service of worship,
the faithful employ as a symbol of their being in the very presence of
God, not concrete objects as others do at the time of communion, but the
very words of greeting exchanged between the Prophet Muhammad and God on
the occasion of the former's mi'raj: "The blessed and pure greetings for
God! - Peace be with thee, O Prophet, as well as the mercy and blessing
of God! - Peace be with us and with all the [righteous] servants of
God!"

The Christian term "communion" implies participation in the Divinity.
Finding it pretentious, Muslims use the term "ascension" towards God and
reception in His presence, God remaining God and man remaining man and
no confusion between the twain. 26. The news of this celestial meeting
led to an increase in the hostility of the pagans of Mecca; and the
Prophet was obliged to quit his native town in search of an asylum
elsewhere. He went to his maternal uncles in Ta'if, but returned
immediately to Mecca, as the wicked people of that town chased the
Prophet out of their city by pelting stones on him and wounding him.

Migration to Madinah 27. The annual pilgrimage of the Ka'bah brought to
Mecca people from all parts of Arabia. The Prophet Muhammad tried to
persuade one tribe after another to afford him shelter and allow him to
carry on his mission of reform. The contingents of fifteen tribes, whom
he approached in succession, refused to do so more or less brutally, but
he did not despair. Finally he met half a dozen inhabitants of Madinah
who being neighbour of the Jews and the Christians, had some notion of
prophets and Divine messages. They knew also that these "people of the
Books" were awaiting the arrival of a prophet - a last comforter.

So these Madinans decided not to lose the opportunity of obtaining an
advance over others, and forthwith embraced Islam, promising further to
provide additional adherents and necessary help from Madinah. The
following year a dozen new Madinans took the oath of allegiance to him
and requested him to provide with a missionary teacher. The work of the
missionary, Mus'ab, proved very successful and he led a contingent of
seventy-three new converts to Mecca, at the time of the pilgrimage.

These invited the Prophet and his Meccan companions to migrate to their
town, and promised to shelter the Prophet and to treat him and his
companions as their own kith and kin. Secretly and in small groups, the
greater part of the Muslims emigrated to Madinah. Upon this the pagans
of Mecca not only confiscated the property of the evacuees, but devised
a plot to assassinate the Prophet. It became now impossible for him to
remain at home. It is worthy of mention, that in spite of their
hostility to his mission, the pagans had unbounded confidence in his
probity, so much so that many of them used to deposit their savings with
him.

The Prophet Muhammad now entrusted all these deposits to 'Ali, a cousin
of his, with instructions to return in due course to the rightful
owners. He then left the town secretly in the company of his faithful
friend, Abu-Bakr. After several adventures, they succeeded in reaching
Madinah in safety. This happened in 622, whence starts the Hijrah
calendar. Reorganization of the Community 28. For the better
rehabilitation of the displaced immigrants, the Prophet created a
fraternization between them and an equal number of well-to-do Madinans.
The families of each pair of the contractual brothers worked together to
earn their livelihood, and aided one another in the business of life.
29.

Further he thought that the development of the man as a whole would be
better achieved if he co-ordinated religion and politics as two
constituent parts of one whole. To this end he invited the
representatives of the Muslims as well as the non-Muslim inhabitants of
the region: Arabs, Jews, Christians and others, and suggested the
establishment of a City-State in Madinah. With their assent, he endowed
the city with a written constitution - the first of its kind in the
world - in which he defined the duties and rights both of the citizens
and the head of the State - the Prophet Muhammad was unanimously hailed
as such - and abolished the customary private justice.

The administration of justice became henceforward the concern of the
central organisation of the community of the citizens. The document laid
down principles of defence and foreign policy: it organized a system of
social insurance, called ma'aqil, in cases of too heavy obligations. It
recognized that the Prophet Muhammad would have the final word in all
differences, and that there was no limit to his power of legislation. It
recognized also explicitly liberty of religion, particularly for the
Jews, to whom the constitutional act afforded equality with Muslims in
all that concerned life in this world (cf. infra n. 303). 30.

Muhammad journeyed several times with a view to win the neighbouring
tribes and to conclude with them treaties of alliance and mutual help.
With their help, he decided to bring to bear economic pressure on the
Meccan pagans, who had confiscated the property of the Muslim evacuees
and also caused innumerable damage. Obstruction in the way of the Meccan
caravans and their passage through the Madinan region exasperated the
pagans, and a bloody struggle ensued. 31.

In the concern for the material interests of the community, the
spiritual aspect was never neglected. Hardly a year had passed after the
migration to Madinah, when the most rigorous of spiritual disciplines,
the fasting for the whole month of Ramadan every year, was imposed on
every adult Muslim, man and woman. Struggle Against Intolerance and
Unbelief 32.

Not content with the expulsion of the Muslim compatriots, the Meccans
sent an ultimatum to the Madinans, demanding the surrender or at least
the expulsion of Muhammad and his companions but evidently all such
efforts proved in vain. A few months later, in the year 2 H., they sent
a powerful army against the Prophet, who opposed them at Badr; and the
pagans thrice as numerous as the Muslims, were routed. After a year of
preparation, the Meccans again invaded Madinah to avenge the defeat of
Badr.

They were now four times as numerous as the Muslims. After a bloody
encounter at Uhud, the enemy retired, the issue being indecisive. The
mercenaries in the Meccan army did not want to take too much risk, or
endanger their safety. 33. In thc meanwhile the Jewish citizens of
Madinah began to foment trouble. About the time of the victory of Badr,
one of their leaders, Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf, proceeded to Mecca to give
assurance of his alliance with the pagans, and to incite them to a war
of revenge. After the battle of Uhud, the tribe of the same chieftain
plotted to assassinate the Prophet by throwing on him a mill-stone from
above a tower, when he had gone to visit their locality.

In spite of all this, the only demand the Prophet made of the men of
this tribe was to quit the Madinan region, taking with them all their
properties, after selling their immovables and recovering their debts
from the Muslims. The clemency thus extended had an effect contrary to
what was hoped.

The exiled not only contacted the Meccans, but also the tribes of the
North, South and East of Madinah, mobilized military aid, and planned
from Khaibar an invasion of Madinah, with forces four times more
numerous than those employed at Uhud. The Muslims prepared for a siege,
and dug a ditch to defend themselves against this hardest of all
trials.

Although the defection of the Jews still remaining inside Madinah at a
later stage upset all strategy, yet with a sagacious diplomacy, the
Prophet succeeded in breaking up the alliance, and the different enemy
groups retired one after the other. 34. Alcoholic drinks, gambling and
games of chance were at this time declared forbidden for the Muslims.
The Reconciliation 35. The Prophet tried once more to reconcile the
Meccans and proceeded to Mecca.

The barring of the route of their Northern caravans had ruined their
economy. The Prophet promised them transit security, extradition of
their fugitives and the fulfillment of every condition they desired,
agreeing even to return to Madinah without accomplishing the pilgrimage
of the Ka'bah. Thereupon the two contracting parties promised at
Hudaibiyah in the suburbs of Mecca, not only the maintenance of peace,
but also the observance of neutrality in their conflicts with third
parties. 36.

Profiting by the peace, the Prophet launched an intensive programme for
the propagation of his religion. He addressed missionary letters to the
foreign rulers of Byzantium, Iran, Abyssinia and other lands. The
Byzantine autocrat priest - Dughatur of the Arabs - embraced Islam, but
for this, was lynched by the Christian mob; the prefect of Ma'an
(Palestine) suffered the same fate, and was decapitated and crucified by
order of the emperor. A Muslim ambassador was assassinated in
Syria-Palestine; and instead of punishing the culprit, the emperor
Heraclius rushed with his armies to protect him against the punitive
expedition sent by the Prophet (battle of Mu'tah). 37.

The pagans of Mecca hoping to profit by the Muslim difficulties,
violated the terms of their treaty. Upon this, the Prophet himself led
an army, ten thousand strong, and surprised Mecca which he occupied in a
bloodless manner. As a benevolent conqueror, he caused the vanquished
people to assemble, reminded them of their ill deeds, their religious
persecution, unjust confiscation of the evacuee property, ceaseless
invasions and senseless hostilities for twenty years continuously.

He asked them: "Now what do you expect of me?" When everybody lowered
his head with shame, the Prophet proclaimed: "May God pardon you; go in
peace; there shall be no responsibility on you today; you are free!" He
even renounced the claim for the Muslim property confiscated by the
pagans. This produced a great psychological change of hearts
instantaneously.

When a Meccan chief advanced with a fulsome heart towards the Prophet,
after hearing this general amnesty, in order to declare his acceptance
of Islam, the Prophet told him: "And in my turn, I appoint you the
governor of Mecca!" Without leaving a single soldier in the conquered
city, the Prophet retired to Madinah. The Islamization of Mecca, which
was accomplished in a few hours, was complete. 38. Immediately after the
occupation of Mecca, the city of Ta'if mobilized to fight against the
Prophet. With some difficulty the enemy was dispersed in the valley of
Hunain, but the Muslims preferred to raise the siege of nearby Ta'if and
use pacific means to break the resistance of this region. Less than a
year later, a delegation from Ta'if came to Madinah offering
submission.

But it requested exemption from prayer, taxes and military service, and
the continuance of the liberty to adultery and fornication and alcoholic
drinks. It demanded even the conservation of the temple of the idol
al-Lat at Ta'if. But Islam was not a materialist immoral movement; and
soon the delegation itself felt ashamed of its demands regarding prayer,
adultery and wine. The Prophet consented to concede exemption from
payment of taxes and rendering of military service; and added: You need
not demolish the temple with your own hands: we shall send agents from
here to do the job, and if there should be any consequences, which you
are afraid of on account of your superstitions,

it will be they who would suffer. This act of the Prophet shows what
concessions could be given to new converts. The conversion of the
Ta'ifites was so whole hearted that in a short while, they themselves
renounced the contracted exemptions, and we find the Prophet nominating
a tax collector in their locality as in other Islamic regions. 39. In
all these "wars," extending over a period of ten years, the non-Muslims
lost on the battlefield only about 250 persons killed, and the Muslim
losses were even less.

With these few incisions, the whole continent of Arabia. with its
million and more of square miles, was cured of the abscess of anarchy
and immorality. During these ten years of disinterested struggle, all
thc peoples of the Arabian Peninsula and the southern regions of Iraq
and Palestine had voluntarily embraced Islam. Some Christian, Jewish and
Parsi groups remained attached to their creeds, and they were granted
liberty of conscience as well as judicial and juridical autonomy.

40. In the year 10 H., when the Prophet went to Mecca for Hajj
(pilgrimage), he met 140,000 Muslims there, who had come from different
parts of Arabia to fulfil their religious obligation. He addressed to
them his celebrated sermon, in which he gave a resume of his teachings:
"Belief in One God without images or symbols, equality of all the
Believers without distinction of race or class, the superiority of
individuals being based solely on piety; sanctity of life, property and
honour; abolition of interest, and of vendettas and private justice;
better treatment of women; obligatory inheritance and distribution of
the property of deceased persons among near relatives of both sexes, and
removal of the possibility of the cumulation of wealth in the hands of
the few."

The Quran and the conduct of the Prophet were to serve as the bases of
law and a healthy criterion in every aspect of human life. 41. On his
return to Madinah, he fell ill; and a few weeks later, when he breathed
his last, he had the satisfaction that he had well accomplished the task
which he had undertaken - to preach to the world the Divine message. 42.
He bequeathed to posterity, a religion of pure monotheism; he created a
well-disciplined State out of the existent chaos and gave peace in place
of the war of everybody against everybody else;

he established a harmonious equilibrium between the spiritual and the
temporal, between the mosque and the citadel; he left a new system of
law, which dispensed impartial justice, in which even the head of the
State was as much a subject to it as any commoner, and in which
religious tolerance was so great that non-Muslim inhabitants of Muslim
countries equally enjoyed complete juridical, judicial and cultural
autonomy.

In the matter of the revenues of the State, the Quran fixed the
principles of budgeting, and paid more thought to the poor than to
anybody else. The revenues were declared to be in no wise the private
property of the head of the State. Above all, the Prophet Muhammad set a
noble example and fully practised all that he taught to others.


