Description of the Prophet Mohammed (pbuh)
==========================================

The following is an excerpt from the book entitled "The Message of
Mohammad", by Athar Husain. Among other things, it talks about some of
the personal characteristics of the prophet Mohammed (Peace Be Upon
Him), the final messenger of Allah (God). It has been edited slightly in
order to reduce it's length. Care has been taken not to change the
content inshallah. The topics include: AppearanceMuhammad (pbuh) was of
a height a little above the average. He was of sturdy build with long
muscular limbs and tapering fingers.

The hair of his head was long and thick with some waves in them. His
forehead was large and prominent, his eyelashes were long and thick, his
nose was sloping, his mouth was somewhat large and his teeth were well
set.

His cheeks were spare and he had a pleasant smile. His eyes were large
and black with a touch of brown. His beard was thick and at the time of
his death, he had seventeen gray hairs in it. He had a thin line of fine
hair over his neck and chest. He was fair of complexion and altogether
was so handsome that Abu Bakr composed this couplet on him: "as there is
no darkness in the moonlit night so is Mustafa, the well-wisher,
bright."

His gait was firm and he walked so fast that others found it difficult
to keep pace with him. His face was genial but at times, when he was
deep in thought, there there were long periods of silence, yet he always
kept himself busy with something. He did not speak unnecessarily and
what he said was always to the point and without any padding.

At times he would make his meaning clear by slowly repeating what he
had said. His laugh was mostly a smile. He kept his feelings under firm
control - when annoyed, he would turn aside or keep silent, when pleased
he would lower his eyes (Shamail Tirmizi). DressHis dress generally
consisted of a shirt, tamad (trousers), a sheet thrown round the
sholders and a turban. On rare occasions, he would put on costly robes
presented to him by foreign emissaries in the later part of his life
(Ahmed, Musnad, Hafiz Bin Qaiyyam). His blanket had several patches
(Tirmizi). He had very few spare clothes, but he kept them spotlessy
clean (Bukhari).

He wanted others also to put on simple but clean clothes. Once he saw a
person putting on dirty clothes and remarked, "Why can't this man wash
them." (Abu Dawud, Chapter "Dress"). On another occasion he enquired of
a person in dirty clothes whether he had any income. Upon getting a
reply in the affirmative, he observed, "When Allah has blessed you with
His bounty, your appearence should reflect it." (Abu Dawud) He used to
observe: "Cleanliness is piety". Mode of livingHis house was but a hut
with walls of unbaked clay and a thatched roof of palm leaves covered by
camel skin. He had separate apartments for his wives, a small room for
each made of similar materials.

His own apartment contained a rope cot, a pillow stuffed with palm
leaves , the skin of some animal spread on the floor and a water bag of
leather and some weapons. These were all his earthly belongings, besides
a camel, a horse, and an ass and some land which he had aquired in the
later part of his life (Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud). Once a few of his
disciples, noticing the imprint of his mattress on his body, wished to
give him a softer bed but he politely declined the offer saying, "What
have I to do with worldly things.

My connection with the world is like that of a traveler resting for a
while underneath the shade of a tree and then moving on." Amr Ibn
Al-Harith, a brother in law of the prophet (pbuh), says that when the
prophet died, he did not leave a cent, a slave man or woman, or any
property except his white mule, his weapons and a piece of land which he
had dedicated for the good of the community (Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari). He
advised the people to live simple lives and himself practised great
austerities.

Even when he had become the virtual king of arabia, he lived an austere
life bordering on privation. His wife Aiysha (ra) says that there was
hardly a day in his life when he had two square meals (Muslim, Sahih
Muslim, Vol.2, pg 198). When he died there was nothing in his house
except a few seeds of barley left from a mound of the grain obtained
from a Jew by pawning his armour (Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari, Chapter
"Aljihad"). He had declared unlawful for himself and his family anything
given by the people by way of zakat or sadaqa (types of charity). He was
so particular about this that he would not appoint any member of his
family as a zakat collector (Sahah-Kitab Sadqat).

His manners and disposition "By the grace of Allah, you are gentle
towards the people; if you had been stern and ill-tempered, they would
have dispersed from round about you" (translation of Qur'an 3:159) About
himself the prophet (pbuh) said "Allah has sent me as an apostle so that
I may demonstrate perfection of character, refinement of manners and
loftiness of deportment." (Malik, Mawatta; Ahmed, Musnad; Mishkat) By
nature he was gentle and kind hearted, always inclined to be gracious
and to overlook the faults of others. Politeness and courtesy,
compassion and tenderness, simplicity and humility, sympathy and
sincerity were some of the keynotes of his character.

In the cause of right and justice he could be resolute and severe but
more often than not, his severity was tempered with generosity. He had
charming manners which won him the affection of his followers and
secured their devotion. Though virtual king of Arabia and an apostle of
Allah, he never assumed an air of superiority. Not that he had to
conceal any such vein by practice and artifice: with fear of Allah,
sincere humility was ingrained in his heart. He used to say, "I am a
Prophet of Allah but I do not know what will be my end." (Bukhari, Sahih
Bukhari, Chapter "Al-Janaiz")

In one of his sermons calculated to instill the fear of Allah and the
day of reckoning in the hearts of men, he said, "O people of Quraish be
prepared for the hereafter, I cannot save you from the punishment of
Allah; O Bani Abd Manaf, I cannot save you from Allah; O Abbas, son of
Abdul Mutalib, I cannot protect you either; O Fatima, daughter of
Muhammad, even you I cannot save." (Sahahin) He used to pray, "O Allah!
I am but a man. If I hurt any one in any manner, then forgive me and do
not punish me." (Ahmed, Musnad, Vol. 6 pg. 103) He always received
people with courtesy and showed respect to older people and stated: "To
honor an old man is to show respect to Allah." He would not deny
courtesy even to wicked persons. It is stated that a person came to his
house and asked permission for admission.

The prophet (pbuh) remarked that he was not a good person but might be
admitted. When he came in and while he remained in the house, he was
shown full courtesy. When he left Aiysha (ra) said, "You did not think
well of this man, but you treated him so well." The prophet (pbuh)
replied, "He is a bad person in the sight of Allah who does not behave
courteously and people shun his company bacause of his bad manners."
(Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari) He was always the first to greet another and
would not withdraw his hand from a handshake till the other man withdrew
his. If one wanted to say something in his ears, he would not turn away
till one had finished (Abu Dawud, Tirmizi).

He did not like people to get up for him and used to say, "Let him who
likes people to stand up in his honour, he should seek a place in hell."
(Abu Dawud, Kitabul Adab, Muhammadi Press, Delhi). He would himself,
however, stand up when any dignitary came to him. He had stood up to
receive the wet nurse who had reared him in infancy and had spread his
own sheet for her.

His foster brother was given similar treatment. He avoided sitting at a
prominent place in a gathering, so much so that people coming in had
difficulty in spotting him and had to ask which was the Prophet (pbuh).
Quite frequently uncouth bedouins accosted him in their own gruff and
impolite manner but he never took offence. (Abu Dawud Kitabul Atama). He
used to visit the poorest of ailing persons and exhorted all muslims to
do likewise (Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari, Chapter "Attendance on ailing
persons").

He would sit with the humblest of persons saying that righteousness
alone was the criterion of one's superiority over another. He invariably
invited people be they slaves, servants or the poorest believers, to
partake with him of his scanty meals (Tirmizi, Sunan Tirmizi). Whenever
he visited a person he would first greet him and then take his
permission to enter the house. He advised the people to follow this
etiquette and not to get annoyed if anyone declined to give permission,
for it was quite likely the person concerned was busy otherwise and did
not mean any disrespect (Ibid). There was no type of household work too
low or too undignified for him. Aiysha (ra) has stated, "He always
joined in household work and would at times mend his clothes, repair his
shoes and sweep the floor.

He would milk, tether, and feed his animals and do the household
shopping." (Qazi Iyaz: Shifa; Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari, Chapter: Kitabul
Adab) He would not hesitate to do the menial work of others,
particularly of orphans and widows (Nasi, Darmi). Once when there was no
male member in the house of the companion Kabab Bin Arat who had gone to
the battlefield, he used to go to his house daily and milk his cattle
for the inhabitants (Ibn Saad Vol. 6, p 213). ChildrenHe was especially
fond of children and used to get into the spirit of childish games in
their company. He would have fun with the children who had come back
from Abyssinia and tried to speak in Abyssinian with them. It was his
practice to give lifts on his camel to children when he returned from
journeys (Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari, Vol. 2 pg.886).

He would pick up children in his arms, play with them, and kiss them. A
companion, recalling his childhood, said, "In my childhood I used to
fell dates by throwing stones at palm trees. Somebody took me to the
Prophet (pbuh) who advised me to pick up the dates lying on the ground
but not to fell them with stones. He then patted me and blessed me."
(Abu Dawud) Daily routineOn the authority of Ali, Tirmizi has recorded
that the Prophet (pbuh) had carefully apportioned his time according to
the demands on him for offering worship to Allah public affairs, and
personal matters. After the early morning prayers he would remain
sitting in the mosque reciting praises of Allah till the sun rose and
more people collected.

He would then preach to them. After the sermons were over, he would
talk genially with the people, enquire about their welfare and even
exchange jokes with them. Taxes and revenues were also disrtibuted at
this time (Muslim, Sahih Muslim Tirmizi, Sunan Tirmizi).

He would then offer chaste prayers and go home and get busy with
household work (Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmizi). He would again return to the
mosque for the mid-day and afternoon prayers, listen to the problems of
the people and give solace and guidance to them. After the afternoon
prayers, he would visit each of his wives and, after the evening
prayers, his wives would collect at one place and he would have his
dinner (Muslim, Sahih Muslim).

After the night prayers, he would recite some suras of the Quran and
before going to bed would pray: "O Allah, I die and live with thy name
on my lips." On getting up he would say, "All praise to Allah Who has
given me life after death and towards Whom is the return." He used to
brush his teeth five times a day, before each of the daily prayers.
After midnight, he used to get up for the tahajjud prayers which he
never missed even once in his life (Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari). He was not
fastidious about his bed: sometimes he slept on his cot, sometimes on a
skin or ordinary matress, and sometimes on the ground (Zarqani). On
friday he used to give sermons after the weekly "Jumma" prayers.

He was not annoyed if anyone interrupted him during the sermons for
anything. It is stated that once, while he was delivering his sermon, a
bedouin approached him and said, "O messenger of Allah, I am a traveler
and am ignorant of my religion." The prophet (pbuh) got down from the
pulpit, explained the salient features of Islam to him and then resumed
the sermon (Tirmizi, Sunan Tirmizi). On another occasion his grandson
Husain, still a child, came tumbling to him while he was delivering a
sermon. He descended and took him in his lap and then continued the
sermon (Ibid). Trust in Allah (swt)Muhammad (pbuh) preached to the
people to trust in Allah (swt).

His whole life was a sublime example of the precept. In the loneliness
of Makkah, in the midst of persecution and danger, in adversity and
tribulations, and in the thick of enemies in the battles of Uhud and
Hunain, complete faith and trust in Allah (swt) appears as the dominant
feature in his life. However great the danger that confronted him, he
never lost hope and never allowed himself to be unduly agitated. Abu
Talib knew the feelings of the Quraish when the Prophet (pbuh) started
his mission.

He also knew the lengths to which the Quraish could go, and requested
the Prophet (pbuh) to abandon his mission, but the latter calmly
replied, "Dear uncle, do not go by my loneliness. Truth will not go
unsupported for long. The whole of Arabia and beyond will one day
espouse its cause." (Ibn Hisham, Sirat-ur-Rasul.) When the attitude of
the Quraish became more threatening, Abu Talib again begged his nephew
to renounce his mission but the Prophet's (pbuh) reply was: "O my uncle,
if they placed the sun in my right hand and the moon in my left, to
force me to renounce my work, verily I would not desist thereform until
Allah made manifest His cause, or I perished in the attempt." (Ibid) To
another well-wisher, he said, "Allah will not leave me forelorn."

A dejected and oppressed disciple was comforted with the words: "By
Allah, the day is near when this faith will reach its pinnacle and none
will have to fear anyone except Allah." (Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari) It was
the same trust in Allah (swt) which emboldened the prophet (pbuh) to say
his prayers openly in the haram in the teeth of opposition.

The Quraish were once collected there and were conspiring to put an end
to his life when he next entered the haram. His young daughter Fatima,
who happened to overhear their talk rushed weeping to her father and
told him of the designs of the Quraish. He consoled her, did his
ablutions and went to the Kaaba to say prayers. There was only
consternation among the Quraish when they saw him (Ahmed, Musnad, Vol.
1, pg. 368). Then leaving his house for Madinah he asked Ali (ra) to
sleep on his bed and told him, "Do not worry, no one will be able to do
you any harm" (Tabari, Ibn Hisham) Even though the enemies had
surrounded the house, he left the house reciting the Quranic verse: "We
have set a barricade before them and a barricade behind them and (thus)
have covered them so that they see not" (translation of Qur'an 36:9)

Abu Bakr was frightened when pursuers came close to the cavern in which
he and Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) were hiding during their flight, but the
Prophet (pbuh) heartened him, "Grieve not. Allah is with us." A guard
was kept at the Prophet's house in Madinah because of the danger that
surrounded him but he had it withdrawn when the Quranic verse was
revealed: "Allah will protect you from the people" (translation of
Qur'an 5:67). A man was caught waiting in ambush to assault the Prophet
(pbuh) but he was directed to be released with the words, "Even if this
man wanted to kill me, he could not." (Ahmed, Musnad, Vol.3 pg. 471) A
Jewess from Khaibar had put poison in the Prophet's (pbuh) food.

He spat it out after taking a morsel but a disciple who had his fill
died the next day. The Jewess was brought before the prophet (pbuh) who
questioned her: "Why did you do this?" "To kill you," was her defiant
reply. She was told, "Allah would not have allowed you to do it."
(Muslim, Sahih Muslim.) In the battle of Uhud when the rear guard action
of the Makkan army had disorganized the Muslim army and had turned the
tables, the Prophet (pbuh) stood as firm as a rock even though he had
suffered personal injuries.

When Abu Sufiyan taunted the Muslims and shouted "Victory to hubal!"
(hubal was one of their idols), the Prophet (pbuh) asked Umar (ra) to
shout back, "Allah is our protector and friend. You have no protector
and friend. Allah is Great, Magnificent." (Ibn Hisham, Sirat-Ur-Rasul).
Again in the battle of Hunain, when the unexpected assault of the army
had swept the Muslim force off its feet and a defeat seemed imminent,
the Prophet (pbuh) did not yield ground.

With trust in Allah (swt) he showed such courage that the Muslim army
rallied behind him to win a signal victory. JusticeThe Prophet (pbuh)
asked people to be just and kind. As the supreme judge and arbiter, as
the leader of men, as generalissimo of a rising power, as a reformer and
apostle, he had always to deal with men and their affairs. He had often
to deal with mutually inimical and warring tribes when showing justice
to one carried the danger of antagonizing the other, and yet he never
deviated from the path of justice.

In administering justice, he made no distinction between believers and
nonbelievers, friends and foes, high and low. From numerous instances
reported in the traditions, a few are given below. Sakhar, a chief of a
tribe, had helped Muhammad (pbuh) greatly in the seige of Taif, for
which he was naturally obliged to him. Soon after, two charges were
brought against Sakhar: one by Mughira of illegal confinement of his
(Mughira's) aunt and the other by Banu Salim of forcible occupation of
his spring by Sakhar. In both cases, he decided against Sakhar and made
him undo the wrong. (Abu Dawud, Sunan Dawud, pg.80) Abdullah Bin Sahal,
a companion, was deputed to collect rent from Jews of Khaibar. His
cousin Mahisa accompanied him but, on reaching Khaibar, they had
separated. Abdullah was waylaid and done to death.

Mahisa reported this tragedy to the Prophet (pbuh) but as there were no
eye-witnesses to identify the guilty, he did not say anything to the
Jews and paid the blood-money out of the state revenues (Bukhari, Sahih
Bukhari Nasai). A woman of the Makhzoom family with good connections was
found guilty of theft. For the prestige of the Quraish, some prominent
people including Asama Bin Zaid interceded to save her from punishment.
The Prophet (pbuh) refused to condone the crime and expressed
displeasure saying, "Many a community ruined itself in the past as they
only punished the poor and ignored the offences of the exalted.

By Allah, if Muhammad's (My) daughter Fatima would have committed
theft, her hand would have been severed." (Bukhari, Sahh Bukhari,
Chapter "Alhadood") The Jews, in spite of their hostility to the Prophet
(pbuh), were so impressed by his impartiallity and sense of justice that
they used to bring their cases to him, and he decided them according to
Jewish law. (Abu Dawud, Sunan Dawud) Once, while he was distributing the
spoils of war, people flocked around him and one man almost fell upon
him.

He pushed the men with a stick causing a slight abrasion. He was so
sorry about this that he told the man that he could have his revenge,
but the man said, "O messenger of Allah, I forgive you." (Abu Dawud,
Kitablu Diyat). In his fatal illness, the Prophet (pbuh) proclaimed in a
concourse assembled at his house that if he owed anything to anyone the
person concerned could claim it; if he had ever hurt anyone's person,
honor or property, he could have his price while he was yet in this
world.

A hush fell on the crowd. One man came forward to claim a few dirhams
which were paid at once. (Ibn Hisham, Sirat-ur-Rasul) EqualityMuhammad
(pbuh) asked people to shun notions of racial, family or any other form
of superiority based on mundane things and said that righteousness alone
was the criterion of one's superiority over another. It has already been
shown how he mixed with everyone on equal terms, how he ate with slaves,
servants and the poorest on the same sheet (a practice that is still
followed in Arabia), how he refused all privileges and worked like any
ordinary laborer. Two instances may, however, be quoted here: Once the
Prophet (pbuh) visited Saad Bin Abadah.

While returning Saad sent his son Quais with him. The Prophet (pbuh)
asked Quais to mount his camel with him. Quais hesitated out of respect
but the Prophet (pbuh) insisted: "Either mount the camel or go back."
Quais decided to go back. (Abu Dawud, Kitabul Adab) On another occasion
he was traveling on his camel over hilly terrain with a disciple, Uqba
Bin Aamir. After going some distance, he asked Uqba to ride the camel,
but Uqba thought this would be showing disrespect to the Prophet (pbuh).
But the Prophet (pbuh) insisted and he had to comply.

The Prophet (pbuh) himself walked on foot as he did not want to put too
much load on the animal. (Nasai pg. 803) The prisioners of war of Badr
included Abbas, the uncle of the Prophet (pbuh). Some people were
prepared to forgo their shares and remit the Prophet's (pbuh) ransom but
he declined saying that he could make no distinctions. (Bukhari, Sahih
Bukhari, Chapter "Ransoms") During a halt on a journey, the companions
apportioned work among themselves for preparing food. The Prophet (pbuh)
took upon himself the task of collecting firewood.

His companions pleaded that they would do it and that he need not take
the trouble, but he replied, "It is true, but I do not like to attribute
any distinction to myself. Allah does not like the man who considers
himself superior to his companions." (Zarqani, Vol 4 pg. 306) Kindness
to animalsThe Prophet (pbuh) not only preached to the people to show
kindness to each other but also to all living souls. He forbade the
practice of cutting tails and manes of horses, of branding animals at
any soft spot, and of keeping horses saddled unnecessarily (Muslim,
Sahih Muslim). If he saw any animal over-loaded or ill-fed he would pull
up the owner and say, "Fear Allah in your treatment of animals." (Abu
Dawud, Kitab Jihad).

A companion came to him with the young ones of a bird in his sheet and
said that the mother bird had hovered over them all along. He was
directed to replace her offspring in the same bush (Mishkat, Abu Dawud)
During a journey, somebody picked up some birds eggs. The bird's painful
note and fluttering attracted the attention of the Prophet (pbuh), who
asked the man to replace the eggs (Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari). As his army
marched towards Makkah to conquer it, they passed a female dog with
puppies.

The Prophet (pbuh) not only gave orders that they should not be
disturbed, but posted a man to see that this was done. He stated,
"Verily, there is heavenly reward for every act of kindness done to a
living animal." Love for the poorThe Prophet (pbuh) enjoined upon
Muslims to treat the poor kindly and to help them with alms, zakat, and
in other ways. He said: "He is not a perfect muslim who eats his fill
and lets his neighbor go hungry." He asked, "Do you love your Creator?
Then love your fellow beings first." Monopoly is unlawful in Islam and
he preached that "It is diffucult for a man laden with riches to climb
the steep path that leads to bliss." He did not prohibit or discourage
the aquisition of wealth but insisted that it be lawfully aquired by
honest means and that a portion of it would go to the poor.

He advised his followers "To give the laborer his wages before his
perspiration dried up." He did not encourage beggary either and stated
that "Allah is gracious to him who earns his living by his own labor,
and that if a man begs to increase his property, Allah will diminish it
and whoever has food for the day, it is prohibited for him to beg." To
his wife he said, "O Aysha, love the poor and let them come to you and
Allah will draw you near to Himself." (Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari) One or
two instances of the Prophet's (pbuh) concern for the poor may be given
here. A Madinan, Ibad Bin Sharjil, was once starving. He entered an
orchard and picked some fruit.

The owner of the orchard gave him a sound beating and stripped off his
clothes. The poor man appealed to the Prophet (pbuh) who remonstrated
the owner thus: "This man was ignorant, you should have dispelled his
ignorance; he was hungry, you should have fed him." His clothes were
restored to the Madinan and, in addition, some grain was given to him
(Abu Dawud, Kitabul Jihad). A debtor, Jabir Bin Abdullah, was being
harassed by his creditor as he could not clear his debt owing to the
failure of his date crop. The Prophet (pbuh) went with Jabir to the
house of the creditor and pleaded with him to give Jabir some more time
but the creditor was not prepared to oblige.

The Prophet (pbuh) then went to the oasis and having seen for himself
that the crop was really poor, he again approached the creditor with no
better result. He then rested for some time and approached the creditor
for a third time but the latter was adamant. The Prophet (pbuh) went
again to the orchard and asked Jabir to pluck the dates.

As Allah would have it, the collection not only sufficed to clear the
dues but left something to spare (Bukhari, Sahih Bukhari). His love for
the poor was so deep that he used to pray: "O Allah, keep me poor in my
life and at my death and raise me at resurrection among those who are
poor." (Nasai, Chapter: Pardon) Abdul Ghani


