Supplement 1
============

Its literal meaning is the 'seal' which is but on the envelope to
secure its contents. footnote 2. We have referred to three lexicons
here, yet the elucidation of this point is not confined to these works
alone. All authoritative dictionaries of the Arabic language interpret
the word Khatam in the sense that we have given to it.

But the deniers of the Finality of Prophethood in their endeavor to
make a sneaky assault on the religion of God argue that if we refer to
someone as 'Last of the Poets' or 'Last of the Legists' or 'Last of the
Commentators', we do not necessarily mean that no poet, legist or
commentator will come after them; rather we only mean to say that all
excellence of their act has been concentrated in such men.

The actual position, however, is that when we do use these exaggerated
epithets for someone we do not thereby replace or remove the original
meaning of the word 'Last'. It is preposterous to assume that by its
metaphorical use to refer to the excellence or perfection of a man, the
word 'Last' loses its original or real significance which is 'Final'.

Such an assumption can only be accepted by a person who lacks
elementary knowledge of the rules of grammar. There is no grammatical
principle in any language by which the metaphorical meaning of a word
may be taken as its real or original meaning. Besides, the metaphorical
meaning in no case replaces or obliterates the real and basic meaning of
the word. When you tell an Arab 'Ja Khatam ul-Qaum', he will certainly
not take it to mean that 'the perfect or the most excellent man of the
tribe has come.'

He will, on the other hand, take it to mean that 'the whole tribe, even
to the last man, has come.' There is another point to be considered.
Such terms as the 'Last Poet', the Last Legist' or the 'Last Narrator of
hadith' are eulogies used by men for other human beings whom they deem
to be perfect and excellent.

Those who use these hyperboles for other men certainly can not say, nor
do they know, that people of such excellence will come in later times or
not. So in human language these appellations are hyperboles, but when
God uses for a person that such and such quality has been culminated in
him, there is no reason to take it in the metaphorical sense in the
strain of human expression. If Allah had pronounced someone as 'Last
Poet', he would have been last poet in the literal sense of the word.

If Allah appoints someone as His 'Last Prophet', there is absolutely no
possibility of any other person attaining to that dignity after that.
God is Omniscient. Man has but limited knowledge. This being so, how can
one construe the human praise of a person as 'Last Poet' or the last of
the jurists in the same sense as God's pronouncement of a person as the
'Last Prophet'? The Observations of the Holy Prophet(PBUH) About the
Finality of Prophethood The meaning of the word Khatam that emerges out
of the context of the Holy Qur'an and which is the same as given in all
lexicons of the Arabic language is also affirmed by the observations of
the Holy Prophet(peace and blessings be upon him).

We quote some authentic traditions to illustrate the case in point: The
Holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: "The tribe of Israel was guided by
prophets. When a prophet passed away, another prophet succeeded him. But
no prophet will come after me; only caliphs will succeed me."

(Bukhari, Kitab-ul-Manaqib). The Prophet of God (PBUH) affirmed: "My
position in relation to the prophets who came before me can be explained
by the following example: A man erected a building and adorned this
edifice with great beauty, but he left an empty niche, in the corner
where just one brick was missing. People looked around the building and
marvelled at its beauty, but wondered why a brick was missing from that
niche? I am like unto that one missing brick and I am the last in the
line of the Prophets." (Bukhari, Kitab-ul-Manaqib).

(In other words, with the advent of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) the
edifice of Prophethood has been completed and there is no empty niche in
this edifice o provide room for another prophet.) Four traditions
relating to this subject are recorded, in Muslim, Kitab-ul-Fada''il,
Babu Khatimin-Nabiyyin. The latter tradition contains the following
additional sentence. "So I came and in me the line of Prophets has
ended."

The very same tradition in similar words has been reported in Tirmidhi,
Kitab-ul-Manaqib, Bab-Fadlin Nabi and Kitab-Adab, Bab-ul-Amthal. In
Musnad Abu Dawud Tayalisi this tradition has been incorporated among
other traditions reported by Jabir bin Abdullah; and its last sentence
reads, "It is in me that line of Prophets came to its final end."

Musnad Ahmad contains traditions reported by Hadrat Ubayyi bin Ka''b,
Hadrat Abu Sa''id Khudri and Hadrat Abu Huraira(may Allah be pleased
with them) on the same subject with a slight variation of words here and
there.

The Holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: "God has bestowed upon me six favors
which the former Prophets did not enjoy: I have been endowed with the
gift of pithy and perfect speech. I was granted victory owing to my awe.
The spoils of war were made lawful unto me. The whole earth has been
made the place of worship for me and it has become the means of
purification for me also. In other words in my religion, offering of
prayers is not confined to certain specified places of worship. Prayers
can be offered at any place over the earth.

And in case water is not available it is lawful for my people to
perform ablutions with earth(Tayammum) and to cleanse themselves with
the soil if water for bathing is scarce. I have been sent by Allah to
carry His Divine message to the whole world. And the line of prophets
has come to its final end in me.

(Muslim, Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah)

The Prophet of Allah (PBUH) affirmed: "The chain of Messengers and
Prophets has come to an end. There shall be no Messenger nor Prophet
after me." (Tirmidhi, Kitab-ur-Rouya Babu Zahab-un- Nubuwwa, Musnad
Ahmad, Marwiyat-Anas bin Malik)

The Holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: "I am Muhammad, I am Ahmad, I am the
effacer and infidelity shall be erased through me; I am the assembler.
People shall be assembled on Doomsday after my time. (In other words
Doom is my only successor.) And I am the last in the sense that no
prophet shall succeed me." (Bukhari and Muslim, Kitab-ul-Fada''il, Bab:
Asmaun-Nabi; Tirmidhi, Kitab-ul- Adab, Bab: Asma-un-Nabi; Muatta'',
Kitab-u-Asma in-Nabi, Al- Mustadrak Hakim, Kitab-ut-Tarikh, Bab:
Asma-un-Nabi.)

The Prophet of God (PBUH) observed: "God Almighty hath sent unto the
world no apostle who did not warn his people about the appearance of
Dajjal( Anti-Christ, but Dajjal did not appear in their time). I am the
last in the line of Prophets and ye are the last community of believers.
Without doubt,then, Dajjal shall appear from amongst ye". (Ibn Majah,
Kitabul-fitan, bab:Dajjal).

''Abdur Rahman bin Jubair reported: "I heard Abdullah bin ''Amr
ibn-''As narrating that one day the Holy Prophet (PBUH) came out of his
house and joined our company. His manner gave us the impression as if he
were leaving us.'' He said, ''I am Muhammad, the unlettered prophet of
Allah'' and repeated this statement three times.

Then he affirmed: "There will be no prophet after me''."(Musnad Ahmad,
Marwiyat''Abdullah bin Amr ibn''-As.) The Holy Prophet (peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him) said: "Allah will send no Apostle after
me, but only Mubashshirat. It was said: what is meant by
al-Mubashshirat. He said : Good vision or pious vision". (Musnad Ahmad,
Marwiyat Abu Tufail, Nasa''i, Abu Dawud) (In other words there is no
possibility of Divine revelation in future. At the most if some one
receives an inspiration from Allah he will receive it in the form of
"pious dream."

The Holy Prophet (PBUH) said: "If an Apostle were to succeed me, it
would have been ''Umar bin Khattab." (Tirmidhi,Kitab-ul- Manaqib) The
Holy Prophet (PBUH) told Hadrat ''Ali, "You are related to me as Aaron
was related to Moses(peace be upon him). But no Apostle will come after
me." (Bukhari and Muslim, Kitab Fada''il as-Sahaba)

This tradition is recorded in Bukhari and Muslim in the account of the
Battle of Tabuk also. Musnad records two traditions narrated by Hadrat
Sa''d bin Abi Waqqas ( may Allah be pleased with him) on this subject.
The last sentence in one of these traditions runs as follows : "Behold
there is no prophethood after me."

Detailed accounts of the traditions incorporated in Abu Dawud Tayalisi,
Imam Ahmad and Muhammad bin Ishaque report that on the eve of his
departure for the battle of Tabuk, the holy Prophet (PBUH) had resolved
to leave Hadrat ''Ali behind him in order to look after the defense and
supervise the affairs of Medina. The hypocrites thereupon began to
spread insinuations and rumours about Hadrat ''Ali. Hadrat ''Ali went to
the Prophet and submitted : ''O Prophet of Allah, are you leaving me
behind among women and children?'' On this occasion in order to set his
mind at peace the Holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: "You are related to me
as was Aaron with Moses."

In other words "as Hadrat Moses on the Mount Tur had left Hadrat Aaron
behind to look after the tribe of Israel, so I (Muhammad) leave you
behind to look after the defense of Medina." At the same time
apprehending that this comparative allusion to Hadrat Aaron might later
on give rise to heresies, the holy Prophet (PBUH) immediately made it
clear that "There will be no Prophet after me."

Thauban reports: "The Holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: And there will
arise Thirty imposters in my Ummah and each one of them will pronounce
to the world that he is a prophet, but I am the last in the line of the
Prophets of God and no Apostle will come after me." (Abu Dawud,
Kitab-ul-Fitan) Abu Dawud in ''Kitab-ul-Malahim'' has recorded another
tradition reported by Abu Huraira in the same subject. Tirmidhi has also
recorded these two traditions as reported by Hadrat Thauban and Hadrat
Abu Huraira. The text of the second tradition runs thus: "It will come
to this that thirty imposters will arise and each one of them will put
forth his claim to be the Apostle of God."

The Holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: "Among the tribe of Israel who went
before you there indeed were such people who held communion with God,
even though they were not his Prophets. If ever there arose a person
from among my people who would hold communion with God, it would be none
else but ''Umar (May Allah be pleased with him)." (Bukhari,
Kitab-ul-Manaqib)

A version of this same tradition in Muslim'' contains Muhaddithuna
instead of Yukallimuna. But then Mukalima and Muhaddith bear identical
meaning i.e., a man enjoys the privilege of holding direct communion
with God or a person who is addressed by the Almighty from the unseen.
Thus we conclude that if there had been any person among the followers
of Muhammad who could hold communion with God without being raised to
the dignity of prophethood, it would have been Umar.

The Prophet of God (PBUH) said: "No Prophet will come after me and
there will, therefore, be no other community of followers of any new
prophet." (Baihaqi,Kitab-ul Rouya; Tabarani)

The Holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: "I am the last in line of the
prophets of God and my Masjid is the last Masjid (referring the holy
Masjid of the Prophet)." (see footnote 3) (Muslim, Kitab-ul-Hajj;
Bab:Fadl-us-Salat bi Masjidi Mecca wal Medina)


A large number of such traditions of the Holy Prophet (peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him) have been reported by the companions and
a great many compilers have recorded them from authoritative sources. A
study of these traditions shows that the Holy Prophet on several
occasions, and in various ways and in different words made it explicitly
clear that he was the last Prophet of God; That no prophet would follow
him and that the line of prophets had ended in him. Furthermore, those
would claim to be Prophets and Messengers of God after his time would be
imposters and liars. (see footnote 4).


