Supplement 2
============

There can be no authentic, creditable and conclusive interpretation of
the words of the Holy Qur''an, Khatam-un- Nabiyyin, than that given by
the Holy Prophet (PBUH) for the credentials of the Holy prophet (PBUH)
need no proof and the authority of his words is unassailable. His words
are authentic and a proof in itself. When the Prophet is explaining a
Nass of the Holy Quran, his explanation is the most authentic and a
proof positive.

The question is who else besides the Holy Prophet (PBUH), to whom the
Qur''an was revealed, is better qualified to comprehend its meaning and
to explain its contents to us? And he who advances an alternative
explanation, shall we regard his claims as worthy of our consideration
let alone our acquiescence?

footnote 3: Referring to this tradition disbelievers in the Finality of
Prophethood argue that the Holy Prophet (PBUH) called his mosque
(Masjid) the last mosque'' despite the fact that it is not the last
mosque, as countless other mosques have been built after it all over the
world. Similarly when the Holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: I am the last
Prophet,'' it did not mean that the line of prophets had ended, but that
Muhammad (PBUH) was the last as regards his excellence amongst the
Prophets of God and Mosque was the last one in the same sense.

Such foolish reasoning is an irrefutable proof of the fact that these
people have lost the faculty of perceiving the true meaning of the words
of God and those of His Prophet(PBUH). Even a cursory glance through the
whole chain of traditions in the context of which this particular
tradition has been recorded makes true import of the words of the Holy
prophet clear to any man.

In this context the various traditions which Imam Muslim has recorded
on the authority of Hadrat Abu Huraira, Hadrat Abdullah bin Umar and the
mother of the Faithful Hadrat Maimuna narrate that there are only three
mosques in the world to which the greatest sanctity is attached, and
these are sacred above all other mosques.

Worship in these mosques is rewarded with thousandfold blessings in
comparisons to offering prayers in other mosques. It is because of this
reason that it has been declared lawful to undertake a journey to these
mosques to offer prayers therein. No other mosque, save these three, can
claim such sanctity that a person should make a journey to offer worship
there leaving all other mosques. Among the three mosques which bear the
greatest sanctity in Islam, the first one is Masjid Al-Haram'' which was
built by Hadrat Abraham(peace be upon him); the second one is theMasjid
al-Aqsa'' which was erected by Hadrat Sulaiman (peace be upon him); and
the third mosque is Masjid-i-Nabawi'' in the Holy city of Medina which
was founded by the Holy Prophet(PBUH). The observation of the Holy
Prophet in regard to the last mosque'' should be viewed in this
context.

The words of the Prophet(PBUH) meant that no Prophet would come after
him, hence there would be no fourth mosque after the last
Masjid-i-Nabawi(a mosque of the last Prophet). It follows, therefore,
that no other mosque should bear such sanctity, that worship in it
should be rewarded with more blessings in comparison with worship in
other mosques and further there shall be no fourth mosque towards which
it is lawful or even desirable for people to make a journey in order to
offer prayers.

footnote 4 In contrast to the observations of the Holy Prophet the
deniers of the Finality of Prophethood quote the following words scribed
to Hadrat Aisha: "Say, indeed, that the Holy Prophet is the Final
Apostle of God; but say not that no prophet will come after him." In the
first place it is an audacity to quote the words of Hadrat Aisha for
contradicting the explicit command of the Holy Prophet(PBUH). Moreover
the very words attributed to Hadrat Aisha are not authentic.

No authoritative work on Hadith contains this observation of Hadrat
Aisha nor any notable compiler of traditions has recorded or referred to
it. This tradition is derived from a commentary entitled Durr-i- Manthur
and a compilation of Hadith Known as Takmilah Majma-ul- Bihar, but its
source and credentials are unknown. It is the height of audacity to put
forward a statement of a lady companion in order to contradict the
explicit observations of the Holy Prophet which the eminent
traditionists have transmitted on the most authentic chains of
transmission.

The Consensus of the Companions After the Holy Qur''an and sunnah, the
consensus of the companions of the holy Prophet (PBUH) holds the third
position. All authentic historical traditions reveal that the companions
of the prophet (PBUH) had unanimously waged a war on the claimants to
the prophethood and their adherents after the demise of the Holy Prophet
(PBUH).

In this connection the case of Musailama is particularly significant.
This man did not deny that Muhammad (PBUH) was the Prophet of God; he
claimed that God had appointed him as a co- prophet with Muhammad to
share his task. The letter which had addressed to the Holy Prophet just
before the Mussailama''s death reads:

"From Musailma the prophet of God to Muhammad the Prophet of God(PBUH).
I wish to inform you that I have been appointed as your partner to share
in the burden of prophethood." The historian Tabari has recorded a
tradition which says that the call to prayers''(Adhan) which Musailama
had devised for his followers included the words, "I testify that
Muhammad is the Prophet of God."

Despite Musailama''s clear affirmation of the Prophethood of Muhammad
(PBUH), he was declared an apostate and ostracised from the society of
Islam. Not only this but a war was waged on Musailama. History also
bears witness to the fact that the tribe of Hunaifa (Banu Hunaif) had
accepted Musailama''s claim to prophethood in good faith. They had been
genuinely led to believe that Muhammad (PBUH) had of his own accord
declared Musailama as his partner in prophethood. A man who had learnt
Qur''an in the Holy City of Medina went to the tribe of Banu Hunaifa and
falsely represented the verses of the Qur''an as having been revealed to
Musailama.

Though Banu Hunaifa had been deliberately misinformed, nevertheless the
companions of the Holy Prophet did not recognize them as muslims and
sent an army against them. There is no scope here for taking the view
that the companions had fought against them as rebels and not as
apostates. Islamic Law lays down that in the event of a war against the
rebel Muslims, the prisoners taken in battle shall not be taken into
slavery. The law further requires that even the rebellious Dhimmis, when
taken as prisoners in battle, shall not go into slavery.

But when military action was taken against Musailama and his followers,
Hadrat Abu Bakr declared that the women and children of the enemy would
be taken as slaves; and when they were taken prisoner in battle, they
were enslaved. From among these a girl was given as a slave to Hadrat
Ali. She bore him a son named Muhammad bin Hanfiya, who is a renowned
figure in the history of Islam. (Al- Badaya wan-Nihaya, Vol. VI, pp. 316
& 325)

This event is a clear proof of the fact that when companions fought
against Musailama, they did not charge him with rebellion. The charge
against him was that he had preferred a claim to prophethood after the
line of Prophets had ended in Muhammad (PBUH) and he had thus misled
other people to affirm faith in his claim of prophethood. The action
against Musailama was taken immediately after the death of the Holy
Prophet (PBUH) under the leadership of Hadrat Abu Bakr Siddique (may God
be pleased with him), and it had the unanimous support of the entire
body of the companions. There can be found no better and explicit
example of the consensus of the companions than this.

The Consensus of all the Ulema of the Ummah Next in line of authority
after the consensus of the Companions stands the consensus, in matters
of religion, of those ulema of the Muslims who came after the time of
Companions (may God be pleased with them).

A glance through the history of Islam from the first century up to the
modern times reveals to us the fact that the ulema of all periods in
every Islamic country of the world are unanimous in their conviction
that no new prophet can be raised after Muhammad (PBUH). They all agree
in the belief that anyone who lays a claim to Prophethood after Muhammad
(PBUH) and anyone who puts faith in such a claim is an apostate and an
outcast from the community of Islam. The following facts are appended as
an illustration of this:

A man in the time of Imam Abu Hanifa (80 A.H.-150 A.H.) laid claim to
Prophethood and said "Let me show you the proofs of my prophethood." The
great Imam thereupon warned the people: "Anyone who asks of this man the
credentials of prophethood, shall become an apostate, for the Prophet of
God (PBUH) has explicitly declared: "No prophet will come after me."
(Manaqib al-Imam-i-Azam Abi Hanifa, Ibn Ahmad al-Makki, Vol. I, p.161,
published in Hyderabad, India, 1321 A.H.)

Allama Ibn Jarir Tabari (224 A.H.-310 A.H.) in his renowned commentary
of the holy Qur''an gives the following interpretation of the verse,
''walakin Rasul Allahi wa Khatam-ul Nabiyyin'': "He has closed and
sealed the prophethood and the door (of prophethood) shall not open for
anyone till the end of the world." (Vide Commentary of Ibn-i-Jarir, Vol.
22, p.12)

In his book Aqida-i-Salfia, while explaining the beliefs of the pious
forbearers and particularly those of Imam Abu Hanifa, Imam Abu Yusuf and
Imam Muhammad, Imam Tahavi (239 A.H.-321 A.H.) writes that Muhammad
(PBUH) is a highly venerable servant of God. He is the chosen Prophet
and the favorite Messenger of Allah. He is the last of the Prophets,
Leader of the pious, chief of the Messengers of Allah and the beloved
one of the Lord. After him every claim to Prophethood is an error
manifest and worship of one''s evil-self." (Sharah al-Tahawiya
Fil-''Aqidat-ul-Salfia, Dar-ul-Ma''arif, Egypt, pp. 15, 87, 96, 97, 100,
102)

Allama Ibn Hazm Andulasi (384 A.H.-456 A.H.) writes: "It is certain
that the chain of Divine revelations has come to an end after the death
of the Holy Prophet(PBUH). The proof of this lies in the fact that none
but a prophet can be the recipient of Divine revelations and God has
affirmed that Muhammad has no sons among ye men and he is the Messenger
of God and that He has sealed the office of Prophethood." (Al-Mohallah,
Vol. 1, p.26) Imam Ghazali (450 A.H-505 A.H.) says If the right of
denying the authority of consensus be admitted, it will give rise to
many absurdities.

For example, if someone says that it is possible for a person to attain
the office of Prophethood after our Apostle Muhammad(PBUH), we shall not
hestitate to pronounce him as an infidel, but in the course of a
controversy the man who wishes to prove that any reluctance in
pronoucing such a person as an apostate is a sin shall have to seek the
aid of consensus in support of his arguments, because reason is no
arbiter against the possibilty of the existance of a new prophet.'

As regards the followers of the new prophets' they will not be utterly
incapable of making various interpretations of La Nabiya Badi, "There
will be no Prophet after me" and Khatam-ul-Nabiyyin, Last of the
Prophets.' A follower of the new prophets' might say that
Khatam-ul-Naibiyyin, Last of the Prophets' bears the meaning "last of
the prominent Messengers." If you argue that "prophets" is a common
word, he would very easily give this term a particular significance with
regard to his own prophethood.'

In respect of No Prophet will come after him', such a man would contend
that this expression does not say that No Messengers will follow him.'
There is a difference betwen a Prophet and a Messenger. The status of a
Prophet is higher than that of the Messenger. The fact is that such
absurdities can be indulged in ad infinitum. It is not difficult, in our
view, to make different interpretations of a word. Besides, there is no
ample scope for people to commit blunders ever and beyond these points
in the exposition of these clear words. We cannot even say that those
who make such interpretations are guilty of the denial of clear
injunctions.

But to refute those who have but their faith in the false expositions
we shall say that the entire Ummah by a consensus of opinion recognizes
that the words No Prophet shall come after him' and the context of the
traditions suggests that the Holy Prophet meant that No Prophet, nor
Messenger shall follow him.' Furthermore, the Ummah is agreed on the
point that above words of the Holy Prophet leave no scope for a
different interpretation than given to it by the consensus of the Ummah
and he who would not join the consensus is no more than a dissident.
(Al-Iqtisad Fil Aiteqad, p.114, Egypt)

[We have quoted here the original Arabic text (in the Urdu Edition) of
the opinion of Imam Ghazali because the deniers of the idea of the
Finality of Prophethood have vehemently challenged the authenticity of
this reference.)

Mohy-us-Sunnah Baghawi ( died 510 A.H.) writes in his commentary
Malam-al-Tanzil: "God brought the line of Prophets to an end with him.
Hence he is the final Prophet.......Ibn Abbas affirms that God(in this
verse) has given His verdict that no Prophet will come after the Prophet
Muhammad(PBUH)." (Vol. 3, p. 158)

Allama Zamakhshri (467 A.H.-538 A.H) writes in his commentary entitled
Kashshaaf, "If you ask how Muhammad can be the last of the Prophets when
Hadrat Isa (Jesus Christ) will appear towards the end of the world? I
shall reply that the finality of Prophethood of Muhammad (PBUH) means
that no one will be endowed with prophethood after him. Hadrat 'Isa is
among those upon whom prophethood was endowed before Muhammad(PBUH).
Moreover, Hadrat 'Isa will appear as a follower of Muhammad and he will
offer prayers with his face towards the Qiblah of Islam, as a member of
the community of the Muslims." (Vol. 2, p. 215)

Qazi 'Iyad (died 544 A.H.) writes: " He who lays a claim to
prophethood, affirms that a man can attain the office of prophethood or
can acquire the dignity of a prophet through purification of soul, as is
alleged by some philosophers and sufis; similarly a person who does not
claim to be a prophet, but declares that he is the recipient of Divine
revelation, all such persons are apostates and deniers of the
prophethood of Muhammad(PBUH), for Muhammad (PBUH) has conveyed the
message of God to us that he is the final Prophet and no Prophet will
come after him. He had also conveyed to us the Divine message that he
has finally sealed the office of Prophethood and that he has been sent
as a Prophet and a Messenger to the whole of mankind.

It is the consensus of the entire Ummah that these words of the Holy
Prophet are clear enough and eloquently speak of the fact that they can
admit of no other interpretation or amendment in their meaning. Hence
there is no doubt that all these sects are outside the pale of Islam not
only from the view-point of the consensus of the Ummah but also on the
ground of these words having been transmitted with utmost authenticity."
(Shifa, Vol. 2, pp. 270- 271)

Allama Shahrastani (died A.H. 548), in his renowned book, Almilal wan
Nahal, writes: "And similarly who says that a prophet shall come after
Muhammad (PBUH), there are no two opinions that such a man is an
infidel." (Vol. 3, p. 249)

Imam Razi (543 A.H.-606 A.H.), in his work Tafsir Kabir while
explaining the meaning of the verse Khatam-un-Nabiyyin states: "In this
context the term Khatam-un Nabiyyin has been used in the sense that a
Prophet whose ministry is not final may leave some injunctions or
commandments incomplete or unexplained thus providing scope for a
succeeding prophet to complete the task. But the Prophet who will have
no successor is more considerate and provides clear guidlines for his
followers, for he is like a father who knows that after him there will
be no guardian or patron to look after his son."(Vol. 6, p. 581)

Allama Baidawi(died A.H. 685), in his commentary, Anwar-ul-Tanzil,
writes: "In other words he, Muhammed (PBUH), is the last of all
Prophets. He is the one in whom the line of Prophets ends or the one
whose advent has sealed the office of Prophethood. The appearance of
Hadrat 'Isa (peace be upon him) after Prophet Muhammed (PBUH) is not a
contradiction of the finality of Muhammed's Prophethood, because Hadrat
Isa will appear as a follower of the Shariah of Muhammed." (Vol. 4, p.
164)

'Allama Hafiz-ud-Din Al-Nasafi (died A.H.710), in his commentary,
Madark-ut-Tanzil, writes: "And he Muhammad(PBUH) is the one who has
brought the line of prophets to an end...in other words he is the last
of all prophets. God shall not appoint another prophet after him. In
respect of Hadrat Isa(peace be upon him) it may be stated that he is
among those who were appointed Prophets before the time of
Muhammad(PBUH). And when Hadrat Isa appears again, he will be a follower
of the Shar'iah of Muhammad, and one among faithful." (p. 471)

Allama Alau-din Baghdadi (died A.H. 725) in his commentary, Khazin,
writes: "Wa Khatam-un-Nabiyyin,' in other words, God has ended
prophethood in him, Muhammad(PBUH). Henceforth there is no prophethood
after him, nor is there any partner with him in prophethood...Wa Kan
Allahu Bikulle Shaiin Alima, God is aware that no prophet will come
after him." (pp. 471-472)

Allama Ibn Kathir (died A.H. 774) writes in his well- known commentary,
"Hence this verse is a clear proof of the fact that no prophet will come
after Muhammad(PBUH) and when it is said that no prophet will come after
him it is a foregone conclusion that no messenger will succeed him
either, for the office of a messenger holds prominence over the office
of a prophet. Every messenger is a prophet, but all prophets are not
messengers. Any one who lays a claim to prophethood after Muhammad(PBUH)
is a liar, a disruptionist, an imposter, depraved and a seducer despite
his wonderous jugglery and magical feats. Any one who would make this
claim in future till the end of the world belongs to this class. (Vol.
3, pp. 493-494) Allama Jalal-Ud-Din Suyuti (died A.H. 911) writes in his
commentary entitled Jalalain,

"God is aware of the fact that no prophet will succeed Muhammad (PBUH)
and when Isa (PBUH) will reappear in the world he will act according to
the Shariah of Muhammad (PBUH)." (p. 768) Allama Ibn Nujaim (died A.H.
970) in his renowned work of the canons of Fiqh entitled, 'Al-Ashbah
wan-Nazair', Kitab- us-Siyyar:Bab: al-Raddah, writes: "A person who does
not regard Muhammad (PBUH) as the last Prophet of God is not a Muslim,
for the finality of Muhammad's prophethood is one of those fundamental
articles of faith which a Muslim must understand and believe." (p.
179)

Mulla Ali Qari (died A.H. 1016) in his commentary Fiqh Akbar, writes:
"To lay a claim to Prophethood after the ministry of our Prophet
Muhammad (PBUH) is a sheer infidelity by the consensus of Ummah." (p.
202)

Shaikh Isma'il Haqqi (died 1137 A.H.) while elucidating this verse in
his commentary Ruh-ul-Bayan, writes: "Asim reads the word Khatam with a
vowel stress on the letter ta which means the instrument of stamping and
sealing, just as 'Printer' is the machine which imprints. The
connotation of the word is that the Holy Prophet (PBUH) was the last of
all prophets and God has sealed the office of prophethood through his
agency. In Persian the same meaning will be expressed by the term 'Mohar
Paighambran'. The seal of Prophets i.e., his (Muhammad's) advent sealed
the door of prophethood and the line pf prophets ended in him. Other
reciters pronounce the word Khatim with the vowel point under the letter
ta which means to say that Muhammad (PBUH) was the one who sealed the
doors of prophethood. In Persian the same meaning will be expressed by
the term 'Mohar Konindai Paighambran,' 'Sealer of the prophets,' so both
ways the word Khatam bears one and the same meaning........Henceforth
the Ulema of the Ummah of Muhammad(PBUH) will inherit only spiritual
eminence from him. The inheritance of Prophethood is extinct, for
Muhammad(PBUH) has sealed the office of Prophethood for all time to
come. The appearance of Hadrat Isa (PBUH) after Muhammad(PBUH) is not a
contradiction of the finality of Muhammad's prophethood. The term
Khatam-un-Nabiyyin makes it clear that no one will be appointed a
prophet after Muhammad(PBUH).

Hadrat Isa (PBUH) was appointed Prophet before Muhammad(PBUH) and
Isa(PBUH) will appear as a follower of the Shari'ah of Muhammad(PBUH).
He (Isa)(PBUH) will offer prayers with his face turned towards the
Qiblah designated by Muhammad(PBUH). Hadrat Isa (PBUH) will be one among
the faithful of Islam.

He will neither receive any Divine revelation nor will issue new
injunctions; he will act as a follower of Muhammad(PBUH). Ahl-Sunnat wal
Jam'at (the Sunni sect) believe that no prophet will come after our holy
Prophet Muhammad(PBUH) because God has affirmed: "wa-lakin Rasul Allahi
wa Khatam-un-Nabiyyin", and the Prophet has said: La Nabiya Badi (There
will be no Prophet after me.) Henceforth anyone who says that a prophet
will succeed Muhammad(PBUH) will become an apostate, because he has
denied a basic article of faith. Similarly anyone who casts doubt about
the finality of Muhammad's prophethood, will also be declared an
infidel, because the foregoing discussion has distinguished right from
wrong. And any claim to prophethood after Muhammad(PBUH) is absolutely
false."

In Fatawa-i-Alamgiri which was compiled by the eminent scholars of the
Indian sub-continent at the command of Aurangzeb Alamgir, in the 12th
century Hijri, it is recorded: "A man who does not regard Muhammed
(PBUH) as the final Prophet of God, is not a Muslim, and if such a man
claims to be a messenger or prophet of God, he shall be proclaimed an
apostate." (Vol. 2, p. 263)

Allama Shoukani (died 1255 A.H.) in his commentary, Fath-ul-Qadeer,
writes: "A majority of people have read the word Khatam with the vowel
point under the letter ta but 'Asim reads the same word with vowel
stress on ta. The first reading means that Muhammed (PBUH) ended the
line of Prophets (peace of Allah be upon them) i.e., in other words the
Holy Prophet came last of all the Prophets. The second reading means
that the Holy Prophet was the seal by which the office of Prophethood
was finally closed; and that his advent lent grace to the group of
Allah's Prophets.

Allama Alusi (died 1270 A.H.) in his commentary, Ruh-ul-Ma'ani, writes:
"The word 'Prophet' is common, but the word 'Messenger' has a particular
significance. Hence when the Holy Prophet (PBUH) is called the 'Seal of
Prophets,' it necessarily follows that he is also the 'Seal of
Messengers.' The implication of the Holy Prophet's position as 'the Last
of all Prophets and Messengers of God' is that by his(PBUH) elevation to
the dignity of Prophethood in this world, the same dignity has
henceforth been abolished and no man can attain that dignity now." (Vol.
22, p. 32)

"Anyone who claims to be the recipient of Divine revelations as a
prophet after the advent of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH), shall be declared
an infidel. There is no difference of opinion among Muslims on this
point." (ibid., vol.22, p.38) "The affirmation in the Book of God of
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) as the Last of the Prophets' is unequivocal. The
Sunnah has clearly explained this and the Ummah has reached a consensus
on it. Hence anyone who lays a contradictory claim against this position
shall be declared an apostate (ibid., vol.22, p. 39)


