Supplement 3
============

These are the expositions of the leading savants, jurists, scholars of
Hadith and commentators of every realm of Islam, from the sub-continent
of India to Morocco and Spain (Andulus) and from Turkey to Yemen. We
have indicated their years of birth and death in each case so that the
reader may realise at first glance that this list includes eminent
authorities of every century of the Islamic History falling between the
first and thirteenth century.

We might even have added expositions by the learned doctors of Islam
belonging to the fourteenth century; but we omitted the Ulema of the
14th century purposely because someone might state that these scholars
had explained the meanings of Khatam-i-Nabuwat as 'the Seal of all
Prophets' to refute the claim of the 'new prophets' of the modern age.

It cannot, however, be said that the ulema of the past centuries
entertained feelings of animosity against a later day personality
claiming to be a prophet. These writings also make it clear beyond doubt
that from the first century up to the present-day the entire Muslim
world has unanimously taken the expression Khatam-un-Nabiyyin to mean
the Last of all Prophets.' Muslims of all periods have been unanimous in
the belief that the office of prophethood has been sealed after the
advent of the holy Prophet(PBUH).

There has never been any difference of opinion among muslims that any
person who prefers a claim to prophethood and those who believe in such
a claim to prophethood are outside the pale of Islam. It is now up to
all reasonable persons to judge that in the face of all this massive
evidence- the plain dictionary meaning of the phrase
'Khatam-un-Nabiyyin' the interpretation of the Quranic verse in its true
perspective, the exposition of the Holy Prophet himself and the
consensus on the finality of prophethood of Muhammad(PBUH) of the entire
body of muslims all over the world from the time of the companions of
the Holy prophet to the present day followers of Islam-what scope is
left for an alternative interpretation and what justification can they
give for opening the door of prophethood for a new claimant.

Furthermore, how can those people be recognized as Muslims who have not
only expressed their opinion in favour of opening the door to
prophethood, but they have, in fact, catapulted a man into the mansion
of the Prophets of God and have become the followers of this
trespasser?

In this connection three more points are noteworthy. Is GOD the Enemy
of our Faith?In the first place, Prophethood is a delicate matter.
According to the Holy Qur'an the idea of Prophethood is such a
fundamental article of faith that one who believes in this idea is a
believer and he who disbelieves is an infidel. If a man does not put his
faith in a prophet, he is an apostate; similarly if he believes in the
claim of an imposter to be a prophet, he becomes an infidel. In such a
delicate and important matter Omniscient God certainly cannot be
expected to have made a slip.

If there were to be a Prophet after the time of Muhammad (PBUH), God
would have made this possibility clear in the Holy Qur'an or He would
have commanded His Apostle Muhammad to make a clear declaration of it.
The Apostle of God would never have passed away without having
forewarned his people that other Apostles would succeed him and that his
followers must put their faith in the succeeding prophets.

Had God and His Messenger (PBUH) any intention of undermining our faith
by hiding from us the possibility of opening the door of Prophethood
after the advent of Muhammad (PBUH) and the coming of a new prophet,
thus leaving us in a quandary that if we did not believe in the ministry
of a new prophet we would apostate from Islam? Further than this, not
only were we kept in the dark by God and His Messenger (PBUH) about all
this, but, on the contrary, they made observations and affirmations
which the Ummah for the last thirteen [now fourteen] hundred years has
taken to mean and even today holds the view that no prophet will come
after Muhammad (PBUH).

Could God and His Messenger really temper with our faith? Supposing for
a moment that admittance to the office of Prophethood is open and a new
Prophet does appear, we shall refuse him without fear.

For this refutation, God might call us to account on the Day of
Judgement; but we shall place the whole record of His own affirmations
and injunctions before Him and this evidence will prove that
(God-forbid) Allah's Book and the Sunnah of His Messenger had led us to
disbelieve the new prophet and had thus condemned us to be infidels. We
have no fear that after considering this record God Almighty will
consider it fit to punish us for blasphemy against the new Prophet.

But if the door of Prophethood is in fact closed and no Prophet will
arise after Muhammad (PBUH), and despite this fact a person puts his
faith in the claim of a new prophet, that person should think well
indeed as to what record can be presented before God in his defense to
avoid the punishment for blasphemy and to achieve salvation? Such a man
should look through the material of his defense before he is produced in
the August Court of the Almighty. He should compare this material with
the record that we have presented and then judge for himself if the
material upon which he is relying for his defense is worth the trust of
a reasonable man and can he court the risk of facing the charge of
blasphemy and be punished for it with the kind of defense that he has at
his disposal? Do We Need a Prophet Now?The second point which requires
consideration is that Prophethood is not a quality to be acquired by any
person who proves himself worthy of it by devoting himself to prayers
and righteous deeds.

Nor is it anything like a reward given in recognition of good service.
Prophethood is an office and Allah appoints some person to this office
to fulfill a special need. When such a need arises, God appoints a
Prophet to fulfill it. Allah does not send prophets in rapid succession
when there is no need or when the need has been fulfilled. When we refer
to the Quran in order to find out conditions when the Prophets were
appointed by Allah, we come to know that there are only four conditions
under which the Prophets have been sent unto the world.

Firstly there was need for a prophet to be sent unto a certain nation
to which no prophet had been sent before and the message brought by the
Prophet of another nation could not have reached these people.

Secondly, there was need for appointing a prophet because the message
of an earlier Prophet had been forgotten by the people, or the teachings
of the former prophets had been adulterated and hence it had become
impossible to follow the message brought by that Prophet. Thirdly, the
people had not received complete mandate of Allah through a former
prophet. Hence succeeding prophets were sent to fulfill the task of
completing the religion of Allah.

Fourthly, there was need for a second prophet to share the
responsibility of office with the first prophet.

It is obvious that none of the above needs remains to be fulfilled
after the advent of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH).

The Holy Quran says that Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) has been sent as a
bearer of instructions for the whole mankind. The cultural history of
the world bears testimony to the fact that since the advent of the Holy
Prophet (PBUH) up to the present time such conditions have always
prevailed in the world which were conducive to transmitting his message
to all nations at all times. It follows,

therefore, that different nations no longer need different prophets
after the time of the Holy Prophet (PBUH). The Holy Quran and the
records of Hadith and the biographical details of the life of Muhammad
(PBUH) stand witness to the fact that the Divine message brought into
this world by the Holy Prophet is extant in its original and pure form.
The Prophet's message has suffered no process of distortion or
falsification. Not a single word has been added to or expunged from the
Holy Book which the Prophet (PBUH) brought unto the world from Almighty
Allah, nor can anyone make additions to or delete anything from it till
the Day of Resurrection.

The message which the Holy Prophet (PBUH) conveyed by word and action
has been transmitted to us in such comprehensive, pure and original form
that we feel as if we were living in the environment and period of the
Holy Prophet (PBUH).

In this way the second condition under which prophets are sent unto the
world has also been fulfilled. Thirdly the Holy Qur'an clearly affirms
that God has finally completed His Divine Mission through the agency of
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). Hence there is no room for a new prophet to
carry the divine mission to completion.

As regards the fourth condition, if a partner were really needed he
would have been appointed in the time of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) to
share the burden of his ministry. Since no co- prophet was appointed,
this condition also stands fulfilled.

We should, therefore, look around for a fifth condition under which a
new prophet might be needed after Muhammad (PBUH). If a man argues that
people have fallen into depravity, hence there is need for a new prophet
to reform the degenerate people, we shall ask him: when did a prophet
ever come to introduce reforms only that we should need one now to carry
out the work of reformation? A prophet is appointed so that he may be
the recipient of Divine revelation and Divine revelations are made with
express purpose of transmitting a new message or to correct the wrongs
that have crept into an earlier religion.

When the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (PBUH) have
been preserved in their original and comprehensive form and when the
Divine mission has been completed by Muhammad (PBUH), all possible need
for the transmission of Divine revelations have now been fulfilled and
there is further need only of reformers to cleanse the evils of mankind,
but there is no room for the prophets.

A New Prophethood is a Curse Rather than a Blessing for the UmmahThe
third point which needs consideration is that whenever a prophet is sent
unto a certain people the question of faith and infidelity invariably
arises among these people. The faithful form one Ummah and the
disbelievers automatically form different community. The difference that
keeps these two communities apart is not peripheral or superficial but a
basic and fundamental difference of belief or disbelief in a prophet;
and those two communities can never merge with each other unless people
of one side decide to surrender their faith.

In addition, these two Ummahs obtain guidance and derive their law from
two different sources. One sect follows the law emanating from the
Divine message and Sunnah of the Prophet they believe in; the other
community is fundamentally opposed to the idea of this Prophet being the
law-giver. On this basis, it becomes an impossibility for these two
sections to join in a unified and cohesive society. It will be perfectly
clear to a man who keeps the above facts in view that the Finality of
Prophethood is a great blessing from Allah for the people of Islam. It
is due to this that the Ummah has been able to form a permanent
universal brotherhood.

The belief in the finality of Prophethood has secured Muslim society
from the danger of any fundamental dissension which might result in
permanent division in its ranks. Now every man who accepts Muhammad
(PBUH) as a divinely appointed Guide and Leader and also is not inclined
to seek instruction from any other source except the Divine message of
the Holy Prophet (PBUH) is a member of the brotherhood of Islam and on
this basis, can join this brotherhood at any time.

If the office of Prophethood had not been sealed once and for all after
Muhammad (PBUH), the people of Islam could never have forged a cohesive
society; for every new prophet would have shattered the unity of the
Ummah.

A reasonable man after a little deliberation will come to the
conclusion that when a prophet has been sent to the whole mankind (not
just to a certain group or nation), and when the Divine message has been
completely transmitted through this Prophet and further when the
teachings of the Prophet have been fully preserved, the office of
prophethood should be sealed after him in order that the whole world may
unite in allegiance to this Prophet and form one brotherhood of the
faithful. Only in this way can universal brotherhood of Islam be secured
against needless dissensions which might have repeatedly erupted on the
appearance of every successive prophet.

A prophet may be a shadow or a buruzi prophet; or "a prophet who is
law-giver and the bearer of a Divine book." The appearance of anyone of
the above God-appointed prophets will invariably have the social
consequence of his followers forming one Ummah and his detractors being
condemned as infidels and hence outside the pale of Islam. This division
of mankind is unavoidable when the need for a prophet is inevitable.

But in the absence of such a need, it is utterly impossible to expect
that Allah in His Wisdom and Beneficence will needlessly cause strife
among His creatures on the question of faith and disbelief, thus for
ever preventing His creatures to form one Ummah. Hence what is confirmed
by the Qur'an and what is clearly affirmed to be true by the Sunnah and
the consensus of the Ummah, is also corroborated by reason. Reason
demands that the office of prophethood should remain sealed hereafter
for all time to come.

The Reality of Masih' i.e. "The Incarnation of Jesus Christ"The
propagandists of the new prophethood usually tell the Muslim laity that
the traditions have foretold the arrival of a Christ incarnate'. They
argue that Christ was a prophet, hence his re-emergence is not contrary
to the concept of the finality of prophethood. The concept of the
finality of prophethood is valid, but, nevertheless the idea of the
arrival of Christ incarnate' is also tenable.

Further on, they explain that Christ incarnate' does not refer to the
Christ, son of Mary(PBUH). Christ(PBUH) is dead. The person whose
arrival has been foretold in the tradition is a man like Christ',An
incarnation of Jesus. And he is such and such a person who has already
arrived. To follow him is not contrariwise to belief in the Finality of
prophethood.'

To expose the fallacy of this case we record here authentic traditions
on this subject with full references to the authoritative works on
Hadith. After going through this collection of Ahadith, the reader can
judge for himself as to how the observations of the Holy Prophet(PBUH)
are being presented today in a form which bears no relation to their
original shape and content. Traditions Relating to the Descent of
Christ, Son of Mary Hadrat Abu Huraira reports that the Prophet (PBUH)
of God said: "I swear by Him Who hath power over my life, the son of
Mary shall descend among ye as a Just ruler. He will break the cross and
kill the swine;[see footnote 5] and he will put an end to war."
(Bukhari, Kitab Ahadith al-Anbiya; Bab:

Nuzul 'Isa Ibn Maryam; Muslim, Bab: Bayan Nuzul 'Isa; Tirmidhi,
Abwab-al-Fitan; Bab Fi Nuzul 'Isa; Musnad Ahmad, Marwiyat Abu Huraira)
In another tradition the word jizya has been substituted for harb,
"war", i.e., he will abolish the jizya on non-believers. [see footnote
6] Another tradition reported by Hadrat Abu Huraira says, "The Doomsday
shall not be established before the descent of Jesus, son of Mary," and
these words are followed by the text as given in the tradition above.
(Bukhari, Kitab-ul-Muzalim: Bab: Kasr-ul- Salib Ibn Majah,
Kitab-ul-Fitan al-Dajjal.)


