Supplement 4
============

Hadrat Abu Huraira reports that the Apsotle (PBUH) of Allah observed:
"What will you be like when the son of Mary shall descend among ye and a
person among ye will discharge the office of Imam (leader in
Prayers)."[see footnote 7] (Bukhari, Kitab Ahadith Anbiya, Bab: Nuzul
Isa; Muslim, Nuzul Isa; Musnad Ahmad, Marwiyat Abu Huraira) Hadrat Abu
Huraira reports the Apsotle (PBUH) of Allah having said: "Christ, son of
Mary, will then kill the swine and remove the Cross. A congregation for
prayer will be held for him. He will distribute such an enormous
quantity of goods that none will be left in need of anything. He will
abolish taxes.

He will encamp at Rauha (a place situated at a distance of 35 miles
from Medina) and from there, set out to perform Hajj or Umrah or both."
(The reporter is in doubt as to which of these two had been mentioned by
the Holy Prophet (PBUH). (Musnad Ahmad, Silsila Marwiyat Abi Huraira;
Muslim, Kitab-ul-Hajj; Bab Jawaz-ul- Tamatttu fil-Hajj wa-al-Qir'an)

Hadrat Abu Huraira relates that the Prophet (PBUH) of God after
mentioning the exile of Dajjal said: "The Muslims will be preparing for
war with Dajjal and they will be falling in line in preparation for
offering Prayers and the Takbir will have been said for Prayers when in
the meantime Christ (PBUH), son of Mary, will descend and lead Muslims
in Prayer. The enemy of God, Dajjal, on seeing him will start melting
like salt in water. If Christ (PBUH) would leave Dajjal alone, he would
melt and die anyway, but God will cause Dajjal to be slain at the hand
of Christ (PBUH) and Christ will display his spear strained with the
blood of Dajjal to the Muslims."

(Mishkat, Kitab-ul-Fitan, Bab: al-Malahim, quoted by Muslim) footnote5
The implication of "breaking the Cross" and "killing of the swine" is
that Christianity will become defunct as a religion. The whole edifice
of the Christian religion is based on the belief that God crucified His
only son (i.e. Hadrat Isa (PBUH) on the Cross and caused him to suffer
this 'accursed' death so that he might thus expiate for the sins of man.
Among the followers of God's Prophets, the Christians are unique in
having rejected the entire Shariah of God and retaining this belief
only.

The swine has been declared unlawful by all the Prophets, but the
Christians have gone as far as to make it lawful. Hence when Jesus(PBUH)
will proclaim on his appearance, "I am not the son of God; I did not die
on the Cross, nor did I expiate for the sins of anyone," the whole basis
of Christian belief will be demolished. Similarly, the second
distinctive charactertistic of Christianity will vanish when Jesus(PBUH)
will say: "I never declared the swine lawful for my followers nor did I
proclaim them free from the restraints of Divine Law."

footnote 6 In other words this expression means that differences
between the followers of various religions will vanish and the whole
mankind will join the brotherhood of Islam. Consequently, there shall no
longer be any war or cause for imposing religious tax on anyone. This
interpretation is supported by Tradition No. 5 and 15 quoted
hereafter.

footnote 7 The implication is that Jesus(PBUH) will not act as the
leader of Prayers. He will offer Prayers behind the already existing
Imam of Muslims.

Hadrat Abu Huraira reports that the Apostle (PBUH) of Allah affirmed:
"No Prophet shall come during the period between me and Jesus (PBUH).
And Jesus shall descend. Recognize him when you see him; he is a man of
medium height and of a rudy, fair complexion. He will be dressed in two
pieces of yellow garment. The hair of his head will appear as if water
is trickling out of them, though his hair would not be wet. He will
fight for the cause of Islam. He will break the Cross into pieces.

He will slay the swine. He will abolish the Jizya on non-believers. In
his time God will put an end to all other faiths except the religion of
Islam. And Christ will kill Dajjal. He will live on this earth for a
period of forty years and at the end of this period he will pass away.
The Muslims will offer the funeral prayers of Christ (PBUH). (Abu Dawud,
Kitab-ul-Malahim, Bab: Khuruj-ul-Dajjal; Musnad Ahmad, Marwiyat Abu
Huraira)

Hadrat Jabir bin Abdullah reports that he heard the Prophet (PBUH) as
saying: "Then Christ, son of Mary, will descend. The leader of the
Muslims will say to him, "Come, lead us in Prayer," but he will reply,
"No be thou your own leaders in prayer."[see footnote 8] He will say
this out of respect for the dignity that God has bestowed on the people
of Islam." (Muslim, Bayan Nuzul Isa ibn Maryam; Musnad Ahmad, Basilsila
Marwiyat Jabir bin Abdullah)

In connection with the episode of Ibn Sayyad, Jabir bin Abdullah
relates that Umar bin Khattab (RAA) submitted: "O Apostle of God, allow
me to slay him. In reply the Prophet of God observed, "If indeed this
man is he (referring to Dajjal), then he shall be slain by Christ, son
of Mary. You shall not slay him. But if this man is not he (Dajjal),
then you have no right to kill an individual from amongst those with
whom we have guaranteed protection (Dhimmies)." (Mishkat,
Kitab-ul-Fitan, Bab: Qissa Ibn Sayyad, quoted by Shara al-Sunnah
al-Baghawi).

Jabir b. Abdullah relates that while narrating the episode of Dajjal,
the Holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: "At that time Christ, son of Mary,
will suddenly descend among the Muslims. A congregation will be
assembled for prayer and he shall be asked: " O Spirit of God, come
forward and lead (us in Prayer)." But he will say, 'No, your own Imam
shall step forward and act as the leader.' Thus when the Muslims will
have offered the morning Prayer, they will set out to do battle against
Dajjal. When that liar will look on Christ (PBUH), he will start melting
like salt in water. Christ (PBUH) shall advance towards him and slay
him. And it will come to pass that every stone will cry out: 'Spirit of
Allah, this Jew is hiding behind me.' Not a single follower of Dajjal
will escape slaughter." (Musnad Ahmad, Basissila Riwayat Jabir b.
Abdullah)

footnote 8 The implication of this observation of Christ (PBUH) is that
"Someone from amongst you should act as your leader."

Hadrat an-Nawas b. Sam'an (while relating the story of Dajjal) reports:
"Meantime when Dajjal will be engaged in perpetrating such deeds, God
shall send Christ, son of Mary. Christ (PBUH) will descend near the
white tower in the eastern quarter of Damascus, wearing two pieces of
yellow garment and resting his hands upon the arms of two angels. When
he will bend his head, it would seem that drops of water would fall down
from his head and when he will raise his head it would seem as if pearls
would be trickling in the form of drops.

Any infidel who will be within reach of the air of his breath, and the
air of his breath willr each as far as his eye would see - will not
escape death. Later the son of Mary will pursue Dajjal and will overtake
him at the gate of Lydda [see footnote 9] and put him to death."
(Muslim, Dhikr Dajjal; Abu Dawud, Kitab ul-Malahim, Bab: Khuruj; Dajjal;
Tirmidhi, Abwab-ul-Fitan; Bab: Fi Fitna al-Dajjal; Ibn Majah, Kitab
ul-Fitna, Bab: Fitna al-Dajjal)

Abdullah b. Amr b. al-As says that the Apostle of God (PBUH) observed:
"Dajjal will arise in my people and will survive for forty (here the
reporter is not certain whether the Prophet mentioned forty days or
forty months or forty years). Then God shall send Christ, son of Mary,
unto the world. He will resemble in appearance with 'Urwa b. Masud (a
companion of the Prophet). Christ will pursue Dajjal and put him to
death. Following this for a period of seven years the state of the world
will be such that a quarrel between two individuals will be unknown."
(Muslim, Dhikr-ul-Dajjal) footnote 9 Please note that Lod (modern Lydda)
is situated at a distance of few miles from Tel Aviv, the capital of the
State of Israel in Palestine. The Jews have built a large air-base at
this place.

Hudhaifa b. Usaid al-Ghifari reports that "once the Holy Prophet(PBUUH)
visited us when we were sitting in company and talking to each other.
The holy Prophet(PBUH) enquired: "What are you talking about?" The
people said,"we were talking about the doomsday." The holy Prophet(PBUH)
observed :"Doomsday shall not be established before the appearance of
ten signs. He then enumarated those signs as:

Smoke Dajjal Daabba Rising of the sun in the West The descent of Christ
son of Mary (PBUH) Appearance of Yajuj and Majuj Formation of three huge
cavities or landslide on the earth, one in the east Second in the west,
and third in the Arabian Isles, Finally, a huge conflagration which will
arise in Yemen and drive people towards the plain of Doom."

(Muslim, Kitab ul-Fitan wa Ashtrat-us Sa'h:Abu Dawud, Kitab ul-
Malahim, bab: Amarat ul-Sa'h).

It is reported by Thauban, the freed slave of the Holy Prophet that the
holy Prophet (PBUH) observed: "God will grant protection from Hell-fire
to two groups from among the people of my Ummah. One group consists of
those who will invade India; the other group will consist of those who
will align themselves with Christ, son of Mary(PBUH)." (Nasa'i,Kitab
ul-jihad;Musnad ahmad, Bisilsila Riwayat Thauban)

Mujamme b. jaria Ansari reports: "I heard the Holy Prophet(PBUH) as
saying: Christ, son of Mary will slay Dajjal at the gate of Lod(Lydda)."
(Musnad Ahmad , Tirmidhi, Abwab-ul-Fitan).

Abu Umama al-Bahli(mentioning Dajjal in the course of a long tradition)
reports "Exactly when the Imam of the Muslims will step forward to lead
the morning prayers, Christ son of Mary(PBUH) will descend among them.
The Imam will retreat to make room for Christ to lead the prayers. But
Christ patting the Imam in the middle of his shoulders will say "Nay
thou shall act as leader, for this congregation has assembled to follow
you in prayer." Hence the Imam will lead the prayers. When the prayer is
over Christ(PBUH) will command, Open the Gate.' The gate shall be thrown
open.

Dajjal will be present outside the gate with a host of seventy thousand
Jewish troops. As soon as Dajjal catches the sight of Christ (PBUH), he
will say to him," I shall strike you with such force that you will not
survive the blow." Christ (PBUH) will pursue and overtake him at the
Eastern gate of Lod(Lydda). God will cause the jews to be defeated.
Earth shall be filled with muslims as a vessel is filled to the brim
with water-the entire world shall recite the same Kalima and worship
shall be offered to none else except God Almighty." (Ibn
Majah,Kitab-ul-Fitan ; Bab : Fitan Dajjal) Uthman b. Abi al-As reports
that he heard the Prophet of God (PBUH) as saying: "And Christ son of
Mary will descend at the time of morniing prayer.

The leader of the muslims will say to him, "O spirit of God, Be thou
our leader in prayer." He will answer "The people of this Ummah are
leaders unto each other." At this, the leader of the muslims shall step
forward and lead the prayers. When the prayer is over, Christ(PBUH) will
take hold of his weapon and advance towards Dajjal. Dajjal, on seeing
Christ shall start melting like lead.

Christ (PBUH) will slay him with his weapon. The companions of Dajjal
will be defeated. They will flee away, but will not find a hiding place
anywhere. Even the trees will cry out,"O pious, this infidel is hiding
behind me," and the stones will say, "O pious, this unbeliever has taken
cover behind me." (Musnad Ahmad, Tabarani, Hakim)

Samura b. Jundub (in a long tradition) ascribes this saying to the Holy
Prophet (PBUH): "Then at morning time Christ, son of Mary, shall descend
among the Muslims. And Allah shall cause Dajjal and his hosts to suffer
a most crushing defeat. Even the walls and roots of the trees will cry
out, "O pious, this infidel is hiding behind me. Come and strike him to
death." (Musnad Ahmad, Hakim)

A tradition related to 'Imarn b. Husain says that the Prophet of God
(PBUH) observed: "There will always be a group of people among my
followers who will keep firm faith in right and they shall overwhelm
their opponents till God issues a decree and Christ son of Mary (PBUH)
descends upon earth." (Musnad Ahmad)

With reference to the episode of Dajjal, Hadrat 'Aisha (may Allah be
pleased with her) reports that "Hadrat 'Isa (PBUH) will descend and slay
Dajjal. After this Hadrat 'Isa (PBUH) shall rule over the earth as a
just leader and a benevolent sovereign for a period of forty years."
(Musnad Ahmad)

Safina, the freed slave of the Apostle of God (PBUH) reports (in
connection with the episode of Dajjal) that "Hadrat 'Isa (PBUH) will
descend and God shall put an end to the life of Dajjal near the slope of
Afiq"[see footnote 10]. (Musnad Ahmad)

Hadrat Hudaifa b. Yama relates (with reference to Dajjal), "When the
Muslims will fall in lines to offer prayers, Christ son of Mary (PBUH)
shall descend from heaven before their eyes. He will lead the prayers.
When the prayers are over he will say to the people: "Clear the way
bewteen me and this enemy of God." God will give victory to the Muslims
over the hosts of Dajjal.

The Muslims will inflict dire punishment upon the enemy. Even the trees
and stones will cry out, "O Abdullah, O Abdul Rahman, O Muslim, come,
here is a Jew behind me, kill him." In this way God will cause the Jews
to be annihilated and Muslims shall be the victors. They will break the
Cross, slaughter the swine and abolish Jizya (levied on non-Muslims)."
(Mustadrak Hakim - A brief version of this tradition has been recorded
in Muslim. Hafiz Ibn Hajar in Fath-ul-Bari Vol. VI, p. 450 declares this
tradition to be authentic.)

The above are twenty-one traditions which have been transmitted on the
authority of fourteen companions of the Holy Prophet and have been
recorded with correct references in the most authoritative books on
Hadith. In addition to these, there are numerous other traditions
relating to the same subject, but we have not reproduced them here for
the sake of brevity. We have taken as example only those traditions
which are sound and authentic as regards chain of transmission.


