Supplement 5
============

Footnote 10 Afiq known as Fiq in modern times is a city in Syria,
situated on the borderline between Syria and Israel. There is a lake
called Tibriya a few miles toward the west of the city. This lake is the
source of river Jordan. Towards the southwest of this lake, there is a
path between the mountains which descends two thousand feet to the point
in the lake of Tibriya where the river rises. This mountainous path is
called the slope of Afiq.

The Verdict of these TraditionsAnyone who reads the above traditions
will come to the conclusion that they do not mention the advent of a
promised Masih or a like Masih or projection of Masih. The texts
referred to above leave no scope for any man who is born of human sperm
from the womb of a woman to declare "I am that Masih whose advent was
foretold by the Holy Prophet Muhammad (PBUH)."

All the above traditions clearly and definitively proclaim the descent
of that Holy Christ who was born to Mary without the instrumentality of
father two thousand years ago. It is certainly of no avail at this
juncture to open the debate as to whether the Holy Christ is dead or
exists alive somewhere in the world. Supposing he is dead, God has the
power to raise him alive[see footnote 11], otherwise also it is not
beyond the Divine power of God to keep a man alive somewhere in the
cosmos for as long as thousands of years; and to bring the man back to
the world at His Will.

At any rate, a believer in the veracity and sanctity of the traditions
will have no doubt that the traditions foretell the advent of 'Christ
son of Mary' and no one else. On the contrary, if a person has no faith
in the traditions, he would not be a believer in the descent of anyone,
for traditions are the only bases of the doctrine of Descent.

In view of all this, it is a strange kind of funny logic to take the
doctrine of Descent derived from the traditions and having torn out the
clear reference to Christ son of Mary, establish a modern day 'Christ
incarnate' in place of Mary's son.

Yet another point which is made equally clear by the traditions is that
Christ son of Mary will not descend in the capacity of a newly appointed
Apostle of God. He will not receive any Divine revelations. He will not
be the bearer of any new message or repository of a fresh mandate from
God, nor will he amend, enlarge or, abridge the Shariah of Muhammad
(PBUH), nor indeed will Christ son of Mary be brought into the world to
accomplish the renewal of faith. Christ son of Mary (PBUH) will not call
upon the people to put their faith in his own prophethood, nor will he
found a separate community of followers[see footnote 12].

He will be appointed to accomplish a particular task and this will be
to root out the mischief of Dajjal. To serve this purpose, Jesus(PBUH)
will descend in such manner that those Muslims among whom he appears,
will have no doubt at all about his identity as Jesus son of Mary whose
advent at a most opportune time was foretold by the Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH). Jesus(PBUH) will join the community of Muslims and will offer
prayers behind the incumbent Imam of the Muslims[see footnote 13].

He will allow the incumbent Imam of the Muslims to supersede him so as
to make it clear beyond any shadow of doubt that he has not descended to
assert his position as a Prophet or to carry out the office of
Prophethood. There is no doubt that in the presence of a Prophet among a
community of people no other person can assume the office of an Imam or
a leader.

Hence when Jesus(PBUH) will become an individual member of the
Fraternity of Islam, this fact will in itself proclaim to the world that
he has not descended to assume the office of a Prophet. On this basis,
therefore, the question of opening the seal of Prophethood at the second
coming of Christ is completely irrelevant.

It might be said (without actually comparing the two situations) that
Jesus's advent will be like the appointment of a former Head of State to
render some State service under the regime of the present Head of State.
It is not too difficult for a man of ordinary common sense to understand
that the appointment of a former Head of State to render some State duty
under the regime of present Head is not a violation of the constitution
of the State. Two cases, however, do violate the State Law. In the first
case, if a former Head of State makes a bid to assume that office once
again.

In the second case, if a person refutes the existence of the former
regime of a defunct Head of State, for this would be tantamount to
challenging the validity of the tasks carried out by the former regime.
In the absence of any one of the above two eventualities, the mere
appointment of a past Head of State to a State duty does not change the
constitutional position. The same applies to the second advent of
Christ, son of Mary.

The seal of Prophethood is not violated by his second advent. However,
if he assumes the office of Prophethood once more and starts performing
the duties of a Prophet or conversely a man repudiates the sanctity of
Christ (PBUH) as a former Prophet, both these cases constitute a
violation of God's law in respect of the creation of Prophets. The
traditions have clearly ruled out the existence of both these
possibilities. On the one hand, the traditions affirm that no Prophet
shall come after Muhammad (PBUH). At the same time, they foretell the
second coming of Christ, son of Mary. This is sufficient to make it
clear that during his second advent in the world, Christ will not
discharge the duties of a Prophet.

In the same manner, his advent will not give rise to a new question of
faith or apostasy among the followers of Islam. Any one who repudiates
the sanctity of Christ as a former Prophet is an apostate. The Holy
Prophet (PBUH) himself affirmed Christ's sanctity as a former Prophet.
The followers of Muhammad (PBUH) therefore, have from the beginning,
always believed in the sanctity of Christ as a former Prophet. This
belief will hold good even at the time of the second advent of Christ.

At that time Muslims will not put faith in the ministry of a new
Prophet. They will retain their belief in the sanctity of Christ as a
former Prophet. This position is neither contrary to faith in the
Finality of Prophethood today nor will it be derogatory to this belief
at the time of Christ's second advent in the world.

The last point which is made clear by these other traditions and
numerous others pertains to the fact that Dajjal (for the suppression of
whose grave misdeeds God will send Christ, son of Mary(peace be on him),
will arise among the nation of Jews and that he will impose as 'Masih.'
No one can understand the reality of this fact without studying the
history of the Jews and their religious beliefs.

After the death of Hadrat Sulaiman (PBUH) [i.e. Solomon], the tribe of
Israel suffered perpetual decline until it came to pass that they became
slaves of the Babylonian and Assyrian Empires and their imperial masters
dispersed them over the face of the earth.

At that moment in their history the Prophet of the Jews began to
deliver the glad tidings of the arrival of a 'Masih' from God who will
redeem them from disgrace. On the basis of such prophecies the Jews had
long awaited the advent of a 'masih' who would be a king. This king
would fight and win territories. He would gather Jews from all over the
world and assemble them in Palestine.

He would create a mighty Jewish Empire. Contrary to all their eager
expectations when the God-appointed 'Masih', Christ son of Mary (PBUH)
came without an army to win countries, the Jews repudiated his
Prophethood and determined to put an end to his life. Since then the
Jews all over the world have awaited the rise of a 'Masih Mau'ud,' 'The
Promised Messiah,' the glad tidings of whose arrival had been delivered
to them by their Prophets of yore. Their literature abounds with the
wishful dreams of this millennium.

The Jews have for centuries been savoring the imaginary pleasure
afforded by the description of this millennium in Talmud and the works
of the Rabbis. The Jewish nation has cherished the hope that this
'Promised Messiah' would be a great military and political leader. He
will restore to them the country between the rivers Nile and Euphrates
(which the Jews have always coveted as their patrimony). He will gather
Jews from all parts of the world and assemble them once again in this
country.

Today when we look at the affairs of the Middle East in the perspective
of the prophecies of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH), we perceive at once that
the stage has been set for the emergence of the Dajjal who as was
foretold by the Holy Prophet (PBUH) would rise as a 'Promised Messiah'
of the Jews.

The Muslim people have been ejected from a large part of Palestine and
in that part a Jewish State named 'Israel' has been set up. Jews from
all over the world are converging at this place. America, Britain and
France have helped to make this Jewish State a formidable military
power.

The Jewish scientists and technocrats are developing this country fast
with the massive aid of Jewish capital. The military and technical
potential of Israel poses a grave threat to the neighboring Muslim
countries. The leaders of Israel have never concealed their design of
redeeming 'the land of their patrimony.' The map of the future Jewish
State which they have been publishing for a long time is given on the
following page. [Map omitted] It shows that they wish to include in the
Jewish State the whole of Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, nearly all the area of
Iraq besides taking Askandron from Turkey, Sinai and Delta area from
Egypt and Upper Hejaz and Najd areas from Saudi Arabia.

This of course includes the Holy City of Madina also. In this context,
it is quite clear that taking advantage of the critical conditions
created by a World war, the Jews will certainly make a bid to grab these
areas. And at this juncture will arise Dajjal whom the Jews will deem as
their 'Promised Messiah.'

The Holy Prophet (PBUH) not only prophesied the advent of this Dajjal
but also had warned the Muslims that they would suffer colossal
hardships and one day will seem like one year of suffering and calamity.
It was for this reason that the Prophet of God (PBUH) used to pray for
protection against the great evil of 'Dajjal Masih' and he used to
enjoin his followers to implore Allah to save them the severity of these
evil times.

It is certain that Allah will not send any 'Christ Incarnate' to combat
with this 'Dajjal Masih.' He will appoint the real Christ, the Christ
who was born of Mary, and whom the Jews had declined to acknowledge as a
Prophet two thousand years ago. He will send the same Christ whom the
Jews believed they had put out of their way by killing him. The place
where the real Christ will descend is not in India, Africa or America.
It is in Damascus that he will appear, because this place will be the
actual battle ground at that time. Look at the map no. 1

[map has to be omitted]

and you will find that Damascus lies at a distance of hardly 50-60
miles from the orders of Israel. If you recall the text of the
traditions we have cited above, you will find it not too difficult to
understand that Dajjal will penetrate into Syria with 70,000 Jewish
troops and will take position before Damascus. At this moment of crisis,
Christ son of Mary (PBUH) will descend near a white minaret in the
Eastern quarter of Damascus. After the morning prayers, Christ (PBUH)
will advance with the Muslims for fighting against Dajjal. The enemy
will retreat before the powerful assault of Christ son of Mary, and
Dajjal will run away towards Israel by way of the slope of Afiq
(Reference to Tradition No. 21). Christ (PBUH) will pursue Dajjal and
destroy him on the airfield of Lydda (Traditions No. 10-14- 15).

A great slaughter of the Jews will ensue and every one of them will be
annihilated. The nation of Jews will be exterminated (Traditions No.
9-15-21).

At the proclamation of truth by Christ, the Christian religion will
become extinct (Traditions No. 1-2-4-6). And the followers of all
religions, their former having renounced allegiances, will amalgamate to
form the one and only brotherhood of Islam. The traditions reveal this
fact clearly beyond any doubt.

In view of the above, the propaganda network that has been set up in
our country in the name of Masih Mau'ud, 'the Promised Messiah', is
unquestionably a false and bogus venture.

One of the funniest aspects of this base movement is that the person
who deems himself the subject of the prophecies of Muhammad (PBUH) has
given this interesting explanation of his identity as 'Christ son of
Mary':

"He (God Almighty) named me Mary in the third part of
Barahin-i-Ahmadia. Later, as is evident from Barahin-i--Ahmadia I was
reared in the form of Mary for two years. Then, my body was filled with
the soul of Christ just as the body of Mary was filled with Christ's
soul and in a metaphorical sense I became pregnant with the soul of
Christ. At last after a period of many months (lasting not more than ten
months) I was metamorphosed from Mary into Christ by a Divine revelation
which has been recorded at the end of part four of Barahin-i-Ahmadia.
Hence in this way I became the son of Mary." (Kashti-e-Noah, pp.
87-89).

In other words he became Mary in the first place, then got pregnant,
and lastly from his own abdomen he issued forth as Christ son of Mary.
There was one snag left, however. According to the traditions, Christ
son of Mary, would appear in Damascus, which has been a prominent and
famous place in Syria for several thousand years and still exists by
this name on the map of the world.

This difficulty was explained away by another fanciful statement: "Let
it be known that in respect of the interpretation of the word
'Damascus', God Almighty has explained to me in a revelation that in
this place the name Damascus has been given to a village whose
inhabitants possess the characteristics of Yazid and are followers of
the habits and ideas of the impure Yazid. This town of Qadian, because
of the reason that most of its residents possess the traits of Yazid in
their character, is akin to and bears certain resemblance to Damascus
(marginal note of Izala-i-Auham, pp. 63-73).

But that was not all. Yet another problem demanded clearance, i.e., the
traditions had prophesied that Christ would descend near a white pillar.
This problem was finally solved when the new 'Christ' got a white pillar
built for him. The traditions mentioned that the white pillar would be
standing prior to the descent of Christ near it and in Qadian the pillar
was built after the appearance of 'Masih Mau'ud.' But never mind the
discrepancy. Anyone who reads the above interpretations of this 'Masih
Mau'ud' with open eyes will arrive at the conclusion that a clear fraud
has been openly perpetrated by an imposter.

footnote 11 Those who deny this possibility should go through verse 259
of Surah al- Baqarah, in which God affirms in clear words that He let
one of His creatures lie dead for a hundred years and at the end of this
period He raised the man alive.

footnote 12 The Ulema of Islam have explained this question in detail.
'Allama Taftazani (722 A.H. - 792 A.H.) in Shara 'Aqaid-i-Nasafi writes:
"It is established that Muhammad (PBUH) is the Final Prophet......If it
is said that according to the Hadith the descent of Christ (PBUH) will
take place after Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) we shall say, "Yes, this fact
has been mentioned in the traditions. But Christ (PBUH) will appear as a
follower of Muhammad (PBUH). The Shariah of Christ stands abrogated.
Hence he will neither receive any Divine revelations, nor will he
establish any canon. In all his actions he will represent Muhammad(PBUH)
only."

The same view point has been re-affirmed by 'Allama Alusi in Tafsir
Ruh- al-Ma'ani: Later when Christ (PBUH) appears, he will retain his
dignity as a former Prophet. After all, God will certainly not divest
him of this dignity, but he will not follow his former mandate, because
the Shariahs of all prophets, including that of Christ (PBUH), stand
abrogated. Hence it will be a Divine obligation upon Christ (PBUH) to
follow in letter and spirit the law of Muhammad (PBUH). He will receive
no Divine revelation, nor will he be charged with the duty of giving new
religious laws. In all his deeds, Christ will act as a representative of
the Holy Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) and he will function as a deputy and
one among the rulers of the followers of Muhammad (PBUH).

Imam Razi further elucidates this point like this: The period of the
Prophets extended as far as the advent of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). When
Muhammad (PBUH) was raised as a Prophet, the era of the advent of new
Prophets came to an end. It is not beyond comprehension that Christ
(PBUH), after his descent, will act as a follower of Muhammad (PBUH).

footnote 13 Although two traditions (No.5 and 21) bear ample evidence
that Jesus (PBUH) will act as leader in the first prayer after his
descent, the majority of the traditions which are comparatively more
authentic (vide No. 3,7,9,15,16) speak of the fact that Jesus(PBUH) will
decline to lead the prayers. He will call upon the incumbent Imam of the
Muslims to step forward and lead the prayers. All scholars of traditions
and commentators are agreed on this latter point.


