Additional Sayings About the Prophet (pbuh)
===========================================

III&E Brochure Series; No. 16 (published by The Institute of Islamic
Information and Education (III&E)) YOU SHOULD KNOW THIS MAN ENCYCLOPEDIA
BRITANNICA confirms: "....a mass of detail in the early sources show
that he was an honest and upright man who had gained the respect and
loyalty of others who were like-wise honest and upright men." (Vol. 12)
GEORGE BERNARD SHAW said about him: "He must be called the Saviour of
Humanity.

I believe that if a man like him were to assume the dictatorship of the
modern world, he would succeed in solving its problems in a way that
would bring it much needed peace and happiness." (The Genuine Islam,
Singapore, Vol. 1, No. 8, 1936) He was by far the most remarkable man
that ever set foot on this earth. He preached a religion, founded a
state, built a nation, laid down a moral code, initiated numerous social
and political reforms, established a powerful and dynamic society to
practice and represent his teachings and completely revolutionized the
worlds of human thought and behavior for all times to come. "His Name is
MUHAMMAD" May Peace of God Be Upon Him (pbuh) He was born in Arabia in
the year 570 C.E.

(common era), started his mission of preaching the religion of Truth,
Islam (submission to One God) at the age of forty and departed from this
world at the age of sixty-three. During this short period of 23 years of
his Prophethood, he changed the complete Arabian peninsula from paganism
and idolatry to worship of One God, from tribal quarrels and wars to
national solidarity and cohesion, from drunkenness and debauchery to
sobriety and piety, from lawlessness and anarchy to disciplined living,
from utter bankruptcy to the highest standards of moral excellence.

Human history has never known such a complete transformation of a
people or a place before or since - and imagine all these unbelievable
wonders in just over two decades. LAMARTINE, the renowned historian
speaking on the essentials of human greatness wonders: "If greatness of
purpose, smallness of means and astounding results are the three
criteria of human genius, who could dare to compare any great man in
modern history with Muhammad? The most famous men created arms, laws and
empires only.

They founded, if anything at all, no more than material powers which
often crumbled away before their eyes. This man moved not only armies,
legislation, empires, peoples and dynasties, but millions of men in
one-third of the then inhabited world; and more than that, he moved the
altars, the gods, the religions, the ideas, the beliefs and souls....his
forbearance in victory, his ambition, which was entirely devoted to one
idea and in no manner striving for an empire; his endless prayers, his
mystic conversations with God, his death and his triumph after death;
all these attest not to an imposture but to a firm conviction which gave
him the power to restore a dogma.

This dogma was two-fold, the unity of God and the immateriality of God;
the former telling what God is, the latter telling what God is not; the
one overthrowing false gods with the sword, the other starting an idea
with the words." "Philosopher, orator, apostle, legislator, warrior,
conqueror of ideas, restorer of rational dogmas, of a cult without
images, the founder of twenty terrestrial empires and of one spiritual
empire, that is Muhammad. As regards all the standards by which Human
Greatness may be measured, we may well ask, Is there any man greater
than he?" (Lamartine, HISTOIRE DE LA TURQUIE, Paris, 1854, Vol. II, pp
276-277) The world has had its share of great personalities.

But these were one-sided figures who distinguished themselves in but
one or two fields, such as religious thought or military leadership. The
lives and teachings of these great personalities of the world are
shrouded in the mist of time. There is so much speculation about the
time and place of their birth, the mode and style of their life, the
nature and detail of their teachings and the degree and measure of their
success or failure that it is impossible for humanity to reconstruct
accurately the lives and teachings of these men.

Not so this man. Muhammad (pbuh) accomplished so much in such diverse
fields of human thought and behavior in the fullest blaze of human
history. Every detail of his private life and public utterances has been
accurately documented and faithfully preserved to our day. The
authenticity of the record so preserved are vouched for not only by the
faithful followers but even by his prejudiced critics.

Muhammad (pbuh) was a religious teacher, a social reformer, a moral
guide, an administrative colossus, a faithful friend, a wonderful
companion, a devoted husband, a loving father - all in one. No other man
in history ever excelled or equaled him in any of these different
aspects of life - but it was only for the selfless personality of
Muhammad (pbuh) to achieve such incredible perfections. MAHATMA GANDHI,
speaking on the character of Muhammad, (pbuh) says in (YOUNG INDIA): "I
wanted to know the best of one who holds today's undisputed sway over
the hearts of millions of mankind....I became more than convinced that
it was not the sword that won a place for Islam in those days in the
scheme of life.

It was the rigid simplicity, the utter self-effacement of the Prophet,
the scrupulous regard for his pledges, his intense devotion to this
friends and followers, his intrepidity, his fearlessness, his absolute
trust in God and in his own mission. These and not the sword carried
everything before them and surmounted every obstacle. When I closed the
2nd volume (of the Prophet's biography),

I was sorry there was not more for me to read of the great life."
THOMAS CARLYLE in his (HEROES AND HEROWORSHIP), was simply amazed as to:
"how one man single-handedly, could weld warring tribes and wandering
Bedouins into a most powerful and civilized nation in less than two
decades." DIWAN CHAND SHARMA wrote: "Muhammad was the soul of kindness,
and his influence was felt and never forgotten by those around him."
(D.C. Sharma, THE PROPHETS OF THE EAST, Calcutta, 1935, pp. 12) EDWARD
GIBBON and SIMON OCKLEY speaking on the profession of Islam write: "'I
BELIEVE IN ONE GOD, AND MAHOMET, AN APOSTLE OF GOD' is the simple and
invariable profession of Islam.

The intellectual image of the Deity has never been degraded by any
visible idol; the honor of the Prophet has never transgressed the
measure of human virtues; and his living precepts have restrained the
gratitude of his disciples within the bounds of reason and religion."
(HISTORY OF THE SARACEN EMPIRES, London, 1870, p. 54) Muhammad (pbuh)
was nothing more or less than a human being. But he was a man with a
noble mission, which was to unite humanity on the worship of One and
Only One God and to teach them the way to honest and upright living
based on the commands of God.

He always described himself as, "A Servant and Messenger of God," and
so indeed every action of his proclaimed to be. Speaking on the aspect
of equality before God in Islam, the famous poetess of India, SAROJINI
NAIDU says: "It was the first religion that preached and practiced
democracy; for, in the mosque, when the call for prayer is sounded and
worshippers are gathered together, the democracy of Islam is embodied
five times a day when the peasant and king kneel side by side and
proclaim: 'God Alone is Great'... I have been struck over and over again
by this indivisible unity of Islam that makes man instinctively a
brother." (S. Naidu, IDEALS OF ISLAM, vide Speeches & Writings, Madras,
1918, p. 169)

In the words of PROF. HURGRONJE: "The league of nations founded by the
prophet of Islam put the principle of international unity and human
brotherhood on such universal foundations as to show candle to other
nations." He continues: "The fact is that no nation of the world can
show a parallel to what Islam has done towards the realization of the
idea of the League of Nations." The world has not hesitated to raise to
divinity, individuals whose lives and missions have been lost in
legend.

Historically speaking, none of these legends achieved even a fraction
of what Muhammad (pbuh) accomplished. And all his striving was for the
sole purpose of uniting mankind for the worship of One God on the codes
of moral excellence. Muhammad (pbuh) or his followers never at any time
claimed that he was a Son of God or the God-incarnate or a man with
divinity - but he always was and is even today considered as only a
Messenger chosen by God.

MICHAEL H. HART in his recently published book on ratings of men who
contributed towards the benefit and upliftment of mankind writes: "My
choice of Muhammad to lead the list of the world's most influential
persons may surprise some readers and may be questioned by others, but
he was the only man in history who was supremely successful on both the
religious and secular levels." (M.H. Hart, THE 100: A RANKING OF THE
MOST INFLUENTIAL PERSONS IN HISTORY, New York, 1978, p. 33) K. S.
RAMAKRISHNA RAO, an Indian Professor of Philosophy in his booklet,
("Muhammad, The Prophet of Islam,") calls him the "Perfect model for
human life." Prof. Ramakrishna Rao explains his point by saying: "The
personality of Muhammad, it is most difficult to get into the whole
truth of it. Only a glimpse of it I can catch. What a dramatic
succession of picturesque scenes! There is Muhammad, the Prophet.

There is Muhammad, the Warrior; Muhammad, the Businessman; Muhammad,
the Statesman; Muhammad, the Orator; Muhammad, the Reformer; Muhammad,
the Refuge of Orphans; Muhammad, the Protector of Slaves; Muhammad, the
Emancipator of Women; Muhammad, the Judge; Muhammad, the Saint. All in
all these magnificent roles, in all these departments of human
activities, he is alike a hero."

Today after a lapse of fourteen centuries, the life and teachings of
Muhammad (pbuh) have survived without the slightest loss, alteration or
interpolation. They offer the same undying hope for treating mankind's
many ills, which they did when he was alive. This is not a claim of
Muhammad's (pbuh) followers but also the inescapable conclusion forced
upon by a critical and unbiased history.

The least you could do as a thinking and concerned human being is to
stop for a moment and ask yourself: Could these statements sounding so
extraordinary and revolutionary be really true? And supposing they
really are true and you did not know this man MUHAMMAD (pbuh) or hear
about him, isn't it time you responded to this tremendous challenge and
put in some effort to know him? It will cost you nothing but it may
prove to be the beginning of a completely new era in your life.

by Eng. Husain Pasha We invite you to make a discovery of this
wonderful man, Muhammad (pbuh), the like of whom never walked on the
face of this earth. Please call for more information about Islam and
this wonderful man, Muhammad (pbuh): The Institute of Islamic
Information & Education P.O. Box 41129 Chicago, IL 60641-0129 Tel. (312)
777-7443 Fax. (312) 777-7199


