Prophet Muhammad (saas)
=======================

A Blessing for Mankind CONTENTS Birth Youth Marriage Prophethood
Challenges Migration (Hijrah) New Era Emmissaries Entertained in Madinah
Liberation of Makkah Farewell Pilgrimage Death A Guidance to follow
Economy (Expertise & Outlook) Cleanliness Orderliness Friendliness
Neighborliness Goodwill Respect for Women Statesmanship Messengers of
Allah Birth Muhammad (PBUH) (Blessings and Peace be upon him) was born
in Makkah, Arabia, on Monday, 12 Rabi' Al-Awwal (2 August C.E).

His mother, Aminah was the daughter of Wahb bin Abd Al-Manaf of the
Zahrah family. His father, Abdullah, was the son of Abd Al-Muttalib. His
genealogy has been traced to the noble house of Isma'il, the son of
Ibrahim (Abraham) (PBUH) (May Peace be upon him) in about the fortieth
descent. Muhammad's father had died before his birth and his mother died
when he was about six years old making him an orphan. In accordance with
the tradition of noble families of Makkah, he was taken by a foster
mother, Halimah, to her village where he lived for a few years. During
these years he was taken to Makkah several times to visit his mother.

After the death of his mother, he was placed under the custody of his
grandfather, Abd Al-Muttalib. When the grandfather died, he was under
the care of his uncle, Abu Talib. By this time he used to look after
sheep around Makkah and used to accompany his uncle on trade journeys to
Syria. Youth In his youth he believed firmly in the Oneness of Allah
(God)(SWT).

He lived a very simple life and hated vanity and pride. He was
compassionate to the poor, widows and orphans and shared their
sufferings by helping them. He avoided all vices, which were commonly
practiced among young people such as gambling, drinking wine, vulgarity
and others. He was well-known as As-Sadiq (the truthful) and Al-Amin
(the trustworthy). He was always trusted as a mediator between two
conflicting parties in his homeland, Makkah. Marriage When he was about
25 years old, his uncle urged him to work with the caravan which
belonged to a wealthy widow named Khadijah. He accepted and undertook
the journey to Syria.

He conducted business with such prudence and sense of duty that he
returned with larger profit than usual. Khadijah was so impressed by the
honest and attractive personality of Muhammad (PBUH) that she offered to
marry him which Muhammad (PBUH) accepted. This marriage was a happy one.
They had children. Khadijah was so far his only wife until she died at
the age of 51. Prophethood Muhammad (PBUH) was born amidst a
polytheistic (unbeliever) society. He was saddened and sick of the
corrupt society around him.

He often went to Hira cave in the mountain near Makkah, later known as
Jabal An-nur (the mountain of Light) where he meditated and pondered
over the prevailing darkness brought about by ignorance. There he often
remained deep in thought in communion with the unseen yet All-Pervading
God of the Universe. One night, while he was meditating in the Hira
cave, the Angel Gabriel (peace be upon him) came to him. The Angel
aroused him and his mighty voice reverberated in his ears. He was
perplexed and did not know what to do. He was asked to read. He replied:
"I cannot read!" The Angel repeated three times asking Muhammad (PBUH)
to read, but he replied the same answer. Finally the Angel asked: [Read
in the name of your Lord , who created man from a clot. Read in the name
of your God, the Most Bountiful, who taught by means of the pen, and
taught man what he did not know.] (Qur'an 96: 1-5)This was the first
revelation received by Muhammad (PBUH).

He was 40 years old at that time. The revelation continued to come to
him from time to time in a period of 23 years. These series of
revelation were arranged according to the divine guidance given to
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH), and later collected in the form of a Mushaf
(book) the Qur'an (Reading). Most of its verses have clear meaning. Some
verses are interpreted in conjunction with other verses and some others
were interpreted by the Prophet (PBUH) himself through his words,
actions and agreements which are known as his Sunnah (Traditions). The
Qur'an and the Sunnah together constitute the guidance and way of life
for those who submit their life to Allah (God) (SWT).

People who follow this guidance and way of life are guaranteed by Allah
(SWT) to be saved in this world and the Hereafter. Challenges When the
Prophet (PBUH) called the people to the way of Allah, not many people
listened to his call. Most of them were members of his family and from
the low class society. Among them were Khadijah, Ali, Zayd and Bilal.
When he intensified his mission (da'wah: Call to Islam) by publicly
announcing the religion he preached, he won more followers but at the
same time had to face many challenges from the nobles and leaders who
found their position being threatened and jeopardized.

They stood together, under the pretext of defending the religion of
their ancestors, to fight the new religion. The morale of the few people
who embraced Islam was heightened when a small group of the respected
people of Makkah joined the religion. Notable among them were Uthman bin
Affan, Zubair bin Al-Awwam, Abd Ar-Rehman bin Awf, Talhah bin
Ubaydullah, Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas, Arqam bin Abi Arqam, Ubaydullah bin
Harith, Sa'id bin Zayd, Amr bin Nufail, Fatimah (the wife of Nufail),
Asma binti Abu Bakr, Abdullah bin Mas'ud, Ja'far bin Abi Thalib (May
Allah be pleased with them) and many others. Before this group, Abu Bakr
was the first among the earlier followers that impressed the Prophet
(PBUH) very much. The Prophet (PBUH) said about him: "I never invited
anyone to the faith who did not display any hesitation in embracing it
except Abu Bakr.

When I had offered Islam, he showed no hesitation at all in accepting
it." As the result of these challenges from the Makkan unbelievers, some
Muslims were subjected to torture, persecutions, isolations and
boycotts. The Prophet (PBUH) had to be patient and had to look for the
protection of Muslims. He asked Negus, King of Ethiopia to allow Muslims
to migrate to his country. Negus welcomed the Muslims emigrants in his
territory and refused to hand them over to the Makkan unbeliever
rulers.

Migration (Hijrah) By the end of the Makkan period, the Prophet (PBUH)
lost two people who were dear to him. They were his most affectionate
uncle, Abu Talib, and his faithful and loving wife, Khadijah. After
their deaths, the Makkans felt free to do what they wanted to impose to
the Prophet and his followers. In many Makkah was the Ka'bah (the Holy
Mosque), which was built by Prophet Ibrahim (PBUH) centuries before as a
holy place to worship Allah (SWT), the One. But in the course of time,
the place had been converted by unbelievers to the worship of objects
other than Allah (SWT). People added to it many tradition of their
own.

They used to visit this place for a few months in a year for
pilgrimage. They came from all parts of Arabia, representing various
famous tribes. The pilgrimage, inspite of its religious bearing,
constituted for the Arabs a yearly festival where people met and indulge
in their cultural activities. The Prophet (PBUH) took this opportunity
to spread Islam.

Among those who were interested in his call, were a group of people
from Yathrib (Madina) in the North of Arabia. They met secretly with the
Prophet (PBUH) and a few Muslims from Makkah in a village called Aqabah.
After becoming Muslims, they took an oath of allegiance to protect
Islam, the Prophet and the Makkan Muslims. The following year, the group
of Muslims from Yathrib came again to Makkah. They met the Prophet
(PBUH) at the same place where they previously met. This time, Abbas bin
Abd Al-Muttalib, the Prophet's uncle who was himself not a Muslim yet,
was present at the meeting.

They invited the Prophet (PBUH) and the Muslims from Makkah to emigrate
to Yathrib. They promised to treat them as true brothers and sisters. A
long dialogue was held between the Muslims of Yathrib with the Prophet's
uncle to make sure that they really wanted to welcome the Makkan Muslims
in their town. The Prophet (PBUH) agreed at the end to emigrate to the
new land. Upon knowing that, the Muslims had planned to leave Makkah,
the Makkan unbelievers tried to stop the immigration but the first group
had already migrated to Yathrib.

The Makkans had fearthat the movement to Yathrib would give the Muslims
a new base to spread Islam. Within two months nearly all Muslims
fMakkah, except the Prophet, Abu Bakr, Ali and a few helpless people had
migrated. The Makkans then decided to kill the Prophet (PBUH). They made
a plan for this purpose, but Allah (SWT) had made another plan over
them, to quote the Qur'an. With various tactics and a good planning, the
Prophet finally arrived peacefully in Yathrib, which was later known as
Madinat Ar-Rasul (The city of the Prophet).

New Era In Madinah the Prophet (PBUH) was able to work freely in
spreading Islam. The followers of Islam increased day after day. But the
threat by the Makkans did not stop. A few physical confrontations with
the Makkans were ensued. Sometimes the battles were won by the Muslims,
and sometimes by the Makkans.

The Prophet (PBUH) also engaged in battles with the Byzantine and
Persian powers that were jeopardizing the existence of Islam from the
north and the east. But confrontation with the Makkans stopped for a
while after the treaty of Hudaibiyah had been signed between the Muslims
and the unbeliever Makkans. During the Madinah period, the Muslims also
established treaties with the Jews of Madinah and the tribes around the
city. The Jews broke the treaty, which led to their expulsion out of the
Arabian peninsula.

In Madinah, the Prophet (PBUH) succeeded in establishing Islam as a way
of life in its true meaning. He was not only giving guidance on purely
religious matters such as salat (prayers), zakat (almsgiving), Saum
(fasting) and Hajj (pilgrimage) and examples in these matters, and also
provided Muslims with rules and laws covering social, economic,
political fields.

Emissaries Entertained in Madinah It was in Madinah that the Prophet
(PBUH) received envoys and emissaries from various tribes and nationals,
asking matters of various sorts, demanding dialogues, negotiations etc.
Among the emissaries were an envoy representing the Christian community
in Najran (South Arabia). The Prophet (PBUH) welcomed them, entertained
them as honoured guests and even allowed them to conduct their religious
service in his city. It was a good occasion to share each other's views
on matters of religion. Some members of the envoy were deeply impressed
by the treatment they received from the Muslims, thus leading them to
embrace Islam.

Liberation of Makkah The treaty of Hudaibiyah gave the Muslims a big
opportunity to exemplify the true Islam in personal conduct and in
relations with peoples and communities. But the peace did not stay long
due to the attitude of the Makkan tribal chiefs who broke the treaty.
Soon the Prophet (PBUH) marched very quietly to Makkah in the 8th year
of the Hijrah (emigration) to Madinah.

The Makkans gave no resistance and by the whole city surrendered to the
Prophet (PBUH). He announced a general amnesty for all his enemies and
treated all citizens of the city with generosity. A verse of the Qur'an
was revealed on the occasion: [ When the help of Allah and victory
comes, and you see the people enter the religion of Allah in crowds. So
glorify the Name of your Lord and beg His forgiveness. He, verily accept
repentance.] (Qur'an 110: 1-3)After the liberation of Makkah all the
remaining hostile tribes in Arabia began to realize the reality of
Islamic faith. People had seen the noble teachings of Islam.

Good examples of forgiveness, tolerance, justice, fairness,
steadfastness and other qualities as exemplified by the Prophet (PBUH)
and his companions had left an impression in the hearts of hundreds of
thousands of people who became Muslims. Farewell Pilgrimage In time the
whole Arabia had become the land of Islam. The Prophet (PBUH) intended
to perform the Hajj (pilgrimage). He announced his intention to the
Muslims in Madinah and the surrounding areas and asked them to join
him.


