Supplement 7
============

This was in fact the only Hajj performed by him during his life time.
On this occasion he taught those who were present with him and to the
whole world about the Hajj and the divine message that Allah had
entrusted him to all mankind. At the last gathering with the Ummah
(nation) during the Hajj season, the Hajj of Wada' (Farewell) a sermon
was delivered by the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) at the valley of Arafat
about 81 or 82 days before his death. It contained the very fundamentals
of Islam.

Seated on his camel, he spoke with a clear tone and asked who heard his
speech to convey it to those who were not present there. Among others he
said: "O people, lend me and attentive ear, for I know not whether,
after this year, I shall ever be amongst you again. Therefore listen to
what I am saying to you very carefully and take these words to those who
could not be present here today. O people, just as you regard this
month, this day, this city as sacred, so regard the life and property of
every Muslim as a sacred trust. Return the goods entrusted to you to
their rightful owners. Hurt no one so that no one may hurt you.

Remember that you will indeed meet your Lord, and that He will indeed
reckon your deeds. Allah has forbidden you to take usury, therefore all
interest obligation shall henceforth be waived. Beware of Satan, for the
safety of your religion. He has lost all hopes that he will be able to
lead you astray in big things, so beware of following him in small
things.

O people, it is true that you have certain rights with regard to your
women, but they also have rights over you. If they abide by your right
then to them belongs the right to be fed and clothed in mildness. Do
treat your women well and be kind to them for they are your partners and
committed helpers.

And it is your right that they do not make friends with anyone of whom
you do not approve, as well as never to commit adultery. O people,
listen to me in earnest, worship Allah (SWT), say your five daily
prayers, fast during the month of Ramadhan, and give your wealth in
zakat. Perform hajj if you can afford to. You know that every Muslim is
the brother of another Muslim. You are all equal. Nobody has superiority
over the other except by piety and good deeds. Remember, one day your
will appear before Allah (SWT) and answer for your deeds.

So beware, do not go astray from the path of righteousness after my
death. O people, no Prophet or Messenger will come after me and no new
faith will be born. Reason well, therefore, O people, and understand my
words, which I convey to you. I leave behind me two things, the Qur'an
and my example, the Sunnah, and if you follow these you will never go
astray. All those who listen to me shall pass on my words to others and
those to others again; and may the last ones understand my words better
than those who listen to me directly.

Be my witness O' Allah, (SWT) that I have conveyed Your message to Your
slaves."The importance of this sermon can be seen from the Prophet's
perception that this occasion may be the last one during his lifetime.
He felt that this was the right time to summarize the principles of
Islam to his fellow brothers and sisters. By the perfection of this
religion, it means that there's no need for humanity, and for the
Muslims in particular, to look for another alternative way of life.

As long as one holds fast to the two things left behind by the Prophet
(the Qur'an and the Sunnah), one will never go astray. Death About two
months after returning from Makkah for Pilgrimage, the Prophet (PBUH)
became ill but he was still able to perform his prayers in the mosque
and give directives to the companions. His health was deteriorating day
by day. At the last moment he asked Abu Bakr to lead the prayers in the
mosque, Every member of his family and every companion was worried about
his health.

It was on Monday, 12th Rabi'Al-Awwal, the year 11A.H., when he passed
away at the age of sixty three years. Many people did not believe that
he had passed away. They thought that the Messenger of Allah would live
forever. It was Abu Bakr, who had the feeling, since the Farewell
Pilgrimage that the death of the Prophet (PBUH) was coming near, He
convinced the congregation that the Prophet (PBUH) had actually passed
away. Abu Bakr said to the congregation that if they worshipped Mu,
Muhammad had died , and if they worshipped Allah (SWT), He lives
forever.

Then hrecited from the Qur'an: "Muhammad (PBUH) is nought but a
Messenger like the Messengers who had surely passed away before him:
will you, then, if he dies or be slain, turn round on your heels?"A
Guidance to follow Muhammad as a man had already died, but as a Prophet
(PBUH) he left behind him a legacy in the form of the Qur'an and the
Sunnah. He stressed the urgent need to hold firmly to these two sources
during his farewell speech in the valley of Arafat. If people hold fast
to them, they will never go astray.

The teachings he left for us if put into practice in their true spirit
and proper way will bring a happy life in this world and besides the
indubitable rewards that will be received by those who believed in them
in the life after death. In this sense, Islam is a worldly religion
which cares first for the worldly affairs of humanity.

The Hereafter is merely a continuation of the worldly life. It is
difficult to portend that man can be saved in the Hereafter without
being saved in this world. The safe way is to follow the way shown to us
by the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). When his wife, Aishah, was asked by a
companion about the Prophet's (PBUH) daily conduct, Aishah replied that
the conduct of the Prophet (PBUH) was the Qur'an which is the guidance
from Allah and Muhammad (PBUH) was given authority by Allah to interpret
it. That is why his conduct was the exemplary of human conduct.

Islam as brought by the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) is very much
misunderstood, as a religion perceived to contain souls and rituals like
prayers, fasting, almsgiving and pilgrimage. Thanks to the new
developments in the world, Islam is now looked upon in a wider
perspective than the narrow-minded view in the past. The increased
interest in Islamic studies by Muslims and non-Muslims supported by the
advanced printing technology has begun to open the eyes of the world
about the true teachings and intrinsic values of Islam.

Economy (Expertise and Outlook) In the field of economic development,
the goal is not material gain, but human welfare in general. Islam
exhorts that the balance between the material and physical aspects,
between the individual and societal needs, be maintained in order to
narrow the gap between two opposite sides of human world.

It is stated in the Qur'an: "Say, who is there to forbid the beauty
which Allah has brought forth for His creatures, and the good things
from among the means of sustenance. Say, they are for those who believe
[in Allah (SWT)] in this worldly life, to be theirs alone in the
Hereafter on the Day of Resurrection ... Say, the only things my Lord
forbids are the shameful deeds, be they open or secret, the sin,
unjustified envy, the ascribing of divinity to aught beside Allah (SWT),
and the attributing unto Allah (SWT) of aught of which you have no
knowledge"So everyone is free to conduct any business he likes outside
the harmful and shameful circle he has been warned to refrain from.

If he does not listen to this warning, he will be in trouble. Every
good quality set as a precondition to a successful business is
encouraged by Islam. The Prophet (PBUH) himself was a businessman before
he was appointed as a Prophet. His ability to run business prudently, by
his fairness and truthful conduct in dealing with people had won him the
heart of his employer, Khadijah who later offered him marriage. He
advocated Muslims to follow the spirit of Prophet Daud's (PBUH) (David)
industriousness who earned his living from his own labour.

He also said that faith of a Muslim is not complete if he is not good
in his profession. He said: "If you leave matter to those who are not
professional, you are waiting for a disaster". If he works in the
production line, his products must be compatible with product of other
companies or factories. In order to be marketable, it must suit the
taste of buyers and their standards of living. In this regard, Islam
teaches not to cheat in offering the product to the market. It must be
shown as it is without any publicity it does not deserve.

In the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH), he found many cases in market
places where the merchants tried to cheat the customers. The Prophet
(PBUH) said to them: "Whoever cheats is not one of us (Muslim Book of
Iman 164 and Ahmed V.3 PP 498)".Islam laid many regulations the field of
economy such as trade, leasing, business transaction, contract and
others to prevent unfair dealing within the community and in the world
of business at large. What is also prevented by Islam is a monopoly and
exploitation by one man or one group at the expense of the others.
Cleanliness The first thing in the religion brought by the Prophet
Muhammad (PBUH) is the concern for cleanliness.

The concept of cleanliness in Islam covers physical and spiritual,
mundane and religious domains. Before performing any rituals prescribed
by Islam, one should cleanse his body, and his dress, his place of
worship and his environment should also be clean. Prior to carrying out
his prayers or starting for pilgrimage, one has to make his Wudu
(ablution).

If he or she is in a state of impurity after having had a lawful
intimate intercourse or post-natal period or other reasons, he or she
has to take a complete bath by pouring clean water over the whole body.
In the case of daily prayer, every Muslim has to clean his/her private
parts, face, hands, feet, mouth, nose, and ears at least five times
every day for the five daily prayers. This also reminds him/her to keep
his/her soul clean from unlawful deeds. Cleanliness is not in the
physical sense only. The body should be purified as well from evil
doings that might harm his relationship with others and with Allah
(SWT).

He has to clean his mind from bad intentions or committing unlawful
acts. He has to clean his heart from jealously, hypocrisy and other evil
desires. He has to embody hope, truthfulness, forgiveness, compassion,
holiness, the sense of brotherliness, neighborliness and other noble
qualities. He has to pay special attention to his diet against all
unhealthy food medically and religiously. He has to keep his eyes, ears,
tongue from evil. These are among the noble characteristics as
exemplified by Prophet Muhammad (PBUH).

To clean the wealth, Islam instituted the zakat system (way of
purifying wealth). A person whose wealth has reached a certain point is
obligated to pay zakat (alms) which is a duty enjoined by God and
undertaken Muslims in the interest of society as a whole. For those
capable persons whose wealth does not reach the minimum chargeable rate,
he can also give voluntary contribution to the needy. This does not mean
that the needy should always be receiving help from the affluent ones.

Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) said: "The upper hand (giver) is better than
the lower one (receiver)". Muslim Kitab Zakat No. 124If the receiver of
zakat can grasp the spirit of the Prophet's (PBUH) saying, he will try
his best to be the giver instead of the receiver by endeavoring to
better his life as encouraged by the teachings of Islam. In Islam the
possession of more wealth does not raise a man's dignity, nor does
poverty degrade him. It is true that wealth is necessary for man to live
on this earth but it is only a means, not the end. The end is happiness
in life by attaining the higher values and not losing sight of in the
pursuit of wealth.


