[Classification of Islamic Discourses]
======================================

One may classify the Islamic discourse prevalent at the present time in
the following manner:

First
-----

1. A populist salvationist “messianic” discourse. This is the discourse
of the overwhelming majority of the Muslim masses that have
instinctively realized that the processes of modernization,
secularization, and globalization do the*umma* (Muslim community) no
good and bring no real reform. These masses have observed that these
processes are in essence nothing but processes of Westernization, that
rob the*umma* of its religious and cultural heritage, giving it nothing
in return, and that have only led to further colonial hegemony and class
polarization within society. Adhering and clinging to Islam, which they
know well, the masses encapsulate themselves within their Islamic
heritage, cry for help, and hope for salvation from Allah. But they are
incapable of contributing new ideas or organizing political movements.
Such a discourse frequently expresses itself in the form of spontaneous
and, at times, violent acts of protest against all forms of radical
Westernization and colonial invasion. But more often it expresses itself
in the form of philanthropy, either at the individual level (giving
money to the poor), or at the community level (building mosques,
hospitals and schools or providing meals to the public, especially in
Ramadan, etc.). The populist discourse is mainly the discourse of the
poor and the marginal, but it is also the discourse of those wealthy
members of society who appreciate their religious and cultural heritage,
and who recognize that its loss would mean a loss of everything.

Second
------

2. The political discourse. This is the discourse of some middle class
professionals, academicians, students, and traders, who perceive the
need for an Islamic action that can protect this*umma* . These people,
having realized that political action is the means of achieving their
objective, have set up or joined political organizations that do not
resort to violence, and out of which youth and educational organizations
may branch. Some of the bearers of this political discourse harbored, at
one time, the illusion that taking over the central state would be the
long sought panacea, and some of them did develop para-military
organizations and try to infiltrate the armed forces and seize power by
force. However, as of 1965, as will be shown later, there has been a
general inclination toward working through existing legitimate political
channels. Most of the bearers of this political discourse, at the
present time, tend to restrict their activity to the political and/or
educational sphere.

Third
-----

3. The intellectual discourse. This is the discourse that deals
primarily with theoretical and intellectual issues.

This classification does not mean that the three discourses exist in
total isolation, each one separate from the other. In fact, the populist
and political discourses, more often than not, merge into one another,
and the same can

be said about the political and intellectual discourses. Notwithstanding
the common ground shared by the three kinds of discourse, we deem it
useful, from the analytical point of view, to assume their independence
from one another.


