A Chronological Diachronic Classification
=========================================

In addition to this synchronic system of classification, a
chronological, diachronic classification might prove more relevant, from
the standpoint of this paper.

1. The old Islamic discourse. This emerged as a direct and immediate
reaction to the colonial invasion of the Muslim world, and prevailed
until the mid-1960s.

2. The new Islamic discourse. After an initial indefinite, marginalized
period, this discourse began to assume a more definite form in the
mid-1960s, and started to move gradually toward the center.

Both discourses endeavored to provide an Islamic answer to the questions
raised by modernization and colonization. Nevertheless there are radical
points of divergence between them that stem from two interrelated
points:

1. Their respective attitudes vis-à-vis Western modernity.

2. The varying levels of comprehensiveness of outlook that each
discourse has developed.

This paper focuses primarily on the old and the new intellectual Islamic
discourses, and to a much lesser degree, on the political discourse. It
tries to identify some of the salient characteristics of the new
discourse. Any intellectual or political movement must pause from time
to time to look critically at itself and to assess its performance so as
to be able to abstract some of its own nascent traits and crystallize
them into a relatively coherent system, then map its future course.

It is worth noting that the first generation of Muslim reformists came
in contact with the modern Western cultural formation in a historical
era that is considerably different, in many aspects, from the present
one. It could be argued that the comprehensive secular paradigm, the
fundamental paradigm underlying the modern Western cultural formation,
has always occupied a central position in the conscience of the modern
Western man and has always molded his view of the universe. It could
also be said that the imperialist aspects of Western modernity
manifested themselves only too clearly from the very beginning. All of
these facts notwithstanding, modern Western civilization viewed itself
as a humanistic, man-centered civilization, and for some time
maintained, at the level of vision if not also at the level of practice,
a sense of balance and faith in absolute moral and human values. At the
structural level, Western societies long maintained a high level of
social coherence and solidarity. Family values, far from being an empty
social slogan remembered during election days, were a concrete social
reality.

But things changed. It might be useful, in this context, to conceive of
secularism not as a fixed paradigm, but rather as a dynamic paradigmatic
sequence that unfolds progressively in time and space. One can say that
by the end of the nineteenth century, many of the links that make up
this sequence had not yet materialized. Man’s private life and many
aspects of his public life were still beyond the reach of the processes
of secularization. In other words, Western man was a secularist only in
some aspects of his public life, but in his private life as well as in
many aspects of his public

life, he was committed to moral and human values, and, more often than
not, to Christian religious values and code of ethics. When the first
generation of Islamic reformists, the bearers of the old Islamic
discourse, encountered this modern cultural formation, they did not
interact with a comprehensive secular civilization but rather with a
partially secular one. Whereas partial secularism recognizes the
validity and importance of values on the moral level, and of the idea of
totality on the epistemological level, comprehensive secularism denies
them as well as the very idea of transcendence. Many of the negative
aspects of Western modernity, which later became more or less a
recurrent pattern and central phenomena, were isolated events and
marginal incidents that could be easily overlooked. Furthermore, the
Western critique of modernity and the Enlightenment had not yet been
crystallized, in spite of the fact that the voices of protest were
becoming stronger. Western romantic literature, for instance, is in
essence a protest against the negative aspects of Western modernity. The
writings of some conservative Western thinkers, such as Edmund Burke,
include references to many topics that were later developed by the
Western critical discourse on modernity. Nevertheless, the shortcomings
of modern Western civilization, whether at the level of theory or at the
level of practice, were not yet obvious to those who observed or studied
it.

As for the bearers of the new Islamic discourse, the situation is quite
different. Most had their intellectual formative years in the 1950s and
had their first encounter with modern Western civilization in the 1960s.
This was the time when Western modernity had already entered the stage
of crisis, and when many Western thinkers had begun to realize the
dimension of this crisis and impasse. (See*Introduction to the
Deconstruction of the Secular Discourse* , 4 vols., Cairo, December
1997). The bearers of the new Islamic discourse realized, from the very
beginning, the darker aspects of Western modernity. It had embroiled the
entire world in two Western wars, called “world wars” because the whole
world was dragged into the arena of conflict. In the time of “peace,”
the world was caught in a frenzied arms race. The centralized
nation-state, growing stronger and more authoritarian, expanded and
reached the most private aspects of man’s life, and, through its
sophisticated security and educational*apparati* , tried to “guide” its
citizens! The media, another by-product of Western modernity,
extensively invaded the private lives of citizens, accelerating the
process of standardization and escalating the consumerist fever. In the
meantime, the pleasure sector became so powerful as to control people’s
dreams, selling them erotic utopias and outright pornography. The family
as a social institution could not sustain the pressures and therefore
divorce rates rocketed, reaching levels rarely witnessed before. The
crisis of meaning, the epistemological crisis, anomie, alienation, and
reification became more pronounced. While the liberal capitalist project
ceased to be the smashing success story it used to be, the socialist
experiment collapsed and lost any vestige of credibility. Anti-humanist
intellectual trends such as Fascism, Nazism, Zionism, and Structuralism
emerged and reached a climax in post-modernist thought. By the
mid-1960s, the critical Western discourse on modernity had crystallized
and the works of the Frankfurt School thinkers

had become widely available and popular. Many studies, critical of the
age of the Enlightenment, were published. Writing about the
standardization that resulted from Western modernity and about its
one-dimensional man, Herbert Marcuse sought to demonstrate the existence
of a structural defect that lies at the very heart of modern Western
civilization in its totality, a defect that goes beyond the traditional
division of this civilization into a socialist and a capitalist camp.
Many revisionist historians, rewriting the history of modern Western
civilization, tried to underscore the enormity of the crimes committed
against the peoples of Asia and Africa and the colonial pillage of their
lands. Many studies, radically critical of development theories,
appeared during the same period. The New Left movement made a
significant contribution in this regard. Thus, whether on the practical
or theoretical level, it was not difficult for the bearers of the new
Islamic discourse, those who studied Western modernity in the middle of
the twentieth century, to recognize many of its shortcomings and to see
it in its totality. It was no longer possible for them to experience a
naive infatuation of the type experienced by the intellectuals of the
first generation. The Western modernity they knew, experienced, and
studied was, in many aspects, different from the Western modernity
known, experienced, and studied by the generation of the pioneers.

It should be pointed out that neither the new nor the old generation of
Muslim intellectuals constructed their respective intellectual systems
exclusively on the basis of the Islamic worldview. Their interaction
with Western modernity was, as could be expected, an important formative
factor. After all, this was a civilization that acquired centrality by
virtue of its economic and military accomplishments, put forward its own
view of the world as if it were the view of all human beings at all
times and in all places, conceived of its knowledge as a precise science
applicable to all communities, and set the challenge that everyone else
had to respond to. Responses varied with the type of challenge and its
intensity. The early reformists found many positive aspects in Western
modernity. One may even go so far as to suggest that they were entranced
by it. This is evident from Shaykh Muhammad Abduh’s oft-quoted remark
that “whereas in the West he found Muslims without Islam, in the East he
found Islam without Muslims.” He wanted to say that in the West he found
people who manifested in their very conduct the ideals of Islam even
though they were not Muslims, whereas in the Muslim world, he found
people who believed in Islam, but their conduct belied their belief.
Consequently, the issue for many of the bearers of the old Islamic
discourse was basically how to reconcile Islam with Western modernity,
and even how to make Islam catch up with it, and live up to its
standards and values. This was the core of Muhammad Abduh’s project,
which predominated until the mid-1960s.

Had Shaykh Muhammad Abduh's experience with Western modernity been
different, he would have hesitated long before making this remark and
before proposing his project. The following incident may explain this
point further. In 1830, Shaykh Rifa’a al-Tahtawi, whose infatuation with
Western civilization is well-known, was in Paris. In that same year,
French cannons were pounding unsuspecting Algerian towns and villages,
reducing them to

rubble. Shaykh al-Tahtawi could see only the bright lights in Paris and
could hear only the urbane and sophisticated rhythms of Western
modernity. On the other hand, the Algerian shaykhs, who were subject to
a brutal colonial attack using the most sophisticated technology
available at the time, could see only the raging flames of fire and
could hear only the racket of bombs. One of these shaykhs was once told
that the French troops had actually come to Algeria to spread Western
civilization and modernity. His response was as cryptic as it was
significant: “But why have they brought all this gunpowder?” Like this
Algerian shaykh, the bearers of the new Islamic discourse smelled the
reek of gunpowder, saw the flames of fire, heard the racket of cannons,
and watched the hooves of colonial horses tread over everything. Then
they saw gunpowder become omnipresent, transformed into a variety of
weapons of destruction and extermination: bombs, missiles, biological
and nuclear weapons, etc. Huge budgets were allocated for the production
or purchase of these weapons, first by western, then eastern, southern
and northern governments. In fact, the mass-destruction weapons industry
has grown into the most important industry of our enlightened rational
times, and homo sapiens, for the first time in his long history,
allocates more funds for the production of weapons of destruction than
for the production of food.

The old Islamic discourse was neither unique nor isolated in its
advocacy of Western modernity; it was, in a sense, part of the general
outlook that prevailed in the Third World since the beginning of this
century. Efforts were directed at catching up with the West and
competing with it on its own terms. Liberals called for the adoption of
the modern Western outlook in its totality, “both its sweet and bitter
aspects.” The Marxists rebelled slightly and suggested that the peoples
of the Third World could enter the promised land of Western modernity
through the gates of Marxism and social justice. The Islamists, in their
turn, imagined it would be possible to adopt the Western modern outlook
or rather adapt Islam to it. It is interesting to note that all the
trends and movements, religious or secular, irrespective of their
ideological inclinations and social or ethnic backgrounds, turned the
West into a silent and ultimate point of reference.

As a result of this attitude to Western modernity, the Islamic worldview
retreated, its dimensions shrunk, and it lost its comprehensiveness.
Instead of providing an Islamic frame of reference for Muslims in the
modern age, the issue became how to “Islamize” certain aspects of
Western modernity. The Islamization process would, in most cases, take
the form of “omitting” those aspects of Western modernity deemed*haram*
(prohibited) by Islamic law, without any addition or innovation,
underscoring those aspects of Western modernity deemed*halal*
(permissible) by Islamic law, and searching for those aspects within the
Islamic worldview analogous to some aspects found within Western
modernity. This inevitably meant the eventual atrophy of those aspects
of the Islamic worldview that have nothing analogous to them within the
modern Western worldview. But ironically, those aspects constitute the
very essence and source of the specificity of the Islamic worldview.

The bearers of the new Islamic discourse do not have the same
fascination with Western modernity. Actually, a radical critique of
Western modernity is one of their main points of departure. They too are
neither unique nor isolated in their critique, for they do not differ
from many of the thinkers and political movements in the Third World at
the present time who try to evolve new forms of modernity, nor from many
important thinkers in the West who are critical of Western modernity.
Marxism was a form of critique of modernity, out of which sprung the
Frankfurt School which further deepened the critique. Romantic
literature, as indicated earlier, was also a protest against Western
modernity. The protest of modernist literature, however, is even more
profound and radical; it tries to represent the reified world of
modernity, where the chain of causality is either completely broken or
becomes so rigid that man becomes completely determined. The theater of
the absurd is part of this Western protest against the dead-end Western
modernity has landed mankind in. More recently, religious fundamentalism
emerged as a populist extension of this intellectual trend. All of these
trends, in one way or another, show an increasing, if implicit,
realization that Western modernity strips man of his specificity and
subverts his human essence.

The new Islamic discourse is only part of a wider global trend. The
perceived crisis of Western modernity has taken different forms in
different parts of the world. In the Muslim world, the perception has
taken an Islamic form. Nevertheless, the critique of the new Islamic
discourse of modernity is characteristically different from the other
critiques. For one thing, it recognizes and emphasizes the inextricable
ties between Western modernity and Western imperialism. Imperialism was,
after all, our first encounter with modernity, and Zionist settler
colonialism in Palestine is the last. Furthermore, unlike the Western
critique of modernity, which is nihilistic and pessimistic, the Islamic
critique is optimistic by virtue of the fact that it proposes a project
for reform.


