Difference Between Two Fundemental Points
=========================================

It could be said that even though there are many points of agreement and
disagreement between the old and the new discourses, the attitude to
Western modernity and the level of comprehensiveness of the Islamic
paradigm, as indicated earlier, are the basic points of difference that
could serve as a basis for classification. The main distinguishing
features of each discourse spring from these two fundamental points and
can be outlined as follows:

1. The bearers of the new Islamic discourse are neither apologetic nor
self-defensive. They are not interested in expending much energy on the
attempt to “improve” the image of Islam or to “justify” themselves, even
though they are interested in sending “a message” to the world.

2. The bearers of the new discourse neither reject nor accept the West
uncritically. Ironically, total rejection, just like total acceptance,
presupposes the West as a silent point of reference. What the bearers of
the new Islamic discourse reject, in effect, are both the presumed
centrality and universalism of the West, as well as its imperialism,
which is closely linked to its claim of centrality. They reject the
practices of spoilage, pillage, and repression that were perpetrated by
Western colonialism in the past and that at present take new forms that
are no less brutal than the previous ones. They also reject what they
consider the negative aspects of Western modernity and fully realize its
crisis.

But despite their awareness of the crisis of Western modernity, and
their realization that there is no point in repeating the mistakes of
others or proceeding along the same path that led to an impasse, the
bearers of the new Islamic discourse do not resemble the Algerian shaykh
who smelled the reek of gunpowder and saw nothing else in Western
modernity. Indeed, they have read Eliot’s*The Waste Land* , Becket’s and
Camus’ absurd plays, and Derrida’s nihilist writings; and they know that
the West constructed its material infrastructure through the process of
pillage (which led to “imperialist” not “capitalist accumulation” as
claimed). However, they also know Western theories of architecture, how
to use the computer, various management theories, and the broad horizons
opened up by Western modernity. They know the advantages of this
modernity just as they know its destructiveness. They also know that
Western modernity has raised certain questions that cannot go
unanswered. They know that the Muslim mind is not a blank sheet, and
that the Islamic starting point cannot be a hypothetical zero point.
Hence the necessity, and even the inevitability, of engaging and
interacting with Western modernity, and assimilating its achievements
without adopting its value system. In short, the bearers of the new
Islamic discourse do not see any justification for accepting Western
modernity in its entirety. Instead, they stand on their Islamic ground
and view Western modernity, opening up to it, simultaneously criticizing
and interacting with it. This is what can be referred to as “the
interactive critical response,” which is the very opposite of the
“positive” unqualified acceptance or the “negative” unqualified
rejection of Western modernity–two extreme points between which the old
discourse oscillated.

The old Islamic discourse is an eclectic, cumulative discourse that
imported constituent elements of Western modernity, without realizing
their relation to the Western worldview, and at the same time adopted
other constituent elements of the Islamic religio-cultural formation,
without realizing their relation to the Islamic worldview. Having
isolated these Islamic and modern Western constituent elements, the
bearers of the old discourse tried to “add” the one to the other,
creating a concoction rather than a totality.

The bearers of the new discourse, on the other hand, are not content
with importing ready-made Western answers to the questions posed by
Western modernity. They have developed a radical, exploratory,
generative discourse that neither attempts to reconcile Islam with
Western modernity, nor preoccupies itself with searching for the points
of contrast (or similarity) between the two. Rather, it sets forth to
explore the main traits of Western modernity, presenting a radical, yet
balanced critique. In the meantime, the bearers of the new discourse go
back to the Islamic worldview, with all its values and its religious,
ethical, and civilizational specificities. They explore it and try to
abstract an epistemological paradigm from it, through which they can
generate answers to the problems raised by Western modernity. One can
place the modern attempts aimed at reviving*fiqh* (jurisprudence) from
within, in the context of this generative approach. Rather than impose
Western analytical categories on the Islamic worldview, the bearers of
the new discourse try to discover its fundamental categories. One can
safely argue that the new Islamic discourse, issuing forth from an
Islamic framework, opens the door of*ijtihad* regarding both the modern
Western worldview and the Islamic religious and cultural heritage.

Given this radical generative approach, the new Islamic discourse is by
necessity comprehensive. While at the grass roots-level the bearers of
the new Islamic discourse raise the slogan “Islam is the solution,” at
the philosophical level they raise a more complex one, “Islam is a
worldview.” Theirs is a discourse that stems from a comprehensive
worldview from which different ethical, political, economic, and
aesthetic systems are generated. It is an Islamic discourse that deals
with architecture, love, marriage, economics, city planning, the
philosophy of law and history, modes of analysis and thinking, etc. It
deals with the quotidian, the direct, and the political, as well as with
the total and ultimate. Actually, the new Islamic discourse claims that
it is addressed not to Muslims only, but to “all humanity.” In other
words, it claims that its project for reform is an answer to the crisis
caused by Western modernity. In this respect, its claim is similar to
the claim made by the Islamic discourse that prevailed during the time
of the Prophet, peace be upon him.

By virtue of their open-ended critical interactive approach to Western
modernity, the bearers of the new Islamic discourse are able to benefit
in a creative way from this modernity without being engulfed by it.
Issues such as class conflict, the necessity of an equitable
distribution of resources, gender issues, and the influence of the
environment on shaping man’s personality had been debated by Muslims
before. However, the sensitivity and intense awareness of the new
discourse vis-à-vis these issues have been

enhanced, thanks to the interaction with Western modernity. The bearers
of the new discourse do not object to benefiting from this modernity in
discovering the mechanisms of the solutions for these problems nor the
solutions themselves, as long as such solutions do not contradict the
Islamic paradigm.

Opening up to the modern Western worldview and critically interacting
with it have alerted the bearers of the new discourse to aspects that
would otherwise have been difficult for them to realize. Issues raised
by Western modernity such as international relations, globalization, the
menace posed by the media and the central state to the human individual,
the increasing amount of leisure time available to ordinary people, and
the processes of standardization and leveling, were never raised by
humanity in the past, and expectedly were not raised by the old Islamic
discourse.

The bearers of the new Islamic discourse discovered that opening up to
Western modernity and studying it in a critical and interactive manner
may serve to sharpen the awareness of Muslims who would then come to
know the nature of the crisis of Western modernity and its magnitude.
Consequently, this may increase the Muslims’ knowledge of and confidence
in, themselves, and may even help them discover the creative and
generative potentials within the Islamic worldview. The bearers of the
new Islamic discourse, having realized the wide gap separating science,
technology, and democratic procedures from human values, try to address
themselves to this issue. For instance, in the case of science and
technology, they try to benefit from the technological and scientific
achievements of Western modernity, without adopting its worldview and
without accepting its claims of scientific neutrality and value-freedom.
An attempt is made to incorporate these achievements within an Islamic
value system (see below). The same applies to democracy. The attempt to
distinguish between democracy and*shura* (consultation) is an attempt to
incorporate democratic procedures within the Islamic value system, so
that value-free democratic procedures do not become the frame of
reference, and do not arrogate for themselves the status of an ultimate
value.

The bearers of the new Islamic discourse realize that the human sciences
are neither precise, nor universal or neutral, that they contain several
human biases, and that they are fundamentally different from the natural
sciences. However, the human sciences do not lose their value because of
this lack of precision and neutrality. On the contrary, their ability to
deal with human phenomena is thereby enhanced. The difference between
the natural sciences and the humanities emanates from the fact that the
basic subject of the humanities, that is man, cannot be reduced in his
entirety to the natural-material system. Human reality is radically
different from material reality, in spite of the existence of man in the
natural-material world. Thus, the bearers of the new Islamic discourse
attempt to establish human sciences that do not exclude the human
element and that are, consequently, different in their basic premises,
principles, ambitions, and criteria from the natural sciences. The main
characteristic of the human sciences is that they are not, and cannot,
be value-free, and that they have to be incorporated within a value
system, which is the Islamic value system in

the case of the Muslims. This, indeed, is the basic premise of the
Islamization of knowledge project, or the project for generating Islamic
knowledge.

The bearers of the new discourse are quite aware of what is referred to
as “the new science” that comprises concepts such as indeterminacy and
that does not move within the framework of the concepts of hard
causality within which nineteenth century science moved. The bearers of
the new Islamic discourse realize that the terms in the Western lexicon
are not simple, for they are an integral part of a complex cultural
lexicon that determines their purport and meaning. For instance the
word*‘aql* (mind–reason) within the Islamic context has a specific and
definite Islamic meaning. Having been so impressed by modern Western
civilization, and having failed to master the subtleties of its cultural
idiom, the former generation imagined that the word “reason” in the
modern Western philosophical lexicon was synonymous with the word*‘aql*
in the Islamic lexicon. Hence the deep admiration for, and even
fascination with, Western rationality and the Enlightenment. On the
other hand, the bearers of the new discourse have knowledge of the
complexity of the category of the mind in the Western lexicon and the
contradictions inherent therein. They are also familiar with the Western
critique of reason, that is divided into “instrumental reason,”
“critical reason,” “functional reason,” “imperialist reason,” “abstract
reason,” etc. The critique also talks of “the negation of reason,”
“destruction of reason,” “deconstruction of reason,” and “decentering
reason.” Thus, it is no longer tenable to suppose that the word*‘aql* ,
as it exists in the Islamic lexicon, is synonymous with the word
“reason,” as it exists in the modern Western lexicon. With the emergence
of absurd, irrational tendencies in the West, the matter has become even
clearer and more crystallized.

The bearers of the new Islamic discourse realize the cultural dimension
of most human phenomena, religion included. The bearers of the old
discourse stopped at the distinction between what is*halal*
(permissible) and*haram* (forbidden). The car and the hamburger are
undoubtedly*halal* , and so is canned meat, as long as it does not
contain pork. However, the pioneers did not grasp the cultural dimension
of the commodity and its roots in a comprehensive worldview. (It should
also be added that a full realization, on the part of many Western
intellectuals, of the nature of the commodity as a cultural artifact was
still quite rudimentary and nascent). Consider the car for instance:
when a driver turns the ignition key, more often than not, he thinks he
is handling a simple machine that transports him from one place to
another, which of course is a fallacy. Driving a car is an act rooted in
a whole worldview that manifests itself in a specific lifestyle; it
necessitates prospecting for oil then drilling innumerable wells. Huge
oil tankers cross the oceans to deliver huge quantities of oil to hungry
gas-guzzlers and over-heated houses. That of course results in the
pollution of the atmosphere, the land, and the sea. Troops are deployed
to guarantee the flow of cheap energy and to protect the “national
security” of the consumers. Speed gradually becomes the sole criterion
for judging human conduct and city planning. Towns are planned in such a
way as to facilitate

the movement of speeding cars; and consequently, old, traditional
districts and buildings are demolished. The same can be said of the
hamburger and the take-away food. The cultural dimension of these
commodities, which seems perfectly innocuous, absolutely*halal* , and
entirely unblemished from the purely religious point of view, is an
organic part of a worldview that conflicts with the Islamic worldview
and Islamic certainties.

The realization on the part of the bearers of the new Islamic discourse
of the importance of the cultural dimension of all phenomena is manifest
in their acceptance of the nationalist idea, and their refusal to take a
confrontational attitude in relation to it. They accept cultural
plurality within the framework of Islamic values, and realize the
importance of forging an alliance with the nationalist elements in a
common confrontation with the forces of hegemony and globalization that
try to eradicate autonomy, specificity, and the very idea of absolute
values and transcendence.

The bearers of the new Islamic discourse are perfectly aware of the
problem of the environment and the ecological crisis. Concepts such as
“infinite progress” (which are central in Western modernity) are deemed
by them as hostile to the very idea of boundaries and therefore to the
idea of man and nature, and, eventually, to the idea of God. Such
concepts are atheistic, not only in the religious, but also in the
epistemological human sense. Thus, the bearers of the new discourse
persistently search for new theories of development and new concepts of
progress. They argue that Islamic theories of development should be
radically different from the generalist Western theories promoted by
“international” organizations, for such theories have largely proven to
fail, and have led to an environmental crisis and the impoverishment of
the masses. This is linked to the continuous criticism by the bearers of
the new discourse of consumerism (the invitation to accelerate
consumption, the revolution of rising expectations, etc.) and their
realization of its danger to the environment, natural resources and
man’s psychological and nervous systems.

The new Islamic discourse is aware of the basic philosophical question
in the modern world, that is, the question of epistemological relativism
that leads to nihilism. It replaces it with what may be termed “Islamic
relativism,” which asserts that there is only one absolute, the
Almighty. But His absoluteness implies the relativism of everything
else. However, by virtue of the presence of the absolute God outside
relative time, He becomes the center of the universe, bestowing on it
purpose and meaning. This means that while the world is itself relative,
it does not fall into relativism, nor does it become meaningless.
Islamic relativism is a “relative relativism,” not an absolute one.
Thus, there is a simultaneous awareness of the irreducibility of truth
to matter and of the relativity and impermanence of some of its aspects.
In other words, there is an awareness of a certain interrelatedness
between the absolute and the relative that does not necessarily result
in a nihilistic negation of the absolute. Any human discourse, the
discourse of the Muslims included, is primarily and ultimately a set of
endeavors, assiduously exerted by human beings, living within time and
place, to comprehend the world of man and nature, and for each to
interpret his

sacred text. But human hermeneutics, the bearers of the new Islamic
discourse would argue, is different from the sacred text.

All this leads to a belief in the idea of*tadafu’* (gentle
conflict–interplay) and*tadawul* (succession or alteration), and to a
recognition of the dynamism of the world.*Tadafu’* does not necessarily
mean conflict, even if it occasionally takes that form.*Tadawul* implies
that permanence is one of God’s traits and that everything else changes.
It also implies that the world is not exclusively ours. On the concrete
human level, this means accepting to co-exist with “the other” and to
search for a common ground. Hence, the emergence of the modern*fiqh* of
minorities, whether pertaining to non-Muslim minorities in Islamic
societies or Muslim minorities in non-Muslim societies. This*fiqh* stems
from the Islamic concepts of justice and equality.

The bearers of the new Islamic discourse are aware of the danger of
post-modernism, which manifests itself in an onslaught on all human and
sacred texts. The Quran, for instance, is seen as a historical text,
that can be interpreted in its entirety with reference to certain
temporal circumstances and events. I believe that Justice Tariq
Al-Bishri has made a major contribution in this field. Through his work,
he has attempted to assert the stability of the sacred text. He has
explained that the disagreement among religious jurists, in most cases,
does not stem from their interpretation of the text, but rather from
their disagreement regarding the nature of the human incident for which
they were asked to issue a*fatwa* (legal judgment). This is a very
important matter, because post-modernism involves an attack on anything
stable or normative and involves a denial of any ultimate foundation.

I believe that the bearers of the new Islamic discourse are making a
concerted effort to discover new middle analytical categories that
distinguish the Islamic discourse from the discourse of Western
modernity, characterized as it is by a feverish oscillation between two
conflicting poles. The discourse of Western modernity demands either
absolute certainty or absolute doubt; either a reason fully dominating
the world, or a reason completely dominated by it (reduced to
fluctuating matter and perpetual experimentation); and, finally, either
a full presence (to use post-modernist idiom) or full absence. It is a
discourse that shifts from rigid materialistic rationality to an equally
rigid materialistic irrationality. The new Islamic discourse, on the
other hand, tries to create a human space that goes beyond the
materialistic extremes of Western modernity. In human matters, evidence
does not have to be decisive and comprehensive, covering all
possibilities and filling all gaps, and the chain of causality does not
have to be organically or strictly linked. It is sufficient to marshal
adequate evidence, and cause and effect need not be linked in a rigidly
scientific, materialistic manner. This is what can be called in Arabic
*sababiyah fadfadah* .

The closest equivalent to the word*fadfadah* in English is the word
“loose” or “wide,” neither of which truly expresses the meaning of the
Arabic word that connotes a level of tolerance and a loosening of rigid
organic unity, permitting a degree of freedom without necessarily
leading to incoherence and fragmentation. This causality, in my view, is
the essence of

the Islamic worldview; it asserts that A does not uniformly and
absolutely lead to B, but that it does so by the will of God. “God
willing” expresses the distance that separates the creator from the
created, a distance which is actually a human space where man can
exercise his freedom and use his reason, becoming thereby a responsible
trustworthy creature. It is an affirmation of what is called in Islamic
jurisprudence*bayniyah* , from the preposition*bayn* , which means
“between.”

Dr. Bashir Nafi' has made the important point that the Islamic discourse
in traditional Islamic societies is*shari’a* (religious law).*Shari’a*
is indeed the very basis of both the old and new Islamic discourses.
However, the new discourse attempts to resolve the problem of what I
call the “duality of idiom.”*Shari’a* , Muslims believe, is open and has
been capable of generating answers to collective and ultimate questions
that have faced both Muslim communities and Muslim individuals
throughout history. But the idiom of the*shari’a* , due to the
historical and cultural discontinuity caused by the colonial invasion,
has become inaccessible to many people. The bearers of the new Islamic
discourse are trying to decode this idiom, so that it would be possible
to extract the wisdom inherent therein and apply it to modern realities.
This is exactly what one Muslim scholar did when he described “enjoining
good and forbidding evil” as the Islamic idiom for expressing the
problem of power sharing. This does not mean that the Western and
Islamic idioms are synonymous. All that this scholar tried to explain is
that this modern issue, expressed in a modern idiom, is the same issue
that was addressed by the Islamic tradition through its own idiom. Such
an*ijtihad* would undoubtedly help in increasing the generative power of
the traditional religious worldview and help Muslims to stand firmly on
their own doctrinal ground.

Due to the isolation of*shari’a* from political and social realities,
many Muslims have come to view it as if it were a set of disjointed
verdicts and opinions. However, the process of generating new answers to
new challenges requires an awareness of the interrelatedness and
integrity of the components that make up the*shari’a* , as well as an
awareness of the fact that it expresses a worldview. This is what the
new discourse is trying to accomplish. Undoubtedly, the traditional
discipline of*maqasid* (purposes) deals with this issue. It is through
this discipline that it is possible to distinguish between the whole and
the part; the final and the temporary; the essential and the contingent;
the permanent and the impermanent; and the absolute and the relative.
What is needed is to develop this traditional discipline so as to attain
an Islamic epistemological paradigm emanating from the Quran (the
Muslim’s sacred text) and the*sunna* (the Prophet’s traditions). Such a
paradigm would be hierarchical, its crown is the testimony that there is
no god but Allah; this is succeeded by the primary Islamic of justice
and equality; and then by the various lateral precepts. The scope
of*ijtihad* can then be expanded without much apprehension of going
astray. After all,*ijtihad* would take place within the framework of the
hierarchical epistemological paradigm extracted (through a continuous
process of*ijtihad* ) from the Quran and the*sunna* . That paradigm
would be

the only norm on the basis of which judgments are made and new
interpretations are formulated.

One of the main traits of the new Islamic discourse is that its bearers
realize the complex dimensions of the question of power, its various
intricate mechanisms, and the relationship between local reality and
international relations. The bearers of the new discourse also realize
the complexity of the modern state as well as its power and ability to
dominate and interfere in man’s private life. They know it has become an
octopus that has its own quantifying logic, which goes well beyond the
will of those who are supposed to be running it, be they Islamists,
Marxists or liberals. The role of bureaucracy in decision making, and in
manipulating the ruler according to its whims and purposes, is quite
clear to them. They realize too that the state has a variety of
“security” apparati (information, education, etc.) that maintain a tight
grip over the masses through the pleasure industry, the bombardment of
the public with information and songs, and the rewriting of history.
Thus, taking over the state does not solve the problems of the Muslims,
as some of the bearers of the old discourse used to imagine. The heart
of the matter is the necessity of setting bounds on the state and
trimming its nails to enable the*umma* to be restored to its role as
vicegerent. Hence their interest in the notion of the*umma* and the
increasing attention to civil society and to the role of the*awqaf*
(religious endowment), and their growing interest in new theories of the
state and administration.

The new Islamic discourse, by virtue of its universality and interest in
the cultural dimension of human phenomena and on the basis of its
awareness of itself as a comprehensive worldview, pays great attention
to aesthetics. It is not content with a*halal/haram* categorization of
things. In fact, the bearers of the new Islamic discourse endeavor to
develop a comprehensive vision of Islamic arts based on the Islamic
worldview. Hence the new theoretical formulations, and the many
applications in the field of architecture and various arts. This aspect
of the new Islamic discourse is an expression of its creative critical
approach to Western modernity and its generative approach to tradition.
Many Islamic artists in the modern age, studying either in the West or
in the East, have been exposed only to Western artistic views and
methodologies. Nevertheless, many of them seek to break away from the
modern Western worldview. While directing their critique to it and
benefiting from the knowledge they acquired thus far, they attempt to
generate artistic criteria and norms from within the tradition that
translate themselves into Islamic artworks and buildings that follow an
Islamic style, yet respond to the needs of the modern age. It is notable
that these artists study the Islamic heritage from new angles; they
rediscover it and its theoretical bases, using the analytical tools they
learned in the West. They have also started showing interest in
classical Islamic writings in this field.

One of the important aspects of the new Islamic discourse is the way its
bearers read history. There is a rejection of the idea of unilinear
concepts that presume the existence of a single terminal point and a
final*telos* toward which the entire history of mankind is moving. This
makes viewing the histories of all men through a single viewpoint and
judging them through

one and the same standard inevitable. But this single viewpoint and
standard are not, in reality, universal (as claimed), it is actually the
viewpoint and standard of modern Western man. I believe that Dr. Bashir
Nafi’ has given us a concrete example of this rejection of unilinear
history by presenting a reading of Islamic history from within, without
importing analytical categories from outside the system The reading
process here is at once explanatory, empathetic and critical. Dr. Bashir
has read the documents that Western historians have not read, or
probably have read but marginalized, for they deemed them unimportant.
Thus, he has succeeded in offering a new view. This includes his
emphasis on the role of Sufism and the Sufi*tariqa* (guild) which other
historians, trained within the secularist tradition, usually
unconsciously overlook or consciously disregard. They view Sufism as
mere superstition, whereas Dr. Bashir Nafi’ finds the study of Sufism
and Sufi schools an essential prologue to understanding Islamic history.
In some of his studies, Justice Tariq al-Bishri also explains the
importance of studying the Sufi*tariqas* in order to comprehend the
history of modern Egypt.

One can say that there are scores of the bearers and promoters of the
new Islamic discourse including Malik Bennabi, Naquib al-Attas, Fahmi
Huwaidi, Rachid Ghannouchi, Munir Shafiq, Adel Hussein, Tariq Al-Bishri,
Dr. Abdelhalim Ibrahim Abdelhalim, Dr. Rasim Badran , Dr. Salim
Al-’Awwa, Dr. Bashir Nafi’, theIIIT group including Dr. Ismail Raji
Al-Faruqi, Dr. Taha Jabir Al-’Ulwani, Dr. Abdulhamid Abu Sulayman, Dr.
Hisham Al-Talib and Dr. Jamal Al-Barzinji, who are the founders of the
Institute. Of those associated with IIIT, one can also mention Dr. Muna
Abulfadl, Dr. Dr. Sayf Yusuf, Dr. Nasr Arif, Dr. Usama Al-Qaffash, Ms.
Hiba Ra’uf, Dr. Al-Bayumi Ghanim, Fuad Sa’id, Hisham Ja’far, Dr. Aly
Gomaa and Dr. Lu’ay As-Safi. The bearers and promoters of this discourse
also include: Dr. Jamal \`Atiyah (and the contributors to Al-Muslim
Al-Mu\`asir), Azzam Tamimi, (and Liberty for the Muslim World group),
and Al-Habib Al-Mukni (and Al-Insan group). There are, undoubtedly,
scores of others inside and outside the Arab world who are contributing
to the crystallization of the new discourse. It is also notable that
many intellectuals among the Islamic minorities in the West have started
to contribute quite creatively to this new Islamic discourse. One may
count in this category Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Ziaudin Sardar, Ali Mazrui,
and Parviz Manzur. This is not meant to be a comprehensive list. Such a
list would be compiled by a research institute that can assign the task
to a group of researchers. Perhaps what is required now is to deepen our
understanding and knowledge of the central premise of this discourse,
and to initiate a process of epistemological condensation by listing the
names and publications of those who bear or promote this discourse.

*This Paper Translated from Arabic by Azzam Tamimi.*

Cairo, 15-23 February 1997

© 21st Century Trust


