[Introduction]
==============

From a Shi'a point of view, there are four sources on which any
investigation about Islam has to be based: the Glorious Qur'an, the
Sunnah (including sayings, actions and tacit approval of the Prophet),
reason, and consensus. After a careful consideration of these four
sources, it becomes clear that the Qur'an and the Sunnah both originate
from revelation and that consensus is reducible to the Sunnah.
Therefore, there are two types of sources:

-the Qur'an and the Sunnah that constitute the revealed or the
transmitted sources*(al-adillah al-naqliyyah)*

-  reason or intellect that constitutes the rational source (*al-dalil
al-'aqli* ).1

It has to be noted that what has been said above does not mean that
every single enquiry must be based on all the aforementioned sources;
rather it means that there is no way to establish the truths about Islam
other than referring to one or more of the above sources. There are
fields of studies that are completely intellectual such as natural
theology or philosophy, and there are fields of study that are purely
based on revealed information such as revealed theology, and there are
fields that rely on both, such as law and morality.2

It should also be noted that when Muslim scholars mention the Qur'an and
the Sunnah as revealed sources this does not mean that they do not
believe in previous revelations. Indeed, it is part of Islamic faith to
confirm all the previous prophets and revelations. The only problem here
is how to identify what was actually revealed to them. Therefore,
whenever something is known to represent a fact or a universal or
unconditional rule revealed previously by God, that too, is certainly
accepted.

Thus, we can conclude that there are two major common ways to understand
and discover religious truths: revelation and reason.3 The Shi'a believe
that reason is a reliable source of knowledge and that it is in complete
harmony with revelation. According to some hadiths, God has two proofs
(hujjah) through which humans can understand His will: the internal one,
reason (al-'aql), and the external one, the prophets. Sometimes reason
is called, “the internal prophet” and the prophets are called “the
external reason”. There is an established rule among Shi'a jurists that
whatever judgement is made by reason is the same as that made by
religion (shar') and vice versa.

In what follows, I will try to explore the status of reason in Islam and
then I will refer to different roles of reason in general and in
understanding moral values in particular. Having studied revelation and
reason as two sources of understanding Islam, I will briefly refer to
the Shi'a understanding of faith and authority.


