The status of reason
====================

Islam regards reason as one of the greatest blessings bestowed by God on
human beings. It is by means of reason that we understand ourselves and
the world around us. It is by means of reason that we realise the
necessity of investigating our origin and the One who has created us. If
we had no reason, we would not be responsible for our acts or beliefs.
In Shi'i Islam in particular, great emphasis has always been placed on
reason and the rational sciences. This emphasis derives from the Qur'an
and the traditions of the Prophet and the Imams of his household. The
Qur'an says in several verses:

***Surely there are signs in this for those who ponder. (13:4; 16:12;
30:24)***

The Qur'an also condemns more than once those who do not think or use
their reason. The following two traditions, selected from the large
number of hadiths available on the subject, show the place of reason in
Shi'a belief. Imam Sadiq (A.S.) says:

Whoever has intellect has faith and whoever has faith will enter
Paradise.4

With reason one comes to understand the truth, to believe in Islam and
follow the teachings of the Prophet, and consequently will be able to
enter Paradise. In an insightful hadith addressing one of his
companions, Hisham b.  Hakam, Imam Musa Kazim said:

With reason God completes His proof. God has equipped His prophets with
the ability of expressing their ideas in a way that all people can
understand. God has shown people His lordship through reason.

Then the Imam recited the following verse of the Glorious Qur'an,

***“Your God is the One God, there is no god but God who is the
Compassionate the Merciful…Surely in the creation of the heavens and the
earth and in the alternation of days and night, and in the ships that
move in the sea, and in the rain that descends from the sky to bring
life on the earth, and all kinds of animals that God has spread over the
earth, and also in the movement of the wind and the clouds which God has
kept between the earth and the sky- in all these there are signs for
those who are thoughtful.” (2:163 & 164)***

Then the Imam said:

God has made these signs a proof to show people that they have a Creator
Who arranges everything for them and Who directs everything, because God
then says “surely there are signs in these facts for those who use their
reason”.5

Many other references to the Qur'an are made in this tradition to show
that God in His final message considers reason as the only means by
which human beings become responsible. It is unanimously accepted that
one of the conditions of moral or legal responsibility is to have sound
reason. If someone is insane, he is not considered as responsible for
his acts. What is expected of people in religion also varies according
to their mental and rational capacity. Those with a higher degree of
intelligence or learning are expected to be more knowledgeable, pious
and obedient than others.6

On the continuity and development of the philosophical tradition, S. M.
H. Tabataba'i (1892-1981), who was the most celebrated contemporary
master of Islamic philosophy, writes:

In the same way that from the beginning Shi'ism played an effective role
in the formation of Islamic philosophical thought, it was also a
principal factor in the further development and propagation of
philosophy and the Islamic sciences… In the same manner, in the other
intellectual sciences, there appeared many outstanding figures such as
Nasir al-Din Tusi (who was both philosopher and mathematician) and
Birjandi, who was also an outstanding mathematician.

All the sciences, particularly metaphysics or theosophy (falsafah-i
ilahi or hikmat-i ilahi), made major advances thanks to the
indefatigable endeavour of Shi'ite scholars. This fact can be seen if
one compares the works of Nasir al-Din Tusi, Shams al-Din Turkah, Mir
Damad, and Sadr al-Din Shirazi with the writings of those who came
before them.7

On the place of intellectual sciences among the Shi'a, Yann Richard
writes:

Today, however, one of the originalities of Shi'ite Islam is to
recognize that metaphysical speculation and philosophical discourse have
a certain place in religious knowledge. The Centre for Theological
Studies at Qom is certainly the only place of Islamic studies in the
world where one dares comment on the philosophical treatises of
Aristotle or Avicenna, and where the post-Platonic philosophical
tradition has remained alive. Ayatollah Khomeini was known at Qom up
till the beginning of the 1950s for his philosophy course.8


