The role of jurists in the time of minor occultation
====================================================

The period of the presence of the Imams ended in the year 260AH, when
Imam Askari was martyred. This period is called 'asr al-zuhur (the age
of the presence), in contrast to*'asr al-ghaybah* (the age of the
occultation).

In the time of the presence of the Imams, the role of Shi'a jurists was
not very complicated since most of the time there was more or less the
possibility of referring to the Imams personally and asking them for
guidance.34 Of course this was not always easy and free from risks.
Therefore, during the time of the Imams, they trained a group of the
companions to start ijtihad, to start deriving specific rules from
general rules. In a clear and very well known hadith (narration), Imam
Sadiq said to one of his companions:

”Our task is to give you the principles and your task is to derive the
implications”.

There are also cases in which the Imams have asked some of their
companions, e.g. Aban ibn Taghlib to issue fatwa for the Muslims.

After the martyrdom of Imam Askari, the Shi'a started to experience a
new age in which they could not visit their Imam (i.e. the 12th Imam).
This was the period of the minor occultation. The 12th Imam personally
appointed four individuals (one after the other) to act as
representatives for himself to the Shi'a community. These deputies of
the Imam were called the*nuwwab al-arbi'ah* (the Four Deputies)
including Uthman ibn Sa'id, his son, Muhammad ibn Uthman, Husayn b. Ruh
and Ali b. Muhammad al-Saymuri respectively. When the Shi'a had
questions for the Imam they referred to these deputies who then acted as
a means of communication between the Shi'a and Imam Mahdi.

One reason for having this state was to prepare the Shi'a for the next
age, which is known as ghaybat al-kubra (the major occultation). Before
Ali ibn Muhammad died, Imam Mahdi gave him a message. This message was a
condolence to the Shi'a for losing him (in advance) as he was the last
means of communication to the Imam and a command to Ali b. Muhammad not
to introduce anyone as the deputy after himself. So with the passing
away of Ali b. Muhammad, the major occultation started. In this period
no particular person was appointed as deputy and the age of generally
appointed deputies (*al-na'ib al-'amm* ) started.

The scope of the authority or deputyship of faqih is one of the most
essential elements of the Shi'a political doctrine. In what follows I
will try to briefly point out the main areas of this authority:

Authority in presenting Islamic rulings and issuing fatwa
---------------------------------------------------------

A Faqih is the one who has the authority in presenting Islamic views on
practical issues including moral and legal ones e.g. abortion,
euthanasia, banking, insurance and marriage. With respect to the
beliefs, everyone is responsible to investigate and inquire about the
principles of the faith by himself and cannot rely on anyone. Of course,
having proved the truth of the religion for himself, one can refer in
details to the experts. Expertise needed for doctrinal issues include
great knowledge of both intellectual and revealed theology and it is
obvious that to be able to understand the revealed

theology one needs to master the methodology of understanding the Qur'an
and the Sunnah which is provided in fiqh and its principles.

It has to be noted that a faqih or any other scholar has no authority to
legislate or alter the laws. His role is just to do his best to
understand the religious position by scholarly consulting the Scriptures
and reason.

This type of authority is unanimously accepted.

Authority in judging
--------------------

This is also unanimously accepted.

Authority in administering hisbah affairs
-----------------------------------------

It is unanimously accepted that a Faqih is responsible for administering
hisbah affairs i.e. those things that we know for sure the Legislator is
not pleased with them being ignored or unattended, even though they are
not as such or primarily obligatory. For example, if there is an orphan
who possesses some money but he has no guardian to look after his money
to his best interest all Shi'a faqihs say that this is responsibility of
the just faqih to undertake such task. Or if there are properties whose
owners are unknown it would be again the responsibility of faqih to
protect them from being wasted. Any social affair with whose negligence
the Legislator is not pleased, thus, must be undertaken and supervised
by the just faqih.

Authority in ruling the society
-------------------------------

As we saw above, there is no doubt among the Shi'a scholars that the
faqih has responsibility and authority for getting somehow involved in
socio-political spheres. Islam is to bring happiness by offering a
comprehensive plan of life and it is job of the faqih to understand,
present and implement this plan. No one can remain indifferent in
respect to what happens in the society and the knowledgeable people have
greater responsibility.

Unlike some faqihs who had the idea that the authority of faqih in
socio-political affairs is limited to hisbah affairs, some have had the
idea that the Faqhi has all the power needed to rule the society. The
Ayatollah Khomeini has said:

'By authority we mean governance, the administration of the country and
the implementation of the sacred laws of the Shari'ah. This constitutes
a serious and difficult duty but does not earn anyone an extraordinary
status or raise him above the level of common humanity. In other words,
authority here has the meaning of a government, administration and
execution of law. Contrary to what many people believe, it is not a
privilege but a grave responsibility.35

This is echoed in the constitution of Islamic Republic of Iran as
follows:

'The powers of government in the Islamic Republic of Iran are vested in
the legislature, the judiciary, and the executive powers, functioning
under the supervision of the absolute religious leader and the
leadership of the Ummah.' (Article 57)

Thus, it becomes clear that in Shi'i Islam the authority primarily
belongs to God and then to the people with whom God is pleased. After
the Prophets and Imams, just faqihs are granted such authority. The main
requirement for

having such authority is justice and deep acquaintance with the
religious sources, i.e. the Qur'an, the Sunnah and reason. Reason is one
source and at the same time reason helps us to define the proper method
for understanding the first two (the Qur'an & Sunnah). Once again it
becomes clear how important reason, justice and piety are for Shi'i
Islam.


