Bibliography
============

1- Abd al-Jabbar (1384 A.H.),**Al-Usul al-Khamsah** , (Cairo)

2- Abd al-Jabbar (1962),**Al-Mughni fi at-tawhid wa al-'Adl** (Cairo:
Darul Kutub al-Misreyyah)

3- Al-Ghazali (1988),**Al-Iqtisad fi al-I'tiqad** (Beirut: Darul Kutub
al-'ilmeyyah)

4- Heydarpoor, Mahnaz (2002),**Love in Christianity & Islam** (London:
New City)

5- Al-Hilli, Allamah (1363 A.H.),**Anwar al-Malakut fi Sharh al-Yaqut**
(Qum: Razi & Bidar)

6- Al-Hilli, Allamah (1982),**Nahj al-Haqq wa Kashf al-Sidq** (Qum: Razi
& Bidar)

7- Hourani, G.F. (1985),**Reason and Tradition in Islamic Ethics** ,
(Cambridge University)

8- Khumeini, Ayatollah Sayyid Ruhullah,**Islam and Revolution: Writings
and Declarations of Imam Khomeini** , trans. and ed. By Hamid Algar,
Berkeley, CA: Mizan Press, 1981.

9- Al-Kulayni, M.(1397 A.H.), Usul al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyyah)

10- Misbah Yasdi, Muhammad Taghi,**Dorus-e Falsafe-ye Akhlaq** ,
Ettela'at Publications, Tehran, 1994.

11- Muzaffar, Muhammad Riza (1993),**The Faith of Shi'a Islam** (Qum:
Ansariyan Publications).

12- Richard, Yann (1991, English translation first published
1995),**Shi'ite Islam** (Oxford, UK & Cambridge, USA: Blackwell
Publishers)

13- Al-Shahrestani, Muhammad b. 'Abd al-Karim (1414/1993),**Al-Milal wa
al-Nihal** (Beirut: Dar al-Ma'rifah, third imprint)

14- Shomali, Muhammad Ali (2003),**Shi'i Islam: Origins** , Faith &
Practices (London: ICAS Press)

15- Shomali, Muhammad Ali (2004),**Discovering Shi'i Islam** ,(Qum:
Jami'at al-Zahra, Second Edition, Third reprint)

16- Tabataba'i, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn (1975),**Shi'ite Islam** (Albany,
New York: SUNY Press), trans. Sayyid Hossein Nasr.

### Notes

###

[^1]: By “reason” we mean an instrument or a faculty of understanding of
theoretical knowledge and practical knowledge. With the first, we can
obtain some knowledge about existing things in the world, and with the
second we can acquire some knowledge about what humans must or must not
do. In other words, reason enables us to know what is there in the world
and ability to know what one ought to do.  For example, see Muhammad
Taghi Misbah Yasdi, Dorus-e Falsafe-ye Akhlagh, Ettela'at Publications,
Tehran, 1994.

[^2]: Al-Ghazali, a renowned Sunni thinker from the Ash'arite tradition,
divides theological issues into three categories: issues that can only
be known through religious sources, issues that can only be known with
the intellect, and issues that can be known in both ways. He mentions
the visibility of God (according to the Ash'arites, God is visible, at
least in the Hereafter) as an example for the first category and
exclusiveness of creating movements to God for the second category.

With respect to cases in which both intellect and naql (transmitted
knowledge) have judgement, al-Ghazali adds that whenever we receive
something from religious sources, we have to see what the rational
judgement is. If intellect allows us to do so we have to follow the
religious sources. But if that thing is rationally impossible we have to
interpret that text in another way, since there is no disharmony or
contradiction between religion and intellect. Then, al-Ghazali adds that
in cases in which intellect is silent again we have to accept and follow
the demands of religious sources. He insists that rational permission
for possibility of something is not required. What is really required is
to be free from rational impossibility. “There is a [subtle] difference
between these two, which unintelligent people sometimes fail to
recognise.” [Al-Iqtisaad fi al-I'tiqaad, (Arabic), p. 133]

[^3]: Things which are understood through personal intuitions or
mystical experiences are valid for the very person who has had these
intuitions or experiences, and is certain about the truth and validity
of them or beliefs which are based on them. However, these are not
included in our discussion here, partly because this sort of knowledge
cannot be communicated through discussion or argumentation to others.
The only way to learn and accept these issues is to undergo the same
experiences.

[^4]: Ussul al-Kaafi, Vol. 1, p.11.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 13.

[^6]: For example, we read in a divine saying (al-hadith al-qudsi) in
Usul al-Kafi, the Book of Reason & Ignorance that “God rewards and
punishes people in proportion to their reason”.

[^7]: Tabataba'i, Shi'ite Islam, Part II, “Outstanding Intellectual
Figures of Shi'ism”.

[^8]: Richard, p. 61.

[^9]: M. R. Muzaffar in his commentary on reason says the following:

We believe that Allah has endowed us with the faculty of the intellect
('aql), and that He has ordered us to ponder over His Creation, noting
with care the signs of His Power and His Glory throughout the entire
universe as well as within ourselves. It is stated in the Qur'an:

“We shall show them Our signs on the horizons and in themselves, till it
is clear to them that it is the Truth.” (41:53)

Allah has shown His disapproval of those who blindly follow the ways of
those who were before them:

“They say: 'No, but we will follow such things as we found our fathers
doing'. What! And if their fathers had no understanding of anything.”
(2:170)

And He has shown His dislike for those who follow nothing but their own
personal whims:

“They follow naught but an opinion.” (6:117)

Indeed, our intellect forces us to reflect upon Creation so as to know
the Creator of the universe, just as it makes it necessary for us to
examine the claims of someone to prophethood and to consider the truth
of his miracles. It is not correct to accept the ideas of someone
without criticism, even if that person has the gift of great knowledge
or holds an esteemed position.

[^10]: Having verified the truth of the Prophet or the Qur'an, we come
to know many things that we were unable to know by ourselves, because of
our lack of access to certain realms of reality or certain evidence.

[^11]: In this regard, George Hourani says:

“It (Ash'arite view, or what he calls 'theistic subjectivism', or what
others have called 'ethical voluntarism') is not peculiar to Islam,
since it occurs in medieval Judaism and occasionally in western thought;
but it was probably more prominent and widespread in Islam than in any
other civilization.” (1985, p. 57)

[^12]: Despite some differences in positions of the Shi'a and the
Mu'tazilites, they are both called ”ahl al-'adl” (the people of
justice), because they both believe in independent moral values and in
the existence of rational criteria for judging what is good and what is
bad, and because a proper defence of the principle of divine justice
depends on the belief in independent and rational good and evil.

[^13]: Anwār al-Malakut fi Sharh al-Yāqut, p. 104.

[^14]: Nahj al-Haqq wa Kashf al-Sidq, p. 82.

[^15]: Imam Ali, Nahj al- Balaghah, Sermons, no. 86.

[^16]: Qur'an, 2:285. This verse indicates that the believers are those
who believe that Allah, His angels, His books and His apostles are true.

[^17]: Qur'an, 49:15. This verse indicates that the believers are only
those who believe that Allah and His Apostle are true.

[^18]: Qur'an, 27:14.

[^19]: Imam Ali, Nahj al- Balaghah, Sayings, no. 227.

[^20]: According to the Glorious Qur'an, the objects of faith include:
God (2:62) and His attributes (67:29); the day of Judgment (2:62); God's
Apostles and His revelations to the apostles (2:285; 3:53); God's Angels
(2:285) and the invisible world (2:3).

[^21]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi,  the Book of Reason and Ignorance, no.
14.

[^22]: Ibid., no. 34.

[^23]: Ibid., the Book of Faith and Disbelief, “Bab al-hubb fi Allah wa
ai-bughd fi Allah”, No. 6, p.126.

[^24]: Ibid, No. 5, p. 125.

[^25]: Al-Majlisi, 1983, Kitab al-iman wal-kufr, “Bab al-hubb fi Allah
wa al-bughd fi Allah”, lxvi, p. 238.

[^26]: Qur'an, 2: 257.

[^27]: See also the verses: 8:29 & 20:123.

[^28]: Obedience here does not mean inferiority. Even the Prophets had
to obey their parents.

[^29]: See also the verses: 5:55 and 59:7.

[^30]: For a comprehensive list of non-Shi'a sources of this hadith, see
numerous volumes of  'Abaqaat al-Anwaar by Mir Haamid Husayn al-Hindi
(d. 1306 A.H.) and Al- Ghadir by  'Abd al-Husayn al-Amini (d. 1390
A.H.).

[^31]: For more information about this verse and some debates that have
arisen by the verse among Shi'a and Sunni scholars refer to:
Sharafud-Din, Abdul Husayn, Al- Muraja'at, translated from Arabic to
English by Yasin T al-Jibouri, World Ahlul-bayt Islamic League (WABIL),
pp. 173-180.

[^32]: Ijtihad is a very demanding qualification and involves deep
knowledge of several disciplines and mastering several skills. Nowadays
it usually takes around twenty years or even more of hard study to
become a well-established mujtahid. However, the time taken is somewhat
dependant on one's talents. Thus, it becomes clear that in the Shi'i
thought respect for and obedience to the faqih is respect for and
obedience to knowledge and piety that qualify someone to have such a
position and not to the person as such. The Shi'a follow the most
knowledgeable and the most pious jurist, since he is the person who
would be most likely to represent the views of the Prophet and the
Imams.

[^33]: The methodology of understanding religious rulings from the
sources is well studied in the science of the principles of
jurisprudence (usul al-fiqh).

[^34]: We say most of the time because during this period it was not
always possible to refer to the Imams (AS), especially when they were
under house arrest, e.g. the 10th and 11th Imams (AS), and the Shi'a had
no easy access to them. Or sometimes the Shi'a were living in some
cities far away.

[^35]: Ayatollah Khomeini, Islam and Revolution, pp. 62-62.i
