Different roles of reason
=========================

In general, reason contributes to religious sciences in the following
major areas:

I. The first step towards religion, inquiring into it and searching for
its truth, is taken by reason. It is reason that drives us to take the
issue seriously and tells us that our interests would be harmed if the
claims of religion are true and we fail to discover and believe in them.
According to the Qur'an, God requires all human beings to exercise their
rational faculty and to ponder on His signs and communications in the
universe. On many occasions disbelievers are condemned and criticized
because of their failure to think or to act according to rational
requirements. For example, they are condemned because of their blind
imitation of their ancestors, and there are many verses containing
rhetorical questions calling on people to think, such as the following:
“Do not they think?”, or “Do not they ponder?”

II. The second role of reason is to set up standards and logical
processes for reasoning and for inference from the Scriptures. Once we
have started our research and investigation, it is again reason that
instructs us on how to think and how to argue. It is also reason that
tells us to be fair and committed to the truth during and after the
entire process of rational discovery.

III. The third is to understand the realities of the world, such as the
existence of God and the truth of religion. The Shi'a believe that by
the exercise of reason every person can come to understand that God
exists, that He has sent certain people as His messengers, and that
Resurrection will take place. Indeed, it is obligatory for every Muslim
to examine and question his beliefs until he attains certainty, and to
be able to support his beliefs with valid logical arguments, including
the intellectual ones. Muslims are not allowed to say that they believe
in God for no particular reason, or call themselves Muslim simply
because their parents are Muslim, or because they were born in a Muslim
community.

Faith is a matter of reasoning, not of imitation. Everyone is advised to
secure his faith with sound arguments. In this way, one can have
complete confidence in his belief, and nothing can cause him to doubt
it.9 Of course, once the truth of a given prophet or book is
established, many further truths can be learnt from that prophet or that
book.

IV. The forth is to understand and present moral and legal principles,
such as the wrongness of oppression and the rightness of justice.
Details are, of course, provided by religious sources, although the
process of understanding the Scriptures and the implications of
religious judgements again is governed by reason. For example, if God
says that you must perform hajj (the pilgrimage to Mecca), it rationally
implies that we must make all necessary preparations, such as buying
tickets or obtaining a visa.

If there is a conflict between two obligations such as saving an
innocent life and performing our prayers, what should we do? In this
case, even if there is no explicit or specific religious instruction we
still rationally understand that we must act according to the certain
and clear judgement of our reason, which is to save the person's life.

All the above roles of reason are recognised and, indeed, encouraged and
urged in Islam. In contrast, the role of revelation or the scripture in
religious sciences can be summed up as follows:

- confirming truths that are already known by  reason;

- teaching truths that are not known by reason, such as the details of
the resurrection and detailed injunctions of moral and legal systems;10

- establishing due recompense sanctions through the religiously
determined system of reward and punishment.

Here I should make two points:

a. One has to distinguish between the decisive and certain rational
judgements and things such as guessing or personal opinions or weak
arguments. There have always been some people who introduced their
ideas, or even they themselves thought so, as enjoying rational grounds,
while after consideration it becomes clear that there is no basis for
such a claim. Similarly, there are  people who represent their ideas as
Islamic ideas, while religious sources do not support them in any known
way.

b. Although reason is recognised as an independent source of knowledge,
it has its own limits. There are many things on which reason has no
judgement and is silent, because they are beyond its scope. Therefore,
there might be many things that we can understand by other ways of
understanding such as perception, intuition or revelation that do not
fall in the scope of reason.

You can not really understand through rational arguments how a rose
smells or what a mother feels when her child is dead. In respect to
religious issues, there are many facts that are not knowable by reason,
such as many details of the resurrection. What is important is that
there is nothing in Islam that contradicts reason. One must therefore
distinguish between what lies beyond one's actual rational capacity and
what conflicts with rational standards.

Thus, we should not base our acceptance of religious facts on finding a
rational proof or justification for them, though they must be rationally
possible. The Qur'an sometimes uses the expression of “vision” and
attributes it to the heart for some type of knowledge which is much
higher than perception and rational knowledge. For example, on the
ascension of the Prophet Muhammad to the heaven, the Qur'an says:

<p dir="rtl">
“ما كذب الفؤاد ما رأي”
</p>

***The heart did not tell lies about what it saw. (53:11)***


