Role of Reason in understanding Moral Values
============================================

Now let us study in more detail the role of reason in understanding
moral good and bad or what is right and wrong. This has been an
important issue for all religious traditions, especially Judaism,
Christianity and Islam. According to “Divine Command Theory”, “good” or
“morally right” means “Commanded by God”, and “bad” or “morally wrong”
means forbidden by God.”11

On the other hand, there have also been some theologians who have argued
for rational approach to ethics. They believed that there are
independent criteria of good and bad that can be understood by our
reason. God's commands are not arbitrary and we can exercise rational
methods to discover moral norms. Among Muslim theologians, the
Ash'arites held the former view and the Shi'a and the Mu'tazilites held
the latter.12

According to the Ash'arites, all values are determined by the will of
God and moral concepts such as 'good' and 'right' have no meaning other
than 'that which God wills' or 'what is commanded by God'. These words
have no objective meaning. According to the Shi’a and the Mu 'tazilites,
values such as justice and goodness have a real existence, independent
of anyone's will, even God's.

Values are objective. According to the Ash'arites, all values are
determined by the will of God and moral concepts such as 'good' and
'right' have no meaning other than 'that which God wills' or 'what is
commanded by God'. These words have no objective meaning. According to
the Shi’a and the Mu 'tazilites, values such as justice and goodness
have a real existence, independent of anyone's will, even God's. Values
are objective. According to the Ash'arites, all values are determined by
the will of God and moral concepts such as 'good' and 'right' have no
meaning other than 'that which God wills' or 'what is commanded by God'.
These words have no objective meaning. According to the Shi’a and the Mu
'tazilites, values such as justice and goodness have a real existence,
independent of anyone's will, even God's. Values are objective.

Based on the above question, the other controversy concerns the question
of whether good and evil are rational (*al-husn wal qubh al-'aqliyyān* )
or revealed. The Shi’a and the Mu 'tazilites believed that good and evil
are objective and therefore can be known rationally. Allamah Hilli, a
great Shi’a scholar, in his comments on Al-Yāqút by al-Nawbakhti writes:

The principle, on which the problems concerning justice depend is that
God is the Wise, He never does an evil action and He never fails to
perform any necessary (*wājib* ) action. When this principle is proved
questions concerning justice, such as goodness of obligation (*taklif*
), necessity of Grace (*lutf* ) and the like are constructed upon. And
since this principle depends on knowing good and evil and their
rationality, the author started his discussion with these.13

Else where he writes:

Imamites and their followers, the Mu 'tazilites, believe that goodness
and badness of some actions are known by reason evidently such as our
knowledge of goodness of beneficial telling truth and badness of harmful
lies, on which no reasonable person have doubt, and his certainty about
this

is not weaker than his certainty about the need of a contingent being
[in its existence] to a cause or about the equality of two things which
are each equal to a third thing.

They believe that there are some actions, understanding of whose
goodness or badness needs reflection such as goodness of harmful telling
truth and badness of beneficial lies, and finally that there are some
actions, on which reason is unable to make judgement and their goodness
and badness is to be expressed by the religious law, Shar', such as [how
to perform] worships.14

On the other hand, there are the Ash'arites who deny rationality of
goodness and badness. Shahrestani in his Al-Milal wa al-Nihal describes
the idea of Ash'arites as follows:

All obligations are to be learnt from the scriptures. Reason (al-'aql)
does not make any thing obligatory and does not make anything deserve to
be considered as good or bad. Thus, knowing God becomes possible by
reason and becomes obligatory (wājib) by the scripture (sam'). God, the
most High, says:

***“We have never chastised unless we have despatched some messenger”.
(The Qur'an, 17:15)***

Similarly, gratitude to the blessing-giver, rewarding the obedient and
punishing the disobedient all become obligatory (*wājib* ) by the
revealed, and not reason. (*Vol. 1, p. 115* )

In contrast, the Shi’a and the Mu 'tazilites have argued that if
goodness and badness were just religious and not understandable by
reason, unbelievers would not recognise them today or before they knew
of revelations e.g. the Qur'an. But we know that there are many common
values and moral principles among both theists and atheists. 'Abd
al-Jabbar, a great Mu 'tazilite theologian, says: “any sane person knows
his obligations even though he does not know that there is a commander
and forbidder” (*Al-Mughni, Vol. 1, p. 45* ).

The Qur'an in fact implies in many statements that knowledge of what is
obligatory, good, and evil is accessible to everyone,

***“Surely God bids to justice and good-doing and giving to kinsmen, and
He forbids indecency, dishonour and insolence”. (16:92)***

These virtues and vices must have been understood as such prior to
revelation. The objectivity of ethical value is asserted or implied all
through the Qur'an. For instance, the repeated commands of God to do
what is right would be empty of force and spirit if they meant only
“commands to do what He commands”. It is even harder to make sense of
statements that God is always just to His servants on the supposition
that “just” means “commanded by God”.

None of this means, of course, that humans are not in need of religious
guidance. The argument is rather that in order to benefit fully from
religious guidance, humans have been endowed with reason, and it is only
when they are thoughtful and rational that they can comprehend
revelation. The truth of religion and the principles of morality are
understood by reason, but there is much more to be learnt from
revelation. According to Shi’a thinkers,

religion can provide us with a fuller and more comprehensive account of
morality, and moreover motivates us to observe moral requirements.


