The Nature of Faith
===================

Faith is a voluntary act of human kind, although some degrees of faith
may require special grace and guidance of God. Man needs to try to be
faithful and make preparations for faith. One reason for holding faith
as a human act is that according to the Qur'an the people are held
responsible or accountable for being faithful or non-faithful. People,
on occasions, are blamed in the Qur'an for their failure in becoming
faithful and this shows that it is because of their own decision.

The other reason is that in the Qur'an or hadiths people are encouraged
to have faith by referring to its good outcomes. The other reason is
that faith may decrease or increase depending on human practices and
characters. Imam Ali (A), the first Shi'ite Imam, says: “Do not be
jealous because jealousy eats away faith just as fire eats away dried
wood.”15

Among philosophers of religion, there are two main views about the
nature of faith: the propositional view which takes faith as “belief
that” (*fides* ) and the non-propositional which takes faith as “belief
in” (*fidusia* ). Of course, each may imply the other secondarily and in
practice a faithful person is the one who both believes that God exists
and trusts Him. However, the question is which one primarily constitutes
the faith

Reflecting on relevant verses of the Glorious Qur'an, normally the
assumption among philosophers of religion is that in Islam faith has a
propositional nature. For example, we read:

***“… the believers; they all believe in Allah and His angels and His
books and His apostles; we make no difference between any of his
apostles; and they say: we hear and obey, our Lord”.*** 16

***“the believers are only those who believe in Allah and His Apostle
then they doubt not”.*** 17

I think faith means acceptance of or submission to certain truths and
involves three elements, but it is not identical with any of them:

(a) A heartfelt knowledge. This knowledge is propositional. No one can
be faithful while he is in doubt. It should be noted that according to
the Glorious Qur'an, faith is different from knowledge, because
sometimes a person may have knowledge in its most certain form, but lack
faith. Sometimes people know some truths, but deny them unjustly or
arrogantly.18 The knowledge, thus, prepares the ground for faith, and
faith needs knowledge; but it is not knowledge.

(b) A verbal declaration of that heartfelt knowledge.

(c) Acting in accord with that knowledge. The believer in his life must
work in harmony with that knowledge he has, otherwise there would be no
benefit in that knowledge. When Imam Ali (A) was asked about belief, he
said: “Faith involves appreciation with heart, acknowledgement with
tongue and actions with limbs.”19

Thus, faith is a voluntary act for which knowledge is a pre-requisite)
and should imply declaration with tongue and practice with limbs. Faith
is a reality that might decrease or increase. Taking into account all
the above aspects of faith and based on the Qur'an and the Sunnah, I
believe that faith consists in submission to certain truths, such as
existence of God (God exists).20

Therefore, faith is neither “belief that” nor “belief in”. One may
believe that something is true and at the same time deny or reject it.
Among those who believe in basic religious truths and commit themselves
to those truths, some people may be prepared to commit and submit
themselves just in declaration of faith, some may be prepared to fully
or partly practice their faith and some may be prepared to submit their
entire reality including acts, heart and mind to God.

Faith may also have degrees according to different degrees of the
required knowledge or different degrees of the consequent acts.


