Spectators and Participants
===========================

Those who have been in contact with man and nature from close-up and
have not been mere spectators, have never doubted the justice of God.
Socrates, in the time of his prosecution, takes the cup of poison from
the guard and drinks it. Since he had a great message for all men of all
times, he drank the poison with no fear.

If we look at the life of \`Ali ibn Abi Talib, Prophet Muhammad's
miracle[^1] 1 and most beloved companion, we find it filled with
suffering and pain. One out of many, is that he was the best in
knowledge and action among his society, yet he remained silent for
twenty nine years for the sake of the people's ideological unity at that
time. Although he had the power to revolt and seize power, he did not
and saw others rule.

He accepted this psychological suffering for twenty-nine years.

Later, when the people realized who he was and came to him and chose him
as their leader, he ruled the society with utmost justice. A kind of
justice which has made, an eastern materialist Shibli Shumayyil say
about him: "The leader \`Ali ibn Abi Talib, greatest of all, is the man
who neither the West nor Fast, neither yesterday nor today, have seen
his example‚Äù.[^2]  
 \`Ali himself has said: "If you give me all the world with everything
in it, in condition that I take a husk of barley from an ant's mouth, I
will not do so! "[^3]

For the just[^4], this world is most painful, but nevertheless, \`Ali
never said that this world is evil. fie always said that it is the world
of suffering, be ready, be careful. He also said: "This world is the
best place for one who understands it well."

You might say that very well, but it does not follow that since some men
like \`Ali or Socrates have said and done so the problem of evil does
not exist. Very well, but where did the problem of evil come from
anyway? From the minds of some other people whose lives were quite more
comfortable than Socrates' or \`Ali's? Like Epicurus, Hume or Mill or
even me and you.

Looking at their biographies, none have suffered as much as the first
group. The latter in comparison with the former, are really spectators
of life rather than participants. So you can see how subjective and
relative the problem of evil (suffering) is.

[^1]: According to Avicenna (Ibn Sina), Persian philosopher, physician
and scientist of the Middle Ages, "Prophet Muhammad had two miracles:
The Qur'an and \`Ali," because \`Ali was educated wholly by the Prophet.

[^2]: George Jordagh, Imam Ali, The voice of Human Justice.

[^3]: \`Ali ibn Abi Talib, Nahj al-balaghah.

[^4]: In fact when we believe in the justice of God, we will try to see
the same justice in society. Because any injustice will be against the
will of God and against the music of the universe. And this is why the
belief in the justice of God was always a threat to the ruling powers.


