A Question and its Answer
=========================

**Question:** Now that we know that suffering and hardship could be used
for the benefit of the individual, let us see what the benefits are in
more detail. But, at this very point you might ask: Even if I agree that
there is goodness and 'purpose in suffering, why couldn't God create the
same result without suffering? If He is Omnipotent and Wise, why did He
prescribe for us to go through all this difficulty and hardship to reach
a developed stage?

We can answer this question in many ways, but there is a very basic
answer that cuts the root of the problem from the very bottom and shows
how narrow and unwarranted our questions are.

**Answer**: "Justice means to have a method and current according to a
law (or a set of laws). So, unless there is a law outside a being who
has to conform to that law, we cannot conceive justice.

A person is just when his method and practice is according to a law (or
a set of laws) which its reality is outside the belonging of that person
and is not changeable by that person. For example, in society there is a
law that workers should be paid. This law is a reality outside the
choice of the individuals. In other words, they cannot change this law
individually. If somebody pays the worker he has observed justice and
if' lie does not, he has not observed justice.

"This principle about justice, does not apply to God at all, since there
is no law which can be outside the realm of God's power or choice and no
law can restrict Him. Therefore, we say that God's actions are according
to Divine \`hikmah' or purpose, and not according to laws which we
create through our knowledge and desires, and falsely compare them with
His justice. In other words, the clay in the hands of the potter cannot
make laws for the potter, and cannot compare the potter's justice with
those laws."[^1]

This was the first answer that makes the question vanish completely.
There is also another answer to the question. But before we go to that,
let us repeat the question once again:

"Why do we have to go through all these difficulties, created by God, in
order to reach a developed stage?" We need to study the orders of
existence to understand the second answer.

[^1]: Muhammad Taqi Ja'fari in an interview.


