The Problem of Death
====================

Another important subject which creeps in when we think of our existence
and God's justice is death.

If God is just how can death destruct our evolved and purified selves
after the long and laborious school of our lives?

The answer is that it does not. The reasons are quite a few. First of
all, God has told us through all of his prophets, that death is not the
end of the story of our lives. Since I have assumed that you believe in
God, this evidence is quite substantial. (You are aware that the problem
of evil or suffering arises after assuming or knowing the existence of
God)

There are many ways which we can prove our life after death. Apart from
experiential proofs such as telepathy, prescience, dreams and contact
with the dead, there are many rational ones; such as this one which
argues on the basis of desires and satisfactions.

For every desire in us there is something in the world which will
satisfy it. Our thirst can be satisfied with water. Our hunger with
food. Our love with the beloved. Sexual desire is fulfilled by the
opposite sex. Our desire for knowledge is satisfied with knowledge. So,
every desire and ability is a proof that there is a perfection which our
desires are aimed towards that perfection.

Now, we have this very powerful desire in us, namely the desire to be
eternal. By a little introspection we can see that all of us have this
desire to be conscious forever of what is happening in the universe.
Now, what state or thing can satisfy this desire? Nothing of the
material or psychological things we see around us. Isn't this the proof
that there is a life after death where our desire for eternity will be
satisfied? Rumi clarifies this with a nice analogy: "It is an elephant
that dreams of India when it sleeps. No donkey dreams of India, since
the donkey has never missed India.'[^1]

We, in fact, are like that elephant, and eternity is like India. The
elephant belongs to India and that is why he dreams about it. Similarly,
eternity is where we belong to, since we dream about it.

These hopes and spiritual desires are what has been called by gnostics
the 'non-homogeneity' and \`homesickness' of man in this earthy life.

Somebody asked Aristotle that if life was better or death. He replied:
"In my eyes they are the same." The man asked again: "Do you like to die
now?" Aristotle replied: "I said they are the same, I did not say death
was better. Since it is a light which you take from this house to the
other."

Our condition after death is nothing, but our actions in objective and
concrete form. To be more clear, we 'see' our actions. Rumi can help us
again: "Death of every person, my friend, is like himself. For a friend
it is a friend and for an enemy an enemy. O' you who are afraid of
death, while running away, be aware that you yourself are the cause of
this fear. It is your own ugly face, not death's. Your soul is like a
tree and death its leaves. If you are tired of thorns, you have
cultivated them; and if you are in fine silk you yourself' have
spun."[^2]

***"The death from which you shrink will surely meet you, and afterward
you will be returned unto- the Knower of the invisible and the visible,
and He will tell you what you used to do " (Qur'an, 62:8).***

"O' Allah, set our deaths into being killed in your way."[^3]

[^1]: Mathnawi, Book 4.

[^2]: Mathnawi, Book 3.

[^3]: A prayer by Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, from the Prophet.


