Preface
=======

In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful.

***“Whatever spoils given by Allah to His Messenger from townspeople
belongs to Allah and to the Messenger, and to the nearest of kin, and to
the orphans, and the indigent, and the wayfarer, so that it may not
circulate amongst the rich of you. And what the Messenger gives you,
take it then; but forsake what he forbids you. And venerate Allah, for
He is stern in retribution.” Holy Qur'an (59:7)***

*“Were it my money I would have distributed it among them equally. But
it is Allah's.”* Imam Ali (a.s.)Imam Ali (a.s.)

\*\*\*\*\*

Praise is due to Allah for His explicit and implicit favours. Peace and
blessings are on the brilliant light, the giver of good tidings and
warnings, our master Muhammad and on his infallible household and the
righteous among his companions.

Today, the world appears to becoming more lost in self-generated chaos,
economic problems take precedence over all other hardships and haunt the
rulers of both the Eastern and Western blocks.

If the West suffers from high unemployment, high inflation ... etc., the
East complains of decline in production, shortages in the supply of the
basic necessities of life... Both capitalism and socialism, including
before being developed into communism, are not only retracting their
theoretical slogans and renouncing their doctrinal principles, they are
nearly perishing as each are riddled with ambiguities and shortcomings
that have failed to address even the most fundamental issues of
con-temporary society.

Satellite states, like in the Arab world, have been dominated by the
Western democracies and as a result, have been misled in setting up
capitalistic systems or they have reluctantly turned tific socialism.
The result from both should announce their ideologies, has been only
bitter disappointment. Nothing has remained in their hands except the
ashes of aping foreigners, which are being scattered by the piercing
wind of the Islamic movement.

Both the East and the West have claimed their absolute dependence on the
outcome of abstract theories, not only in the fields of material
sciences but even in their ideological and philosophical views with
regard to the universe, life and man. Each attach the uppermost
importance to tangible experiments to prove facts and adopt the ensuing
results.

But, contrary to all their claimed developments, the examples of
socialism and capitalism in practice have proved to be fiascoes, neither
imparting happiness to man nor satisfying his basic needs, both physical
and spiritual; in failing to achieve worldwide security or putting an
end to global catastrophes, instead cultural erosion and moral collapse,
continue to increase unabated, while there has been no sign of
pinpointing the root causes of anxiety and psychological misery that is
sweeping virtually all nations today.

As the Foundation presents this booklet about economic distribution in
Islam, free of charge, it is a single proof of the greatness of Islam
and looks forward to the day when humanity will shake worldly dust off,
fits communities and become arrayed with celestial robes to walk in the
light of Islam, where happiness can be won in both this life and the
Hereafter.

***“... and to whomever Allah does not give light, he has no light.”
Holy Qur'an (24:40)***

Al-Balagh Foundation


