Nature Of Economic Problem
==========================

The central question which presents itself in the world of economics and
wealth and which needs a comprehensive and exact answer is: What is the
economic problem and what is its cause?

The answer to this question depends upon what is the approach and the
nature of the system chosen. The identity of the economic system, which
manages the distribution of wealth among human beings, conversely is
outlined in accordance with the general comprehension of the problem and
its nature. The solution to any economic problem thus lies within the
system, in its formula. It gives the answer to the question, what the
economic problem is and how it can be dealt with.

To analyze the problem overall from a philosophical point of view needs
a comprehensive grasp of the nature of both man and wealth, the value of
each and their significance in life as a prerequisite. It further relies
on a deep, exact and efficient comprehension of the problem on one hand,
and on the other, an objective analysis of the implemented system, which
is immune to any prejudice that may be caused by the personal bias of
the concerned economist and those who invented its perspectives.

These factors, put together, help to give the shape of the answer and to
plan an economic system with its stated hallmarks.

Now, let us see what answer Islam gives to our question: What is the
economic problem and what is its mainspring?

1. Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what
the hands of people have wrought, that he may make them taste a part of
that which they have done, so that they may return.” Holy Qur'an
(30:41)***

2. And Allah has also said:

***“And you love wealth with exceeding love. ”Holy Qur'an (89:20)***

3***. “Decked out fair to mankind is the love of desires -Women,
children, hoarded treasures of gold and silver, marked horses, cattle
and tilth. That is the enjoyment of the life of this world; but Allah -
with Him is the fairest return. Say: 'Shall I tell you of better than
that?' For those that are god-fearing, with their Lord are Gardens
underneath which rivers flow, therein dwelling forever, purified spouse,
and Allah's good pleasure. And Allah sees His servants.” Holy Qur'an
(3:14-15)***

4. ***“... most surely man is ungrateful to his Lord. And most surely he
is a*** ***witness of that. And most surely he is tenacious in the love
of wealth ...” Holy Qur'an (100:6-8)***

5. ***“And those who made their abode in the city and in the faith
before them love those who have fled to them, and do not find in their
hearts a need of what they are given, and prefer (them) before
themselves though poverty may afflict them, and whoever is preserved
from the niggardliness of his soul, these it is that are the successful
ones. ”Holy Qur'an (59:9)***

6. ***“Therefore be careful of (your duty to) Allah as much as you can,
and hear and obey and spend, it is better for your souls; and whoever is
saved from the greediness of his soul, these it is that are the
successful. ”Holy Qur'an (64:16)***

7. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.w.) is reported to have said:

“Refrain from doing injustice, for it is the darkness of the Judgment’s
Day. Avoid misery, it was misery that cut down those who were before
you. It made them shed their blood and do haram (what is forbidden and
harmful)”.

8. And the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) is also quoted to have said:

“Two fierce wolves entering a pen of sheep are not as much harmful as
avarice and love of a social rank to the faith of a Muslim.” [^1]

Examining these quotations and compile their content, the following
conclusions can be reached:

1. In the first quotation, the Qur'an blames man for causing his own
problem. Corruption, be it political, economic or moral, is only man's
making. Man encapsulates a host of stimuli and desires and he himself is
spurred on to extremes in peculiar proclivities, to cause corruption,
injustice and tyranny under which humanity suffers greatly.

***“Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what
the hands of people have wrought, that He may make them taste a part of
that which they have done, so that they may return.” Holy Qur'an
(30:41)***

2. Quotations 2,3,4 and 8 emphasize that man's selfishness, avarice, his
excessive love for property and wealth and his tendency to amass them,
is the main cause of all his daily problems, in general, and his
economic problems, in particular.

3. Quotations 5,6 and 7, from the Qur'an and holy Prophetic traditions,
how that avarice itself which is a vice used with great eagerness and
desire to obtain and keep wealth away from the bands of others, is the
latent, effective factor behind man's greed and his predilection to
monopolize wealth and deprive others from it.

In summary, we can assert an important fact in the world of economics,
as clearly stated by Islam and known as the cause behind the problem of
wealth distribution, is man's self-centeredness and his greed. For the
worlds of the holy Qur'anic verses and Prophetic traditions lay great
stress on avarice and greed as the root causes of the economic problems
in the fields of distribution and consumption.

This view rules out the effect of external conditions, including means
of production, whether in abundance or scarce, and distribution, for
man, himself, controls distribution, His will controls it. His awareness
identifies his view of justice, the value of money and wealth and the
meaning of life. It is this very awareness that principally outlines the
way he adopts in dealing with himself and others.

Everywhere and every time subjective factors are the root causes of the
problems and the sources of economic injustice, regardless of the
variation in conditions, means and quantity of production, which tend
themselves to be by-products resulting from the original misdiagnosis.

The only way to save man from economic injustice and confusion is his
daily life, re-shaping his existence and re-formulating his conceptions,
his view of life, money, wealth, profit and moral pleasure, in a sound
and objective way and in harmony with the Qur'an and in agreement with
its deep, analytical views.

Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“... surely Allah does not change the condition of a people until
they change their own condition; ...”*** ***Holy Qur'an (13:11)***

Unless an independent, economic system is adhered to this, change cannot
be fully successful; a system, which takes upon itself the task of
re-distributing human wealth and managing economic life in agreement
with the principles of Islamic justice and equality and not on
high-fluting theories that lose the essence of what the basic problem
is:

Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“And that if they should keep to the (right) way, We would certainly
give them to drink of abundant water.” Holy Qur'an (72:16)***

***“And if the people of the towns had believed and guarded (against
evil) We would certainly have opened up for them blessings from the
heaven and the earth ...”Holy Qur'an (7:96)***

There is no way to better man's life other than effecting a complete,
psychological and ideological transformation. Yet to achieve this, a
just system and law must be brought about, both socially and legally, to
serve as a prelude in the building of a human community, where man can
bask in righteousness and happiness and taste the flavour of freedom and
dignity.

The Qur'an, in many of its ayahs and conceptions, emphasizes this method
of transformation:

*“until they change their own condition”. “and that if they should keep
to the (right) way”. “believed and guarded (against evil).”*

By scrutinizing these words, we can arrive at the conclusion that the
Qur'an made psychological change, and treading on the right path
(Shari'ah and the Divine system), having faith in them and insisting on
adhering to their profound principles. Islam is prerequisite to human
change for the better and the sources of good and man's economic
welfare.

This is the true dimensions of the problem and overcoming it. But what
of the external factor that perpetuate and self-propel the
ill-effects?This is the true dimensions of the problem and overcoming
it. But what of the external factor that perpetuate and self-propel the
ill-effects?

External Factors
----------------

Identifying human faults as an internal cause of the economic problem,
Islam turns its attention to specify the external factors, which
constitute the chief reasons behind exacerbating the problem. Islam
attributes the economic problems to two factors:

1. The Human Factor. The subjective one and root cause as already has
been explained.

2. External Factors. The objective ones.

These factors can be deduced, by concerned researchers of Islamic
economics, from the sources of legislation, morals, and concepts that
deal with the social and economic aspects of man's life. Briefly they
can be summed as:

1. Inadequate production.

2. Ill-distribution.

3. Ill-consumption.

By referring to the Qur'an, Prophetic Sunnah, books of fiqh and studies
on morals, we can compile many texts, principles and thoughts which deal
with each of these causes. To present a clearer picture of the Islamic
view of the economic problem, it is necessary to consider all three
causes separately.By referring to the Qur'an, Prophetic Sunnah, books of
fiqh and studies on morals, we can compile many texts, principles and
thoughts which deal with each of these causes. To present a clearer
picture of the Islamic view of the economic problem, it is necessary to
consider all three causes separately.

### 1) Inadequate Production

The main cause of poverty as well as being a principle factor behind the
economic problem, under whose burden man is still suffering, is the
decline in production in the view of Islam. That is why Islam has
focused attention on it and blamed two main factors for it:

A. Unemployment and disusing of human resources:

Islam looks upon work as a holy and esteemed asset. It puts it on the
same footing with jihad and worship. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) is reported
to have said:

“Worship is of seven parts the best of which is seeking halal (lawful)
provision.” [^2]

Islamic traditions and texts dealing with the importance of work are
bountiful. They have one aspect in common urging man to work, mobilizing
human beings to raise their production capabilities and fighting sloth
and unemployment as the prime reasons of poverty and materialistic and
social decline.

Of the traditions reported in regard to this point is one quoted from
Imam Ali (a.s.):

“When things coupled, sloth and helplessness got together and engendered
poverty.”

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) quote his father Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.), on the
same subject that he said to one of his sons on his death-bed:

“Beware of laziness and boredom, for they prevent you from your share of
this world and in the Hereafter.” [^3]

B. Ignorance and lack of experience about methods of productions,
including the under-utilization of natural resources and man's creative
powers. These factors play a critical and undeniable role in the decline
of production and spread of need and destitution. Islam, for such
consideration, urges Muslims to seek knowledge, make use of natural
resources and gain knowledge about work and management. The Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) is quoted to have said:

“Allah surely loves the trustworthy professional.”

Islam works towards mobilizing man bodily, psychologically and
intellectually, employing his technical and scientific abilities for the
sake of production, adequate supplies of needed commodities, and
creating wealth. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) reproached whoever has no
interest in increasing his wealth through halal (lawful) work and
expanding his ability to spend and meet his needs and the needs of his
dependents.

In the words of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.):

“There is no good in whoever who does not like earning his living from
halal work to satisfy his needs, pays his debts, and strengthen his ties
of kinship”.

This Prophetic tradition emphasizes the necessity of man striving to
earn his own way; that his earnings should outweigh his expenses. The
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) laid stress on this point: “relation to the good of
his family and the community as a whole”.

Islam's plan is simple and precise, directing man's energies into
productive employment as a moral responsibility and a legal duty that
fits into building a healthy Muslim society, where there is no unmet
wanting.Islam's plan is simple and precise, directing man's energies
into productive employment as a moral responsibility and a legal duty
that fits into building a healthy Muslim society, where there is no
unmet wanting.

### 2. Ill-Distribution

Bad distribution is the second gravest external cause of the economic
problem, which also results in the spread of poverty and need, and
unbalanced economic life. As clearly seen from secular systems,
different social classes have arisen. One of them lives in the lap of
luxury, enjoying every kind of material pleasure, amassing wealth,
monopolizing means and sources of riches. While the other is hardly able
to have daily bread and scrape together a subsistence living.

This gross inequality in economic life, which represents a dangerous and
harmful schism in society, has its main causes principally in bad
distribution and the implementation of bland, man-made economic systems
which have their own momentum is aggravating the catastrophe. Feudalism,
capitalism, and communism and the like have merely exacerbated the
crisis all the more.

Ill-distribution, has a long historic experience, regardless of whatever
secular economic system has been tried. Its consequence of an unjust
spread of wealth is the prime basis of today's social tragedy of
mankind.

Such is well established, by Muslim and non-Muslim experts alike, as
exampled by one report in an Italian publication, and translated and
published in the Kuwaiti daily “Al-Qabas”, back on August 15-8-1976 in
its issue 1525:

“Experts in the fields of development, food and population unanimously
agree that the available natural resources in the world are so abundant
that they can meet all the needs of the nations if goodwill was shown
and if these resources were equally distributed among all nations. The
root cause is the unjust distribution of the resources...and the failure
of many nations to win their real independence, decide the fate of their
wealth and distribute it justly and fairly.

“Russian scientist Ivan Shatilov has also said that cultivated areas now
could satisfy the hunger of tens of billions of people if their crops
were distributed equally and fairly among the nations of the world. He
further points out: 'On the other hand, we must not lose sight of the
fact that the advanced industrialized world has not, so far, made use of
the marine sources of food. The oceans constitute 71 percent of the
total surface of the earth, whereas they produce no more that 1 percent
of man's foodstuff.'“

Man will never be able to taste the flavour of happiness and dignity, as
historical records testify, unless he sheds the shackles of
short-sighted man-made systems, and blot out forever their traces in the
human community, souls and lives. Such systems proved themselves a
failure. They only record their flagrant, tragic defeat, which victimize
humanity and brings forth unspeakable cries of starvations, wars and
deprivations.

Man was metamorphosed into a machine working incessantly in-favour of
the ruling classes, whether being individuals as is the case in the
capitalist and feudalist systems, or authorities, and parties as it is
in the socialist and communist systems.

Only when man recovers his consciousness from the anesthesia of
propaganda manipulated by those who covet these principles from their
won vested interest and breaks the fetters of servitude which subdues
him by force and coercion, man will see the fountain of light and find
the path to an honorable free life, where he finds his righteousness and
dignity. Only when man strives to seek and intensifies his efforts to
win good and happiness will he find the key presented by Islam.

This concise discourse, is not intended to delve into great detail the
major principles and important lines drawn by Islam in its unmatched
economic system. It is but an outline of just its view.This concise
discourse, is not intended to delve into great detail the major
principles and important lines drawn by Islam in its unmatched economic
system. It is but an outline of just its view.

### 3) Ill-Consumption

The major third factor conducive to the economic problem and
perpetuating the spread of poverty and destruction of human resources is
ill-consumption, which the misuse of wealth and the non-usage of assets
that could preserve and satisfy human demands in a calculated balanced
way.

Like all other fields, Islam has a unique diagnosis for consumption in
its particularly caring way of embracing a complete formula for life.
Its guidelines show the following steps:

#### A. Limiting Consumption

Consumption is the most critical stage in dealing with the wealth and
making use of it and Islam did not neglect this vital area but set a
system with clear moral aspects that controls the process, utilizing the
graces and favours bestowed on man by Allah.

So that man would not act excessively or unreasonably in regard to
consuming life's resources, Islam projects a well-laid system,
calculated and in accordance with its message and its distinctive way of
handling matters at man's disposal.

#### B. Prohibition of Extravagance and Wastefulness

Extravagance and wastefulness are nothing but harmful misusages of
wealth. Islam exhorted man to confine himself to the necessities of life
and to keep his lusts, avarice and the untoward behaviors in check.

Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“O children of Adam! attend to your embellishments at every time of
prayer, and eat and drink and be not extravagant; surely He does not
love the*** ***extravagant.” Holy Qur'an (7:31)***

***“And they who when they spend, are neither extravagant nor
parsimonious, and (keep) between these the just mean.” Holy Qur'an
(25:67)***

***“And give to the near of kin his due and (to) the needy and the
wayfarer, and do not squander wastefully. Surely the squanderers are the
brothers of the Satan and Satan is ever ungrateful to his Lord.” Holy
Qur'an (17:26-27)***

***“And do not make your hand to be shackled to your neck nor stretch it
forth to the utmost (limit) of its stretching forth, lest you should
(afterwards) sit down blamed, stripped off.” Holy Qur'an (17:29)***

These exhortation and restrictions were purely to keep a balanced
economy perfectly organized. If wealth is employed in the interest of
man, used as it was ordained and planned by Allah, all human needs were
met.

Islam, in its legislation and perceptions, erect a structure of logical
bases compatible with human make-up and instinctive needs.

Because man cannot always handle wealth, Allah's given services and
favours are bestowed upon him in a strategically productive way, Islam
puts before him the way according to which he can utilize and consume
wealth efficiently and justly. If, however, these are ignored and
neglected, the specific objective outlined by Allah will be lost to man
with disastrous consequences as can be seen by the widespread plight of
people all over the world.

All activities, including commodities and services, are put into two
categories that best suit their nature, halal (lawful) and the haram
(unlawful). Wine, gambling, revelry, debauchery, wasteful entertainment
... etc, are strictly prohibited because they only dissipate man's
wealth.

Instead of being wasted in vain, such huge sums of money should be spent
in the services of human society to satisfy fundamental human needs and
preserve wealth from being squandered and lost. It is an ailment that
plagued all societies who lack the sound planning Islam presents to man.

Thousands of millions of dollars are wasted daily on wine, gambling,
extravagant entertainment, debauchery, as well as on accumulating
weapons of mass destruction and annihilation for wars and terrorizing
other nations, whilst millions of people are straddled with hunger,
deprivation and misery.

Islam makes such perverse and corrupt consumption haram because its aims
are to employ wealth in fields that secure welfare for humanity.

With its exact and perfectly planned economic system, Islam has placed
in the hands of mankind the economic gifts of securing the cure of all
financial woes and salvaging an equitable world from the abyss of
poverty, deprivation and injustice in which millions still painfully
suffer from and seemingly will continue to do so with ill-founded
man-made equivalents.

[^1]: Al-Naraqi, Jami' al- Sa'adat (Collector of Felicities), vol. 2, p.
46.

[^2]: Al-Harani, Tuhaf al-Uqul an Aal al-Rasul, Mawa'id al-Nabi
(Treasures of Minds about the Household of the Messenger of Allah,
Exhortations of the Prophet).

[^3]: Al-Kulaini, al-Kafi, vol. 5, p.67.


