Features of Islamic Thought
===========================

Islamic Thought has limited, obvious and specific features that have
the ability to differ it from other ideas and theories along with
granting it energy and power on contribution, as well as, original
development; besides, enabling it to face different problems of life by
giving them suitable solutions. We can summarize the most important
features as follows:

**1. Mental trend:**

Muslim Thought and thinking is characterized as an activity which
relies on intellectual breaks, because it believes in the mind's role;
in the field of human knowledge by depending on two prime principles in
this regard:

A. Giving free rein to truth (i.e., the harmonizing of the view of the
mind with reality).
B. Believing in the mind's power in discovering truth.

Surely, the mind has been given a prominent role and principal duty by
Muslim Thought. So, the mind has a right of understanding and deduction,
as well as, derives knowledge, science, concepts and theories from the
Qur'an and Sunnah to be attributed finally to Allah (be He Exalted).

It is correct to say that it is an Islamic Thought and that, for
example, so and so is an economic, philosophical, political, gregarious
opinion of Islam. Indeed, it is quite true for us that nothing is
referred to Islam (i.e., to be attributed to Allah-be He Exalted), in
saying this Islamic matter and that non- Islamic one, unless we are sure
that matter has been truly revealed by Allah and delivered by His Holy
Prophet.

As long as we are sure that Islam gives us permission to employ the
mind in understanding, deducing and discovering; besides, allowing us to
allocate the mind's energy in every field of legislation, thought and
knowledge; equally the mind helps us to derive political, economical,
moral, philosophical, social and other ideas and concepts from their
original sources, then, we can say that any thought which gets benefit
via the mind under the guidance of legislation is exactly an Islamic
Thought.

**2. Extension and Inclusiveness:**

Islamic Thought is characterized by its wide idea and includes all
aspects and fields of life. The main reason behind that extension and
inclusiveness is due to the width and generality of its horizons of
sources which depend on Islamic Thought whether in its material or
structure. The thought, knowledge and Muslim culture, before us, are as
a clear evidence and witness to this. So, Muslim scholars, philosphers,
thinkers and researchers have discussed all affairs and aspects of life,
starting with knowledge theory, method of research, thinking and
philosophy of existence, along with the explanation of life and the
world, up to lesser matters in the human being's life. They have studied
matters of belief, regulation, morals, psychology, behaviour,
legislation, philosophy and history; besides, other ever so little or
great knowledge sciences and arts to a degree that they include all
fields and horizons.

In addition, they have laid down the basis, rules and totals which can
involve every new thing in life and give it a solution. But, surely,
Muslim Thought has the priority with regard to all its basis and totals.
Truly, thought always guides life as a pioneer and never goes behind it.
And if we saw some vaccant areas in thought and knowledge, the cause
would be the retardation of Muslim researchers and thinkers; as a result
of the intellectual and civilizational relapse that has been inflicted
on Muslims over the last periods, and not because of the self-incapacity
of Islamic Thought and knowledge. Therefore, if a researcher deals with
any chapter or idea, art, literature, knowledge and human sciences, he
will find intellectual material and a huge wealth of information can
supply him with what he needs to cover the research and theory in this
regard or on that subject.

**3. Activity and Dynamism:**

The Muslim Thought is characterized by its activity and influence on
the person and society's lives by giving it a dynamic power that boasts
energy of the person along with material, as well as, psychological
powers directed towards highness and integration for creating a reality
of motion.

So, it is a thought that aims at building and moving life; besides,
igniting the human being's powers to transfer it to behaviour, work,
positions and contributions. Surely, the value of thought in a human
being's life lies behind its ability to provoke the human being to act
upon himself together with igniting his powers of positive motion for
making lofty human civilization and life. And, also, Muslim Thought, due
to its witnessed history and practical truth, is a thought that has full
ability to put the human being in a particular circle of movement and
contribution.

Because, in theory, it thoroughly refuses concrete motionlessness and
inactivity or to be as an academic thought and on the far practical side
of the human being; besides, creating a dynamic power in the human
being, as well as, a self-movement, and, also, to affect his
surroundings and interact with the world round him (i.e., world of
nature, life and the human being).

Nowadays, the problem of Muslims is not an intellectual and theoretical
one to the extent that it is a problem of motivation, revival and
dynamism, as well as, how to convert intellectual, material and
psychological power into life, charity, product and work style. And the
Muslim who attempts this uphill road, will be a dynamic power and
creative, as well as, a constructive man who can affect his surroundings
which is full of stagnancy, retardation and immobilization. So, Muslim
Thought, with its whole, available strength and moveable, practical
trend, as well as, its ascent power, besides its integral trend, can
create, from pre-Islamic society, which was immersed, totally, in
stagnancy, retardation and automatism, a dynamic, strong nation along
with a boasting power for an historial movement.

Nowadays, this Thought has the ability to be dynamic, and organized and
direct the human being's power by enriching it with charity, activity
and creativity.

**4. The Existence of Limited Standards and Precepts (Commitments):**

Allah (be He Exalted) says:

"And (know) that this is My path, the right one, therefore, follow it,
and pursue not (other) ways, for they will lead you away from His
way;... ". Holy Qur'an (6:153)

"(Receive) the baptism of Allah, and who is better than Allah in
baptizing? and Him do we serve." Holy Qur'an (2:138)

One of the features of the Muslim Thought is that which is
characterized by its principles, criteria and precepts; that which has
the ability to keep it in good condition with connected, logical
originality and structure. If a Muslim researcher wants to think or
probe into current issues, such as, sociology, psychology, aesthetics,
education, history, expression, ethics, finance, economics,
international relations and subjects of civilization, for example,
liberty and the like, he will find himself face to face with Muslim
ideological material and criteria, as well as, precepts that have the
ability to restrict his direction of thinking and research methods, and
all the results that will be reached by him when he wants to prove a
scientific definition or pose any intellectual matter and when he
discovers interpretation for any certain matter or plans any
organization for it.

In that situation, he will find himself committed to principles and
criteria that can organize his thinking, research, definitions, and
expressions. These criteria and precepts can be summed up as follows:

1. Tenets and concepts.
2. Values and morals.
3. Verdicts.

The Muslim thinker, when he wants to prove a theory on expressing
behaviour and history, he should inhibit his analysis, expression,
organization and history from going against the divine rule. One of its
evidence is that: Surely, the human is free and does things by choice,
i.e., he has the ability to pick out any certain kind of conduct,
because, freedom objects to the concept of justice. So, the recompense
of both retribution and reward will never be justifiable unless done
within the ability of choice.

Also, when a Muslim thinker wants to research into a case of liberty,
he will make a link between it and the commitment with Islamic values
and verdicts and does not leave them to disorder and dissolution. So, we
find the thinker who deals with meaning in his explanation of the cause
of an economic problem, cannot attribute it, for example, to the lack of
the power of nature on providing man's needs; because, he previously
knows that it is against Allah's wisdom, as well as, His knowledge and
justice.

Whereas, on the contrary, the thinker will refer it to the problem of
distribution which is hidden in man's essence. The same human being who
is overcome with the inclination to greed, gluttony and injustice, is
lead to give unjust orders and rules of economic distribution.

The Muslim researcher who deals with these ethics finds a link between
morals and absolute divine integration. (i.e., Thou adopt Allah's
manners); such as, justice, mercy, wisdom, forgiveness, truth, etc., and
makes a connection between them and the present-day reality; as we have
made it clear before in the economic example, therefore, the
consideration of morals with regard to him and due to this meaning are
divine and practical.

In this way, the thinker proves his ideas and theories, and can move
through his research, deduction and development and within the limited
criteria and precepts of tenet principles. As Islamic rules of belief
act as a group of precepts and criteria for maintaining Islamic
research, thought, theory, literary and artistic product it, also,
protects research from deviation, disorder, contradiction and from the
infiltration of strange ideas and concepts; besides, the odd and
non-Muslim tendencies. And the same basis of belief can form an orbit
for ideas and theories that move round; and a spirit that flows in over
research, a degree that the intellectual construction becomes a united,
coordinated, integral structure.

The ideas in belief (i.e., a group of thoughts and concepts about the
world, life, the human being and existence) behave as a prime base to be
built up on all foundations of civilizational and moral construction, as
well as, man's cultural activities, such as, knowledge, the arts and
literature.

Verdicts (i.e., compulsory, lawful and unlawful) behave as measures and
criteria for thought. So, every intellectual, cultural, artistic and
literary product will submit to commitment with lawful, unlawful and
compulsory measures. As belief and ideas behave as measures and concepts
of intellectual commitment, in the same way, morals behave as measures
and precepts of intellectual commitment. Surely, morals are as a spirit
that flows in all dimensions of human production and affects them, as
well. By this, the commitment is accomplished and construction is being
built up solidly, and the progress of thought is corrected according to
the obvious Islamic basis.

**5. Originality:**

Linguists have defined \`originality', thus: Original man means he has
a root. Original man means the one who has an affirmed view and is
reasonable, and is in a deep-rooted originality, much the same as, \`to
magnify' bears the meaning of magnification.

When we say a person is of \`original view' it means that he has a firm
groundwork in originality and it is also to say that he is a person of
original view and mind. And as \`original glory' means it has
originality,(32) thus, the meaning of originality becomes more limited
to us in language. Nevertheless, due to convention, the same meaning is
used in respective fields. So, it is said, \`An original Islamic Thought
and an original Muslim culture - i.e., they have Muslim principles, that
which is based on and obtain their existence from.' Therefore, no hybrid
will be included or mixed with any other odd thoughts which are
unfamiliar to the \`roots' and \`fountainheads'.

The secret behind the \`Originality of Muslim Thought' is hidden in the
following elements:

1. The originality of the source and its enrichment in doing without
fabrication, borrowing and demanding integration from the others.
2. The existence of precepts and frameworks that have the ability to
reserve the identity of Muslim Thought and reinforce it, too.
3. The existence of method and style for Islamic research and thinking,
which takes into consideration the observed original product when
dealing with principal sources of thought and knowledge along with an
attempt at discovery, foundation and creation, criticism, testing and
getting benefit from the product and other intellectual experiences.

Allah (be He Exalted) says:

"(Receive the baptism of Allah, and who is better than Allah in
baptizing? and Him do we serve." Holy Qur'an (2:138)

"And (know) that this is My path, the right one, therefore, follow it,
and pursue not (other) ways, for they will lead you away from His
way;..." Holy Qur'an (6:153)

It was related that Allah's Apostle (a.s.) said:

"This religion is borne by just persons at the turn of every century
who refute liars' sequel, extremists' distortion or ignorant people's
literary theft; exactly as an iron slag is driven away by a
bellows."(33)

Whereas, on the basis of originality, we can isolate and distinguish
between philosophical, economic, political, social, moral and lawful
thought and the like. Therefore, we can describe Islam-abiding thought
as an Islamic original one and, at the same time, we take away this
trait from that thought which does not abide by Islam. So, we cannot
term it as an Islamic one; although it has been produced by an
Islam-embraced writer or thinker, because the self-identity of thought
and its personality can only grant it the trait but not the identity of
the belief of the writer which still never embodies any intellectual,
literary or artistic product. By this, the intellectual commitment and
the preserving of originality, as well as, abided thought will be a
responsibility of the Muslim writers, thinkers, men of letters, artists
and scholars.

And as a result of this, Muslim jurists have given a decision about the
taboo that books on error should not be read by any person who is unable
to react strongly against them; inhibiting or stopping their
publication. From here, the responsiblity of protecting our nation from
intellectual deviation and from losing the ideological originality or
purity, as well as, the loss of the identity of belief which results
from the use of non-Muslim concepts, ideas, theories, letters and the
arts which are in circulation through intellectual markets, schools,
universities and institutes of thought, art, literature and knowledge,
news propaganda media, etc.; which are not abiding by the line of
original Islam. So, due to this, we have to take preventive measures and
fortified means to keep on the Islamic, cultural and intellectual
track.

Surely, the ideological originality that must be available on request
is restricted by the following three stages:

1. A stage that distinguishes between what is a Muslim item and a
non-Muslim one, as well as, between what is correct and what is
incorrect. And, this is, of course, the only lesser stage of
intellectual originality that can keep the ideological personality and
Islamic knowledge safe. So, when a Muslim is faced with any thought
presented before him that touches on economics, sociology, politics and
psychology or a theory of art, literature, philosophy or law and, so on,
he will differ and distinguish-because he has obtained intellectual
principles, articles of belief and primary criteria between
Islamic-based thought and the non-Muslim one which is (the latter)
against all Islamic values, criteria and rules.

2. A stage of criticism and judgement: The second stage of intellectual
purity and originality is a stage of the criticising and judging of
thoughts, concepts, and theories which are alien to the spirit of Islam
and its ideological rules.

This is one of the intellectual originality stages and has a serious,
key role in keeping safe the Islamic thought, Muslim intellectual
personality, missionary originality and social, as well as,
civilizational life of the Muslim nation. The ideological,
civilizational and foreign infiltration that began in the middle of the
first of the Hegira century, included the beginning of fatalism and
delegation of authority, as well as, Murajji'a Thought (i.e., a Muslim
sect which believes in postponement).

A close association started, later on, with translated Greek
philosophy, logic, ethics, etc.; besides, the Persian and Indian ones,
as well as, the attempt by people who embraced Islam; like, the Jews,
Christians and other various religions' followers, to apply their
intellectual doctrines and legendary beliefs, as well as, their concepts
about life and the world.

A fierce intellectual struggle has started with that strange newcomer,
and against the destructive and devastative attempts which coincide with
the beginning of criticism and purification along with the decisive
reaction of the nation, Muslim thinkers, and, scholars. So, critical
work and the task of purging has its role in keeping on the originality
track and protecting Islamic thinking and thought from confusion,
disorder and deviation.

Through the long extension of the Islamic thought process, criticism is
considered as a basic scientific method in reserving legislation,
sciences and its principles, as well as, to protect Muslim civilization,
culture and life. So, that critical and defensive method being practiced
by the infallible Imams (upon whom be peace), scholars, philosophers and
thinkers with regard to two circles, are shown like this:

1. A non-Muslim circle which deals with responding to ideas, theories
and infiltrated suspicions into the Islamic, intellectual entity, such
as the incoming philosophies, theories, concepts, beliefs which are
unfamiliar with Muslim thought and originality.

2. The Islamic circle. Shi'ite Imams (upon whom be peace) and Muslim
thinkers, such as religious jurists, tradition scholars, interpreters,
philosophers, theologians, men of fundamentals; and the like, have
depended on this critical method to keep with Islamic legislation and
originality and protect it from all interpretations, inclinations and
strays whether done on purpose or not. Also, they have created the
sciences of tradition and biography and criticism traditions, as well
as, the science of juristic dispute.

Besides, they have held comparison studies which deal with the
philosophy and theology field and fundamentals science of religious
jurisprudence. Similarly, they have taken criticism as a method to
research and verify the views.

Therefore, method becomes a base for researching and thinking. It,
then, becomes obvious who it is that does the research into
jurisprudence, fundamentals, theology, philosophy, tradition and
philosophy of ethics, history and interpretation. Even language still
has an unstable personal opinion except when the researcher reviews and
discusses the views strictly and carefully to reach a chosen, deduced
independent conclusion, in order to make a pursuer of this strict
scientific method understand that the scientific personal opinion of the
Muslim researcher and thinker in every art and science, as well as,
field of knowledge is an essence of close examination, criticism, and
purification.

So, due to that scientific method, Muslim scholars and thinkers have
fortified the originality and purity of Muslim Thought against any
foreign subjects being imported or interpolated into it and, also, to
protect the Thought from the mind's deviations of a person who
researches within the Islamic frame, but, who is still unable to
discover the fact and abide by the originality and purity criteria. As a
result of this, an active, energetic, defensive, critical and
intellectual movement has come into existence and is able to achieve its
missionary targets strictly and actively.

It is clear to every researcher and study-pursuing person, that the
ideological, civilizational and struggle of belief between Islam and its
enemies has intensified, since its origination, until today. Therefore,
we can see that the European civilizational and intellectual conquest
has had its planned, destructive act, against Islam and its mission, as
well as, its culture.

Of course, that conquest is more dangerous than all other attempts of
the civilized and intellectual kind over the first Islamic period,
because Muslim society, at that time, had possessed ideological strength
and immunity to a degree that was stronger than what Muslims were over
the European intellectual conquest. So, during the first period, Muslims
were considered an excelling, victorious, international, political
power.

Similarly, Muslims were carrying the flaming torches of culture and
calling for Islam to be the pioneer in leadership of human beings.
Hence, the feeling of excellence and psychological strength and immunity
were one of the original pillars, of achievement besides, power of
thought and challenge of the Islam- abiding Imams, scholars and
thinkers. Therefore, the strange incoming current has been defeated and
Islamic Thought became free from its effect and negative role after
being excluded, diagnosed and refused by it.

Moreover, due to that strict adherence and interaction, Islamic Thought
has taken much benefit from power, activity and contributions. So, its
circle becomes wider by including many subjects and processes. Also, its
methods, as well as, powers become strong enough to defend, react and
fix the Islamic personality landmarks of thought, culture and
civilization.

Muslim Thought can dissolve, digest, absorb and assimilate the most
suitable Islamic-incoming thought to apply it to its Islamic structure
after being reversed, sieved and its formula, as well as, engineering
reviewed on grounds which are Islam-abiding.

Concerning the studied and planned Western intellectual conquest period
which aims at eradicating the Islamic mental personality and effacing
its identity, all the European ideological establishments, universities,
research, misleading and propagating foundations; such as, journalism,
theatre, publishing houses, movies, parties and political movements,
that European thought and theories include like democracy, communism,
socialism, nationalism, racism and regionalism, have done their best to
spread the European thought, theories and concepts. So, they have set
forth the Marxism and Capitalism theories; equally, the regional and
racial thought in the field of policy, economy, philosophy and
history.

Also, other philosophical theories which try to set forth explanations
for existence, knowledge, manners, morals, nature and various human
knowledge; for instance, psychology, sociolgy and theories of
literature, art, culture and, so on, as a substitute for Islamic
Thought, knowledge, culture, and civilization. Besides, there are their
attempts at eradicating the Muslim person, society and thought of their
missionary contents and replacing them with other European incoming
thoughts.

Surely, Islam-abiding thinkers, scholars, writers, scientific theology
schools, Islamic political movements and Islamic scientific foundations
have firmly stood against this current. So, they could find an Islamic
intellectual rebirth and fulfill, once again, the civilizational and
cultural originality along with reserving the Islamic identity of
thought, knowledge and life's philosophy. Allah (be He Exalted) says:

"No! We cast the truth against the falsehood, so that it breaks its
head, and lo! it vanishes;..." Holy Qur'an (21:18)

"They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and Allah
will not consent save to perfect His light, though the unbelivers are
averse." Holy Qur'an (9:32)

Thus, we see the strength and activity of Islamic Thought, as well as,
its power on creation, contribution, reserving the originality and
making an independent identity in spite of destructive storms and other
attempts of distortion and substitution.

3. A stage of deduction and establishing theory. Concerning the upper
most, mature, completed originality stages is a stage of deduction,
groundwork and invention, (i.e., foundation of thought and theory to be
deduced with regard to its Islamic fundamentals).

Indeed, the Islamic Thought has great theoretical and civilizational
tasks today and must be suitable for the size of intellectual and
civilizational product which depends on non-Muslim rules that go
together with living, civilizational and intellectual needs which are
met by a person, nowadays, in the fields of philosophy, ethics,
economics, politics, psychology, information, public opinion, sociology,
philosophy of history, art, and literature together with all social
matters and subjects.

Surely, to deduce and form an Islamic theory that abides by purity and
originality and is established according to such aspects is not
available except for the Muslim thinker who has many prime requirements
and those are as follows:

1. To have broad knowledge of sources of Islamic legislation and
thought and with that which results from Islamic Thought in the field of
research and theorization which deals with a subject and its related
theory which is set up and deduced by the thinker. And, his knowledge
must be at such a level that it enables him to deduce the needed
theory.
2. To have the necessary knowledge required for research, studies and
theories that are set forth by non-Muslim researchers and specialists in
that field.
3. He should have a scientific method and Islamic way of thinking that
enables him to deduce and set up both the research and theory.
4. To have a deducing talent and scientific power on understanding and
education.


