Introduction
============

If any of the Qur’anic verses written in this book is not recited as
qunoot in any salat, but prayed as a du-a’a recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Bismillahir Rah’maanir Raheem

In the beginning and then

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ الِ مُحَمَّدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allahumma Salli A’laa Muhammadin wa Aali Muhammad

Before you say the text of the verse (dua’a) and in the end again say

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ الِ مُحَمَّدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allahumma Salli A’laa Muhammadin wa Aali Muhammad

Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib says:

Put faith in Allah. Seek His protection. Direct your prayers, requests,
solicitations and supplications to Him and Him alone. To give as well as
to withhold lies in His power.

Ask as much of his favours as you can.

\*\*\*\*\*

Know that Allah owns the treasures of the heavens and the earth. Not
only He has given permission to ask for his mercy and favours, but also
has promised to listen to your prayers. He has not appointed guards to
prevent your reaching Him. Invoke His help in difficulties and distress.
Implore him to grant you long life and sound health. Pray to him for
prosperity.

Think over it that by simply granting you the privilege of praying for
His favours and mercy, He has handed over the keys of His treasures to
you. Whenever you are in need, pray, and He gives his favours and
blessings.

Sometimes you find request are not immediately granted. Do not be
disappointed. Fulfillment of desires rests with the true purpose or
intention of the prayer. More often fulfillment is delayed because the
merciful Lord wants to bestow upon you suitable rewards. In the meantime
bear patiently hardships, believing sincerely in His help. You will get
better favours, because, unknowingly, you may ask for things that are
really harmful to you. Many of your requests, if granted, may bring
eternal damnation. So, at times, withholding fulfillment is a blessing
in disguise.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صلّى الله عليه واَله وسلّم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: Sallallaahu A’layhi Wa Aalihee Wa Sallam

Whenever you read or say the name or any epithet or appellation of the
Holy Prophet.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيُهِ السَّلاَم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: A’layhis Salaam

Whenever you read or say the name or any epithet or appellation of any
Imam of the Ahl ul Bayt, any prophet or messenger of Allah, and any
distinguished member of the family of the holy Prophet.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلَواةَ اللهِ عَلَيُهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: Salawaatullahi A’layhaa

Whenever you read or say the name of Fatimah Zahra, Khadija Kubra,
Zaynab Binti Ali, Maryam or Asiya.


