Part 1: Supplications from the Holy Qur’an
==========================================

Supplication n. 1
-----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهدِنَــــا الصِّرَاطَ المُستَقِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنعَمتَ عَلَيهِمْ غَيرِ المَغضُوبِ عَلَيهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ الضَّالِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ihdinas’siraat’al Mustaqeem Si’raat’al Lad’eena An-A’mta A’layhim
Ghayril Maghz’’oobi A’layhim Wa Laz’’ Z’’aaalleen

***“Keep us on the right path. The path of those upon whom Thou hast
bestowed favors. Not (the path) of those upon whom Thy wrath is brought
down, nor of those who go astray.”*** ***(Sura al-Fatiĥa, 1:6-7)***

No matter how much wisdom you have, always beseech Allah to guide you in
the right path, whatever the field of enquiry or activity you are taking
after. Seek Allah’s help to keep you very close to the ways and means of
the righteous and the pious servants of Allah (the Holy Prophet and the
Ahlul Bayt), the surest road to success in this world, and to keep you
away from the dishonest methods and hypocritical attitude of the astray
devils (the followers of the accursed Shaytan), although they may appear
profitable for a little while, but finally bring you ruin and
destruction in the end.

Supplication n. 2
-----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbana Taqabbal Minna Innaka Antas Samee-u’l A’leem

***“…Our Lord! accept from us; surely Thou art the Hearing, the
Knowing.” (Sura al-Baqara, 2:127)***

Prophet Ibrahim and prophet Isma-il, while building the holy Ka’-bah
prayed to Allah for the successful completion of their project. Putting
in their best efforts does not make your labour fruitful, because there
are many unknown and uncontrollable forces working in the universe that
can bring disappointment if Allah, who not only knows but has total
control over all things and events, does not help you. So always invoke
Allah by reciting this verse in the traditions of His prophets, whenever
you take up a job, which has not been prohibited.

Also recite this verse at the end of any good deed-after praying any
*wajib* or *sunnah* salat, or when you have read whole or part of the
holy Qur’an, in a single sitting, or after attending a *majlis* (a
religious gathering for mentioning the merits of the Holy Prophet and
his Ahl ul Bayt).

Recitation of this verse is also recommended for seeking fulfillment of
any legitimate desires.

Supplication n. 3
-----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِ إِذَا دَعَانِ فَلْيَسْتَجِيبُواْ لِي وَلْيُؤْمِنُواْ بِي
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْشُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa Id’aa Sa-alaka I’baadee A’nnee Fa Innee Qareeb Ujeebu Da’-Watad
Daa-i’ Id’aa Da-a’ani Fal-Yastajeeboo Lee Wal Yoo-Minoo Bee La-A’llahum
Yarshudoon

***“And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very
near; I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me, so they
should answer My call and believe in Me that they may walk in the right
way.”(Sura al-Baqara, 2:186)***

This verse tells us not to turn to anyone but Allah to ask for
fulfillment of all our wants and needs, and also to make it clear that
there is no other way to get satisfaction of our desires except to
invoke Allah, who answers whenever called by supplicant. It brings you
near to Allah and keeps you on the right path. Allah answers to the cry
of help because the love of Allah for His servants is much greater than
the love of a mother for her children.

This dua’a may be recited as it helps to get nearness of Allah and to
have complete faith in Him alone; and because Allah says he will answer
whenever he is called. This verse makes the recitation of dua’a
necessary and obligatory for all Muslims.

To multiply livelihood and to obtain fulfillment of legitimate desires
recite this verse 700 times after performing *wudu* and before praying
any *wajib* salat. It can be reduced to 70 times or 7 times according to
your convenience.

Supplication n. 4
-----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَفِي الآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً
وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaaa Aatinaa Fiddunyaa H’asanata Wa Fil Aakhirati H’asanata Wa
Qinaa A’d’aaban Naar

***“…Our Lord, give us good in this world and good in the Hereafter, and
save us from the torment of Fire.”*** ***(Sura al-Baqara, 2:201)***

According to this verse, short and temporary life in this world is as
important as the eternal life of the hereafter.

Although good in the permanent life of the hereafter is the aim of all
Muslims, but god in this world is also necessary because man has been
asked by his creator to take part in all activities of this world
without breaking the rules and regulations, made by Him. So beseech Him
for the good in both the worlds.

This verse is generally recited as qunoot in al prayers.  
 It can be recited at the time of walking around (*tawaf*) the Holy
Ka’-bah.

Supplication n. 5
-----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا أَفْرِغْ عَلَيْنَا صَبْرًا وَثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَنَا وَانصُرْنَا
عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaaa Afrigh A’laynaa S’abraw Wa Thabbit Aqdamanaa Wan Surnaa A’lal
Qawmil Kaafireen

***“…O our Lord, pour patience down on us, and make our foothold firm,
and help us against the disbelieving people”. (Sura al-Baqara, 2:250)***

This verse teaches us to pray for grant of patience and perseverance in
the face of trial and tribulations of this world so that we remain
faithful to the true religion of Allah, even if deprived of the comforts
of life, as these two aspects of our character make us fight our enemies
and the enemies of Allah.

If we read the life account of the holy Prophet, Imam Ali and their
infallible descendants, we find that their lives were the true
exposition of this verse. Recite this dua’a in the times of trials, and
to undo and put an end to the intrigues of your enemies.

Supplication n. 6
-----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا لاَ تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِن نَّسِينَا أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا رَبَّنَا
وَلاَ تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِنَا رَبَّنَا وَلاَ تُحَمِّلْنَا مَا لاَ طَاقَةَ لَنَا بِهِ
وَاعْفُ عَنَّا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا أَنتَ مَوْلاَنَا
فَانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Laa Too-Akhid’naaa In-Naseenaa Aw Akht’aanaa Rabbanaa wa Laa
Tah’mil A’laynaaa Is’ran Kamaa Ha’maltahoo A’lal Lad’eena min Qablinaa
Rabbanaa wa Laa Tuh’ammilnaa Maa Laa T’aaqata Lanaa Bih Wa’-Fu A’nnaa
Waghfirlanaa Warh’amnaa Anta Mawlaanaa Fans’urnaa A’lal Qawmil Kaafireen

***“…O our Lord, do not hold us responsible if we forget or make
mistake. O our lord, do not lay on us a burden such as you laid on those
before us. O our Lord, do not impose upon us that which we have not the
strength (to bear). Pardon us, and forgive us, and have mercy on us. You
are our lord-master, so help us against the unbelieving people.”***
***(Sura al-Baqara, 2:286)***

The right path (what to do and what not to do) has been clearly shown to
man by Allah. These commandments are very easy to follow, not beyond our
capacity, as the holy Prophet once said: “I have brought for you a very
easy religion.”

Now man is responsible for what he does. If we make mistakes, by
breaking laws of Allah, we must admit our mistakes and humbly and
sincerely seek forgiveness of our merciful Lord, who not only forgives
faults but helps us to overcome our enemies and the enemies of Allah;
and in this way, keeps away from us hardships and sorrows that they
(enemies) might bring if Allah does not stop them, in answer to our
supplications.

Through this prayer we pray for the triumph of truth over falsehood and
the suppression of satanic tendencies by godliness, and ask Allah not to
inflict on us situations under which we may not be able to avoid
wrongdoing. After acknowledging our limitations we undertake to work at
our maximum capacity, hoping that through his mercy He will wipe clean
all traces of errors and mistakes.

Supplication n. 7
-----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا لاَ تُزِغْ قُلُوبَنَا بَعْدَ إِذْ هَدَيْتَنَا وَهَبْ لَنَا
مِن لَّدُنكَ رَحْمَةً إِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْوَهَّابُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Laa Tuzigh Quloobanaa Ba’-Da Id’hadaytanaa Wa Hab Lanaa Mil
Ladunka Rah’mah Innaka Antal Wahaab

***“Our Lord! make not our hearts to*** ***deviate after Thou hast
guided us aright, and grant us from Thee mercy; surely Thou art the most
liberal Giver”*** ***(Sura Ali-‘Imran, 3:8)***

It is better to be careful and recite this dua’a in advance so that we
may not change our heart and mind (follow another religion) after
accepting the true religion of Allah, Islam, the only right path.

This prayer is a precaution to avoid possible perversion of the mind and
the heart after accepting divine guidance. The purpose of our lives in
this temporary and transient world is to make preparation for the
eternal life of the hereafter.

To strengthen your faith recite this dua’a in every *wajib* as well as
*sunnah* salat.

Supplication n. 8
-----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ مَالِكَ الْمُلْكِ تُؤْتِي الْمُلْكَ مَن تَشَاء وَتَنزِعُ
الْمُلْكَ مِمَّن تَشَاء وَتُعِزُّ مَن تَشَاء وَتُذِلُّ مَن تَشَاء
بِيَدِكَ الْخَيْرُ إِنَّكَ عَلَىَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُولِجُ اللَّيْلَ فِي الْنَّهَارِ وَتُولِجُ النَّهَارَ فِي اللَّيْلِ
وَتُخْرِجُ الْحَيَّ مِنَ الْمَيِّتِ وَتُخْرِجُ الَمَيَّتَ مِنَ
الْحَيِّ وَتَرْزُقُ مَن تَشَاء بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allaahumma Maalikal Mulki Tu’-til Mulka Man Tashaa-u wa Tanzi-u’l Mulka
Mimman Tashaa wa Tu-i’zzu Man Tashaa-u wa Tud’illu Man Tashaa Biyadikal
Khayr Innaka A’laa Kulli Shay’in Qadeer Toolijul Layla Fin Nahaari wa
Toolijun Nahaara Fil Layl wa Tukhrijul Mayyita Minal H’ayy wa Tarzuqu
Man Tashaa-u Bighayri H’isaab

***“..O Allah, Master of the Kingdom! Thou givest the kingdom to
whomsoever Thou pleasest and takest away the kingdom from whomsoever
Thou pleasest, and Thou exaltest whom Thou pleasest and abasest whom
Thou pleasest in Thine hand is the good; surety, Thou hast power***
***over all things.*** ***Thou makest the night to pass into the day and
Thou makest the day to pass into the night, and Thou bringest forth the
living from the dead and Thou bringest forth the dead*** ***from the
living, and Thou givest sustenance to whom Thou pleasest without
measure.”*** ***(Sura Ali-‘Imran, 3:26-27)***

Sovereignty belongs to Allah. He is the Sole & Ultimate Authority in
domains of creations and legislations. Everything is created by Him, so
to total submission to His Will is Islam, which has been described in
these verses in the form of prayer. The Holy Prophet and his Ahlulbayt
have rightly advised the believers to recite this prayer at all
occasions, so that the conviction in the omnipotence of the Almighty
Lord permeates their hearts and minds guide them in all their physical
and mental activities.

A complete resignation to Allah’s will is possible only when man
believes that it is Allah who alone can do and undo things, conceivable
and inconceivable, in easy and difficult. The then grace of the Lord
abounds, because in his hands is all good. There should be no complaint,
nor grudge, nor frustration. With total resignation to his will, man
must pray and invoke his mercy to obtain fulfillment of his/her
legitimate wants and needs.

He (Allah) and He alone, and no one else bestows upon whom so ever he
chooses, the power to exercise the authority, in this world, or in the
hereafter. To some he gives power in this world though many of them do
not follow his commandments. He must not get confused. It is not our
look out because our knowledge of things, persons and events is
hopelessly very little.

He knows why he has done so. Abdullah Ibne Abbas said that this may
verse may contain the great name of Allah, *ismi azam*. If this dua’a is
recited with realization of its meaning, the realization of his absolute
sovereignty and his exclusive rights and option, Allah will fullfil the
legitimate desires of the reciter of this dua’a.

Not to be proud and arrogant after achieving success, in this world,
recite this dua’a regularly.

According to the Holy Prophet whoso recites these verses daily after
Fajr *salaat*, gets sufficient means to livelihood. Also the reciter
gets enough funds to repay loans. To discard nervousness in big public
gatherings, or if there is fear of insult or harm at the time of meeting
a person or a group of persons recite this dua’a.

Supplication n. 9
-----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُنَالِكَ دَعَا زَكَرِيَّا رَبَّهُ قَالَ رَبِّ هَبْ لِي مِن لَّدُنْكَ
ذُرِّيَّةً طَيِّبَةً إِنَّكَ سَمِيعُ الدُّعَاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Hab Lee Mil Ladunka D’urriyyatan T’ayyibah Innaka Samee-u’d Du’aa

“O Lord, bestow me a goodly offspring from You; verily, You are the
hearer of prayer”. ***”*** ***(Sura Ali-‘Imran, 3:38)***

(9) When Zakariyya saw Maryam receiving her sustenance direct from
Allah, he was so much convinced of His extraordinary benevolence and its
miraculous nature that he beseeched Him to give him a tayyab (virtuous,
blessed and good) son, he could not normally have since his wife was
barren.  
 Recitation of this dua’a 7 times after every wajib salaat will make
your children pious and obedient.

Supplication n. 10
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ قَوْلَهُمْ إِلاَّ أَن قَالُواْ ربَّنَا اغْفِرْ لَنَا
ذُنُوبَنَا وَإِسْرَافَنَا فِي أَمْرِنَا وَثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَنَا
وانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaghfir lanaa d’unoobanaa wa israafanaa fee amrinaa wa thabbit
aqdaamanaa wan s’urnaa a’lal qawmil kaafireen

***“O our Lord, forgive us our sins and our excesses in our affairs, and
set our foothold firm, and help us against the disbelieving people”.***
***(Sura Ali-‘Imran, 3:147)***

The Holy Qur’an says that all the prophets of Allah who had fought in
the way of Allah, never giving in to the enemies of Allah, used to
recite this dua’a.

By reason of their steadfastness and their asking for protection and
seeking refuge with Allah, Allah granted them victory against infidels,
glorified their mission and enhanced their reputation.

As human beings we may commit mistakes and not follow the instructions
given by Allah, so we must seek His forgiveness with firm determination
that we will not commit such sins any more. We must also recite this
dua’a to remain firm in our faith no matter what the temptations are, so
that we may defeat our enemies and the enemies of Allah.

The dua’a can also be recited to remove hardships and difficulties put
in our way by our enemies so as to induce us to give up the right way of
doing things as Allah has asked us to do.

Supplication n. 11
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا خَلَقْتَ هَذا بَاطِلاً سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Maa Khalaqta Haad’aa Baat’ilaa Subh’aanaka Faqinaa A’d’aaban
Naar

***“O our Lord, You have not created (all)*** ***this in vain. Glory be
to You. Save us then from the torment of the fire”*** ***(Sura
Ali-‘Imran, 3:191)***

The Holy Qur’an says that those who remember Allah all the time and try
to understand the nature of His creation recite this dua’a, because in
the creation of the heavens and the earth and in the difference of night
and day are signs of His omnipotence for the men of understanding.  
 Recite this dua’a in the qunoot of tahajjud (night prayer)

Supplication n. 12
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبَّنَا إِنَّنَا سَمِعْنَا مُنَادِيًا يُنَادِي لِلإِيمَانِ أَنْ
آمِنُواْ بِرَبِّكُمْ فَآمَنَّا رَبَّنَا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا
وَكَفِّرْ عَنَّا سَيِّئَاتِنَا وَتَوَفَّنَا مَعَ الأبْرَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Innanaa Sami’-Naa Munaadiyay Yunaadee Lil – Eemaani An Aaminoo
Birabbikum Fa- Aamannaa Rabbanaa Faghfir Lanaa D’unoobanaa Wa Kaffir
A’nnaaa Sayyi- Aatinaa Wa Tawaffanaa Ma-A’l Abraaar

***“O our Lord, we have indeed heard the voice of a preacher (messenger)
calling (us) to faith: “Believe in your Lord.” So we believed. Our Lord,
forgive us then our sins, and remove from us our evil deeds, and make us
die with the virtuous”.*** ***(Sura Ali-‘Imran, 3:193)***

This is the continuation of dua’a. The wise men hear the message of
Allah, and, as they have already understood the meaning of the nature of
divine creation, readily accept the true faith, the belief in the one
and only Allah, seeking His forgiveness for the sins they have committed
in the days of ignorance; and not forgetting that Allah (alone) can keep
them on the right path till the lat day of their lives in this world,
invoke Him to make them die as true believers.

Make a habit of reciting this dua’a because there is nothing worth
keeping with yourself except the true faith to the last breath of your
life, in order to obtain permanent bliss in the next world. This world
is a place of test and trial for you. Even after a whole lifetime of
true faith if a person for a single insignificant moment, does not
believe in the one and only Almighty Allah in the last breath of his
life, he is forever condemned to fire of hell.

Supplication n. 13
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَآتِنَا مَا وَعَدتَّنَا عَلَى رُسُلِكَ وَلاَ تُخْزِنَا
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ إِنَّكَ لاَ تُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Wa Aatinaa Maa Wa-A’ttanaa A’laa Rusulika Wa Laa Tukhzinaa
Yawal Qiyaamah Innak Laa Tukhliful Mee’a’ad

***“O our Lord, give us what You have promised us through Your
messengers, and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection. Verily,
You do not break Your promise”.*** ***(Sura Ali-‘Imran, 3:193)***

Through this dua’a the faithful servants of Allah, who have accepted the
true religion, revealed by Allah through His messengers, invoke Allah to
keep them safe from the shame and disgrace, the evil doers will face on
the day of judgement, because rewards and favours have been promised
only for those who believe in Allah and do good deeds in this world.  
 Every faithful should recite this dua’a to receive favours of Allah on
the day of judgement.

Supplication n. 14
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّئِنْ أَنجَانَا مِنْ هَـذِهِ لَنَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الشَّاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

La-in Anjaanaa Min Haad’ihee Lanakoo- Nanna Minash Shakireen

***If He (our Lord) delivers from this, certainly we shall be of the
thankful (Sura Ana’am, 6: 63)***

This dua’a should be recited to obtain protection of Allah when
calamities surround you, having total faith in His power, with firm
determination that you will always thank your Lord for saving you from
the calamities

Supplication n. 15
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا لاَ تَجْعَلْنَا مَعَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Laa Taj-a’lnaa Ma – A’l Qawmiz’ Z’aalimeen

***O our Lord, put us not together with the unjust people… (Sura A’raaf,
7: 47).***

Every true believer must seek Allah’s help to avoid the company of
unjust people who not only do not believe in Allah but have gone astray
by not following the rules and regulations made by Allah to direct their
behavior in this world.

Supplication n. 16
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا أَفْرِغْ عَلَيْنَا صَبْرًا وَتَوَفَّنَا مُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaaa Afrigh A’laynaa S’abraw Wa Tawaffanaa Muslimeen

***O our Lord, pour out on us patience, and make us die as those who
have submitted (to You).*** ***(Sura A’raaf, 7: 126).***

If hardship, poverty and discomfort come in your life, you as a faithful
servant of Allah must recite this dua’a to have patience and self
control to remain firm on the right path and face the misfortunes
boldly, without ever showing any action that has been prohibited, so
that you may leave this world as a true Muslim, submitting to the will
of Allah.

A group of master magicians, on the invitation of Pharaoh, came to show
their superiority over Musa because Pharaoh wrongly thought that Musa
was also a magician. The magicians threw a few ropes on the floor and
they took the shape of snakes. Musa put the staff, he was holding in his
hand, on the ground.

The staff changed into a python and swallowed up the snakes. Pharaoh got
angry and threatened to kill them. When the magicians came to know that
Musa was not a magician but a prophet of Allah, and what they saw was a
miracle of Allah, they laughed at Pharaoh and recited this dua’a.

Supplication n. 17
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَلأَخِي وَأَدْخِلْنَا فِي رَحْمَتِكَ وَأَنتَ
أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbighfir Lee Wa Li – Akhee Wa Adkhilnaa Fee Rah’matika Wa Anta
Arh’amur Raah’imeen

***O Allah, forgive me and my brother and admit us to Your mercy, You
are the most merciful of the merciful.*** ***(Sura A’raaf, 7: 151).***

A true faithful must always recite this dua’a to seek mercy of the
merciful Lord, particularly when he is in the middle of unmanageable
difficulties.

To receive the Tawrat Musa climbed the mountain of Toor and observed
fast for 30 days, as directed by Allah. Musa noticed that on account of
fasting his mouth was stinking, so he thought it improper to pronounce
the glory of Allah with a stinking mouth, and brushed his teeth. It was
considered an act of disobedience and he was required to observe fast
for ten more days.

After 40 days, Musa came back to his people with the Tawrat, but he
found his people worshipping the false god of the magician Saamiree.
Seeing this Musa became angry and criticised his brother Haroon who was
acting as his lieutenant, in his 40 days absence. Haroon explained that
he tried his best to keep them on the right path and warned them against
the tricks of the magician but they paid no attention to his advice, so
his brother (Musa) should have not included hi in the group of his
unjust followers. Musa on hearing the explanation of Haroon recited this
dua’a.

It is highly recommended to read this dua’a as qunoot in all prayers.

Supplication n. 18
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنتَ وَلِيُّنَا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا وَأَنتَ خَيْرُ
الْغَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Anta Waliyyunaa Faghfir Lanaa Warh’amnaa Wa Anta Khayrul Ghaafireen

***(O Lord) You are our guardian, so forgive us, and You are the best of
the forgivers*** ***(Sura A’raaf, 7: 155).***

Recite this dua’a again and again to take stock of your mistakes and
faults so as to avoid them in future, and to seek Allah’s protection and
forgiveness with firm determination that you will live an honest and
pious life to deserve His mercy.

According to the Holy Qur’an, Musa chose of his people 70 men, who
insisted upon seeing Allah with their own eyes, for an appointed tryst
on the mountain. As soon as they reached there, a trembling came on
them. All the 70 men were destroyed. Then Musa recited this dua’a to
beseech Allah to have mercy on him and on the pious among his followers.

Supplication n. 19
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاكْتُبْ لَنَا فِي هَـذِهِ الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَفِي الآخِرَةِ إِنَّا
هُدْنَـا إِلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Waktub Lanaa Fee Haad’ihid Dunyaa H’asanataw Wa Fil Aakhirati Innaa
Hudnaaa Ilayk

***(O Lord) ordain for us good in this world and in the hereafter.
Verily we turn to You alone.*** ***(Sura A’raaf, 7: 156).***

This dua’a was also recited by Musa immediately after the above noted
dua’a to invoke Allah to give him and his followers all that which is
good in this world and the next world, because it is Allah (alone) who
can give whatever His obedient servants ask for.

Allah’s mercy enfolds all those wrongdoers who turn repentant unto Him
as said in verse 153 of Sura A’raaf. Islam assures the sinners that the
door of Allah’s mercy remain open for those who sincerely turn repentant
to Allah.

Supplication n. 20
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَسْبِيَ اللّهُ لا إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَهُوَ
رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

H’asbiyallaah Laaa Ilaaha Illaa – Huw A’layhi Tawakkaltu Wa Huwa Rabbul
A’rshil A’z’eem

***Suffices me Allah. There is no god save Him. On Him do I rely, and He
is the Lord of the great ‘Arsh’ (the glorious throne of the mighty
power).(Sura at-Tawbah, 9: 129).***

Whenever Allah revealed the verses of the Holy Qur’an to His last
prophet the hypocrite men used to ask each other how could these verses
of Allah be of any use to them?

In this verse Allah says that His messenger was very kind to his
followers and was anxious not to overburden them, he was full of pity
and mercy. When they turned away, Allah asked the Holy Prophet to recite
this verse.

This dua’a was recited by the Holy Prophet. We, his followers, must also
recite it to put out trust in Allah (alone) and to ask for fulfillment
of all our desires. If recited 66 times daily, it brings honour and
respect.

Supplication n. 21
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا لاَ تَجْعَلْنَا فِتْنَةً لِّلْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَجِّنَا بِرَحْمَتِكَ مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbana Laa Taj –A’lnaa Fitnatal Lil – Qawmiz’ Z’aalimeen Wa Najjinaa
Birah’matika Minal Qawmil Kaafireen

***O our Lord, make us not a trial*** ***for the unjust people. And
deliver us by Your mercy from the disbelieving people. (Sura Yunus, 10:
85-86).***

When Musa observed that none from among his people, save a few, trusted
him, because they were in fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs, he advised
them to put trust I Allah if they had indeed surrendered unto Him, then
they recited this dua’a.

We must also recite this dua’a daily to remain firm in our faith and to
seek protection of Allah from the harm of our enemies.

Supplication n. 22
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ إِنَّ ابُنِي مِنْ أَهْلِي وَإِنَّ وَعْدَكَ الْحَقُّ وَأَنتَ
أَحْكَمُ الْحَاكِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Inna bonee Min Ahlee Wa Inna Wa’-Dakal H’aqqu Wa Anta Ah’kamul
H’aakimeen

***(My) Lord, verily my son is of my family; and verily Your promise is
true and You are the most just of all judges. (Sura Hud, 11: 45).***

When Nuh came to know that Allah was going to destroy all that had been
created, by drowning the whole world, except those who came on the ark
built by him, he advised one of his sons to do the same. His son refused
and told his father that he would climb a high mountain, but waves like
mountains came and he was drowned.

Nuh cried unto his Lord and said that his son was his household and that
surely the word of Allah came true because He is the most just of all
judges.

This dua’a is to be recited along with any other prayer (dua’a) which is
recited to seek fulfillment of legitimate desires.

Supplication n. 23
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ أَنْ أَسْأَلَكَ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِهِ عِلْمٌ
وَإِلاَّ تَغْفِرْ لِي وَتَرْحَمْنِي أَكُن مِّنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Inneee A-o’od’u Bika An As-alaka Maa Laysa Lee Bihee I’lm Wa Illaa
Taghfirlee Wa Tarh’amneee Akum Minal Khaasireen

***O Lord, verily I seek refuge with You, from asking You that of which
I have no knowledge; and*** ***unless You forgive me and have mercy on
me, I shall be of the losers. (Sura Hud, 11: 47).***

When Nuh said the words, mentioned in dua’a 22, Allah replied to him
that his son was a wrongdoer and what Allah knew Nuh did not, so he
should not have relied upon his ignorance; and Nuh immediately recited
this dua’a.

We must also recite this dua’a to have full faith in the wisdom of Allah
under all good and bad circumstances because Allah is all-knowing; and
humbly seek His help to keep ourselves and our children on the right
path.

Supplication n. 24
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَوَفَّنِي مُسْلِمًا وَأَلْحِقْنِي بِالصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tawaffanee Muslimaw Wa Alh’iqnee Bis’-S’aalih’een

***(O Lord) Let me die submitting to You (as a Muslim), and join me with
the righteous. (Sura Yusuf, 12: 101).***

This is the prayer of Yusuf which he recited when Allah gave him
kingdom, taught him wisdom, saved him from the harm of his brothers, set
him free from the prison, and brought his parents to meet him.

We must also recite this dua’a if we get what we want, particularly
after attaining success in any work, and after coming out safe from
difficulties.

Supplication n. 25
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَـذَا الْبَلَدَ آمِنًا وَاجْنُبْنِي وَبَنِيَّ أَن
نَّعْبُدَ الأَصْنَامَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbij-A’l Haad’al Balada Aaminaw Wajnubnee Wa Baniyya An Na’-Budal
As’naam

***(My) Lord, make this city secure, and keep me and my sons away from
worshiping idols. (Sura Ibrahim, 14: 35).***

This is the dua’a of prophet Ibrahim he recited to bring peace to the
city of Makkah and to keep him and his descendants safe from worshipping
any other god except the one and only Allah.

When a high ranking prophet like Ibrahim prayed to Allah for preserving
him and his descendants from serving false gods, we, the ordinary
servants of Allah, must always recite this dua’a as many times as
possible.

Supplication n. 26
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ اجْعَلْنِي مُقِيمَ الصَّلاَةِ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِي رَبَّنَا
وَتَقَبَّلْ دُعَاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbij-A’lnee Muqeemas’ S’alaati Wa Min D’urrriyyatee Rabbanaa Wa
Taqabbal Du-A’aa

***O Lord, make me steadfast in prayer, and (also) some of my offspring.
O our Lord, accept*** ***my prayer. (Sura Ibrahim, 14: 40).***

This is also a prayer of Ibrahim to make him establish prayer, and to
give his children the motivation to do the same, and to favour them all
by accepting their worship.

For accepting of *sunnah* and *wajib* prayers, we may recite this dua’a
after every prayer.

Supplication n. 27
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَوْمَ يَقُومُ
الْحِسَابُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaghfir Lee Wa Liwaalidayya Wa Lil-Mu’mineena Yawma Yaqoomul
H’isaab

***O our Lord, forgive me and my parents and believers on the day when
the reckoning shall come to pass. (Sura Ibrahim, 14: 41).***

Prophet Ibrahim recited this dua’a to seek forgiveness of Allah for him,
for his parents and for those who believe in the one and only Allah,
because His mercy alone will keep all believers away from the fire of
hell on the day of judgement.

A high ranking Prophet, Ibrahim, also known as KhaleelulLaah (close
friend of Allah), has included his parents in his dua’a. The *sunnah*
(way of life) of the infallible Prophets is a guidance for us.

It is obligatory to love our parents and respect them because through
them we are brought into this world. Allah, who provides sustenance to
all, has selected parents to give livelihood to all that which have been
created by Him. So next to the almighty Allah we owe everything in our
life to our parents. They take care of us from the day we are born. They
bring us up with love and care.

It is a well known fact that Allah, in His infinite mercy, has created
love of mother, to keep alive the circle of continuous life on this
earth, and because of this it is said that paradise lies under the feet
of the mother.

Love of parents for their children is the divine wisdom through which
mankind and other living beings have been surviving for millions of
years on this planet. In no way we can repay our parents for what they
do for us, except by following the command of Allah who ask us, in the
holy Qur’an, to lower unto them our wings of submission through
compassion and recite this dua’a and the dua’a mentioned in 28.

Supplication n. 28
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبِّ ارْحَمْهُمَا كَمَا رَبَّيَانِي صَغِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbir-H’amhumaa Kamaa Rabbayaanee S’agheeraa

***O my Lord, have mercy on them (parents) just as they nourished me
when I was small. (Sura al-‘Isra’ or Bani Isra’il, 17: 24).***

This and dua’a 27 and dua’a 55 are the best dua’a which we must pray for
our parents at all times, whether they are alive or dead.

In the *salatul walaydayn* always recite these dua’as in *qunoot*.

In reply to a question, as to what is the position if some one’s
parents, one or both, have died immediately after giving birth without
ever nourishing the child, Imam Jaffer bin Mohammed as Sadiq said that
subsistence of a child in the womb is enough to make the child feel
obligated to his or her parents, and pray regularly to seek Allah’s
blessings for them.

We must mention again that besides our own obligation, it is the command
of Allah to give highest form of respect to our parents, to talk to them
politely, even to sit with them and to talk to them is *Ibadat* (act of
obedience to Allah), to carry out their orders, to love them and to take
care of them in their old age and as directed in verse 23 of Bani
Isra’il not to say (even) “uff” to them, nor chide them, but to say
gentle words to them; and above all to pray for obtaining mercy of Allah
for them.

*Salat, sawm, dua’as* and all other good deeds of disobedient children
go waste because Allah does not bestow blessings and does not have mercy
on those who disobey their parents.

Supplication n. 29
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبِّ أَدْخِلْنِي مُدْخَلَ صِدْقٍ وَأَخْرِجْنِي مُخْرَجَ صِدْقٍ
وَاجْعَل لِّي مِن لَّدُنكَ سُلْطَانًا نَّصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Adkhilnee Mudkhala S’idqiw Wa Akhrijnee Mukhraja S’diqiw Waj-a’l
Lee Mil Ladunkaa Sult’aanan Nas’eeraa

***O Lord, cause me to enter a goodly entrance and cause me to go out a
goodly*** ***exit, and grant me from you an authority to assist (me).***
***(Sura al-‘Isra’ or Bani Isra’il, 17: 80).***

This dua’a is recited to seek Allah’s help for success in whatever work
we are doing, mental or physical, spiritual; or material, with a firm
determination to avoid that which has been forbidden and to take up only
that which is allowed.

It is highly desirable to recite this dua’a in *tahajjud* (*qunoot* of
*salatul* *witr*).

Recite this dua’a if you are afraid of a person or a thing; and at time
of going to dangerous places.

Supplication n. 30
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا آتِنَا مِن لَّدُنكَ رَحْمَةً وَهَيِّئْ لَنَا مِنْ أَمْرِنَا
رَشَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaaa Aatina Mil Ladunka Rah’mataw Wa Hayyi Lanaa Min Amrinaa
Rashadaa

***O*** ***our Lord, grant us mercy from You, and provide a right course
for us in our affair. (Sura al-Kahf, 18: 10).***

This dua’a is recited to have full confidence to bear patiently all the
difficulties which we face if we oppose the enemies of Allah to remain
on the right path, by putting our trust in Allah for obtaining His help
and mercy.

This dua’a was recitd by the people of the cave, known as *ashaabul
kahf,* when they heard the sound of advancing soldiers, while running
away from the army of the cruel king, who wanted to kill them because
they, as true believers, refused to worship idols.

This dua’a can be recited to overcome the enemies: and to achieve
success in whatever work we are doing.

Supplication n. 31
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَبْ لِي مِن لَّدُنكَ وَلِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fahab Lee Mil Ladunka Waliyyaa

***(O my Lord) so grant me from yourself an heir. (Sura Maryam, 19:
5).***

Recite this verse if you want to have a son because this dua’a was
recited by Prophet Zakariyya to beseech Allah to give him a son.

Supplication n. 32
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ اشْرَحْ لِي صَدْرِي وَيَسِّرْ لِي أَمْرِي وَاحْلُلْ عُقْدَةً
مِّن لِّسَانِي يَفْقَهُوا قَوْلِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbishrah’ Lee S’adree wa Yassir Leee Amree Wah’–Lul U’qdatam Mil
Lisaanee Yafqahoo Qawlee

***O Lord, expand for me my breast, make my task easy for me. Loose the
knot of my tongue, that they may understand my speech. (Sura Ta-Ha,
20:25-28).***

This dua’a was recited by Musa when he commanded by Allah to go to
Pharaoh and show him the power of Allah by the help of the two miracles
given to him.

Although Musa was going to Pharaoh under the instruction of Allah,
equipped with two divine miracles, still he invoked Allah to set his
mind at ease and to make his task easy.

We must always seek Allah’s help to get success in our work, whatever
the nature of it may be, so far as it is not prohibited.

Recite this dua’a before you give a lecture or discourse before a large
or small gathering of people. You should also recite this if you want to
make someone or some people to understand your point of view. Stammering
will disappear if this dua’a is regularly recited.

Supplication n. 33
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبِّ زِدْنِي عِلْمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

…Rabbi Zidnee I’lmaa.

***O Lord, increase me in knowledge. (Sura Ta-Ha, 20:25-28).***

Recite this dua’a 7 times after every wajib prayer to increase
knowledge.

Supplication n. 34
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنِّي مَسَّنِيَ الضُّرُّ وَأَنتَ أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Annee Massaniya” Z”urru Wa Anta Arh’amur Raah’imeen.

***(O Lord) verily distress has touched me, and You are the most
merciful of all mercifuls. (Sura al-Anbiya’, 21: 83).***

This dua’a was recited by Prophet Ayyub. Allah put him to severe trials
by taking away wealth, health and children. His father, a descendant of
Ishaq, was a very rich man.

Although poor health, disease and poverty made him weak and miserable,
he never complained or showed despair. His patience and endurance became
a byword for coming generations till now.

Recite this dua’a to cure sickness and disease and to remove poverty.

Supplication n. 35
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّا إِلَهَ إِلَّا أَنتَ سُبْحَانَكَ إِنِّي كُنتُ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Laa Ilaha Illaaa Anta Subh’aanaka Innee Kuntu Minaz” Z’aalimeen

***There is*** ***no god but You (O Lord). Glory be to You. Verily I was
of the unjust.*** ***(Sura al-Anbiya’, 21: 83).***

This verse is known as *ayatul karimah*, the “glorious verse”.

This dua’a was recited by prophet Yunus when he found himself in the
dark belly of a big fish, who swallowed him alive.

To seek fulfillment of any legitimate desire, or to disperse afflictions
and calamities, offer a two rakat salat and at the end recite this dua’a
720 times.

Supplication n. 36
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ لَا تَذَرْنِي فَرْدًا وَأَنتَ خَيْرُ الْوَارِثِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Laa Tad’arnee Fardaw wa Anta Khayrul Waaritheen

***O Lord, do not leave me alone (childless), though You are the best of
inheritors.*** ***(Sura al-Anbiya’, 21: 89).***

This dua’a was recited by prophet Zakariyya to beseech Allah to give him
a son.

Recite this dua’a 125 times after I’sha salat if you want to have a
child.

Supplication n. 37
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ احْكُم بِالْحَقِّ وَرَبُّنَا الرَّحْمَنُ الْمُسْتَعَانُ عَلَى
مَا تَصِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbih’- Kum Bil H’aqq Wa Rabbunar Rah’maanul Musta- A’anu A’laa Maa
Tas’ifoon

**O Lord, judge You with truth. Our Lord is the beneficent, whose help
is sought against that which you ascribe to Him.** ***(Sura al-Anbiya’,
21: 112).***

This world is a place of trial. Enjoyment in this life is for a little
while. The real and permanent bliss of the next world is the aim of the
true believer, which will be awarded by Allah, the true judge, after
taking account of our deeds on the day of judgement. He is the
beneficent Lord. He helps those who seek Hs protection from the evil of
disbelievers and hypocrites.

Have full confidence in the truth of His judgement and invoke Him by
reciting this dua’a to deal with your affairs justly.

Supplication n. 38
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ انصُرْنِي بِمَا كَذَّبُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbin S’urnee Bimaa Kad’d’aboon.

***O my Lord! help me against their calling me a liar.(Sura
al-Mu’minoon, 23: 26).***

This dua’a was recited by prophet Nuh when his people refused to listen
to his preaching.

Enemies of Allah become enemies of those who believe in Allah, so to
overcome them and to become able to counter their false propaganda,
recite this dua’a.

Supplication n. 39
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبِّ أَنزِلْنِي مُنزَلًا مُّبَارَكًا وَأَنتَ خَيْرُ الْمُنزِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Anzilnee Munzalam Mubaarakaw Wa Anta Khayrul Munzileen

***O Lord, disembark me with a blessed disembarkment, for You are the
best of those who enable to disembark.*** ***(Sura al-Mu’minoon, 23:
29).***

When prophet Nuh was on board the ark, Allah commanded him, and whoso
was with him, to recite this dua’a.  
 Recite this dua’a at the time of going on a journey, or if you are
migrating or moving over to another place.

Supplication n. 40
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ فَلَا تَجْعَلْنِي فِي الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Falaa Taj-a’lnee Fil Qawmiz’ Z’aalimeen

***O Lord, then do not put me among the unjust people.*** ***(Sura
al-Mu’minoon, 23: 94).***

This is a dua’a to seek safety from falling into errors, or into the
hands of the enemies of Allah, and to avoid sinful ways.

Supplication n. 41
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا آمَنَّا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا وَأَنتَ خَيْرُ
الرَّاحِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Aamannaa Faghfir Lanaa Warh’amnaa Wa Anta Khayrur Raah’imeen

***O our Lord, we believe, so forgive us and have mercy on us, for You
are the best of the Mercifuls. (Sura al-Mu’minoon, 23: 109).***

On the Day of Judgement Allah will remind the disbelievers of these
words which His sincere servants used to say whenever the disbelievers
laughed at the believing servants of Allah.

Recite this dua’a to seek mercy of Allah which alone keeps you safe from
the evil of this world and from the punishment on the Day of Judgement.

Supplication n. 42
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبِّ اغْفِرْ وَارْحَمْ وَأَنتَ خَيْرُ الرَّاحِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbighfir Warh’am Wa Anta Khayrur Raah’imeen

***O Lord, forgive and have mercy, for You are the best of the***
***Merciful. (Sura al-Mu’minoon, 23: 118).***

In the Holy Qur’an Allah asks the Holy Prophet to recite this dua’a.

There is no one in the whole universe equivalent to the stats of our
Holy Prophet and by asking him to invoke Allah for mercy and protection,
He is, infact, showing us that even the dearest friend of Allah needs
His protection.

We must recite this dua’a at all times and at all places.

Supplication n. 43
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا اصْرِفْ عَنَّا عَذَابَ جَهَنَّمَ إِنَّ عَذَابَهَا كَانَ
غَرَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanas’rif ‘Nnaa A’d’aaba Jahannama Inna A’d’aabahaa Kaana Gharaama.

***O our Lord, turn away from us the torment of hell, verily its torment
is continuous.*** ***(Sura al-Furqan, 25:65).***

Allah says in the Holy Qur’an that His faithful servants spend their
nights, prostrating (*sajdah*) and standing, before their Lord, and
recite this dua’a.

It is highly recommended to recite this dua’a in *tahajjud*.

Supplication n. 44
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا هَبْ لَنَا مِنْ أَزْوَاجِنَا وَذُرِّيَّاتِنَا قُرَّةَ
أَعْيُنٍ وَاجْعَلْنَا لِلْمُتَّقِينَ إِمَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Hab Lanaa Min Azwaajinaa Wa D’urriyyaatinaa Qurrata A’-Yuniw
Waj – A’lnaa Lil – Muttaqeena Imaamaa

***O our Lord, grant us out of our wives and our offspring that which
cheers our eyes, and make us guides of those who safeguard themselves
against evil. (Sura al-Furqan, 25:74).***

While pointing out the qualities of His faithful servants Allah says in
the Holy Qur’an that they invoke Him to give them pious wives and
obedient children and make them so much pious and God-fearing that all
faithful men and women may follow their example.

(According to Imam Jafar bin Muhammad as Sadiq this is the dua’a of Imam
Ali ibn Abi Talib whose descendants, one after another, were elected as
Imams, for the mankind, by Allah).

Supplication n. 45
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ هَبْ لِي حُكْمًا وَأَلْحِقْنِي بِالصَّالِحِينَ وَاجْعَل لِّي
لِسَانَ صِدْقٍ فِي الْآخِرِينَ وَاجْعَلْنِي مِن وَرَثَةِ جَنَّةِ
النَّعِيمِ وَاغْفِرْ لِأَبِي إِنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الضَّالِّينَ وَلَا
تُخْزِنِي يَوْمَ يُبْعَثُونَ يَوْمَ لَا يَنفَعُ مَالٌ وَلَا بَنُونَ
إِلَّا مَنْ أَتَى اللَّهَ بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Hab Lee H’ukma Wa Alh’iqnee Bis’-S’aalih’een Waj A’l Lee Lisaana
S’idqin Fil Aakhireen Waj – A’lnee Miw Warathati Jannatin Na-E’em
Waghfir Li-Abee Innahoo Kaana Minaz” Z”Aaalleen Wa Laa Tukhzinee Yawma
Yub-A’thoon Yawma Laa Yanfa –U’maaluw Wa Laa Banoon Illaa Man Atallaaha
Biqalbin Saleem

***O Lord, give me authority and unite me with the righteous, appoint
for me a truthful tongue among the posterity, make me of the inheritors
of the garden of bliss, forgive my father; verily, he was of those who
went astray, do not disgrace me on the day when they are raised (again),
the day when neither wealth nor sons will be any avail, save to him who
comes to Allah with a submissive heart.*** ***(Sura ash-Shu’araa’, 26:
83-89).***

Ibrahim recited this dua’a to invoke Allah to give him authority to
guide and lead mankind to the right path of Allah, the only righteous
way, and to pass this authority to the pious men among his posterity so
that they may occupy a place of honour among those who will inherit the
kingdom of paradise on account of their piety and obedience to Allah.

The Holy Prophet, Imam Ali and their descendants, the holy Imams, were
the direct descendants of Prophet Ibrahim. Allah had listened to the
prayer of Prophet Ibrahim and fulfilled all his desires.

Supplication n. 46
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَافْتَحْ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَهُمْ فَتْحًا وَنَجِّنِي وَمَن مَّعِي مِنَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Faftah’ Baynee Wa Baynahum Fat- h’aw Wa Najjinee Wa Mam Ma-I’ya Minal
Mu’mineen

***(O Lord), therefore decide You between me and them a decision, and
deliver me and the believers who are with me.*** ***(Sura ash-Shu’araa’,
26: 118).***

After losing hope in his people, who refused to believe in Allah,
prophet Nuh recited this dua’a to keep him and a few of his believing
companions safe from the wrath of Allah.

Recite this dua’a whenever you are in the midst of non-believing people
who want to harm you because of your faith and belief.

Supplication n. 47
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ
وَعَلَى وَالِدَيَّ وَأَنْ أَعْمَلَ صَالِحًا تَرْضَاهُ وَأَدْخِلْنِي
بِرَحْمَتِكَ فِي عِبَادِكَ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Awzi’–Nee An Ashkura Ni’-Matakal Latee An-A’mta A’layya Wa A’laa
Waalidayya Wa An A’-Mala S’aalih’an – Tarz”aahu Wa Adkhilnee
Bi-Rah’matika Fee I’baadikas’ S’aaliheen

***O Lord, arouse me to be thankful for Your bounty which You have
bestowed on me and my parents, and to do good that shall please You, and
admit me by Your mercy, among Your righteous servants. (Sura an-Naml,
27: 19).***

Once Prophet Sulayman with his armies of men, jinn and birds, was
marching to a battlefield. When they reached the valley of the ants, an
ant, seeing a huge gathering of men and jinn, warned all other ants to
enter their dwellings lest Sulayman and his armies crush them, because
of their negligence. Hearing this Sulayman thanked Allah and recited
this dua’a.

We must recite this dua’a to thank Allah when we get His favours and
bounties, or when any occasion of happiness comes into our lives,
because Shaytan leads us to pride and arrogance, if we achieve success
in our work and have power over men and material.

Supplication n. 48
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي ظَلَمْتُ نَفْسِي فَاغْفِرْ لِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Innee Z’alamtu Nafsee Faghfirlee

***O Lord, verily I have wronged myself, so forgive me. (Sura al-Qas’as,
28: 16).***

One night Prophet Musa entered the city of Pharaohs and saw that two men
were fighting, one was from his people and the other was an enemy; he
went to the help of his follower and hit the other man with his fist,
which killed him on the spot. Realising that it was not a good deed, he
recited this dua’a to seek forgiveness of Allah and to ask protection
from the certain revenge the Egyptians would take for killing one of
them.

Recite this dua’a to admit your shortcomings and to seek forgiveness and
protection and protection of Allah.  
 This dua’a will protect you from the evil of your enemies.

Supplication n. 49
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ نَجِّنِي مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Najjinee Minal Qawmiz’ Z’aalimeen

***O Lord, deliver me from the unjust people. (Sura al-Qas’as, 28:
21).***

This dua’a was recited by Prophet Musa when he found the conditions in
Pharaoh’s land unsuitable to stay there any longer and decided to
migrate to some other country.

To avoid the cruelty of oppressive rulers; or at the time of leaving
your home to escape persecution, recite this dua’a to reach safely at a
safe place, for a permanene or for temporary asylum.

Supplication n. 50
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ انصُرْنِي عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْمُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbin S’urnee A’lal Qawmil Mufsideen

***O Lord, help me against these mischievous people. (Sura al-‘Ankaboot,
29: 30).***

This duaa was recited by the prophet Loot to make him win victory over
his corrupt and shameful people.

If we are living among corrupt, debauched and immoral people, who are
beyond reform, this dua’a should be recited to keep ourselves aloof from
the temptations of the vulgar and sinful satanic social set up.

Supplication n. 51
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ إِنِّي لِمَا أَنزَلْتَ إِلَيَّ مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَقِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Innee Limaaa Anzalta Ilayya Min Khayrin Faqeer

O Lord, verily I have ned of what You have sent me of the good. ***(Sura
al-Qas’as, 28: 24).***

After leaving the city of Pharaohs, Prophet Musa reached Midain where he
found a whole tribe of men watering their sheep. He saw that two girls
were keeping back their flocks apart from those men. On enquiring he
found that as their father was a very old man they had to wait till the
shepherds go away.

Musa immediately watered their flock for them and recited this dua’a.
Afterwards the father of the two girls who was also a prophet, hired him
and gave him land to till. Later Musa married one of the two girls.

Recite this dua’a whenever you do a good deed because Allah certainly
gives us the recompense of whatever good we do.

It is also said that to get a lawful profitable occupation in a new
country one must recite this duaa’a.

This dua’a can also be recited at least 7 times after every *wajib
salat*.

Supplication n. 52
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ هَبْ لِي مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Hab Lee Minas’ S’aalih’een

***O Lord, grant me a righteous (son).(Sura as-Saaffaat, 37: 10).***

Saraah, the first wife of Ibrahim, was childless, therefore, she gave
Haajirah as a gift to her husband, who married her and recited this
dua’a, so that Allah might give him a son from the new wife. Prophet
Ismail was born to Haajirah, and Allah also gave a son, Prophet Ishaq,
to him from Saarah.

Supplication n. 53
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَسِعْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ رَحْمَةً وَعِلْمًا فَاغْفِرْ لِلَّذِينَ
تَابُوا وَاتَّبَعُوا سَبِيلَكَ وَقِهِمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Wasi’ –Ta Kulla Shay-ir Rah’mataw Wa I’lman Fghfir Lil-Lad’eena
Taaboo Wat-Taba-o’o Sabeelaka Waqihim A’d’aabal Jah’eem

***O our Lord, You comprehend all things in (Your) mercy and knowledge,
therefore forgive those who turn repentant and follow Your way, and save
them from the torment of hell. (Sura al-Gafiir or al-Mu’min, 40: 7).***

Allah says in the Holy Qur’an that those who bear the Arsh and all who
are round about it sing the praises of Allah, and recite this dua’a to
ask forgiveness for those who believe in Allah.

Recite this dua’a to admit your sins and to make up your mind not to
commit sins any more, so that you may receive forgiveness and mercy of
your Lord, which alone can keep you away from the fire of hell.

Supplication n. 54
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَأَدْخِلْهُمْ جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ الَّتِي وَعَدْتَهُمْ وَمَنْ
صَلَحَ مِنْ آبَائِهِمْ وَأَزْوَاجِهِمْ وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ ۚ إِنَّكَ
أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Wa Adkhilhum Jannaati A’dni Nillatee Wa- A’ttahum Wa Man
S’alah’a Min Aabaaa-Ihim Wa Azwaajihim Wa D’urriyyaatihim Innaka Antal
A’zeezul H’akeem

***O our Lord, admit them to the ever-blissful gardens which You have
promised to them, and those who do good from among their fathers, their
wives, and their children; verily, You are the almighty, the all-wise.
(Sura al-Gafiir or al-Mu’min, 40: 8).***

This dua’a is the continuation of dua’a 53 to invoke Allah to make the
believing men and women enter the gardens of paradise, including their
spouses and children, provided they do good deeds and avoid evil
conduct.

Supplication n. 55
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِهِمُ السَّيِّئَاتِ ۚ وَمَنْ تَقِ السَّيِّئَاتِ يَوْمَئِذٍ فَقَدْ
رَحِمْتَهُ ۚ وَذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Waqihimus Sayyi-Aat Wa Man Taqis Sayyi-Aati Yawma-Id’in Faqad Rah’imtah
Wa D’aalika Huwal Fawzul A’z’eem

***(O Lord), keep them away from evil, and whomsoever You keep away from
evil, on this day, and him indeed You have bestowed mercy, and that is a
great achievement.*** ***(Sura al-Gafiir or al-Mu’min, 40: 9).***

This is a further continuation of two dua’as 53 and 54 to seek
protection from Allah from the evil, because whomsoever is kept safe
from the evil will be taken into His mercy on the day of reckoning.
Deliverance from the fire of hell on the day of judgement is the best
achievement for the faithful servants of Allah.

Supplication n. 56
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ
وَعَلَى وَالِدَيَّ وَأَنْ أَعْمَلَ صَالِحًا تَرْضَاهُ وَأَصْلِحْ لِي
فِي ذُرِّيَّتِي إِنِّي تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ وَإِنِّي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Awzi’-Nee An Ashkura Ni’-Matakal Lateee An-A’mta A’layya Wa A’laa
Waalidayya Wa An A’-Mala S’aalih’an Tarz”Aahu Wa As’lih’lee Fee
D’urriyyatee Innee Tubtu Ilayka Wa Innee Minal Muslimeen.

***O Lord, arouse me that I may thank You for the bounties You have
bestowed on me and my parents, and that I may do good which pleases You,
and do good to me with regard to my offspring. Verily I turn repentant
to You, and verily I am one of those who submit. (Sura al-Ahqaaf, 46:
15).***

In the earlier part of this verse Allah commands man to show kindness
towards parents and recite this dua’a, because his mother bears him in
discomfort, and gives birth under painful labour, and they bring up the
child with love and care till he or she becomes strong.

Allah has made obedience to parents obligatory and the Holy Prophet
said:

“Allah is happy with those who obey their parents.”

Recitation of this dua’a has been made compulsory by Allah for the
children to seek protection and mercy for their parents. (Please also
refer to the notes of dua’as 27 and 28).

The most important thing to give thanks to Allah for the favours and
bounties we receive from Him, therefore, recite this dua’a after any
wajib prayer daily.

Supplication n. 57
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّهُ أَنِّي مَغْلُوبٌ فَانتَصِرْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbi Annee Maghloobun Fantas’iir.

***(O Lord), verily I am overcome (by those people), so give help.***
***(Sura al-Qamar, 54: 10).***

When Prophet Nuh was called mad by his people and had been driven out,
he cried unto Allah and recited this dua’a.

Recite this dua’a when you are surrounded by enemies, or adverse
circumstances have put you at a disadvantage. Begin this dua’a on
Thursday and recite 2060 times by the end of the next Thursday, and
recite 100 times after every *wajib salat* till you are free from the
evil of enemies, or adverse circumstances.

Supplication n. 58
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لَنَا وَلِإِخْوَانِنَا الَّذِينَ سَبَقُونَا
بِالْإِيمَانِ وَلَا تَجْعَلْ فِي قُلُوبِنَا غِلًّا لِّلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ رَؤُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanagh Fir Lanaa Wa Li-Ikwaaninal Lad’eena Sabaqoonaa Bil-Eemaani Wa
Laa Taj-A’lfee Quloobinaa Ghillal Lil-Lad’eena Aamanoo Rabbanaaa Innaka
Ra-Oofur Rah’eem

***O our Lord, forgive us and our brothers who have preceded us in the
faith, and do not put a grudge in our hearts against those who believe;
O Lord, verily You are Kind and Merciful. (Sura al-Hashr, 59: 10).***

Allah says that those who come into faith must not envy their brothers
who were before them in the faith, but seek forgiveness and mercy for
themselves and their brothers-in-faith, and invoke Allah to create love
and understanding among them all.

Whenever we invoke Allah for His mercy and forgiveness we must also
include in our dua’a all the believing men and women.

Supplication n. 59
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبَّنَا عَلَيْكَ تَوَكَّلْنَا وَإِلَيْكَ أَنَبْنَا وَإِلَيْكَ
الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa A’layka Tawakkalnaa Wa Ilayka Anabnaa Wa Ilaykal Mas’eer

***O our Lord, we put our trust in You, and we turn repentant to You,
and to You is our final returning. (Sura al-Mumtahanah, 60: 4).***

Faith should never be allowed to be corrupted even for the sake of the
nearest relatives (parents, wife or children), says the Holy Qur’an, and
gives the example of Prophet Ibrahim who discarded all his family
members except his wife, his nephew and a few others who were true
believers, to show that there would be hostility and hate between them
until they believe in Allah, and recited this dua’a.

Put your trust in Allah alone and turn repentant to Him because we will
one day certainly go to Him for reckoning and then His mercy and
forgiveness alone will keep us away from the fire of hell.

Supplication n. 60
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا أَتْمِمْ لَنَا نُورَنَا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا إِنَّكَ عَلَى كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbanaa Atmim Lanaa Nooranaa Waghfirlanaa Innaka A’laa Kulli Shay-In
Qadeer

***O our Lord, perfect for us our light, and grant us protection. Verily
You have power over all things. (Sura at-Tah’reem, 66: 8).***

The Holy Qur’an say that on the day of judgement the Holy Prophet and
those who believed with him, will occupy the highest status, and their
lights will run before them, and they will recite this dua’a.

Ibn Abbas said that the companions of the Holy Prophet in this verse are
Imam Ali and his friends who will recite this dua’a.

Supplication n. 61
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ ابْنِ لِي عِندَكَ بَيْتًا فِي الْجَنَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbibni Lee I’ndaka Baytan Fil-Jannati

***O Lord, build for me a house in the Garden. (Sura at-Tah’reem, 66:
11).***

To all believers the Holy Qur’an gives the example of Asiya, the wife of
Pharaoh, one of the four chosen women, who recited this dua’a. Although
she was near to the worst enemy of Allah, Pharaoh, who watched her day
and night, yet she gathered courage to follow the right path and saved
Prophet Musa from the evil designs of Pharaoh, when Musa was just-born
baby.

She also accepted the true faith of Allah by watching the miracles of
Allah through which He kept safe Musa from the evil schemes of Pharaoh.
She preferred good in the hereafter over success in this world and
wanted a house in paradise, where she would live for ever.

Supplication n. 62
------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ وَلِمَن دَخَلَ بَيْتِيَ مُؤْمِنًا
وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا
تَبَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rabbighfir Lee Wa Liwaalidayya Wa Liman Dakhala Baytiya Mu’minaw Wa
Lil-Moomineena Al Mu’minaat Wa Laa Tazidiz’z’aalimeena Illaa Tabaaraa

***O Lord, forgive me, my parents and him who enters my abode as a
believer, and the believing men and believing women, and do not give the
unjust increase save in perdition. (Sura Nuh, 71:28).***

This dua’a was recited by Prophet Nuh when his people disobeyed him and
revolted against Allah, to invoke Allah to forgive him, and his parents
and believing men and believing women, and to destroy the infidels.

This dua’a is recited in the qunoot of salatul walaydayn(parents).


