Night of Power (Lailatul-Qadr)
==============================

The most important thing of this month is the Night of Power
(Lailatul-Qadr) - the night which is superior, than a thousand months,
one thousand months jihad, one thousand months reign, and the worship in
it is superior than one thousand months of worship, (as has been
narrated in the traditions). Yes! the Night of Power is a very precious
and distinguished night, in accordance with the Qur'anic interpretation
it is a very auspicious night; and as could be derived from the
traditions, in this night the sustenance and age of servants, and the
good and evil of their affairs are destined; the Holy Qur'an was
descended in this night; also the angels are descended all over the
earth, and when they pass through the gathering of believers, send
salutations and praises upon them, and consider their prayers until the
dawn.

*“It has been narrated that during this night the prayers of all are
accepted, and the prayer of no one remains unanswered except the
following:*

*The one who has displeased and angered his parent and was declared
disinherited or rebellious by them.*

*The one who has cut off his relationship with his kith and kin.*

*The one who possesses animosity and vengeance of a believer in his
heart.*

*The one who consumes alcoholic drinks.”*

In the book “Iqbal”, a tradition has been narrated from the Holy Prophet
[s]:

“That Prophet Moses [a] in his prayer said: 'O' Allah! I desire Your
nearness and union. 'My nearness and union belong to someone who remains
vigilant and awake during the Night of Power.' Replied Allah. Prophet
Moses [a] said: 'O' Allah! I want Your blessing and forgiveness.' 'My
blessing belongs to someone who is kind towards the destitute on the
Night of Power.' Replied Allah.

Prophet Moses [a] said: 'O' Allah! I want to pass through the bridge of
Serat on the road to Paradise safely.' 'The safety in passing through
the bridge of Serat belongs to someone who pays alms on the Night of
Power,' replied Allah. Prophet Moses [a] said: 'O' Allah! I want the
trees and fruits of Paradise.' They belong to someone who does not
forget to remember and praise Me on the Night of Power.' Replied Allah.
Prophet Moses [a] said: 'O' Allah! I wish to have your pleasure and
consent.' My pleasure and consent belong to someone who offers two
rak'ats of prayer during the Night of Power.' Replied Allah.

In the same book of Iqbal it has been narrated from the Holy Prophet
[s]:

“On the Night of Power the gates of Heaven are opened. There for every
is no servant who offers prayer in this night, but Allah for every
prostration stores a tree in the Paradise - the tree whose branches and
shade is so vast that if a rider travels for one hundred years through
its shade he would not be able to cross it; for every ra'kat would build
a home for him in Paradise - the home decorated and built by pearls,
topaz, and rubies; for every verse recited a crown from the crowns of
Paradise; for every praise *(tasbeeh)* a bird from the birds of
Paradise; for every sitting a rank from the ranks of Paradise.

For every witnessing *(tashahud)* - a chamber from the chambers of
Paradise, and for every salutation - a robe from the robes of Paradise
would be bestowed upon him by Allah. And at the breaking of the dawn,
companions - youthful and sympathetic, *houris* of Paradise - pure and
decorated, servant obedient and well uniformed, horses - most obedient
and swift, flowers, greenery, and good smells, running elegant fountain
streams, and many other bounties which make the soul pleased and eyes to
shine, would also be bestowed upon him by Allah.”

1. The Ranks of the Night of Power (Lailatul-Qadr)
--------------------------------------------------

It may be derived from some of the traditions that there are ranks and
degrees for the Night of Power and each one of the nights of 19th, 21st,
23rd, and 27th may be considered possessing one of those degree. And the
night which possesses the most superior distinction, has been mentioned
in the Holy Qur'an as equal to thousand months, and whatever is destined
in that night wouldn't be changed is the night of 23rd of the Holy
Month, which is also known as the Night of Juhanni.[^1]35

And the one who wants that his actions should be exact and precise,
better be vigilant during all these four nights. Of course, regarding
the Night of Power there are some other narrations as well, but since
their authenticity is not confirmed, it would not be appropriate to
describe them here.

2. Beseeching Allah for Bestowing Readiness for the Night of Power (Lailatul-Qadr)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yes! the one who believes in the religion and respects Qur'anic verses
and traditions of the sinless Imams [a], it would be desirable that he
should make his best efforts and endeavours for celebrating this night.

The efforts which are desirable and should be undertaken are, that
during the whole year before the arrival of the Night of Power, he must
repeatedly beseech Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted) to bestow upon him
the divine grace *(towfiq)* to be vigilant during this night; bless him
with most esteemed and dearest deeds; consider that night superior than
one thousand months for him and may accept from him; make him His most
favourite and nearest one during this night; bless him with His love,
learning, nearness, union, pleasure, and consent together with health,
happiness, and welfare; should be pleased with him in such a manner,
that after this he would never be displeased with him; should make the
prophets.

Imams, and especially the Imam of the Age (may Allah hasten his
appearance) pleased with him; and allocate him to live in Allah nearness
accompanied by the impeccable ones, bestow upon him divine favour to
succeed in establishing Allah's obedience and consent, and make his
ultimate end Allah's countenance and pleasure.

3. Preparation For the Night of Power (Lailatul-Qadr)
-----------------------------------------------------

The other decent efforts for this night are that before its arrival, the
prudent wayfarer should arrange for its preliminaries and necessities,
e.g. for worshipping in this night a suitable place, dress, and perfume
should be arranged in advance for engaging in private humming
communications Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), as well as for
communications with his masters, i.e. sinless Imams [a] he should
arrange suitable themes and contents; for paying alms during this night
should allocate some money, even for the invitation of guests and for
payment of alms, he should plan in advance to select the most suitable
guests and the genuinely poor people who really deserve financial
support.

Let us imagine that if an emperor dispatches a special courier before
someone, with compassion and mercy invites him for a special feast,
gives him glad-tidings that if he appears in the royal feast with
decency and decorum, rewards and magnificent gifts would be bestowed
upon him, and the more respectfully he would behave in the assembly, the
emperor too would increase his rewards and gifts in proportion with his
behaviour.

Undoubtedly, after receiving such a message this person would become
excited and pleased, and in order to prepare himself would not leave any
stone unturned, and during this period would mobilize all his resources
and efforts to procure whatever is required for being present in such an
assembly, so that finally, when that moment arrives, being fully
decorated in a respectable and decent manner, he could present himself
over there.

The invitation of an emperor is responded in the above manner but how
about the invitation of Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), who is the
King of all kings - the King of the Earth and the Heavens - has invited
us for His feasts; in order to invite us has dispatched his favourite
angels, pious prophets and sinless Imams as his couriers. He has
assigned His angels to announce his invitation kindly and
compassionately to us; has given us the glad-tidings of giving us
permanent abode in Paradise in return for sincere worshipping during one
single night (the Night of Power); has promised such bounties, which
have not been seen by any eye, have not been heard by any ear, and have
not been imagined through any human being's mind, as well as has given
us the glad-tiding of illumination, ecstasy, majesty, splendour,
nearness, union, and countenance, for whose least comprehension and
understanding, faculties of reason and thoughts find themselves
astonished and helpless.

Are we among those who have prepared for this night and invitation, the
way we ought to be, and must be, in order to attain the eternal blessing
and salvation? Or are we among those negligent and idle ones, who do not
achieve anything except loss and eternal doom? We must better know that
the one who acts naively and lazily, and does not strive to take
advantage of the magnificent generosities of this night, when in the
Hereafter, would see that those who were zealous, committed, and
vigilant during these nights what have they achieved, and what
magnificence, splendour and glory have been bestowed upon them. But they
would gain nothing except regret - the regret so great and painful that
the Hell's blazing fire and its torturous punishments would seem smaller
as compared to their regret, and then together with the losers and
eternally doomed ones, would cry loudly:

***“Ah! Woe upon me! In that I neglected (my duty) towards Allah.”***

- Holy Qur'an (39:56)

But on that Day when the gates of repentance would have been closed,
there would be nothing left for compensation of the damage, everyone
would have seen the ultimate outcome of his deeds, and then feeling
sorry and being regretful would not produce any gain. Therefore, we must
take a look upon ourselves, and before falling into such regret and
grief, must admonish ourselves for being so lazy, naive, and easy going.
And before that we are called for accounting and are condemned into the
state of wretchedness and destitution, for wasting our precious
capital - the capital through which we could have accomplished most
precious and greater gains we better put our self to scrutiny.

### 3.1. Selection of the Most Suitable Deeds

Other desirable efforts of this night are that with the nearing of these
nights, one should increase his eagerness for receiving the promised
bounties and blessings; should select worships and deeds which are more
in harmony with his mood from the point of view of sincerity, heart's
presence, and internal purification; in this matter should seek help
from Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), and the impeccable ones; and if
he cannot diagnose himself what suits his mood properly, he should seek
guidance from Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), through consultation
*(istekhara)*.

### 3.2. Meditation and Pondering

After recital of invocations and supplications one should also allocate
some time for self-meditation and pondering, of course, this should be
done at a time when he is free from whatever disturbs his thoughts like
domination of sleep, over-eating, and pains of hunger etc.

### 3.3. Not to be Negligent from Allah

During these nights, one must strive his best to keep thinking about
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), all along the night, and should not
forget Him during any part of the night even for the sake of recommended
and justified deeds. Also while offering prayer and supplications he
should not think about any other thing even though if they happen to be
recommended things.

For example, during prayer *(salat)*, one should not think about
recommended deeds like building of mosque, cleaning of mosque, and
paying alms etc., because all these are indications of negligence; even
during a part of the prayer *(salat)*, he should not think about the
next portion of the prayer, e.g. in the state of standing, to think
about the prostration is negligence.

He must try to concentrate upon whatever act of the prayer he is
performing and should not be negligent about whatever he is doing or
reciting. In order to make this task easier, before performing different
acts of prayer, e.g. recital or genuflexion *(rukoo)*, first of all, he
should think about them briefly and then should perform them. And in
case while performing a certain act, negligence dominates over him, and
if a verse or invocation is recited with negligence, he must repeat it
again.

For example, when he wants to stand towards Mecca *(Qiblah)* for prayer
*(salat)* first of all, he should think briefly about the wisdom of
standing towards Mecca, and then should turn his face in that direction;
and when he wants to stand for the prayer, first of all, he should think
about the meanings of standing, i.e., his standing is for truth and his
resting upon his two feet is the indication of his hope *(raj'a)* and
fear *(khouf)* about the acceptance of his worship. When he wants to
recite the phrase:

*“In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful.”*

First of all, he should think about its meaning in brief, and then
should recite it with his tongue, and similar is the case with other
acts of the prayer.

### 3.4. Resorting (Tawassul) to Ahlul-Bait [a]

The one who wants to be vigilant in this manner throughout the night,
must take refuge in the sinless *(ma'sum)* - the one to whom this night
belongs - at the beginning of that night, should stretch his hands
towards their generous threshold. With persistence, supplicating in a
polite and soft manner, with words and content arousing their
sympathies, should beseech them for bestowing upon him the grace of
being vigilant during this night.

Then he must surrender and hand over all his existence, reason, heart,
self, virtues, deeds to them, and throughout the night, must be careful
not to commit anything which is not in harmony with this surrender,
because the one who succeeds in it, certainly would have achieved
whatever he aspired for during this night.

### 3.5. Crying and Shedding Tears

For the prudent wayfarer who desires, that during these nights his fear,
humility, tears, crying, anguish, and lamentation be increased as much
as possible, one of the best method is that he should tie his hands
around his neck; should pour dirt upon his head; should place his head
against a wall; sometimes he should stand and sometimes he should cry;
should imagine himself at the scene of Judgement Day; and the way
sinners are rebuked with harshness, should rebuke himself accordingly;
then he should look towards his right, imagining about the companions of
the right hand *(ashab al-yamin)* and should think about their
splendour, majesty, features, virtues, robes, and smells; then he should
look towards the left, imagining about the companions of the left hand
*(ashab al-shumal)* should regard himself among them, thinking about
their torturous and painful condition with blackened faces, their
swollen eyes, tied hands and feet, and burnt skins; the angels standing
in readiness to execute Allah's command to throw him together with them
inside Hell; then he should imagine and be scared lest Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted) orders:

***“Seize ye him, bind ye him, burn ye him in the blazing fire, and make
him march in a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits.”***

- Holy Qur'an (69:30-32)

Then he should cry:

*“O' Thou are the most compassionate, and Thou Who are the shelter of
unsheltered ones!”*

And should cry:

*“Where is Your vast blessing? Where is Your infinite forgiveness? Where
are Your love and benevolence?”*

Then he should cry, should remember His patience and kindness, should
think about His infinite forgiveness and generosity, and if Satan wants
to make him hopeless should tell him: 'you, with all these sinning and
transgressions can't be hopeless about Allah's blessing and forgiveness,
which belongs especially to righteous ones and you are not among them.'
He shouldn't pay attention to his words, don't let his whispers effect
his heart, turn his face from him, take refuge in Allah, (the Glorious,
the Exalted), and should pay more attention to his prayer, hopes and
needs, and in a hopeful manner should speak to Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted): it is far away from Your benevolence and magnanimity to turn
Your face away from someone needy like me, and not to forgive a
destitute and helpless one like me who has stretched his needy hands
towards Your threshold, has resorted to Your most favourite ones, with
tearful eyes, and heart and body trembling with fear.

Then becoming further hopeful, he should submit his wants before Him,
and whatever spiritual exalted position and sublime ranks, like
enlightenment, love, union, faith, and piety could enter in his mind, he
must beg from Him. And should repeat the following text as much as
possible:

*“O'! Thou Who is capable of doing whatever he pleases, and except Thee
there is none, who could do whatever he desires. O'! Thou are the One
Whose great generosities and large bounties are not* *expansive at all.
O'! Thou Whose donations do not decrease anything (from His treasures),
and Whose not giving away does not increase anything.”*

Then he should insists more about the same meanings and plead by saying:

*“O' my Lord! if I do not deserve to request whatever I have requested
from You, but Your generosity and benevolence is such and deserve to
bestow upon me the grant of my needs. O' my Lord! Your recognition,
which You Yourself have taught me encourages me, that I should desire my
great needs from You, because, whatever You bestow upon Your servants
and provide for them is not because they are worthy of them, and if
there is such worthiness, even that worthiness is bestowed upon them by
You, therefore, benevolence and welfare could not belong to anyone
except You, and if such is the case, O' Lord! That worthiness and
decency, which You bestowed upon Your righteous servants, bestow upon me
too, so that I could also achieve this worthiness, whereby my prayers
could receive Your acceptance and my desires get fulfilled.*

*O' Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted)! You are the one that whatever You
do, no one can question You, and there is no one who could dare to raise
a finger of criticism. Or could challenge You in Your Power and Reign,
You are such that neither Your generosity have any limit and boundary,
nor Your blessing have any end, therefore, O' Lord bestow upon me
worthiness in accordance of Your Power, and make me rich with Your
generosity.*

*O' Thou are the most generous one among the generous ones! O' Allah
(the Glorious the Exalted)! If You want to punish me, instead, punish
one of those who don't believe in Your divinity and keep enmity towards
Your friends. Come on and punish him, but as far as I am concerned, can
I find anyone else except You to pardon me? O' Lord! Would You deprive
me from Your generosity ? Or there is no need for You to punish and take
revenge but as far as I am concerned, I do need a lot of Your
forgiveness and generosity.*

*O' my Lord! Your enemy as well as my enemy, Satan desires that I become
deprived from Your supplication and prayer and, thus, become pessimistic
and hopeless from Your blessing and generosities, but I, because of Your
grace have turned off my face from him, and trampled over whatever he
desired. Therefore, help and support me over him, because in spite of
his whispering I didn't become hopeless and never turned off my face
from You.*

*O' Lord! With my little comprehension about Your blessing and
forgiveness as well as Your being needless and omnipotent, I don't
believe that You will deprive from Your forgiveness and pardon, anyone
of Your servants even the pagans except the enemies of your favourite
ones who have oppressed your saints and tortured them but as regards to
the punishment of others, if it was not the surrender and obedience to
Your book and Your prophet's words, I wouldn't have believed; that
regarding the punishment of unbelievers, you have stated in your book
that they will be punished; from the point of view of my reason - the
reason which you have bestowed upon me - in case you decided to punish
them to fulfil Your warning against them, You are not helpless to do
so.*

*But if You don't act in accordance with Your warning, by not punishing
them, then even in that case, there would not be the least interference
in Your Exalted essence and perfection. O' Lord! I presume so about the
unbelievers, then how come shouldn't be hopeful about the believers who
have taken refuge in Thee, have put their trust in Your generosity, and
desire Your union, even though they might have sinned and acted
disobediently?*

*O' my Lord! My Master! Sinning is from the servant and forgiveness is
from the Master, especially, if the Master happens to be Exalted and
beneficent like Thee. O' my Lord! This is what I presume* *about Your
generosity and kindness towards Your servants, during other months,
days, and nights, and therefore, I am hopeful. But during the Holy Month
of Ramadhan on the Night of Power, which You have created for the sake
Your special generosities and blessings; have bestowed a special favour
upon Your servants; have given glad-tidings of Your forgiveness and
mercy to the sinners; have opened the gates of Your benevolence and
magnanimity towards all; have spread the tablecloth of your forgiveness
and blessing for all; can I say except that - You will reward everyone
with pardon, forgiveness, love and blessing; would grant their wants;
would accept their prayers; would reward their evils with goods, and
their sins with good deeds; and would let Your greatness and magnanimity
to surpass their limits - what else can I presume?*

*This is my optimistic presumption towards You, and that is my
favourable opinion about Your kindness and magnanimity; You Yourself are
knowledgeable, that Your great Prophet has given what glad-tidings for
those, who have favourable opinion about you.”*

4. Some Other Deeds to be Performed During the Night of Power (Lailatul-Qadr)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. It is up to the prudent wayfarer to offer two rak'ats of prayer
*(salat)* each one of the Nights of Power; in each rak'at after surah,
al-Hamd, the Opening, should recite surah al-Ikhlas, the Sincerity,
seventy times, and after salutation, should recite:

*“O' Allah! Forgive me and accept my repentance.”*

And then should ask about his wants and desires.

2. Then he should offer 100 rak'ats special prayer for the Night of
Power, and in between should recite the supplications which have been
left by the sinless ones (*ma'sumin [a]*) - the prayers which are
extremely precious and valuable, contain most subtle discourses,
delicate points and exalted learnings about Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), His Characteristics, Sacred Names, Generosity and Beneficence,
Wisdom and Justice, divine will and destiny, etiquette and manners of
supplicating to Allah; all of which are heavenly revealed, and except
prophets and imams, who learned them through revelations, no one else
has access to them.

### 4.1. Comments About the Prayer's Etiquette

Of course, it should not be forgotten that these supplications should be
recited in the state of being completely awake, aware, conscious, and
with a live heart; blessed is the one whose recital of this prayers with
a live heart is influential upon his heart and soul; whatever is uttered
by his tongue is also accepted by his heart and soul; that if for these
supplications there do not exist any reward and blessing, except only
this effect upon his heart and soul, even then it merits, and one should
mobilize all his energy, strength, efforts, and all over crusade with
heart and soul in order to accomplish this effect. But in addition to
that for each word and phrase there are rewards, blessings, and
illuminations - the rewards and blessings which no one has the capacity
to measure.

Therefore, the one whose recital of these supplications do not produce
any effect upon his heart and soul, at least should recite them
consciously, should ponder about their meaning, must endeavour in order
to comprehend as to what did he read, what did he say, and what did he
want, lest he recite them with negligence with the tip of his tongue,
like the magicians who utter nonsensical, meaningless words from the tip
of their tongue, without knowing what is being uttered, what is said,
and what is wanted by him.

And the one whose recital of these supplications neither influences his
heart and soul, nor he hesitates in their recital; does not even care to
understand their meanings, instead of reciting these supplications,
should cry about his own worst condition and should shed tears upon this
heavy tragedy - the tragedy of not receiving divine grace in
supplications; his being unable to appreciate these supplications, and
not being able to be influenced by them, should recite the following
sentence several times:

***“We are from Allah and towards him is our return. “***

- Holy Qur'an (2:156)

which is recited at the time of occurrence of a tragedy. Further he
should say:

*“I seek refuge in Allah from this tragedy, which is horrible and would
bring a severe punishment.”*

In a divine tradition, it has been mentioned about the characteristics
of the people of the next world:

*“Their prayers ascend upwards and reaches Allah, their words are
accepted, and Allah loves to listen to their prayers the way a mother
likes her own child.”*

Therefore, we should be careful and should ponder about this sentence:

*“Their prayers ascend upwards.”*

Is not it shameful that the prayers which ascend upward should be
recited from the tip of the tongue, while the heart and soul remain
occupied in worldly affairs? Is not it disgusting that we seek Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), from tongue and seek world by heart -the
world which in traditions has been called Allah's enemy as well as the
enemy of His friends? Is not it helplessness and disobedience that our
tongue's tip remains busy in his remembrance while the heart takes off
towards the world? Does there exist any greater tragedy than this one?

3. Open the Holy Qur'an, recite its special prayer, place it upon your
head. and your intention in doing so, in addition to showing respect and
regard to the Holy Qur'an, should be that through this means, reason and
thoughts become strengthened and the illumination of reason becomes
perfected with the illumination of the Holy Qur'an.

4. The salutations *(ziyarat)* of the Lord of the Martyrs, Imam
al-Husayn [a] should be recited during this night, some other *ziyarat*
which have been which have been narrated by the Sinless Imams should
also be recited.

5. the recitals of surah al-Rum, al-Ankabut and al-Dukhan from the Holy
Qur'an should not be forgotten on the night of 23rd Ramadhan.

6. The special supplications which have been narrated should be recited,
especially, the supplications, which has been quoted in the book of
Iqbal from some authentic books and begins as follows:

*“O' Allah! If, about this night and the nights before, there is a doubt
or reluctance in their being the Nights of Power, but regarding, Thee,
Thou unity (Tawhid), and that because of Your Exaltedness and
Magnanimity, You will purify your servant's deeds there is absolutely no
doubt.”*

If, one could discover truly the meanings of the above content that
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), and in His unity there is absolutely
no doubt and contradiction - indeed he has received a good reward for
his worship of this night. Also, one should not forget recital of a
short prayer which has been mentioned in the book of Iqbal quoted from
Imam al-Sajjad [a] and which starts with:

*“O Intrinsic Fundamental (Secret) evident in His Expose intelligible
expression (Manifest), and O Rational Exposition (Manifest) leading to
His genuine quintessential (Secret).”*[^2]

Which, while being short is a very subtle Monotheistic prayer worth
reciting.

### 4.2. Comments About the Importance of Ahlul-Bait's [a] Supplications

I swear that if we did not achieve any benefit from the existence of
Sinless Imams [a] except these very higher learning, subtle themes, and
delicate points regarding Monotheism - which they have explained to us,
even then it would have been desirable to mobilize all our efforts and
strength for their thanks and appreciation, while accepting and
admitting, that these thanks and appreciation would not be sufficient to
compensate for that great blessing, and whatever we do, we would never
be able to thank them for that great blessing the way it ought to be
thanked.

7. One should not forget to select a period for having a private union
between himself and his Creator and during this period should
concentrate his mind and soul at this point, that Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted), is completely aware of his helplessness and disobedience
as well as is able to rescue him from this wretchedness, because his
generosity, magnanimity, love, and kindness do not have any limits; then
he should tie his hopes towards His threshold of generosity and
benevolence, should look forward towards His blessings and bounties, and
should listen carefully to the blowing of the breeze of His love.

### 4.3. A Reminder

Yes! Congratulations and thousands of congratulations for the one who
was able to have the divine grace of performing correctly whatever was
described. But the one who did not have the divine grace of performing
all of them, lest be tricked by Satan and through acceptance of his
whispers, in which he says:

*“You are not the one who could perform all these tedious worships, the
way they ought to be performed, therefore, it makes no sense to bother
yourself, leave it and do your own things, because, their incomplete
performance would not bring any reward for you.”*

In this manner he would quit performing whatever he could have
performed, would close upon himself the path of salvation and
righteousness forever, and with this negligence and cheating would
entangle himself into serious disaster. Therefore, he should not pay
attention to these Satanic whispers and should not show any negligence
in performing whatever he could perform, even if it happens to be quite
insignificant, because, deeds and worships however smaller they might
be, possess illumination and reward, would enable the doer to have the
divine grace for performing another deed and worship, which quite often
helps the person to be able to perform complete worship.

Be aware that Satan does not have any other aim and objective except to
keep you away from Lord's obedience and to cut off your bonds of
servanthood. It should not be forgotten that paying attention to Satanic
whispers results in heart's darkness, which in turn makes a person lazy
and disappointed in performance of Allah's worship; disappointment from
performance of deeds and worship results in renunciation of some of the
worships; renunciation of some of the worships results gradually in
renunciation of all the worships; renunciation of all the worships
results in our eternal degradation and doom, except that Allah's
generosity rescues us, so that we practice abstinence in following
Satan, and because of abstinence from Satan's following, our heart
becomes illuminated, thus having the divine grace for worship and
servanthood.

Yes, the prudent believer, lest underestimate his good deed, no matter
how insignificant it may be, or may consider even a tiny portion of it
as insignificant and worthless, and with such presumption renounces it;
that such behaviour would not accomplish anything except loss and
damage. (Similarly considering his good deeds as big and with such
presumption getting himself involved in self-conceit).

Also, lest he renounces a good deed because he is not able to perform
it, instead, he should perform it, as much as possible; of course, after
performance of a deed be it small or big, he should regard it as
insignificant while comparing it with Allah's Exaltedness.

Because, the All deed and worship, regarded as insignificant by the
servant are considered as much bigger by Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), who very often looks at it positively, and accepts it from his
servant, and what is important and useful for the servant is that Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), accepts deed, and not its being small or
big, because He does accept quite insignificant deeds, rewards
handsomely, and this acceptance and rewards mean infinite gains for the
doer. On the contrary, plenty of deeds which aren't accepted by Him
don't mean anything for the servant. Didn't Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), accept a little worship and repentance from Prophet Adam [a]
but reject plenty of worship from Satan, and order him to leave the
Celestial kingdom forever?

Therefore, from this consideration lest, one may regard his deed and
worship as big and looks at it with appreciation and astonishment, even
though if he has performed worship equivalent to the worship performed
through all humans and angels; because considering one's own worshipping
as great does not have any gain except its being ruined, and worst then
that, it changes deed's illumination into darkness. Similarly lest he
regards a little deed and worship as worthless and may renounce it,
because, so often Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), accepts a small
deed, and with his acceptance makes it a lot.

### 4.4. Comments About the Prayers of Others

Whatever has been described so far to strive hard to have more sincerity
and truth and to consider deeds and worships as small and insignificant
was about the deeds and worships which some one performs for himself;
and all this emphasis is because of the reason, that no one should like
and accept about himself anything, except, the deeds and worships which
are performed with sincerity, and should not account for whatever is not
done with truth and sincerity, rather should see it as sinning and
transgression.

But lest he regards and presumes so about the deeds and worships of
others, because underestimating others deeds not only doesn't produce
any gain - the gain which is obtained for underestimating one's own
deeds - rather is detrimental, because it produces the background
whereby others become discouraged and disgusted with respect to their
deeds and worship, thus the doors of goodness and prosperity becoming
closed upon them.

Therefore, from this consideration to treat others deeds and worships in
this manner is not allowed, instead, for appraisal of others deeds their
very apparent value should be considered as genuine. Or even higher than
this, Allah's Generosity and Magnanimity should be considered as
criteria, and should be presumed so, that very often Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), because, of his Generosity and Magnanimity might
accept their deeds, even if they are not accompanied with truth and
sincerity. Also, we should consider the possibility that perhaps Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), because of His kindness and love towards
the servants, might accept and grant their prayers, even if they are
recited from the tip of their tongue, and not from the depth of their
souls. Therefore, from this consideration lest we disappoint and
discourage Allah's servant from His blessing and forgiveness.

And thus with such undesirable conduct make him discouraged and with
respect to his deeds and worships, ultimately resulting in his quitting
worship and servitude. Even if his deeds and worships are not sincere,
and are mixed with some undesirable things, it is not too far that this
very apparent and superficial deeds and worship - if are not renounced
suddenly - performed by a servant would become the basis for breezing
the cold breeze of Allah's grace over him, thus, blowing the spirit of
reality in the spiritless skeleton of his worships; the illumination of
reality radiating upon his soul in such a manner that he would suddenly
became transformed, gaining access to the real worship and the reality
of worship, from that superficial worship, and attaining righteousness,
salvation, and eternal prosperity. I even believe that if an intoxicated
sodomite in state of intoxication, would cry O' Allah! and besought Him
for help, He would reply him.

### 4.5. The Night of Twenty Seventh of Ramadhan

It has been reported from Zaid bin 'Ali that his father Imam al-Sajjad

[a] used to recite the following prayer from the beginning till the end
of the night, on the night of twenty seventh of Ramadhan:

*“O' Allah please bestow upon me the divine grace so that I become
disgusted with this world - the House of deception - and become
attracted towards the Hereafter - the House of Eternity - and before the
arrival of my death, should make myself readied for the journey towards
the Next world.”*

### 4.6. The Commentary - World Being the House of Illusion (Dar al-Ghuroor)

A little bit of pondering and meditation about the above-mentioned
supplication, would reveal this delicate point that in accordance with
the Qur'anic verses, traditions narrated from the Sinless Imams [a], and
whatever has been spiritually contemplated by the mystics, this world is
altogether deceitful and whatever we see, in reality isn't as it appears
to be, rather it is like a mirage, which is misleading. Therefore, from
these considerations it has been called as the House of Arrogance *(Dar
al-Ghuroor)* and the House of Deception *(Sarai-Farib)*.

Perhaps acceptance of this point might be hard for some, and they may
not accept it easily that whatever is being seen by them in reality is
not, what it appears to be, rather mistakenly they see a thing as
something else. But there are situations, where human perception makes a
mistake in seeing a thing as something else, e.g., a spoon inside a
glass of tea appears as a broken spoon. If we think, ponder, and pay
attention that this mistake of human sight -whose being a mistake, there
is the least contradiction with other sights which are not mistakes, at
least in appearance doesn't differ at all.

With this analogy, we can therefore conclude, that seeing a thing as
something else - even contradictory to what it is supposed to be is a
phenomenon whose occurrence is possible, and is not an impossibility.
And if the traditions describe that our perceptions see the world and
its phenomenon mistakenly as things - which in reality they are not -
then with reference to the above-mentioned analogy, such occurrence and
its reality should also be acceptable i.e., the reality that whatever we
see in this world, is not, what it appears to be. Following are some of
the traditions relevant to this matter:

1. The traditions which mention the speaking of lifeless solid material,
like the speaking of stone pebbles upon the Prophet's [s] hands. In
spite of the fact that our senses do not accept the speaking of stone
pebbles and other solid bodies.

2. The traditions which describe the conditions of graves, that some of
the graves are full of joy like green pastures, while some of them are
like the trenches full of blazing fires, in spite of the fact that human
senses do not see the graves as such.

3. The traditions which describe the role of angels in directing the
world's phenomenon, while our sense of perception does not see them.

4. The traditions which mention that the sustenance of all worldly
existence including solids, plants and animals comes from the Celestial
kingdom, while our sense of perception do not see such a thing.

All these traditions describe this point, that in this world, there are
plenty of phenomenon which are not perceived by our senses, or are
perceived in a different manner. Yes! This world is named as the House
of Arrogance *(Dar al-Ghuroor)*, because its phenomenon do not manifest
themselves to us the way they really are; rather manifest themselves
with forms which do not show reality; with perspectives which lack
authenticity, with essence which like a mirage disappears; with
stability which is altogether in motion; with realities which like
mirage, are imaginations and hallucinations. It deceives its lovers, and
presents itself to them in a charming manner; only for the believers for
whom the worldly materialistic veils have been removed from their
esoteric eyes the world manifests itself, the way it actually is, and
they see world's phenomenon the way they really are. Removal of worldly
materialistic veils from the heart's esoteric eyes, as have been
mentioned in the above-mentioned tradition means:

*“Becoming disgusted with the House of Arrogance.”*

And seeing the worldly phenomenon the way they are, means:

*“Becoming attracted towards the House of Eternity.”*

Since Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), has spread his blessings and
forgiveness more than any other period, during these esteemed nights for
his servants, and has invited them for worship, obedience and sitting
down upon the table of his generosity it is a must for the servants to
pay more attention towards the etiquette of these nights, by engaging
themselves in worshipping and vigilance, they should look forward
hopefully towards His Generosity and Magnanimity, and should not be
negligent in remembering, that during these nights Satan too tries hard,
more than any other period, to keep us away from worship, vigilance, and
being benefited from Allah's blessings and favours.

### 4.7. How to Farewell the Night of Power (Lailatul-Qadr)

As was described for the other important and esteemed nights, the Night
of Power (Lailatul-Qadr) should also be farewelled exactly in the
similar manner, i.e. at the end of the night, one should resort
(*tawassul*) to the Impeccable ones (the M'asumin [a]) - to whom that
night belongs - should submit his deeds and worships to those exalted
ones, with a heart broken, with grief and shedding tears, should request
them to make those deeds as righteous, and should intercede with Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), for their acceptance, and thus making them
as fruitful.

### 4.8. The Day of Power (Qadr)

It should be understood that in accordance with the traditions both the
night and day are interconnected, as far as their worth, value, esteem,
and splendour are concerned, i.e. if the day is esteemed and honourable,
the night of that day also possesses the same distinction and vice
versa. Therefore, we must appreciate the importance of the Days of Power
and like the Nights of Power, should celebrate them by sincerely
performing worships and righteous deeds.

[^1]: Abu Yahya 'Abdullah bin Onais al-Juhanni: a shepherd from the
tribes of Juhan arrived before the Holy Prophet [s] and said: 'O'
Prophet of Allah! I wish you order me, so that during one of the nights
of Ramadhan I come to Madina and offer the prayer.' The Holy Prophet [s]
called him on the 23rd night of Ramadhan, and therefore this night
become famous as the Night of Juhanni. - Bihar al-Anwar vol. 99 p. 20,
and Asad al-Ghabe vol. 3, p. 20 [Author].

[^2]: This prayer has also been mentioned in the book 'Mafatih al-Jinan'
of Hajj Sheikh Abbas al-Qummi in the deeds of the 23rd night of Ramadhan
[Author].


