The Last Night of the Holy Month of Ramadhan
============================================

During this night there are few important deeds and one should make his
best endeavours for their performance as follows:

To offer ten *rak'ats* of prayer for acceptance of this month's deeds
and worships. In the book of Iqbal, it has been narrated from the Holy
Prophet [s], that he has sworn that whoever offered ten rak'ats of
prayer during this night in the following manner:

“The prayer should be offered with salutations after each two
*(rak'ats)*; in each rak'at after Surah al-Hamd, Surah al-Ikhlas should
be recited ten times; and in each genuflection *(rukoo)* and prostration
*(sujood)*, recite the four-praises *(tasbihatul-arba’a)* - 10 times:

(subhan Allahi wal hamdu lillahi wala ilahi illAllahu wAllahu akbar)

*“Glory to Allah, all praises belong to Allah, and there is no god but
Allah, and Allah is Great.”*

And after offering the salutations of the last *rak'at* should recite
the following phrase one thousand times:

*(Astaghfirullah)*

*“I ask Allah to forgive me.”*

Then in the end he should offer prostration by reciting the following:

*“O' Living, O' Self-existent, O' the Majestic and Magnanimous, O' the
Merciful in this world as well as in the next-world, O' the Lord of the
first and the last, forgive our sins, and accept our prayer, fasting,
and deeds. He wouldn't even have raised his head from the prostration,
but Allah would bestow upon him his forgiveness, would accept from him
his Ramadhan's deeds and worships, and would pardon his sins no matter
how heavy they might be, because of him would accept the worshipping of
his neighbours, and in the end the Holy Prophet [s] said: 'this is the*
*special gift for the men and the women of my community (ummah), and
before me Allah has not given such gift to anybody.”*

It would be desirable that all of us should do especially, those who
care about others reformation and refinement; because of their being
benefited from Allah's blessing of general compassion, they love to
guide others towards reformation, righteousness, truth and perfection;
for this purpose have selected the preaching as their profession,
therefore, they must be ahead of others in undertaking this deed,
because, the benefits which are gained by the people due to the
performance of this deed are far greater than the benefits received by
them in a preaching assembly. Because, undoubtedly, whatever is said in
a preaching assembly does not influence all the people present over
there what to say about its influence upon those who were absent and did
not listen to the preaching sermon.

But the reward of the above-mentioned deed reaches to all the neighbours
living in that area, even if their number happens to be in thousands or
more. In addition to that the benefit which is gained by someone through
a preacher is far insignificant as compared to the benefit of the
above-mentioned deed, i.e., forgiveness for all their sins and
acceptance of all their deeds and worships performed during the Holy
Month of Ramadhan.

1. Questions and Answers
------------------------

Perhaps, acceptance of whatever has been described above might be
difficult for some, specially, when there is a room for criticism
regarding the authenticity of this tradition. In reply it must be said:
Yes! The document of this tradition are not so authentic, but do not
many traditions narrate that for performance of recommended deeds, there
is no need that tradition's documents should be free from contradiction
and be absolutely authentic, and whoever has performed the recommended
deeds, described in a tradition although with less authentic documents
would receive the rewards mentioned therein?

If again it is asked: we are not sure, maybe for such type of
traditions, their proof of authenticity might not be needed, but how do
we know that Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), would accept such a
deed, and with its reward would even pardon the people living in that
area, so that we should regard it as superior than preaching?

The reply is, that this doubt is also valid for preaching, where the
possibility of non-acceptance is relatively much higher, because the
preaching is done in people's presence; therefore, is not safe from the
danger of fame and egotism, and both these factors play an effective
role in making the deed contaminated with the tan of hypocrisy, but the
deed described above is performed in privacy and isolation, and
therefore, remains immune from being damaged through these two
calamities.

2. Studying Imam al-Sajjad's [a] Affairs
----------------------------------------

It is desirable to study and ponder, whatever has been narrated about
the actions, deeds, intensity of repentance and obedience of Imam
al-Sajjad[^1] [a] during this night, in order to find out that such a
noble and esteemed personality like him, with all that piety and
spiritual grandeur, present himself before Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), for repentance in this manner; therefore how should we -with
all this disobedience, ingratitude, indecency and intemperance present
ourselves before Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), for repentance and
obedience.

*“The great Sayyid in the book of Iqbal has quoted from Imam al-Sadiq
[a], that when the Holy Month of Ramadhan arrived, Imam al-Sajjad [a]
did not admonish his male and female servants for their mistakes, rather
wrote all their mistakes in a diary. Then on the last night of the Holy
Month, he called all of them and asked them to sit down around him,
opened his diary, called their names one by one, saying: 'Do you
remember that on that day you made a mistake and I did not admonish
you?' The servant replied: 'Yes! I do remember.*

*Then when he got all of them to admit their mistakes in this manner, he
stood up in their midst and said: 'All of you cry loudly saying: 'O' Ali
bin Husayn! As you have written our mistakes in your note-book, your
Lord has also written about your mistakes, and without even a single
mistake being left out, has registered them in a special diary; a day
will come when you will be scrutinized in His presence the way we have
come before you for scrutiny; now you should forgive us and let us go,
the way you desire Allah to forgive you; you forgive us so that He
forgives you; you overlook upon us, so that He may overlook upon you;
you be kind to us so that He be kind towards you.*

*“O' Ali bin Husayn! Here we are standing afraid in your presence, you
too should remember the Day when you would be standing afraid in the
presence of your Master; the Wise and Just Lord Who would not overlook
even the tiny deeds and would bring them for accounting; therefore, you
be generous to us, so that He too would be generous towards you on that
Day.*

*“He uttered these words himself, so that they could repeat them, they
too repeated these words with their tongues loudly, while he was
standing among them, shedding tears, cried, and said: \`O' Allah! You
Yourself have commanded to overlook and forgive those who have done
wrong to me. O' Allah! I have done wrong to my own self, in accordance
to Your command I have forgiven and overlooked those who have done wrong
to me;*

*You too should overlook and forgive me, because, You are most deserving
to overlook and forgive; O' Allah! You have commanded us not to oust the
destitute from our threshold; here we are destitute, who have placed our
heads upon Thy threshold, have put our hands upon the skirt of Your
generosity, our eyes are eagerly fixed upon Your love and kindness,
please do a favour upon us, and do not oust us disappointed and empty
handed from Your threshold, because You are more deserving for mercy and
compassion among all.*

*“Then he looked upon them and said: 'I have forgiven you and have
overlooked your mistakes, now will you too over-look me? And if I was
not a good master for you, will you forgive me? That I was not a good,
just, and generous master, but I myself am a servant of an Exalted,
Merciful, and Compassionate Master.' Then they would respond to him: 'O'
our master! We have overlooked and have forgiven you.' Then he said to
them: 'please pray and say: O' Allah! Forgive 'Ali bin Husayn* *the way
he has forgiven us; make him free from the Hell's fire the way he has
freed us from the servitude.'*

*“And they repeated these words upon their tongues, then he himself said
Amen and said to them: 'Go away, I have forgiven you all, and have made
you free, so that my Master too may forgive me and make me free.' In
this manner he would make all of them free; since, the Day of Eid
ul-Fitr would have arrived, also bestowed upon them gifts and rewards,
so that they should not depend upon others for their needs; and there
was never a Ramadhan that in its last night, he would not have freed
more or less twenty of his slaves in this manner.*

*“He said: 'Allah frees seventy millions sinners from the Hell on every
night of the Holy Month of Ramadhan, and on the last night frees a
number equivalent to the sum of freed during all the nights, and I also
like to free my servants in this world, so that my Master also frees me
from his punishment on the Judgement Day.' He never kept a slave for
more than one year, if he got a slave in the beginning or end of the
year, freed him on the night of Eid ul-Fitr brought another one in his
place, and when the Night of Eid arrived again, freed him too, and he
practised this method until the end of his life.”*

Yes! This was the method practised by Imam al-Sajjad [a] for absorbing
Allah's blessing at the Night of Eid ul-Fitr, and if we cannot properly
execute his method in our lives, it would be desirable, to strive our
best to follow it to the extent that is possible. At least, we may write
in a diary the mistakes and omissions committed by our children,
relatives, servants and others, then on the occasion of Eid ul-Fitr's
night let us overlook and forgive all of them and so much better, if we
look towards Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), and say:

Allah! So-and-so, Your slave, did such and such wrong and transgression
against me, but I did not take revenge'; and similarly should remember
the mistakes and wrong of all of them one by one, and then should say;
O' Allah! You know it very well that these slaves of your did these
wrongs to me, but as far as I was concerned, only for Your sake did not
stand against them, and did nothing to take revenge, with the hope that
You too would keep Your wrath and punishment away from me. O' Allah! You
Yourself have commanded us to overlook and forgive others, therefore You
too should overlook and forgive us, because, You are far more deserving
for forgiveness and generosity as compared to all of us.

O' Allah! You are the one Who bestowed this divine grace upon me to
forgive those who have done wrong to me, therefore, please be generous
and do not deprive me from Your forgiveness, because that divine grace,
which you bestowed upon me is greater than this forgiveness. Therefore,
when you did not deprive me from that greater blessing, please, also do
not disappoint me from being blessed with your forgiveness too.

O' Allah! You Yourself have commanded me to respond to an act of
goodness in a much better way. I have forgiven those who had done wrong
to me, I am hopeful that You too will respond to my act of goodness with
a much better reward; would free me from Your punishment; with the
alchemy of Your love, would replace my evils into manifold goodness,
would increase my rank; therefore, complete Your generosity, and do not
disappoint me from these wants.

Here, it should be reminded that not executing this method exactly, the
way described above, and simply paying heart's attention, although might
be useful and effective, nevertheless, its performance in the above
manner is far more effective and possesses many distinctions including:

A. As heart's attention towards a deed is considered only as heart's
worship, its execution and performance with tongue and other bodily
parts is considered as part's worships, therefore, if we do it in the
above manner in addition to the heart's worship, we would also have the
worship of other body organs.

B. Further performance of a certain deed by a certain human body organ,
produces a special influence upon the heart, thus, exciting other organs
to perform other deeds, which in itself creates a background for another
deed, and in this manner like a chain reaction, a continuous reward is
achieved by the worshiper. It is obvious, that paying heart's attention
only would never accomplish such an auspicious happening.

C. Also performance of deed and worship through bodily organs, have this
good advantage that it might become an ideal example and model,
providing the relevant background for others, who may also perform it,
thus bestowing a reward upon us, because, whoever is the pioneer of a
decent tradition and desirable work, every time someone would act in
this manner, a reward would also be bestowed upon the pioneer of that
good tradition. In addition to that, it provides a background, whereby
the righteous and good deeds are spread among others, as the method
practised by Imam al-Sajjad [a] provided a background, thus enabling it
to make its entry among others and, thus encouraging them to perform it.
Now, if Imam al-Sajjad [a] instead of performing it in this particular
style, would simply have paid attention by heart, then in that case,
would we have any awareness about this method today, and have practised
it? Never.

3. Self Accounting
------------------

The other important deeds of this night is self scrutinizing, and it
would be so much better and desirable that at the end of the month, the
fast observing believer should audit his investment and profit, exactly
like two partners who scrutinize their investments and gains at the end
of the day. He should look at his investment, i.e., age, faith,
blessings and illuminations of the Holy Month of Ramadhan and should
find out whether at the end of the month his faith in Allah, (the
Glorious, the Exalted), the Holy Prophet [s], and religion has increased
or not ? He should think how are his ethics and his spiritual condition?

He should think whether the Holy Month of Ramadhan has contributed
towards the improvement, perfection and maturity of ethics, and affairs
like fear, hope, patience, asceticism, Allah's remembrance,
enlightenment, love, reliance, surrender, consent, Monotheism, heart's
wideness, spiritual contemplation of hidden realities, acceptance of
calamities, keeping secrets, detachment from the world, and attachment
towards the Hereafter, etc., or not? He should think how are his deeds
and character? Has he taken steps towards their betterment? Has he
increased his efforts for their correct religious performance ?
Especially, he should review his tongue's actions, and should think
whether its sins like lying, speaking nonsense, back-biting, accusation,
obscenity and ill-speaking have decreased or not?

If after this scrutiny he discovered that his heart's affairs are still
like before, and no step forward has been taken for their betterment, he
should realize that he has not been benefited from this esteemed month
and its bounties, the way he should have been. That his undesirable and
unjust actions have closed the path for the illumination and blessings
of this Holy Month, thus, making him deprived from its benefits.

Otherwise, it is not possible that illuminations and bounties of this
month, especially, the blessing of the Night of Power *(Lailatul-Qadr)*
as well as illumination and bounties of prayers and supplications do not
leave any influence upon his actions and affairs. Some one like this
should feel sorry for his loss, and from this fear, lest the saying of
the Holy Prophet [s], that: *“Whoever passes the Holy Month of Ramadhan
without his being pardoned, then there do not exist any pardon for
him”*, might be valid for him.

Therefore, he should arise for his reform, should seek refuge in Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), should beseech Him for help, should All
stretch his hands towards the threshold of His generosity, with his
tongue and from the profundities of his heart must cry:

***“Or, Who listens to the (soul) distressed when it calls on Him, and
who relieves its suffering.”***

- Holy Qur'an (27:62)

He must honestly and sincerely lament upon his sorry state of affairs,
from the profundities of his soul and mobilizing his entire existence
must cry:

***“There is no god save Thee, be Thou glorified, Lo! I have been a
wrong doer.”***

- Holy Qur'an (21:87)

His condition should be such that shame and degradation of wrongdoers,
anxiety and fear of sinners should be apparent upon his face. He must
request for forgiveness and pardon with the degree of anxiety in
proportion to the magnitude of his sins and the calamity inflicted upon
him. If Allah forbid, his lazy and deviated self prevents him from
offering repentance, at least, his case should not be worst than
Satan's; acting exactly in the same manner as he besought Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), and also accomplished his objective - i.e., not
to be disappointed from His kindness and generosity, not remaining
negligent, in spite of all the damages and deviations, not closing the
eyes from the Lord's magnanimity; and in summary in the last night of
this month, for compensation and provision of the benefits and rewards -
lost by him during the entire month - as well as for reparation of
losses and damages inflicted upon, he must do whatever he can, and in
this manner should prepare himself for the Day of Eid ul-Fitr - the day
for presenting ourselves before Allah, (the Glorious, the Exalted) so
that he should not remain empty handed from being benefited from great
rewards, because indeed deprivation of them would be a tremendous loss
and damage which would be irreparable.

4. Farewell of the Holy Month of Ramadhan
-----------------------------------------

The other important etiquette of the last night is to farewell the Holy
Month of Ramadhan, to be sad, feel regret because of its parting, and
recite most of the elegant prayers and supplications which have been
narrated for this occasion by the Impeccable ones (*M'asumin [a])*.

5. Comments About the Sense and Perception Among Solid Bodies
-------------------------------------------------------------

Perhaps acceptance of the above might be a little bit difficult for
some, and they may say: is the month a human being with awareness and a
friend with feelings, so that we must say farewell to it? They should
read whatever Sayyid Ibn Tawus has mentioned in his book Iqbal in order
to find their reply and they should ponder over the following
explanation:

It must be understood that time, place, and other lifeless phenomenon,
although in this world are lifeless and in their solid state do not
possess intelligence and awareness, nevertheless, in accordance with
very explicit testimonies of plenty of traditions, which speak about the
psychic and next world, as well as on the basis of spiritual
contemplation reported by many gnostics, all of them are possessed with
life, awareness, intelligence, speaking, friendship, and enmity etc., in
some of the worlds far beyond these material worlds. Because all these
phenomenon of this world do possess an existence in other worlds - the
worlds whose existence, was created much before the creation of this
material world as well as extends far beyond the boundaries of this
material world. Also, each phenomenon in one of the worlds of creation
possesses special features and commands in accordance with the
requirements of that particular world of creation, which differs with
the features and commands of other worlds of creation.

And the specialities of some of the worlds of creation are that whatever
there exists - is alive, aware, and alert - because, that world is the
world of life, awareness, and intelligence. In accordance with some of
the traditions, such is the world of Hereafter, a fact which is not very
far away from the words of Holy Qur'an:

***“Lo! the home of the Hereafter - that is life, if they but knew.”***

- Holy Qur'an (29:64)

Here, we will refer to some of the traditions which indicate the same
point as follows:

A. The traditions which mention about speaking of the fruits of
Paradise.

B. The traditions which say that the thrones and couches feel happy when
the dwellers of Paradise sit upon them.

C. The traditions describe that the earth speaks to believers and
unbelievers, and if they do not hear these words it is because the
earth's speaking is due to its celestial existence, and not because of
its material existence.

D. The speaking of pebbles upon the Holy Prophet's [s] hand is relevant
to the same phenomenon. Of course, the speaking of pebbles was also due
to their celestial existence and the Prophet's [s] miracle was to enable
the material ears to hear the speech of a celestial being.

E. Also, it is because of the same reason that everywhere, a prophet,
imam, or saint, through miracles, has made the dead alive, or enabled
him to speak, like the staff of Prophet Moses [a] and the bird of
Prophet Jesus [a], whose lives were celestial, and Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted), in accordance of His wisdom, made this celestial life -
which is hidden from the sight of earthly creatures -manifested upon
them, as the famous Iranian mystic poet Maulana[^2] has composed these
elegant verses regarding this matter as follows:

“The world is depressed, because it consists of inanimate objects (solid
bodies),

And inanimate objects solid bodies are depressed.

Wait! till the sun of the Day of Judgement arises,

Then you will see the actions of this material world.

Since, the staff of Prophet Moses [a] turns here into a dragon,

It becomes a news for the creatures of this world.

These things are dead here, but are alive in the celestial world,

They are silent observers here, but would speak over there.

Because, the orders were issued from that side,

That staff turns in to a dragon for us.

So do the hills sing hymns in harmony with Prophet David [a]

And the toughness of iron changes in to wax with the touch of his hands.

The air provides transportation for Prophet Solomon [a],

While the ocean speaks eloquently with Prophet Moses [a]

The moon responds to Prophet Muhammad's [s] indication,

While the blazing fire turns into a rose garden for Prophet Abraham [a].

The earth swallows Korah *(Qaroon)* like a snake,

While the wood pillar *(Astan al-Hanana)* in the Prophet's Mosque
laments for Prophet Muhammad [s].

The stone pebbles salute the Prophet Muhammad [s],

While the mountains communicate with Prophet Yahya [a].

We the (solid bodies) see, hear, and are aware,

But with you strangers, don't communicate.

Because, so far you earthly creatures - are entangled within the
materialistic boundaries,

How could you become intimate with our soul?

If you move beyond this material world towards the celestial world,

You will then hear the uproar of the various constituents of the
universe.

- Mathnavi 1008/3

With the above explanation it becomes explicit that time, like other
lifeless solid bodies in some stages of their existence possess sense,
awareness and intelligence, and from this consideration it is possible
to speak, share intimate feelings, and say farewell to it.

Yes! At the time of farewell and parting with the Holy month of Ramadhan
it is important that the one who does farewell says goodbye, and shows
grief and regret, because of his parting and separation, should also
possess this worthiness and decency of saying farewell and goodbye to
it, as well as should be honest and sincere, in expressing his grief and
sorrow.

Otherwise, Allah forbids he would farewell such a dearest month during
such a dearest night with lie, discord, and dissimulation. But the
worthiness and decency of farewell belong to someone, who has
accompanied it because of his own desire, friendship, love and
attachment, from the beginning till the end of the month.

And now when this month is parting with him, it is natural that he
should say farewell. But the one who had accompanied this month because
of reluctance, compulsion and being compulsory, as well as the one who
by trampling the requirements of this month has shown his severe
opposition, are those, who in reality were not the accompanying friends
of the month, and now they will be acting to say farewell; because
parting and farewell looks beautiful and elegant only when it is done by
sincere friends.

Also, expression of regret and grief could be true only for them,
because so far one does not desire love and company of someone or
something, naturally, he would not feel regret and grief from their
departing and separation; on the contrary the one who loves, the company
of something or someone, would never trample the manners and etiquette
of the friendship, and would never do a thing, which could be regarded
as opposition to his beloved; rather would endeavour with all of his
strength, that whatever he does should be nearer to his beloved's
desires and objectives.

Therefore, if you were indeed happy with the arrival of the Holy Month
of Ramadhan, enjoyed worshipping and fasting, strove your best for their
performance, believed in their merits, esteem, and greatness the way it
ought to be, now here, when this month is parting from you, it is quite
natural, that this would be hard upon you, making you sad and aggrieved.
Here it is that in this parting, if you say the following:

*“Farewell! O' my fellow companion whose presence was blessings and
rewards, and whose parting is full of grief and regret.”*

In this farewell you indeed would be truthful sincere, and if you look
towards Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), and saying:

*“O' Allah! We do farewell to someone, whose farewell and separation is
indeed hard for us, this pain has broken our hearts, and this separation
has made us lonely and has engulfed our souls with regret and grief.”*

Then you would be honest and truthful in your prayer and supplications.
But Allah forbids, if in parting with the Holy Month of Ramadhan and in
complaining at his departure you, uttered the sentences as mentioned
above by tongue, while deep inside your heart, were not very happy with
his arrival, were not very eager for fasting and worshipping, were sad
during his stay, and were not sad from his departure, don't you feel
scared that the Holy Month may respond, regarding your parting words as
lie and nonsense and may say: \`don't you feel ashamed of your words?'

Were you not the one who did not like my company and considered it as
hard? Were you not the one, who acted so naive and turned down my
blessings, bounties, gifts, and rewards when I offered them for you?
Were you not the one who neither came for my welcome because of your
love and eagerness nor accompanied me due to friendship and honesty?
Were not you the one who desired for my departure, and now although from
the tip of your tongue you are reciting the eulogies of separation,
nevertheless deep inside your heart you are rejoicing?!

Don't you feel scared that Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), too,
instead of accepting your supplication might turn His face away from
you, or because of your breaking the bounds of His reverence through
false supplications and lying with the tip of your tongue, might punish
you? O' you poor destitute, the loser who has entangled himself into
degradation and wretchedness, by wasting the Lord's blessings and
bounties!

What would you do, and how horrible a condition would you be in, if
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), scrutinized you for your crime of
lying in supplications, and punished you for your sin of hypocrisy and
discard! Would you have an answer for your Lord? Would you have a path
for your rescue?

Therefore, if you recognize correctly Holy Month of Ramadhan, know its
merit and worth before Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), discover its
blessings, generosity, bounties, and rewards with respect to yourself;
then you will find this month like an exalted and benevolent guest, who
has came to your home, only for a few days, so that it could release you
from Hell, could take your hand, thus, carrying you along with him,
towards the most superior and most sublime spiritual positions, making
you neighbours with the prophets, angels, righteous saints, and
ultimately leading you even to sit in front of Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), Himself, how would you encounter with such a guest?

And how much would you be pleased in accompanying and escorting him?
Wouldn't you be taking good care of him during his presence? And
wouldn't you be pleased from being benefited from the pleasure of his
company? Wouldn't you be sacrificing upon him your heart and soul?
Wouldn't you regard his presence as extremely pleasant and dearest, and
his separation as extremely painful and bitter?

Yes! If you appreciated correctly the reverence of the Holy Month of
Ramadhan, you will treat him like the above guest; at the time of his
departure would feel in this manner; while saying farewell to him your
condition would become similar to Imam Sajjad's [a]; the way you would
be saying farewell to him, the Holy Month of Ramadhan too would be
saying farewell to you in an elegant manner: the way you would be
feeling sad and full of grief, it too, because of your separation, would
be in grief; because, the kindness and generosity of exalted ones
towards the smaller ones, are far greater than the love and friendship
of smaller ones towards them.

And for those, who had mixed and varied affairs during this month, i.e.
sometimes, they felt happiness in their heart for Ramadhan's arrival,
were happy and pleased in it's company, paid respect towards it's worth,
merits and excellence, were benefited from it's blessings and bounties,
saturated their souls from it's illuminations, and over all acknowledged
it's rights the way they ought to have been. But occasionally some of
the times forgot them, acted in a manner which was not proper for this
month, or even by performance of indecent deeds violated the reverence
of this month.

It is up to them that in this last night should make their best
endeavours, should open their tongue for apologizing with truth and
sincerity; in order to indicate their regret, apology, repentance, and
request, should do whatever they can, and in this manner should
compensate for their shortcomings and negligence shown towards their
noble guest, thus, making it contented and pleased. Because, his is an
exalted guest who has been sent by Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted),
near us for goodness, blessings, prosperity, rewards, and not for
inflicting loss and damage. Therefore, from this consideration it is so
exalted that if we open our tongue for pardon, and sincerely indicate
our feeling ashamed and repentant it will certainly accept our excuse
and would over look our unfair actions.

6. How to Farewell the Holy Month of Ramadhan
---------------------------------------------

It would be appropriate to open the tongue for an excuse as follows:

O' Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted)! Through this noble month you did a
great favour upon us and bestowed a great blessing, but alas, we did not
appreciate it's worth, and by wasting this golden opportunity have
oppressed our own selves, that you know about the dimensions of this
calamity more than others. O' Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted)!

Now that the Holy month has reached to the end and we would not longer
have it's blessed days and nights at our disposal; the wind of Your
blessings has blown towards us and awakened us from the deep sleep of
ignorance; now we have realized that how much dearest one has been lost;
with this loss, what terrible calamity we have inflicted upon our self.

Now, we don't know any other way, except to look towards You; we admit
our mistakes and wrongs which we have done to ourselves; that we have
lost this great generosity feel sorry, that we have remained
empty-handed from all those bounties shed tears with grief; now, who
else is there except You, who could rescue us from this loss, and could
treat this scare of intense grief from our hearts, and could lighten the
burden of sins and regrets, which is so heavy upon our souls?

O' Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted)! In spite of our bad condition,
wretchedness, deviations, and indecencies, we discovered that You have
not forgotten and abandoned us to ourselves, has not released us in
ignorance and negligence, and have not closed the doors of repentance
upon us; otherwise, You wouldn't have made us aware of our mistakes and
losses.

Therefore, there is room, not to be disappointed from Your Generosity,
not to turn off our eyes from Your blessings and bounties, not to remain
empty-handed from Your Kindness, because, no one becomes hopeless from
You except unbelievers, and no one except losers close their eyes from
the threshold of Your Magnanimity.

Therefore, O' my Lord! You are so Exalted, Magnanimous an Acceptor that
you accepted the magicians of Pharaoh's court, accepted his own prayer,
and even did not return empty-handed, Satan, Your worst servant. For the
sake of reverence of the Holy Prophet [s], please do accept me in this
night, grant my prayers, change my wickedness into many fold goodness,
delete my name from the list of losers and those who have suffered
severe damages, by entering it in to the list of righteous and
prosperous ones, and bestow upon me the companionship of Your most
favourite saints.

O' my Lord! My sinning, deviations, indecencies, boldness, and immodesty
have blackened my face; for the sake of the illumination of the Holy
Prophet [s], and his Holy Progeny Ahlul Bait [a], please look upon me
with Your Generosity, and allow me to sit under the shadow of Your
Blessing. O' my Lord! This is the month of Your feast, You Yourself
don't like that a host should act miserly in treating his guests, even
if this hospitality would result in a loss for the host. But O' Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted)! Whatever You increase in Your benevolence
and hospitality (towards Your guests) You have bestowed it upon Your own
domain and kingdom, but if You deprive me from Your hospitality I would
be left out hungry while sitting upon Your tablecloth.

Yes! It is up to such a person to see off this month through performing
a perfect repentance with truth and sincerity, keeping in mind never to
repeat the sinning, deviations, and transgressions committed by him in
the past.

7. The Last Day of the Holy Month of Ramadhan
---------------------------------------------

At the end of the last day of the Holy Month of Ramadhan, the day of
presentation of deeds, it is up to us to seek refuge with the impeccable
ones M'asumin [a] i.e. the Holy Prophet [s] and his Holy Progeny
Ahlul-Bait [a], and the one, to whom that particular day belongs -
resort *(tawassul)* towards the threshold of their generosity, through
our best conduct in accordance with all the codes and etiquette; should
keep our self engaged in supplications, while resorting and
communicating with them, should utilize such phrases and sentences, and
should indicate such humility and abjectness, thus arising their
sentiments, so that they could look at us with love and kindness; could
extend the shadow of their generosity and could pour upon us the rain of
their love and benevolence.

Then with apology and excuse, we should present our deeds of the month
of them; with humility we must beg and request them, that through their
prayer and intercession should make our deeds as good ones, should keep
them immune from defects and calamities, should request Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), that for the sake of His Own Exaltedness may
accept them, as well as may multiply them many fold with reward and
goodness.

If we perform the last day's deeds in the state of prostration, end the
Holy Month of Ramadhan while hungry and prostrating, entering into the
night of Eid ul-Fitr, it could be genuinely expected that we will be
benefited from Allah's blessing, kindness, and generosity far beyond our
imaginations.

[^1]: Imam al Sajjad [a]: The son of Imam al-Husayn [a] and the daughter
of Yazdigird, the last Sassanid king of Iran, was born in Madina on
Saturday, 15th Jamad al'ula 36 A.H. He participated in Imam al-Husayn's
uprising and accompanied his father to Karbala being a tragic witness to
the tragic event. After his father's martyrdom he was made captive and
taken from Karbala to Kufa and from Kufa to Damascus. His speeches and
protests on necessary occasions made a manifest the worthiness and glory
of Alhul-Bait [a], the cruel injustice suffered by his father, and
enormities perpetuated by Yazid's Umayyads regime. Imam al-Shafi
considered Imam 'Ali ibn al-Husayn [a] as the most supreme jurist of all
the people of Madina. His book Al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyah stands out as a
profound social work of the time and a reflection of a supreme endeavour
to meet the exigencies of spiritual ordeals facing the society at the
time of Imam. He died at the age of 58, in Madina; poisoned by al-Walid
ibn Abdul Malik Ibn Marwan on 25th Muharram 95 A.H., and is buried in
Jannatul Baqi Cemetery in Madina [Tr].

[^2]: Maulana: Maulana Jalaluddin Muhammad (604- 672 A.H), son of
Muhammad bin Khatibi famous as Bahauddin, was the most famous scholar
and mystic poet of Iran. His father too was a great scholar and mystic
of his time. He received his early education under the tutorship of his
learned father, and later on after his father's demise, continued his
studies under the famous scholar Burhanuddin Mohaqeq Tirmizi. The later
encouraged him to pursue his higher studies at the prestigious Literary
Learning Center in Damascus. Mualana met with Shams Tabrizi in 642 A.H.
This meeting had a tremendous impact upon him, and brought a great
spiritual revolution in his personality. His most famous mystical poetry
works are: 1. Mathnavi, consists of six volumes, containing 2600 verses
of poetry, describing the religious and gnostic sublime realities in a
simple language. 2. Divan al-Kabir, consisting of 50,000 mystical verses
is another literary mystical masterpiece left by Maulana [Tr].


