Translator's Foreword
=====================

***“In the Name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful”***

The Day of Judgement in the Holy Qur'an has been described as the Day of
Regret (Yaum al-Hasrat), when the people would witness the inner essence
of this world for the first time with their own eyes; they would then be
crying: Is there a way to get out of Hell?[^1]1

But then it would be too late. Unfortunately, for most of the people, it
is only after their death or their being transferred into other world
that they witness the esoteric essence of this creation. But the
esoteric essence of this creation is a reality and there exists a
complete harmony and co-ordination among its various constituents.

In the Islamic narrations it has been mentioned, that if a group of
people are sitting at a place, then in case if they were engaged in a
righteous deed, that piece of earth prays and seeks Allah's forgiveness
(*istighfar*) for them. But if they were busy in sinning, the same spot
sends cursing upon them. For a pious righteous scholar (*alim
al-rabbani*), it is said that the whole universe, i.e. earth, mountains,
plants, rivers, and even the fishes inside the water pray and seek
Allah's forgiveness (*istighfar*) for him.[^2]

Therefore, there is a direct relationship between human existence and
the created world, if he sins the entire creation curses upon him,
likewise if he engages into Allah's servitude and obedience, the entire
creation prays for him and beseech Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), to
bestow upon him His best blessings and bounties. Because, a sinner moves
in the direction opposite to the divine aim of human creation, his
sinning creates a disorder in the aim of human creation which is the
movement towards Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted).

Since, Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), likes the tears of shame of
sinners, he has created the Holy Month of Ramadhan a month of blessings
and mercy. It is a month of worship, prayers, supplications, repentance,
night-vigil, and self-purification. Worshipping in this month is
bestowed rewards many times the reward of worship performed in other
months.

Even the sleeping and breathing of a believer are given the reward of a
worship. It is a month when the gates of Paradise are opened while
Hell's doors are closed. Divine angels continuously invite the people
towards Allah's worship, especially at the dawn on the Night of Power
(*Lailatul-Qadr*) in which the worshipping and night-vigil are superior
than the prayer of thousand months.[^3]

Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), in this month has granted an audience
inviting all the believers for a divine feast, the invitation of which
has been brought by His messengers.

The host is the Most Merciful and Compassionate Lord, His favourite
angels are the servants, and the believers are the guests. The
tablecloth of divine blessings, containing all sorts of rewards and
favours has been spread. From all dimensions the divine special
blessings and favours which can't be seen by the eyes, ears are helpless
to hear about them, and human hearts can not even imagine them are
readied to be awarded upon the guests in accordance to their merits,
worth, and absorbing capacities. If we are negligent, we will feel
regret on the Day of Judgement whereby feeling sorry and being regretful
will not be of any advantage. There is a detailed sermon delivered by
the Holy Prophet [s] describing the importance of this blessed month, a
portion of which is quoted here as follows:

*“O' people the month of Allah with blessing mercy and pardon has came
to you, a month which is the best month among all months before Him; its
days are the best days; its nights are the best nights and its hours are
the best hours. It is the month in which you have been invited by Allah
for a feast and have been selected as the recipient of this special
favour. Your breathings merit the reward of a worship. In this month
your deeds are accepted and prayers are granted.*

*Therefore, with true intention and pure hearts beseech Allah to bestow
upon you His special favour to be able to observe fasting and recite the
Holy Qur'an. Because, the most unfortunate and wretched one is the who
remains deprived from Allah's pardon during this great month. With your
thirst and hunger remind yourself about the thirst and hunger of the Day
of Judgement; pay charity to poor and destitute people, pay respect to
elders; be kind towards youngsters, and observe the bonds of
relationship with your kith and kin.”*

The Holy Month of Ramadhan is directly related to Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted), because, it is the only month whose name has been
mentioned in the Holy Qur'an, the month in which the Holy Qur'an after
descending through various veils in the Celestial Kingdom was revealed
upon the sacred heart of the Holy Prophet [s] though Archangel Gabriel
as described in the Holy Qur'an as follows:

***“The Holy Month of Ramadhan in which was revealed the Qur'an, a
guidance for mankind, and clear proofs of the guidance, and the
criterion (of right and wrong).”***

- Holy Qur'an (2:185).

The present book is the English translation of the Persian book:
Spiritual Journey of the Mystics (*Saluk al-Arifan*) - which is the
translation of Arabic book: *al-Muraqebat fi Amal al-Sunnah*, written by
the most eminent perfect mystic Late Hajj Mirza Javad Agha Maliki
Tabrizi. As the enclosed biography would reveal, he was the most eminent
gnostic and ascetic of his period, who had attained the most Exalted
mystic position of (*Kashf-wa-Shahud*) a spiritual position, whereby the
curtains are rolled up from the wayfarers esoteric eyes, enabling him to
see into the unseen far beyond the limits of this material world.

The book presents a detailed description of etiquette and codes of
special deeds performed by Allah's most sincere servants during the Holy
Month of Ramadhan; the self-restraint and asceticism practised by them
during these worships and the self-purification achieved by them.

The present translation covers the following topics: deeds and etiquette
of the Holy Month of Ramadhan, special distinction of the Holy Month of
Ramadhan, the splendour and eminence of supplications compiled by the
Ahlul-Bait [a], etiquette and codes of prayer, the leadership (*Imamat*)
and preaching (*Va'iz*), the Night of Power (*Lailatul-Qadr*), the last
night of the Holy Month of Ramadhan, the commentary - world being the
House of Illusion (*Dar al-Gharoor*), how to farewell the Holy Month of
Ramadhan, and comments about the sense and perception among the solid
bodies etc.

If the readers are seriously interested to discover the inner essence of
the Ramadhan's reality far beyond the apparent rituals of not eating and
drinking etc., they will find the content of this book highly useful and
interesting. In the end, I would like to mention about the most severe
calamity of our times, especially in the advanced materialistic
societies which is - *the dryness of the eyes*. Following is a tradition
narrated by Imam al-Sajjad [a]:

*“O' Lord! I do complain to you, against the dryness of the eyes, which
do not cry, are not afraid of you, and instead take pleasure in looking
whatever makes them pleased.”*

- Bihar al-Anwar vol. 94, p.143

And the following narration:

*“The dryness of the eyes is the result of hard-heartedness;
hard-heartedness is caused due to excessive sinning; excessive sins are
the result of consumption of food, which is arranged through forbidden
and unlawful income; earning through forbidden and unlawful means is due
to forgetting death; forgetting death is due to lengthy desires; lengthy
desires are caused because of attachment to the world; and the world's
attachment is the root of all evils.”*

Therefore, if after offering daily prayers, recital of *Dua Kumail*,[^4]
in the *Qunoot* of night-prayer, performance of deeds during the Nights
of Power (*Lailatul-Qadr*) in the Holy Month of Ramadhan, and in general
while communicating and establishing a link with the Most Supreme
Reality, if one cannot shed a tear, then he should resort to spiritual
physicians immediately without any further delay.

I wish to express my sincere appreciation to all of those who have
contributed towards the realisation of this translation, especially
Ayatullah Ibrahim Amini, the learned scholar and jurisprudent from the
Religious Learning Centre of Qum, and Hajj Agha Ansariyan for their
encouragement, guidance, and valuable suggestions. I am indebted to my
wife Mrs. Fatimeh Razavi and my daughter Miss. Saman Zaidi in their
painstaking efforts and endeavours for typesetting and designing of the
text. Elucidatory footnotes added by the translator are identified with
[Tr].

In the end I wish to apologise to my readers for possible errors and
omissions, and sincerely welcome their suggestions and comments
regarding this work as well as other translation works of this
translator, published earlier by the Ansariyan Publications, on the
following address. Also, it will be highly useful if the readers could
communicate and let us know their needs and requirements about the
Islamic books which should be translated from Arabic and Persian into
English. We look forward to hear the comments of our dear readers.

Sayyid Husayn Alamdar  
 Ramadhan 27, 1418 January 26, 1998 Tehran  
 Phone: 0098-021-2281619 Fax: 0098-021-2281619

[^1]: The Holy Qur’an (40:12)

[^2]: Friday Prayer sermon of Tehran delivered by Ayatullah Imami
Kashani on Ramadhan 10, 1418, Jan. 9, 1998

[^3]: The Holy Qur'an (97:3)

[^4]: Dua-Kumail: The Prayer of Kumail, a prayer taught to Kumail bin
Ziyad - a close associate of Imam Ali [a] - by the Imam [a]. Its
recitation is particularly recommended during Friday night (i.e., night
after the end of Thursday). For the text see Sheikh Abbas Qummi's
Mafatih al-Jinan pp. 83-90 [Tr.]


