Etiquette and Deeds of the Holy Month of Ramadhan
=================================================

It has been narrated from the Commander of the Faithful Imam 'Ali
[a][^1] that:

*“Don't say Ramadhan because, you don't know what Ramadhan is. Whoever
says so must pay charity and must offer an atonement fast, instead of
saying Ramadhan, say the way Allah has called it the Month of
Ramadhan.”*

The most important duty of a devoted wayfarer in this great month is to
understand the right of this Holy Month in which Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted), has invited the wayfarers of His path for a feast. Also he
must understand the correct meanings of fasting and its relevance with
Allah's invitation. Having discovered this reality he must endeavour
that all his actions and deeds are accompanied with required devotion
and sincerity in order to earn the pleasure of his host Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted).

1. Effects of Fasting and Hunger
--------------------------------

Tolerance of hunger, the most obvious part of fasting, earns plenty of
advantages for a devoted wayfarer journeying towards Allah's path from
the point of view of enlightenment and knowledge of Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted), as well as his advancement in attaining spiritual
perfection. This has been emphasized in plenty of narrations, and
therefore it would be appropriate to quote first an example and later on
to discuss about its wisdom. The Holy Prophet [s] has narrated:

*“Engage yourself in self-struggle (Jihad al-Nafs) through the means of
hunger and thirst, whose reward is equivalent to the reward of those who
participated in the armed struggle for Allah's sake. There is nothing
more superior before Allah's sight than tolerating hunger and thirst
during fasting.”*

Also said:

*“The one who tolerates more hunger as well as ponders deeply about
Allah as compared to others, will be assigned higher Exalted positions
before their Lord on the Day of Judgement.”*

Also, he said to Asma:

*“O' Asma! If you may act in a manner that when the angel of death
approaches you, he should find you hungry and thirsty. If you do it you
will attain the most Exalted spiritual position, will join the ranks of
prophets, will make the angels happy, and will earn the divine
salutations for yourself.”*

And said:

*“Keep your stomachs hungry and thirsty, and make your bodies used to
hardships, perhaps your hearts will then have a chance of seeing Allah's
glory.”*

Also, in the narration of Prophet's heavenly journey *(Me'raj)* the
following have been narrated:

*“O' Ahmad! Do you comprehend the outcome of fasting? 'No.' Replied the
Holy Prophet [s]. 'The outcome of fasting is less eating and less
talking.' Replied Allah, then explained the outcome of silence and less
speaking as follows:*

*'The result of silence is wisdom; the result of wisdom is
enlightenment; the result of enlightenment is certainty; and when a
person attains the Exalted spiritual position of certainty, then he does
not care how does he start his day, whether with ease or hardship, and
tragedy or comfort. Such is the state of those who have attained the
position of content, and whoever attains this position acquires three
inseparable characteristics: thanks (shukr) not contaminated with
ignorance, invocation (dhikr)*[^2] *not mixed with forgetfulness and
love not mixed with the love of others.'*

*'Whoever loves Me in this manner does not intermingle the love of
others with My friendship; I too love him and make others to love him;
would make his heart's eyes opened, so that he could witness My
Splendour and Majesty; would not deprive him from the knowledge and
enlightenment bestowed by Me upon others; in the midst of night's
darkness as well as during the brightness of the day would whisper and
communicate with him, so that he becomes disgusted with other's company;
would have him listen to My speech as well as the speech of My angels;
My secrets which I keep hidden from others would become manifested upon
him.*

*'Would saturate his wisdom with My enlightenment (ma'refat) and would
sit Myself in place of his wisdom; would make the pang of death and its
hardships easier for him so that he would enter Paradise with ease and
comfort. When the angel of death would descend upon him would speak to
him: Welcome! Welcome! Welcome! Allah is anxiously waiting for you.'*

*The narration continues:*

*At this point Allah would speak to him: 'This is My Paradise, make
yourself at home, and this is My neighbourhood in which you would be
dwelling forever.' Then the soul would say: 'O' my Lord! You have
introduced Yourself to me and after identifying You I became detached
with Your entire creation.*

*By Your Splendour and Majesty I swear that in order to earn Your
pleasure if I have to be slaughtered seventy times with extreme
suffering and torture, even then Your consent would have been the most
dearest and desirable thing for me.' At this point Allah would speak to
him: 'I swear with My Splendour and Majesty that from now on there will
never be any veil between Me and you, that you may see Me whenever you
desire so; that is the way I treat my friends.' “*

The above-mentioned narration clearly explains the merit and wisdom of
hunger, and on this basis the learned scholars of moral ethics have
described numerous advantages for hunger, some of them will be mentioned
here as follows:

1. One of the effect of less eating is purity of heart and insight,
because, over-eating and fullness creates a state similar to drunkenness
within a human being which slows down his sense of perception, reducing
his power of quick grasping, thus, ultimately resulting in his heart's
blindness. Opposite to that, hunger results in the mind becoming sharp,
bestows comprehension upon conscience, thus, making the heart readied
for enlightenment. In this regard the following tradition has been
narrated from the Holy Prophet [s]:

*“Whoever keeps his stomach hungry his thinking culminates to the
highest level, thus, making his reflections stronger.”*

2. The other effects of less eating are humility, hospitality,
self-breaking, earthiness, and freedom from arrogance, egotism, and
haughtiness, because these are the by-products of transgression,
rebellion, and ill-servitude towards Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted).
The one who frees himself from these calamities through hunger will also
make himself readied for humility, obedience, and surrender before the
Lord.

3. The other effects of less eating are lowering of intensity of sensual
passions and other such motivations which invite a human being towards
sinning and other deviations. As we know in most of the cases sins and
transgressions are committed as a result of passionate talks and other
sensual motivations, therefore, controlling these passions through
hunger might free us from getting entrapped into many dangerous
situations.

4. Another effect of less eating is less sleeping, we know that
oversleeping is one of the most important factor of wasting of our age
which is the precious sum at our disposal for our hereafter's affairs.
But hunger reduces sleep, thus, providing opportunities for night vigil,
the source of all blessings and bounties, and helps a human being in
worshipping and supplications which is the ladder for his attaining the
most desirable spiritual station (*Maqam al-Mahmud*).

5. Another effect of less eating is the ease of worshipping rather
servitude, because, the one who is used to less eating will save a lot
of time which otherwise must have been spent for making arrangements,
purchasing, cooking, consuming, and relieving, as well as time spent for
medical treatment, since in many cases the sickness is the cause of
over-eating. Therefore, he will utilize all this available time in
worship and servitude; in addition to that he will free himself from the
hardships of arranging good foods and medical treatments, which means
that he will be having more free time as well as more ease and comfort.

6. Another effect of less eating is the financial ability of a person to
spend for charity, benevolence, pilgrimage, and other acts of worship
which require expenses, because, a lot of expenses spent only for
providing unnecessary food items or for medical treatment as a result of
over-eating, could be utilized for the above-mentioned worships. The
advantages described are so vast in scope that the faculty of reason is
helpless to describe their profundities.

Especially, the prime advantages are purity of heart, sharpness of mind
and thinking, because, thinking is tantamount to ultimate result while
our other actions and deeds are tantamount to preliminaries. Even
thinking or meditating in itself is spiritual journey while the other
actions and deeds constitute the preliminaries and background of this
spiritual journey. It is in this background that the narration says:

*“Meditating for even a single second is better than worshipping for
seventy years.”*

With the above-mentioned introduction we may see the numerous advantages
and important points including:

1. One can discover with certainty that why Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), treats his guests with hunger. Is not hunger is the best means
of attaining His knowledge, nearness, and countenance? Are not Allah's
knowledge, nearness and countenance the most dearest and esteemed
things?

2. It also becomes clearly explicit that fasting is not a divine
obligation, rather is a invitation for attaining divine ceremonies,
whose requirement is a divine Grace bestowed upon us for which we must
be thankful to Allah. Awareness of this point makes clear the divine
proclamation in the following verse:

***“O' ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you, even as it was
prescribed for those before you, that you may ward off (evil).”***

- Holy Qur'an (2:183)

is a proclamation, extremely honourable, esteemed, distinguished, and
sweet, because, it is an invitation to sit upon the table full of His
generosity and to attain the sacred spiritual station of His union
*(wasal)* and countenance *(laq'a)*.

3. Realization of the fact that the wisdom behind the indispensability
of fasting that is less eating, is to weaken the sinful sensual
passions; therefore, we should not indulge in over-eating and consuming
more food than the daily requirements after fast-breaking *(iftar)*,
thus, in this manner making the fasting and hunger of the whole day as
useless.

4. Awareness about the merits and advantages of fasting would reveal
that in order to observe it properly with devotion, we must make our
best efforts so that we are not deprived from utilizing its vast
benefits.

5. Pondering about the indispensability of fasting would reveal things,
which enhance the value and worth of fasting, things which decrease its
worth, and things which contradict and oppose fasting. It is from these
considerations that the meanings of the following tradition can be
appreciated, which says:

*“Fasting is not only renunciation of food and drink, while observing
fasting your flesh, eyes, tongue, and in accordance with certain
traditions even skin and hairs must observe fasting and must remain
pious and ascetic.”*

6. The above explanation would also reveal that our aim and objective
for fasting should not be either for the sake of freedom from Hell's
punishment or for receiving the bounties of Paradise, even though both
of these objectives are achieved through fasting. Rather our aim and
intention from fasting should be that this deed would make us closer to
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), thus, helping us attaining union with
Him. It would lead a human being farther apart from bodily sensual
desires and would make him closer to angelic and spiritual virtues.

Pondering about the above-mentioned explanation would reveal that, since
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), has invited us for His benevolence,
any sort of talk, action, and behavior which would make us farther away
from divine presence, would be indicative of negligence on our part, and
would not be complimentary to that.

Therefore, from these considerations we should not like and approve it,
because, sitting in this state upon the table of blessing of the One who
has invited us and is knowledgeable about all our thinking, thoughts,
and plans while He is caring about us and we are naive towards Him, He
is remembering us while we are negligent towards Him, and He is looking
towards us while we are turning our faces away from Him, of course,
would be impolite and rude, and no wise person would tolerate such
behavior from any of his friends.

But Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), because of His special grace and
favours towards His bondsman, has not considered these indecent
behaviours and inexcusable negligence as forbidden *(haram)* and
considering this negligence factor, has assigned obligations for His
bondman which are far lesser in magnitude than their capacities. For the
sake of their ease, have allowed them to observe only parts of
obligations as much as they may, and has overlooked the portions not
performed by them.

However, on the other hand, His great devoted servants don't allow
themselves to behave in this manner with their Lord, rather in every
deed whether compulsory or forbidden, act in a manner which suits with
their servitude and bondage as well as is decent enough for the Divinity
and Splendour of their Lord, and those who show negligence in this path,
and do not care about the rights of their bondage and the divinity of
their creator are regarded by them as damned and destitute.

Regarding fasting, what conditions Imam al-Sadiq [a][^3]considers
essential for the authenticity of fasting, some of them would be
described here as follows:

*“The fast observer should consider himself as Hereafter's traveller,
should remain in the state of humility, fear, self-degradation, and like
a servant fearing his master, should remain afraid of Allah; his heart
should remain pure from defects and contamination, and his inner-self
should be free from everything except Allah; must sacrifice his entire
friendship and intentions for Him and must purify his heart from all
other friendships except Allah's; must surrender his eyes and soul to
Him; must commit his soul for His remembrance; must utilize his body in
Allah's path and must keep it distant apart especially the tongue from
all sorts of sins and indecencies. Whoever has observed these
limitations had indeed discharged his obligations of fasting properly,
and whoever has shown negligence to discharge these obligations has
wasted his fast and would not be benefited from its reward.”*

We must think about musts which Imam al-Sadiq [a] in this narration has
considered essential for a fast observer, so that we may appreciate the
advantages and blessings incorporated therein. For example, a fast
observer who consider himself as a Hereafter's traveller - a traveller
who is nearing his final destination - obviously will not be interested
in worldly allurements, and will not pay attention towards anything
except collection of provisions for his eternal journey. Or for example,
a fast observer who is in a state of humility and heart-brokenness would
not be interested in anything, except attaching himself to Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), and would be pleased with His remembrance.

And the fast observer who has surrendered his body and soul absolutely
to Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), wouldn't care for anything except
Him, inevitably his soul and body, self and conscience, and his entire
existence would be filled with Allah's remembrance, love, worship, and
servitude. And the fasting of someone like him is the fasting of
favourites. (I swear by Allah in the name of His favourite and friends
that may He bless us with the grace of undertaking such a fast at least
once in lifetime).

2. Types of Fasting
-------------------

There are three types of fasting:

1. The fasting of commons, which is the renunciation of eating and
drinking, and observance of other fasting requirements as described in
the Books of Jurisprudence.

2. The fasting of nobles, which in addition to the above also includes
renunciation of sins i.e. controlling eyes, ears, tongue, and other
bodily parts from sinning and transgression.

3. The fasting of most distinguished nobles which in addition to the
renunciation of the above also includes relinquishment of everything, be
it permissible or forbidden, which makes mind and conscience negligent
from Allah's remembrance.

Of course, it must be understood that even the fasting of noble and the
fasting of most distinguished notables in itself contains infinite
degrees and ranks, i.e. like the believers containing various degrees
and ranks in accordance with their piety and asceticism, inevitably
their fasting too will differ on the basis of the magnitude of their
piety and asceticism. Considering that each believer possesses a
particular degree of faith and piety, it could be said that faith,
piety, and fasting have as much as ranks and degrees as there are the
number of believers.

3. Classification of Fast observers On the Basis of Their Aims and Intentions
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

As described earlier that fasting can be classified into three
categories in accordance with renunciation of things; on the basis of
aims and intentions, fasting may be classified into five categories as
follows:

1. A group of people observe fasting without having particular aim and
intention which could be the basis of correctness of their deeds and
accordingly could prevent their deeds from becoming nullified. For
example, some might observe fasting, because of fear from the people, or
for the sake of their material and worldly benefits, or may observe
fasting because of prevailing habits among Muslims. Some observe fasting
in order to remain immune from people's persecution as well as not to
remain deprived from material gains and advantages obtained through
intermingling with the community.

2. A group of people observe fasting in order to remain immune from
peoples persecution, as well as not to remain deprived from material
advantages obtained through social intermingling; in order to remain
immune from Hell's punishments as well as not to be deprived from the
bounties of Paradise.

3. Another group observe fasting only for the sake of immunity from
Hell's punishment, or for utilization of Heavenly bounties, or for the
sake of both.

4. Another group observe fasting for the sake of immunity from Hell's
punishment as well as to be blessed with Heavenly bounties, but in
addition to that, also to seek Allah's pleasure and nearness.

5. In the end there is a group who observe fasting and does not have any
other intention and aim except Allah's pleasure and nearness. They
observe fast only in order to become closer to Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), and to attain the position of His consent.

4. Special Fasting - the Affairs of Allah's Favourite Saints
------------------------------------------------------------

It has been narrated that fasting carries still further higher ranks,
and that is the fasting of those who observe fasting and worship only
because they consider, Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), as worthy of
worshipping. They do not have any intention and objective in their
fasting and worshipping, even the aim and intention of becoming nearer
to Him and attaining His pleasure and countenance. They consider even
worshipping and fasting with the intention of Allah's countenance and
nearness as incomplete, and I myself have seen someone like this who
considered such worships and deeds as worshipping of self or egotism.

It seems that their thinking is not acceptable, and I don't believe that
there is any prophet, imam, or favourite angel whose deeds and worships
would be based solely upon his belief that Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), deserves worshipping and in none of his deeds wouldn't have
desired even attaining Allah's nearness and countenance . And if, some
of the mystics considered worshipping with the intention of Allah's
nearness and attaining His countenance as self-worshipping or egotism
they have acted extravagantly with exaggeration.

Of course, it must be understood that occasionally a situation arises
for mystics and saints, whereby their worships, actions, and even
intentions are not for the sake of attaining Allah's nearness or
countenance rather they do it because, they consider Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), as worthy of worshipping. But, I don't believe
that continuation of this situation permanently would be possible for
any of the prophets what to say about others.

And I don't prefer even worship with this intention, over the worship
performed for the sake of attaining Allah's nearness and countenance.
How could I prefer such a worship because, I do not know any worship
superior than the worship's of the Holy Prophet [s] and Commander of the
Faithful Imam 'Ali [a], which in accordance with various traditions, in
most of the cases, were performed with the sole intention of attaining
Allah's countenance and pleasure.

Even, I can go further deeper and say that it is not far away from
reality that maybe some of the times the worships of these nobles might
have been performed with the intention of fear from divine punishment.
And why shouldn't it be so? Is it possible that someone's intensity of
fear from divine punishment be so severe that whenever he would think
about Hell would result in his fainting?[^4]  
 Then how come such severe fear wouldn't be effective in his actions and
worships? I believe that if such a thing is not impossible, it is far
away from being accepted.

I may even say that the situations of divine prophets and saints
including their Lord and Master the Prophet of Islam differ
significantly, and the reason of this difference is due to the
respective manifestations of the glory of Allah's sacred names upon
them. At times, when the sacred names of Allah's beauty were manifested
upon them they become infatuated with His love, sought comfort in His
love and affection, behaved like a lover uttering amorous words, did not
desire any thing other than Him, and even sometimes behaved in affected
manners. And when the sacred divine names of Allah's glory and wrath
were manifested upon them they were engulfed with fear and anxiety,
trembled and shed tears, recited phrase of repentance upon their tongue,
mentioned their humility and neediness, besought him for His forgiveness
and pardon, and requested immunity against divine punishments and Hell's
fire.

The reason of such manifestations was divine orders and expediency so
that these Allah's noble creatures could be trained in this manner, may
be promoted to higher Exalted spiritual stations, and could attain His
nearness. Yes! The spiritual training and spiritual positions of those
noble personalities were in Allah's hand, and He himself with such
manifestations has carried them upward towards meaningful perfection and
Exalted spiritual positions. Didn't we recite in the comprehensive
prayer *(Ziyarat al-Jamiah)*:[^5]

*“O' my Masters! Allah's with alternative manifestations of fear and
hope (i.e. by revealing His wrath, glory, and beauty), has taken over
the control of your heart's training and asceticism in His own hands.”*

Yes! The difference in the lifestyles of divine messengers and saints is
a matter, which is confirmed by narrations, and anyone who has
undertaken some research about the traditions regarding their
biographies would be able to appreciate this matter easily. For example:
regarding the Holy Prophet [s] it has been reported in traditions that
he sometimes said:

*“O' Humera (Ayesha)!”*

And called Ayesha for companionship or talking, while on the other hand
he kept awaiting for prayer time and said to Bilal:

*“Comfort me, O' Bilal! (by calling for prayers).”*

Sometimes, when revelation were descended upon him, the colour of his
face used to change, even he used to be scared during windstorms fearing
divine retributions. Does not this explicitly indicate the variations in
the behavior of that noble personality? And if it so, how can it be
accepted that in all his worships and obedience he does not have any aim
except considering Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), as worthy of
worship?

The above discussion proves this point that those who said that - the
worship should be performed with the only intention that He (Allah) is
worthy of worship - is an statement which cannot be accepted, even if it
was uttered by the great scholars and mystics with the exception that,
those noble ones, with these words would have pursued a matter which is
in agreement with their intention of achieving Allah's nearness.

Because, the aim of attaining nearness of the Supreme Reality or
Beloved's countenance could be possible without the heart's infatuation
with Paradise or fear from Hell's tortures, rather with the intention of
considering Him worthy of worship and, thus, striving towards His
nearness. And therefore, performance of worship and deeds with this
intention, in itself is an evidence and the meanings of that worship and
deed, which has been performed with the sole intention of knowing Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), as worthy of adornment as the Commander of
the Faithful Imam \`Ali [a] has said:

*“O' Allah! If I adore you and lower my head in servitude, it is neither
because of the heart's infatuation towards Paradise nor because of fear
from Hell's fire, rather I worship You because I consider you as worthy
of worshipping.”*

The above narration emphasizes the same point because, the noble Imam
has placed the worship due to worthiness only in front of worships for
the sake of greed or fear and not against all other kind of worships
even if performed with the intention of attaining Allah's nearness and
achieving his pleasure.

Yes! I beseech Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), to bestow upon me the
grace, favour, and strength to worship Him with the intention of
attaining His nearness. Furthermore I ask Him to guide us to understand
the correct and proper meanings of His nearness and accordingly should
strive towards its attainment, so that we are not included among those
who consider His nearness as meaningless and impossible. Didn't some of
the exalted scholars and jurisprudents consider, although incorrectly,
Allah's nearness as meaningless? And said that intention of Allah's
nearness could not mean anything except servitude to His commands,
otherwise it would be in contradiction with Allah's attributes.

Also, it should not be forgotten that considering worshipping due to
greed or fear as futile, even if these words are uttered by some of the
learned scholars and gnostics are undesirable and improper, of course,
such negligence and blunders from these noble ones are not in disharmony
with their exalted academic and mystical ranks because, Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), in accordance with His wisdom and expediency
makes them entangled into such negligence and stumbles.

Also, it must be understood that one of the most famous and learned
scholar Sayyid Tawus, in his book Iqbal, has regarded those who worship
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), only due to fear from Hell as low.
According to his own explanation, these are the people who did not
consider Allah as worthy of worship and if there was no fear of Hell,
they would not have worshipped Him at all. Of course, such views as
Sayyid Tawus has explained, are not correct and those who possess this
thinking are indeed low and such Islam and belief are indeed, sick and
contaminated.

Also, this must be clarified that a sincere devotee does not look
towards anything except his beloved, in addition to that from the point
of view of tolerance of hardships, performs the hardest worships, as has
been narrated from the Commander of the Faithful Imam 'Ali [a] that if
there were two deeds carrying the same reward, he would have selected
the harder one. These are the real sincere ones, and may Allah bless
them.

5. Classification of Fast observers On the Basis of Their Food Consumption
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

From the point of view of eating and drinking the fast observers differ
as follows:

The fast observers whose eating and drinking is provided through
forbidden means are like the ones, who carry the burden of things
belonging to others upon their shoulders. The things ultimately reach to
their owner and the exhaustion and fatigue remain with these people. The
reward of fast of such fast observers is given to the real owners of
those eatables or drinks which were illegally consumed by these fast
observers, and for them nothing remains except tyranny, wrath, and
usurpation of people's wealth.

Or they are like those who undertake pilgrimage to Mecca riding upon an
usurped animal, in which case the reward of the Hajj pilgrimage reaches
to the owner of that animal and exhaustion and fatigue remain for the
usurper.

The fast observers whose eating and drinking consist of doubtful
material, (i.e. there being lawful *(halal)*[^6] or unlawful
*(haram)*[^7] is not confirmed), could be further classified into two
groups:

The first group consists of those fast observers whereby the consumption
of such eating and drinking items apparently is lawful *(halal)* for
them.

The second group consists of those whose consumption of such eating and
drinking items apparently is not lawful *(haram)*. These people, with
slight variation, are similar to those fast observers whose eating and
drinking is provided by unlawful *(haram)* means.

The fast observers whose eating and drinking consist of lawful *(halal)*
means, but are excessive in their consumption in quality as well as in
quantity. That is they fill their tablecloth with colourful delicious
dishes at dawn *(Suhur)* and at the time of fast breaking *(iftar)*, and
in their consumption of these foods indulge in over-eating.

Their story resembles that of a low ambitious miserly person who in the
presence of his beloved amuses himself with something else, while his
beloved desires that his lover should pay attention only towards him,
and should enjoy his companionship. Such low ambitious miserly ones do
not possess the decency and worthiness to be invited for the union with
their beloved, they deserve only to be amused in their petty amusements.
Because, these are the slaves of their stomachs and not the bondsman of
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted). It would be more appropriate to
consider them as worshippers of belly instead of calling them as Allah's
worshippers.

The fast observers, who in their qualitative and quantitative
consumption of eatables go further deeper as compared to the previous
group, reaching to the level of extravagance. Their situation is similar
to those fast observers whose eating and drinking consist of unlawful
*(haram)* means because, lavishness and extravagance is forbidden and is
tantamount to a sin. Therefore, it would be more appropriate to consider
them as disobedient and sinners, instead of knowing them as obedient
bondsman of Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted).

5. The fast observers whose eating and drinking as well as their level
of consumption consist of lawful *(halal)* and is permissible; are not
indulged in any sort of waste and extravagance; neither they fill their
tablecloth with colourful delicious dishes nor they practice over-eating
and belly-filling; limit themselves to consume only a single food and
abstain themselves from eating with the intention of enjoyment; Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), will reward them with best of His bounties;
with His infinite generosity will bless them, and no one knows or could
imagine what sort of special rewards have been accumulated for them by
Him.

6. Classification of Fast observers On the Basis of Eating at Dawn (Suhur) and Fast-breaking (Iftar)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fast observers from the point of view of their intention *(niyyat)* for
eating at dawn *(Suhur)* and fast breaking *(iftar)* may be classified
as follows:

1. Those who do not make any special intention for eating *Suhur* and
*iftar* and simply eat to enjoy the food taste as well as to make up for
the hunger during the fasting.

2. Those who eat *Suhur* and *iftar* with the intention of enjoying the
food taste and make up for the hunger, but at the same time with the
intention that eating *Suhur* and *iftar* are recommended *(mustahab)*
and help a person in his worshipping.

3. Those who eat *Suhur* and *iftar* because, it is recommended, Allah
likes it, and it helps a person in worshipping, but in addition to that
also pay due regard to special etiquette and instructions about *Suhur*
and *iftar* - etiquette such as recital of Holy Qur'an, engaging in
special supplications before, after, and during *Suhur* and *iftar*, and
praising and thanking Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted).

7. Etiquette of Eating at Dawn (Suhur) and Fast-breaking (Iftar)
----------------------------------------------------------------

One of the most important etiquette and instruction is the recital of
Surah al-Qadr (Power) before taking *Suhur* and *iftar* as well as
recital of illustrious and illuminated supplication:

***“Allahuma rabb al-nur al-'adheem”*** (Allah is the possessor of great
illumination)

which has been given book of Iqbal written by the most esteemed and
famous scholar Sayyid ibn Tawus. About this supplication it has been
narrated from Imam al-Sadiq [a] that the Holy Prophet [s] has
recommended recital of this prayer to Commander of the Faithful [s] Imam
'Ali [a] and said that Archangel Gabriel came to me and said:

*“Whoever in the Holy Month of Ramadhan before iftar recites this
prayer, Allah answers his prayer, accepts his prayer and fasting, grants
his ten requirements, forgives his sins, removes his grief, makes his
heart at ease, grants his wishes, makes his deeds to ascend upward with
the deeds of prophets and righteous saints, and on the Day of Judgement
brings him to His presence with a face illuminated like bright moon.”*

### Comment

It becomes conspicuous from the narrations that fasting does not mean
only abstinence from eating and drinking rather it also means
renunciation of sins. Because, some of the sins like backbiting, lying,
lustful sight, cursing, and oppression - be it less or more - would
break the fast like the eating and drinking.

Therefore, it is up to the fast observers to abstain from all the above,
and during fast must endeavour so that eye, ear, tongue, hands, feet,
and other bodily parts all together must observe fasting and should
abstain themselves from performance of those acts which should not be
performed, even they should avoid over-talking and should practice
silence lest their fasting days do not have any difference with other
days except eating and drinking, and they should not forget the words of
the Holy Prophet [s], who has said:

*“Renunciation of eating and drinking is the easiest thing - which has
been made compulsory upon the fast observers.”*

And if, the scholars and jurisprudents consider the fasting of someone
who has committed a portion of these sins - as correct, it is from this
consideration that what they meant with this correctness of this fast is
from the point of view of make up fasting (i.e. for some one, like this,
it is not obligatory that after the Holy Month of Ramadhan he must
repeat these fasts as makeup fasting).

But what is meant with the correctness of fasting in traditions is -
their acceptance by Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted). And in many cases
a fast observer may undertake a fast in such a manner that in accordance
with the religious decrees of a jurisprudent it would not be obligatory
upon him to offer make-up *(qadha)* fast, but it may be that such fast
would not have been acceptable by Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted).

The correct and perfect fast which Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted),
has made obligatory for the self-perfection and spiritual ascent of fast
observers, inevitably must be accompanied with abstinence from all
bodily sins. Apart from that it would be much better if the fast
observer in addition to renunciation of bodily sins should also practice
abstinence from sins of the heart, i.e. should prevent the heart from
any other remembrance except Allah's, and should renounce everything
except Allah which is the most superior and esteemed fast.

Some one who has truly discovered the reality, virtues, and wisdom of
fasting inevitably should abstain from all sort of sins and
transgression for the sake of fast's acceptance, otherwise on the
Judgement Day he would be questioned why his eyes, ears, tongue, and
other bodily parts did not observe fasting? And simply quitting eating
and drinking which would relieve him from undertaking make-up fasting
*(qadha)* in this world, would not make him immune from scrutiny and
Allah's punishment on the Judgement Day.

[^1]: The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali ibn Abu Talib [a]: was the
first perfect exemplar of the teachings of the Most Noble Messenger [s].
'Ali was raised by him from early childhood and followed him like a
shadow until the very end of the latter's life. He was like a moth
before the prophetic flame; the final moment when he was separated from
the Most Noble Messenger [s] was when he embraced his corpse and laid it
to rest. 'Ali [a] was the first person after the Most Noble Messenger
[s] to approach spiritual realities in the manner of philosophical
reflection, that is, by free exercise of reason. He used many technical
terms and laid out and organized the rules of Arabic grammar in order to
protect the Holy Qur'an from copyist's errors. The exact scholarship,
spiritual culture, and consideration of ethical, social, political, and
even mathematical problems shown in 'Ali's [a] discourses, letters, and
other documents that have reached us are astonishing. The wealth of
these documents makes 'Ali [a] the best known individual among Muslims
to have a full realization of the sublime goals of the Holy Qur'an and
the critical and practical concepts of Islam as they should be realized.
They testify to the soundness of the prophetic saying: “I am the city of
knowledge, and 'Ali is its gate.” Furthermore, he combined this
knowledge with action. In short, 'Ali's outstanding character is beyond
description, and his virtues are innumerable. Never in history has
someone's character drawn the attention of the world's scholars and
thinkers to such an extent [Tr].

[^2]: dhikr: inducing or maintaining a state of Allah's awareness,
especially by means of vocal or silent recitation of his Supreme Names.
For details see Ayatullah Ibrahim Amini's Book: Self Building, pp.
277-284 [Tr].

[^3]: Imam al-Sadiq [a] (83/699-148/765): the son of the fifth Imam, he
lived in an increasingly favourable climate and was able to teach openly
in Madina. Large numbers of scholars gathered around him to learn,
including such famous Sunni figures as Imam Abu Hanifah, the founder of
the one of the four Sunni schools of law. Towards the end of Imam
Ja'far's life severe restrictions were placed upon his activities, as a
result of growing Shi'ite unrest. More traditions are recorded from him
than from all the other Imams together. He is so important for
Twelve-Imam Shi'ite law that it is named the Ja'fari School after him.
He is buried in the Baqi Cemetery in Madina. Ja'far's fame for religious
learning was great, greater than that of his father or of any other
Twelver Imam except for 'Ali bin Abu Talib [a] himself, perhaps the
earliest historical reference presenting Ja'far as one of the most
respected and highly esteemed personalities of his epoch, and as having
profound knowledge and learning, is Ya'qubi's statement that it was
customary for scholars who related anything from him to say: “the
learned one informed us”. Even the famous jurist of Medina, Imam Malik
bin Anas, is reported to have said, when quoting Ja'far's traditions:
“the Thiqa (truthful) himself told me that...” Similar compliments for
Ja'far are attributed to the Imam Imam Abu Hanifah, who is also reported
to have been his pupil. Al-Sadiq's [a] knowledge was great in religion
and culture, he was fully informed in Philosophy, he attained great
piety in the world, and he abstained entirely from lusts. He lived in
Madina long enough to greatly profit the sect that followed him, and to
give his friends the advantage of the hidden sciences [Tr].

[^4]: Some of the Islamic traditions about some of the Sinless Imams [a]
have mentioned that while remembering Hell's horrible punishments they
fainted, [Author].

[^5]: For Ziyarat al-Jamiah refer to the book Prayers and Supplications
selected from Mafatih al-Jinan, Zad ul-M'ad and Almanac p. 654 [Tr]

[^6]: Halal: things which are allowable by religious law.[Tr]

[^7]: Haram: categorically forbidden by religious law [Tr].


