The Splendour and Eminence of Supplications Compiled by the Ahlul-Bait [a]
==========================================================================

Also, it would be appropriate to ponder about the narrations regarding
supplications, as well as to think about the ways and manners of
supplications as practised by the sinless Imams [a]; must take a
profound look at the exalted themes and subtle meanings which are
contained in the supplications compiled by those honourable ones. In
order to discover that whatever these impeccable ones have incorporated
in their supplications regarding Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), His
Sacred Names, Characteristics, Glory, and Splendour is far deeper than
what could be imagined by human thinking and comprehension.

One will discover what sort of beauty and elegance have been shown by
them in their etiquette of servanthood; what have been uttered by them
regarding the Splendour and Glory of Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted);
in what pleasing manners they had asked him for forgiveness and
blessings, and by what excuses had pleaded Him for bestowing His love,
mercy, benevolence and blessings?

I can swear to my own soul that these exalted themes and sweet pleasing
manners of these supplications, are the most explicit manifestation of
miracle, proving the authenticity of divine mission of these sinless
Imams [a]. And the one who possesses some sense of thinking and some
degree of understanding in his heart, if will ponder about these
supplications, would certainly accept their vicegerency *(Imamat)*[^1]
without requiring any further proof and miracle.

And the one who desires to appreciate more about the splendour,
eminence, and sweetness of these supplication should engage himself in
supplications; without copying from their supplications should compile
his own prayer; then he should compare it with the supplications of
those noble ones, in order to discover the limits of variation between
his own and theirs.

Yes! The aware and enlightened ones who dare to swim in this fathomless
ocean of these supplications and with a penetrating eye ponder about
their profundities will discover that what sort of learning and sublime
realities, to the extent of miracles have been incorporated in their
supplications by the sinless Imams [a].

I myself have not seen even one tenth, rather one hundredth of realities
and learning (which have been incorporated in these supplications), in
other speeches of those noble ones, even did not find them in narrations
and lengthy sermons. (Of course, with the exception of some narrations
which deal with communications with Allah, monotheism, praise, and
worship).

The mystery of this variation could be that those honourable ones in
their narrations had spoken with the people while in their supplications
and hymns have spoken with Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted). Obviously,
the degree of speech, its culmination, and descent depends upon the
degree of intelligence and comprehension of the addressee; the delicate
and sensitive points which are spoken before an aware and knowledgeable
addressee are not spoken before some one who lacks these
characteristics.

Yes! These supplications, reached to us through Sinless Imams of the
Prophet's Ahlul-Bait [a] as though form the complete reflection, or echo
of whatever is contained in the Holy Qur'an. Or in other words these
supplications constitute on Ascending-Qur'an in front of a
Descending-Qur'an. The later is the holy scripture which was revealed by
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), to his esteemed servant - Prophet
Muhammad [s], while the former constitutes the Qur'an from Allah's most
distinguished servants, ascending upward towards Him. While the Qur'an
is Allah's communications and candid words with his esteemed servants;
these supplications are a communication of Allah's esteemed servant with
Him, and this matter is not accepted and comprehended by any one, except
a small number of believers who are thoroughly familiar and enlightened.

Also, it should be emphasized that the sinless Imams [a] through these
supplications have done a great favour to us by leaving such precious
souvenirs - the souvenirs and blessings, for which we are helpless to
thank; it is our obligation to appreciate their worth; in our actions
must utilize the etiquette and proper manners as recommended by them;
and must try with best of our abilities lest we act as unthankful and
unappreciative of truth.

1. Etiquette of the Holy Qur'an and Supplications
-------------------------------------------------

As far as the Holy Month of Ramadhan is a month of Qur'an and
supplications, it will be appropriate to include some of the
instructions and etiquette of recital of the Holy Qur'an and
supplications leaving details at their own place, and since the Holy
Qur'an has priority and preference over supplications, firstly the
etiquette of Qur'anic recital shall be explained:

2. Etiquette of Recital of the Holy Qur'an
------------------------------------------

As Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), has said in the following verse:

***“Will they then not meditate on the Qur'an, or are there locks on the
hearts.”***

- Holy Qur'an (47:24).

Those who do not ponder over the Holy Qur'an have been reprimanded
severely. The first and important instruction and etiquette of Qur'anic
recital is deliberation and pondering of the recited verse, because
whoever will recite the Holy Qur'an with deliberations inevitably with
discover the splendour and majesty of Qur'an and its bearer, and its
meanings and contents to the extent of his deliberation and pondering.

And this awareness and understanding will become a cause which would
enable him to keep his mind and conscience away from scattered thinking
during recital; thus, increasing understanding about the meanings and
objectives of the Holy Qur'an in his deliberations. He should renounce
whatever acts as obstacles in closing the path of understanding, and
whatever positive and negative commands, advice, and exhortations are
encountered by him must regards them as though all of them have been
revealed especially for him.

It is at this injunctive that deliberations and pondering about the Holy
Qur'an will have influence upon him and would excite his mind and soul
and it is after this experience that he will find access inside the
worlds of beauty and illumination, thus, ascending towards higher
spiritual positions. These are some of the instructions and etiquette of
recital of the Holy Qur'an, some of them are mandatory while others if
not compulsory are indeed precious and esteemed.

3. Understanding of Meanings of the Holy Qur'an
-----------------------------------------------

About the understanding of Meanings of the Holy Qur'an, in a nutshell it
may be said that it should be understood that the reality of Qur'an is
something behind these phrases written on the paper, seen by our eyes,
recited by the tongue, and heard by the ears; it is a light from Allah's
celestial illumination, which has reflection, glory, and manifestation
for all the worlds of existence, whose every reflection and
manifestation contain special effects.

In the Hereafter, it will be manifested in a form similar to the faces
of prophets, angels, and favourite saints, would speak in the same form
and would intercede before Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted). In summary
it is a glory from Allah's Glories and a manifestation from Allah's
Manifestations. (These are the points which have been emphasized in the
traditions of sinless Imams [a] - who themselves are the guardian,
companion, and equivalent of the Holy Qur'an). In some aspects, as is
evident from the following quotations from the Commander of the Faithful
Imam 'Ali [a]:

*“I am the speaking Qur'an.”*

The reality of Qur'an is similar to the reality of the existence of the
Holy Prophet [s] and the sinless Imams [a] of his Ahlul-Bait. Yes! The
Holy Qur'an possesses a reality so much higher and exalted which cannot
be reached through our limited and insignificant amount of knowledge, as
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), Himself has mentioned in the Holy
Qur'an:

***“Which none toucheth save the purified.”***

- Holy Qur'an (56:79).

Since, the understanding of Qur'an's reality, would lead to the
understanding of its grandeur, understanding of its grandeur will
manifest the Splendour and Majesty of its Descender (i.e. Allah); the
one who will comprehend all the above, will keep his mind free from all
sorts of scattered thoughts during recital of the Holy Qur'an, will
ponder and deliberate about the meaning of each phrase and sentence in
order to discover their meanings and goals; and the one who will do so,
will earn plenty of goodness and a lot of advantage. He would acquire
plenty of knowledge because the Holy Qur'an is an illumination which
takes out its followers from the darkness and thus, leading them towards
light, Allah's pleasure, and straight path of belief and mysticism. As
the Holy Qur'an describes it:

***“The scripture which is an exposition, to all things.”***

- Holy Qur'an (16:89).

And said:

***“Not a leaf falleth but He knoweth it, not a grain amid the darkness
of the earth, naught of wet or dry, but (it is noted ) in a clear
record.”***

- Holy Qur'an (6:59).

4 How to Think and Deliberate Over the Holy Qur'an
--------------------------------------------------

It would be appropriate to present an example for showing the method of
deliberation over the Qur'an and understanding its meaning. For example,
someone who recites the following verse:

***“Have you observed the water which ye drink?”***

- Holy Qur'an (56:68).

Should not limit himself only to think about the phrase water and its
apparent meanings and taste, rather should ponder about it from various
dimensions. For example: He should pause and think all the plants of
various colours, different species of animals which are found in this
world all have been created by this water. He must think about the human
being who has been created with water; in addition to his having
apparent visible capabilities such as eyes, ears, and tongue also
possesses inner-self and strange inner-power so much astonishing that it
could help ascend him towards the most higher sublime spiritual
stations.

He must ponder that this same man created by water possesses an
inner-self so marvellous, astonishing, and vast as though the entire
world of creation has been miniatured in his inner-self; it is from this
consideration that he is regarded as a separate entity called a
smaller-world *(jahan al-asghar)* as compared to the world of creation
which is called the greater-world *(jahan al-akbar)*. And in accordance
to a more delicate and sophisticated interpretation a human being
represents a greater-world as compared to the world of creation being a
smaller-world.

Then he must ponder that the water which is needed by all the plants,
animals, and human beings, in itself, as told in the Holy Qur'an is a
manifestation of Allah's blessing. Further he should think that Allah's
blessing is His characteristic which cannot be separated from His Holy
Essence, which would make him aware that Allah is the fountain-head and
source of all things. Such deliberations are the basis and background of
attaining spiritual contemplation *(shahud)*[^2] and I believe that
whoever will deliberate about every thing in this manner, would be able
to test the following tradition narrated by Imam al-Sadiq [a] and its
truth would become explicitly clear.

*“I never saw a thing but saw Allah, before, after, and with it.”*

Another method which should be mentioned is that: it would be
appropriate if the reciter of the holy scripture should deliberate and
pause more and more in order to comprehend the meanings and objectives
of this great heavenly book more profoundly as follows:

A. One of the method is to deliberate about the lifestyles of prophets.
We know that those noble ones in spite of possessing all those sublime
spiritual positions and Allah's nearness were inflicted with severe
hardships and difficulties in their personal lives. On the one hand they
were inflicted with hardships like poverty and sicknesses, while on the
other hand they were confronted with severe enmity and assaults from
their enemies, who not only persecuted them through cursing, slandering,
and impeaching but also tortured and even executed. And in this manner
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), trained them through infliction of
different types of calamities, to the extent that their leader who was
the beloved and most dearest of Allah had to say:

**“None of the prophet was tortured and suffered like me.”**

If, the reciter of the Holy Qur'an ponders about the suffering and
torture of the divine prophets, he will discover the following
constructive points:

• that the Majesty, Splendour, and Magnanimity of Allah are so great
that noble personalities of prophets in spite of their possessing all
that dignity and grandeur are humbled before the divine will and wisdom
and no one could dare to criticise Him.

• that because of obedience and worship (offered by him) should not
expect that Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), will do things according
to his desire, or worst than that he might expect such a thing
compulsory upon Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted).

• that if he is inflicted with poverty, diseases, and other hardships in
his life, he should never feel hopeless from receiving Allah's blessings
and favours.

• that one should never reprimand a believer because of being inflicted
with calamities.

• that one should never regard a believer as insignificant, because, of
his being in a state of poverty and possessing nothing; may be his
poverty and destitution could be an indication of his greatness
*(karamat)*.

• that the world is quite insignificant and worthless before Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), and accordingly he too should not regard the
world as great and should never feel sorry and unhappy from loosing it.

• that inclination of world towards a person will be indication of his
being distant from the privileged spiritual station of Allah's nearness,
and world's disinclination towards a person would be an indication of
his righteousness and salvation, as it was revealed to Prophet Moses
[a]:

*“Whenever poverty comes to you say: O' the indication of righteous ones
welcome! And whenever wealth approaches you say: the penalty of sins has
arrived before their commitment.”*

B. The other examples upon which he must deliberate are the penalties,
punishment, and divine limits which have been prescribed in the holy
scripture and *shari'a* for the sinners. For example, he must ponder
that the divine punishment for theft of even one fourth Dinar - which
apparently is an insignificant sin - is cutting of hand.

Therefore, he will realize how much Allah's wrath and punishments,
transgression against Allah's commands through indulgence into major
sins would bring. And therefore, this deliberation would become the
basis for causing his heart fearful of divine wrath and severe
punishments, thus, in order to keep himself immune from them would be
mindful of his speaking and other actions; will try to abstain himself
from the heart's and tongue's sins which are committed by human beings
every day.

C. Another example which must be pondered by reader of the holy
scripture is the life histories and deeds of past generations, who were
destroyed because of divine wrath. Prophet Jesus [a] asked one of them:

*“For which of your deed you have been tormented with such horrible
punishment? He replied: 'we loved the world like a child who loves his
mother, followed the sinners, had little fear and lot of big desires and
spent our lives negligently by indulging into worldly amusements.'
Prophet Jesus asked: 'What was their punishment and destruction?' 'In
the evening they went to their comfortable beds and were struck by
divine wrath', he replied. 'What was it?' the Prophet asked. 'The
fountains of Hell-Fire which engulfed us till the Day of Judgement.' He
replied.*

*Prophet Jesus [a] asked: 'What did you say and hear?' 'We said, if you
return us to the world, we will become righteous and pious and were told
that you are liars', was the reply. When asked: 'How come no one else
except you respond to me?' 'The angels of divine wrath and punishment
closed their mouths with Hell-Fire, and therefore they were not in a
position to open their mouths; and the reason that I am in a position to
speak is - that I did not belong to them and was not with them, but
since I was among them when divine torment struck them, it also engulfed
me; right now, I am sitting at the brink of Hell and don't know what
would happen? Whether I will fall inside it or would be rescued?' he
replied.”*

Therefore, we must ponder about their affairs and must learn a lesson
from them. For example, one of the past nation (ummah) whose fate is a
warning are the “Saturday (sabbath)” companions *(Ashab al-Sabt)* whose
faces, were changed as pigs and monkeys, and were destroyed on account
of divine wrath and punishment. The one who recites their story in the
Holy Qur'an after pondering about their fate must pause and think about
his own affairs, lest his own actions and deeds might be similar to
theirs.

Yes! Such deliberations and pondering were responsible for taking away
comfort and sleep from the eyes of gnostics and righteous ones, and
caused them to recite the following slogan:

*“How can one who is not immune from his tomorrow, sleep comfortably;
one who does not know about his condition the very next morning”*. These
thoughts forced them to look into the mirror repeatedly every day, lest
their face might have became blackened, or metamorphosed due to their
sins.

5. Obstacles in Qur'an's Understanding
--------------------------------------

The reciter of the Holy Qur'an in order to have more and better
understanding of its objectives in addition to above-mentioned
deliberations should also endeavour to remove the obstacles which
prevent its understanding. Otherwise, not only would they not be
benefited from its recital, on the contrary might suffer even losses.
Some of the obstacles which might prevent Qur'an's understanding may be
listed as follows:

It has been said that extreme precaution about the grammar and too much
emphasis that all the words should be pronounced correctly with
precision is something which closes the path of deliberation and
pondering which is a means of understanding Qur'anic objectives, thus,
preventing the reciter from discovering the aims of the holy scripture.

Some of the abject and low characteristics and filthy habits which
results in heart's blackening also make the mind and conscience
incompetent to comprehend Qur'anic meanings and objectives. This point
has been mentioned in the following verse of the Holy Qur'an:

***“Thus doth Allah print on every arrogant, disdainful heart.”***

- Holy Qur'an (15:35).

It means that Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), has sealed the hearts
of tyrants and arrogant people who look upon others in a degrading
manner, and therefore, the path of understanding the realities has been
closed for them. Or, in verses of the Holy Qur'an it has been emphasized
that comprehension and realization of realities belong especially for
those who restrain themselves from sins, and trust in Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted). Yes! Just like the rust makes a mirror dark and
unusable, similarly such sins make the heart rusted and thus, unable to
comprehend the realities.

To consider fallacies as true religion and to take position on the basis
of that prejudice, and rejecting everything as null and void except his
own false belief also closes the path of Qur'anic comprehension. Because
very often it might happen that during Qur'anic recitation, some of its
realities may be manifested for the reciter, thus, the truth becoming
apparent for him, but he did not accept it, because, of its being in
contradiction with his imaginations and beliefs. Or, he may interpret
and explain them in a manner whereby these manifestation will become
harmonious with his fallacies. Such individuals too would remain unable
to discover the Qur'anic realities except that they should clean
themselves from those fallacies.

Limiting the meanings and aims of the Holy Qur'an to their apparent and
exoteric interpretation and treating their commentary *(tafsir)* and
esoteric meanings *(tawil)* as false also closes the path of Qur'anic
understanding and comprehension, thus, making him deprived from the
blessing of discovering the truth.

The one who wants to discover the grandeur and reality of the Holy
Qur'an should read it with deliberations as well as should keep himself
distant from the obstacles which prevent him from comprehension of its
realities. In proportion to his spiritual perfection and attainment of
higher sublime positions, the Qur'anic realities and divine learning
will become manifested upon him; his soul would be able to quench his
thirst from the drink poured by the Glorious Cup, thus, becoming
intoxicated with the joy of attaining spiritual contemplation
(*shahud*).

It is at this injuncture that his heart would accept various reflections
of Qur'anic verses in accordance with their meanings and intentions, and
each verse in proportion to his desires and understanding will produce a
special joy and ecstasy within his heart. Because in that situation he
would feel that every Qur'anic verse has been revealed for his
condition, especially for him and addressed to him. It is from this
consideration that during recital of Qur'anic verses in accordance with
their meanings and realities, each verse will produce different states
in his heart like joy, grief, fear, hope, trust, obedience, consent, and
Monotheism *(Tawhid)* etc.

And those conditions will initiate a relevant response such as, to seek
forgiveness, admittance of guilt, repentance, supplication, thanks,
praise, and recital of 'Allah is Great', or 'There is no god but Allah,'
at the completion of each verse. For example, when he will be overtaken
by fear, he would not find himself in a position to request from Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), the rewards and eternal blessings which
have been promised in the Qur'anic verses for His righteous servants,
instead he would complain about his own calamity and misfortune by
seeking refuge in Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted).

While at other times, when the state of hope will overtake him, with a
heart saturated with an ardent desire and curiosity, he will beseech
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), to bestow upon him the exalted
spiritual stations, especially reserved for His most favourite righteous
gnostics, whereby he could enjoy their enlightened company.

Yes! If the above stages took control of him with perfection (i.e.
without least doubt about Allah's bounties and blessings of revelation),
it would become clearly manifested upon him and would ascend him to such
higher sublime spiritual limits, that in the recital of Qur'anic verses,
he would realize and would be able to see, through the heart's esoteric
eyes that Allah is speaking to him with love and compassion, and invites
and whispers to him with affection.

Here his condition would resemble that of someone who is standing in the
presence of an elderly personality in a state mixed with shame and
humility hearing his words with sincerity and complete devotion. In
case, if he thanked this great blessing with sincerity and accepted the
breezing of this breeze in a manner, it deserves to be, then Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), too would increase His goodness and affection
for him, thus, ascending him higher and higher towards exalted spiritual
stations, so that he would be able to contemplate spiritually the writer
in writings; the speaker in speech; the characteristics in sentences;
and facts and realities in phrases. In this background Sheikh Saduq
(R.A.) in his (Tawhid)[^3] has narrated a tradition from Imam al-Sadiq
[a] as follows:

*“Allah has manifested himself to his servants through His words but
they do not see him.”*

Here it is that he will forget himself, his Qur'anic recital, all other
affairs, and will concentrate all his energy and endeavours to see the
Speaker - the Speaker who has revealed Himself to him through His words.
(I pray to Allah by all pious, immaculate, and near ones to bestow upon
us such an exalted spiritual station.)

[^1]: Imamat: The position of leadership in religious and civil matters
in the Islamic society is known as the Imamate, and its holder is known
as the Imam. It is the belief of Shi'i Muslims that Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted), must have designated an Imam for the people after the
death of the Most Noble Messenger [s] to uphold the culture and laws of
the religion and to guide people on the way of truth. The term Imam as
used in a technical sense in Shi'ism differs from the general usage of
the term in Arabic, where it means “leader” or in Sunni political theory
where it means the caliph himself. As used technically in Shi'ism the
term refers to the person who contains within himself the “Muhammadan
Light” which was handed down through Fatimah al-Zahra [a] the daughter
of the Blessed Prophet [s], and 'Ali [a], the first Imam, to the others,
terminating with the Hidden Imam who is to appear again one day as the
Mahdi. As a result of the presence of this light, the Imam is considered
to be “Sinless” and to possess perfect knowledge of the esoteric as well
as the exoteric order. The Imams are like a chain of light issuing forth
from the “Sun of Prophecy” which is their origin, and yet they are never
separated from that Sun. Whatever is said by them emanates from the same
inviolable treasury of inspired wisdom. Since they are an extension of
the inner reality of the Blessed Prophet [s], their words really go back
to him. That is why their sayings are seen in the Shi'ite perspective as
an extension of the prophetic Hadith, just as the light of their being
is seen as a continuation of the prophetic light. In Shi'ite eyes, the
temporal separation of the Imams from the Blessed Prophet [s] does not
at all affect their essential and inner bond with him or the continuity
of the “Prophetic-light” which is the source of his as well as their
inspired knowledge [Tr].

[^2]: shahud: the witnessing of Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), that
excludes any awareness of self and that takes place through the agency
of Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), himself, not by means of any organ
or vision, whether outer or inner [Tr.].

[^3]: Tawhid: Divine Unity or Monotheism [Tr].


