Etiquette and Codes of Prayer
=============================

In accordance with the faculty of reason and on the basis of Islamic
traditions, prayer too has its etiquette and codes; some of them will be
described here, but firstly it would be appropriate to describe the
realities of prayer as follows:

1. What is Prayer, and What it Ought to Be?
-------------------------------------------

The literary meanings of phrase prayer means requesting in a humble
manner. A little pondering about this definition would reveal:

Because the reality of prayer is requesting and beseeching - an act of
the heart and that is internal - therefore, a prayer which does not come
out from the heart or in other words from a negligent heart in reality,
is not a prayer.

Because prayer is a request in a state of need with humility and is not
like other requests or demands; therefore, a prayer or request which is
not accompanied by need and humility too will be far away from the
reality of prayer.

Since the request and pleading inevitably should be accompanied by hope,
it must be understood that hope is an essential part of a prayer;
therefore, a prayer which is not accompanied by hope or is accompanied
by hopelessness will not be regarded as real prayer.

Since for acceptance of prayer and fulfilment of wants one may trust
only someone Who knows about our genuine wants as well possesses the
power of their being materialized, therefore, the supplicant must have
firm faith in the knowledge and power of Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), to whom he is beseeching for fulfilment of his own needs
through prayer; a firm faith about His knowledge and wisdom as regard to
his needs; as well as His absolute power and authority to grant them.

Since humility and humbleness in front of elderly personalities differ
in accordance with their status, i.e. it may be that what is considered
as humility and humbleness in front of a certain respectful personality
may not be regarded sufficient in front of a very great respectable
personality. And since Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), happens to be
Greater than all the great personalities, therefore, one should do his
utmost to show his humility and humbleness in front of Him. Because
requesting and pleading before such a Magnanimous and Glorious Lord
without his permission and consent would be impolite and stubbornness,
which is in contradiction with obedience and humility.

Therefore, request from Him should not be without His permission;
because of His Love and Benevolence towards His creatures, He had given
us such a permission, and has asked us to present our requirements and
needs at His threshold, and beseech Him for their grant as the Holy
Qur'an says in the following verse:

***“And when My servants question thee concerning Me, then surely I am
nigh. I answer the prayer of the supplicant when he cryeth unto Me. So
let them hear My call and let them trust in Me.”***

- Holy Qur'an (2:186).

Since requesting or begging in reality couldn't be anything other than
goodness and blessing for the supplicant, and because a human being does
not comprehend his real good and bad correctly as Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted), says in the Holy Qur'an:

***“Man prayeth for evil as he prayeth for good.”***

- Holy Qur'an (17:11)

i.e. as he strives for his good and blessing also endeavours for his bad
and evil (in his imagination considering it as good) even though this
goodness might be decorated with evil, as has been narrated in the book
Misbah al-Shari'a as follows:

“There is nothing (to be asked) except Allah's nearness and countenance.
It is up to the supplicant not to open his tongue except for good and
welfare, and should not ask Allah anything other than goodness and
blessing, and should never include harmful requests in his prayers.
Secondly, if the prayer is not granted, he should never be disappointed
and never be suspicious about Allah's promise: 'I answer the prayer of
My servants' and should consider that whatever he has asked in his
prayer unconsciously, might have been harmful and undesirable, because
of this very consideration Allah has not granted it and instead has
stored for him other blessings.”

2. Secret of Non-acceptance of the Prayer of Righteous
------------------------------------------------------

I swear to my own soul that there exists mystery and secret in
non-acceptance of at least some parts of the prayers of the righteous
and impeccable ones, in spite of the fact that Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), has himself promised that He will grant such prayers. Because
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), possesses unlimited mercy and
compassion towards His righteous servants, and this very infinite love
and affection compels Him to keep them immune from whatever constitutes
as bad and evil, even though in their own imaginations they regard it as
something good and a blessing.

The non-acceptance of their supplications and wants is due to divine
expediency beyond our comprehension like the expediency of getting a
child killed through Prophet Khidr [a] - the killing which apparently
from the point of view of the parents was evil and bad, but in reality
was blessing and goodness for them.

Now let us suppose that this mother and father because of their being
unaware of tragic and harmful future happenings would have considered
their son's remaining alive as something good and a blessing for
themselves, and with this intention would have beseeched Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), for their son's life. Then in that case would
the granting of their prayer (with the intention of good and blessing)
be - that their son remains alive and instead of being good and blessed
makes them losers in both the worlds, or he better be killed so that the
parent could be saved from loosing both the words, and instead of him
another righteous son be awarded to them? It is obvious that acceptance
of their prayer could be materialized only through the killing of their
son.

Because a supplicant prays with the intention of achieving goodness,
prosperity, and salvation through this means; in case he did not mention
anything particular in his prayer and, wished for its grant, then it
would be appropriate that he should consider his prosperity and welfare
in whatever is granted by Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted). Now if He
sees and is knowledgeable that whatever is being asked by a supplicant
(unknowingly) would bring nothing except loss and calamity for him; then
in that case the real grant of supplicant's prayer would be not to
accept his prayer, instead to bestow upon him whatever is considered
good and useful for him.

Non-acceptance of such prayer by Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), are
commonly practised among human beings, and very often it happens that
someone would turn down the request of a dear one for the sake of
prudence.

For example, if a sick person mistakenly considers a fatal harmful drug
as health-giving and begs his father to give him that medicine, and the
father being knowledgeable of its fatal harmful effects, would then the
father grant the son's request? Never. And, if he knowingly grants his
son's request by giving him that fatal drug, then in that case wouldn't
he be criticised by the wise people, and wouldn't it be said that the
son requested a health-giving medicine and instead his father gave him a
fatal drug?

Similar is the story of Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), and his
servant, sometimes it may happen that a servant through the means of his
prayer asks something from Allah say wealth and property, because, he
considers it something good for his wellbeing, but since Allah's vast
and infinite wisdom which covers all do's and don'ts relevant to a
servant's life affairs knows that wealth and property do not suit this
servant; knows that increase of wealth for him even though he is not
aware of it would result in his taking distance from truth and reality.

Here it is that Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), because, of his
profound love and compassion towards his servant does not grant the
servant's prayer and instead makes him deprived from the wealth and
property asked by him in his prayer.

Because, if a servant seeks wealth and property through prayer from
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), it is because of this reason that he
regards it as a means of good and prosperity for himself, without being
aware of the fact that his prosperity and welfare lies in his being poor
and destitute instead of being rich and wealthy.

And since Allah, (the Glorious, the Exalted), is knowledgeable about the
fact that wealth and property is not the real grant of his prayer, i.e.,
to bestow upon a servant the blessings which are indeed required for his
prosperity and eternal salvation. The real grant of prayer does not mean
that Allah should bestow upon a servant whatever is desired by him -
even though being aware of the fact - that unknowingly the servant has
asked for a thing which would be harmful and disastrous for him. Or, in
other words the grant of a servant's prayer could be explained as
follows:

In cases where a servant prays for something which would bring good and
prosperity for the servant, the grant of his prayer (by Allah) would
mean to bestow upon him the desired things.

But whereby a servant unknowingly or in his imagination considering it
good for his prosperity, while in reality it is harmful and disastrous
for him asks something from Allah the grant of his prayer would be to
not to grant his prayer, thus, making him deprived from his desired
wants.

The above matter that - occasionally Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted),
grants a supplicants prayer by non-acceptance of his request has been
described in many traditions. Even it has been narrated in some of the
traditions, that Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), because of his love
towards a servant, sometimes not only did not accept his prayer, instead
due to His love, gets the servant occasionally involved into some minor
sins, in order to keep him immune from greater sins like arrogance and
self-conceit which would bring greater calamities upon the servant.

Therefore, whatever Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), decides about a
servant, without least doubt it would bring for him salvation and
prosperity; whatever He does with a servant, even though apparently and
over all may not appear in his favour, but relative to that person's
affairs and characteristics, certainly means goodness and prosperity,
and is executed in accordance with wisdom and prudence. Apart from that,
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), bestows all sorts of favours and
blessings which are useful for His righteous believers and are permitted
by His wisdom and discretion, even though if they do not seek them in
their prayers.

3. Questions and Answers
------------------------

Perhaps acceptance of the above explanation might be a little bit
difficult for some people and they might ask that if such is the case
than what is the benefit of prayer? And what are the meanings of
prayer's acceptance? In reply it must be said: sometimes the action,
deeds, and affairs of a servant are such that divine wisdom dictates to
deprive him from a particular thing because of his deeds and actions.

Here it is that if a servant raises his hands for prayer beseeching from
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), for good and prosperity, then this
same prayer would result in causing the earlier divine discretion which
was to deprive the servant from utilization of a particular blessing to
be changed to other divine discretion, i.e., to allow the servant from
utilization of that particular blessing. Therefore, a prayer might
result in lots of rewards and blessings which were denied before,
because, of our undesirable actions and deeds. In addition to its being
granted by Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), a supplication also
possesses plenty of precious and valuable advantages.

4. Etiquette of Prayer
----------------------

There are special etiquette and instructions for prayer, some of them
will be described here as narrated in the Islamic traditions as follows:

### Being Hopeful towards Allah and Hopeless from Others

One of the etiquette of prayer is that the supplicant for granting of
his prayer and fulfilment of his needs should put his trust only in
Allah and should not look towards anyone except Him. This etiquette has
been described in the following verse of the Holy Qur'an:

***“And call on Him in fear and hope.”***

- Holy Qur'an (7:56).

And now let us refer to some of the Islamic traditions:

In the famous book of al-Kafi as well as in many authentic books the
following tradition has been narrated from Imam al-Sadiq [a] who has
quoted from his father who quoted from the Holy Prophet [s] that Allah
has said to some of the prophets:

*“I swear by My Majesty and Splendour that: whoever puts his hope in
someone other than Me, I will cut off his hope, will dress him in the
robe of disgrace and wretchedness, will deprive him from My nearness,
will cut off communication with him and will hide his memory. Woe be
upon him, who takes shelter in other than Me during difficulties, while
the solution of difficulties rest with Me. Does he hope in others while
I remain living and eternal? Does he go to the homes of human beings for
solution of his problems while the gates of their houses remain closed?
Does he leave the door of My house while its gate remains always open?*

*Was there anyone who trusted Me and was betrayed? The hopes of My
servants are tied to Me, and I take care of their hopes. I have filled
the sky with those who never get tired of My praise, and have ordered
the angels never to close the door between Me and my servants. Does not,
the one who faces the problem know that no one can solve it except with
My permission? Why does not the servant approach Me for his needs, while
I had already blessed him with favours without his asking for them?*

*Why does he not ask me instead of asking others? Does he imagine that
in the beginning I bestow My favours upon the servant and will now
deprive him after his request? Am I miser that My servants regard me as
miserly? Do not the world and Hereafter belong to me? Are not mercy and
benevolence My characteristics? Do not all the desires end with Me? Who
has the power to terminate them?*

*“I swear with My Majesty and Splendour that if all the needs of all of
the world's habitants are summed up, and if I bestow upon them in
accordance to their wants, not even the equivalent to the weight of a
tiny particle will be decreased from My kingdom. Whatever is bestowed by
Me, how could be it susceptible to loss or reduction? How destitute and
wretched is the one who is hopeless* *of My blessings? How helpless is
the one who disobeys me, indulges into forbidden deeds, disregards My
limits and transgresses?”*

In another divine tradition *(hadith al-qudsi)* it has been narrated:

*“Whatever my servant imagines about Me I am exactly like his
imagination, therefore, lest my servant imagine anything except good
about Me.”*

The Prophet [s] has said:

*“Beseech Allah with certainty and hope, and request your wants and
requirements from Him.”*

Imam al-Sadiq [a] has said:

*“Whenever you beseech Allah for granting of your prayer and needs,
imagine that the prayer has been granted and your needs have been
provided.”*

In a tradition it has been narrated that Pharaoh was being drowned he
pleaded for help from Prophet Moses [a] and since he turned down his
request, Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), revealed to him:

*“Oh Moses! You did not help Pharaoh because you were not his creator,
but if he would have called Me for help, without doubt I would have
helped him, after all I happen to be his Creator.”*

Also, there is another famous tradition that when Korah (Qaroon) asked
help from Prophet Moses [a] and did not hear any response, Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), reprimanded him that why he did not help Korah?

*“It has been narrated in a tradition that on the Judgement Day, when
the accounting of deeds is completed, special angels will lead the
servant whose sins are greater than his good deeds towards the Hell.
While in this state the servant turns his face and looks towards his
back, then Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), in spite of being
knowledgeable about him orders to bring him back and asks him, why did
you turn your face backward and look towards Me? O' Allah! I never
imagined, never expected it, and never thought that You will treat me
like this '. Replied the servant.*

*'O' My angels! I swear to my Splendour and Majesty that till he
existed, never had such good expectations towards Me, nevertheless, take
him to Paradise because now he is claiming to have such good
expectations.”*

### Importance of Remaining Hopeful towards Allah

In some of the traditions it has been narrated that whoever expects good
from Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), He too likes to treat him with
goodness and manage his affairs in accordance of his expectations. But
here it must be pointed out that one should not be tricked by Satan, and
incorrectly may regard carelessness, easy going, and slackness in
religious affairs as having good intentions towards Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted).Obviously such interpretation does not have any logical
reasoning and expecting good from Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted),
should never be used to open the ground for carelessness and laxity in
religious affairs.

Otherwise, how come these same people who believe in this fallacy,
through utilization of the excuse - expecting good from Allah - do not
practice easiness and carelessness in their worldly affairs like
endeavouring for earning a living, in spite of the fact that Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), with emphasis and swearing has insured the
sustenance for all living beings, and only it is in the religious or
Hereafter's affairs that the excuse of having good intentions towards
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), is mentioned, thus, showing laziness
and carelessness in performance of their religious obligations?

If they are honest in their saying, and truly trust Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted), and expect good from Him, they should have practised their
same belief in their financial and worldly affairs too. If they would
have a compassionate and kind father financially capable of taking care
of their living expenses, then in that case because of their having firm
trust upon their father's assurance, they would not have been worried
about their living, and certainly would not have bothered to make
efforts and endeavours for earning a living.

Then how it is that they believe so firmly in their father's words for
assuring their sustenace? But do not put their trust and hopes in Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), who has assured in the Holy Qur'an, the
provision of sustenace for all living creatures? Are the compassion,
benevolence, and blessing of Allah lesser than their father's? Or, is He
incompetent in providing the sustenance to His servants? Or, does He
show stinginess in providing sustenance to His servants? Is not Allah,
the most beneficent and compassionate? Are not His benevolence,
blessings, and favours greater than everything and anybody else?

Therefore, those who do not have such good intentions towards Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), in their worldly affairs, should not claim to
have such good intentions in their religious affairs, otherwise, their
claim would be nothing except an excuse for being negligent and easy
going in their religious affairs.

### Abstinence from Sinning - Oppression Against People's Lives, Possessions, and Honour

Another etiquette of prayer is that the supplicant should renounce
sinning, especially transgressions, oppressions, and eating forbidden
*(haram)* things. He should not raise his hand of oppression towards
people's lives, possessions, and prestige, instead should endeavour to
have a pleasing character. Following are some of the traditions in this
regard.

In a divine tradition it has been narrated:

*“From you is the prayer; and it is up to Me to grant it; the prayers of
all supplicants are granted except those who have filled their bellies
with food provided through forbidden (haram) means.”*

The Holy Prophet [s] has narrated:

*“Whoever wishes his prayer be granted by Allah must endeavour to earn
his sustenace through lawful means, i.e., he must restrain himself from
earning his living through fraudulent and forbidden means.”*

Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), has recommended to Prophet Jesus [a]:

*“Say to the oppressors of bani-Israel: Do not beseech Me in the state
of idol-worshipping and usury, because, I have sworn that whoever
beseeches Me I will grant his needs, and My grant for those who are
indulged in idol-worshipping and usury would be nothing except cursing
and damnation for them.”*

It has been narrated from the Holy Prophet [s] that Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted), sent revelation to him:

*“Warn the Islamic community (Ummah) not to congregate inside the mosque
for offering prayer and beseeching Me while being transgressors or
oppressors towards other human beings, in that case till they are busy
in prayers and supplications would only be inflicted with My curse and
damnation, or otherwise they must remove that transgression from
themselves (through obtaining the consent of the oppressed). It is only
after this stage that they will become nearer to me, so that I would
become their eyes and ears, and would make them companions of the
prophets, martyrs, and righteous saints.”*

About the non-acceptance of prayer of someone in bani-Israel it has been
narrated that his prayer was not granted, because, he besought Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted), with a contaminated tongue and heart as
well as with ill intention.

It has been narrated from the Holy Prophet [s]:

*“That whoever beseeches Allah with immodest character is like someone
who wants to shoot the arrows with a chord-less bow.”*

Imam al-Sadiq [a] has said:

*“Allah does not grant the prayer of a sleeping and negligent heart,
therefore, one should pray to Him whole-heartedly, and should beseech
him with attention while being fully awakened, only then a supplicant
should look forward for his prayer being granted.”*

It has been mentioned in a tradition that the prayer of the following is
not granted:

1. “A person who is sitting idle at home, and without making endeavours
for earning a living asks Allah for sustenance through prayer.”

2. Prayer of someone who beseeches Allah to inflict harm upon his fellow
companion.

3. Prayer of someone who is blessed with wealth by Allah and spent it
carelessly in nonsense amusements.

4. Prayer of some one who gives a loan to other party without obtaining
his signature on a document, and in case the recipient of loan denies,
the loan-giver beseeches Allah for the repayment of his money through
prayer.”

It has been narrated in a tradition that:

*“Whoever prays against his neighbours and relatives, or asks forbidden
things (haram) from Allah his prayers are not granted.”*

Also, it has been quoted from the Commander of the Faithful Imam 'Ali
[a]:

*“That while beseeching Allah one should not ask for impossible and
forbidden things.”*

5. Factors which Influence Prayer's Acceptance
----------------------------------------------

In addition to the above-mentioned characteristics which prevent
prayer's there are other etiquette and manners which provide required
background for prayer's acceptance, and it is up to the supplicant to
pay attention towards them. Following is a brief description about those
factors:

### 5.1. Shedding Tears and Crying

Fearing Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), beseeching him with tearful
eyes, and lowering head upon his threshold are the etiquette of
servanthood; in addition to bringing plenty of favours and blessings
also provide background for prayer's acceptance. Following are some
traditions.

It has been narrated in a tradition:

*“There is a bottleneck passage between Paradise and Hell, and except
those who shed tears out of fear for Allah's wrath, no one else would be
able to pass through it.”*

It has been narrated from the Holy Prophet [s]:

*“Allah has sworn with his Splendour and Majesty that My servants do not
know the value of shedding tears and crying; are not aware that for
their crying what heavy price and sweet rewards have been stored; for
them I have provided special palaces in My vicinity, and there is no
partner to share it with them.”*

It has been narrated:

*“On the Day of Judgement there is no eye which is not tearful, except
the eye which was tearful in the world because of Allah's fear; there is
no one with eyes full of tears because of Allah's fear, except that
Allah will forbid his body parts from Hell's fire, there is no face with
tears of Allah's fear flowing upon his cheeks, but Allah will make it
immune from disgrace and abjectness; there is nothing in creation but
has its definite dimensions and weight, except a tiny drop a tear shed
for the sake of Allah's fear, that through this drop Allah would silence
the oceans of His wrath; and if in a community (ummah) a single servant
sheds tears, Allah would bestow forgiveness upon the entire community
for the sake of that servant's tear.”*

Of course, there are plenty of traditions about this matter.

### 5.2. To Offer Thanks, Praise, and Apology

Another etiquette of prayer is to praise and adore Allah (the Glorious,
the Exalted); the Commander of the Faithful Imam 'Ali [a] was asked:

*“How to praise Allah and consider Him the Greatest?”* The Imam replied:
*“You must recite the following:*

*'O' Thou who are nearer to me than my jugular vein; O' Thou who is the
distance between a man and his heart; O' Thou who is manifested as the
most fascinating scene upon the horizon; and O' Thou, who could not be
compared with any other thing.'“*

While praising Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), it would be more
desirable that we should beseech Him with His sacred names and
characteristics, which are relevant to our prayer and needs; must
remember His blessings and bounties and should thank Him for that; then
we should think about our transgressions and sins, and should offer
excuse and Apology.

### 5.3. Deliberation and Persistence

Also, it would be desirable that the supplicant should take a pause and
ponder about his prayer; should avoid haste and hurrying; should insist
whatever he desired from Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), because he
likes a servant who insists and shows persistence for his wants. Also
one must repeat his needs at least three times.

### 5.4. Praying Away from People's Sight

It is more appropriate that one should stand in prayer in an isolated
place away from people's sight so that he could prevent himself from
dissimulation as well as could obey Allah's command. Also it has been
narrated that:

*“One prayer in privacy is equivalent to seventy prayers performed in
the presence of others.”*

### 5.5. Standing Together for Prayer

Sometimes it is appropriate that a group of people should stand up for
praying together, and it is much better if the number of people be at
least forty, or at least four people each of them repeating his wants
ten times, or in case there is only one person, it would be much better
if he asks for his wants forty times.[^1]

### 5.6. Humility and Meekness

Another etiquette of prayer is that one should stand before Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), with a humble heart and in a state of meekness;
as much as possible in a pleasing and soft manner of tongue, considering
himself as destitute and nothing; and in this manner should present his
needs and wants in prayer. It has been narrated that Allah (the
Glorious, the Exalted), said to Prophet Jesus [a]:

*“O' Jesus! Beseech me like a poor and destitute who does not have any
shelter except Me; beseech Me with a broken heart; in isolation and
privacy remember me a lot; I love a servant who uses his tongue in a
soft and pleasing manner, in a state of earthiness, but, of course with
an alive and awakened heart and not with a sleepy and negligent heart; I
like and appreciate My servant's endeavours in sending his heart broken
sad voice and melody of his grief to My ears.”*

Also, it has been narrated that Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), said
to Prophet Moses [a]:

*“Whenever you beseech Me, you must be in a state of trembling with
fear, being afraid of my wrath put your face upon dirt by offering
prostration; tell your mysteries with a broken heart and trembling with
fear; let your heart die because of My wrath; look towards Me in a state
of frenzy (in My love), like someone who runs away from the fear of
enemy and cries for help and support.* *You too should cry because of
fear of sins and seek My help, because, I am the best helper for My
servants.”*

### 5.7. Salutations Upon the Holy Prophet [s] and His Holy Progeny Ahlul-Bait [a]

Another etiquette of prayer is to offer salutations upon the Holy
Prophet [s] and his Holy Progeny Ahlul-Bait [a] before and after the
prayer. Following are few traditions:

*“It has been narrated that in appraisal of deeds nothing is more
precious and esteemed than sending salutations upon the Holy Prophet
Muhammad [s] and his Holy Progeny (Ahlul-Bait [a]).”*

The following has been narrated from Imam al-Sadiq [a]:

*“Unless and until a prayer is accompanied by salutations upon the Holy
Prophet [s] and his Holy Progeny (Ahlul-Bait [a]) it is far away from
being granted.”*

Also it has been reported:

*“That whoever wants to present his needs before Allah must start his
prayer firstly by sending salutations upon the Holy Prophet Muhammad [s]
and his Holy Progeny (Ahlul-Bait [a]), should then remember his own
needs and desires and again should finish it by repeating the
above-mentioned salutations, because, the salutations offered at both
ends of the prayer are undoubtedly accepted immediately and Allah is
Greater and Most Compassionate than, that he would accept the two ends
(i.e. beginning and end) of the prayer leaving the middle portion
unaccepted.”*

#### Importance of Sending Salutations Upon the Holy Prophet [s] and His Holy Progeny Ahlul-Bait [a]

Here, it must be added that, sending salutations upon the Holy Prophet
[s] and His Holy Progeny Ahlul-Bait [a] are indeed desirable and
extremely important as, Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), does not
accept the belief *(iman)* of someone who does not believe in the
vicegerency *(wilayah)* of the Holy Prophet [s] and His Holy Progeny
Ahlul-Bait [a] likewise, does not accept the prayers of those who do not
send salutations upon them, i.e., as the vicegerency *(wilayah)* of the
Holy Prophet [s] and his Holy Progeny Ahlul-Bait [a] is the prerequisite
and criteria for belief *(iman)*, likewise sending salutations upon them
is also essential etiquette and requirement of the prayer.

Also it must be mentioned that salutations upon the Holy Prophet [s] and
his Holy Progeny Ahlul-Bait [a] like other deeds and worship consist of
outwardly appearance as well as inner character, possess body as well as
spirit, and their spirit is that we must discover that what special
majesty and splendour are possessed by these noble personalities before
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted); we must appreciate that they are our
intercessors and mediators near Him and He does not accept anyone,
except through the path of resorting *(tawassul)* to them.

We must discover that indeed they are superior and exalted over our own
selves; of course, all these findings and realizations, should be real
and true appreciation, in order to influence our actions and deeds. That
is, our actions and deeds must indicate that we have indeed discovered
their splendour and majesty; have accepted their superiority and
exaltedness above our own selves; and if, with such genuine appreciation
and understanding, send salutations upon those exalted ones,
undoubtedly, they too would respond to our one salutation with ten
salutations, one hundred salutations, and may be many times with
infinite salutations, as well as our prayer will be accepted by Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted).

### 5.8. Sincerity and Heart's Purity

Another etiquette of prayer is that the supplicant should not beseech
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), superficially with tongue, instead
should seek Him with profundities of his conscience and from the fathoms
of his heart and soul; should purify his inner self from everything
other than Him, especially, worldly materialistic affairs which
contaminate heart and make the soul unclean; should keep himself away
from such thoughts as being suspicious and disbelieving towards Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted),because such thoughts are indication of
disrespect and weakness of faith, which eventually make the heart dead
whereby Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), turns his face away from
human beings, as the Holy Qur'an said:

***“That your thought which ye did think about the Lord, hath ruined
you.”***

- Holy Qur'an (41:22).

### 5.9. Prevention is Better than Cure

Another etiquette of prayer is to supplicate during happy and good
times; such prayer possesses lot of worth and value and could be
compared with the prevention before being inflicted with the disease.
Otherwise, forgetting prayer and Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted),
during happy and good times and beseeching Him and stretching hands for
supplication only during hard times while being surrounded by calamities
in the state of helplessness would not produce any significant gain.

### 5.10. Remembrance and Preference of Others

It is desirable that during prayer we must keep in mind others while
asking our own deeds, whatever we ask from Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), it should not be only for our own selves, rather should ask
similar things for others as well, and undoubtedly such supplication is
more deserving and is nearer for being granted. Further it would be more
desirable if we prefer other believers than our own selves, that is
firstly we pray for them and then should mention our own wants and
desires.

Of course, praying for other believers must be done with sincerity;
should be accompanied by one's heart and soul for the sake of mutual
friendship, and not for the sake of formalities by the tip of tongue, or
with selfish ideas, that praying for others would result in grant of our
own prayer sooner, then in that case, it would not produce any result.

#### Importance of Friendship of a Believer and His Remembrance during Prayer

It must be clearly understood, that regarding the friendship of
believers, what really constitutes its axis, foundation, and criteria
is - that to be friendly with them, should be only for Allah's sake and
not for the sake of any other motive. It is this type of friendship of
believers, which have been considered as precious and esteemed in the
Islamic traditions and the Holy Qur'an, it has been emphasized a lot, so
much so that in accordance with the following narration:

*“It has been considered as the most stable pillar of belief.”*

And in another tradition:

*“The faith has been defined, as having such sincere friendships with
believers.”*

In praising the believers who love each other in this manner, a lot has
been written in traditions. For example, it has been narrated in a
tradition:

*“Whenever the two friends shake their hands Allah too puts his hand
between their hands and presses the hand of the one who is more
steadfast and sincere in that friendship.”*

Regarding the believer who prays for other believers it has been
narrated:

*“Whenever a believer prays for a fellow brother believer, an angel from
the worldly sky says to him: 'O' servant of Allah! Know that whatever
you have asked for your fellow brother believer a thousand times of that
would be given to you; the second angel makes triple and so on so forth
until the seventh angel announces seven hundred thousands times of
reward bestowed upon him. Then Allah announces glad tidings to him
saying: 'O' My servant! My treasure never gets emptied through My
donations! I will bestow upon you million times of whatever you have
asked for your fellow brother believer.'“*

*Regarding the believers who help and support each other or fulfil the
needs of other believers, there are plenty of traditions. It has been
narrated in a tradition:*

*“Whoever fulfils the wants of a brother believer is like the one who
has worshiped Allah with fasting during day and offering night prayer
for nine thousands years.”*

It has been narrated in another tradition:

*“Whoever does not mobilize all his resources and strength in*

*fulfilment of a brother believer's wants has indeed done a treachery
towards Allah, His Prophet, and the believers.”*

The story of Imam al-Sadiq [a] and Hasan bin Yaqtin is very famous in
this regard. In summary, Imam al-Sadiq write a brief recommendation
letter in favour of Hasan bin Yaqtin to the ruler of Ahwaz as follows:

*“Before Allah there is a heavenly shade or canopy in which no one can
rest but without opening a knot of difficulties for a brother believer,
or help him, or do some good however small it may be in his favour. And
now a brother believer has approached you, regards.*

*The ruler of Ahwaz after reading this letter came out bare-footed to
welcome Hasan, received him warmly, kissed his face, asked him about
Imam's condition, then took him inside his home and treated him with
warmth and affection, fulfilled his requirements, forgave his taxes, and
divided equally all his wealth, horses, and slaves between him and
Hasan.*

*“Of course, he undertook all these good actions and justified them for
Allah's sake and in the path of Ahlul-Bait's [a] friendship . After a
little while Hasan returned before Imam al-Sadiq [a] and described his
encounter with the ruler of Ahwaz then the Imam said: 'By Allah, because
of this* *kindness shown by the ruler towards you I am happy, so too my
impeccable forefathers, the Commander of the Faithful Imam 'Ali [a], the
Holy Prophet [s] and Allah.”*

Also, there are plenty of traditions about those who make believers
uncomfortable. For example, Husayn bin Abi al-Ala has narrated:

“Once together with twenty or more pilgrims I went to Mecca and
sacrificed a sheep at every lodging station for my fellow pilgrims.
Later on when I had a chance of seeing Imam al-Sadiq [a], he said to me:
'woe be upon you Husayn! Why did you hurt the believers and make them
feel insulted?' I said: 'I seek Allah's shelter from doing such a
thing.' He said: 'I heard that you sacrificed a sheep at each lodging
stations for your fellow companions.' I said: 'O' my master! By Allah,
in this act I don't have any other intention except seeking Allah's
pleasure.'

“He said: 'Did not you realize that perhaps among them there might have
been others who would have liked to do the same thing, but since they do
not have the financial strength to do such a thing, considered
themselves as wretched and insulted?' I said: 'O' son of the Holy
Prophet [s] salutation and greetings of Allah be upon you! I seek
Allah's pardon, and would never indulge again in such an act.'“

Here, we would overlook from mentioning about plenty of fascinating
traditions dealing with this matter, and limiting our discussion to only
few above-mentioned narrations.

### 5.11. Raising Hands Upward in Prayer

To raise hands upward during prayer is another etiquette and code of the
prayer, and it is narrated that when the Holy Prophet [s] stood up for
prayer and wants he stretched his hands forward exactly the way the poor
and destitute stretch their hands forward for receiving food etc.

In this regard when Imam al-Sadiq [a] was questioned, he replied:

1. Whenever you seek Allah's refuge, stand facing towards Mecca
*(Qiblah)* while the palms of the hands should also be facing
*(Qiblah).*

2. When you beseech Allah make distance between your fingers while
holding your palms towards the heaven.

3. When you cut off hopes from everybody and put all your hopes towards
Him, you must hold your forefinger pointing towards Him.

4. In the state of supplication raise your hands to the level of your
head.

5. And while crying and shedding tears because of fear of Allah's wrath
and punishment, should shake your forefinger.

Raising hands upwards is the etiquette of prayer in sitting and standing
position, but occasionally supplication in the state of prostration
possesses more merit, part of the prayer should be recited during
prostration. Let us describe the state of prostration, briefly.

### 5.12. Prostration and its Reality

Prostration, in its outwardly form and in true manifestation is the most
supreme state and spiritual position for a human being, i.e., the
position of annihilation in Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), as it has
been mentioned in the traditions:

*“A human being in the state of prostration is nearer to Allah than in
any other state.”*

Earlier, we have mentioned about the Holy Prophet's [s] recommendation
for prolonged prostration for everybody. Prostration and especially
prolonged prostration is the most important and most elegant state of
servanthood, and it is because of this reason that in each prayer unit,
it is performed twice, whilst other actions are performed only once. And
it is from this consideration that about the prolonged prostration of
Ahlul Bait [a] and their special Shi'ites a lot of things have been
narrated, e.g., Imam al-Sajjad [a][^2], sometimes has recited the
following prayer in prostration for one thousand times.

*“In reality there is no god but Allah.”*

Also about Imam Kadhim [a][^3] and some of his companions it has been
narrated that sometimes their prostration prolonged from the day-break
till the noon prayer.

During my stay at Najaf al-Ashraf[^4] for religious education there was
a learned Sheikh who was the leader and shelter for pious and mystics. I
asked him to tell me the most superior deed which he himself has tried
and which is most effective and helpful for a gnostic's spiritual
journey. He recommended for me two things:

Firstly: performing a prolonged prostration and reciting the following
invocation during each day and night:

***“There is no god save Thee Be Thou Glorified. Lo! I have been a wrong
doer.”***

- Holy Qur'an (21:87).

And the aim and intention of this invocation should be that:

'O' Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted)! My soul is imprisoned in this
worldly prison and has been bonded in the chains of passions and carnal
desires; with my indecent behavior, I have chained and imprisoned my own
self; and I never say this unjust statement, that you have done this to
me, that you have entangled me into this prison and bondage. Never!
Never! You are too Glorious and inviolable for such statements, and it
is I who has inflicted upon me such calamity, I have oppressed myself
with my own hands.'

That noble saint recommended this prostration to all of his friends, and
they practised this recommendation by reciting the above-mentioned
invocation in the prostration. Some of them recited one thousand times,
some of them even recited a little more or less, and some of them three
thousand times and discovered the constructive effects in their own
lives.

### 5.13. Having a Ring in the Hand

Another etiquette of prayer is to put a ring of Turquoise (Firozeh)
Red-chalcedony (Aqiq) in the fingers; it has been reported that Allah
(the Glorious, the Exalted) has said:

*“I feel ashamed to reject the supplication of a supplicant having a
ring of Turquoise or Red Chalcedony upon his fingers.”*

Also Imam al-Sadiq [a] has narrated:

*“A hand with a Turquoise or Red-chalcedony ring raised in prayer is
dearer before Allah than any other hand.”*

#### Importance of the Ring

Here it would be essential to mention an important point about putting
on a ring; that it is very unlikely that a human being will ever be
immune from commitment of sins and transgressions, therefore, it is
prudent that in order to compensate for those committed sins, one should
engage himself continuously into performance of some of the worship and
supplications, and putting ring upon the finger is one of them.

### 5.14. Paying Alms and Charity

The paying of alms is another etiquette and manner of prayer, which has
been emphasized a lot, in plenty of Islamic traditions; it is desirable
that a supplicant should never forget about it. The following has been
narrated in a tradition:

*“With payment of alms beseech Him for your own sustenance.”*

### 5.15. Suitable Timings

It is appropriate that a supplicant should pay special attention about
the timings of his prayer. Following are some of the most suitable
timings for supplications:

A. Friday Day and Night

It has been narrated from Imam al-Baqir [a]:[^5]

*“Every Thursday night till the end of Friday, Allah calls his believing
servants from the Upper Heavens, inviting them towards Himself and
announces: 'Is there any believing servant who before the day breaks
asks forgiveness for his sins and I forgive him, is there any one who
seeks anything from me and I grant his requirements, is there a
believing servant, who cries for Me, and I respond?”*'

Also, it has been narrated:

*“Allah delays the grant of a supplicant's prayer and fulfilment of his
needs until Friday.”*

Also, it has been narrated from the Holy Prophet [s]:

*“The day of Friday is the most superior and exalted among all the days
in the sight of Allah, even superior than the days of Eid-ul-Fitr and
Eid-ul-Adha. He continued and said: 'there is a special particular hour
on Friday, that at that time there is no one who desires anything
permissible and proper, but Allah grants his requirements.”*

The Holy Prophet [s] continued: *“During Friday there are two hours
which possess special merits; firstly, the hour when the Imam of the
Friday congregational-prayer finishes his sermon until the lines of
congregational-prayer get readied for the prayer, and the other hour is
the end of the day.”*

B. The noon *(dhor)* and afternoon *(asr)* of Wednesday, especially, for
prayer and cursing of infidels.

C. During night *(isha)* a), it has been narrated that such opportunity
and preference were not given to the past nations.

D. The first hour of the first half of the Night, it has been narrated
from Imam al-Sadiq [a]:

*“There is a particular hour during, the night, in which if a believer
would offer the prayer, it is impossible but it would be accepted (by
Allah). He was asked: 'which hour is it?' The first hour of the first
half of the night', replied the Imam”*

Also, it has been narrated from the Commander of the Faithful Imam 'Ali
[a]:

*“It was at this hour that Prophet David [a] went out to fight against
Goliath.”* Also he said: *“Whoever prays during this hour, his prayer is
granted but ....”*

E. End portion of night till the dawn or the last one third of the
night.

It has been narrated from the Holy Prophet [s]:

*“Whenever the end portion of night arrives Allah looking at his
servants says: 'Is there any supplicant so that I could grant his
prayer? Is there any needy so that may I fulfil his needs? Is there any
repentant so that I there could accept his repentance? Is there anyone
offering apology so that I could accept it?”*

In another tradition it has been narrated that Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted) says:

*“O' righteous ones strive and o' sinners and transgressors stop doing
it.”*

Also it has been narrated:

*“Whoever sleeps in that portion of the night till the dawn, Satan
urinates in his ears.”*

#### Response of Sayyid Ibn Tawus to Divine Proclamation

The most celebrated learned scholar and jurisprudent Sayyid Ibn Tawus
(R.A.) who in the words of my own teacher - holds the highest rank in
the community after the Sinless Imams [a] and no one else could be
compared to him - has responded to this divine invitation with most
elegant and sublime themes and sentences. And it would be most desirable
if the wayfarer towards the spiritual journey, during this hour of the
night should recite those sentences and contents from the book Uddat
al-Da'i, in response to that divine proclamation.

#### Another Important Point From Sayyid Ibn Tawus

It must be mentioned that this pious tradition of responding to divine
proclamation, for the first time was established by Ibn Tawus, similarly
he was the pioneer of celebrating the first day of his becoming obliged
for religious duties as the Day of Feast (Jashn al-Taklif) for thanking
Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted), because of bestowing upon him this
distinction (i.e., to perform religious obligations). And it was not
heard that before him anyone has done so, therefore, in truth both of
the above-mentioned initiatives are indicative of his sagacity, great
spirit, and lively mind.

F. At the breaking of dawn, the duration between the real and false
day-break, in my opinion this is the best time especially for prayer of
sustenance.

G. From dawn till sunrise.

H. The Night of Power (Qadr), especially the night of twenty-third of
the Holy Month of Ramadhan.

I. The Nights of Awakening *(Shab al-Ahya)*, i.e., the first night of
the Holy Month of Rajab, the 15th night of the Holy Month of Sha'ban,
the night of Eid-ul-Fitr and the night of Eid ul-Adha.

J. The Days of Eid-ul-Fitr, Eid-ul-Adha and the Day of 'Araf'a.[^6]

K. After finishing the daily mandatory prayers, the Commander of the
Faithful Imam 'Ali [a] has quoted from the Holy Prophet [s]:

*“Whoever, after offering daily mandatory prayers supplicates - his
supplications are granted.”*

Ibn Faham says:

I saw the Commander of the Faithful, Imam 'Ali, in my dream and asked
him about this tradition, he replied that it is correct, and said after
the mandatory prayer put your head in prostration and recite:

*“O' Allah! By the one who has reported this tradition, by the one who
has quoted this tradition from its narrator, send salutations upon all
of them and grant my such and such needs.”*

It has been reported from Imam al-Sadiq [a]:

*“Allah has made daily prayers mandatory upon you at times most liked by
Him. You too should beseech Him for fulfilment of your needs at those
times.”*

There are traditions regarding beseeching Allah (the Glorious, the
Exalted), after performance of recommended *(nafilah)* prayers and other
recommended deeds.

L. During blowing wind, rain fall, at the day's end, when shadow
disappears, and when the first drop of the blood of a martyr is spilled;
during all of the above incidents the Gates of the Heaven are opened and
the background for the grant of prayer is materialized.

### 5.16. Suitable Place

Selection of suitable place like the *Raas al-Husayn* (the place where
the head of Imam al-Husayn [a][^7] is buried), or any other sacred place
is another etiquette and manner of supplication, which has been
mentioned in some of the traditions; supplication at such places
undoubtedly possesses more distinction and is more nearer to be granted.

### 5.17. Important Thing About the Prayer

It will be sufficient to limit the description about the etiquette and
codes of supplication to whatever already has been explained above, with
the reminder that what constitute the most important thing in
supplication are its esoteric codes and etiquette. Therefore, it is up
to the supplicant that he should mobilize his best endeavours for their
utilization, keeping in mind that all the profit and loss, good and evil
lie in Allah's hand. He should never forget that all his good and
welfare rest only in Allah's guardianship, nearness, and pleasure.

Therefore from these considerations in his supplications, he should not
think anything, or ask Allah anything, other than these, or whatever
contains their background; that a true believer even likes Allah's
bounties only from this consideration that he considers them from Him,
rather in bounties too does[^8] not see anything except their
relationship with Allah (the Glorious, the Exalted). It is because of
this reason that all his existence, self, actions, and spirit became
indifferent from world and worldliness and is continuously engaged in
praise, adoration, and supplications.

Of course, being so is not easy and such state is not achieved without
going through harsh rigorous asceticism, and only a small number of
favourite gnostics have been able to attain such grace; but others even
the good ones and the companions of right-hand *(Ashab ul-yamin)* look,
towards the means *(Musabeb al-Asbaab)*.

And in their prayers instead of asking only Him, His-nearness, and
His-pleasure present other requests and other wants. Therefore, it is
for us that if we are not in the category of those special favourite
gnostics who don't ask Him anything except Him, and do not ask anything
from the beloved except the beloved himself,[^9] at least, together with
worldly requests, we must beseech Him for bestowing upon us His pleasure
and nearness.

And if we are not lucky to have access to such grace at least we must
ask him for forgiveness and Paradise together with our worldly deeds.
May we be among those whose prayer is:

***“Our Lord! Give unto us in the world that which is good and in the
Hereafter which is good.”***

- Holy Qur'an (2:201)

And if we cannot ask this continuously in all the prayers, at least we
must ask this in some of the prayers.

Apart from this, what is most important in prayer is humility,
earthiness, humbleness, and shedding tears, and it is up to the
supplicant that in addition to the heart-brokenness and heart's
humility, should not forget the exoteric manifestations of prayer such
as: sitting upon dirt, putting dirt upon the face, putting head upon the
dirt, opening the head and hairs, putting hands around the neck (like
the captives), pleading with tongue in a sweet pleasing manner, begging,
and utilizing the most appropriate phrases and sentences relevant to
your own needs and His Splendour and Majesty.

[^1]: Group-prayer may seems in contradiction with whatever has been
explained earlier about praying in secrecy. Some of the prayers and
wants require isolation and privacy and for them congregation and
assembly might be harmful, but on the other hand prayers for asking
immunity from common disasters should be offered in a group as
congregation prayers [Author].

[^2]: Here it should be understood that the conditions of Imam al-Sajjad
[a] after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn [a] were such that he was mostly
confined inside his home. Similarly Imam al-Kadhim [a] was imprisoned by
the Abbaside Caliph Harun ar-Rashid, where he remained until his
martyrdom. [Tr]

[^3]: Imam al-Kadhim [a]: The son of the sixth Imam, he was contemporary
with such Abbaside caliphs as al-Mansur and Harun al-Rashid. He lived
most of his life in Madina with severe restrictions placed upon him and
finally died in a prison in Baghdad. After him, the Imams were often not
able to live in their traditional home of Madina, but were forced to
remain near the caliph in Baghdad or Samara. He is buried in Kadhimayn
in Iraq [Tr].

[^4]: Najaf al-Ashraf: is the tomb of Commander of the Faithful Imam
'Ali [a] in Iraq, which used to be main center of learning in the Shi'i
world before the restrictions and pressures placed on the Shi'i scholars
of Najaf by the Bathist regime of Baghdad. The Bathist persecution of
Najaf reached a high point in May, 1969, when a number of scholars
('ulama) were arrested and tortured, and religious endowments were
confiscated [Tr].

[^5]: Imam al-Baqir [a]: (57/675-114/372), the son of the fourth imam,
he was present at Karbala at a young age. Because of changing political
and religious conditions, among them the general revulsion following the
events at Karbala, many people came to Madina to learn the religious and
spiritual sciences from him. He trained numerous well known men of
religion, and mainly for this reason is the first Imam 'Ali [a] from
whom large numbers of traditions are recorded. He is buried in the Baqi
Cemetery in Madina [Tr].

[^6]: Day of 'Araf'a: The ninth day of the Month of Dhu'l-hijja, when
all the pilgrims participating in the Hajj must be present at the plain
of \`Arafa outside Mecca. For the text of the prayer that Imam Husayn
[a] recited on this day, see Sheikh Abbas Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan,
pp.350-369, and for a translation of it, see William C. Chittick's A
Shi'ite Anthology (Albany, N.Y., 1980), pp.93-113 [Tr].

[^7]: Imam Husayn [a]: The younger son of the Commander of the Faithful
Imam 'Ali [a] and Fatimah al-Zahra [a] - the daughter of the Holy
Prophet [s] - Fatimah al-Zahra was born in Madina on Thursday 3rd
Sha'ban 4 A.H; like his brother he lived most of his life quietly in
Madina under the watchful eyes of the Caliph's officials and spies. When
Mu'awiyyah's son Yazid became caliph, he demanded allegiance from Imam
al-Husayn [a], who refused to give it. Finally Imam al-Husayn [a] felt
it necessary to go into battle against Yazid to protest against the
injustices which were being carried out in the name of Islam. He and a
small group of followers including most of his immediate family were
cruelly massacred at Karbala. The day of his martyrdom is 10th Muharram,
61 A.H. “Ashura has become the most solemn day of the Islamic calendar,
marked by processions and universal mourning. He is buried in Karbala in
Iraq [Tr].

[^8]: The famous Iranian poet Sheikh Sa'di\* has composed the following
famous verses in Persian: (be jahan khurram az anam ke jahan khurram az
ost, asheqam bar hame alam ke hame alam az ost). “I am happy with this
world, because, this happiness of world is from Him, I am the lover of
this whole world, because, this whole world is from Him.” \*Sheikh
Sa'di: Mushraf-ud-din Masleh bin Abdullah famous as Sheikh Sa'di was a
great learned scholar and poet of Iran in the Seventh Century. He was
born in a religious family in Shiraz, south-western Iran in 606 A.H. He
received his earlier education in Shiraz and then went to Baghdad for
higher education. He travelled a lot and isited Syria, Hijaz and North
Africa and used to mix socially with the people in those journeys. His
famous works are Gulistan and Bostaan. Sa'di's tomb is located in Shiraz
and it attracts large numbers of tourists throughout the year [Tr].

[^9]: (goyand tamanai az dost bekun Sa'di az dost nakhuam kard juz dost
tamannai). “They suggest me, ask something from my beloved, I would
never ask anything from my beloved but beloved himself.”


