Introduction
============

Though there are important differences between Twelve-Imam Shi'ism and
Sunnism on the level of the principles of the religion (usul al-din), on
the level of the sharia and fiqh or jurisprudence there are surprisingly
few places where Shi'i or 'Ja'fari' law differs from all four Sunni
schools, the Hanaf'i, Hanbali, Maliki, and Shafi'i. Perhaps the most
important difference occurs in relation to the institution of mut'a, or
'temporary marriage'. The Sunni authorities agree that mut'a was
permitted by the Prophet at certain points during his lifetime, but they
maintain that in the end he prohibited it completely. In contrast the
Shi'is maintain that the Prophet did not ban it, and they cite numerous
hadith from Sunni as well as Shi'i sources to prove this. Having
established its legality, they then devote tremendous care and attention
to defining its legal status and all the rules and regulations connected
with it.

One major purpose of the present study is to trace the origin of this
divergence between Sunni and Shi'i law by going back to the sources and
arguments on both sides. A second purpose is to describe the legal
situation of mut'a in Shi'ism. In order to do this, it is first
necessary to understand the rules and regulations that define marriage
itself, since all the discussions of mut'a take place within this
context. Hence Chapter One describes the 'pillars' and 'conditions' of
marriage according to the five schools of law, though in a manner which
is by necessity truncated and which makes no attempt to give a thorough
presentation of all the different opinions. Chapter Two discusses the
'four pillars' of mut'a and Chapter Three its 'statutes'. Once the
nature of mut'a and its structural relationship to permanent marriage is
understood, the debates concerning the legitimacy of mut'a-summarized in
Chapter Four--can be better understood.

The present work is based on an MA dissertation completed in 1974 under
the direction of Professor Abu 'l-Qasim Gurji of the Faculty of Theology
at Tehran University (most of the Persian text was published under the
title Izdiwaj-i muwaqqat: (mut'a-sigha) [Tehran: Hamdami, 1358/1979]).
The original work included a brief investigation of the contemporary
relevance of mut'a, and nowadays I am often asked my opinion on this
topic. Let me only remark that the modern West has not come near to
solving all the legal problems that have grown up because of relatively
free sexual relationships in contemporary society. If any real solution
to these problems is possible, perhaps a certain inspiration may be
drawn from a legal system such as mut'a which, with its realistic
appraisal of human nature, has been able to provide for the rights and
responsibilities of all parties.

As for the abuses of mut'a that have occurred in certain times and
places, in large measure these can be traced to the refusal of people to
observe the letter of the law; perhaps those who established mut'a had
too high an opinion of human dignity, self respect, and fear of God.
They no doubt thought that the Prophet's saying: 'Every religion has its
special character trait, and the special character trait of my community
is shame (haya') would continue in effect until the end of time. At
least mut'a can be said to provide a legal structure which, when
observed, prevents most of the well known problems and abuses connected
with unregulated sexual relationships.


**Sachiko Murata**

Port Jefferson, NY 14 December 1986

Acknowledgement

The Muhammadi Trust wishes to express its gratitude to its patron for
their willing and kind support in making this publication possible.


