Chapter 2
=========

**The Four Pillars Of Mut'a**

The Arabic dictionaries define mut'a as 'enjoyment, pleasure, delight'.
The root form, m-t: signifies, 'to carry away, to take away'. A
'marriage of mut'a' is a marriage which the contract stipulates will
last for a fixed period of time. This 'marriage of mut'a' is referred to
both in the hadith literature and, in much more detail, in the books on
jurisprudence (fiqh). In the hadith and in other sayings related from
early Muslims the word 'mut'a' itself is usually employed. The Shi'is
hold that this particular term is the preferred name for temporary
marriage because the Qur'an itself refers to this kind of marriage
employing a term derived from the same root. In the following verse, the
word istimta', the tenth verbal form of the root m-t-', is translated as
'enjoy': 'So those of them [women] whom you enjoy, give to them their
appointed wages' (4:24).

In general the word mut'a was more commonly used than other terms for
temporary marriage both during the lifetime of the Prophet and
afterwards during the time of the Shi'i Imams and other Muslim leaders.
Both its proponents and opponents preferred this word and its
derivatives. In Wasa'il al-shi'a, the comprehensive and definitive
reference work for Shi'i hadith concerning all branches of
jurisprudence, the word mut'a is employed in the headings of all
sections on temporary marriage.

In books on jurisprudence the terms mut'a, al-nikah al-munqati'
('discontinued marriage'), and al-nikah al-muwaqqat ('temporary
marriage') are all employed. Al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli [^1] still employs the
term 'discontinued marriage' in his writings, [^2] and hence his
commentators use the same expression, although in sections of the
statutes relating to this kind of marriage they also employ the terms
istimta' and the related word tamattu'. Al-Shahid al Thani [^3] employs
the same term as al-Hilli [^4] , but others, such as al-Shahid al-Awwal,
[^5] al-'Allama al-Hilli [^6] and al-Shaykh al-Ansari [^7] prefer the term
mut'a. [^8]

Among Sunni jurisprudents there is a discussion concerning whether or
not the marriage of mut'a is the same as 'temporary marriage'. Most of
them have agreed that they are synonymous. [^9]

In some works a special term is applied to women who participate in
mut'a: musta'jara, or 'rented woman'. Mut'a is considered a kind of
'rental' because in general a man's basic aim in this kind of marriage
is the sexual enjoyment of a woman, and in return for his enjoyment the
woman receives a certain amount of money or property. In defining
'rental' the jurisprudents say: 'It is to gain possession of a benefit
in exchange for a specified sum.' [^10] This definition applies equally
to temporary marriage. In this connection a number of hadith have been
recorded in which the word musta'jara is employed. [^11]

Shi'i jurisprudence discusses temporary marriage with all the care it
bestows upon permanent marriage. Like permanent marriage, mut'a has
'pillars' and 'statutes'. To the two pillars of permanent marriage-the
formula and the persons-are added the time period and the dower .

I. The Formula

Since it is a contract, mut'a requires a declaration and an acceptance.
As in permanent marriage, the declaration is the prerequisite of the
woman. It must consist of one of three Arabic formulas, the same three
which are employed by the Shi'is in permanent marriage. Al-Sayyid
al-Murtada [^12] is said to have added that a slave girl may employ the
formula 'I have allowed you' (abahtu-ka) or 'I have considered you
lawful' (hallaltu-ka), [^13] but his words have not been confirmed by
others. Al-Shahid al Thani writes: 'To me it seems more correct to limit
ourselves to the first three phrases.' [^14] Apparently there is no
disagreement on the point that the woman may not employ expressions
like: 'I have given you possession', 'I have given to you as a gift', 'I
have rented to you', 'I have lent to you', etc.

The 'acceptance' is made by the man after the woman has made her
declaration. His words must demonstrate that he is satisfied with the
declaration. For example, he may say: 'I will accept the marriage', or
'I accept the mut'a.' If he should say only: 'I accept' or 'I am
satisfied', the contract is valid.

That the declaration should precede the acceptance is not a condition
of the contract, since a contract consists of a declaration and an
acceptance, in whatever order the two may occur. It is claimed that
there is a consensus on this point. [^15] Al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli states
explicitly that if the man says: 'I have married you', and then the
woman says the same thing to him, the contract is sound. [^16]

According to al-'Allama al-Hilli, the formula of the contract must be
recited in the perfect tense. [^17] But the majority of the 'ulama' hold
that it is permissible for it to be recited in the imperfect tense, as
long as there is the intention of contracting the marriage. [^18] Many
hadith have been related showing that the imperfect tense is acceptable.
For example, the Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq was once asked what formula should
be recited when a mut'a is contracted. He replied: 'I marry thee in
mut'a according to the Book of God and His prophet's sunna without
inheritance from me to thee or vice versa, for so many days, for so many
dirhams. .....' [^19]

The legal discussions of contracts assert that the persons who make the
declaration and acceptance must be 'worthy of the contract' (ahl al
'aqd). In the question of mut'a this means that those who conclude the
contract must be the man and woman themselves, or their representatives
(wakil), or their fathers. Hence, for example, it is permissible for the
father to say: 'I give my daughter in mut'a with her agreement.' If
anyone other than the above persons should conclude the contract, it is
'uncommissioned' (fuduli) and therefore invalid.

II. The Persons

A man can conclude a contract of mut'a only with a Muslim or one of the
'People of the Book'. It is not permissible to engage in temporary
marriage with an unbeliever or an enemy of the Household of the Prophet
(ah! a!-hayt, i.e., the Imams), such as a follower of the Khawarij. A
Muslim woman cannot marry a non-Muslim.

If the man has a free, permanent wife, he cannot contract a mut'a with
a slave without his wife's permission. Should he do so, the contract is
invalid or in abeyance pending her permission. If the slave should
belong to someone else, a mut'a cannot be contracted without her
master's permission. Several hadith have been recorded on this point,
For example, the Imam Ja'far says: 'There is nothing wrong with marrying
a slave [temporarily] with the permission of her master.' [^20]

A man is not permitted to marry the daughter of his sister-in-Iaw or
brother-in-law without his wife's permission. Should a contract be
concluded without her permission it is invalid or in abeyance until she
gives her permission. [^21] With these two exceptions, the relatives to
whom marriage is not permitted are the same as in permanent marriage.

It is recommended that a Muslim man conclude a temporary marriage only
with a chaste Muslim woman. Here by 'chaste' (afifa) the classical
authors have in mind someone who has never committed fornication and who
follows the shari'a in her activities. More specifically, the adjective
denotes a woman who has observed the shar'i laws concerning marriage and
in general is honest and upright. The two attributes 'Muslim' and
'chaste' are derived from sayings by two of the Imams: the Imam al-Rida
was asked: 'Is it possible for a man to conclude a temporary marriage
with a Jew or a Christian?' He answered: 'I would prefer that he engage
in mut'a with a free Muslim woman.' [^22] To a question about performing
mut'a, the Imam Ja'far replied: 'It is permissible. So marry none but a
chaste woman, for God says, " And those who guard their private parts"
(23:5). Hence you should not put your private parts where you do not
feel safe with your dirhams.' [^23]

If someone makes an accusation against a woman, it is recommended that
before concluding the contract of mut'a with her the man inquire from
her about her situation, i.e., as to whether or not she has a husband
and whether or not she is chaste. But asking is not a condition of the
contract. [^24] According to the 'Principles of Jurisprudence', [^25] the
principle of 'correctness' as applied to the acts of a Muslim [^26]
demands that one consider the act of a woman who has declared herself
ready to enter into mut'a as correct. According to this principle,
whenever we are in doubt concerning the correctness of the act of a
Muslim, we preserve the social and legal order by judging that his act
was correct. For example, if we are in doubt concerning the legality of
a couple's marriage, we judge that it was legal. Otherwise we would also
have to doubt the legitimacy of their children, the application of the
laws of inheritance, etc. In a different area of the law, the canonical
prayer provides a good example: If, after finishing his prayer, a person
doubts as to whether or not he said the correct number of cycles, he
assumes the number was correct, Otherwise he would spend a good deal of
his time repeating acts of worship he has already performed. The
slightest doubt would be sufficient to cause him to repeat the same
act.

On the basis of this principle, one must dismiss the possibility that a
potential wife might be unchaste, so it is unnecessary to ask her.
Several hadith are related which demonstrate the reprehensibility of
asking about the woman's situation after the contract has been
concluded. For example, a man once said to the Imam Ja'far: 'I married a
woman temporarily, and then it came to my mind that she might already
have a husband. I investigated the matter and found out that it was so.'
The Imam said: 'And why did you investigate?' [^27]

It is reprehensible for a man to conclude a marriage of mut'a with a
fornicatress, by reason of the Qur'anic verse: 'The fornicator shall
marry not but a fornicatress or an idolatress, and the fornicatress-none
shall marry her but a fornicator or an idolator; that is forbidden to
the believers' (24:3). If a man should contract a temporary marriage
with a fornicatress, it is his duty to command her not to perform
adultery. But this is not a necessary condition of the marriage, by
reason of the 'principle of correctness' as applied to the Muslim's act.
[^28]

It is also reprehensible, without any exceptions, to contract a
temporary marriage with a virgin, by reason of the words of the Imam
Ja'far: 'It is reprehensible, because it is a stain upon her family.'
[^29] If a contract should nevertheless be concluded, it is not
permissible for the man to consummate the marriage, unless the marriage
took place with the permission of her father-a condition almost
impossible to imagine in Muslim society. 'A virgin may not be married
temporarily without her father's permission' (the Imam al-Rida). [^30]

III. The Time Period (Mudda)

The time period of a temporary marriage must be delineated in a manner
which allows no possibility of increase or decrease. According to the
Imam al-Rida, '. ..(mut'a must) be a stipulated thing for a stipulated
period.' [^31] In addition, the Imam was once asked if it is possible to
conclude a contact of mut'a for 'one or two hours'. He replied, 'No time
limit is understood from "one or two" hours.' [^32]

According to al-Shaykh al-Ansari, all of the hadith indicate that it is
permissible for the agreed upon time period either to be joined to the
moment of concluding the contract or to be postponed. [^33] The situation
here is the same as with a contract concluded for purposes of rental,
since-as was pointed out above-the woman takes on certain legal
characteristics of rented property.

In the case of a temporary marriage which begins after a period of
postponement, there arises the question of whether or not the woman may
marry a second man in the period between the conclusion of the contract
and the beginning of the marriage period. Here there are two
possibilities: that it is not permitted, because the woman already has a
husband; or that it is permitted, because of the existence of all the
'requisites of a contract' and the absence of an impediment. Apparently
the ruling here is that a second temporary marriage would be permissible
provided that the woman has enough time before the beginning of the
first marriage to conclude a second marriage and then to observe her
waiting period.

As for the possibility of postponing the beginning of mut'a, this is
conditional upon the stipulation of the day and the month in which it is
to begin. For example, if the man should state that the contract will be
for one month but fail to stipulate exactly when that month is to begin,
the contract is invalid because the time is not stated. In contracts of
rental, such instances are always invalid. [^34] But if the contract
should be nonconditional, without any mention of a postponement, then
the marriage begins as soon as the contract is concluded, since,
according to the accepted standard, when a contract has been concluded,
the transaction has taken place. [^35] The most authoritative view holds
that if the stipulated period is not mentioned in the text of the
contract, the marriage cannot take place and the contract is invalid.
[^36] The consensus of the community has established that one of the two
pillars that differentiate mut'a from permanent marriage is mention of
the time period; whenever this pillar is not present, everything that
depends on it is invalidated. In addition, a contract follows the
intentions of those who conclude it, Thus, if the time period is not
mentioned, the marriage cannot be transformed into a permanent one,
since that was not the intention. In this connection a hadith has been
related from the Imam Ja'far: 'There will be no mut'a without two
things: a stipulated period and a stated dowry.' [^37]

In spite of this opinion, the majority of the 'ulama' hold that if the
time period is not mentioned, the contract is not invalidated; rather,
the marriage becomes a permanent one. These scholars argue that a
marriage contract is concluded either for temporary or permanent
marriage. If a time period is mentioned, the contract is for mut'a; but
if it is not mentioned, the contract is for permanent marriage. Hence,
whenever the contract of mut'a is invalidated because the time period
has not yet been stipulated, the contract will be one of permanent
marriage. Here they cite the principle of 'correctness' in relation to
the contract, In order to corroborate their argument, they mention a
hadith of the Imam Ja'far: 'If a time period is stated, the marriage is
mut'a; if it is not stated, it is permanent,' [^38]

In opposition to those who hold that a temporary marriage is
transformed into a permanent marriage if the time period is not
mentioned, al-Shaykh al-Ansari writes that temporary marriage and
permanent marriage are two different realities. Although the word
'marriage' is employed for both, this does not make them share in the
same nature. The difference between the two does not lie in saying that
one is an unconditional marriage and the other conditional. No, the
relationship between them is like that between purchasing something and
receiving a gift. In both cases, 'ownership' is the result. But the fact
that purchasing an object and receiving a gift have a common measure
does not mean that they have the same nature. We cannot say that the
only difference between the two is that receiving a gift entails
'unconditional ownership' and purchasing entails 'ownership conditional
on payment'. No one would ever claim that when someone says: 'I have
transferred ownership' and forgets to mention a price, the purchase is
immediately transformed into a gift. The relationship between temporary
and permanent marriage is similar. [^39]

In Sharh al-Ium'a al-Shahid al Thani adds that the hadith which is
quoted from the Imam Ja'far in support of the position of the majority
of the 'ulama' does not state explicitly that the desire of the two
parties to the contract is to conclude a marriage of mut'a, but then
they fail to mention the time period. On the contrary, the purport of
the hadith is that marriage with a stated period is muta, while marriage
without a stated period is permanent marriage. [^40]

There is no upper or lower limit to the duration of the time period. It
makes no difference if the period is extremely long, so that one doubts
whether the parties will survive its duration; or if it is extremely
short, so that there is no possibility of consummation. In other words,
any time period is permissible, so long as both sides are aware of the
situation and are satisfied. [^41]

Once the contract is concluded the wife receives the whole dowry,
whether or not the husband consummates the marriage before the time
period expires. The wife is entitled to the dowry as long as she places
herself at her husband's disposal and does not present him with any
obstacles to consummating the marriage. The situation is exactly the
same as renting a house, but then choosing not to take up residence
before the rental period has expired. When the time period is over, the
wife is freed from the obligations of the contract. [^42]

It is not permissible for the parties to stipulate in the contract 'one
act of intercourse' or the like without mentioning a time period, since
such an expression cannot take the place of a stipulated period of time.
In the view of most of the 'u!ama', if such a contract were to be
concluded, it would not be transformed into that of a permanent
marriage, since the time period has been mentioned incorrectly. The fact
that the contract has been concluded in an improper manner and is thus
invalid as a contract carries more weight than the failure to mention
the stipulated period.

However, if the time period is mentioned along with the condition that
the marriage will entail only a certain number of sexual acts, the
contract is correct, Here the juridical principle that comes into play
is enunciated in the Prophet's saying: 'The believers hold fast to their
conditions [when they stipulate them in agreements]. ' [^43] In such a
situation, as soon as the man has performed the agreed number of sexual
acts, further sexual intercourse with the woman is forbidden, even if
the time period has not elapsed. There is no contradiction between the
continuation of the marriage and the interdiction of sexual relations.

A complication would arise in the above situation if, after the woman
has been forbidden to the man, she gives him permission to engage in
further acts of sexual intercourse. Is the man allowed to have
intercourse or not? Here there are two opinions. According to the first,
there is a definite obstacle to sexual relations. For the contract does
not allow any further sexual acts, so the permission of the woman is
immaterial, since it is not sufficient to override the stipulations of
the contract and legitimize relations. According to the second opinion,
intercourse is permitted. Since in mut'a-in contrast to permanent
marriage-a woman does not have the right to initiate a sexual act, the
obstacle to sexual relations in the present situation is the woman's
unwillingness to permit anything more than what was agreed upon in the
contract, But the contract itself establishes the permissibility of
intercourse. So if the obstacle is removed, the result will be that the
contract as such will come into play. [^44]

If the role of the time period is to contain a stipulated number of
sexual acts, whenever the number is finished, the woman is free of any
further obligation to the man. It goes without saying that if the
stipulated number of sexual acts is not performed by the end of the time
period, the marriage still comes to an end. [^45]


