Iv. the Dower
=============

The contract must mention a dower of known property, whether in cash or
kind, whose amount is safe from increase or decrease. In order to gain
knowledge of the property, it is sufficient for the woman to see it, but
it is not necessary that it actually be weighed, measured, or
counted-whatever the case may require. The contract of mut'a is not
simply an exchange of goods, but a marriage. Even if it is defined as a
'rental', that also is different from an exchange. Hence it is
sufficient that any possibility of misunderstanding which might arise
from not seeing the dower be removed. As for goods which are not
present, it is sufficient that the dower be described in such a manner
that the woman's ignorance will be removed, i.e., that it be described
exactly as it is. [^46]

There is no condition or requirement concerning the amount of the dower
except that the two sides come to an agreement over articles which may
properly be exchanged, even if they are no more than a few grains of
wheat. [^47] On this point there are specified hadith as well as the
general hadith which state that a woman who enters into mut'a is
'rented'. [^48] If the dower is not mentioned, the contract is
unanimously held to be invalid, On this point also there are a number of
hadith. [^49]

The woman may ask for the whole amount of the dower at the beginning of
the marriage. In this case, the man may not take back any of the dower
under any circumstances, unless for some reason the contract should have
been invalid from the beginning (see below). Several hadith are recorded
which establish this point without question. [^50]

In a situation where a contract is concluded, but before the beginning
of the time period the man decides not to go through with the marriage
but to 'give back' to the woman the contracted time, she is entitled to
one-half the dower. The situation is similar to divorce before
consummation in permanent marriage. [^51]

But if the man should give only part of the time period back to the
woman before consummation, there is a difference of opinion as to the
dower. According to al-Shaykh al-Ansari and al-Shahid al Thani, the
situation cannot be the same as in the first case--where the whole time
period was given back-since in this second case the essential point is
that mut'a demands a full dower. [^52]

The difference between the first and second cases is explained in more
detail by al-Shahid al Thani. He poses the question: 'What is it that
requires one-half of the dower to be held back from the woman? Is it two
things together, i.e., not consummating the marriage and giving back the
whole of the time period? Or does the problem revolve around whether or
not the marriage was consummated?' He states that there are two
possibilities: On the one hand, the hadith are explicit concerning the
matter of consummation. The situation is exactly the same as in divorce
after permanent marriage: one-half of the dower must be paid if the
marriage has not been consummated, but the whole dower must be paid if
it has been consummated. So in this respect, the reason that one-half
the dower is held back is that the marriage was not consummated. On the
other hand, there is the question of what exactly necessitates that the
dower be paid. In permanent marriage the key element is consummation.
But temporary marriage is different from permanent marriage because of
the time period. Therefore the time period also must be taken into
account. [^53]

Al-Shahid al Thani remarks that the difference between these two
possible interpretations becomes obvious in a situation where the
husband should return more than one-half of the time period to the wife,
not having consummated the marriage. According to the first
interpretation, the wife must receive the whole dower; but according to
the second, she is only entitled to one-half of it, He concludes that
the second interpretation would seem to be the correct one, so long as
we accept the authenticity of the hadith attributed to the Imam
al-Hasan: When asked about a man who gave the remaining time period back
to his temporary wife before the consummation of the marriage, he
replied in a general sense, 'The woman must return one-half the dower to
the man.' [^54]

Al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Hasan holds that whether the full dower or only
one-half is to be paid depends totally upon the question of
consummation. 'Giving back the time period' is equivalent to using it up
completely. In other words, when the man returns the remaining time
period to the woman, he has already taken possession of conjugal rights
with her for the elapsed time. But this does not require that the woman
relinquish one-half of the dower. In this respect the situation
resembles the woman's 'giving back the dower' in permanent marriage. If
the woman thus relinquishes her claim to it, this does not mean that her
husband is no longer her husband in the full sense. Therefore, giving
back the time period has no relationship with the dower being reduced to
one-half. The only question to consider is whether or not the marriage
has been consummated. If it has been consummated and then the husband
returns some or all of the remaining time, the wife is entitled to the
whole dower, since without question the dower becomes necessary as soon
as consummation takes place. [^55]

Whether the time period is given back with or without consummation, the
wife's consent is unnecessary, since giving back the period is
equivalent to the erasing of a debt owed by the woman. [^56]

If of her own free will a woman who has concluded a contract of mut'a
should separate from her husband before the end of the time period,
whether before or after consummation, the man reduces the dower in
proportion to the amount of time by which the time period of the mut'a
has been reduced-provided, that is, that he has not already paid her the
full dower. [^57] Thus, for example, if the woman's dower is 3000 rials
and the time period 30 days; and if the woman should separate from her
husband after 20 days, her husband would reduce the dower by one-third.
Hence, if the woman should fail to fulfill any of the conditions of the
marriage for the whole time period, she forfeits the whole dower. The
reason she forfeits part or all of it is that first, the contract of
mut'a by definition entails an exchange, such that the woman is in the
position of a 'rented' object, Second, numerous hadith have been
recorded concerning this particular point, For example, the Imam Ja'far
was asked if it is permissible to hold back part of the dower if the
woman fails to put herself at her husband's disposal. He replied: 'It is
permissible for you to hold back what you can [i.e., what you have not
already given her]. So if she goes back on her word, take from her [in
proportion to] the amount she has broken the contract.' [^58]

However, if the woman should fail to provide the man with conjugal
rights because of an excuse sanctioned by the sharia, such as
menstruation or 'fear of an oppressor', then the dower may not be
reduced. A man came to the Imam Ja'far and said: [^59] 'I concluded a
contract of mut'a with a woman for one month for a given amount, But the
woman only came to me for part of the month, and part she stayed away.'
The Imam replied: 'An amount should be held back from her dower
equivalent to the amount she stayed from you, except for the days of her
menstruation, for those belong to her.'

If it should become apparent that the contract is invalid because the
woman already has a husband, or because she should be maintaining a
waiting period as the result of a previous marriage, or because she is
forbidden to the man by family relationship, or because of some other
reason, then one of the following courses of action should be taken:

If the marriage has already been consummated and if the woman was
ignorant of the fact that the contract was invalid at the time of sexual
intercourse, then she should be given the 'normal dower'. Here the
reasoning is that the fact of intercourse has to be honored and
compensation given. Since the contract is invalid, the 'specified dower'
is nullified; hence the normal dower must be paid. [^60]

As for whether the normal dower is the same as that for permanent
marriage or is to be adjusted according to the time period of the mut'a,
the most authoritative opinion is voiced by al-Shaykh al-Ansari and
al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Hasan. They hold that the normal dower is the same
as for permanent marriage. AI Tabataba'i argues that here the normal
dower is compensation for 'mistaken intercourse'. Since the contract was
invalid without the knowledge of the husband and wife, their intercourse
is 'mistaken'. Therefore the man must pay the normal dowry of permanent
marriage, which is demanded in any instance of 'mistaken intercourse'.
[^61] The time period for which the woman was at the man's disposal is
irrelevant, just as there is no difference between one act of sexual
intercourse and several acts as long as the mistake remains in force.
[^62]

If it should become apparent that the contract is invalid before the
marriage is consummated, the woman receives no dower. Only a valid
contract or the fact of intercourse warrants the dower's payment.
Al-Shahid al Thani claims that on this point there is consensus among
the ulama. [^63]

If the marriage has been consummated and the woman was aware of the
contract's invalidity, she can have no claim to a dower, since she is a
fornicatress, and there is no dower for fornication.

In all three of the above cases, if the man has already given the woman
the whole dower, she must return part or all of it as soon as the
invalidity of the contract becomes apparent. If she no longer possesses
the amount which must be returned, she is liable for it, no matter how
it may have left her hands-whether, for example, she has spent it or it
was stolen. [^64]

If the woman should die during the period of the mut'a, even if it be
before consummation, her dower may in no way be lessened, exactly as in
permanent marriage. [^65]

**Footnotes:**

[^1]. Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Sa'id (602-76/1205-77), author of Shara'i'
al-islam, a standard textbook of Shi'i fiqh and the subject of many
commentaries.

[^2]. Shara'i', Beirut, 1930,II,23.

[^3]. Zayn al-Din Muhammad ibn 'Ali al-'A.mili (911-65/1505-58), author
of Sharh al-lum'a (al-Rawdat al-bahiyya fi sharh al-lum'a
al-dimashqiyya), a commentary on al-Iuma al-dimashqiyya by al-Shahid
al-Awwal.

[^4]. Sharh al-lum'a, v, 245.
[^5]. Abu 'Abdullah Muhammad ibn Makki al-'Amili (d. 782/1380).

[^6]. Jamal al-Din Hasan ibn Yusuf ibn Zayn al-Din 'Ali ibn al-Mutahhar
(648-726/1250-1326), author of lrshad al-adhhan ila ahkam al-iman.

[^7]. Murtada b. Muhammad Amin al-Dizfuli (1214-81/1800-64). His works
al-Matajir on fiqh and al-Rasa'il on us'ul al-fiqh are considered the
most complete textbooks on these sciences.

[^8]. Sharh al-lum'a, v, 245; al-Matajir, Tehran 1352/1973, the book on
muta (which is a commentary on al-'Allama's lrshad).

[^9]. Fiqh,IV, 90.

[^10]. Shara'i, I,233.

[^11]. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Hurr al-'Amili (1033-1104/1624-93),
Wasa'il al-shia, Tehran, 1385/1965-66, XIV, 446.

[^12]. 'Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Musawi (355-436/965-1044), leading Shi'i
scholar and author of many works. His brother, al-Sharif al-Radi (d.
406/1015), was also a famous scholar and compiled 'Ali's Nahj
al-balagha.

[^13]. Riyad, II, 113; Mukhtasar-i nafi' (an 18th/14th century Persian
summary of al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli's Shara'i' by an unknown author), ed.
M.T. Daneshpazhuh, Tehran, 1343/1964,231.

[^14]. Al-Shahid al Thani, Masalik al-ajham (a commentary on Shara'i'),
Tehran, 1273/1856-57, I,536.

[^15]. Sharh al-lum'a, v, 110.

[^16]. Shara'i',II, 24.

[^17]. al-Matajir,II,298.

[^18]. Riyad, II,113.

[^19]. Wasa'il, XIV, 466.

[^20]. Ibid.,463.

[^21]. Shaykh Muhammad Hasan (d. 1266/1850), Jawahir al-kalam (a
commentary

on Shara'i'), Tehran, 1325/1907, V, 165.

[^22]. Wasa'il, XIV, 452.

[^23]. Ibid.

[^24]. Jawahir, v, 165.

[^25]. Usul al-fiqh, the science that discusses the arts and techniques
for making juridical judgments.

[^26]. Asl al-sihha.

[^27]. Wasail, XIV, 458, hadith 3.

[^28]. Jawahir, V, 166,

[^29].Wasail, XIV, 459, hadith 10.

[^30]. Ibid., 458, hadith 5.

[^31]. Ibid., 479, hadith I.

[^32]. Ibid., hadith 2.

[^33]. Ibid., 446, hadith 2 and 4.

[^34]. Matajir, II, 300.

[^35]. Ibid.,Jawahir,v,171.

[^36]. Matajir, II, 299; Sharh al-lum'a, V, 287; Jawahir, V, 169.

[^37]. Wasa'ill, XIV, hadith 1.

[^38]. Ibid., 469, hadith 1.

[^39]. Matajir, II, 299.

[^40]. Sharh al-lum'a, V, 287.

[^41]. Ibid.,285.

[^42]. Matajir, II, 300; Jawahir, V, 170.

[^43]. Sahih al-Bukhari, n.p., 1378/1958, III, 120.

[^44]. Matajir, II, 300.

[^45]. Ibid.

[^46]. Matajir, II, 300; Sharh al-lum'a, V, 284.

[^47]. Wasa'il, XIV, 467, hadith 5.

[^48]. Matajir, II. 300; Masalik, l, 538.

[^49]. Wasa'il, XIV, 465-66, hadith 1-3.

[^50]. Ibid., 482, hadith 1-2; 483, hadith I.

[^51]. Sharh al-lum'a, v, 285; Shara'i, II, 24; Matajir, II, 300;
Masalik, 1,538.

[^52]. Matajir, II, 301; Sharh al-lum'a, V, 285; Masalik, 1,538.

[^53]. Masalik, I, 538.

[^54]. Wasa'il, XIV, 483, hadith I.

[^55]. Jawahir, V, 168.

[^56]. Sharh al-lum'a, v, 285; Masalik, I,538.

[^57]. Sharh al-lum'a,v,285.

[^58]. Wasail, XIV, 481, hadith I.

[^59]. Ibid., hadith 4.

[^60]. Masalik, l,539; Matajir, lI,301; Riyad,II,114.

[^61]. Riyad, II ,115.

[^62]. Matajir, II, 301.

[^63]. Masalik, I, 538.

[^64]. Matajir, II, 301; Sharh al-lum'a, v, 287-88.

[^65]. Sharh al-lum'a, v, 286.


