Chapter 3
=========

**The Statutes Of Mut'a Conditions In The Contract**

IT IS permissible for one or more conditions to be mentioned in the
contract of mut'a, so long as they are legitimate. A condition must be
accompanied by a declaration and an acceptance. Fulfilling the condition
then becomes necessary, since it is part of the contract,

As for conditions not mentioned in the text of the contract itself, but
stated before or after the contract, their fulfillment is not
obligatory. Concerning this point both al-Shaykh al-Ansari and al
Tabataba'i claim a consensus of the ulama. [^1] A number of hadith are
mentioned in this connection, among them these words of the Imam Ja'far:
' Any condition before the marriage is destroyed by the marriage, but
what is after the marriage is permissible.' [^2] Here by 'after the
marriage' is meant immediately after the words of the woman: 'I have
married myself to thee.' Hence, the condition enters into the
declaration and becomes a necessary condition of the marriage. ' After
the marriage' does not signify after the acceptance by the man. The
Imam's words 'permissible' here are usually interpreted to mean
'incumbent'. [^3]

It is permissible for the contract to stipulate as a condition a
particular time for meetings between the husband and wife, such as
daytime or night-time. As already mentioned, it is also permissible for
a given number of sexual acts for a given period to be stipulated, as
for example, during one day or over the whole period of the marriage.
These are legitimate conditions and in no way contradict the
requirements of the contract. As the Prophet said: 'The believers hold
fast to their conditions [which they stipulate].' However, if only a
given number of sexual acts is stipulated without mention of a time
period, the contract is invalid, since the time period must be stated.
[^4]

It is permissible for a condition to be stipulated that the marriage
not be consummated, since again the condition is legitimate and does not
contradict the requirements of the contract. [^5] In addition, the Imam
Ja'far was asked explicitly if such a condition was permissible. He
replied: 'The man has to fulfill the stated conditions.' [^6] However,
according to the most widely held opinion, in such a case if the woman
should give permission for intercourse during the time period,
intercourse is then permissible. For the contract warrants intercourse,
but if the condition of non-intercourse is laid down, that is the
woman's right over the man. In other words, she has been 'rented' for
the purpose of sexual intercourse, and the condition has become the
barrier to this end. So if she chooses to waive the condition, she is
then at the man's disposal. [^7]

**Coitus Interruptus**

It is permissible to perform coitus interruptus, even if it is not
mentioned as a condition in the contract. Al-Shahid al-Awwal and al
Tabataba'i claim a consensus of the ulama' on this point. [^8] They say
the consensus derives from a hadith reported from the Imam Ja'far: 'That
[semen] belongs to the man: he may expend it as he wishes.' [^9] In
addition, in contrast to permanent marriage, the basic aim of mut'a is
enjoyment, not the production of offspring. [^10]

If the woman becomes pregnant such that the pregnancy derives from the
period of mut'a, the child belongs to the husband, even if he performed
coitus interruptus. This statute applies to every legitimate act of
sexual intercourse, not specifically to mut'a, since the principle
enunciated in the saying: 'The child belongs to the bed' is of general
application. [^11] Al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Hasan claims consensus on this
point. [^12]

However, if the man should deny the child, then it does not belong to
him; the 'sworn allegation' required in permanent marriage is not
necessary. Al-Shahid al Thani, al-Shaykh al-Ansari and al-Shaykh
Muhammad al-Hasan claim consensus on this question. They point out that
the 'bed of mut'a', like the 'bed of a slave-girl', does not hold the
same high position as the bed of a permanent wife, since a wife by mut'a
is a 'rented woman'. [^13] On this point two hadith have been recorded.
[^14]

Al-Shahid al Thani adds that although sworn allegation is unnecessary
in mut'a, this is the outward and exoteric statute, and there is another
'statute' established between man and God. In this second respect it is
not permissible for the man to deny the child just because he performed
coitus interruptus or suspects his wife of adultery. He must have
definite knowledge that the child does not belong to him. Hence it is
encumbent upon him to observe what exists between him and God, even
though his word alone will be accepted and there is no need for him to
make a sworn allegation. [^15]

**Divorce**

By a consensus of the ulama there is no divorce in mut'a. [^16] The man
and woman become separated from each other through the expiration of the
time period, or else by the man's 'returning' the remaining time to the
woman. In this connection a saying of the Imam Ja'far is as explicit as
possible. He was asked if the husband and wife married by mut'a become
separated without divorce. He replied: 'Yes. ' [^17]

**Forswearing**

In mut'a there is no forswearing, since forswearing's very definition
has to do with divorce, which does not exist in mut'a. Moreover, the
woman cannot demand a right to sexual intercourse in temporary marriage,
a demand which is essential in the establishment of forswearing in
permanent marriage. The only thing the woman may demand is the dower, to
which she is entitled as a 'rented' woman. [^18]

**Sworn Allegation**

Sworn allegation does not take place in muta. According to the Imam
Ja'far: 'A free man does not make a sworn allegation against a slave
girl, a non-Muslim (dhimmi), or a wife by mut'a.' [^19] Moreover, in the
case of denying parentage, by a consensus of the ulama' it is
unnecessary for the man to make the sworn allegation, as we have already
seen.

**Zihar**

There is a difference of opinion as to whether or not zihar may take
place in temporary marriage. The majority of the ulama' hold that it can
take place, since the Qur'anic pronouncements concerning it are general
and not delimited. For example, the verse: 'Those of you who say,
regarding their women: 'Be as my mother's back', they are not truly
their mothers' (58:2) indicates that zihar pertains to any woman with
whom intercourse may legitimately take place, a category within which a
wife by muta is included. Al-Shahid al Thani, al Tabataba'i, and
al-Muhaqqiq al-HiIIi all hold this opinion. [^20]

But al-Shaykh al-Ansari and al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Hasan seem to prefer
the opposite opinion, that zihar does not take place in muta. For the
result of zihar is either returning to the wife, or finally divorcing
her. As for the second possibility, there is no divorce in mut'a. And
'returning to the wife' is unnecessary in mut'a, whereas it is necessary
in permanent marriage. When a man pronounces the formula of zihar in
permanent marriage, the woman remains his wife. According to permanent
marriage's statutes, she has a right to sexual intercourse. Once the man
pronounces the formula of zihar, she may demand her right at any time.
At that time the man must either pay the expiation or divorce her. But
since the woman has no right to sexual intercourse in mut'a, the problem
of 'return' to her does not present itself. At any rate, when the time
period expires, separation takes place. Thus if zihar exists in mut'a it
comes down to this: the man returns the remainder of the time period to
the woman. There is no reason to claim that this returning is equivalent
to divorce. [^21]

**Inheritance**

According to the most widely held view, there is no inheritance between
husband and wife in mut'a unless it should be specifically mentioned as
a condition of the contract. One of the spouses may be named heir to the
other, in which case the inheritance is one-sided; or it may be
stipulated that if either spouse should die, the other will inherit.

If no such conditions are mentioned, there is no inheritance. According
to the Imam Ja'far: ' Among mut'a's statutes is that you do not inherit
from the woman, nor does she inherit from you. [^22]

The reason that inheritance is permissible provided that the condition
is entered into the contract is first the universal applicability of the
prophetic hadith: 'The believers hold fast to their conditions.' Second,
according to the Imam Ja'far: 'If they should stipulate the condition of
inheritance [in the contract of mut'a], they must hold fast to this
condition.' [^23] Third, the Imam al-Rida has a similar saying: 'If they
should stipulate the condition [of inheritance], it takes place; and if
they should not, it does not take place.' [^24] This position concerning
inheritance is that held by such authorities as al-Shahid al-Awwal,
al-Shahid al Thani, al-Shaykh al-Ansari, al-Muhaqqiq al-HiIIi, al-Shaykh
Muhammad al-Hasan, and al Tabataba'i. [^25]

Two other positions are worth quoting on this question, each of which
finds its basis in the hadith.

Certain ulama' hold that inheritance cannot take place as a result of
mut'a, whether or not it is mentioned in the contract. They base this
opinion on the first hadith related from the Imam Ja'far above on the
question of inheritance, a hadith which they interpret to apply to every
case without exception.

Certain ulama' hold that inheritance takes place as long as there is no
condition negating it in the contract. They base this opinion on the
words of the Imam al-Baqir: 'The two of them inherit from each other (as
a result of mut'a) as long as they do not mention a condition to the
contrary.' [^26]

There is also the question of inheritance by a child born as the result
of a temporary marriage: its inheritance from its father is one-half of
that of a child by permanent marriage, while its inheritance from its
mother is the same as it would be in permanent marriage.


