Chapter 4
=========

**The Legitimacy Of Mut'a**

The ulama', both Sunni and Shi'i, agree that mut'a was permitted at the
beginning of Islam. However, they disagree as to the reasons it was
permitted.

**The Shi'i View**

In the sura entitled 'Women', after listing those women to whom
marriage is forbidden, the Qur'an states as follows: 'Lawful for you is
what is beyond all that, that you may seek, using your wealth, in
wedlock and not in licence. So those of them whom you enjoy, give them
their appointed wages; it is no fault in you in agreeing together, after
the due apportionate. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise' (4:24). All Shi'i
ulama' and some Sunni ulama' hold that this verse-especially the words:
'Such wives as you enjoy (istamta'tum)'-refers to the permissibility of
mut'a. The Shi'is present several arguments to prove this point. [^1]

This verse was revealed towards the beginning of the Prophet's stay in
Medina, which lasted from AH 1/CE 622 to 10/632. At that time the men of
Medina used to 'seek enjoyment' from women for a limited period of time
in exchange for a specified sum of money. By its revelation this verse
in effect confirmed an existing situation; and it emphasized that men
must fulfill their promises concerning the agreed upon sum. In Medina
this custom was looked upon as one kind of temporary marriage and was
referred to by the term istimta', the same word employed in the Qur'anic
verse-even though the literal meaning of the word is 'to seek benefit'
or 'to take enjoyment'. Hence the meaning of the Qur'anic verse must be
understood in terms of the conventional usage of the time, for as is
well known in the science of Qur'anic commentary and Islamic
jurisprudence, the Qur'an follows the conventional usage of the people
in all statutes and legal prescriptions. If someone wants to understand
a word in the Qur'an in other than the conventional meaning of the time,
he must supply a strong reason for doing so.

The context of the verse also indicates that it is referring to
temporary marriage. In the preceding verses the Qur'an forbids acts of
injustice toward women. 'Oh believers, it is not lawful for you to
inherit from women against their will; neither debar them, that you may
go off with part of what you have given them' (4:19). The most commonly
accepted interpretation of this verse is that it forbids the pre-Islamic
Arab custom of inheriting stepmothers. When a man died, one of his sons
would inherit his wife, as long as she was not his own mother. The
stepson would place a cloth upon his dead father's wife and thereby
become her owner. If he wished he could then marry her without paying
her a dower. Or he could keep her a virtual prisoner. He could also
marry her to someone else and take her dower for himself, or forbid her
to marry anyone as long as he was alive. If the woman possessed
property, he was entitled to take possession of it for himself. [^2]

The next verse reads in part as follows: ' And if you desire to
exchange a wife in place of another, and you have given to one a
hundred-weight, take of it nothing' (4:20). In other words, if a man
divorces a wife to marry a different wife, he must not take back any of
the dower that he has given the first, even if the dower is a very large
one and he desires only a small part of it.

The next subject referred to in this passage is the marriage of one's
father's wife: ' And do not marry women that your fathers married. ..'
(4:22). Both this verse and verse 19 were revealed after Abu Qays b.
al-Aslat died and his wife was inherited and married by his son Muhsin.
The son refused to pay the daily expenses of his stepmother and wife,
nor would he give her, her share of the inheritance or allow her to
visit her relatives. She came to the Prophet and explained what had
happened. He told her to return to her husband and wait, that perhaps
God would send down a statute that would clarify her situation. Then
these verses were revealed. [^3]

In the following verse (4:23) the Qur'an enumerates the women who are
forbidden to men. These are divided into seven kinds stemming from blood
relationship and seven more stemming from other causes: 'Forbidden to
you are your mothers and daughters. ..'. The next verse adds a fifteenth
category of women forbidden to men: ' And wedded women, save what your
right hands own.' It continues with the words quoted above: 'Lawful for
you is what is beyond all that.' In other words, any woman not belonging
to one of the fifteen categories is permitted, whether by marriage or
ownership.

Next the verse states: 'that you may seek, using your wealth, in
wedlock and not in license.' Grammatically, this clause is in apposition
to 'what is beyond all that.' It explains the legitimate mode of seeking
sexual relationships with women, whether as the result of marriage or
the purchase of slaves.

The next part of this same verse states as follows: 'So those of them
whom you enjoy, give them their appointed wages.' The word 'so' (fa)
shows that this part of the verse is the conclusion reached by the
previous words. This section is either part of the previous subject
matter, or an example of it; in other words, its relation to the
previous section is either that of the part which is completing the
whole, or the particular example to the universal principle. And since
the previous section deals with the different kinds of legitimate sexual
relationships, either by marriage or the purchase of slaves, we can
conclude that this section of the verse is the exposition of a further
kind of marriage, not mentioned previously; a kind which requires that
the man pay the wages of his wife.

The next verse states that if a man is too poor to marry a free Muslim
woman, he should marry a Muslim slave girl; and the following verse
concerns certain statutes related to such marriages.

Finally this section of the chapter concludes with these words: 'God
desires to make clear to you, and to guide you to the customs of those
who went before you, and to turn towards you; God is All-knowing,
All-wise' (4:26).

Many sayings have been related from the Companions of the Prophet and
those who followed them (al-taibi'un) confirming the Shi'i view that
verse 24 of this chapter concerns mut 'a. Several of the companions,
including Ibn 'Abbas, the ancestor of the 'Abbasid caliphs, Ibn Mas'ud,
one of the first to accept Islam, and Ubayy b. Ka'b, one of the scribes
of the revelation, hold that three words have been dropped form this
passage in the Qur'an and that the original version read: 'So those of
them whom you enjoy to a specified term (ila ajal musamma).' This
clearly indicates that the verse refers to mut'a. For example, it has
been related that Ibn 'Abbas was asked about mut'a. He answered: 'Have
you not read the sura "Women" (4).' His questioner replied: 'Of course I
have.' He said: 'Did you not read: "So those of them whom you enjoy to a
specified term. .." , He answered: 'I did not read the verse like that.'
Ibn 'Abbas then said: 'I swear by God, this is how God revealed it', and
he repeated this statement twice. [^4]

In Majma' al-bayan, al Tabarsi, the famous Shi'i commentator of the
Qur'an summarizes the Shi'i arguments: the word 'enjoy' in this verse
refers to the marriage of mut'a, i.e., a marriage for a specified dower
and a determined time period. This opinion has been related from Ibn
'Abbas and many of the 'followers' of the Companions such as Isma'il b.
'Abd al-Rahman al-Suddi (d. 127/744-45) and Sa'id b. Jubayr al-Asadi
(95/713-14). In fact, this clearly must be the case, for although the
words istimta' and mut'a have the literal meaning of 'enjoyment', in the
language of the shari'a they refer to the contract of temporary
marriage, especially when they are followed by the word 'women'. Hence
the meaning of the verse is: 'Whenever you draw up a contract of mut'a
with a woman, you must pay her, her wages.' [^5]

**The Sunni View**

As was indicated above, the Sunnis agree that at the beginning of Islam
mut'a was permitted. For example, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d. 606/1209),
the famous Sunni theologian, writes in his Great Commentary on the
Qur'an that mut'a was at first permitted. The Prophet made a 'lesser
pilgrimage' ('umra) to Mecca, and the women of Mecca made themselves up
especially for the occasion. Some of the Companions complained about
their long separation from their wives, and the Prophet replied: 'Then
go and enjoy (istimta') these women.' [^6]

Those Sunnis who hold that the Qur'anic verse mentioned above (4:23)
does indeed refer to the permissibility of mut'a also maintain that the
verse was subsequently abrogated (naskh) by other Qur'anic verses. They
offer three arguments to prove their point: other Qur'anic verses, the
sermon of 'Umar banning mut'a, and hadith of the Prophet transmitted by
the Companions. The Shi'i in turn reject each of the arguments.

1. The Qur'anic Argument

The Sunnis argue that sexual intercourse is forbidden except with one's
wife or a slave by reason of the verse: 'Prosperous are the believers
... who guard their private parts save from their wives and what their
right hands own.' (23:1-6) [^7] According to the Prophet's wife 'A'isha
and others: ' Mut'a is forbidden and abrogated in the Qur'an where God
says: "who guard their private parts. .." [^8]

The Sunni argument continues by pointing out that without question a
woman enjoyed through muta is not a slave. Nor is she a wife, for
several reasons: If she were a wife, she and her husband would inherit
from each other, since God says: ' And for you a half of what your wives
leave. ..'. (4:12). But everyone agrees that mut'a does not involve
inheritance. If she were a wife, the child would belong to the husband,
since according to the Prophet: 'The child belongs to the bed.' But
again this is not the case. And finally, if she were a wife, it would be
necessary for her to maintain the waiting period, since this is
commanded by God (2:234); but this also is not the case.

We have already seen that some of these arguments, taken from al-Razi's
Great Commentary, do not in fact apply to mut'a as the Shi'is understand
it. However this may be, it will be useful to see how the Shi'is answer
each of the Sunni claims:

As for the 'abrogation' of the verse concerning mut'a, historical
considerations show that this cannot be the case. The verse mentioned as
abrogating mut'a was revealed in Mecca, while the verse establishing it
was revealed after the Prophet had emigrated to Medina. But a verse
which abrogates another verse must be revealed after it, not before it.
[^9]

As for the Sunni claim that a wife by mut'a is not a legitimate wife
because she does not fulfill the shari requirements for being a 'wife',
this also is false. In the question of inheritance, the Qur'anic verse
is a general one, and there is no reason to suppose that it may not have
certain exceptions. In fact, the specific requirements of mut'a as
established by the hadith literature show that mut'a is an exception.
Nor is it the only exception, since an unbeliever cannot inherit from a
Muslim, nor can a murderer inherit from his victim. In short,
inheritance pertains to permanent marriage, but even in permanent
marriage it has certain exceptions, so that the verse establishing it
cannot be interpreted as nullifying mut'a's validity. [^10]

In the question of the child, there is no reason to claim that it is
illegitimate. In mut'a the 'bed' is legitimate, so the offspring is also
legitimate.11 The Imam Ja'far was asked: 'If the wife becomes pregnant
as a result of mut'a, to whom does the child belong?' He replied: 'To
the father', [^12] i.e., the child is legitimate.

In a similar manner numerous hadith exist to prove that a wife by mut'a
must observe the waiting period. Some of these are even related in Sunni
sources. For example al-Razi himself quotes a relevant saying from Ibn
'Abbas. He was asked: 'Is mut'a fornication or marriage?' He answered:
'Neither the one nor the other.' The questioner then asked: 'Well then,
what is it?' Ibn 'Abbas replied: 'It is mut'a', just as God has said.'
The questioner continued: 'Is there a waiting period in mut'a?' He
replied: 'Yes, a menstrual period.' 'Do the husband and wife inherit
from each other?' He answered: 'NO.' [^13]

Certain Sunnis also argue that mut'a cannot be considered a legitimate
form of sexual union because it excludes such things as inheritance,
divorce, sworn allegation, forswearing, and zihar. Since these necessary
concomitants of marriage do not apply to mut'a, it cannot be considered
marriage, so the woman cannot be considered a legitimate wife. If she is
neither a wife nor property, sexual intercourse with her is
illegitimate: 'Prosperous are the believers, who. ..guard their private
parts, save from their wives and what their right hands own. ..; but
whosoever seeks after more than that, those are the transgressors'
(23:1-7). Hence, persons who engage in mut'a transgress God's law.

A typical Shi'i answer to this argument runs as follows: First, the
Qur'anic verse is a general statement, and there is no reason why its
specific applications may not be clarified by other verses and hadith.
Second, it is not true that the above things are concomitants of
marriage: there is no inheritance in the case of a non-Muslim wife, a
murderer, or a slave-girl. A legitimate sexual relationship may be
dissolved without divorce in the case of a wife who is the subject of a
sworn allegation, a spouse who leaves Islam, or a slave-girl who is
sold. Sworn allegation, forswearing, and zihar are all concomitants of
permanent marriage, not of legitimate sexual relationships in general
(i.e., they do not apply to sexual relationships with a slave). If we
suppose that some proof is found-in the form of a Qur'anic verse or a
hadith-demonstrating that these things do in fact pertain to legitimate
sexual relationships, then it will be necessary to specify that there
are certain exceptions. This is the only way we will be able to combine
the Qur'anic verses and the hadith which show that these pertain to
legitimate sexual relationships with those hadith which demonstrate that
they do not pertain to mut'a. [^14]

2. The Sermon of 'Umar

In a famous sermon [^15] the second caliph 'Umar banned mut'a with the
following words: 'Two mut'a were practiced during the time of the
Prophet [i.e. temporary marriage and mutat al-hajj], [^16] but I forbid
both of them and will punish anyone who practices either.' Al-Razi
summarizes the Sunni interpretation of 'Umar's words by saying that they
were pronounced in a gathering of Companions and no one protested.
Therefore, the situation must have been as follows: either (1) everyone
knew that mut'a was forbidden, so they remained silent; or (2) they all
knew that it was permitted, yet they remained silent out of negligence
and in order to placate 'Umar; or (3) they did not know whether it was
forbidden or permitted, so they remained silent since the matter had
just then been clarified for them, so they had no reason to protest.
[^17]

Al-Razi continues by saying that the first possibility is what he is
trying to prove. If we maintain the second possibility, then we must
call 'Umar and the Companions who were with him unbelievers. For they
knew that the Qur'an and the Prophet had permitted mut'a, yet 'Umar went
ahead and banned it without the Qur'anic verse permitting it having been
abrogated. This is unbelief (kufr); and those who knew 'Umar was wrong
without protesting shared in his unbelief. But such a supposition
requires that we call Islam a religion of unbelief, which is absurd.

The third possibility-that 'Umar's listeners had not known whether
mut'a was permitted or forbidden-is also absurd. For, if we suppose that
mut'a was permitted, then people would need to have knowledge of that
fact in their everyday lives, just as they need to have knowledge about
the permissibility of marriage. So mut'a's legal situation must have
been known, just as everyone knew about mamage.

Al-Razi concludes that as soon as we see that the second and third
possibilities are in fact absurd, then we know for certain that the
Companions remained silent only because they all knew that mut'a had
already been abrogated.

The Shi'is answer al-Razi's arguments as follows: [^18] 'Umar's sermon
demonstrates that during the lifetime of the Prophet mut'a was
permitted. The reason 'Umar attributed the banning to himself is that he
wanted to show that he was expressing his own view. If

the Prophet himself had prohibited mut'a, or if its permissibility
pertained only to a specific period in time, then 'Umar would have
attributed its prohibition to the Prophet, not to himself.

Another saying concerning muta is also attributed to 'Umar: 'God
permitted for His Prophet what He willed, and the Qur'an has been
revealed in its entirety. So complete the hajj and the 'umra as God has
commanded you. But avoid marrying these women, and do not bring before
me any man who has married a woman for a specified period, or I will
stone him.' [^19] The Shi'i ulama' point out that without question
stoning as a punishment for having performed mut'a could not be
permissible, even if we were to accept that mut'a is forbidden. For
stoning can only be a punishment when a man has committed fornication
with a married woman. Hence 'Umar had no basis for laying down this
statute. [^20]

Al-Razi answers this line of reasoning by saying that perhaps 'Umar
only mentioned stoning to intimidate his listeners and make them think
more seriously about the consequences of temporary marriage. Certainly
such intimidation is permissible. The Prophet himself said: 'If anyone
from among us fails to pay his alms (zakat), I will take it from him
along with part of his property. ' But it is not permissible in Islam to
take a part of someone's property in punishment for not paying his alms.
The Prophet only said these words to press his point and to frighten his
listeners. [^21]

Concerning 'Umar's two sayings banning mut'a, the Shi'is argue as
follows: [^22] If his prohibition was based on 'independent judgment'
(ijtihad),[^23] then it is baseless, since all ulama' agree that
independent judgment can never gainsay the Qur'an or the hadith. As for
the Qur'anic basis of muta, we have already seen that-as far as the
Shi'is and certain individual Sunnis are concerned-the Qur'an permits it
in the chapter on Women, verse 23. As for its basis in the prophetic
hadith, many traditions have been related in the standard Sunni
collections, such as the words of 'Umar himself in his sermon: 'Two
mut'as were practiced during the time of the Prophet. ..'.

Concerning 'Umar's 'independent judgment', one of the contemporary
Shi'i ulama' argues as follows: ' Umar may have made his judgment
completely on his own initiative and in direct contradiction to the
words of the Prophet; or he may have based his judgment on a prohibition
issued by the Prophet himself. If the first case is true, then 'Umar's
judgment is groundless, as noted above. And the second case cannot be
true, since a number of the Companions have given witness to the fact
that mut'a was permitted during the lifetime of the Prophet and up until
the time of his death. [^24]

In general the Shi'is argue that if 'Umar's prohibition had been based
upon the words of the Prophet, then other Companions would have known
about it. How is it possible for the Prophet to have forbidden mut'a,
yet, during the rest of his life, the period of Abu Bakr's caliphate and
the beginning of 'Umar's caliphate, for prohibition to have remained
unknown to everyone but 'Umar? Moreover, if his prohibition were based
upon the words of the Prophet, why did he not attribute it to him
instead of to himself? [^25]

Al-Razi answers these arguments by claiming that none of them disproves
his original contention. None of them proves that mut'a had not already
been abrogated when 'Umar made his sermon. Moreover, there remains the
question of the transmission of the hadith abrogating mut'a : Was 'Umar
the only person to have heard the Prophet ban it, or had others heard
him as well? Perhaps some of the Companions had heard the prohibition
from the Prophet and had then forgotten. But when 'Umar mentioned the
prohibition in a large gathering, everyone knew he was speaking the
truth, so they remained silent. [^26]

As for the fact that 'Umar attributes the prohibition to himself,
al-Razi answers by pointing to his earlier argument: If 'Umar meant: '
Mut'a has been permitted by the shari'a up until now, but now I have
banned it', then it becomes necessary for us to consider not only him,
but also everyone who heard his pronouncement and did not protest, as an
unbeliever. It becomes necessary to consider even the Imam of the
Shi'is, 'Ali, as an unbeliever, since he was present and remained
silent. But no one wants to make such a claim. Hence we can only
conclude that what 'Umar meant was ... Mut'a was permitted during the
time of the Prophet, but I have forbidden it, since I know for
certain-as you know-that the Prophet abrogated it.'

The Shi'is reply to al-Razi's arguments as follows: First, it is
impossible to imagine that all of the Companions other than' Umar had
forgotten that muta had been forbidden, considering its everyday
importance. People need legitimate sexual relationships almost as much
as they need food and water. Second, the fact that no one protested
against 'Umar's pronouncement cannot be considered proof that the
Prophet himself had forbidden mut'a. For 'Umar threatened the people
with stoning, and considering his fabled severity, no one would have
dared to speak against him. If 'Ali had been able to protest against
'Umar, he would not have remained because of the circumstances he had no
choice but to have patience and to bide his time. The case of mut'a is
similar. For was it not 'Ali who said: 'If 'Umar had not prohibited
mut'a, no one would commit fornication except the wretched'? [^27]

Shi'i authors also point out that 'Umar banned the two kinds of muta
together, whereas everyone-Sunnis and Shi'is-agree that the hajj
al-mut'a is permissible. Hence the muta pertaining to women should also
be permissible. [^28]

Finally, another Sunni view on this subject deserves mention: Other
hadith are recorded in reliable sources according to which 'Umar does
attribute the banning of muta to the Prophet and not to himself. So it
is probable that here we do not have an exact quotation of his words,
but a paraphrase. Even if we accept the Shi'i claim that these are truly
'Umar's exact words, then it is clear that by his words: 'I forbid them
both', he meant: 'I am clarifying their situation for you; or: 'I am
putting into practice the view of the Prophet.' For it is well known in
the science of jurisprudence that prohibition and permissibility are
often attributed to him who clarifies the statute. Thus, for example,
when it is said that Shafi'i forbids hadith but Abu Hanifa permits it,
no one imagines that Shafi'i and Abu Hanifa are establishing these
injunctions as their own. What is meant is that they are explaining the
injunction on the basis of their own understanding of the Qur'an, the
sunna, etc. [^29]

**3. The Hadith Transmitted by the Companions**

In Sunni sources hadith have been transmitted from the Prophet showing
that he banned mut'a during his lifetime. In most of the Sunni 'sound
collections' (sihah), it is related from 'Ali that he said: 'Verily the
Prophet of God banned the mut'a of temporary marriage and the eating of
the meat of domesticated asses.' [^30] In many of these sources, and in
Shi'i sources as well, the words: 'on the day of the Battle of Khaybar'
are added. The Shi'i report that the great Shi'i ulama' such as
al-Shaykh al Tusi considered this saying authentic but maintained that
'Ali was practicing taqiyya or 'dissimulation' when he uttered it-i.e.,
he was hiding the true situation in order to protect himself. [^31]

Ibn Sabra relates from his father the following: 'I came upon the
Prophet of God in the early morning ... leaning against the Ka'ba. He
said: "Oh People! I commanded you to 'seek enjoyment' (istimta') from
these women, but now God has forbidden that to you until the Day of
Resurrection. So if you have a temporary wife, let her go her way; and
do not take back anything of what you have given her." ' [^32]

Another hadith is related from Salma b. al-Akwa'. Through his father he
reported that the Prophet of God permitted mut'a in the year of Awtas
(8/629) for three days; but then he prohibited it. This particular
hadith is related in many sources, with many discrepancies in the text.
[^33]

For their part, the Shi'is do not consider these three hadith to have
any authority. To illustrate how they reject them, we can summarize
al-Khuis arguments: [^34] The hadith attributed to 'Ali cannot be
authentic, since all Muslims agree that mut'a was permitted in the year
Mecca was conquered. So how could 'Ali have claimed that muta was banned
on the Day of Khaybar (three years before Mecca's conquest)? Because of
this obvious discrepancy, some of the great Sunni authorities on hadith
have maintained that the words 'on the day of Khaybar' probably refer
only to the meat of domestic asses. But this is absurd, for two reasons:
First, it is counter to the rules of Arabic grammar: if the phrase
referred only to asses, the verb would have to be repeated. Thus, in
Arabic one says: 'I honored Zayd and 'Amr on Friday', or one says: 'I
honored Zayd and I honored 'Amr on Friday', thus making it clear that
'on Friday' refers only to 'Amr. If the adverbial phrase referred only
to the meat, the text of the hadith would have to read: 'Verily the
Prophet of God banned muta, and he banned the eating of the meat of
domesticated asses on the Day of Khaybar .' In short, since everyone
agrees that mut'a was permitted when Mecca was taken, the Prophet cannot
have banned it three years before that. Hence the hadith is not
authentic.

The second reason that the 'Day of Khaybar' cannot refer only to the
meat of domesticated asses is that this clearly conflicts with hadith
related by al-Bukhari, Muslim, and Ahmad b. Hanbal (three of the most
authoritative Sunni collections). For their versions of 'Ali's hadith is
as follows: 'The Prophet banned the mut'a of marriage on the Day of
Khaybar, as well as the meat of domesticated asses. ,

As for the hadith related by Ibn Sabra from his father, alKhu'i points
out that although his hadith has been related by many chains of
authority, they all go back to Ibn Sabra himself, and thus the hadith is
of the type known as 'wahid, i.e., it derives from a single Companion.
And a Qur'anic verse cannot be abrogated even by the most authentic kind
of hadith, much less by a relatively weak one. Moreover the very content
of the hadith shows that it is not correct. It is hardly conceivable
that the Prophet could have stood before the Ka'ba in front of a large
group of Muslims and ban something until the Day of Resurrection, and
that then only one person-Sabra-should have heard him or related his
words. Where were those Companions who recorded even the gestures and
the glances of the Prophet? Certainly they should have joined Sabra in
reporting the prohibition of muta until the Day of Resurrection. And
where was 'Umar himself? He certainly should have known about the
prohibition so that it would not have been necessary to attribute the
banning of mut'a to himself. Finally, there are discrepancies in the
various versions of Sabra's hadith. In some versions the prohibition is
said to have occurred in the year of Mecca (8/630), in others in the
year of the Farewell Pilgrimage (10/632). This discrepancy makes the
hadith even more untrustworthy.

Al-Shahid al Thani alludes to another point concerning Ibn Sabra's
hadith not mentioned by al-Khu'i: Ibn Sabra himself is the only source
for his father's words, but no one knows anything about him. He is not
mentioned in any of the books on hadith as a transmitter, nor has any
other hadith been related from him. For this reason al-Bukhari-the most
famous Sunni authority, and generally considered the most reliable-left
Ibn Sabra's hadith out of his collection. [^35]

As for the hadith of Salma b. al-Akwa', al-Khu'i remarks that again it
is a saying related from only one Companion (wahid) and cannot abrogate
a Qur'anic verse. In addition, if it is an authentic hadith, it is
strange that it remained unknown to such important Companions as Ibn
'Abbas, Ibn Mas'ud, and Jabir b. 'Abd Allah. How is it possible for the
hadith to be authentic, while Abu Bakr did not forbid mut'a during the
whole period of his caliphate and 'Umar only banned it towards the end
of his own? [^36]

There are many sayings of the Shi'i Imams and the Companions which
indicate that mut'a was permitted up until the time of 'Umar's
prohibition. Three of the most famous are those of 'Ali, Ibn 'Abbas, and
'Umran b. al-Hasin. As we have already seen, 'Ali said: 'If 'Umar had
not prohibited mut'a, no one would commit fornication except the
wretched.' [^37] This is the most famous form of a saying reported in
numerous sources and a number of different versions. [^38] The above
version is derived from Sunni works; a Shi'i version is related from the
fifth Imam, al-Baqir: 'If it were not for that [i.e., mut'a] with which
['Umar] b. al-Khattab preceded me, no one would commit adultery except
the wretched.'

The saying related from Ibn 'Abbas is reported by the tenth/sixteenth
century Sunni scholar al-Suyuti in this form: 'God have mercy on 'Umar!
Mut'a was naught but a mercy from God, through which He showed mercy to
Muhammad's community. If 'Umar had not banned it, no one would need
fornication except the wretched.' [^39]

The saying of 'Umran b. al-Hasin is as follows: ' Mut'a was permitted
by the Book of God, and we practiced it while the Prophet was alive. No
verse was revealed abrogating it, and the Prophet did not ban it before
he died.' Some sources, including the Sahih of Muslim, then add the
sentence: 'Then a man ['Umar] said what he wanted to according to his
own opinion.' [^40]

Another saying pointed to by the Shi'is is related from Jabir b. 'Abd
Allah in Muslim's Sahih: 'Jabir came [to Mecca] for the 'umra, so we
went to see him where he was staying. He was asked about many things,
and then mut'a was mentioned. He said: 'Yes, we practiced mut'a at the
time of the Messenger of God, Abu Bakr, and 'Umar.' [^41]

For their part, the Sunnis do not accept these traditions as proving
the Shi'i points. The Sunnis consider the saying of Ibn 'Abbas the most
important and center most of their arguments around it. They quote other
sayings from Ibn 'Abbas on the same subject as proof of their own
contention. Al-Razi relates that poems were composed celebrating Ibn
'Abbas as the authority for the permissibility of mut'a. Having heard of
these verses, Ibn 'Abbas said: 'God slay them! I never said that it was
permitted unconditionally, but only to him who has no choice, just as
[when a person has no choice] carrion, blood, and pork are permitted.'
[^42]

Another saying is related from Ibn 'Abbas declaring that the Qur'anic
verse permitting mut'a was abrogated by the verse concerning divorce
(65:1). In addition, on his deathbed he is reported to have said: 'Oh
God, I repent to Thee of what I have said concerning mut'a. ..'.

In answer to the hadi'th of 'Ali, al-Razi relates the other saying
attributed to him referred to above; but he has nothing to say about the
other two traditions mentioned by the Shi'is.


