Letters
=======

Fatimah Tabataba’i’s Letter to Imam Khomeini
--------------------------------------------

***In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful***

 *The fragrance of union with you*  
 *has ignited these sparks within me;*  
 *But grief in my breast for you*  
 *has extinguished their flaring in me.*  
 *What a sign to the worlds are you,*  
 *worlds resounding so mournfully,*  
 *With cries to Whom all praise is due,*  
 *extolling His endless Glory!*[^1]

My dear Imam, my revered guide!

Those responsible for the publication of your works have asked me to
write what I know about the manner in which you composed your mystic[^2]
poetry, so that a small window could thereby be opened upon this
dimension of your existence for the eyes of your devotees. But when I
pick up the pen, the sorrow of your loss keeps me from writing, and
grief over your departures does not release me. Alas, without you, our
house has no light or radiance. Every place in the house bears some
token of you. The perfume of your presence is everywhere. Your little
‘Ali[^3] is constantly looking for you and asking about you. Since we
told him that you are in heaven, in his eagerness to see you he keeps on
gazing toward the sky and the stars.

No more than three months have elapsed since your spiritual journey.
Every day your devotees gather at the *Husayniyyah*[^4] and at your
house and weep like bereaved lovers. They strew petals in the passageway
between the house and the *Husayniyyah*.

My *pir*![^5] You were aware of your lover’s state: you knew about my
enamored soul, and you knew how enthralled by you and how agitated I am,
so how could you leave me alone? How can I, who have spent my entire
life in the shining rays of your existence, now live in darkness?!

*In this, my black night, I’ve lost the way to my intended.*  
 *Come out from some corner, oh star of guidance!*[^6]

I will leave an account of this sore grief and anguish for another
opportunity, and confine myself to what has been requested of me,
because:

*The stories of the gnostic masters nourish the soul.*  
 *Go, ask of the mystery; then come, and tell us the tale*.[^7]

When I was reading philosophical texts required for my field of study, I
would occasionally bring some of the difficult and obscure passages of a
book before Imam (may his grave be hallowed) for consultation. These
question and answer periods were soon transformed into twenty minute
lessons. One morning when I went to him to begin a lesson, I discovered
that he had written me a warning in a satirical quatrain:

*Fati, who studies the branches of philosophy,*  
 *Knows only ‘ph’, ‘l’, and ‘s’ of philosophy,*[^8]  
*My hope is that in the light of God*  
 *She may unveil herself of philosophy!*

After receiving this quatrain, I very persistently began to request
other verses. A few days later:

*Fati, one must journey to the Friend,*  
 *The self of one’s own self one must transcend!*  
 *Bits of knowledge that toward yourself tend*  
 *Are devils to avoid in the way you wend.*[^9]

Little by little, my insistent pleas had their effect, for a little
later he composed this:

*Fati, you and the Reality of gnosis.*  
 *what does it mean?!*  
 *To apprehend the essence without attributes,*  
 *what does it mean?!*  
 *Without study of ‘A’, you shall not find*  
 *your way to ‘Z’.*  
 *Without having entered the spiritual path, being gifted—*  
 *what does it mean?!*

I listened with my entire soul to such succinctly expressed quatrains of
enlightening advice. I hung them like pendants from my ears and became
intoxicated by their sweetness. Suddenly, I came to realize that it
would be a pity for message about gnosis such as these to be kept
private. Therefore, I boldly persisted in my request that he not abandon
the line he had taken up with composition of these massages. I must
confess that I was encouraged to persevere by the boundless kindness of
that dear, and so, I augmented my pleas with a request for
*ghazal*.[^10] He reproached me, saying, “What, am I a poet?!” But as
before, I insistently persisted with my spiritual guide, and after a few
days I heard this:

*In so far as the Friend is, you will not be harmed.*  
 *In so far as He is, the dust of quality and quantity is naught*  
 *Abandon whatever there is, and choose Him.*  
 *There is no more excellent advice than these two words.*[^11]

\*\*\*\*\*

*You have not become a lover if you have a name.*  
 *You are not a mad if you have a message.*  
 *You have not become drunk if you have consciousness.*  
 *Be considerate with us until you have the goblet.*

Days passed and every once in a while Imam paid the price of my ardent
entreaties with a *ghazal* or with some writings. With this turn of
events, I would allow no further delay, and I first showed the
collection of quatrains to my spouse, Ahmad.[^12] He also expressed his
enthusiasm and encouraged me to pursue the case. So, I took a notebook
to Imam and I requested that when suitable he inscribe therein his
poems, admonitions, and mystical allusions… And it was in this way that
he so graciously complied with my request and granted me a position from
the table of his gnosis and generosity as provision for my journey, and
he gave me something he had written which ended with a *ghazal*. It was
a positive answer to my persistent request.

Now, the fruit of these efforts, that is, this valuable legacy, I place
at the disposal of that respectable institute which publishes his works
so that they may present it to the devotees of Imam, and thereby to
provide the limpid water of this fountain for those who thirst. In this
context I have other things to say which, if God grants me the
opportunity, I shall relate.

*In grief, untimely days elapsed;*  
 *Days accompanied by inner burning,*  
 *If the days have gone, let them go without fear,*  
 *But you stay, like unto whom there is no purity.*[^13]

Fatimah Tabataba’i  
 23/6/1368 AHS  
 (Sept. 12, 1989)[^14]

Imam Khomeini’s Reply to Fatimah Tabataba’i
-------------------------------------------

***In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful***

My Dear Fati,

It seems that you have finally succeeded in your imposition on me to
write a few lines, disregarding my excuses: old age, infirmity, and a
full schedule. Now I will begin my speech with the blight of old age and
of youth, both of which have afflicted me, or you could say, the ends of
which I have reached. Now, inclining towards the *barzakh*,[^15] if not
toward hell, I am wrestling with the minions of the angel of death.
Tomorrow, the black letter of my deeds shall be handed to me, and I
shall be asked for an account of my misspent life. I have no answer,
except my hope in the mercy of He Whose mercy embraces all things,[^16]
He who revealed to the Mercy of Worlds:[^17] “do not despair of the
mercy of Allah; surely Allah forgives sins.”[^18]

I take it that I am to be included among those to whom these *ayat*[^19]
must be applied. But as for the ascension to the sacred premises of His
greatness, and mounting to the neighborhood of the Friend, and joining
in the banquet of Allah, to which one must arrive by means of the steps
he himself has taken, how can it be? In my youth, when I had vigor and
ability, die to the machinations of Satan and his minion, the commanding
self,[^20] I became preoccupied with various notions and grandiose
expressions by which I acquired neither concentration nor a spiritual
state, because I never took in the spirit of these things. I didn’t go
from the exoteric to the esoteric, from the earthly domain to the
angelic domain. I finally realized that I did not gain anything from all
the clamor of the casuistry of the seminary but some heart-rending
words.

I was sunk so deeply among such expressions and such regards that
instead of seeking to lift the veils, I collected books as if nothing
else mattered in the entire world but a handful of papers. In the name
of the humanities, divine goals and philosophical truth, the seeker, who
has been endowed with a divine nature, is diverted and sinks beneath a
great veil. The weighty tomes of *The Four Journeys*[^21] diverted me
from my journey to the Friend; I acquired no opening from *The
Openings*,[^22] nor any wisdom from *The Bezels of Wisdom*,[^23] let
alone from other books, for each of which is another sad story. When I
reached old age, with every step, I was gradually drawn away[^24] from
that misfortune, until I reached senility, and what is beyond senility,
with which I am now wrestling. “And among you are some who are brought
back to a most decrepit life, so that they do not know anything after
they had known.[^25]

You, my daughter, are miles away from this stage. You have not savored
its flavor. May God extend your life to such an age, but without its ill
effects. You expect writings and discourses from me, and that in the
form of a mixture of poetry and prose! You don’t seem to realize that I
am neither a writer nor a poet nor an orator. You, my dear daughter,
without having reached the stage of unripe grapes, wish to attain the
stage of confection made from boiled ripe grapes! Know that a day shall
come when, God forbid, you will bear the heavy burden of regret upon
your shoulders for having misspent your youth with such infatuations
while you let the higher things escape you, just as I have, I who have
fallen behind in the caravan of lovers. So, listen to this wretched who
bears such a burden on his shoulders, and who is bent beneath it. Don’t
be satisfied with expressions such as these, which are a trap of the
great Beelzebub.[^26]

Seek the Great and Glorious One! Youth with its delights and
gratifications are soon past. I’ve been through it all, through all
these, and now I’m wrestling with the chastisement of hell. The Satan
within does not let up on me. May Almighty God forbid that he should
strike the last blow. But despair of the embracing mercy of the Divine
is itself a grievous enormity. May God protect the sinner from such an
affliction. It is said that at the end of his life, Hajjaj ibn
Yusuf,[^27] that great murderer of history, said, “Oh God! Forgive me,
even though I know that everyone says You will not forgive me!” Upon
hearing of this, Shafi‘i[^28] said, “If he has said this, it may be
(that he is forgiven).” But I don’t know whether that wicked man was
blessed to say this or not, but I know that despair is worse than
anything.

Oh my daughter, don’t be so overconfident of mercy that you neglect the
Friend, nor should you despair and thus become one of those who has lost
both this world and the hereafter. Oh God! By the five companions of the
cloak,[^29] shelter Ahmad, Fati, Hasan, Rida (Yasir) and ‘Ali, who, we
are proud to say, belong to the household of your dear Prophet, and to
the household of his appointed one.[^30] Shelter them from the evils of
Satan and from the desires of the soul. Here ends my speech, and God’s
sentence upon me is complete. Peace!

Since you have demanded poems from me with that insistence which is so
characteristic of you, I must confess that neither in my youth, which is
the season of poetry and sensitivity, and which has now been spent, nor
in the season of old age, which I have also left behind me, nor in this
most decrepit state of life, with which I am now wrestling, have I ever
had a talent for poetry. It is related that someone said, “My power is
no different in old age from what it was in my youth, for I have
remained unable to lift this stone both in youth and in old age.” I
could say the same thing about poetry and literature, for I have
remained incapable of them through both my youth and old age. Thus I
declare:

*If ‘poet’ be the word for Sa‘di of Shiraz,*[^31]  
 *What you and I may weave is but a play of dross*.[^32]

Now, since I’m incapable of poetry, I’ll play a trick[^33] with
doggerel, and so concede to your demands.

*Ahmad is from Muhammad the chosen one*  
 *Whom the Praised One shall watch from above*.[^34]  
*Fati is from the throne of the womb of Fatimah*  
 *Whom the Creator of the heavens shall love.*  
*Hasan, a fruit of this tree of beauty,*  
 *The Benefactor shall be his sure companion boon.*  
 *Yasir, of the pure house of the two offspring,*[^35]  
 *The secrets of sanctity about him shall be strewn.*  
 *‘Ali who is from the garden of ‘Ali,*  
 *His slogan shall be ‘Ali is great.*  
 *Five persons from the loins of Ahmad*  
 *Shall find intercession from the four plus eight.*[^36]  
 *My daughter asks me for fresh poetry,*  
 *Doggerel, I say, as mementoes of late.*

Again you ask for poetry, and yet again, so here is some more babble:

*I am a lover, a lover!*  
 *Except for union with You*  
 *there is no cure for this,*  
 *Who is there*  
 *whose soul has not been kindled*  
 *by this fire?*  
 *Except for you,*  
 *in the assembly of those burnt of heart,*  
 *nothing is remembered.*  
 *This is a story*  
 *with neither a beginning*  
 *nor an end.*  
 *The mystery of the heart*  
 *cannot be exposed*  
 *to anyone*  
 *Except to the Friend*  
 *for whom there is neither presence*  
 *nor absence.*  
 *With whom may I confide,*  
 *that one can never*  
 *see the Friend,*  
 *Unless neither thought*  
*nor vision*  
 *is under his control?*  
 *Open a corner of your eye*  
 *to look*  
 *at this poor man;*  
 *Engage him with the play of love,*  
 *for this is a disorderly wilderness.*  
 *Open the cask*  
 *and fill the goblet to the brim.*  
 *Except for You,*  
 *None gives the true measure*  
 *nor keeps its promise*.[^37]  
*The tongue cannot be stilled*  
 *From the distracted talk*  
 *Of one in whose breast is only*  
 *a distracted heart.*  
 *Tear up the tablet,*  
 *break the pen,*  
 *and breath nothing more,*  
 *For there is no one*  
 *who is not baffled and bewildered*  
 *by Him.*

Azar 1365 AHS  
 Rabi‘ ath-Thani 1407 AH  
 (November-December 1986)

[^1]: Below is a more literal rendering of the same poem by Fatimah
Tabataba’i’. Its four lines are in ghazal form, with first, second and
fourth lines rhyming. The first line is in Arabic. Verse which mixes
Arabic and Farsi is highly renowned. “The fragrance of union with you
has ignited sparks of passion for you within me. Grief for you in my
breast has kept the small fire from flaring, as you wished. What a sign
you are to the worlds which are filled with the sound of the wailing of
the holy, Which passes the apex of the beyond: Hail to the eternal
Glory, hail!”

[^2]: ‘Irfani is the adjectival form of ‘irfan, a kind of mysticism or
gnosis which flourishes in the context of Shi‘i Islam.

[^3]: ‘Ali is the son of Sayyid Ahmad, who is the son of Imam. ‘Ali’s
mother is the author of this letter, Fatimah Tabataba’i.

[^4]: A Husayniyyah is a place for the remembrance of the third Imam,
the grandson of the Prophet, Husayn, peace be with him. The Husayniyyah
mentioned here is the place where Imam delivered his speeches, attached
to his house in northern Tehran.

[^5]: Pir literally means old man, but it is also used as spiritual
title, especially among mystics, for one’s spiritual master.

[^6]: This couplet is from Hafiz.

[^7]: This is another couplet from Hafiz.

[^8]: In Arabic, these letters spell fals, a small coin, or farthing.

[^9]: More literally: Fati, one must journey toward the Friend, One must
pass beyond the self of one’s self. Everything known which has the scent
of your being, Is a devil in the way which you must avoid.

[^10]: The ghazal is a lyric form of Persian poetry, with rhyme in the
first two and in even numbered lines, and allowing various metric forms.
With respect to content, it usually does not express the linear
development of an idea, but rather its couplets express variations on an
idea or mood.

[^11]: The ‘two words’ are ‘abandon’ and ‘choose,’ which reflect the
negative and positive elements in the first article of Muslim faith:
There is no god but God.

[^12]: It refers to the son of Imam, Hujjat al-Islam wal-Muslimin Haj
Sayyid Ahmad Khomeini. (Eds.)

[^13]: From Mawlawi Jalal ad-Din ar-Rumi.

[^14]: Iranians use three calendars: the lunar Islamic calendar is used
for religious occasions and is indicated by AHL/AH; for national events
the Persian solar calendar is used, AHS; Gregorian calendar dates are
indicated by C.E. Approximate Christian era dates will be given in
brackets below dates on other calendars.

[^15]: The barzakh, literally means an isthmus, is the interval between
the death of the individual and the general resurrection. It is
mentioned in the Qur’an, (23:100): “And after them shall be a barzakh
until the day they shall be raised.”

[^16]: This refers to what God says in the Qur’an, (17:156): “My mercy
embraces all things.”

[^17]: This is the title of the Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings of
Allah to him and to his progeny) which derives from the Qur’an,
(21:107), “And We did not send you but as a mercy to the worlds.”

[^18]: Qur’an 39:53.

[^19]: The chapters of the Qur’an are divided into ayat, which do not
always correspond to what would be considered verses.

[^20]: The nafs al-ammarah, the commanding self, is mentioned in the
Qur’an, (12:53). In ‘irfan, the way of the Muslim gnostic, it is the
base self, to be contrasted with the nafs al-lawwamah, the reproving
self, (75:2), and finally, with the nafs al-mutma’innah, the tranquil
soul (89:27).

[^21]: The Asfar al-‘Arba‘ is the magnum opus of Sadr ad-Din Shirazi
(979-1050 AH / 1571-1640), the most important Muslim philosopher since
the thirteenth century.

[^22]: The Futuhat al-Makkiyyah of the great sufi theoretician, Ibn
al-‘Arabi (560-638 AH / 1165-1240), is an encyclopedic work projected to
fill 17,000 pages in its critical edition.

[^23]: The Fusus al-Hikam of Ibn al-‘Arabi, cf. fn. 1 of the
introduction.

[^24]: This is an allusion to an expression in the Qur’an: “We will draw
them on gradually whence they know not.” (17:182; 68:44).

[^25]: From the Qur’an: 16:70 and 22:5.

[^26]: The Qur’anic name of the devil is used here, Iblis.

[^27]: Hajjaj ibn Yusuf (d. 714 C.E.) was a lieutenant appointed by the
Umayyad caliph, ‘Abd al-Malik (r. 685-705 C.E.). In order to suppress
dissent in Mecca, he ordered the bombardment of the sacred mosque. He is
famous for his bloody persecution of the Shi‘ites, particularly for
having killed Sa‘id ibn Jubayr (d. 713 C.E.), who was one of the early
exegetes of the Qur’an. It is reported that Hajjaj was tormented by the
image of this martyr in his dying moments.

[^28]: Shafi‘i (d. 820 C.E.) was the founder of one of the four schools
of Sunni jurisprudence.

[^29]: It is reported that on a day known as Mubahilah, the Prophet
Muhammad (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny)
gathered ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn under his mantle and said, “Oh
Lord, these are the people of my household.” Imam uses the occasion of
praying for the five members of his daughter-in-law’s family as a
reminder of the family of the Prophet.

[^30]: Imam Khomeini prays for the five members of the family of his
daughter-in-law, and mentions that they are descendants of the Prophet
(peace and blessings of Allah to him and his progeny) through his
appointed successor, ‘Ali.

[^31]: Shaykh Muslih ad-Din Sa‘di (1184-1283) was one of the greatest
Persian poets. Born in Shiraz, he studied Sufi mysticism at the
Nizamiyyah madrasah at Baghdad, with Shaykh ‘Abdul-Qadir al-Jilani and
with Shihab ad-Din Suhrawardi. He made the pilgrimage to Mecca many
times and traveled to Central Asia, India, the Seljuq territories in
Anatolia, Syria, Egypt, Arabai, Yemen, Abyssinia, and Morocco. His best
known works are Bustan (Garden) and Golestan (Rose-Garden), also known
as Sa‘di Nameh. The former is a collection of poems on ethical subjects,
the latter a collection of moral stories in prose. He also wrote a
number of odes, and collections of poems known as Pleasantries, Jests
and Obscenities. His influence on Persian, Turkish and Indian
literatures has been very considerable, and his works were often
translated into European languages from the 17th century onwards. (Eds.)

[^32]: Literally: If Sa‘di of Shiraz is a poet, The weavings of you and
me are play.

[^33]: The expression bazi dadan, literally to give a play, is sometimes
used in the sense of to deceive, cheat, or to increase the stakes of a
game. Imam’s usage of the term is peculiar to him.

[^34]: One of the names of God is al-Hamid, the Praised One. The name
Ahmad, Imam Khomeini’s son, the name Muhammad, and Hamid all come from
the same root in Arabic. Ahmad is also used as a name of the Prophet.
This sort of play on words continues through the poem. For example,
Hasan and Muhsin, the Benefactor, have the same root. The children of
Imam’s son, Sayyid Ahmad are ‘Ali, Rida (also called Yasir) and Hasan.

[^35]: This refers to the two grandsons of the Prophet, Hasan and
Husayn.

[^36]: The four plus eight are the twelve Imams of Shi‘i Islam.

[^37]: Here there is a pun between the words for promise, payman, and
for measure, paymaneh, which indicates the cup.


