Appendix:  On the Symbolism of Religious Poetry
===============================================

**On the Symbolism of Religious Poetry** [^1]

***In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful***

Persian poetry is rich in symbolism, which may be shocking to one
unfamiliar with its conventions. In the Arabic language, Sufis had
already used the metaphor of intoxication for mystical experience, and
of the union of lovers for the presence of God. These themes were
expanded upon in Persian, and elements of pre-Islamic Persian culture
were introduced to symbolize the interiorization of faith. When the Sufi
poet ‘Attar describes himself as a Zoroaster, he does not mean that he
had abandoned Islam, but rather that there was a dimension of Islam
which might appear so strange to one who was merely superficially a
Muslim that it could be imagined to be a different religion.

When Hafiz speaks of the hair of his beloved, he is interpreted as
indicating the grace of God which emanates multiplicity, just as the
strands of hair are a multiplicity. One cannot, however, simply replace
the symbols of Persian poetry by their prosaic equivalents in mystical
theology, for this would destroy the poem. Persian poetry derives its
excitement from the impossibility of disentangling all the images, from
the nagging doubt that something unorthodox lurks within it, and from
the invitation of the poet to the reader to become an insider, one who
sees through the apparently heretical images to the purity of the poet’s
meaning.

Persian poetry is the most perfect expression of the multiplicity of
levels of meaning which lies at the heart of Iranian culture. Persian
poetry must not be read as a puzzle to be decoded, but as an unsolvable
enigma. The poetry of Imam Khomeini (may his soul be sanctified) trades
on the use of the standard symbols of classical Persian mystical poetry.
The apparent heterodoxy is sharpened by the position of the poet as an
exoteric religious leader. Even though we know he had nothing to do with
worldly wine, there is something shocking in the fact that such a person
should talk about wine at all. Some have also questioned whether Islamic
law does not prohibit the use of the language of love, *‘ishq* in Arabic
and adopted in Farsi, with reference to Allah, the Exalted.

*‘Ishq* literally means extreme love, as has been mentioned in the
standard dictionaries of classical Arabic. Sometimes it has been defined
as “exceeding the limits of love”. One must not assume, however, that
this refers to physical passion and carnal desires, for the expression
has a more general meaning, and a profusion of love with respect to
anything may be called *‘ishq*.

Love is one of the most elevated sentiments of the heart, which in its
pure essence, according to the Muslim mystics and philosophers, is free
from the incidental impurity of the carnal soul. If in some cases love
accompanies such impurities it is not necessary that at all stages it
should do so. The mystics of Islam, the *‘urafa*, even go so far as to
say that it is incorrect to use the term *‘ishq* for the physical
passions, because passion is only something that happens to accompany
love in some cases. Since love is not to be confused with passion, which
is not included in the literal meaning of *‘ishq*, if *‘ishq* is used
for carnal desire it must be understood as a figurative use of the word
if it is allowed at all. Thus, the mystics reverse the claim made by
many Western as well as Eastern commentators on mystical poetry, that
the language of love is applied to God only figuratively. Such
commentators assume that the literal meaning of such language is for
something physical, but by attending to the meaning of the words used we
see that love must be understood as something essentially spiritual.

One might object that if love is not to be interpreted as necessarily
physical, neither must it be interpreted to be essentially spiritual,
but should be neutral with regard to the material and the spiritual. A
moment’s reflection, however, suffices to realize that whatever is
considered to be of such a nature that it may or may not have a physical
aspect must be regarded as spiritual, for it is the nature of spirit to
be contingently associated with the body in this way.

The mystics and philosophers for centuries have taught that the demands
of the carnal soul are ever perishing and evanescent. What is called
‘carnal love’ originates from the sexual instinct, and it must not be
confused with the reality of the spiritual sentiment. Carnal love is
like the other animal instincts. *‘Ishq*, however, is said to become a
part of the human nature itself and not to perish.

Intense love, wherever, it is found, can be correctly designated by the
word *‘ishq*. For example, one may speak of the word *‘ishq* of the
mother for her children or their love for her; one may speak of even
higher stages of *‘ishq* for the most lofty human sentiments, like
*‘ishq* for knowledge or *‘ishq* for service to society, and all are
correct. Hence, the application of the word *‘ishq* to God in such
poetry as that of Hafiz or Imam Khomeini, or in the writings of the
mystics should not be viewed with suspicion and must be considered
perfectly permissible from a religious point of view.

Furthermore, in the noble Qur’an it has been said: “***Those who believe
have intense love for Allah***” (*wal-ladhina amanu ashaddu hubban
lillah*) (2:165). Intense love is nothing but *‘ishq*, as has been
reported in the dictionaries. This word also occurs in *hadith*s.
Kulayni, for example, narrates from the sixth Imam, peace be with him,
that he said:

“The Prophet (*s*) said, ‘The best of people is one who loves (*‘ishq*)
worship, embraces it, loves (*hubb*) it with his whole heart, and
occupies his body with it, and prepares for it, and he does not care
whether he has comfort or trouble in this world.’”

The use of the word *‘ishq* in this *hadith* provides positive proof
that the meaning of *‘ishq* is not restricted to passionate affairs, nor
even to material affairs.  
 Of course, the application of the term, Beloved (*ma‘shuq*), for God as
a Name is forbidden and is considered incorrect by the scholars of
Islamic law, for the divine Names are fixed (*tawfiqi*). One should only
consider terms to be Names of God when this is expressly indicated by
God Himself through the revelation to His prophets. This is different,
however, from the use of such a term not as a Name of God, but as an
adjective when it is not intended as a Name of God, as in poetry and
mystical expressions, and as such it poses no difficulty from the point
of view of Islamic law. The meaning of ‘the Beloved’ and ‘Friend’ is
also found in the following *hadith qudsi*:

“When a servant is occupied completely with My service I will make his
desire and pleasure to be remembering Me. Whenever I make his desire and
pleasure to be in remembering Me, he will love Me and I will love him,
and when he loves Me and I love him, I will remove the veil from that
which is between Me and him.”

There are several other *hadith*s like this in which the word *‘ishq* or
its cognates appears.  
 Shaykh Abu’l-Muhasan Husayn ibn Hasan Jorjani in his *Tafsir
Jala’l-Adhhan wa Jala’l-Ahzan*, known as *Tafsir-e Gazor*, commenting on
the significance of the letters *Ha Mim ‘Ayn Sin Qaf*, says that some
say that this *ayah* is about the dignity of the Prophet, may the peace
and blessings of Allah be with him and his progeny. “*Ha* is the pool
(*hawd*) of entrance, *Mim* is the kingdom (*mulk*) of expanse, *‘Ayn*
is the love (*‘ishq*) of the Worshipped and the highness (*‘uluww*) of
limitlessness, *Sin* is the visible brilliance (*sana’*), *Qaf* is his
standing (*qa’im*) in a praiseworthy position (*maqam*) and his nearness
(*qurbat*) to the generosity of the worshipped…” in which sentence the
phrase *‘ishq* for the Worshipped is mentioned.

Some object to the use of the word *‘ishq* because it is not used in the
Qur’an, but there are many words which are current among legal scholars
of Islam that are not used in the Qur’an, such as the word *ijtihad*,
the use of which is unproblematic, and on this matter there is no
disagreement. Hence the use of the *‘ishq* by the mystics and poets
should not be a source of any doubts about religious propriety.

The method of poetry involves taking liberties with language, and using
images, sounds and rhythms, and other techniques, such as allusion to
the writings of earlier poets. All of this is to be found in the poetry
of Imam Khomeini, may Allah pour light into his grave, as well.
Sometimes allusion is made to shocking behavior, or there may appear to
be an apparently disrespectful attitude displayed for the mosque or the
seminary, but disrespect and indulgence of sinful behavior are far from
the poet’s intention, which, if one looks below the surface, can be seen
to be the expression of intense love for Allah.

About the Translators
---------------------

**Dr. Ghulam-Rida A‘wani** heads the Iranian Academy of Philosophy in
Tehran. He also teaches Islamic Philosophy at Shahid Beheshti University
and the University of Tehran. Dr. A‘wani has authored and edited
numerous books on Islamic philosophy and mysticism, including *40 Poems
from the Divan of Nasir ad-Din Khosrow*, co-edited and co-translated
with Peter Wilson. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Tehran.

**Dr. Muhammad G. Legenhausen** is a research fellow at the Iranian
Academy of Philosophy in Tehran. He has taught philosophy at Rice
University and at Texas Southern University. He has published various
articles on metaphysics and the philosophy of religion, and is the
co-editor with Mahdi ‘Abidi of *Jihad and Shahadat: Struggle and
Martyrdom in Islam*. He received his Ph.D. in philosophy from Rice
University.

An Introduction of the Institute for Compilation and Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The splendor of the Islamic Revolution and the role of Imam Khomeini’s
personality, views, thoughts, and literary works in the occurrence and
perpetuity of the Revolution; the need of the future generation for the
works of the founder of the Islamic Republic and standard-bearer of the
global Islamic movement; the publication and propagation of the
authentic and complete works and thoughts of His Eminence; and the
prevention of historical distortion of the Islamic Revolution were among
the factors which prompted Hujjat al-Islam wal-Muslimin Haj Sayyid Ahmad
Khomeini to inquire through an elaborate letter about His Eminence’s
view on the manner of studying, compiling and publishing his own works
and related documents, and to determine the authority in supervising and
ascertaining the authenticity or otherwise of whatever is to be
published in the name of Imam Khomeini both in Iran and abroad. In his
reply in the form of a written decree dated September 8, 1988 (Shahrivar
17, 1367 AHS), His Eminence assigned the responsibility of compilation
and collection of all materials relevant to him to his own son, Haj
Sayyid Ahmad.

In consonance with this decree, the Institute for Compilation and
Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works was established and has commenced
its activities. The heart-rending event of the demise of the Imam of the
Muslims and the burgeoning need of the Islamic society to obtain His
Eminence’s guidelines and literary works have compelled this Institute
to expand its realm of activities qualitatively and quantitatively.
Along this line, the law on the preservation of Imam Khomeini’s works
was enacted by the Islamic Consultative Assembly (the Iranian
Parliament) on November 5, 1989 (Aban 14, 1368 AHS) and approved by the
Council of Guardians as binding and ready for execution. In this manner,
pursuant to its momentous religious and legal mission, this Institute
has embarked on planning and modifying its organizational structure
within the framework of the following objectives:

1. Collection of all related documents and literary works of Imam
Khomeini as well as all works relevant to his personality, life,
struggles, and thoughts written by writers or made by artists both in
Iran and abroad;

2. Permanent preservation of the aforementioned documents and works
through the most appropriate means;

3. Study and research on the literary works for the elucidation of the
history of the Islamic Revolution, Imam Khomeini biography, and
compilation, translation and preparation of the literary works’
compendium for publication;

4. Publication of the literary works’ compendium through various means
both in Iran and abroad, and propagation and dissemination of the Imam’s
thoughts and ideals;

5. Perpetual supervision of everything written or made by artists in the
name of Imam Khomeini; prevention of distortion of the Imam’s speeches,
writings, and events related to the Imam; giving replies to the
inquirers and researchers on the literary works as the official center
for the collection and preservation of the documents and works of the
Imam. In order to attain the above-cited objectives, the main programs
and activities of this Institute can be divided into the following five
areas:

a. Collection of the documents and works, which include (i) collection
of documents and works of Imam Khomeini; (ii) collection of all works
related to the Imam’s biography, struggles and thoughts written or made
both in Iran and abroad;

b. Permanent preservation of the documents and works;

c. Study and research, translation, compilation, and preparation of the
works for publication;

d. Publication of the works and continuous revival and propagation of
the thoughts and school of thought of Imam Khomeini;

e. Supervision: Consonant with the decree of the Imam and enactment of
the Islamic Consultative Assembly, the Institute is the sole official
source of whatever is to be published in the name of Imam Khomeini.

List of English Publications
----------------------------

(*August 2002*)

The following list of English publications of the Institute for
Compilation and Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works are available free
on request:

• A Call to Divine Unity: Imam Khomeini’s Letter to Mikhail Gorbachev,
Leader of the Soviet Union

• Father! O Standard Bearer of Islam

• Imam Khomeini and the Culture of *‘Ashura*: Abstracts of Papers
Presented at the International Congress on Imam Khomeini and the Culture
of *‘Ashura*

• *Kauthar*: An Anthology of Imam Khomeini’s Speeches Including an
Account of the Events of the Islamic Revolution (1962-1978) (3 Volumes)

• Pithy Aphorisms

• Standpoints: A Selection of Stances Assumed by Hujjat al-Islam
wal-Muslimin Haj Sayyid Ahmad Khomeini

• The *‘Ashura* Uprising

• The Last Message: Imam Khomeini’s Religio-Political Testament

• Palestine from Imam Khomeini’s Viewpoint

• *Hajj* in the Words and Messages of Imam Khomeini

• The Narrative of Awakening: A Glance at Imam Khomeini’s Ideal,
Scientific and Political Biography (2nd Edition)

• Fundamentals of the Islamic Revolution: Selections from the Thoughts
and Opinions of Imam Khomeini

• Imam Khomeini on Exportation of Revolution

• The Life of Imam Khomeini (Volume 1)

• The Position of Women from the Viewpoint of Imam Khomeini

• Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist

• *Adab as-Salat*: The Disciplines of the Prayer (2nd Edition)

• Reunion with the Beloved: Imam Khomeini’s Letters to Hujjat al-Islam
wal-Muslimin Haj Sayyid Ahmad Khomeini (2nd Edition)

• The Greatest *Jihad*: Combat with the Self

• The Wine of Love: Mystical Poetry of Imam Khomeini

• Forty *Hadith*s: An Exposition of Mystical and Ethical Traditions
(*forthcoming*)

• *Sahifeh-ye Imam*: An Anthology of Imam Khomeini’s Speeches, Messages,
Interviews, Decrees, Religious Permissions, and Letters (22 Volumes)
(*forthcoming*)

Kindly address your request for these books as well as for others in
more than 20 different languages of the world to the International
Affairs Department, The Institute for Compilation and Publication of
Imam Khomeini’s Works, P.O. Box 19575/614, Tehran, Islamic Republic of
Iran, or e-mail: <info@imam-khomeini.org>.

[^1]: Reprinted from A Jug of Love, op. cit., pp. 27-32. (Eds.)


