Examples From the Prophet’s Supplications
=========================================

Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) was the greatest propagandist of Allah in the
earth and was the interpreter of His revelation, the leader of
monotheists, the master of devotees, and the last of prophets who had
raised highly the word of monotheism and had defeated everything
worshipped away from Allah. He spread the knowing of Allah and proved
His oneness, and so he lit minds and souls and established edifices of
faith and refuted all suspicions of atheists.

The Prophet (a.s.) devoted himself totally in his mission to Allah since
the first moment when he offered his life and all his powers to spread
his religion and to save man from the darkness of ignorance and
superstitions. He undertook the educating of man and the refining of his
behavior. He established educational programs for that, so that man
might be happy in his life and afterlife. From among those programs was
his supplications that could calm down confused souls with the
spirituality they (supplications) had.

The importance of Du’a (supplication)
-------------------------------------

For the Prophet (a.s.), du’a was too important. Many traditions were
transmitted from him showing that. He said, “Du’a is the very
worship.”**[1]**

He said, “Du’a is the key to mercy.”**[2]**

He said, “Du’a is the weapon of believers.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Fasahah, vol. 1 p. 323, quoted from Sunan of Abi Dawud,
vol. 1 p. 333, Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 4 p. 467.  
 **[2]** Nahj al-Fasahah, vol. 2 p. 323, quoted from Kanzol Ummal, vol.
2 p. 62.  
 **[3]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 1 p. 492.

### The benefits of Du’a

The determined, inevitable fate can be repelled by some things, one of
which is the du’a. The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Practice du’a too much
because du’a repels the fate.”

He also said, “Some man may be deprived of livelihood because of a sin
that he commits, and nothing can repel the decree of fate except du’a,
and nothing increases one’s old except piety.”**[1]**

He said, “Dutifulness to parents increases one’s old, lying decreases
one’s livelihood, and du’a repels the decree of fate.”**[2]** 

He said, “Du’a repels the decree of fate.”**[3]**

He said, “Guard your properties by zakat, cure your sick ones by
charity, and prepare du’a for afflictions.”**[4]**

He said, “Nothing repels the decree of fate except du’a and nothing
increases one’s old except piety.”**[5]**

He said, “Carefulness is not useful before the decree of fate, but du’a
is useful before what has come down (of affliction) and what has not
come down yet.”**[6]**

### Those whose du’a is responded to

Some traditions were transmitted from the Prophet (a.s.) showing that
Allah promptly responds to the supplication of some people, such as:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 5 p. 277.  
 **[2]** At-Targheeb wet-Tarheeb, vol. 3 p. 596.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 63.  
 **[4]** Nahj al-Fasahah, vol. 1 p. 324, quoted from al-Mu’jam
al-Kabeer, vol. 1 p. 128.  
 **[5]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 1 p. 493.  
 **[6]** Shu’ab al-Eeman, vol. 2 p. 50.

**1. The wronged**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Beware of the supplication of a wronged one
because he just asks Allah for his right, and Allah the Almighty does
never prevent any rightful one from his right.”**[1]**

This tradition declares that Allah responds to the supplication of the
wronged whether they are believers or not and He avenges severely on the
unjust.

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “The supplication of a wronged one is responded
to even if he is a dissolute, because his dissoluteness is against
*himself*.”**[2]**

He said, “Avoid the invocations of the wronged because there is no
screen between them and Allah.”**[3]**

He said, “Beware of the wronged one’s invocation because it is carried
on the clouds, and Allah the Almighty says: by My glory and loftiness, I
will make you (the wronged one) win even if after a time.”**[4]**

He said, “Beware of the wronged one’s invocation, because it goes up to
the heaven like a spark.”**[5]**

He said, “He, who invokes (Allah) against one who has wronged him, will
be supported.”**[6]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 507.  
 **[2]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 3 p. 367.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 400.  
 **[4]** Al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer, vol. 4 p. 84, Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal,
vol. 2 p. 305.  
 **[5]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 1 p. 29.  
 **[6]** Sunan of at-Tarmithi, vol. 1 p. 343.

**2. The father’s supplication for his children**

From the supplications that Allah responds to is the prayer of a father
for his children because he prays eagerly, loyally, and from the deep of
the heart. The Prophet (a.s.) said,

“A father’s prayer for his child is like the Prophet’s prayer for his
nation.”**[1]**

**3. One’s prayer for his brother**

The Prophet said, “The brother’s prayer for his brother secretly shall
not be rejected.”**[2]**

**4. The prayer of one who is far away for another who is far away**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “The promptest of prayers in being responded to
is the prayer of one, who is far away (from his country and home) for
one, who is far away (from country and home).”**[3]**

**5. The prayer of an afflicted believer**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Avail the prayer of an afflicted
believer.”**[4]**

**6. The supplication at affection**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Avail the supplication at affection
(godliness) because it is a mercy.”**[5]**

**7. The supplication of one who is done good to**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “The prayer of one, who is done good to, for
the good-doer shall not be rejected.”**[6]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mishkat al-Anwar, p. 163, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 98.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 98.  
 **[3]** Sunan of Abi Dawud, vol. 6 p. 343.  
 **[4]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 103.  
 **[5]** Nahj al-Fasahah, vol. 1 p. 321, quoted from Kanzol Ummal, vol.
2 p. 103.  
 **[6]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 98.

**8. The Muslim’s prayer for his Muslim brother**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “The prayer of a Muslim secretly for his
brother is responded to. There is an angel at his head entrusted with
him that whenever he (the Muslim) prays for his brother in good, the
angel says: Amen! And you shall get the same.”**[1]** 

**9. Answered supplications**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “There are five supplications that are
responded to; the supplication of a wronged one until he is made
satisfied, the supplication of a hajji until he comes back home, the
supplication of a warrior in the way of Allah until he comes back home,
the supplication of a sick one until he recovers, and the supplication
of a brother secretly for his brother; and the promptest of these
supplications in being answered is the supplication of a brother
secretly for his brother.”**[2]**  

**10. Supplications that are not rejected**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “There are three (persons) that Allah has
promised not to reject any of their supplications; a faster until he
breaks his fasting, a wronged one until he is made satisfied (against
the wrong-doer), and a traveler until he comes back home.”**[3]**

**Supplications that are not responded to**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Either you enjoin the good and forbid the
wrong or Allah will make your evils prevail over you and then the
beneficent ones of you shall pray Allah but it shall not be responded to
them.”**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Fasaha, vol. 1 p. 322.  
 **[2]** Shu’ab al-Eeman, vol. 2 p. 46.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 99.  
 **[4]** Al-Mu’jam al-Awsat, vol. 5 p. 29, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 66.

He said, “Supplicate Allah while you are confident in the response, and
know well that Allah does not respond to a supplication from a
neglectful, inadvertent heart.”**[1]**

### The best of du’as

Here are some of the best du’as, transmitted from the Prophet (a.s.),
that man may supplicate Allah with:

**1. Abundance of livelihood at old-age**

“O Allah, increase Your livelihood to me at my old-age and at the end of
my life.”**[2]**

**2. The fear of Allah**

“O Allah, make me fear You as if I see You, make me happy with my being
pious to You, do not make me wretched by Your disobedience, choose for
me the best of Your decrees, and bless Your fate to me so that I may not
like to hasten what You have delayed, or to delay what You have
hastened, and make my richness be in my soul.”**[3]** 

**3. Gratefulness and patience**

“O Allah, make me patient, make me grateful, and make me in Your
security. O Allah, make me grateful, make me patient, and make humble in
my eye, and high in the eyes of people.”**[4]**

**4. Doing good**

“O Allah, make me from those who when doing good become delighted and
when doing bad ask for forgiveness.”**[5]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sunan of at-Tarmithi, vol. 5 p. 217, Sunan of Abi Dawud, vol. 1
p. 334.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 1 p. 543.  
 **[3]** Al-Mu’jam al-Awsat, vol. 6 p. 121.  
 **[4]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 686.  
 **[5]** Sunan of at-Tarmithi, vol. 5 p. 189.

**5. Bliss in this life**

“O Allah, forgive me my sin, make my house (life) more comfortable, and
bless my livelihood.”**[1]**

**6. Good end**

“O Allah, make our end good in all the affairs and protect us from the
disgrace of this life and the torment of the afterlife.”**[2]**

**7. Protection**

“O Allah, protect me by Islam when standing, protect me by Islam when
sitting, protect me by Islam when sleeping, and do not make an enemy or
envier rejoice at my misfortune. O Allah, I ask you (to give me) from
every good whose treasuries are in Your hand, and I seek Your protection
from every evil whose treasuries are in Your hand.”**[3]**

**8. Resurrection with the poor**

“O Allah, make me live as a poor, make me die as a poor, and resurrect
me with the group of the poor. Surely the most wretched one is he upon
whom the poverty of this life and the torment of the afterlife
accumulate.”**[4]**

**9. Reconciliation**

“O Allah, reconcile us with each other, conciliate our hearts, guide us
to the ways of peace, save us from darkness into light, and keep us away
from vices whether apparent or hidden. O Allah, bless our hearings,
sights, hearts, spouses, and offspring,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 4 p. 181.  
 **[2]** Sunan of at-Tarmithi, vol. 5 p. 189.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 187.  
 **[4]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 4 p. 322.

and accept our repentance, You are the Oft-Returning, the
Merciful.”**[1]**

**10. Sound faith and life**

“O Allah, better to me my faith which is the protection of my affairs,
better to me my life in which my living is, better to me my afterlife in
which there shall be my resurrection, make living as increase to me in
every good, and make death as relief to me from every evil.”**[2]**

**11. Help at dying**

“O Allah, assist me against the hardships of death and the agonies of
death.”**[3]** 

**12. Forgiveness**

“O Allah, forgive me my sin, ignorance, wastefulness in my affairs, and
what You are more aware of than me. O Allah, forgive me my error,
intention, joking, and seriousness and all that is in me. O Allah,
forgive me what I have committed and what I shall commit, and what I
have concealed and what I have disclosed.”**[4]**

**13. Best qualities**

“O Allah, enrich me with knowledge, adorn me with patience, honor me
with piety, and pretty me up with healthiness.”**[5]**

**14. Fear of Allah**

“O Allah, share out to us from Your fearing what may hinder us from Your
disobediences, from Your obedience what You may  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sunan of Abi Dawud, vol. 1 p. 219, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p.
187.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 185, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 6 p. 18.  
 **[3]** Al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer, vol. 23 p. 34.  
 **[4]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol. 7 p. 166.  
 **[5]** Tahthib al-Ahkam, vol. 3 p. 73.

take us to Your Paradise by, and from certainty what may make the
misfortunes of this life easy to us, and make us enjoy our hearings,
sights, and power as long as You make us live, and make all that be
lasting to us, and make our revenge on one who has wronged us, make us
win victory over our enemy, do not make our affliction in our religion,
do not make this life the most of our interest nor the end of our
knowledge, and do not make one, who shall not have mercy on us, prevail
over us.”**[1]**

**15. Seeking soundness**

“O Allah, You have created my self and You make it die. Its death and
living are to You; so if You make it live, protect it, and if You make
it die, forgive it. O Allah, I ask You for good health.”**[2]**

“O Allah, make me sound in my body, make me sound in my hearing, and
make me sound in my sight. O Allah, I seek Your protection from
disbelief and poverty. O Allah, I seek Your protection from the torment
of the grave; there is no god but You.”**[3]**

**16. More knowledge**

“O Allah, benefit me with what You have taught me, teach me what may
benefit me, and increase my knowledge.”**[4]**

**17. Good qualities**

“O Allah, I ask you for guidance, piety, chastity, and
sufficiency.”**[5]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahj al-Fasahah, vol. 1 p. 333.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 15 p. 337.  
 **[3]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 5 p. 42.  
 **[4]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 3 p. 70.  
 **[5]** Sahih of Muslim, vol. 8 p. 81.

**18. Faith**

“O Allah, I ask You for good health with faith, faith with good morals,
and success followed by deliverance.”**[1]**

**19. Blessing of morning**

“O Allah, bless to my nation (their activities) in early
morning.”**[2]**

**20. The fear of Allah**

“O Allah, by Your knowing of the unseen and Your power over the
creation, make me live if You know that life is better to me, and make
me die if You know that death is better to me. O Allah, I ask You to
make me fear You secretly and openly, and ask You for the word of
loyalty in satisfaction and anger, and ask You for temperance in poverty
and wealth.”**[3]**

**21. Good deeds**

“O Allah our Lord, grant us good in this world and good in the
hereafter, and save us from the chastisement of the fire.”**[4]**

**22. The increase in good**

“O Allah, give us more and do not decrease (Your giving to) us, honor us
and do not disgrace us, give us and do not deprive us, prefer us and do
not prefer others to us, please us and be pleased with us.”**[5]**

**23. Self-control**

“O Allah, do not entrust me to my self in the twinkle of an eye, and do
not take away from me the good You have given to me.”**[6]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 1 p. 523.  
 **[2]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 1 p. 156, al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer,
vol. 8 p. 24.  
 **[3]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 1 p. 524, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p.
174.  
 **[4]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 3 p. 288.  
 **[5]** Sunan of at-Tarmithi, vol. 5 p. 8.  
 **[6]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 62 , Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77 p. 64.

**24. Guardians of Muslims**

“O Allah, harass whoever undertakes something of my nation’s affairs and
harasses them, and be kind to whoever undertakes something of my
nation’s affairs and treats them kindly. And I seek Your protection from
the whole evil.”**[1]**

**25. Seeking goodness**

“O Allah, I ask You for the whole goodness that which I know and that
which I do not know, and I seek Your protection from the whole evil that
which I know and that which I do not know.”**[2]**

**26. Soundness against diseases**

“O Allah, I seek Your protection from leprosy, madness, and from bad
diseases.”**[3]**

**27. Safety from bad qualities**

“O Allah, I seek Your protection from impotence, laziness, cowardice,
stinginess, senility, cruelty, inadvertence, dependence, lowness, and
misery. And I seek Your protection from poverty, disbelief,
disobedience, dissension, hypocrisy, pride, and self-conceit. And I seek
Your protection from deafness, dumbness, madness, leprosy, and bad
diseases.”**[4]**

**28. Bad neighbor**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih of Muslim, vol. 6 p. 7.  
 **[2]** Sunan of ibn Majah, vol. 2 p. 264.  
 **[3]** Sunan of Abi Dawud, vol. 1 p. 346.  
 **[4]** Al-Mustadrak ala as-Sahihayn, vol. 1 p. 530, Kanzol Ummal, vol.
2 p. 188.

“O Allah, I seek Your protection from a bad neighbor in the permanent
abode (towns) because the neighbor of desert (Bedouin) often
moves.”**[1]**

**29. A cunning friend**

“O Allah, I seek Your protection from a cunning friend whose eyes see me
and whose heart watches me; if he sees a good deed, he conceals it, and
if he sees a bad deed, he spreads it.”**[2]**

**30. Knowledge and labor**

“O Allah, I seek Your protection from knowledge that does not benefit, a
deed that is not accepted (by Allah), and a supplication that is not
responded to.”**[3]**

**31. Debt**

“O Allah, I seek Your protection from the dominance of debt, the
dominance of opponents, and the gloat of enemies.”**[4]**

**32. Enticement**

“O Allah, I seek Your protection from the enticement of women and I seek
Your protection from the torture of the grave.”**[5]**

**33. Abomination**

“O Allah, I seek Your protection from abominable morals, abominable
desires, abominable deeds, and from diseases.”**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 1 p. 572.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 185.  
 **[3]** Sahih of Muslim, vol. 8 p. 87.  
 **[4]** Sunan of an-Nassa’iy, vol. 2 p. 268, Musnad of Ahmed bin
Hanbal, vol. 2 p. 173.  
 **[5]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 189.  
 **[6]** Sunan of at-Tarmithi, vol. 5 p. 233.

**34. Bad day**

“O Allah, I seek Your protection from a bad day, from a bad night, from
a bad hour, from a bad friend, and from a bad neighbor in the permanent
abode.”**[1]**

**35. At travel**

When the Prophet (a.s.) wanted to travel, he recited this du’a:

“O Allah, You are the companion in the travel and the successor in the
family. O Allah, accompany us with loyalty and accept us with success. O
Allah, cover to us the land and make the travel easy to us. O Allah, I
seek Your protection from the hardship of the travel (the journey
towards the afterlife) and the grief of the last abode.”**[2]**

### Supplications the Prophet taught to Ali

**First supplication:**

One day, the Prophet (a.s.) sent Imam Ali (a.s.) to Yemen to invite the
people there to monotheism and to embrace Islam. The people of Yemen
turned Muslims at Imam Ali’s hand with no fight. The Prophet (a.s.)
supplied Imam Ali (a.s.) with this holy supplication:

“O Allah, I turn to You with no trust from me in other than You, nor a
hope taking me except to You, nor a power that I rely on, nor a means
that I resort to except the seeking of Your favor, expecting of Your
mercy, and the havening into the best of that which You have accustomed
me to, and You are more aware of what has come to me before in my
turning to You of what I like and hate; so in whatever You cast on me
Your power, it is  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer, vol. 67 p. 294.  
 **[2]** At-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 8 p. 116.

praiseworthy Your trial (on me) and clear Your decree in it, and You 
efface what You will, and establish (what You will), and with You is the
source of ordinance.

 O Allah, avert from me the fates of every calamity, and the means of
every hardship, and spread on me a shadow from Your mercy, vastness from
Your favors, and a grace from Your pardon so that I do not like the
hastening of what You have delayed nor the delaying of what You have
hastened, that besides what I ask You to be my guardian to my family,
children, and fellows as best as You be a guardian to any absent of the
believers in keeping every honor, covering every sin, pardoning every
disobedience, and repelling every affliction, and grant me for that the
gratefulness to You, the remembrance of You, the good worshipping to
You, and the satisfaction with Your decree of fate, O You the Guardian
of the believers.

And make me, with all that You have entrusted me with and my children
and what You have granted to me, be from the believing men and believing
women who are in Your refuge that is not violated, in Your protection
that is not assaulted, in Your neighboring that is not left, Your
safeguard that is not broken, and in Your shelter that is not exposed,
for whoever is in Your refuge, protection, neighboring, safeguard, and
shelter will be safe and protected, and there is no power and strength
except in Allah, the High, the Great.”**[1]**

**Second supplication:**

From the supplications that the Prophet (a.s.) had ta\*ught to Imam Ali
(a.s.) is this one narrated by Anass bin Uways:

“O Allah, You are Allah, and You are the Beneficent, and You are the
Merciful, the Sovereign, the Holy, the Giver of peace, the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 4
p. 292-293.

Granter of security, the Guardian, the Mighty, the Compeller, the
Superb, the First, the Last, the Manifest, the Hidden, the Praised, the
Glorious, the Beginner, the Restorer, the Loving, the Witness, the
Ancient, the Highest, the Great, the Aware, the Truthful, the
Compassionate, the Merciful, the Grateful, the Forgiver, the Wise, the
Lord of power, the Firm, the Vigilant, the Great,  the Aware, the Rich,
the Guardian, the Protector, the Lord of Majesty and Generosity, the
Magnificent, the Aware, the Rich, the Guardian, the Judge, the Strainer,
the Enlarger, the Just, the Loyal, the Guardian, the Truth, the
Manifest, the Creator, the Bestower of sustenance, the Granter, the
Forgiver, the Lord, the Trustee, the Kind, the Sustainer, the Bestower,
the Lord, the Trustee, the Subtle, the Aware, the All-Hearing, the
All-Seeing, the Rewarder of deeds, the Exalted, the Near, the Responder
(to supplications), the Sender, the Heir, the Vast, the Everlasting, the
Alive, the Existing that does not die, the Eternal, the Light, the
Forgiver, the Unique, the Vanquisher, the One, the Eternal, the One who
neither begets nor is He Begotten, and there is none like unto Him, the
Possessor of might, the Powerful, the Aware of the unseen, the
Originator, the Inventor, the Strainer, the Enlarger, the Caller, the
Assistant, the Repeller,  the Harmful, the Benefiting, the Honorer, the
Degrader, the Sustainer, the Giver, the Prominent, the Good-doer, the
Kind, the Favorer, the Giver of life and death, the Doer of whatever He
wills, the Master of the Kingdom; You give the kingdom to whomsoever You
like, and take away the Kingdom from whomsoever You like, You exalt
whomsoever You like and degrade whomsoever You like, in Your hands is
all good, and surely You have power over all things. You cause the night
to pass into the day and You cause the day to pass into the night, You
bring forth the living out of the dead, and you bring forth the dead out
of the living, and You give sustenance to whomsoever You like without
measure. (O You) the One Who causes dawn to break, Who causes the grain

and the stone germinate. Whatever is in the heavens and the earth
glorifies Him, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

O my Lord! Whatever saying I have said, whatever oath I have taken,
whatever vow I have vowed in this day of mine and this night; Your will
is on all that, so that whatever You like may occur and whatever You do
not like may not occur. So avert (affliction) away from me by Your power
and might as there is no might or power save in Allah, the High, the
Great.

O Allah! By these attributes that are accepted to You, send blessings on
Mohammad and on the Progeny of Muhammad and forgive me, have mercy on
me, accept my repentance, accept my deeds, improve my conditions, ease
for me my affairs, increase my sustenance, and make me, by the Honor of
Your Face, in no need of all of Your people, and save my face, hand, and
tongue from asking other than You, and make to me deliverance and escape
in my affairs, as You know and I do not know, and You have Power and I
do not, and You have power over all things; by Your mercy O most
Merciful of all the merciful, and send blessings on Mohammad and on his
progeny the good, the pure.”**[1]**

**Third supplication:**

From the supplications that the Prophet (a.s.) had taught to Imam Ali
(a.s.) is this one narrated by Uways al-Qurani:

“O Allah! I ask from You not from other than You, and I turn to You and
not to any other than You. I ask from You, O You the security for the
afraid, and the Protector of the seekers of protection; You are the
Judge of all goodness, the Forgiver of slips, the Effacer of bad deeds,
the Recorder of good deeds, the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 4
p. *292-293*.

Exalter of degrees, I ask You by the best of all requests and the most
successful that people should not ask except by them, and I ask You by
You O Allah, O Beneficent, and by Your best attributes, highest
examples, and by Your blessings that are uncountable, and by Your
attributes that are noblest to You, most beloved to You, most honored in
position near You, the nearest as means to You, the most in getting to
destination, the promptest to You in response, and by Your stored,
glorious and most glorious, great and greatest Name that You love and
are pleased with and pleased with whoever supplicates You by it and You
respond to his supplication, and it is certain that You do not prevent
Your asker by it (from response), and by every Name that is for You in
the Torah, the Bible, the Psalms, and the Criterion (Furqan), and by
every Name that is for You which You have taught or not taught to any
one from Your people, and by every Name by which the carriers of Your
Throne, Your angels, and Your choices from Your people call upon You,
and by the askers from You, the turners to You, the seekers of Your
protection, and by the suppliants to You, and by every servant who
worships You in a land, in a sea, in a plain, or in a mountain, I
supplicate You with a supplication of one whose neediness has become so
heavy, whose sin so great, who has put his self to perishment, whose
power has become so weak, who does not trust in anything of his deeds,
nor does he find to his sin a forgiver but You, nor to his effort a
refuge but You. I have escaped from You to You confessing and not
disdaining, and not being haughty before worshipping You. O You, the
comfort of every resorting poor, I ask You that You are Allah that there
is no god but You, the Compassionate, the Favorer, the Inventor of the
heavens and the earth, the Possessor of glory and generosity, the Knower
of the unseen and the seen, the Beneficent, the Merciful; You are the
Lord and I am the servant, You are the owner and I am the owned, You are
the Mighty and I am low, You are the Rich and I am poor, You are the
Alive and I am dead, You are the Immortal

and I am mortal, You are the Good-doer and I am the bad doer, You are
the Forgiver and I am sinful, You are the Merciful and I am the
fallible, You are the Creator and I am the creature, You are the
Powerful and I am weak, You are the Giver and I am the beggar, You are
the Securer and I am afraid, You are the Sustainer and I am the
sustained one, and You are the only One deserving that I complain to
Him, ask for His help, and wish from Him, because how many sinful ones
there are that You have forgiven and how many mistakers there are that
You have pardoned, so pardon me, have mercy on me, relieve me from what
has afflicted me, do not expose me with what I have committed against
myself, take my hand (guide me), and the hands of my parents and
children, and have mercy on us by Your mercy, O the One of Majesty and
Generosity.”**[1]**   

**Fourth supplication**

From the other supplications that the Prophet (a.s.) had taught to Imam
Ali (a.s.) is this one:

“All praise is due to Allah. There is no god but He, the King, the
Truth, the Manifest, the Administrator without any minister and without
consultation with any of his slaves. He is the First, who cannot be
described, and the Eternal after the annihilation of all creatures. He
is the greatest in Lordship, the Light of the heavens and the earths,
and the Creator and Inventor of them out of nothing. With no pillar He
created both of them and opened them apart. So the heavens stood stable
in obedience to His commandment and the earths became fixed on the
surface of the water with their pegs. Then our Lord rose high in the
highest heavens, the Beneficent on the Throne He sat. Everything that is
in the heaven and in the earth and in between them and what is below the
earth is to Him. So, I bear witness  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 4
p. 296-297.

that verily You are Allah. There is none to elevate what You have
lowered and no one to exalt him whom You leaves in disgrace and no one
to bring into disgrace him whom You exalts and no one to prevent what
You give and no one to give what You withhold. You are Allah, there is
no god but You. You have existed when there was neither built sky nor
broad earth nor brilliant sun nor dark night, nor bright day, nor deep
sea, nor firm mountain, nor moving star, nor shining moon, nor blowing
wind, nor raining cloud, nor flashing lightning, nor glorifying thunder,
nor breathing soul, nor flying bird, nor blazing fire, nor flowing
water. You existed before the existence of everything and You created
everything and controlled everything and originated everything. You
enriched some and reduced others to poverty, caused some to die and
brought others to life, and made some people glad and others weep, and
then You mounted the Throne. O Allah, You are Blessed and Supreme. You
are Allah that there is no god other than You. You are the Creator, the
Supporter. Your Decree is overpowering and Your Knowledge is
irrefutable. Your plan is wonderful, Your promise is true, Your word is
right, Your judgment is just, Your saying is right guidance, Your
Revelation is light, Your mercy is vast, Your pardon is great, Your
grace is excessive, Your gift is abundant, Your cord is strong, Your
might is ever-ready, the resorter to You is honored, Your punishment is
severe, and Your plotting is cunning. O Lord! You are the place of every
complaint, You are present in every gathering, the Witness of every
secret, and the ultimate goal of every need, the Dispeller of every
sorrow, the Affluence of every needy person, the fort for every refugee,
the security for every afraid one, a shield for the weak, a treasure for
the poor, the Deliverer of griefs, the helper of the virtuous; such is
Allah, our Lord, there is no god but He. You suffice from Your servants
whoever relies on You, and You are the Protector of whoever resorts to
You and beseeches You. You are the shield for whoever seeks refuge with
You, the

supporter of whoever seeks You support. You forgive the sins of whoever
seeks Your forgiveness. Your are the Powerful One of the powerful, the
greatest of the great, the Master of masters, the Lord of lords, the
Guardian of guardians, the Helper of those crying for help, the Reliever
of the distressed, the best of all listeners, the best of all seers, the
best of all judges, the quickest of all reckoners, the most Merciful of
the merciful, the best of all forgivers, the Satisfier of the needs of
the faithful, and the Assistant of the virtuous.

You are Allah, there is no god but You the Lord of the worlds. You are
the Creator and I am the creature. You are the Master and I am the
servant. You are the Lord and I am a slave. You are the Provider and I
am provided. You are the Giver and I am a beggar, You are the Generous
and I am a miser. You are the Mighty and I am weak. You are the Noble
and I am humble. You are the Rich and I am needy. You are the Master am
I am the slave. You are the Forgiver and I am sinful. You are the
Omniscient and I am ignorant. You are the Forbearing and I am hasty. You
are the All-Merciful and I am mercified. You are the Curer and I am
sick. You are the Responder and I am distressed. And I bear witness that
verily You are Allah, there is no god but You, the Giver to Your
servants (even) with no request (from them), and I bear witness that
verily You are Allah, the One, the Peerless, the Unique, the
Independent, the Single, and to you we must return. O Allah, have
blessings upon Muhammad and his family the holy and pure, and forgive my
sins, keep my faults concealed, and extend to me from You mercy and
bounteous sustenance O the most Merciful of the merciful! All praise is
due to Allah the Lord of the worlds, and Allah is Sufficient to us and
is the best Reliable, and there is no might and power save in Allah the
Exalted, the Great.”**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 4
p. 289-300.

**Fifth supplication:**

This is another supplication taught by the Prophet (a.s.) to Imam Ali
(a.s.) to supplicate Allah with it at Iftar (the breaking of fasting):

“O Allah the Lord of the Great Light, the Lord of the Sublime Throne,
the Lord of the Swelling Sea, the Lord of the Big Shaf’ (the day of Eid
ul-Adha) and the Honored Light, and the Lord of the Torah, the Bible,
the Psalms, and great Criterion (Furqan).

You are God in the heavens and God in the earth, and there is no god in
them other than You. You are Mighty in the heavens and Mighty in the
earth, and there is no mighty one in them other than You. You are King
in the heavens and King in the earth, and there is no king in them other
than You.

I ask You by Your Great Name, by the Light of Your Holy Face, and Your
Ancient Kingdom, O You Ever-Living, Eternal, Ever-living, Eternal, and
by Your Name by which the heavens and the earth have shone, and Your
Name by which the first people had been righteous and by which the last
people become righteous. O You the Alive One before everything alive,
and the Alive One after everything alive, O You the Alive One, there is
no god but You; have blessings on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad
and forgive my sins and make to me in my affairs ease and near
deliverance and fix me on the religion of Muhammad and the progeny of
Muhammad, and on the guidance of Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad,
and on the Sunna of Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad, peace be on
him and on them, and make my deeds from among the accepted and highly
raised deeds, and grant to me as You have granted to Your saints and the
people of Your obedience, for I believe in You, rely on You, turn to
You, and my coming is to You, and gather to me and to my family the
whole goodness, and keep away from me, from my parents, from my family,
and

from my children the whole evil; You are the Kind, the Favorer, the
Originator of the heavens and the earth, You give goodness to whomever
You like and withhold it from whomever You like, so bestow on me Your
mercy, O You the most Merciful of the merciful.”**[1]**

### Supplications the Prophet taught to Fatima

The Prophet (a.s.) himself brought up and educated his daughter Fatima,
the principal of all women of the worlds. He fed her with all kinds of
piety and planted in her all excellent qualities and high morals that
made her a unique and unequaled example for every Muslim woman. From
that which the Prophet (a.s.) fed Fatima (a.s.) with were noble
supplications that made her close to Allah all the time by them. The
following are some of those supplications:

**First supplication**

“O Allah the Noblest Mentioned One, and the most Ancient One in glory
and might, O Allah the Merciful One for every seeker of mercy, and the
Refuge of every resorter to You, O Allah Who have pity on every grieved
one who complains his grief and sorrow to You, O Allah the best One from
Whom favor is asked and You give it secretly, O Allah Whom the angels
that are shining with light fear, I ask You by the Names that the
carriers of Your Throne call upon You by, and those around Your Throne
in Your light glorify You by them for the fear of Your punishment, and
by the Names that Gabriel, Michael, and Israfel call upon You by, that
You may respond to me, relieve my grief, and keep my sins concealed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 4
p. 301-302.

O You Who order of the Cry in His creatures and soon they will be
resurrected in the al-Sahira,**[1]** I ask (You) by that Name by which
You give life to the rotten bones, that You give life to my heart,
dilate my chest, and improve my affairs.

O You Who have singled out the everlastingness for Yourself and created
for Your creation death and life, O You Whose doing is just a saying,
Whose saying is a commandment, and Whose commandment is executed on
whomever You like, I ask You by the Name by which Your friend (Abraham)
had called upon You when he was thrown into fire and You responded to
him and said, ***(O fire, be coolness and peace for Abraham),*[2]** and
the Name by which Moses had called upon You from the right side of the
mountain, and You responded to him, and the Name by which You had
relieved the distress of Ayyoub (Job), and accepted the repentance of
Dawud (David), and subjugated for Solomon the wind to blow, and
(subjugated) the Devils, and taught him the language of birds, and the
Name by which You had granted to Zachariah Yahya, and created Jesus from
the Holy Spirit with no father, and the Name by which You had created
the Throne and the Divine Seat, and the Name by which You had created
the Angels, and the Name by which You had created the jinn and men, and
the Name by which You had created the whole creation and everything You
wanted, and the name by which You had the power over everything, I ask
You be these Names that You may give to me what I ask You for, and
satisfy my needs.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It is said, as in traditions, that al-Sahira is a land in other
where than this earth where people shall be resurrected.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 21:69.  
 **[3]** The Life of the Principal of Women Fatima az-Zahra’, p. 55-57.

**Second supplication:**

The Prophet (a.s.) taught Fatima (a.s.) this du’a to be recited at
affliction: ** **

“O You the Aware of the unseen and the secrets in the inners, O You the
Obeyed the All-Knowing, O Allah, O Allah, O Allah, the defeater of the
parties for Muhammad, the Plotter against the Pharaoh for Moses, the
Savior of Jesus from the hands of the unjust, the Rescuer of the people
of Noah from drowning, the Merciful to Your servant Jacob, the Reliever
of Job’s distress, the Savior of Thun-Noon (Jonah) from darks, the Doer
of every goodness, the Guide to every goodness, the Enjoiner on every
goodness, the Creator of goodness, and the One of goodness, You are
Allah; I turn to You in what I know and You are the Knower of the
unseen, I ask You to have blessings on Muhammad and the progeny of
Muhammad.”**[1]**

**Third supplication:**

From the supplications that the Prophet (a.s.) taught to his daughter
Fatima (a.s.) is this one to repel sleeplessness. Imam Ali narrated that
once Fatima (a.s.) complained to the messenger of Allah (a.s.) of
sleeplessness and he said to her to supplicate Allah with this du’a:

“O You the Satisfier of hungry abdomens, the Coverer of naked bodies,
the Calmer of beating nerves, the Putting to sleep of sleepless eyes,
calm down my beating nerves, and permit to my eye a soon
sleeping.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 88 p. 370.  
 **[2]** The Life of the Principal of Women Fatima az-Zahra’, p. 58.

**Fourth supplication:**

The Prophet (a.s.) taught this supplication to Fatima (a.s.) to recite
it when she wanted to go into the mosque:

“O Allah, forgive me my sins and open to me the doors of Your favor.”

And to recite, when going out of the mosque:

“O Allah, forgive me my sins and open to me the doors of Your
mercy.”**[1]**   

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Life of the Principal of Women Fatima az-Zahra’, p. 58.
