From the Prophet’s Sermons
==========================

In Mecca, the Prophet (a.s.) made speeches in which he invited the
people of Quraysh to believe in and embrace Islam, and in Medina, too,
he made speeches to declare the principles and values of Islam. Here, we
mention some of those speeches that besides their religious values, they
are excellent examples in the Arabic literature and eloquence.

**1. His speech in Mecca**

When the Revelation came down to the Prophet (a.s.) ordering him to warn
his near relatives and announce to them his prophethood, he invited them
to have a meal in his house, and after the meal, he made a speech before
them saying, after thanking and praising Allah,

“A pioneer does never tell his family lies. By Allah, if I tell lies to
all people, I will not tell you lies, and if I cheat all people, I will
not cheat you. By Allah, Whom there is no god but Him, I am the
messenger of Allah to you especially and to the whole people generally.

By Allah, you surely shall die as you sleep, shall be resurrected as you
wake up, shall be called to account for what you do; shall be rewarded
with good for good (doing) and with bad for bad (doing), and it shall be
the Paradise forever or the Hell forever.”**[1]**

**2. His speech in Medina**

It was the first speech the Prophet (a.s.) made in Medina. After
praising Allah the Almighty, he said,

“As then, O people, advance for yourselves (do good in your life)! You
know, by Allah, that one of you shall be thunderstruck, and then he
shall leave his sheep with no

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 1 p. 272, al-Kamil fee at-Tareekh,
vol. 2 p. 27.

shepherd, and then his Lord will say to him, where there shall be no
translator or a doorkeeper to prevent him from Him: has My messenger not
come to you and informed you, and have I not given you wealth and
bestowed on you My favors? So what have you advanced for yourself? He
shall look right and left and he shall see nothing, and then he shall
look before him, and he shall not see except the Hell. Whoever of you
can save his face from Fire even if with a half of a date, let him do,
and whoever cannot find, then with a good word (that he may say to
others), for by which a good deed is rewarded with ten likes until seven
hundred doubles. And peace and Allah’s mercy and blessings be on you and
on the messenger of Allah.”**[1]** 

**3. The Friday Sermon in Medina**

In the first Friday Prayer in Medina, the Prophet (a.s.) made this
speech before Muslims saying,

“Praise be to Allah! I praise Him, seek His assistance, seek His
forgiveness, seek His guidance, believe and do not disbelieve in Him,
and show enmity to whoever disbelieves in Him.

I bear witness that there is no god but Allah alone with no partner to
Him, and that Muhammad is His slave and messenger whom He had sent with
guidance, light, and admonition after a cessation of messengers,
littleness of knowledge, deviation of people, shortage of time,
approaching to the Hour (the Day of Judgment), and nearness to the term
(death); so he, who obeys Allah and His messenger, shall be successful,
and he, who disobeys them, shall go astray, lose, and deviate in far
deviation. I recommend you of the fear of Allah, because it is the best
of that which a Muslim may recommend a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 300, Jamharat
Khutab al-Arab, vol. 1 p. 55.

Muslim of; to advise him towards the afterlife and order him to fear
Allah.

Beware of what Allah has warned you against Himself, and there is no
advice better than this and no remembrance better than this. Surely the
fear of Allah to him who acts with scare and fear from his Lord is true
assistance to what you intends from the affairs of the afterlife.
Whoever repairs what there is between him and Allah from his affairs in
secrecy and openness intending nothing except the Face of Allah, it
shall be a (good) mention to him in his life and a supply to him after
death when man shall be in need of what he has advanced, and whatever
else than that, he wishes that if there would be between him and it a
very far distance, and Allah warns you against Himself and Allah is Kind
to the servants. (I swear) by Him Who has proved His saying and
fulfilled His promise, there shall be no changing to that, for Allah the
Almighty says, ***(My word shall not be changed, nor am I in the least
unjust to the servants).*[1]**

Fear Allah in the immediate and the delayed affairs (this life and the
afterlife) of yours in secrecy and openness, because whoever fears
Allah, Allah expiates his bad deeds and gives him a great reward, and
whoever fears Allah shall win a great success. Surely, the fear of Allah
keeps (one) safe from His detestation, safe from His punishment, and
safe from His wrath. The fear of Allah honors faces, pleases the Lord,
and elevates degrees. Do your best and not waste in your duty to Allah.
Allah has taught you His book and clarified to you His way that He may
know those who are truthful and know the liars; so do good as Allah has
done good to you, show enmity to His enemies, and strive hard in the way
of Allah, such a striving as is due to Him. He has chosen you and named
you Muslims

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 50:29.

that he who would perish might perish by clear proof, and he who would
live might live by clear proof, and there is no power save in Allah.
Remember Allah too much and work for what is after today, for whoever
repairs what is between him and Allah, Allah suffices him against what
is between him and people that is because Allah judges on people and
they do not judge on Him, and He has power on people and they do not
have power on Him. Allah is great, and there is no power save in Allah
the Great.”**[1]**

**4. His speech in al-Khayf**

The Prophet (a.s.) made a speech at al-Khayf in Mina saying,

“May Allah make bloom a servant who listens to my saying and understands
it, then he takes it to one who is more aware than him. There are three
things that are not affected in the heart of a faithful; the sincerity
in acting for Allah the Almighty, the loyalty to the men of authority,
and the keeping to congregation (of Muslims)…he, whose interest is the
afterlife, Allah will reunite to him his affairs and make his richness
in his heart, and the (bounties of) life will come to him unwillingly,
and he, whose interest is this life , Allah will scatter his affairs and
make his poverty between his eyes, and nothing from this life shall come
to him except what has been predetermined for him.”**[2]** 

**5. His speech on warning against this life**

The Prophet (a.s.) warned against the deceiving by this life and the
following of desires. He said,

“Surely, this life is pleasurful and sweet, and Allah has entrusted it
to you and He sees how you act (in it); so beware of this life

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh at-Tabari, vol. 2 p. 115.  
 **[2]** I’jaz al-Qur'an, vol. 5 p. 255.

and beware of women. Let the fear of people not prevent one from saying
the truth if he knows it.”

The Prophet (a.s.) kept on making his speech until nothing remained from
the sunlight except some redness on the fronds of palm-trees. Then, he
said,

“It has not remained from this life as to what had elapsed, except like
what has remained from this day as to what had elapsed (from
it).”**[1]**

**6. His speech in the Farwell Hajj**

The Farwell Hajj was the last hajj that the Prophet (a.s.) had performed
before his departure to his Lord. He made a very eloquent speech in the
Kaaba in Mecca where he announced the bases that would keep his nation
safe from deviation and from going astray. He said,

“Praise be to Allah; we praise Him, seek His assistance, seek His
forgiveness, and turn to Him. We seek Allah’s protection from the evils
of our souls and from our bad deeds. And whom Allah guides, there is
none that can lead him astray, and whom Allah makes to go astray, there
is none to guide him. I bear witness that there is no god but Allah
alone with no partner to Him and bear witness that Muhammad is His slave
and messenger.

O servants of Allah, I recommend you of the fear of Allah, invite you to
act due to His obedience, and I ask Allah to show me what is best.

As then O people, listen to me and I will clarify to you. I do not know;
I may not meet you after this year in this situation. O people, your
bloods and properties are inviolable to you until you meet your Lord,
like the inviolability of this day in this

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]**I’jaz al-Qur'an, vol. 5, p. 113.

(inviolable) country. Have I informed? O Allah, bear witness. Whoever
has a trust, let him give it back to one who has entrusted him with.
Every usury in the pre-Islamic era is invalidated, and the first usury
that I begin with is the usury of al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib, and every
blood (that was shed) in the pre-Islamic era is void, and the first
blood that I begin with is the blood of Rabee’ah bin al-Harith bin Abdul
Muttalib. The habits of the pre-Islamic era are invalidated except the
custodianship (of the Kaaba) and the giving of water (to the hajjis)…

O people, Satan has despaired of being worshipped in your land, but is
pleased with being obeyed in other than that as to what you scorn of
your deeds.

O people, ***(postponement (of the sacred month) is only an excess in
disbelief whereby those who disbelieve are misled; they allow it one
year and forbid it (another) year, that they may make up the number of
the months which Allah hath hallowed…)*[1]** Time has turned as the day
when Allah had created the heavens and the earth, and ***(surely the
number of months with Allah is twelve months in Allah's ordinance since
the day when He created the heavens and the earth, of these four being
sacred),*[2]** three successive and one single; Thul Qa’dah, Thul
Hajjah, Muharram, and Rajab, between Jumada and Sha’ban. Have I
informed? O Allah, bear witness.

O people, your women have rights on you and you have rights on them.
Your rights on them are that they should not betray you with anyone in
your beds, and not permit anyone into your houses except with your
knowledge and permission, and not to commit sin. If they commit
something of that, then Allah has

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 9:37.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 9:36.

permitted you that you prevent them from marrying, not to sleep with
them, and that you beat them but not violently. If they abstain and obey
you, then their sustenance and clothing must be on you (to be supplied
to them by you). Women are as prisoners near you that they cannot help
themselves, and you have taken them by the covenant of Allah and married
them by the word of Allah, so fear Allah as to women and be kind to
them. Have I informed? O Allah, bear witness.

O people, the believers are but brothers; it is not permissible to a man
the property of his brother except by his satisfaction. Have I informed?
O Allah, bear witness.

Do not return unbelievers that one kills another, for I have left among
you that which if you follow, you shall not go astray; the Book of Allah
and my progeny my family. Have I informed? O Allah, bear witness.

O people, your Lord is one (the same) and your father is one. All of you
are from Adam and Adam is from earth; ***(the most honorable of you to
Allah is the best of you in his duty to Allah).*** There is no any
preference for an Arab to a foreigner except by piety. Have I informed?

The masses of Muslims cried out, “Yes, you have.” Then, the Prophet
(a.s.) said,

“Let the present inform the absent. O people, Allah has divided for
every heir his share in the inheritance, and no will should be permitted
for an heir (by the bequeather) in more than a third (of the
inheritance). A child is to the bed and the prostitute should be
stoned.**[1]** Whoever claims other than his real father and whoever

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** An illegitimate child should be ascribed to the husband on whose
bed adultery was committed (with his wife) and the adulteress (wife)
should be stoned.

claims other than his own children, the curse of Allah, of the angels,
and of the whole people shall be on him, and Allah will accept from him
neither expiation nor ransom, and peace and mercy of Allah be on
you.”**[1]**  

**7. His speech in the Ghadeer of Khum**

When the Prophet (a.s.) performed his last hajj, he (with the Muslims)
began his journey back to Medina. When he (and the Muslims) arrived in
Ghadeer Khum, Gabriel came down to him carrying with him a very
important message from the Heaven. It was to appoint Ameerul Mo'minin
Ali bin Abi Talib a caliph over the Muslims (after the Prophet) and a
general leader over the nation, and to announce that openly and with no
moment of delay. The message of the Heaven was revealed in this verse,
***(O Messenger! deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord,
and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people).*[2]**

The Prophet (a.s.) determined to fulfill the will of Allah. He stopped
at the desert and ordered the caravans of the hajjis to do the same. It
was a very hot summer day that men put the ends of their abas under
their legs to guard against hot. When Muslims, who were about one
hundred thousands or more as historians say, gathered together, the
Prophet (a.s.) began making a speech before them. He said,

“Praise be to Allah; we seek His assistance, believe in Him, rely on
Him, and seek Allah’s protection from the evils of our souls and from
our bad deeds. Whom Allah guides, there is none that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bayan wet-Tabyeen, vol. 2 p. 15, Tareekh at-Tabari, vol. 3 p.
168, al-Kamil fee at-Tareekh, vol. 2 p. 146.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 5:67. Al-Wahidi in Asbab an-Nuzool, p. 10, ar-Razi in
his Tafsir, vol. 3 p. 636, and other historians mention that this verse
has been revealed on the occasion of al-Ghadeer.

can lead him astray, and whom Allah makes to go astray, there is none to
guide him. I bear witness that there is no god but Allah alone with no
partner to Him and bear witness that Muhammad is His slave and
messenger.

As then O people, kind, wise Gabriel has told me that no prophet lived
except as the half of the life of the prophet that was before him, and I
am about to be called and I will respond (to be made die). I am
answerable and you are answerable too. What shall you say?”

They all cried out, “We bear witness that you have informed, been loyal
in advising, and tried your best. May Allah reward you with good.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Do you not bear witness that there is no god
but Allah and that Muhammad is His slave and messenger, and that His
Paradise is right, His Fire is right, death is right, the Hour (Day of
Judgment) is coming with no doubt, and that Allah will resurrect those
in graves…?”

They all cried out, “Yes, we bear witness of that.”

The Prophet (a.s.), looking at the heaven, said, “O Allah, bear
witness…”

Then he added, “I will precede you to the pond (in Paradise), and you
will come to me at the pond whose wide is as between Sana’a and
Busra,**[1]** and it has silver cups as much as the number of stars. See
how you will be loyal to me in dealing with the two weighty things!”

Someone asked, “O messenger of Allah, what are the two weighty things?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sana’a is the capital of Yemen and Busra is a town in Syria.

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “The major weighty thing is the Book of Allah;
one side (of it) is in the hand of Allah and the other side is in your
hands, so keep to it and you shall not go astray, and the other minor
(weighty) thing is my family. The kind, the wise (Gabriel) has told me
that they (the Qur’an and my family) will not separate until they will
come to me at the pond (in Paradise), and I have asked my Lord to grant
that for them. Do not precede them lest you perish and do not lag behind
them lest you perish …”

Then he took Imam Ali’s hand and said, “O people, who is the worthiest
(of people) of the believers than themselves?...”

They said, “Allah and His messenger are more aware.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Allah is my Guardian and I am the guardian of
the believers, and I am worthier of the believers than themselves. So,
whoever I am his guardian, Ali is to be his guardian.” He repeated that
three times.

Then, he added, “O Allah, favor whoever follows him, be an enemy to
whoever opposes him, love whoever loves him, hate whoever hates him,
support whoever supports him, let down whoever betrays him, and turn the
truth with him wherever he turns. Let the present inform the absent…”

**8. His speech on receiving the month of Ramadan**

On the last Friday of Sha’ban, the Prophet (a.s.) made this speech about
receiving the month of Ramadan where he invited the Muslims to piety,
benevolence, charity, and good deeds. Here is the speech as narrated by
Imam Ali (a.s.),

“O people, the month of Allah is coming to you with blessing, mercy, and
forgiveness; a month that is the best of months near Allah, its days are
the best of days, its nights are the best of nights, and its hours are
the best of hours. It is a month in which you are invited to the
hospitality of Allah and in which

you are made from the people of Allah’s generosity; your breaths in it
are as glorifying (of Allah), your sleeping is as worship, your deeds
are accepted, and your supplication is responded to; therefore, ask your
Lord with true intentions and pure hearts so that Allah may help you to
fast it (the month of Ramadan) and recite His Book, because a wretched
one is he who is deprived of the forgiveness of Allah in this great
month. Remember, by your hunger and thirst in it, the hunger and the
thirst of the Day of Judgment, pay charity to your poor and needy
people, revere your old ones and be merciful to your young ones,
maintain kinship with your relatives, withhold your tongues, keep your
sights away from what is not permissible for you to look at, and your
hearings from what is not permissible for you to listen to, be kind to
the orphans of people and your orphans shall be shown kindness, repent
to Allah the Almighty of your sins, and raise your hands towards Him in
supplication at the times of your prayers, because they are the best
hours where Allah the Almighty looks during them with mercy at His
servants; He answers them if they invoke Him, complies if they call on
Him, and responds to them if they invite Him.

O people, your souls are bind by your deeds, so release them by your
seeking of forgiveness, and your backs are burdened with your sins, so
relieve them by your long prostration, and know that Allah the Almighty
has sworn by His glory that He will not punish the praying and the
prostrating ones, and will not call them to the fire on the day when
people shall stand before the Lord of the worlds.

O people, whoever of you gives food (at the meal of *Iftar*) to a
fasting believer in this month, he shall have near Allah the Almighty
for that (a reward) as (the reward of) a setting free of a slave, and
forgiveness to his afore committed sins.”

He added, “Keep yourselves safe from the Fire even if by a half of a
date (to be given to a needy fasting one), keep yourselves safe from the
Fire even if by a drink of water. O people, whoever of you betters his
morals in this month it shall be to him a permit to pass across the
*Sirat**[1]*** on the day when feet shall slip, and whoever sets free in
this month from what his hand possesses (of slaves) Allah will make
light his judgment (on the Day of Judgment), and whoever withholds his
evil in it (this month) Allah will withhold His wrath from him on the
day when he shall meet Him, and whoever is generous to an orphan in it
Allah will be generous to him on the day when he shall meet Him, and
whoever cuts his relationship with his kin in it Allah will cut from him
His mercy on the day when he shall meet Him, and whoever offers
willingly a prayer in it Allah will record to him an acquittance from
the Fire, and whoever performs an obligation in it, shall have the
reward of seventy obligations performed in other (months) than it, and
whoever much prays Allah to send blessings on me his scales shall be
heavy on the day when scales shall be light, and whoever recites in it a
verse from the Qur’an shall have the reward of the reciting of the whole
Qur’an in other months.

O people, the doors of the Paradise are open in this month; therefore,
ask your Lord not to close them before you, and the doors of the Fire
are closed, so ask your Lord not to open them before you, and the devils
are tied, so ask your Lord not to release them against you.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) asked him, “O messenger of Allah, what are the best
deeds in this month?”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “O Abul Hasan, the best of deeds in this months
is the abstaining from what Allah has prohibited.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Sirat is the bridge that dominates the Hell.

Then the Prophet (a.s.) began weeping, and when Imam Ali (a.s.) asked
him why, he said, “O Ali, I weep for what shall afflict you in this
month. As if I see that, while you shall be offering prayer for your
Lord, the most wretched one of the first, the brother of the killer of
Thamud’s she-camel, shall strike you on your head that shall blood your
beard…”

Imam Ali (a.s.) asked faithfully and confidently, “Shall that be while I
am on my sound faith?”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Yes, on your sound faith. O Ali, whoever kills
you kills me, whoever hates you hates me, and whoever reviles you
reviles me, because you are to me like my self; your soul is from my
soul and your clay (of creation) is from my clay. Allah the Blessed, the
High, has created me and you and chosen me and you; he has chosen me for
prophethood, and chosen you for imamate, and whoever denies your imamate
denies my prophethood.

O Ali, you are my guardian, the father of my two sons, the husband of my
daughter, and my successor over my nation in my life and after my death;
your commandment is my commandment and your prohibition is my
prohibition. I swear by Him Who has sent me with the prophethood and
made me the best of people, you are the authority of Allah over His
people, His trustee with His secrets, and His deputy over His
servants.”**[1]**

**9. His speech in his last illness**

At his last illness, the Prophet (a.s.) made a speech before his
companions who had come to visit him. Here is a short passage from that
speech:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93 p. 218-219, Uyoon al-Akhbar, vol. 1 p.
295-297, Amali as-Saduq, p. 57-58.

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “O people, I am about to be made die soon and
be taken away. I have spoken to you to be excused before you; I leave
among you the Book of Allah and my progeny, my household…”

Then, he took Imam Ali’s hand and said, “This is Ali. He is with the
Qur’an, and the Qur’an is with Ali; they will not separate until they
will come to me at the pond (in the Paradise).”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Life of the Principal of Women Fatima az-Zahra’, p. 284,
quoted from as-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah.
