Wonderful Maxims and Teachings
==============================

The Prophet (a.s.) established wonderful methods of education, morals,
and good manners. The Prophet’s maxims were a perfect method that could
raise man to an exalted position and take his life high in the world of
virtues, so that he really would be the deputy of Allah in the earth.

The Prophet’s maxims are an important part from the Islamic heritage
that deals with all man’s issues and gives answers to all of his
suffering in the different fields of life. Here are some examples of
them:

Good morals
-----------

The Prophet (a.s.) very actively undertook the invitation to the good
morals which was the most important task that he cared too much for. He
said, “I have been sent but to complete the nobilities of character.”
The following are some of the Prophet’s traditions concerning high
morals:

1. He said, “The best of people in faith are the best of them in morals,
and the best of you in morals is the kindest of you to his family
(wife), and I am the kindest of you to my wife.”**[1]** 

2. He said, “The most of that which takes people to the Paradise is the
fear of Allah and good morals.”**[2]**

3. He said to his companions, “Shall I tell you about the most beloved
of you to me and the nearest of you to me in seating on the Day of
resurrection? They are the best of you in morals who is intimate and is
intimated.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rabee’ al-Abrar, vol. 1 p. 50.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** At-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 2 p. 172, Adab ad-Dunya
wed-Deen (morals of life and religion), p. 237.

4. He said, “You shall not include people by your wealth, so include
them by your morals.”**[1]**

5. He said, “Good morals are the half of religion.”**[2]**

6. He said, “The first thing that shall be put in the Scales (on the Day
of Judgment) is the good morals.”**[3]**

7. He said, “There is no ancestry like good morals.”**[4]**

8. He said, “Good morals take their owner high to the degree of a
fasting worshipper.” It is said to the Prophet (a.s.), “What is the best
of that which is given to a servant?” He said, “Good morals.”**[5]**

9. He said, “Good morals fix love (among people).”**[6]**

10. He said, “The most perfect one of the believers in faith is the best
of them in morals.”**[7]**

And about bad morals, the Prophet (a.s.) said, “Bad morals are evil
omen.”**[8]**

**Gaiety**

From the aspects that the Prophet (a.s.) invited to, was gaiety and
smiling at every one when meeting. He said, “From the morals of the
prophets and the truthful is the gaiety when they 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 6, Ayn al-Adab wes-Siyasah (the eye of
literature and politics), p. 134, Siraj al-Mulook (the lamp of kings),
p. 249.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 5141, at-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol.
2 p. 174.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 7, at-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 2
p. 174.  
 **[4]** Al-Jami’ as-Sagheer (little collection), vol. 2 p. 203.  
 **[5]** Tuhaf al-Uqool, p. 45.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** Ibid.  
 **[8]** Ibid., p. 44.

visit each other and the shaking of hands when they meet.”**[1]** He
also said, “Happy miens take grudge away.”**[2]**

**Reason**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Allah has not given to people anything better
than reason; the sleeping of a reasonable person is better than the
staying awake (at night) of an ignorant one, and the staying of a
reasonable person in his country is better than the journey of an
ignorant one (on a task). Allah did not sent a prophet or a messenger
except after he had had perfect reason and that his reason would be
better than the whole reasons of his nation. What a prophet hides inside
himself is better than fatwas of mujtahids. A servant has not to perform
the obligations of Allah until he would have sound reason. All
worshippers do not reach with the virtue of their worshipping what a
reasonable one can reach. The reasonable are the very men of
understanding about whom Allah has said, ***(But none remember except
men of understanding).[3]”*[4]**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Reason is a gift (from Allah).”**[5]**

He said, “The friend of every man is his reason and his enemy is his
ignorance.”**[6]**

He said, “Allah has divided reason into three parts that whoever has had
them his reason is perfect, and whoever has not had them has no reason;
(they are) the well knowing of Allah, good 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rabee’ al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 289.  
 **[2]** Tuhaf al-Uqool, p. 45.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 2:269.  
 **[4]** Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1 p. 60.  
 **[5]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77 p. 174.  
 **[6]** Ibid.

obedience to Allah, and good patience with the decree of fate of
Allah.”**[1]**

He said, “If you are informed about some man that he is good, then
notice his good reason, because man is rewarded due to his
reason.”**[2]**

He said, “If you see some man of much praying and fasting, do not be
pride of him until you see how his reason is.”**[3]**

He said, “At the beginning when Allah created reason, He said to it:
Come! And it came. Then He said to it: Go! And it went. Allah said: by
My glory and honor, I have not created a creature more honored to me
than you; by you I take, and by you I give, by you I reward and by you I
punish.”**[4]**

He said, “A man does not obtain (anything) like a sound reason that
guides him to guidance and holds him back from perishment. A servant’s
faith is not completed and his religion is not straight until his reason
is completed.”**[5]** 

Aa’isha narrated, “I said to the messenger of Allah, ‘With what are
people preferred to each other in this life?’ He said, ‘With reason.’ I
said, ‘And in the afterlife?’ He said, ‘With reason.’ I said, ‘Shall
they not be rewarded due to their deeds?’ He said, ‘O Aa’isha, do they
work except inasmuch as the reason that Allah the Almighty has given to
them? Therefore, as much as the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77 p. 158, Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 3 p. 23,
al-Khisal, p. 102.  
 **[2]** Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1 p. 59.  
 **[3]** Usool al-Kafi, p. 74.  
 **[4]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 3 p. 230, at-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah,
vol. 3 p. 230.  
 **[5]** Muhadharat ar-Raghib, vol. 1 p. 14, Ihya’ al-Uloom, vol. 1 p.
100.

reason they have been given their deeds are, and as much as their deeds
they shall be rewarded.’”**[1]**

**Foolishness**

Foolishness is one of the worst qualities. The Prophet (a.s.) said, “A
fool may ravage by his foolishness much more than the error of a
disobedient.”**[2]** 

Knowledge
---------

Knowledge is the most important pillar on which the civilization of a
nation is based, and it is the main basis of its development in all
fields of life. It is impossible for any nation to have an important
position under the sun while it is burdened with the ties of ignorance.

Islam insistingly invites its followers to seek knowledge, and it has
made that obligatory on every Muslim man and every Muslim woman. The
Prophet (a.s.) said, “Seeking knowledge is an obligation on every Muslim
man and every Muslim woman. Surely Allah loves the seekers of
knowledge.”**[3]**

**The reward of scholars**

Imam Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.) narrated that his grandfather the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) said, “Whoever walks in a way seeking in it
knowledge, Allah will put him in a way towards the Paradise. The angels
shall lower their wings for a seeker of knowledge as pleased with him.
Whoever in the heaven and in the earth and even whales in the sea pray
Allah to forgive the seekers of knowledge. The preference of a scholar
to a worshipper is like the preference of the moon to the rest of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 3 p. 231, Ihya’ al-Uloom, vol. 1 p. 100.  
 **[2]** Muhadharat ar-Raghib, vol. 1 p. 14, Rabee’ al-Abrar, vol. 3 p.
137.  
 **[3]** Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1 p. 79.

stars in the night when the moon is full. Scholars are the heirs of the
prophets. The prophets did not bequeath a dirham or a dinar, but they
bequeathed knowledge, so whoever took from it (knowledge), took full
fortune.”**[1]**

**The punishment of scholars who quit their knowledge**

Imam Ali (a.s.) narrated that the Prophet (a.s.) said, “Scholars are two
men; one works due to his knowledge and he shall be saved, and the other
one gives up his knowledge and he shall perish. The people of the Fire
shall be disgusted with the smell of the scholar who has quitted his
knowledge. The most one among the people of the Fire in regret and
remorse is a man that invites someone to Allah, glory be to Him, and he
responds and accepts from him, and so Allah takes him to the Paradise,
while the inviter himself is taken to the Fire because he quits his
knowledge, follows his desire, and keeps to long hope. As for the
following of desire, it keeps one away from the truth, and as for long
hope, it makes one forget the afterlife.”**[2]** 

**The nation’s rightness is by its scholars and leaders**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “There are two kinds of people that if they are
right all other people become right, and if they are corrupted, all
other people become corrupted; scholars and leaders.”**[3]**

**Jurisprudents are trustees of the messengers** ** ** 

Imam Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.) narrated that his grandfather the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) said, “Jurisprudents are the trustees of the
messengers as long as they do not involve in this life.” It was said, “O
messenger of Allah, what is their  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 84.  
 **[2]** Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1 p. 94.  
 **[3]** Jami’ Bayan al-Ilm, vol. 1 p. 184.

involvement in this life?” He said, “Following the rulers; if they do
that, then you have to beware of them as to your religion.”**[1]**

**Learning knowledge**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Learn knowledge, because learning it is a good
deed, the studying of it (with others) is tasbih (glorification of
Allah), searching for it is jihad, teaching it to those who do not know
it is charity, and affording it to its people is as approaching to
Allah, because it is the manifestation of halal (lawful things) and
haram (unlawful things). It (knowledge) puts its seeker in the paths of
the paradise. It is entertainment in loneliness, a friend in emigration,
a guide to prosperity, a weapon against enemies, and beauty of
companions. Allah the Almighty raises by it peoples and makes them imams
in goodness to be imitated that their deeds are regarded, and their
works are acquired, and the angels wish for their company, because
knowledge is the life of hearts, the light of sights against blindness,
and the strength of bodies against weakness, and that Allah puts its
carrier (the people of knowledge) in the positions of lovers, and grants
them the meeting with the pious in this life and the afterlife.

By knowledge Allah is obeyed and worshipped, and by knowledge Allah is
known and professed as One and Only, and by it kinship is maintained and
lawful and unlawful things are known. Knowledge is the leader of
mind.”**[2]**

**The death of a scholar**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Knowledge does not die by pulling it out of
people, but the knowledgeable die, until when there is no one of them,
people take ignorant leaders who are asked and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1 p. 97.  
 **[2]** Tuhaf al-Uqool, p. 28.

who give fatwas without knowledge, and so they go astray and make people
go astray.”**[1]**

Surely, it is a great loss when a society is afflicted by the death of
scholars whose place is occupied by ignorant persons who undertake
people’s affairs with no knowledge.

**Knowledge is a treasure**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Knowledge is treasuries whose keys are
questions. Therefore, ask, may Allah have mercy on you, because there
are four persons who are rewarded; the asker, the speaker (answerer),
the listener, and one who loves them.”**[2]**

He also said, “Often ask the knowledgeable, speak with the wise, and
associate with the poor.”**[3]**

**The fatwa with no knowledge**

The Prophet (a.s.) warned against giving fatwas with no knowledge. He
said, “Whoever gives a fatwa to people with no knowledge the angels of
the heavens and the earth shall curse him.”**[4]**

The giving of a fatwa with no knowledge may make a lawful thing unlawful
or an unlawful thing lawful, and thus it throws people into sins;
therefore, Islam has prohibited the giving of fatwas with no knowledge.

**Knowledge for pride**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Let him, who learns knowledge to vie in glory
with the fools or pride before scholars or attract the notables towards
him to honor him, take his seat in the Fire,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tuhaf al-Uqool, p. 37.  
 **[2]** Ibid, p.41.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Ibid.

because authority is not fit except to Allah and to its deserving
people. Whoever put himself in a position other than the position in
which Allah has put him, Allah will hate him, and whoever calls for
himself and says: ‘I am your leader’ while he is not so, Allah will not
look at him until he shall refrain from what he says and repent of what
he claims.”**[1]**

**Teaching kindly**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Teach and do not chide, because a
knowledgeable teacher is better than a chiding one.”**[2]**

**Dispraising of ignorance**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “…and the description of an ignorant is: that
he wrongs those who associate with him, trespasses those who are lower
than him, and is impudent to those who are higher than him. His speaking
is without thinking; if he speaks, he errs, and if he keeps silent, he
becomes inadvertent. If a sedition faces him, he hastens to it, and it
makes him perish, and if he sees a virtue, he stays behind. He does not
fear for his old sins, nor does he refrain from sins in what remains of
his life. He lingers and delays before charity heedlessly to what he has
missed or lost from that. These are (ten) features of an ignorant person
who has been deprived of reason.”**[3]**

**Thinking deeply on affairs**

The Prophet (a.s.) often advised Muslims to think deeply on matters
before trying to do them. One day, some man came to the Prophet (a.s.)
and said to him, “Offer recommendations to me, O messenger of Allah!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tuhaf al-Uqool, p. 43-44.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77 p. 175.  
 **[3]** Tuhaf al-Uqool, p. 29.

The Prophet (a.s.) said to him, “Will you follow my recommendations?” He
repeated that three times.

The man said, “Yes I will, O messenger of Allah.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “I recommend you that when you intend to do
something, you are to think deeply on its result; if it is good, you can
do it, and if it is bad, you are to give it up.”**[1]**

**Kinship and pardon**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Maintain relationship with one who cuts his
with you, give to one who deprives you, and pardon one who wrongs
you.”**[2]**

**Praising of benevolence**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Allah the Almighty has made for benevolence
some of His creatures that He has endeared to them benevolence and
endeared to them its deeds, and He has guided to them the seekers (who
are in need) of benevolence and made the giving of it easy to them as He
has made easy the falling of rains to the barren land to enliven it and
enliven its people. Allah the Almighty, as well, has made to benevolence
enemies from among His creatures that He has made benevolence hateful to
them and made its deeds hateful to them, and He has prevented the
seekers of benevolence from asking them and prevented them (the enemies
of benevolence) from giving it as He prevents rains from falling down on
the barren land to destroy it and destroy its people with it, but what
Allah pardons is much more. The doing of benevolence protects  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rawdhat al-Kafi, p. 150.  
 **[2]** Rabee’ al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 46.

one from bad death.**[1]** The people of benevolence in this life are
people of benevolence in the afterlife. The first people to enter into
the Paradise shall be the people of benevolence. The charity in secret
puts out the wrath of the Lord, and the maintaining of kinship increases
one’s age.”**[2]**

**Virtues**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “There is no property more profitable than
reason. There is no loneliness lonelier than self-conceit. There is no
reason like thinking deeply, no determination like piety, no companion
like good morals, no scales like good manners, no benefit like
successfulness, no trade like good deeds, no profit like the reward of
Allah, no god-fearing like abstaining at ambiguity, no abstinence like
the abstinence from unlawful things, no knowledge like pondering, no
worship like performing the obligations, no faith like modesty and
patience, no ancestry like humbleness, no honor like knowledge, and no
assistance like consultation. So keep the head and what it contains, and
the abdomen and what it includes, and remember death and long
trials.”**[3]**

**Generosity**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Allah the Almighty has chosen this religion
for Himself, and it is not fit for your religion except generosity and
good manners; therefore, adorn your religion with them.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bad death is the state of total misery, bitter pains, or serious
diseases that man suffers at dying which makes him ungrateful to the
blessings of Allah and makes him neglect the remembrance of Allah.  
 **[2]** Al-Jami’ as-Sagheer, vol. 1 p. 69, The Letters of ibn Abi
ad-Dunya, p. 74.  
 **[3]** Nathr ad-Durr (scattering of pearls), vol. 1 p. 171, Proverbs
of al-Mawardi, p. 55, at-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 2 p. 357.  
 **[4]** Siraj al-Mulook, p. 247.

Generosity and open-handedness are from nobilities and perfection, and
they are high qualities that every man is honored by them. The Prophet
(a.s.) used to prefer the generous to others in giving. Once, a
delegation from the Arabs came to him. He gave them (from the treasury)
and preferred to them some man from among them. The Prophet (a.s.) was
asked about that and he said, “All the people (of that tribe) are
dependants on him.”**[1]**

**Doing good**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Do good throughout your life and be liable to
the donations of Allah’s mercy, because Allah has donations from His
mercy which He grants to whomever He likes from His servants; and ask
Allah to cover your private parts (honors) and calm down your
fears.”**[2]** 

Surely the doing of good is one of the main concepts that Islam has
emphasized on. Allah says, ***(therefore hasten to (do) good
deeds).*[3]**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “A word of goodness that a believer listens to,
works due to it, and teaches it (to others) is better than the worship
of a year.”**[4]**

**Charity**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Hearts have been created with the nature of
loving whoever does good to them and hating whoever does wrong to
them.”**[5]** 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 2 p. 286.  
 **[2]** Ash-Shihab, p. 12.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 2:148.  
 **[4]** At-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 1 p. 53.  
 **[5]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 2 p. 254, Proverbs (Amthal) of
al-Mawardi, p. 56, Muhadharat ar-Raghib, vol. 1 p. 648.s

Bad and prohibited features
---------------------------

The Prophet (a.s.) warned strongly against bad qualities that would take
man to woe, destruction, and the wrath of Allah, such as:

**Hypocrisy**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “That which I fear most for my nation from is
every hypocrite of cunning tongue.”**[1]**

**Treason**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “A banner shall be installed for a traitor on
the Day of Resurrection and it shall be said: this is the treason of
so-and-so the son of so-and-so.”**[2]**

**Betrayal of trust**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “A man, who has been entrusted with a trust,
shall be brought on the Day of Judgment and it shall be said to him: Pay
back your trust. He shall say: O my Lord, the worldly life has gone. It
shall be said: take him to the Hell. He shall fall into it (Hell) until
he shall reach to its bottom and he shall find it (the trust) there as
it was. He shall carry it on his shoulder and come up with it. When he
shall see that he shall have come out, it (the trust) shall slip and
fall down, and he shall fall down after it (and so on) forever.”**[3]**

**False testimony**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “On the day of Resurrection, birds shall beat
with their beaks, eject what there shall be in their craws,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kashf al-Khafa’, vol. 1 p. 70, al-Jami’ as-Sagheer, vol. 1 p.
14.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 517.  
 **[3]** Al-Jami' as-Sagheer, vol. 2 p. 85, at-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah,
vol. 3 p. 9.

and shake their tails because of the great terror of the Day of
Resurrection, and (on that day) a giver of false testimony shall not be
talked to, and his feet shall not fix on the ground until he shall be
thrown into the Fire.”**[1]**

**Oppression**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “The promptest thing in being punished for is
oppression.”**[2]**

He also said, “There is no sin nearer to punishment that Allah hastens
for its committer in this life, besides what shall be saved for him in
the afterlife, than oppression and cutting off kinship.”**[3]**

**Rejoicing at others’ distress**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Do not show rejoicing at your brother’s
distress that Allah may deliver him (from it) and afflict you.”**[4]**

Surely rejoicing at others’ distresses is a feature of villains whereas
Islam has built its society on high morals, nobilities, the love of
others, and honesty.

**Haughtiness**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Whoever draws his garment as a kind of
arrogance Allah will not look at him.”**[5]**

He also said, “He, who has in his heart inasmuch as the weight of a
grain of mustard seed of arrogance, shall not enter the
Paradise.”**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol. 4 p. 200.  
 **[2]** Al-Mustadhraf, vol. 6 p. 208, Rabee’ al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 823.  
 **[3]** Bahjat al-Majalis (joy of meetings), vol. 1 p. 406.  
 **[4]** Al-Jami' as-Sagheer, vol. 2 p. 201, Kashf al-Khafa’, vol. 2 p.
479, Muhadharat ar-Raghib, vol. 2 p. 501.  
 **[5]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 3 p. 370.  
 **[6]** Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol. 1 p. 98, the Collection of Warram, vol.
1 p. 203.

He said, “He, who glorifies himself and struts in his walking, shall
meet Allah while angry at him.”**[1]**

**Talebearing**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Cursed is a triad!” He was asked, “What is a
triad, O messenger of Allah?” He said, “It is he who betrays his friend
near his ruler, and thus he destroys himself, his friend, and his
ruler.”**[2]**

He also said, “Let him, who believes in Allah and the Last Day, not
convey to us a defect of his believing brother.”**[3]**

**Envy**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Envy eats good deeds as fire eats
firewood.”**[4]**

Envy causes calamities and disasters to people and throws them into
great evils. As a result of envy, the Prophet’s immaculate progeny were
kept away from their right in the caliphate when some companions, after
the Prophet’s death, announced: “The prophethood and the caliphate
should not gather in one family!” Therefore, the caliphate was seized
from its actual people who were kept away from the political life, and
consequently the nation suffered and is still suffering the bitterest
kinds of disasters.

**Evil plotting**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Beware of evil plotting, because Allah has
determined that ***(the evil plotting shall not beset any except the
authors of it).”*[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol. 1 p. 98.  
 **[2]** Siraj al-Mulook, p. 267, Rabee’ al-Abrar, vol. 3 p. 644.  
 **[3]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 3 p. 289.  
 **[4]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 461, Adab ad-Dunya wed-Deen, p. 264,
al-Mustadhraf, vol. 1 p. 214.  
 **[5]** At-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 1 p. 644.

**Lying**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Beware of lying, because it leads to
disobedience, and disobedience leads to the Fire. Speak truthfully,
because truthfulness leads to piety, and piety leads to the
Paradise.”**[1]**

**Stinginess**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “No two wolves that are sent to a flock of
sheep and they ravage it worse than man’s stinginess of wealth.”**[2]**

He said, “The son of Adam gets old and two things grow with him;
stinginess of wealth and stinginess of life.”**[3]**

**Pride**

There are many traditions transmitted from the Prophet (a.s.) on
dispraising pride. Here are some of them:

He said, “I am the master of the children of Adam but with no
pride.”**[4]**

He said, “People are from Adam and Eve like the contents of a vessel
that shall not be filled (they shall not reach perfection). Allah does
not ask about your ancestries. He does not ask except about your deeds.
Surely the most honored of you to Allah is the most pious of
you.”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol. 1 p. 93, Rabee’ al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 639,
Ghurar al-Khasa’is, p. 52.  
 **[2]** Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol. 10 p. 250.  
 **[3]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 3 p. 376.  
 **[4]** Majma' az-Zawa'id, vol. 1 p. 376, Muhadharat ar-Raghib, vol. 2
p. 312.  
 **[5]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 4 p. 145.

He said, “Your prophet is the same and your father is the same. There is
no preference for the black to the red, nor for an Arab to a foreigner
except by piety.”**[1]**

He said, “Allah has removed from you the defect of the pre-Islamic age
and its pride and He replaced it by self-esteem. People are children of
Adam, and Adam is from earth; (they are either) a pious believer or a
cursed disobedient. Let some peoples stop priding on their men; they are
but coals from the coals of the Hell, or they shall be meaner to Allah
than dung beetles which push their dung with their noses. Allah the
Almighty has said, ***(O Noah! he is not of your family. He is of evil
conduct).[2]”*****[3]**

**Injustice**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “When it is the Day of Resurrection, a caller
shall call out: where are the unjust, the assistants of the unjust, and
the likes of the unjust even him who has sharpened to them a pen or
prepared to them an inkpot. They shall gather in an iron coffin and then
they shall be thrown into the Hell.”**[4]** 

He also said, “May Allah have mercy on a servant that has had an act of
injustice in honor or property against his brother, and he comes to him
to absolve him from it before the Day of Resurrection shall come where
there shall be neither a dinar nor a dirham with him.”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A passage from the Farewell Hajj Sermon of the Prophet (a.s.).  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 11:46.  
 **[3]** Sunan of Abi Dawud, vol. 2 p. 624, Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal,
vol. 2 p. 361.  
 **[4]** Rabee' al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 834.  
 **[5]** Ibid., p. 815.

He said, “There are two men from my nation whom my intercession shall
not include; an unjust, oppressive ruler, and an excessive one in
religion and astray from it.”**[1]**

**Impudence**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “The worst of people in position on the Day of
Resurrection is he whom people has left alone to be safe from his
impudence.” And He said, “From the worst of people are those who are
honored (by others) just to be safe from their tongues.”**[2]**

**Double-faced**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Certainly a double-faced one is not trusted
near Allah.”**[3]**

He said, “He, who has two faces in this life, shall have two tongues of
fire on the Day of Resurrection.”**[4]** 

He said, “A double-faced one should not be notable.”**[5]**

**Uncertainty**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “I do not fear for my nation except from
uncertainty.”**[6]**

**Supporting of falsehood**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “He, who supports falsehood to refute by his
falsehood a truth, shall be away from the protection of Allah and the
protection of His messenger.”**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rabee' al-Abrar, vol. 2, p. 497.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 48.  
 **[3]** As-Sunan al-Kubra, vol. 1 p. 246.  
 **[4]** Sunan of Abi Dawud, vol. 2 p. 45.  
 **[5]** Ash-Shifa’, by the Judge Ayyadh, vol. 1 p. 78.  
 **[6]** Rabee' al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 64.  
 **[7]** Majma' az-Zawa'id, vol. 4 p. 205, vol. 5 p. 211.

He said, “He, who goes with an unjust one to support him while knowing
that he is unjust, shall be out of Islam.”**[1]**

**Praising the disobedient**

The Prophet (a.s.) prohibited the Muslims to praise a disobedient one
because that would deaden justice and be disobedience to Allah the
Almighty.

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “When a disobedient person is praised, the
Throne shall shake for that and the Lord will be angry for it.”**[2]**

He said, “Allah is angry when a disobedient one is praised.”**[3]**

**Terrifying a Muslim**

Islam has prohibited the terrifying of a Muslim. The Prophet (a.s.)
said, “It is enough evil for one to terrify his Muslim brother.”**[4]**

Praiseworthy attributes {style="margin-bottom:6.0pt"}
-----------------------

**Five qualities**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “A servant does not obtain full faith until he
has five qualities; relying on Allah, entrusting (all his affairs) to
Allah, believing in all Allah’s orders, being satisfied with Allah’s
decree of fate, and being patient with Allah’s trials. He, who loves for
the sake of Allah, hates for the sake of Allah, gives for the sake of
Allah, and holds back for the sake of Allah, shall be with full
faith.”**[5]** 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma' az-Zawa'id, vol. 4 p. 205.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 1 p. 418, al-Jami' as-Sagheer, vol. 1 p.
35.  
 **[3]** At-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 1 p. 51.  
 **[4]** Rabee' al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 492, al-Mustadhraf, vol. 1 p. 155.  
 **[5]** Al-La’ali’ al-Masnu’ah, vol. 1 p. 302. (But the author
considers it as fabricated.)

**Four qualities**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “There are four things that whoever is given is
given the goodness of this life and the afterlife; a grateful heart, a
mentioning tongue, a body patient with affliction, a wife who betrays
neither him nor his properties.”**[1]**

**Satisfaction**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “He, who is submissive (to Allah), is made
successful, granted (sustenance) sufficiently, and Allah will make him
satisfied with what He has given to him.”**[2]**

He also said, “Satisfaction is a treasure that does not run out.”**[3]**

**Economics**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “He, who is economical, shall not be
needy.”**[4]**

**Obedience of Allah**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Whomever Allah has moved from the meanness of
disobediences to the honor of piety He has enriched him with no wealth,
honored him with no tribe, and entertained him with no entertainer.
Whoever fears Allah, Allah will make everything fear him.”**[5]**

**Seeking forgiveness**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “A servant may commit a sin that takes him to
the Paradise.” He was asked, “O messenger of Allah, how can it take him
to the Paradise.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** at-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 1 p. 44.  
 **[2]** Ibid., 3 p. 211.  
 **[3]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 3 p. 247, al-Mustadhraf, vol. 3 p. 347.  
 **[4]** Al-Jami' as-Sagheer, vol. 2 p. 146, Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 3 p.
347.  
 **[5]** At-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 1 p. 48.

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “He may be repentant of it (that sin) and be
asking for forgiveness until he shall enter into the Paradise.”**[1]** 

He also said, “Whoever often seeks forgiveness Allah will make to him a
deliverance and release him from every distress, and grant him
sustenance from where he does not expect.”**[2]**

**The inviolability of a believer**

Once, the Prophet (a.s.) looked at the Kaaba and said, “Welcome to the
House! How great you are and how great your sanctity is! By Allah, a
believer is more inviolable near Allah than you, because Allah has
prohibited one thing concerning you, but three things concerning a
believer; (the shedding of) his blood, (the plundering of) his money,
and to be mistrusted.”**[3]**

**Pardoning**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Pardon the slips of the notables except the
penalties.”**[4]**

He said, “He, whose brother apologizes to him but he does not accept,
shall not come to me at the pond (in the Paradise).”**[5]**

**Hating the sinners**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Approach to Allah by hating the sinners, and
seek His pleasure by avoiding them.” His companions asked, “With whom
shall we associate?” He said, “Those, the seeing of whom reminds you of
Allah, and whose  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhadharat ar-Raghib, vol. 1 p. 408.  
 **[2]** At-Targheeb wet-Tarheeb, p. 151.  
 **[3]** Rabee' al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 799.  
 **[4]** Bahjat al-Majalis, vol. 1 p. 370.  
 **[5]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 3 p. 258.

logic increase your understanding, and whose deeds make you wish for the
afterlife.”**[1]**

**The most beloved people to the Prophet**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “The happiest one of people to me is a simple
believer of good prayers and whose sustenance is least and he is patient
with it until he shall meet Allah, and who worships Allah well and obeys
Him in secret, and is unknown among people; whose death is hastened,
whose inheritance is little, and the weepers for him are few.”**[2]**

**Wisdom**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Wisdom is the long-sought goal of
believers.”**[3]**

**Reciting the Qur'an**

The Prophet (a.s.) said to Anass, “My son, do not forget the reciting of
the Qur'an in the evening, because the Qur'an enlivens the dead heart,
and forbids indecency and vice.”**[4]**

**Leniency**

Once, a group of Jews came to the Prophet (a.s.) and said to him,
“As-Sam alayk.”**[5]** The Prophet (a.s.) replied, “and on you.”
Aa’isha, the Prophet’s wife, became angry and said to them, “but, death
and curse be on you.” The Prophet (a.s.) said to her, “O Aa’isha, Allah
loves leniency in all affairs.” She said to him,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 5 p. 245.  
 **[2]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 5 p. 52, the Collection of
Warram, vol. 1 p. 182, al-Jami' as-Sagheer, vol. 1 p. 88.  
 **[3]** Kashf al-Ghita’, vol. 1 p. 435, Al-Maqasid al-Hasanah, p.
191.  
 **[4]** At-Tathkirah al-Hamduniyyah, vol. 1 p. 54.  
 **[5]** The greeting of Islam in Arabic is ‘as-Salam alayk or alaykum;
peace be on you (singular) or you (plural)’, whereas ‘sam’ here means
‘death’.

“Have you not heard what they said?” The Prophet (a.s.) said to her,
“And I said (to them): and on you.”**[1]**

The Prophet (a.s.) also said, “Whoever is lenient to my nation Allah
will be lenient to him, and whoever is severe to my nation Allah will be
severe to him.”**[2]**

**The advantage of fasting**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Fasting is the zakat of one’s body.”**[3]**

He said, “A faster shall have two joys; one is at breaking his fasting
and the other is at meeting his Lord.”**[4]**

**Prayer**

The prayer is the main pillar of the religion and the sacrifice of the
pious. Because of its importance, the Prophet (a.s.), whenever
distressed, he resorted to offering prayer.**[5]**

**Comfort in food**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “He, who is eating some food while there is a
two-eyed creature looking at him but he does not give to him\\it, shall
be afflicted with an incurable disease.”**[6]**

**Economic in food**

The Prophet (a.s.) often advised Muslims to be economical in food and
not to be excessive or wasteful, because excessiveness in having food
would cause many illnesses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rabee' al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 45.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 45.  
 **[3]** Ibid., p. 116.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Ibid., p. 97.  
 **[6]** Ibid., p. 679.

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Allah has not adorned man with an adornment
better than the abstinence of his abdomen.”**[1]**

He also said, “He, whose eating is little, his abdomen shall be sound
and his heart shall be clear, and he, whose eating is much, his abdomen
shall be ill and his heart shall be severe.”**[2]**

He said, “The son of Adam does not fill a vessel worse than the stomach.
It suffices man from his food what can sustains him, but if the son of
Adam denies, let him make a third for food, a third for drinks, and a
third for breath.”**[3]**

**Honoring old people**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “From the glorifying of Allah is the honoring
of aged Muslims.”**[4]**

**Trust of meetings**

From the Islamic morals is that one should not reveal a speech taking
place between him and another one, for that may cause a harm. The
Prophet (a.s.) said, “Meetings are a trust.”**[5]**

Once, Abdul Melik bin Marwan, the Umayyad caliph, parted with his guards
in his way. He saw a nomad and asked him, “Do you know Abdul Melik?” The
nomad said, “He is oppressive, aggressive.” Abdul Melik said to the man,
“Woe unto you! I am Abdul Melik.” The man kept on abusing and
criticizing the caliph.” When the guards arrived, the man said to the
caliph, “O Ameerul Mo'minin, keep what has happened secret, because
meetings are a trust.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rabee' al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 674.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 676.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Muhadharat ar-Raghib, vol. 2 p. 323.  
 **[5]** Rabee' al-Abrar, vol. 2 p. 323.

**Consultation**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “He, who seeks what is best near Allah, shall
not be disappointed, and he, who consults (with others), shall not
regret, and he, who is economical, shall not be needy.”**[1]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “He, who consults (with others), shall not
miss, at doing right, a praiser, and at doing mistake, an excuser.”

The Prophet (a.s.) often consulted with his companions on different
matters. In the battle of Badr, the Prophet (a.s.) (and his army)
stopped at the nearest well to the place of the battle. Al-Hubab bin
Munthir said to him, “O messenger of Allah, has Allah the Almighty
ordered you to stop at this place that you should neither exceed nor
stay behind?” The Prophet (a.s.) said, “No, but it is my thought.”
Al-Hubab said, “O messenger of Allah, this is not a suitable place.
March with the people until we reach the nearest well to the people (the
opponents) to stop there. Then, we build a pool around it and fill it
with water. Then, we begin fighting them, and so we will have water to
drink, but they won’t.” The Prophet (a.s.) said, “You have suggested the
right suggestion.” The Prophet (a.s.) did as his companion
suggested.**[2]**

**Unity**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Unity is mercy and separation is
torment.”**[3]** 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma' az-Zawa'id, vol. 2 p. 280, Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 6 p. 69,
al-Mustadhraf, vol. 1 p. 73.  
 **[2]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 6 p. 72-73.  
 **[3]** Usool al-Kafi, vol. 7 p. 558.

He said, “He, who keeps away from unity (of Muslims), shall die the
death of the pre-Islamic age (as unbeliever).”**[1]**

He said, “Whoever parts with the unity a span of the hand, Allah will
take the noose of Islam off his neck.”**[2]**

**The jihad for the sake of Allah**

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “The nearest of deeds to Allah is the jihad in
the way of Allah and nothing equals it.”**[3]**

He said, “The best deed of a believer is the jihad in the way of
Allah.”**[4]**

He said, “Struggle against polytheists with your wealth, souls, and
tongues.”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol. 8 p. 87.  
 **[2]** Sunan of Abi Dawud, vol. 2 p. 426.  
 **[3]** Usool al-Kafi, vol. 4 p. 285.  
 **[4]** Ibid., vol. 13 p. 307.  
 **[5]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 3 p. 124, Usool al-Kafi, vol.
4 p. 297, Sunan of Abi Dawud, vol. 1 p. 562.
