Short Maxims
============

A good collection of short maxims has been transmitted from the Prophet
(a.s.) that are of wonderful eloquence, literature, and wisdom. Though
brief, they show the top of eloquence and expressiveness, and they
include the high Islamic morals and manners. The following are some of
them:

1. “The farthest of you in being like to me (not like me) is the stingy,
the obscene, the indecent.”

2. “The most hateful of men to Allah is a quarrelsome hostile.” 

3. “Be kind to the weak, because you are endowed with sustenance and are
supported for your weak.”

4. Do you like to be good hearted and to obtain what you want? Be kind
to the orphan, pat their heads, and feed them from your food, and you
shall obtain what you want.”

5. “Fear Allah and treat all your children fairly as you like them to be
dutiful to you.”

6. “Beware of the believer’s insight because he sees by the light of
Allah, glory be to Him.”

7. “Avoid anger.”

8. “Avoid wine because it is the key to every evil.”

9. “Avoid every intoxicant.”

10. “The most beloved deed to Allah is the most continuous one of them.”

11. “The most beloved deeds to Allah are the feeding of a hungry person,
the paying of some(needy)one’s debt, or the relieving of someone’s
distress.”

12. “The most beloved deed to Allah is the keeping (withholding) of
one’s tongue.”

13. “The most beloved speech to me is the most truthful.”

14. “The most beloved food to me is that which hands are many at it
(more people participate in eating it).”

15. “The most beloved one of your houses to Allah is the house that an
orphan is treated kindly in.”

16. “The most beloved one of Allah’s servants to Allah is the most
helpful one of them to His servants and the best of them in fulfilling
His rights, who endears to them benevolence and the doing of it.”

17. “Beware of mistrusting people.”

18. “Throw earth on the praisers’ faces.”

19. “The most determined one of people is the best of them in
suppressing his anger.”

20. “Be good neighbors to the blessings of Allah and do not make them
run away, because it is seldom that they (blessings) leave a people and
come back to them again.”

21. “Keep your tongue.”

22. “Pay the trust back to him who has entrusted you with it, and do not
betray whoever has betrayed you.”

23. “Repel penalties by (avoiding) ambiguities (when hesitating whether
lawful or unlawful), and pardon the slips of the notables except the
penalties of Allah.”

24. “Invoke Allah while you are certain of His response, and know that
Allah does not respond to an invocation from a neglectful, inadvertent
heart.”

25. “If Allah gives you wealth, let the result of Allah’s blessing and
honor to you appear on you.”

26. “If Allah wants goodness for a servant, He makes people be in need
of him.”

27. “If Allah wants goodness for a servant, He makes him aware of the
religion, abstinent in this life, and makes him see his defects.”

28. “If Allah wants goodness for a household, he endows them with
leniency.”

29. “If Allah wants growth for a people, He endows them with generosity
and chastity, and if He wants perishment for a people, He opens to them
the door of betrayal.”

30. “When a ruler becomes enraged, Satan prevails.”

31. “When Allah gives one of you goodness, let him begin with himself
and his family.”

32. “If you see an evil omen, let you keep on (action), if you guess,
let you not judge, and if you envy, let you not be oppressive.”

33. “If you judge, be just, and if you speak, speak of goodness, because
Allah is Beneficent and He loves the beneficent.”

34. “If you find that a man is careless of what he says or what is said
about him, then he is either an adulterer or a devil.”

35. “When you see unsound people, pray Allah for good health.”

36. “When the worst of people prevails over them, and the meanest of
people is the leader over them, and the sinful are honored, then let
disasters be waited for.”

37. “If one of you does something, let him perfect it.”

38. “If you are powerful over your enemy, then make pardon as the
gratefulness for the powerfulness over him.”

39. “If someone of you comes from a travel, let him bring with him a
present, even if he puts in his bag a stone.”

40. “If two persons are talking with each other, let you not interfere
between them.”

41. “If your leaders are the best of you, your wealthy people are the
most generous of you, and your affairs are decided after consultation
between you, then the surface of the earth is better to you than its
interior (to live better than to die). But, if your leaders are the
worst of you, your wealthy people are the stingiest of you, your affairs
are decided by your women, then the interior of the earth is better to
you than its surface.”

42. “If you have what suffices you, then do not ask for what may make
you haughty.”

43. “When there shall be the Day of Resurrection, a servant’s legs shall
not slip until he shall be asked about four things; his age how he has
spent it, his youth how he has worn it out, his gains wherefrom he has
gained and on what he has spent them, and about the love to us, we the
Ahlul Bayt.”

44. “If man dies, his deeds stop except three; a continuous charity,
knowledge that is benefited by, and a good child that prays Allah for
him.”

45. “Remember Allah, because He is a supporter to you in what you seek.”

46. “The lowest of people is he who insults people.”

47. “There are four things that are from the signs of misery; inactivity
of the eye (not cry), severity of the heart, far greed for the pleasures
of this life, and the insisting on sins.”

48. “There are four things that whoever has had he shall be in the
greatest light of Allah; he that the protection of his affairs is the
witness that ‘there is no god but Allah and that I am the

messenger of Allah’, he that when an affliction afflicts him, says ‘we
are Allah’s and to Him we shall return’, he that when obtains good,
says: ‘praise be to Allah’, and he that when commits a sin, says: ‘I
pray Allah to forgive me and I repent to Him’.”

49. “There are four things that are required by every one of reason and
intelligence from my nation; listening to knowledge, memorizing,
spreading, and acting according to it.”

50. “There are four things whose littleness is much; poverty, pain,
enmity, and fire.”

51. “Be merciful to a notable that becomes low, a wealthy one that
becomes poor, and a knowledgeable one that is lost among ignorant
people.”

52. “Be abstinent in this life and Allah will love you, and be abstinent
to what there is in people’s hands, and people will love you.”

53. “Resort to secrecy in (many of) your affairs, because every owner of
a blessing is envied.”

54. “Allah’s wrath is so great on adulterers.”

55. “From the most tortured people on the Day of Resurrection is one who
shows people that he is good while there is no good in him.”

56. “From the most tortured people on the Day of Resurrection is a
knowledgeable one whose knowledge does not benefit him (in the life).”

57. “The strongest of you is he who controls himself at anger, and the
most forbearing one of you is he who pardons after having prevalence.”

58. “The most wretched one of the wretched is he on whom the poverty of
this life and the torment of the afterlife gather together.”

59. “The most righteous one of people is the best of them to people.”

60. “Seek good health for others, and you shall be granted it for
yourself.”

61. “Seek favor near the merciful ones of my nation that you shall live
under their protection, and do not seek it near the hard-hearted ones.”

62. “Regard a friend due to his friend.”

63. “The most just one of people is he who accepts for people what he
accepts for himself, and dislikes for them what he dislikes for
himself.”

64. “The bitterest of your enemies is your soul that is inside you.”

65. “Give to a beggar even if he comes to you on a good horse, and give
the employee his fee before his sweat shall dry.”

66. “The most important one of people in this life is he who regards no
importance of this life to him.”

67. “The most reasonable one of people is the most of them in humoring
people.”

68. “Deeds are (regarded) but by intentions and results.”

69. “Deeds are (regarded) by intention.”

70. “The taking of a present by a leader is ill-gotten, and the
accepting of a bribe by a judge is disbelief.”

71. “The most inattentive one of people is he who does not take a lesson
from the change of this life from a condition into another.”

72. “The wealthiest of people is he who is not a captive of greed.”

73. “Spread greeting, offer food, maintain kinship, and pray in the
night while people are sleeping, and thus you shall enter the Paradise.”

74. “The best of friends is he who when you remember supports you and
when you forget reminds you.”

75. “The best of deeds is the gaining in lawful ways.”

76. “The best of deeds is to cause delight for your believing brother,
or pay his debt (instead of him).”

77. “The best of faith is patience and generosity.”

78. “The best of jihad is that when one does not intend to wrong
anyone.”

79. “The best of good deeds is the honoring of companions.”

80. “The best of charity is reconciliation.”

81. “The best of charity is that a Muslim person learns knowledge and
then he teaches it to his Muslim brother.”

82. “The best of charity is the keeping of the tongue (not to offend
others).”

83. “The best of deeds is a truthful intention.”

84. “The best of virtues is to maintain relationship with one who has
cut his relationship with you, to give one who has deprived you, and to
pardon one who has done you wrong.”

85. “The best of people is he who is humble though he is lofty, is
abstinent though he is wealthy, is fair though he is powerful, and is
meek though prevalent.”

86. “The best of my nation’s jihad is the waiting for deliverance.”

87. “The best of you in faith are the best of you in morals.”

88. “The plague of speaking is lying.”

89. “Accept honoring (gift), and the best of honoring is perfume; the
lightest in being carried, and the best in scent.”

90. “The nearest of you to me tomorrow in the Standing (before Allah),
is the most truthful of you in speaking, the best of you in giving back
trusts, the most loyal of you to covenants, the best of you in morals,
and the nearest of you to people.”

91. “The least comfortable people are the stingy.”

92. “The least delighted people are the envious.”

93. “The least things available at the end of time are a trustworthy
brother or a well-gotten dirham.”

94. “Pardon the slips of the people of mistakes.”

95. “The greatest of major sins is the mistrusting of Allah.”

96. “The greatest of major sins are the association (of others) with
Allah, the killing of a human being, the undutifulness to parents, and
false testimony.”

97. “The most satiate people in this life are the hungriest of them on
the Day of Resurrection.”

98. “The most appreciated people are the most knowledgeable.”

99. “The most honorable people are the most pious.”

100. “Honor your children and educate them well.”

101. “Honor the knowledgeable because they are the heirs of the
prophets. Whoever honors them honors Allah and His messenger.”

102. “Accept from me six things and I will assure to you the paradise;
if one of you speaks, let him not tell lies, if he promises, let him not
break his promise, and if he is entrusted, let him not betray. Lower
your sights (do not look at what is unlawful to look at), hold back your
hands (from harming others or obtaining what is unlawful), and keep your
honors (private parts).”

103. “Eating in the markets is lowness.”

104. “Shall I guide you to the best morals of this life and the
afterlife? Maintain relationship with one who has cut relations with
you, give to one who has deprived you, and pardon one who has wronged
you.”

105. “There may be a lust of a moment that causes a long sorrow.”

106. “Let no man be alone with a woman, for Satan shall be the third of
them.”

107. “Put on new clothes and live as honorable.”

108. “Seek the neighbor before buying a house, and the companion (of
travel) before the way.”

109. “Fidelity brings sustenance, and betrayal brings poverty.”

110. “I have been ordered to humor people as I have been to carry out
the mission.”

111. “Hope is but a mercy from Allah to my nation. Without hope a mother
shall not suckle a child, nor shall a planter plant a tree.”

112. “The most beloved servant to Allah is he to whom Allah has endeared
benevolence and to whom He has endeared the doings of it.”

113. “The thing that I most fear for my nation from is every cunning
hypocrite.”

114. “The most regretful one on the Day of Resurrection is a man that
has sold his afterlife for the life of other than himself.”

115. “The most sinful one on the Day of Resurrection is the most
involved one in falsehood.”

116. “The greatest sin to Allah is that when a man neglects those whom
he is responsible of maintaining.”

117. “The things that mostly take people to the Fire are the two hollow
things; the mouth and the private parts.

118. “Happiness and all happiness is in one’s long life that is spent in
the obedience of Allah.”

119. “A reasonable one is he who believes in the oneness of Allah and
obeys Him.”

120. “When a servant commits a sin, it shall be made in his heart as a
black spot. If he gives up, repents, and seeks forgiveness, his heart
shall be cleared, but if he returns to commit the sin, it (the black
spot) shall be increased until it shall overcome his heart, and this is
the rust that Allah has mentioned in this verse, (Nay! But, what they
used to do has become like rust upon their hearts). Qur'an, 83:14

121. “Allah is not obeyed by force, nor is He disobeyed out of defeat,
and He does not neglect the people in the kingdom, but He is powerful
over what He has made them powerful over, and He is the possessor of
what He has made them posses, then if the people follow the obedience of
Allah, there shall be no

preventer or repeller, and if they disobeys Him, and He wills to prevent
them from it (disobedience), He will do…

122. “Allah, glory be to Him, likes lying in (making) righteousness, and
hates truthfulness in (making) corruption.”

123. “Allah has revealed to me: be humble lest anyone should pride on
another or anyone should oppress another.”

124. “Allah has natured the hearts of His people to love whoever does
good to them, and to hate whoever does bad to them.”

125. “Allah the Almighty does not expose the honor of a servant who has
inasmuch as the weight of an atom of goodness.”

126. “Allah repels by charity seventy bad deaths.”

127. “Allah, the Exalted, takes pride in a worshipping young man before
the angels and says: look at My servant; he gave up his lust for the
sake of Me.”

128. “Allah the Almighty hates the obscene, the indecent.”

129. “Allah the Almighty loves the assisting of the terribly needy.”

130. “Allah the Almighty loves leniency in all affairs.”

131. “Allah the Almighty loves from His people the jealous.”

132. “Allah the Almighty recommends you to be kind to women, because
they are your mothers, daughters, and aunts.”

133. “Allah hates the adulterate old men, the oppressive wealthy, the
proud poor, the importunate beggars, and He frustrates the reward of a
reminding giver, and He hates the indecent, daring liars.”

134. “Allah loves when He endows His servant with a blessing that the
sign of His blessing should be seen on him, and He hates misery and the
pretending of misery.”

135. “Those, who love each other for the sake of Allah, shall be in the
shade of the Throne.”

136. “A believer follows the manners of Allah; if Allah gives him much,
he includes it, and if He stops giving him, he shall be abstinent.”

137. “Know that success is with patience, deliverance is with distress,
and ease is with hardship.”

138. “We, the prophets, have been ordered to talk to people according to
their own reasons.”

139. “The firmest ties of Islam is that you love for the sake of Allah
and hate for the sake of Allah.”

140. “Deliberateness is from Allah and hastiness is from Satan.”

141. “You and your properties are to your father.”

142. “Keeping to one’s promise is from faith.”

143. “The best servants of Allah are the loyal, the good.”

144. “In the paradise there are a house called the House of Joy that no
one shall enter into it except those who have delighted the believers’
orphans.”

145. “In wealth there is a due other than the zakat.”

146. “You can not include people by your properties, so include them by
your morals.”

147. “These hearts become rusty as iron becomes rusty.” He was asked,
“Then, how are they clarified?” He said, “By remembering death and
reciting the Qur'an.”

148. “Allah has servants that He has created for (the carrying out of)
the needs of people.”

149. “Allah has servants that He has chosen for the needs of people.
People resort to them at need; they are the safe from the torment of
Allah.”

150. “I but fear for my nation from three: obeyed stinginess, followed
desires, and a deviant leader.”

151. “What has remained from this life is affliction and temptation.”

152. “Surely all goodness is obtained by reason. There is no religion
for one who has no reason.”

153. “There is in poetry wisdom, and in eloquence charm.”

154. “From the rights of a child on his father is to name him with a
good name, teach him writing and reading, and marry him when he is
adult.”

155. “From the causes of forgiveness are the offering of greetings and
the well speaking.”

156. “The firmest weapon of Iblis is women.”

157. “My Lord has recommended me with nine things; loyalty in secrecy
and openness, justice at satisfaction and anger, moderation in poverty
and wealth, to pardon one who has wronged me, give to one who has
deprived me, maintain relationship with one who has cut his relation
with me, and that my silence should be thinking, my logic remembering,
and my looking (taking of) lessons.”

158. “I recommend you to feel shy of Allah as you feel shy of a good man
from your people.”

159. “I recommend you of (being kind to your) neighbors.”

160. “The first thing that shall be weighed in the Scales (on the Day of
Judgment) is good morals.”

161. “The people of oppression and their assistants shall be in the
Fire.”

162. “Beware of greed, because it is the present poverty.”

163. “Beware of excessiveness in the religion, because those before you
had perished because of the excessiveness in religion.”

164. “Beware of false reverence, that is when the body is seen as
reverent whereas the heart is not.”

165. “Beware of the plant of dunghills.” He was asked what the plant of
dunghills was and he said, “A beautiful woman in a bad origin (family).”

166. “Beware of two features; boredom and laziness. If you are bored,
you shall be not patient with a right, and if you are lazy, you shall
not carry out a right.”

167. “Beware of a bad companion, because you are known through him.”

168. “Beware of any thing which is apologized for.”

169. “Hands are three; begging, spending, and withholding (stingy). The
best of hands is the spending one.”

170. “Whatever guardian that is not merciful to his subjects, Allah will
deny the Paradise to him.”

171. “The believing in the fate removes grief and sorrow.”

172. “Faith is two halves; a half in patience, and a half in
gratefulness.”

173. “O people, what has been transmitted to you from me that agrees
with the Book of Allah, then surely I have said it, and what has come to
you that disagrees with the Book of Allah, then surely I have not said
it.”

174. “Pay charity in the early morning, because affliction does not
exceed the charity.”

175. “The dutifulness to parents prolongs one’s life. Telling lies
decreases one’s sustenance. Invocation repels the decree of fate.”

176. “Satiety hardens the heart.”

177. “Between the servant and disbelief is the giving up of prayer.”

178. “Before the Hour (the Day of Resurrection) there shall be seditions
like parts of night (dark and ambiguous).”

179. “A merchant waits for sustenance and a monopolist waits for curse.”

180. “Talking about the blessings of Allah is gratefulness, and
neglecting it (the talking) is disbelief. He, who is not grateful to the
little, shall not be grateful to the much. He, who does not thank
people, does not thank Allah. Unity is goodness and separation is
torment.”

181. “The prize of a believer is death.”

182. “Giving up evil is a charity.”

183. “Shake hands with each other, and hatred shall disappear from your
hearts!”

184. “Pay charities, because charity is your release from the Fire!”

185. “Learn knowledge, and learn calmness and gravity for knowledge. Be
humble to those from whom you learn.”

186. “Be free from the griefs of this life as possible as you can,
because whoever the (pleasures of) life is his greatest interest Allah
will frustrate his skill and make his poverty between his two eyes, and
whoever the afterlife is his greatest interest, Allah

will manage to him his affairs and make his richness in his heart.”

187. “Think deeply about the signs of Allah and do not think about Allah
(Himself).’

188. “Think deeply about the creation of Allah and do not think about
Allah lest you perish.”

189. “Be humble to whom you learn from, and be humble to whom you teach,
and do not be tyrant scholars.”

190. “Offer presents to each other that you shall be more beloved (to
each other), emigrate (for the sake of Allah) that you shall bequeath
glory to your children, and pardon the notables their slips.”

191. “There are three things that are from piety; generosity, good
speaking, and the patience with harms.”

192. “There are three ones that the associating with them deadens the
heart; the association with villains, the (often) talking with women,
and the association with the wealthy.”

193. “There are three fatal things and three rescuing things; as for the
fatal things, they are: obeyed stinginess, followed desires, and
self-deceit, and as for the rescuing things, they are: the fear of Allah
secretly and openly, the moderation in wealth and in poverty, and
justice at anger and satisfaction.”

194. “Struggle against your desires and you shall possess yourselves.”

195. “The companions of Allah tomorrow shall be the people of piety and
abstinence in this life.”

196. “Unity is mercy and separation is torment.”

197. “The beauty of a man is in the eloquence of his tongue.”

198. “The beauty of a man is in the tongue.”

199. “Beauty is in the tongue.”

200. “The love of (receiving) praise from people makes one blind and
deaf.”

201. “Your love to some thing blinds and deafens (you).”

202. “War is trick.”

203. “The inviolabilities that every believer should regard and be loyal
to are the inviolability of the religion, the inviolability of good
manners, and the inviolability of food.”

204. “Allah has prohibited wine, and every intoxicant is unlawful.”

205. “Happy miens remove spite.”

206. “Good morals take their owner high to the degree of a fasting
worshipper.” It was said to the Prophet (a.s.), “What is the best of
that which is given to a servant?” He said, “Good morals.”

207. “Trusting is from the good worshipping.”

208. “Being loyal to covenant is from faith.”

209. “A good question is the half of knowing, and leniency is the half
of living.”

210. “Better your clothes, and repair your saddles (mounts), until you
become as a mole among people (noticeable).”

211. “Guard your monies by zakat, cure your patients by charity, and
prepare invocation for affliction.”

212. “A lawful thing is what Allah has made lawful in His Book, and an
unlawful thing is what Allah has prohibited in His Book, and what He has
said nothing about is from what has been left optional.”

213. “The praise (of Allah) for a blessing is a safety from its
disappearance.’

214. “Modesty is two; the modesty of reason and the modesty of
foolishness. The modesty of reason is knowledge, and the modesty of
foolishness is ignorance.”

215. “Modesty, all of it, is good.”

216. “Modesty is from faith.”

217. “Modesty is the whole religion.”

218. “Your service to your wife is charity.”

219. “The fear of Allah is the head of every wisdom, and piety is the
master of deeds.”

220. “There are two features that do not exist in a believer; stinginess
and bad morals.”

221. “There are two features that nothing of piety may be above them:
the faith in Allah and to benefit the people of Allah.”

222. “There are two things that many people are deceived by; good health
and leisure.”

223. “All the creatures are the household of Allah, and the most beloved
of them to Allah is the most useful of them to His household.”

224. “The best of the believers is the satisfied one, and the worst of
them is the greedy one.”

225. “The best of you is he the seeing of whom reminds you of Allah,
whose logic increases your knowledge, and whose deeds make you wish for
the afterlife.’

226. “Betrayal brings poverty.”

227. “The best door of piety is charity.”

228. “The best of affairs is the moderate one of them.”

229. “The goodness of this life and the afterlife is with knowledge, and
the evil of this life and the afterlife is with ignorance.’

230. “The best of remembrance is that which is secret, and the best of
sustenance is that which suffices (the need).”

231. “The best of charity is that which keeps richness, the upper
(giving) hand is better than the lower (begging) hand, and you begin (in
charity) with those whom you maintain.”

232. “The best of deeds is that you leave this life while your tongue is
wet with the remembrance of Allah.”

233. “The best of gaining is the gaining of the worker’s hand when he is
sincere.”

234. “The best of meetings is the biggest of them.”

235. “The best of people is the most useful one to people.”

236. “The best of people is he whose life is long and his deeds are
good, and the worst of people is he whose life is long and his deeds are
bad.’

237. “The best thing of religion is piety.”

238. “The best of your youths is he who imitates old men, and the worst
of your old men is he who imitates your youths.”

239. “Goodness is too much, but those who do it are few.”

240. “The best of you is he who is best to his family (wife), and I am
the best of you to my family. No one honors women except that he is
generous, and no one insults them except that he is mean.”

241. “The best of you is the best to his wives and daughters.”

242. “The best of you is he whom Allah assists against his own soul and
then he possesses it.”

243. “The best of you is he who learns the Qur'an and then teaches it.”

244. “The best things that man leaves after him are three; a good child
that prays Allah for him, a charity that is continuous and whose reward
reaches him, and knowledge that is benefited by after him.”

245. “The best mosques for women are the bottoms (insides) of their
houses.”

246. “That who is better than goodness is its giver, and that who is
worse than evil is its doer.”

247. “The best of them (women) is the least of them in dowry.”

248. “Leave aside tittle-tattle, importunity, and the wasting of
wealth.”

249. “Leave what you doubt about to what you do not doubt about, because
you shall not feel the loss of a thing that you have left for the sake
of Allah.”

250. “The guide to goodness is as its doer.”

251. “This life changes (from a state to another), so what is for you
(has been predetermined) shall come to you even if you are weak, and
what is against you, you shall not be able to repel it even if you are
powerful.”

252. “This world is as a prison for a believer and as a paradise for a
disbeliever.”

253. “This life is a provision, and the best of its provision is a
righteous woman.”

254. “Religion is the (sincere) advice.”

255. “The remembrance of Allah is a cure for hearts.”

256. “The head of religion is the piety.”

257. “The head of reason after the faith in Allah is the endearment to
people, and the doing of benevolence to every pious and impious one.”

258. “The head of reason after the faith in Allah is modesty and good
morals.”

259. “There may be a carrier of jurisprudence that he is not a
jurisprudent. He, whose knowledge does not benefit him, his ignorance
shall harm him.”

260. “There may be a lust of a moment that causes a long sorrow.”

261. “There may be a worshipper that is ignorant, and there may be a
knowledgeable one that is deviant. Therefore, beware of ignorant
worshippers, and deviant knowledgeable ones.”

262. “May Allah have mercy on one who holds back the nonsense of his
speech, and spends the extra of his wealth.”

263. “May Allah have mercy on a parent who assists his child to be
dutiful to him.”

264. “May Allah have mercy on a servant who speaks good and so he gains
(good), or abstains from speaking bad and so he becomes safe.”

265. “May Allah have mercy on an eye that weeps for the fear of Allah,
and have mercy on an eye that remains sleepless for the sake of Allah.”

266. “The satisfaction of the Lord is in the satisfaction of the parent,
and the anger of the Lord is in the anger of the parent.”

267. “The satisfaction of the Lord is in the satisfaction of the
parents, and His anger is in their anger.”

268. “Suckling changes the natures.”

269. “It has been pardoned for my nation the (unknowingly) mistaking,
forgetfulness, and what they are forced to do.”

270. “Refresh the hearts from time to time!”

271. “Visit the graves because they remind you of the afterlife.”

272. “The abstinence in this life relieves the heart and the body, and
the wishing for it (this life) tires the heart and the body.”

273. “The abstinence in this life is not by prohibiting a lawful thing
or wasting the wealth, but the abstinence in this life is that you
should not be more trusting in what there is in your hands than what
there is in Allah’s hand, and that you should wish for the reward of an
affliction that if you are afflicted by more than your wishing for
keeping it away from you.”

274. “The adultery of eyes is the (unlawful) looking.”

275. “Ask the knowledgeable, talk with wise men, and associate with the
poor.”

276. “A reviler of the dead is as if he is near to perishment.”

277. “The carer for a widow or a poor is like a struggler in the way of
Allah, or a worshipper worshipping all the night and fasting in the
day.”

278. “You shall be greedy of authority, then it shall be regret and
grief to you; and then, how good a suckler and how bad a weaner shall
be!”

279. “It is absurdity in man to make his guest serve him.”

280. “Walking fast takes away the gravity of a believer.”

281. “A just ruler is the shadow of Allah in the earth. If anyone of you
enters a country that has no just ruler, let him not reside in it.”

282. “A just ruler is the shadow of Allah in the earth that whoever
honors him Allah will honor him, and whoever insults him Allah will
insult him.”

283. “A just ruler is the shadow of Allah in the earth; to whom the weak
resort and from whom the oppressed seek support.”

284. “Pray Allah for pardon and good health, for no one has been given,
after certainty, anything better than good health.”

285. “Ask Allah for useful knowledge, and seek Allah’s protection
against knowledge that is not useful.”

286. “Generosity is prosperity, and difficulty is evil omen.”

287. “Bad morals are evil omen.”

288. “The master of a people is to be as their servant, and the giver of
water to them is to be the last one to drink.”

289. “A generous young man with good morals is more beloved to Allah
than a stingy, worshipping old man with bad morals.”

290. “Youth is a branch of madness.”

291. “The worst of affairs are the heresies, the worst of blindness is
the blindness of the heart, the worst of apology is when death comes,
the worst of regret is on the Day of Resurrection, the worst of eating
is the eating of the orphan’s property, and the worst of gaining is the
gain of usury.”

292. “The worst of people is he who oppresses his family.”

293. “The worst of people is he who hates people and people hates him.”

294. “A wretched one is he who is wretched when in his mother’s
abdomen.”

295. “An old man is young in the love of tow things: a long life and
abundant money.”

296. “A fasting person is in a state of worshipping even if he is
sleeping in his bed as long as he does not backbite a Muslim.”

297. “Truthfulness is tranquility and lying is uncertainty.”

298. “Charity puts out the wrath of the Lord and repels bad death.”

299. “Charity closes seventy doors of evil.”

300. “Maintain relationship with whoever has cut his relations with you,
do good to whoever has done you wrong, and say the truth even if it is
against yourself.”

301. “Maintain relationship with one who has cut his relations with you,
give to one who has deprived you, and pardon one who has wronged you.”

302. “Maintain kinship with your relatives even if by greeting.”

303. “Maintaining kinship prolongs one’s life, and the secret charity
puts out the wrath of the Lord.”

304. “There are two kinds of people who if are good, people are good,
and if are corrupted, people become corrupted; scholars and rulers.”

305. “There are two sounds that Allah hates; wailing at an affliction
and playing music at a blessing.”

306. “Fasting is a protection from the torment of Allah.”

307. “A grateful eating person is like a patient faster.”

308. “The food of the generous is a cure, and the food of the stingy is
a disease.”

309. “Greed takes wisdom away from the hearts of scholars.”

310. “Blessed is he whose life is long and his deeds are good, and so
his end shall be good where his Lord will be pleased with him. And woe
unto him whose life is long and his deeds are bad,

and so his end shall be bad where his Lord will be displeased with him.”

311. “Blessed is he who controls his tongue and weeps at his sin.”

312. “The unjust and their assistants shall be in the Fire.”

313. “Worship is seven parts the best of which is the seeking of lawful
gain.”

314. “How great it is for a believer; Allah does not determine a fate
for him except that is better to him whether it pleases or displeases
him. If He afflicts him it shall be a penance for his sin, and if He
gives and honors him, it shall be a gift to him.”

315. “Justice is good, but when it is in rulers it is better. Generosity
is good, but when it is in the wealthy, it is better. Piety is good, but
in the scholars is better. Patience is good, but in the poor is better.
Repentance is good, but in the youth is better. Modesty is good, but in
women is better.”

316. “Justice of an hour is better than the worship of a year.”

317. “Visit him who does not visit you, and give a present to him who
does not give you a present.”

318. “The believer’s promise is as the taking (from him) with the hand
(surely shall be fulfilled).”

319. “The promise is as a debt. Woe unto whoever promises and then
breaks his promise! Woe unto whoever promises and then breaks his
promise! Woe unto whoever promises and then breaks his promise!”

320. “The strictness of (or to) a boy in his childhood shall increase
his reason at his adulthood.”

321. “Live whatever you like, for you shall die, and love whatever you
love, for you shall part with it, and do whatever you do, for you shall
be rewarded for it.”

322. “Chastity is the adornment of women.”

323. “The pardon of Allah is greater than your sins.”

324. “The sign of Allah’s satisfaction with His people is the cheapness
of their (goods) prices and the justice of their ruler. And the sign of
Allah’s wrath on His people is the oppression of their ruler and the
expensiveness of their prices.”

325. “Knowledge and wealth cover every defect, and ignorance and poverty
expose every defect.”

326. “Keep to lenience, and beware of cruelty and indecency.”

327. “Keep to the despair of what there is in the people’s hands, and
beware of greed because it is the present (lasting) poverty.”

328. “Keep to truthfulness, because it is a door from the doors of the
Paradise, and beware of lying, because it is a door from the doors of
the Fire.”

329. “The blindness of the heart is the deviation after guidance.”

330. “Two odd words; a word of wisdom from a fool that you are to accept
it, and a bad word from a wise man that you are to forgive it.’

331. “Spite and envy eat the good deeds as fire eats the firewood.”

332. “Backbiting is to mention your brother with what he hates.”

333. “The exposedness in this life is better than the exposedness in the
afterlife.”

334. “A deep thinking of an hour is better than the worship of sixty
years.”

335. “The Qur'an is real cure.”

336. “Say the truth even if it is bitter.”

337. “The heart of an old man is young in the love of two things; living
and hope.”

338. “A little household is one of the two eases.”

339. “Satisfaction is a property that does not run out.”

340. “Guard by your monies your honors.”

341. “Say good and you shall gain (good), and abstain from an evil and
you shall be safe.”

342. “Tie knowledge by the book (write it down lest it is lost).”

343. “A gainer by his hand is a friend of Allah.”

344. “Greatly hateful to Allah is the eating without hunger, the
sleeping without drowsiness, and the laughing without a wonder
(reason).”

345. “Laughing much deadens the heart.”

346. “Lying, all of it, is sin except that by which a Muslim may be
benefited (lawfully as when reconciling with one another).”

347. “Generosity is piety, honor is (in) humbleness, and certainty is
richness.” 

348. “The honor of man is his religion, his generosity is his mind, and
his ancestry is his morals.”

349. “The penance of a sin is regret. If you do not sin, Allah will
bring people who shall sin so that He will forgive them.”

350. “Time is sufficient as a preacher, and death as a separator.”

351. “It is sufficient sin for a man that he neglects those whom he is
to sustain.”

352. “It is sufficient knowledge for man that he fears Allah, and
sufficient ignorance to him that he is self-conceited.”

353. “It is sufficient jurisprudence for man if he worships Allah, and
it is sufficient ignorance to him when he admires his own opinion.”

354. “Death is a sufficient preacher, piety is sufficient wealth,
worship is a sufficient business, the (Day of) Resurrection is a
sufficient refuge, and Allah is a sufficient Rewarder!”

355. “A believer is natured with every aspect except betrayal and
lying.”

356. “Allah may forgive every sin except that when one dies a polytheist
or he kills a believer intendedly.”

357. “Every one of a blessing is envied except one of humbleness.”

358. “Every loan is charity.”

359. “Each one of you is a guardian, and he is responsible for his
subjects.”

360. “Every favor is charity.”

361. “Every favor you do to a rich or a poor is charity.”

362. “Every harmful person shall be in the Fire.”

363. “A good word is charity.”

364. “How many those are who receive a (new) day, but they do not
complete it (die before its end), and how many those are who expect a
tomorrow, but they do not reach it.”

365. “A good one is he who criticizes himself and works for what is
after death, and a feckless one is he who lets his soul follow its
desires and wishes from Allah all wishes.”

366. “There is no faith for whoever has no fidelity, and no religion for
whoever has no (loyalty to) covenant.”

367. “Do not envy each other, terrify each other, hate each other, or
give up each other. Be brothers in worshipping Allah, and do not be
censurers, praisers, or revilers.”

368. “Do not expose any cover of anyone.”

369. “Do not reject any beggar even by giving him a half of a date.”

370. “Do not revile the dead, because they have gone to what they have
done before.”

371. “Do not revile the dead lest you hurt the live.”

372. “Do not show rejoicing at your brother’s distress, that Allah may
deliver him and afflict you.”

373. “Do not put wisdom near other that its people that you wrong it,
and do not prevent its people from it that you wrong them.”

374. “Do not do anything of goodness hypocritically, and do not give it
up because of shyness.”

375. “Do not backbite the Muslims and do not look for their defects.”

376. “Do not be angry, because anger is corruption.”

377. “Do not increase your grief; what has been predetermined shall take
place, and what has been predetermined as your sustenance shall come to
you.”

378. “Do not dispute with your brother or make fun of him, and do not
promise him and then you break your promise to him.”

379. “Do not wipe your hand by the garment of one whom you do not
provide with clothes.”

380. “Mercy is not taken out except from a rascal.”

381. “There is no good for you in the companionship of one who does not
like for you as what he likes for himself.”

382. “There is no religion for one who has no covenant (does not regard
his covenant).”

383. “It is no charity (to be paid to others) while there is a needy
relative.”

384. “No obedience should be paid to a creature in the disobedience of
the Creator.”

385. “There is no reason like good management, no piety like abstinence,
and no ancestry like good morals.” 

386. “A servant shall not reach the degree of the pious until he leaves
what is undoubtful for fear of what is doubtful (whether lawful or
not).”

387. “One, whose property has been stolen from him, may remain in
accusing one who is innocent of that until he himself becomes more
sinful than the stealer.”

388. “A scholar does not become saturate with his knowledge until his
end shall be to the Paradise.’

389. “A believer does not ravage.”

390. “A believer is not stung from a (same) hole twice.”

391. “Allah has cursed a briber, a bribed one, and the one who mediates
between them.”

392. “Allah has cursed whoever separates (or stir discord between) a
mother from her child or a brother from his brother.”

393. “Every sin has a repentance except bad morals.”

394. “Every thing has a pillar, and the pillar of this religion is
jurisprudence.”

395. “A lazy one has three signs; he slackens until he wastes, wastes
until he loses, and loses until he becomes sinful.”

396. “Allah is in the assistance of a servant as long as the servant is
in the assistance of his brother.”

397. “He is not a liar who tries to reconcile a person with another
(even by using lies).”

398. “If a mountain oppresses another mountain, Allah will tear down the
oppressive one of them.”

399. “If you know what I know, you shall laugh a little and weep too
much.”

400. “Offer presents to each other because the present takes hatred
away. If I am invited to a trotter, I will respond, and if a trotter is
offered to me as a present, I will accept.”

401. “Were it not for woman, man would enter the Paradise!”

402. “Were it not for that the past is the antecedent of the remaining,
and the last would follow the first, we would be sorrowful for you, O
Ibrahim.” Then his eyes shed tears and he said, “The eye sheds tears and
the heart becomes sad, but we do no say except what pleases the Lord.
Surely, we are sad for you, O Ibrahim.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibrahim was the Prophet’s son who died a child.

403. “Say: O Allah, I ask you for a certain soul that believes in Your
meeting and is pleased with Your fate, and satisfied with Your giving.”

404. “A time shall come to people that one shall not care for wherefrom
he takes money; whether from a lawful or unlawful way.”

405. “Someone of you may keep on begging until he meets Allah where
there shall be no bit of flesh in his face.”

406. “If one of you takes his ropes to collect firewood on his back, it
shall be easier to him than to come to a (wealthy) man, whom Allah has
given from His favor, begging him that he either gives to him or not.”

407. “Wealth is not the abundance of properties, but it is the richness
of the soul.”

408. “A believer is not the one who becomes saturate while his neighbor
is hungry beside him.”

409. “Reconcile people even if you tell lies.”

410. “No one has a preference to another except by faith or a good
deed.”

411. “It is not (considered as) backbiting against a deviant.”

412. “He is not from us who cheats, harms, or deceives a Muslim.”

413. “He, who does not regard the old, be merciful to the young, enjoin
the good, and forbid the wrong, is not from us.”

414. “No servant loves a servant for the sake of Allah except that Allah
will honor him.”

415. “Allah does not entrust a servant with subjects that he does not
take care of them sincerely, except that Allah will deny the Paradise
for him.”

416. “A servant does not conceal anything except that Allah will dress
him with its garment; with good if it is good, and bad if it is bad.”

417. “Allah does never honor anyone with ignorance nor does He lower
anyone with patience at all.”

418. “A gainer does not gain anything like virtuous knowledge that
guides its owner to guidance or saves him from perdition, nor does his
religion become right until his reason becomes right.”

419. “No young man honors an old man for his old age, except that Allah
will prepare to him one who shall honor him at his old age.”

420. “No one has ever eaten food better than to eat from the labor of
his own hand. Dawud (David) the Prophet of Allah used to eat from the
labor of his own hands.”

421. “A Muslim man does not offer a present to his brother better than a
word of wisdom by which Allah increases his guidance or preserves him
from perdition.”

422. “Allah has not adorned people with an adornment better than
abstinence in this life and chastity of their abdomen and private
parts.”

423. “Allah does not afflict a people with rainlessness except because
of their rebellion against Allah.”

424. “A meeting shall not be narrow for lovers.”

425. “Leniency does not exist in anything except that it adorns it, and
stupidity does not exist in anything except that it makes it ugly.”

426. “A scholar, by whose knowledge it is benefited, is better than a
thousand worshippers.”

427. “No one is better near Allah than an imam who when speaks is
truthful and when judges is just.”

428. “There is no charity more beloved to Allah than the saying of the
truth.”

429. “No deed is better than the satisfying of a hungry one.”

430. “No man, who knows his worth, perishes.”

431. “A believer is like a spike which the wind moves; it rises one time
and falls down another, and a disbeliever is like a pine tree which
remains erect until it is hollowed.”

432. “A mujahid is he who struggles against his soul in the obedience of
Allah.”

433. “A dispraised beneficent person is mercified (by Allah).”

434. “To humor people is charity.”

435. “He, whom boredom overcomes, comfort leaves him.”

436. “Whoever Allah wants goodness to him, He endows him with a good
companion.”

437. “Whoever commits a sin while laughing shall enter the Fire while
crying.”

438. “Whoever humbles himself in the obedience of Allah is more
honorable than one who is honored in the disobedience of Allah.”

439. “Whoever likes to be the wealthiest of people let him be more
trusting in what there is in Allah’s hand than what there is in his own
hand.”

440. “Whoever loves a people Allah will resurrect him with their group.”

441. “Whoever likes to be the strongest of people let him rely on
Allah.”

442. “Whoever likes to be the most generous of people let him fear
Allah.”

443. “Whoever prefers the love of Allah to the love of people Allah will
suffice him against people.”

444. “Whoever does a favor to you, you are to reward him (with some
gift), and if you can not, then you are to thank (praise) him because
the praise is a reward.”

445. “Whoever fears Allah, Allah saves him from everything.”

446. “Let the goodness, which Allah gives to a person, be seen on him.”

447. “He, whose deed lingers him, his ancestry shall not hasten (exalt)
him.”

448. “Let him, who is tried by judging among Muslims, not raise his
voice at one of the two litigants except that he raises it at the other
(in the same way).”

449. “Let him, who is tried by judging among Muslims, be just to them in
his looking (at them), gesturing, and seating (them).”

450. “He is cursed who throws his tiredness on people.”

451. “He is cursed who reviles his father, he is cursed who reviles his
mother.”

452. “The heart of religion is piety.”

453. “Cunning, deceiving, and betraying are in the Fire.’

454. “Our generosity, we the Ahlul Bayt, is the pardoning of whoever has
wronged us, and the giving to whoever has deprived us.”

455. “Whoever from my nation that his intention is (to) other than
Allah, he is not from Allah, and whoever does not care for the affairs
of the believers is not from them, and whoever

acknowledged meanness willingly is not from us the Ahlul Bayt.”

456. “Whoever assists a dispute wrongfully remains under the wrath of
Allah until he shall die.”

457. “Whoever assists an oppressive one Allah will cause him (the
oppressor) to oppress him (the assistant).”

458. “Whoever seeks glory with the slaves Allah will degrade him.”

459. “He, who is given four things, shall not be deprived of four
things; he, who is given the asking for forgiveness, shall not be
deprived of being forgiven, he, who is given (the showing of)
gratefulness, shall not be deprived of more giving, he, who is given
repentance, shall not be deprived of the acceptance, and he, who is
given invocation, shall not be deprived of the response.”

460. “From the greatest sins is a lying tongue.”

461. “Whoever approaches the doors of kings shall be tempted.”

462. “Whoever eats (all) what he likes, wears what he likes, and rides
what he likes Allah will not look at him until he dies or he repents.”

463. “It is from piety that you maintain relations with your father’s
friend.”

464. “It is from charity that you greet people with happy miens.”

465. “Whoever takes off the garment of modesty backbiting him is
permissible.”

466. “Whoever begins with talking before greeting, do not answer him.”

467. “Whoever reaches a position with no right is from the aggressive.”

468. “Whoever is careful shall succeed or be about to, and whoever is
hasty shall fail or be about to.”

469. “Whoever is careful shall obtain what he wishes.”

470. “Whoever imitates a people is from them.”

471. “Whoever gets used to eating and drinking much his heart shall be
hard.”

472. “Whoever pretends poverty shall be poor.”

473. “From the full greeting is to shake hands.”

474. “Whoever argues in a dispute without knowledge remains under the
wrath of Allah until he shall die.”

475. “Whoever is deprived of leniency is deprived of the whole
goodness.”

476. “He, whom people fear his tongue, is from the people of the Fire.”

477. “He, who guides to goodness, shall have like the reward of its
(goodness) doer.”

478. “Whoever defends his brother’s honor Allah will defend his face
against the Fire.”

479. “Whoever is kind to my nation Allah will be kind to him.”

480. “He, who accuses a believer of disbelief, is as if he is his
killer.”

481. “Whoever is abstinent in this life Allah teaches him without
learning and makes him aware.”

482. “Whoever covers (the defect of) his brother Allah will cover him in
the life and the afterlife.”

483. “From the happiness of a man is an abode, a good neighbor, and a
comfortable mount.”

484. “Whoever strikes (someone) with a whip unjustly shall be punished
for that on the Day of Resurrection.”

485. “Whoever joins an orphan to himself or to another until he will
make him unneedful shall deserve to be in the Paradise.”

486. “Whoever seeks the pleasing of a creature by the displeasing of the
Creator, Allah, glory be to him, will cause that creature overcome him
(with oppression).”

487. “He, who comforts a distressed one, shall have like his reward.”

488. “Whoever pardons at powerfulness Allah will pardon him on the Day
of Hardship.”

489. “Whoever combats with Allah, Allah will defeat him, and whoever
deceives Allah, Allah will deceive him.”

490. “Let him, to whom a door of goodness is opened, make use of it,
because he does not know when it shall be closed before him.”

491. “From the awareness of a man is to better his living, and it is not
from the love of this life the seeking of what may better you.”

492. “He, who cuts kinship with a relative or takes a false oath, shall
meet its evil results before he dies.”

493. “Whoever that his eating is little his body is healthy, and whoever
that his eating is much his body becomes ill and his heart becomes
hard.”

494. “Let him, who is to swear, not swear except by Allah.”

495. “Let whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day fulfill his promise
when he promises.”

496. “He, who conceals some knowledge from its people, shall be bridled
with a bridle of fire on the Day of Resurrection.”

497. “Whoever that his grief is much his body shall be sick. Whoever
that his morals are bad…he tortures himself. Whoever reviles men his
generosity and dignity shall be gone.”

498. “Let whoever fabricates lies against me intendedly take his seat in
the Fire.”

499. “Whoever holds back his tongue from the honors of people Allah will
pardon him his slips on the Day of Resurrection.”

500. “Whoever has no piety that prevents him from disobeying Allah when
he is alone Allah will not care for anything of his deeds.”

501. “He, whose knowledge does not benefit him, his ignorance shall harm
him.”

502. “He, who accompanies an oppressor, becomes sinful.”

503. “Whoever intends to do a sin and then he gives up it shall be a
good deed to him.”

504. “If Allah wants goodness for someone, He makes him aware of the
religion.”

505. “Whoever does wrong shall be rewarded for it in this life.”

506. “Whoever forgives (others) Allah forgives him, and whoever pardons
Allah pardons him.”

507. “A believer is inviolable, all of him; his honor, property, and
blood.”

508. “A believer is honorable and noble, and a disbeliever is
treacherous and mean.”

509. “A believer is good, intelligent, careful.”

510. “A believer to another believer is like a compact structure that
each tightens another.”

511. “A believer is the mirror of another believer and the brother of
another believer; he guards him from behind him.”

512. “A true believer is he whom people feel safe from him for their
souls, properties, and bloods.”

513. “A believer is advantage; if you accompany him, he benefits you, if
you consult with him, he benefits you, and if you participate with him,
he benefits you, and everything of his affairs is advantageous.”

514. “People are like their time.”

515. “People are minerals; like gold and silver.”

516. “Regret is repentance.”

517. “Cleanness is from faith.”

518. “A child’s looking at his parents lovingly is a worship.”

519. “How a good intercessor the Qur'an is for its friend (who keeps and
acts according to it) on the Day of Resurrection!”

520. “How a good thing a present is at need!”

521. “How good assistance to the fear of Allah wealth is!”

522. “How good assistance to the fear of Allah a property is!”

523. “How good a lawful property for a righteous man is!”

524. “How a good gift a word from the words of wisdom is!”

525. “Sleeping with knowledge is better than offering prayer with
ignorance.”

526. “Good intention takes its owner to the Paradise.”

527. “The love of Allah shall be certain to one who becomes angry and
then patient.”

528. “Piety is the master of deeds.”

529. “The ink of scholars has been weighed by the blood of martyrs and
it (the ink of scholars) outweighed.”

530. “A child is from the flowers of the Paradise.”

531. “Woe unto one who is insolent to a Muslim and violates his right.”

532. “Woe unto one who leaves his family with goodness and comes to his
Lord with evil.”

533. “A present is a bounty from Allah, so whoever is offered something
as a present let him accept it.”

534. “Worry is a half of senility.”

535. “A time shall come to people where people shall be (as) wolves;
whoever shall not be a wolf shall be eaten by wolves.”

536. “A high hand (giving) is better than a low hand (taking), and begin
(in giving) with those whom you (are responsible to) sustain.”

537. “Allah’s hand is with unity.”

538. “A false oath misspends goods and mars gaining.” ** ** 
