The Battle of Badr
==================

The battle of Badr had a great importance in the history of Islam, for
by this battle Allah had given a great victory to the Prophet (a.s.) and
his followers, honored his religion, degraded his enemies, and defeated
his opponents. In fact, the battle of Badr was the beginning of the
raising of the banner of Islam and the conquests of Muslims that reached
everywhere.

The trade of Abu Sufyan
-----------------------

The economic life in Mecca depended mainly on the trading to Sham from
which the merchants of Mecca brought what their people needed of
necessary and luxurious goods. It happened that a great trading caravan
of Abu Sufyan set out with seventy men from Quraysh. After buying all
the goods needed, the caravan set out back towards Mecca. When the
Prophet (a.s.), who waited for an opportunity to weaken the economic
abilities of Quraysh, knew about that, he said to his companions, “Here
are the camels (caravan) of Quraysh, get out for them that may Allah
make you possess them.”**[1]**

Abu Sufyan came to know about that; therefore, he feared that Muslims
might attack the caravan, kill the young men with him in the caravan,
and confiscate their goods.

Abu Sufyan sought the help of Quraysh to protect him and the goods with
him. He sent a messenger who arrived in Mecca in a very miserable case
after he himself had cut the ears of his camel, broke its nose, and
gouged out one of its eyes, and torn his own shirt crying out,

“O people of Quraysh, the caravan! The caravan! Your monies with Abu
Sufyan have been attacked by Muhammad and his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As spoils of war after fighting the polytheists in the caravan.

companions, and I see that you may not reach them…help…help!”

This call was like a thunderbolt to the people of Quraysh who were
totally terrified, for they feared for their monies and for their chief
Abu Sufyan and their young men with him. Therefore, all men of Quraysh
hurried up to support Abu Sufyan and protect their trade.

The march of Muslims
--------------------

The Prophet (a.s.) with his three hundred and five companions, who were
armed with faith, set out from Medina on the eighth of Ramadan in the
second year of Hijra. They had no enough weapons or equipments. They had
seventy camels only that each two, three, or four men of them
participated in a camel alternately. The Prophet (a.s.), Imam Ali
(a.s.), and Marthad bin Abi Marthad participated in a camel. Muslims
hastened to follow after Abu Sufyan and his caravan, but they were
informed that he had slipped away and the people of Quraysh had come to
support him and guard the caravan.

For his high morals, the Prophet (a.s.) used to consult with his
companions on different matters, for Allah had said to him, ***“and
consult with them upon the affairs.”*[1]** Anyhow, after knowing that
Quraysh had come to support their trade, the Prophet (a.s.) consulted
with his companions. Al-Miqdad bin Amr said to him, “O messenger of
Allah, go on to what Allah the Almighty has inspired you with, and we
will be with you. By Allah, we will not say to you as the Children of
Israel said to Moses, ***(So go you and your Lord and fight! We will sit
here”[2]***but we say: go you and your Lord and fight, and we will  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 3:159.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 5:24.

fight with you. By Him Who has sent you with the truth, if you take us
to Bark al-Ghimad,**[1]** we will strive with you until you win…”

The Prophet (a.s.) thanked al-Miqdad and prayed Allah for him, and then
said to his companions, “Suggest to me, O people…” He meant by this the
Ansar who were the pillar of his army, for they had paid homage to him
in al-Aqaba that they would protect him as they protected their own
children and women as long as he was in their country. He also wanted to
see whether they were still bound to their covenant and promise to him.
Sa’d bin Mu’ath, who understood what the Prophet (a.s.) meant, said, “O
messenger of Allah, as if you mean us!”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Yes.”

Sa’d added, “We have believed in you and considered you truthful. We
have witnessed that what you have brought is the truth and given to you
for that our covenants and promises to listen and obey. Therefore, take
us to whatever you want. We are with you. By Him Who has sent you with
the truth, if you review us before this sea and you plunge into it, we
will plunge into it with you and no one man from us will lag behind. We
do never hate that you meet by us our enemy tomorrow. We are patient in
war and loyal in the meeting that may Allah make you see from us what
may delight you. So take us with the blessing of Allah…”

The Prophet (a.s.) was delighted by Sa’d’s speech and he said to his
companions, “Go on and be delighted! Allah has promised  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A very far place in Yemen or it is also said in Abyssinia.

me of one of the two parties.**[1]** By Allah, as if I am seeing now the
deaths of the people (of Quraysh).”

And what the Prophet (a.s.) said came true; that after a few days the
chiefs and the notables of Quraysh were killed and their bodies were
thrown into the well.

The Prophet (a.s.) began inquiring the news of Quraysh, their place, and
their numbers. He asked some of his companions, at the head of whom was
Imam Ali (a.s.), to bring him the necessary information about the
opponents. Imam Ali (a.s.) went out with his group and could arrest two
young men from Quraysh. After questioning these two young men, the
Prophet (a.s.) knew that the army of Quraysh was about nine hundred or
one thousand armed men among whom were the most prominent chiefs and
notables of Quraysh. Then he said to his companions, “This is Mecca that
has cast to you the apples of its eye…”

Yes, Mecca sent the dearest of its people to be degraded and avenged by
Allah the Almighty and be killed by the most honored men of His people
and the guards of His religion.

Muslims waited for the passing of Abu Sufyan to attack him with his
caravan, but he slipped away after having known the way that Muslims had
followed.

Abu Sufyan sent a messenger to the people of Quraysh telling them that
the trade caravan was safe and asking them to go back to Mecca. Many of
them approved this suggestion, but Abu Jahl said to them, “We do not go
back until we go to Badr and remain there three days. Then, we slaughter
camels, have food, drink wine, and songstresses play (and sing) to us,
so that the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Either to obtain the camels with their goods or to fight the
polytheists and win the victory.

Arabs will hear about that and they will fear us.” Some men responded
and remained with him and others went back to Mecca.

The Muslims stopped at the valley of Dahas which was a plain place that
if they whenever wanted to leave, they could, but the people of Mecca
stopped at a rough place that if they wanted to leave, they could not
easily. That was from the wrath of Allah against them.

Anyhow, this place that the Prophet (a.s.) and the Muslims stopped at
was not good for battling. Al-Hubab bin al-Munthir said to the Prophet
(a.s.), “O messenger of Allah, has Allah the Almighty ordered you to
stop at this place that you should neither exceed nor stay behind, or it
is the opinion, the war, and the trick?”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “No, but it is the opinion, the war, and the
trick.”

Al-Hubab said, “O messenger of Allah, this is not a suitable place.
March with the people until we reach the nearest well to the people (the
opponents) to stop there. Then, we bury all the wells around that well
and we build a pool around it and fill it with water. Then, we begin
fighting them, and so we will have water to drink, but they won’t.” The
Prophet (a.s.) approved this suggestion because an army would be most in
need of water. The Prophet (a.s.) and his army marched until they
reached the nearest well, and then they built a pool around it and
filled it with water.

Quraysh sent Umayr bin Wahab al-Jumahi to see the number of warriors in
the Muslim army. He went on his horse roving around the Muslims’ camp,
and then came back saying to his people that Muslims were about three
hundred a few more or a few less. Then, he went roving in the valley
around them to see whether the Muslims had ambushes or aids. He came
back

saying to his people, “I found nothing, but, O people of Quraysh, I saw
disasters bearing deaths. The camels of Yathrib carry terrible death.
They are people that have no protection or a shelter except their
swords. By Allah, I see that no man of them is killed except after
killing a man from you. If they kill from you like their number, then
what good is there in living after that?”

Yes, his insight was true. The camels of (Yathrib) Medina carried lions
supplied with faith and longing for martyrdom in the way of Allah,
whereas the army of Quraysh was sinking in amusement and impudence.

Utbah bin Rabee’ah advised Quraysh saying, “I see death-defying people
that you shall not reach…O people, tie it to my head today and say:
‘Utba bin Rabee’a has become coward’, though you know well that I am not
coward…”

Utbah, who was one of the most reasonable and aware men of his tribe,
wanted to spare his people’s lives and properties. The Prophet (a.s.)
looked at him while riding a red camel and said to his companions, “If
there is goodness in one of the people (of Quraysh), it shall be in the
man of the red camel; if they obey him, they will be saved…”

Abu Jahl said, “We will not go back until Allah will judge between us
and Muhammad…it is not as what Utbah said, but he saw that Muhammad and
his companions eat fat camels (or sheep) and that his son is with them,
so he feared from you for him (his son).”

However, Quraysh did not turn to reason, but they insisted on fighting
the Prophet (a.s.) who said to his companions, “By him in Whose hand the
soul of Muhammad is, no man of you fights them and is killed patiently,
expecting (the reward of Allah), attacking and not running away, except
that Allah will take him to the Paradise…” These words inspired power,
determination,

and activeness in them and made them rush most determinedly to fight the
enemies of Allah.

The battle
----------

The fight began on Friday morning, the seventeenth of Ramadan in the
second year of Hijrah (15<sup>th</sup> of January, 624 AD). It was
Quraysh that opened the door of the war when Utbah bin Rabee’ah,
Shaybah, and al-Waleed, who were from the famous heroes of Quraysh,
advanced to challenge. Young men from the Ansar advanced, but Utbah
disdained them and was occupied with haughtiness that he said, “We do
not want these, but we want our cousins from the children of Abdul
Muttalib to duel with us.”

The Prophet (a.s.) ordered Imam Ali (a.s.) (his cousin), Hamza (his
uncle), and Ubaydah (his cousin) to advance for the fight. The men of
Quraysh accepted and the fight began. Hamza killed Shayba, Imam Ali
killed al-Waleed, and Ubaydah and Utbah struck each other. Ubaydah’s leg
was cut and Utba was killed after Imam Ali (a.s.) and Hamza hastened to
support Ubaydah. The hearts of Quraysh were filled with rage and terror
that their heroes were killed at the beginning.

The Prophet (a.s.) raised his hands towards his Lord praying, “O Allah,
this is (the tribe of) Quraysh that has come with its arrogance trying
to falsify Your messenger. O Allah, (grant to me) Your victory that You
have promised to me. O Allah, if this group (of Muslims) perishes today,
You shall be not worshipped…”

The two armies clashed; the Prophet’s companions strived to support
Allah, His messenger, and the Word of Islam, whereas the men of Quraysh
strived to support their idols and bad habits. However, Allah cast
terror and fear in the hearts of the

men of Quraysh and the Muslims’ swords began harvesting their heads one
after the other.

Imam Ali (a.s.) showed indescribable courage in this battle though too
young. He was the striking power in the Muslim army that penetrated the
army of the polytheists and killed whoever met him. The angels were
astonished at his courage and Gabriel called out in the space, “No sword
except Thul Faqar,**[1]** and no young man except Ali.”**[2]**

Allah granted the great victory in this battle to His messenger; honored
him and degraded his enemies and made their bodies scatter here and
there in the battlefield surrounded by curse and lasting disgrace. From
the chiefs of Quraysh that were killed in this battle were Abu Jahl, by
whose killing the Prophet (a.s.) was delighted and said: “It is Allah
that there is no god but Him”, Umayyah bin Khalaf, who was the head of
disbelief and the most excessive in torturing the first Muslims
especially Bilal, an-Nadhr bin al-Harith, who was one of the most
spiteful polytheists to Islam, Utbah bin Rabee’ah, who was the most
hostile to the Prophet (a.s.), and Shayba bin Rabee’a. Most of the men
of Quraysh, who were killed in this battle, were killed by the sword of
Imam Ali (a.s.) who killed more than thirty-four men from the heroes and
famous warriors of Mecca.

The Prophet (a.s.) ordered the carcasses of the polytheists to be thrown
in the well, and then he stopped at the well and said addressing the
killed ones,

“O people of the well! O Utbah bin Rabee’ah, O Shaybah bin Rabee’ah, O
Umayyah bin Khalaf, O Abu Jahl bin Hisham… (he mentioned the names of
some of them who were excessive in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The name of Imam Ali’s famous sword given to him by the Prophet
(a.s.) that Gabriel had brought down from the heaven as traditions
mention.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 3 p. 154.

harming him), have you found really what your god had promised you? I
have found really what my Lord had promised me.”

The Prophet’s companions were astonished why the Prophet (a.s.) talked
to the dead, and he replied to them, “You are not more listening to what
I say than them, but they cannot reply to me.”

In another narration, it has been mentioned that the Prophet (a.s.) said
to the killed people in the well, “O people of the well, the worst tribe
to your prophet you were; you denied me while (other) people believed
me, exiled me while people sheltered me, and fought me while people
supported me.”

Seventy men from Quraysh were taken prisoners, some of whom were set
free after paying ransom that was four thousand dirhams. The Prophet
(a.s.) ordered those, who could not pay the ransom and who knew writing
and reading, to teach the children of Muslims writing and reading
instead of the ransom. The Prophet (a.s.) ordered his companions to be
kind to the prisoners and to treat them very well.

The results of battle
---------------------

The battle of Badr left very important results to Muslims. Here are some
of them:

**1. The prevalence of Islam**

After the battle of Badr, Islam prevailed and Muslims became so powerful
morally and materially. This battle was the mother of victories that
encouraged Muslims to face courageously the severest wars that their
enemies waged against them. It is worth mentioning that when the battle
of Badr came to an end, Imam Ali (a.s.) was the real hero that by his
sword he harvested the heads of evil and polytheism.

**2. The fear of Quraysh**

The victory of Muslims in the battle of Badr caused a wave of fear and
terror in the hearts of the people of Quraysh and the polytheists of the
Arabs. Since the tribe of Quraysh was the strongest of the Arabs in
power and all other abilities and it was defeated by Muslims, so the
other Arab tribes became certain that they would not be able to stand
against the Muslims.

**3. The sorrow of Quraysh**

Quraysh felt great sorrow for the great loss in men and in properties.
They concealed their sorrows for fear that the Muslims might rejoice at
that. Hind, the wife of Abu Sufyan and mother of Mo’awiya, said
addressing her sons, brothers, and other relatives who were killed in
this battle, “How can I weep for you that it may reach Muhammad and his
companions and so they will rejoice at our loss? No by Allah, until I
revenge on Muhammad and his companions. Make-up is impermissible to me
until we shall attack Muhammad.” Abu Sufyan also swore that he would
never sleep with his wife (until they would avenge).**[1]** Their poets
composed many poems full of deep sorrow and sadness elegizing in them
their killed men.

**4. The delight of Muslims**

On the other hand, the Muslims were joyful and delighted by this great
victory in this battle where Allah affirmed their religion and disgraced
their enemies. Many of their poets composed famous poems on this
occasion.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 20.
