The Battle of Uhud
==================

The people of Quraysh received the news of their defeat and their great
loss in men and properties with great sorrow and grief. The most of them
in sorrow and distress were Abu Sufyan and his wife Hind who prohibited
to herself and to the men and women of Quraysh the weeping on their
killed men so that their sorrow would remain inside them until they
would avenge on Muslims.

The leadership of Abu Sufyan
----------------------------

In the battle of Uhud,**[1]** Abu Sufyan was the head of Quraysh and the
first leader of the war. He succeeded in taking the masses of people to
fight against the messenger of Allah (a.s.). He asked the merchants and
the wealthy people of Quraysh to assist him with their monies in the war
against the Prophet (a.s.), and they responded to him. They gave him
monies as he liked to buy weapons and equipments. Concerning this
battle, sixty verses from the Sura of Aal Imran were revealed to the
Prophet (a.s.).

The people of Quraysh agreed unanimously on the war followed by the
tribes of Kinanah, Tihama, and their allies. Historians say that the
army of Quraysh was about three thousand men, whereas the army of
Muslims was about seven hundred men.

All men of Quraysh went out to fight the Prophet (a.s.). They
accompanied with them their women because that would encourage them to
fight defiantly. Abu Sufyan took with him his wife Hind bint Utbah, and
so did the chiefs and notables of Quraysh. The women of Quraysh were
behind the men  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Uhud is a famous mountain in Medina where this battle took place
on Saturday, 11<sup>th</sup> of Shawwal in the third year of Hijra and
took the name of this mountain. Refer to as-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by Zayni
Dahlan, printed in the margins of as-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 19.

drumming on the tambourine headed by Hind (Abu Sufyan’s wife) who
aroused the enthusiasm of the men by reciting stanzas and verses of
poetry. On the other side, her husband Abu Sufyan was encouraging the
men to put out the light of Allah and quench the mission of Islam. When
Quraysh arrived in al-Abwa’, Hind suggested to dig out the tomb of the
Prophet’s mother, and later on if some men from Quraysh were taken
prisoners, they would be ransomed for each part of the Prophet’s mother,
but the people of Quraysh refused this suggestion and said, “Let this
door not be opened; otherwise, they (Muslims) will unearth the graves of
our deads when they come.”**[1]**

The Prophet consults with his companions
----------------------------------------

As usual, the Prophet (a.s.) consulted with his companions on the
political and military affairs except when it was revealed to him from
the heaven concerning those affairs. He suggested to them either to go
out of Medina to repel the army of Quraysh there, or to remain in Medina
waiting for the enemies to fight them in the town. His companions
disagreed on the matter. Abdullah bin Ubayy bin Salool thought that they
should remain in Medina, whereas others said, “O messenger of Allah,
lead us out to our enemies. Let them not think that we are coward or
weak.” The Prophet (a.s.) responded to them unwillingly. He got prepared
and set out followed by about one thousand warrior.

The Prophet (a.s.) marched with the army and when they were at some
place between Medina and the mountain of Uhud, Abdullah bin Ubayy bin
Salool, who was from the heads of the hypocrites, slipped away with the
third of the army.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 268.

The Prophet (a.s.) went on with seven hundred warriors until they
stopped at the slope of the valley and made the mountain of Uhud behind
them. He ordered fifty archers led by Abdullah bin Jubayr to remain on
the top of the mountain and not to leave it in order to guard the backs
of Muslims. The Prophet (a.s.) said to Abdullah, “Shoot the horsemen
with arrows and do not let them attack us from behind us. If we win or
not, let you not leave your place.”

In another narration, it is related that the Prophet (a.s.) said to the
archers, “If you see that we are attacked, do not leave (your place)
until I will send to you a messenger, and if you see that we have won
and defeated the people, do not leave until I will send you a
messenger.”**[1]**

If this troop of the army had followed the order of the Prophet (a.s.),
the Muslims would not have met that defeat and the losses of men.

The war
-------

Quraysh opened the door to the war when Talha bin Abi Talha advanced
crying out, “O companions of Muhammad, you claim that Allah takes us
soon to the Fire by your swords and takes you soon to the Paradise by
our swords. Then, which of you will come out to me?”

The hero of Islam and lion of Allah and of His messenger Imam Ali (a.s.)
advanced saying, “By Allah, I will not leave you until I will send you
soon to the Fire by my sword.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) struck the man with his sword and cut his leg, and he
fell down to the ground. Imam Ali (a.s.) wanted to finish off him, but
he begged him by Allah and kinship to leave him alone, and Imam Ali
(a.s.) left him alone, but after an hour he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seerah al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 222.

died. The Prophet (a.s.) was delighted by his death and so were the rest
of Muslims,**[1]** because he was called ‘the ram of the battalion’ for
his courage. By his killing fear and weakness overcame the people of
Quraysh and they felt as if they were defeated from the beginning. After
Talha, the heroes and courageous fighters advanced to duel with the
Muslims, but Ameerul Mo'minin Imam Ali (a.s.) harvested their heads one
after the other. Their morale collapsed and they became certain that
they were going to perish.

Hind, Mo’awiya’s mother, was in the middle of the battlefield enthusing
the army of Quraysh to keep on fighting the Muslims. Whenever a man from
Quraysh ran away, she offered to him a kohl jar and a stick saying to
him, “You are but a woman, so darken your eyes (with this kohl).”**[2]**
Her zeal was not less than her husband’s who as well encouraged and
enthused his men in all ways. He said to the people of (the tribe of)
Abdid-Dar, who were the carriers of the army’s banner, “You were
entrusted with our banner on the Day of Badr, and we were afflicted with
what you had already seen. Surely, people are attacked from the
direction of their banners which when are defeated they (people) shall
be defeated. Either you suffice us our banner, or you leave it to us
that we will suffice you it.” By this saying, he provoked their emotions
and they considered that as scolding and despising. Therefore, they said
to him, “Do *we* give up our banner to you?! You shall see tomorrow when
we will meet how we will do.” Indeed, it was this that Abu Sufyan
intendeds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Noor al-Absar, p. 78.  
 **[2]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 23.

The Prophet and his companions
------------------------------

Abu Dujanah was one of the best companions. He was very courageous at
war. The Prophet (a.s.) had a sword in his hand. He said, “Who will take
this sword for its right?”

Abu Dujanah said, “What is its right, O messenger of Allah?”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “To strike with it in the face of the enemy
until it (the sword) is bent.”

Abu Dujanah said, “I take it, O messenger of Allah, for its right.”

He took the sword and attacked the polytheists. He killed everyone he
met. He attacked Hind, Mo’awiya’s mother, and was about to beat her
head, but he gave up loftily.**[1]** In another narration it has been
mentioned that he said, “I honored the sword of the messenger of Allah
in not hitting by it a woman.”**[2]** Thus were the situations of the
Prophet’s companions. They were honest, noble, and lofty.

### The murder of Hamza

Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib, the Prophet’s uncle, was a very brave hero
before and after Islam. He was a very faithful Muslim who defended Islam
boldly. He was the striking force in the Muslim army. In the battle of
Uhud, he was assassinated by Wahshi, a villain, sinful slave who was
incited by Hind, Abu Sufyan’s wife, who lost several men from her family
in the battle of Badr. She promised Wahshi to offer him many things if
he would kill Hamza. Wahshi also was incited by his master Jubayr bin
Mut’im who promised to set him free (from slavery) if he would kill
Hamza.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 3 p. 73.  
 **[2]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 227.

When Hamza was martyred, Hind became very joyful and delighted. She
hurried to the battlefield looking for Hamza’s body to satisfy her
grudge against him. When she found him, she cut open his abdomen, took
out his liver, and chewed it, but she could not swallow it, so she throw
it away, and then she cut his nose, ears, and genitals, and she took
them as a necklace. The women with her did the same thing to the bodies
of the other martyrs.**[1]** By doing this, Hind thought that she would
satisfy her soul that was filled with spite and grudge against Hamza.

Hind thanked Wahshi for his assassinating of Hamza and she gave him her
necklaces, earrings, and one of her bondmaids.

Abu Sufyan as well went looking for Hamza’s body to satisfy his grudge
too. When he found him, he began beating his mouth with his spear. In
fact, all the Umayyad family had been brought up with vices, betrayal,
disloyalty, and rejoicing at others’ distresses. There was no one
honest, noble, or generous from among them.

### The Prophet’s sorrow

The Prophet (a.s.) with a group from his companions went looking for his
uncle’s body, and when he found it, he was shocked because he found that
his uncle’s body had been maimed. He said sadly and angrily, “I will not
be afflicted with one like you at all. I have not been in a situation
more hurting to me than this…if Allah makes me prevail over Quraysh in a
battle from the battles, I will maim thirty men from them.”**[2]**

And on this occasion, Allah revealed to the Prophet (a.s.) these verses,
***(If you punish, then punish with the like of that  ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 3 p. 74.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 2 p. 95.

***wherewith you were afflicted. But if you endure patiently, verily it
is better for the patient. And be patient and your patience is not but
by (the assistance of) Allah, and grieve not for them, and do not
distress yourself at what they plot).*[1]** Therefore, the Prophet
(a.s.) became patient and gave up. And then, he prohibited the maiming
even if against a biting dog.

The Prophet (a.s.) enshrouded his uncle with his own garment, put the
other martyrs beside him, and offered the prayer on them seventy-two
times.**[2]** Then he himself buried his uncle while shedding tears and
feeling deep sorrow. He said addressing his martyred uncle, “O you the
uncle of the messenger of Allah, the lion of Allah, and the lion of His
messenger. O you, the doer of goodness, the reliever of distresses, O
Hamza the defender of the messenger of Allah!”**[3]**

The women of the Ansar held meetings of mourning on their killed men.
When the Prophet (a.s.) passed by them, he said, “But there are no
mourners for Hamza!” So the women of the Ansar informed each other about
the saying of the Prophet (a.s.) and said, “Do not weep for your killed
ones until you weep for the Prophet’s uncle.” Then, the women held
meetings of mourning for Hamza the Prophet’s uncle.

### The martyrdom of Mus’ab

Mus’ab was one of the noblest young men of Quraysh and one of the most
pious Muslims. He tolerated different kinds of torture in the way of
Allah and faced many calamities from the polytheists of Quraysh. At the
beginning of the mission, the Prophet (a.s.) sent him as a deputy to
Medina to invite the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 16:126-127.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 2 p. 97.  
 **[3]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 246.

people there to Islam. A great number of people there turned Muslims at
his hand. In the battle of Uhud, he was one of the prominent leaders and
he did very well in the battle until he was martyred. He was killed by
ibn Qam’ah al-Laythi who thought he was the Prophet (a.s.), and
therefore, he cried out in the middle of the battlefield, “I killed
Muhammad.”

The Prophet (a.s.) felt great pain for the loss of Mus’ab as Muslims
lost one of their great leaders who were so loyal and faithful in
defending Islam.

### The rout of the polytheists

Muslims, and especially Imam Ali (a.s.), killed the bearers of the
polytheists’ banners and most of their leaders. Their army fled followed
by their women, who were crying and wailing and uncovering their legs in
utmost meanness and disgrace, towards the mountain. It was not long when
everything was upside-down.

### The defeat of Muslims

Muslims suffered great loss in men and they faced a disaster that was
about to do away with Islam. That was because when the archers, whom the
Prophet (a.s.) had ordered to remain on the mountain to back the army
lest the enemy might attack from behind, saw that the polytheists were
defeated and saw them run away leaving behind them their arms and
baggage, they left their places on the mountain and hurried to the
battlefield to plunder the arms and baggage of the enemy. When Khalid
bin al-Waleed, who was from the leaders of Quraysh then, saw that, he
attacked with his men the Prophet’s companions from behind while they
were unaware. He killed many of them most of whom were prominent leaders
in the army of the Prophet (a.s.). This disaster was the result of the
archers’ disobedience to the Prophet’s order.

When the Prophet (a.s.) saw this painful defeat that his army faced, he
raised his hands towards the heaven praying,

“O Allah, all praise be to You.

O Allah, there is no straitening to what You enlarge and no enlarging to
what You straiten, no guide to whom You make astray and no deviator to
whom You guide, no giver to whom You deprive and no depriver to whom You
give, no approacher to what You isolate and no isolator to what You
approach.

O Allah, give to us Your blessings, mercy, favor, and sustenance.

O Allah, I ask You for the permanent bliss that does not change or
disappear.

O Allah, I ask You for security on the Day of Fear and richness on the
Day of Neediness.

O Allah, I am seeking Your protection from the evil of what You have
given to us and what You have not given to us.

O Allah, endear to us faith and adorn it into our hearts, and make
disbelief, apostasy, and disobedience hateful to us, and make us from
the prosperous.

O Allah, make us die Muslims and join us to the righteous; neither
disgraced nor tempted.

O Allah, fight the disbelievers who deny Your messengers and keep
(people) away from Your way.

O Allah, send down on them Your wrath and torment, O You the Lord of the
truth.”**[1]**

He also invoked Allah in the battlefield with this invocation, “O Allah,
praise be to You, to You is the complaint, and You are the Assistant.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol.3 p. 77.

Then Gabriel came down saying to him, “You have invoked with the
invocation of Abraham when he was thrown into the fire and of Jonah when
he was inside the whale.”**[1]**

### The struggle of Umm Imarah

From the great women who had a distinguished role in the battle was the
Prophet’s companions Umm Imarah. She did very well in this battle. Umm
Sa’d bint Sa’d bin ar-Rabee’ asked Umm Imarah about her jihad before the
Prophet (a.s.) and she replied, “In the morning I went to Uhud to see
what people were doing. I had with me a skin full of water. I went to
the Prophet (a.s.) who was among his companions while the Muslims were
prevalent. When the Muslims were defeated, I surrounded the messenger of
Allah and began fighting to defend him by the sword and shooting arrows
until I was wounded with many wounds.”

In her shoulder there was a deep wound. Umm Sa’d asked her who wounded
her and she said, “It was Ibn Qam’ah, may Allah lower him. When people
(Muslims) left the messenger of Allah, he (Ibn Qam’ah) came saying,
“Show me Muhammad! Let me not be saved if he is saved.” I, Mus’ab bin
Umayr, and some people, who remained fixed with the messenger of Allah,
blocked his way and he struck me this one, and I struck him for it many
strikes, but the enemy of Allah (Ibn Qam’ah) had put on two
armors.”**[2]** Umm Aymen, another great companion, also had a great
role in this battle. She looked after the wounded warriors…**[3]**

### Villains try to kill the Prophet

Utbah bin Abi Waqqas, one of the most hostile polytheists to the Prophet
(a.s.), hit the Prophet (a.s.) with a rock and broke his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 19 p. 131.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol.3 p. 67.  
 **[3]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 227.

front teeth. The Prophet (a.s.) prayed Allah against him saying, “O
Allah, let the year not complete to him until he shall die a
disbeliever.”

Allah responded to His messenger and this villain was killed on that
very day by Hatib bin Abi Balta’ah who took his (Utbah) sword and horse
and brought them before the Prophet (a.s.). The Prophet (a.s.) was
pleased and said to him, “May Allah be pleased with you.”**[1]**

Umayyah bin Khalaf was also a very bitter enemy to the Prophet (a.s.).
When he met him in Mecca, he said to him, “O Muhammad, I have al-Awth
(the name of his horse); everyday I feed it with a great deal of corn so
that I will kill you on it.”

The Prophet (a.s.) replied to him, “But it is me who will kill you by
the will of Allah.”

In the battle of Uhud, this villain came towards the Prophet (a.s.)
crying out, “O liar, where shall you run away?”

Some Muslims blocked his way, but the Prophet (a.s.) ordered them to
clear the way for him. The Prophet (a.s.) took a bayonet and threw it at
Umayyah and it scratched his neck. He shouted out, “Muhammad killed me.”

His fellow men said to him, “You have lost your mind! You often took
arrows out of your ribs, and this is not but a scratch.”

He said to them, “If this, which is in me, is in the people of Thil
Majaz, Rabee’ah, Mudhar, or the whole people of the earth, they will
die. If he spits at me, he will kill me.” He died on his coming back to
Mecca.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2, p. 233.

### Danger surrounds the Prophet

When most of Muslims ran away from the battlefield, dangers surrounded
the Prophet (a.s.) and he was wounded by the enemies.  His front teeth
were broken and his upper lip was cut and it bled on his holy face. He
wiped the blood while saying, “How would a people, who stained (with
blood) the face of their prophet while inviting them to Allah, be
successful?”**[1]**

He fell into a hole that Abu Aamir had dug and concealed so that Muslims
would fell into unknowingly. Imam Ali (a.s.), held the Prophet’s hand
and Talha lifted him (by the other) until he stood up.**[2]**

Abu Sufyan asked some man to call out in the battlefield that Muhammad
had been killed. When the Muslims heard that, they ran away here and
there. Some companions tried to write to Abu Sufyan asking him for
protection.

However, Imam Ali (a.s.) defended the Prophet (a.s.) against the
polytheists so courageously. The Prophet (a.s.) asked him, “O Ali, what
did people (Muslims) do?”

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “They broke the covenant and ran away.’

A group from Quraysh attacked the Prophet (a.s.) who said to Imam Ali
(a.s.), “Suffice me against these people!”

Imam Ali (a.s.) attacked them and they ran away. Another group of about
fifty men attacked the Prophet (a.s.) who again said to Imam Ali,
“Suffice me against these people!” He attacked them and killed four men
from the children of Sufyan bin Uwayf as he killed six men from the
first battalion. A third battalion attacked the Prophet (a.s.) headed by
Hisham bin Umayyah who was killed by the imam and the rest of his men
fled. A  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo’minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 18.  
 **[2]** Ibid.

fourth group headed by Bishr bin Malik attacked the Prophet (a.s.). Imam
Ali (a.s.) killed Bishr and the group ran away.

Thus, Imam Ali (a.s.) protected the Prophet (a.s.) after harvesting the
heads of the heroes of Quraysh. Gabriel was astonished at Imam Ali’s
great struggl in defending the Prophet (a.s.); therefore, he (Gabriel)
said to the Prophet (a.s.), “This comfort (of Imam Ali) has astonished
the angels.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said to him, “And what prevents him from that since
he is from me and I am from him.”

Gabriel added proudly, “And I am from you both.”**[1]**

In this ordeal, Imam Ali (a.s.) was beside the Prophet (a.s.) as a
sacrifice to him. He met sixteen strikes that sent him down to the
ground but Gabriel lifted him up. **[2]**

Then, a group of truthful Muslims hurried to defend the Prophet (a.s.)
from among whom there were:

**1. Anas bin an-Nadhr**

When the Muslims fled and Abu Sufyan rumored that the Prophet (a.s.) had
been killed, Anas bin an-Nadhr faced the Muslims and said determinedly,
“What do you do with life after him (the Prophet). Die for what he died
for.” He fought courageously until he was martyred.**[3]** 

**2. Thabit bin ad-Dahdaha**

He was one of the heroes and prominent Muslims. When he saw the defeat
of Muslims and heard the caller of Abu Sufyan calling out that Muhammad
had been killed, he said to the Ansar, “O people of the Ansar, come to
me! Come to me! I am Thabit bin  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 18.  
 **[2]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 18.  
 **[3]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 246.

ad-Dahdaha. If Muhammad was killed, surely Allah is alive that never
dies. Defend your religion, and surely Allah will support and make you
prevail.”

Some men from the Ansar responded to him, and they together attacked a
group of men from Quraysh among whom were Khalid bin al-Waleed, Amr bin
al-Aas, Ikrimah bin Abi Jahl, and Dhirar bin al-Khattab. Khalid bin
al-Waleed killed him by his spear and killed the men with him.**[1]**

**3. Abu Dujanah**

He was one of the prominent mujahidin.  He bent his back before the
Prophet (a.s.) to protect him against arrows lest no one would hit him.

**4. Ziyad bin Imarah**

He did very well in defending the Prophet (a.s.). The arrows and spears
of Quraysh hit him until he fell to the ground unconscious. He was
carried to the Prophet (a.s.) and he put his head on the Prophet’s leg,
but after no long his soul went high towards its Creator.**[2]**

**5. Abu Talha**

he was too sincere in defending the Prophet (a.s.) and sacrificing him
by himself. He was expert in archery. He spread his quiver before the
Prophet (a.s.) and said to him, “My soul is sacrificed for your soul,
and my face is a guard for your face.”

He kept on shooting his arrows against the enemy army, and the Prophet
(a.s.) ordered some man to put arrows near to him. The Prophet (a.s.)
was overlooking the enemy when Abu Talha was shooting. He said to the
Prophet (a.s.), “O prophet of Allah, may  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 246.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 231.

my father and mother die for you! Do not overlook them lest an arrow
from their arrows hits you. May my neck be the sacrifice for
yours.”**[1]**

**6. Amr bin al-Jamuh**

He was one of the best Muslims. He was lame having four courageous sons
who all fought with the Prophet (a.s.) in all his battles. In the battle
of Uhud, they wanted to prevent their father from going to the war
saying to him, “Allah the Almighty has excused you because you are lame.
He has exempted you from jihad.”

He was not satisfied, and he hurried to the Prophet (a.s.) saying to him
sadly, “My children want to prevent me from this way, but, by Allah, I
hope that I shall walk with my lameness in the Paradise.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said to him, “As for you, Allah has excused you and
there is no jihad on you.”

When the Prophet (a.s.) saw his eagerness to gain martyrdom, he said to
his children, “You may not prevent him that Allah may grant to him
martyrdom.”

He left the Prophet (a.s.) pleasedly and delightedly. He fought
courageously in the battlefield until he was martyred.**[2]**

**7. Sa’d bin ar-Rabee’**

He gave a wonderful picture of faith and heroism in Islam. He fought
everywhere in the battlefield. The Prophet (a.s.) was very careful of
him. He asked his companions to look for him. Some man from the Ansar
went looking for him and he found him breathing his last. He came near
and said to him, “The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 231.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 3 p. 73,74.

messenger of Allah ordered me to see whether you are alive or dead.”

He said to him faintly, “I am dead. Inform the messenger of Allah and
said to him that Sa’d bin ar-Rabee’ says to you: may Allah reward you
with all goodness as ever He has rewarded a prophet on behalf of his
nation. And send my greeting to your people and say to them: Sa’d bin
ar-Rabee’ says to you: there shall be no excuse to you near Allah if
your prophet is touched while there is an eye twinkling among you.”
After no long, his soul left high to the heaven.**[1]** 

**8. Aasim bin Umar bin Qatadah**

His eye was hit in the battle and it fell down on his cheek, but the
Prophet (a.s.) returned it by his hand. After that, it was the best and
sharpest one of his eyes. His children often prided on this charisma.

**9. Al-Usayrim**

He was Amr bin Thabit from bani Abd al-Ashhal who became Muslim on the
Day of Uhud. He held his sword and joined the Muslim army. He was
wounded and he fell to the ground in the battlefield. Some men from his
tribe, who had come to look for their killed men, saw him and said to
each other, “This is al-Usayrim. What brought him here whereas he denied
Islam?” They asked him, “What brought you here O Amr! Is it a pity for
your people or love to Islam?” He said, “But it’s the love of the
Prophet of Islam. I believed in Allah and His messenger and turned a
Muslim. Then, I took my sword and came with the messenger of Allah. I
fought until I faced what I faced.” Soon, he died between them. They
mentioned that to the messenger of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 3, p. 78. Sa’d was
one of the chiefs on the Night of al-Aqabah.

Allah who said, “He is from the people of the Paradise.” In another
tradition it was mentioned that the Prophet (a.s.) said, “He has entered
the Paradise.” He offered no prayer,**[1]** because he was martyred on
the same day when he turned a Muslim, and (the faith in) Islam would
cancel whatever (sin) before.

**10. Mukhayreeq**

He was from Bani Tha’labah. On the Day of Uhud, he said to the Jews, “O
community of the Jews, you have already known that the supporting of
Muhammad is obligatory on you.” Then he took his sword and said, “If I
am killed, all my possessions should be for Muhammad. He can do with
them whatever he likes.”

He joined the Prophet (a.s.) in Uhud and fought with him until he was
killed. The Prophet (a.s.) possessed his (Khuwayreeq) properties and
made them entailment in the way of Allah, and this was the first
entailment in Medina.**[2]**

### The end of the war

The war ended with the victory of Quraysh and the defeat of Muslims.
Many Muslim leaders and famous companions were martyred in this battle.
The Prophet (a.s.) declared that this was the last battle where Muslims
were defeated. He said to Imam Ali (a.s.), “The polytheists shall not
defeat us like it (this battle) at all until Allah will grant to us
victory.”**[3]**

Anyhow, Abu Sufyan left the battlefield with his army while filled with
joy and delight.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 3 p. 73.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 3 p. 72.  
 **[3]** Ibid., p. 84.

The Prophet (a.s.) and his companions buried the martyrs in the very
place of the battle. Many of the martyrs were from the memorizers of the
Holy Qur'an where a fragrance like that of musk emanated from their
tombs. Some carried their killed men to Medina, but the Prophet (a.s.)
returned them to the battlefield where they were martyred.**[1]**

In the year forty of Hijra, Mo’awiyah the son of Hind made water flow in
this graveyard and ordered people to move their deads to another place
and they did while the graveyard was wet.**[2]** He did that to avenge
himself on them, though it is impermissible to violate the tombs of
Muslims, but they must be revered especially the tombs of martyrs.
Anyhow, Mo’awiya the son of Abu Sufyan did that, because he was too far
from the principles and rulings of Islam.

### The Prophet marches with his army to fight Abu Sufyan

The Prophet (a.s.) ordered his companions, who were still in the
battlefield and especially those who fought with him, to move on for
fight. They responded to him and set out. Then Allah revealed about them
this verse, (As for those who heard the call of Allah and His messenger
after the harm befell them (in the fight); for such of them who do right
and ward off (evil), there is great reward).**[3]**

The Muslim army marched until it arrived in Hamra’ al-Asad, eight miles
from Medina. The Prophet (a.s.) and his army remained there three days
and then they went back to Medina. This was a wonderful military plan
that the Prophet (a.s.)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 250.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 3:172.

planned to make Abu Sufyan, who regretted for going back to Mecca
without keeping on fighting and doing away with the rest of Muslims
especially after obtaining the victory over them, think that the Prophet
(a.s.) had prepared an army stronger than his and that the army was on
the way to chase him and his army.

Ma’bad al-Khuza’iy was a polytheist, but he was loyal to the Prophet
(a.s.). He passed by the Prophet (a.s.) while he was in Hamra’ al-Asad
and said to him, “O Muhammad, by Allah, it was painful to us what
happened unto your companions. We liked that Allah might save them to
you.” Then he left the Prophet (a.s.) and set out towards Mecca. In
ar-Rawha’, he met with Abu Sufyan who decided to come back to fight the
Prophet (a.s.) again after the people of Quraysh had said to him, “We
have killed the leaders and the heroes of Muhammad’s army and we want to
return to do away with the rest of them.” Abu Sufyan said to Ma’bad,
“What do you have, Ma’bad?”

Ma’bad said, “Muhammad has set out chasing you with a gathering that I
have never seen like it. They feel burning desires to fight you. Those,
who had left him (the Prophet), joined him and regretted for what they
did. They had anger against you that I have never seen like it.”

Abu Sufyan felt fear and said worriedly, “Woe unto you! What are you
saying?”

Ma’bad said, “By Allah, I see that you shall not leave until you shall
see the forelocks of horses.”

Abu Sufyan said, “We have already determined to do away with them.”

Ma’bad said, “But I see that you may not go on that…” He recited to him
some verses of poetry on the matter that made

Abu Sufyan give up his intention to fight again, and this was a victory
to Islam.

### The results of the battle of Uhud

The battle of Uhud left, on the Islamic side, some painful consequences
such as:

**1. The joy of Quraysh**

The people of Quraysh went back to Mecca playing the trumpets of victory
for what they achieved against the Muslims and the great losses they
caused to them in lives and properties. The most delighted ones of them
at all were Abu Sufyan, his wife Hind, and the Umayyads who felt they
had avenged themselves on the Prophet (a.s.) by killing his uncle Hamza
and the other heroes of Muslims. Before going to his home, Abu Sufyan
went to the Kaaba to greet Hubal, the greatest of idols, and thank it
for that victory, and then he went to his house and slept with his wife
Hind to fulfil his vow that he had made in not sleeping with her until
he would defeat Muhammad.

**2. The delight of the polytheists and the Jews**

The polytheists and the Jews became very delighted at the defeat and the
great losses the Muslims faced in that battle. They thought that the
authority and the power of Islam shook and became disturbed. In their
meetings, they talked mockingly about the fate of Muslims. Abdullah bin
Ubayy bin Salool, the head of polytheists, did not participate in the
fight because the Prophet (a.s.) did not listen to his suggestion or
because he was angry at his allies from the Jews and the Christians;
therefore, he rejoiced at the losses that Muslims faced in this battle.

Anyhow, all the enemies of Islam rejoiced at this defeat of Muslims and
announced their joys at this disaster that had afflicted the Prophet
(a.s.) and his followers, and they wished if

it would happen again so that the banner of Islam might be folded
forever.

**3. Deeming Muslims weak**

After the battle of Uhud, the Arab tribes deemed the Muslims weak. After
they feared Muslims and feared the prevalence of Islam over them, they
began, after the damages that had befallen the Muslims, attacking them
intending to do away with them.
