The Publisher’s Preface
=======================

Reviewing the history of the past teaches man how to live, how to die,
and how to be immortal. The studying of the lives of the great people in
History especially religious personalities at the head of whom and at
the top of the pyramid are the prophets, the righteous saints, and the
guided and guiding infallible imams, takes humanity to the best of
fruits and greatest of results; worldly and afterworldly. Besides, that
scientific and practical experiments and the studying of biographies
have proved that those who followed this way got to their destination
sooner and obtained the happiness of the Two Abodes; this life and the
afterlife.

Since our duty requires us to enliven the biographies of the Ahlul Bayt
(peace be upon them) and with the assistance that Allah the Almighty has
given to us in this way, the *Ansariyan Publications* has undertaken the
translation, from Arabic to English, of the series of the lives of the
Fourteen Infallibles; the Prophet, Fatima, Imam Ali, and their eleven
infallible sons (peace be on them all), written by Allama Sheikh Baqir
Shareef al-Qurashi…this series that may be unequalled in this concern.
Besides the translation, we have printed, and published this precious
series, hoping from Allah the Almighty to make it a true step in the
path of fulfilling our religious duties one of which is the reviving of
the holy lives of our infallible leaders…praying Allah to reward us all
with the best of His reward.

**Ansariyan Publications**
