Bani Quraydhah and the Conquest of Khaybar
==========================================

As soon as the battle of al-Khandaq came to an end, a revelation came to
the Prophet (a.s.) from the heaven ordering him to hasten in attacking
the Bani Quraydhah who were the worst community of Jews that had been
cursed by Allah and His messenger and were a source of sedition and
troubles to Muslims. They plotted against Muslims in broad daylight and
in the darkness of night.

The march of the Muslim army
----------------------------

The Prophet (a.s.) ordered the army to set out for the fight against the
Bani Quraydha, and that they would not offer the Asr Prayer except there
in their land. The Muslim army surrounded the Jews of Bani Quraydhah,
who were protecting themselves in strong forts, and impose on them a
strict blockade.

The Prophet (a.s.) sent Imam Ali (a.s.) to meet the Bani Quraydha. When
he arrived in there, they met him impudently and they criticized the
Prophet (a.s.) badly. Imam Ali (a.s.) went back to the Prophet (a.s.),
told him what happened, and asked him not to approach the Jews’ forts.

The Prophet (a.s.) said to Imam Ali (a.s.), “I think you heard from them
something bad against me. Didn’t you?”

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “Yes, I did.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “If they saw me, they would say nothing like
that.”

Then, the Prophet (a.s.) approached their forts and called upon them, “O
brothers of apes, has Allah disgraced you and sent down His wrath on
you?”

The Prophet (a.s.) ordered his army to firm the blockade which lasted
about twenty-five days where nothing took place except shooting arrows
and stones on each other. The Jews became certain that their forts would
not protect them and they must fall in the grasp of Muslims.

Ka’b bin Asad, a Jewish man, offered an advice to his people saying, “O
community of the Jews, you have been afflicted with what you see, and I
shall give you three suggestions that you may follow any of them as you
like…; we follow this man (Prophet Muhammad) and believe in him. By
Allah, it has come clear to you that he is a sent prophet and he is the
very one you find in your Book, and thus you shall be safe in your
bloods, properties, children, and women.”

They altogether said, “We do never leave the judgment of the Torah and
never replace it with any other than it.”

Ka’b said, “If you deny this, then let us kill our children and women,
and go out to Muhammad and his companions; only men with unsheathed
swords leaving behind us nothing, until Allah will judge between us and
Muhammad. If we are killed, we are killed while leaving no progeny
behind us that we may fear for them, and if we prevail, we, by my life,
shall find women and children.”

They denied this suggestion and said, “If we kill these poor ones, then
what good is there in living after them?”

Ka’b offered his third suggestion saying, “If you deny this too, then
tonight is the night of Saturday, and Muhammad and his companions may
give us security in this night. So let us go down (of the forts) that we
may find Muhammad and his companions in inadvertence.”

They did not respond and they said to him, “(If we do) we shall corrupt
our Saturday and do in it what those before us did not

do except those whom you know and they were metamorphosed as it is clear
to you.”**[1]**

### The delegation of Abu Lubabah

The Banu Quraydhah asked the Prophet (a.s.) to send them Abu Lubabah,
who was from al-Aws the allies of Banu Quraydhah, to consult with him on
this affairs. The Prophet (a.s.) sent Abu Lubabah to them, and when they
saw him, they got up before him reverently and respectfully. Their women
and children began crying in front of him. When he saw them in that
case, he pitied them. They said to him, “What do you see, Abu Lubabah?
Do we submit to the judgment of Muhammad?” He said to them, “Yes, you
do, (he pointed to his throat) but know well that his judgment on you is
the slaughtering!”

He suggested to them to resist and not to submit because he made them
understand that the judgment would be the slaughter in any case. Then,
Abu Lubabah regretted too much because he was certain that he had
betrayed Allah and His messenger. He repented and Allah accepted his
repentance.**[2]**

### The arbitration of Sa’d

The Banu Quraydhah sent for their ally the tribe of al-Aws to mediate
between them and the Prophet (a.s.). A group from the al-Aws interceded
with the Prophet (a.s.) who accepted the intercession and suggested to
them to choose an arbitrator as they liked. The Jews chose Sa’d bin
Mu’ath and were satisfied with him as the arbitrator. He took from them
a promise that they would accept his judgment. He ordered them to put
away their arms and they did. Then he judged to kill those who fought
and killed Muslims and to captivate their women and children.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 3 p. 246.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 3 p. 247, and other
sources.

The Prophet (a.s.) acknowledged the judgment of Sa’d and said, “Allah
and the believers have been satisfied with his judgment, and with such I
have been ordered.”

The sinful Jews were brought to the markets of Medina, and there ditches
were dug for them and they were killed. Then, Muslims were relieved from
Jews’ evils because they were a source of sedition and troubles.

Anyhow, the Banu Quraydhah had black history towards Muslims and were a
source of great evils and disasters to Muslims. They often said, “We
shall not be pleased except by doing away with Muhammad and his
followers.”

Then, the Prophet (a.s.) divided the properties, women, and children of
the Banu Quraydhah among the Muslims after deducting from them the
khums. But, most of their women remained Jewish and they did not turn
Muslim.**[1]**

The raid of Muslims against the Banu Quraydhah made the Arabs fear the
Muslims and it fixed the authority of Islam as a power that could not be
defeated.

The conquest of Khaybar
-----------------------

The Prophet (a.s.) saw that the Muslims would not be safe and that Islam
would not be prevalent with the existence of powerful Jews who were in
the strong forts of Khaybar**[2]** which was a factory of different arms
and war equipments; swords, spears, armors, and tanks that shot hot
water with melted lead and were from the most dangerous weapons at that
time. Khaybar  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Life of Muhammad, p. 356.  
 **[2]** Khaybar was a place about three miles from Medina. Inhabited by
Jews, it had strong forts and huge gardens of date-palm trees. The
battle of Khaybar took place at the end of the sixth year of Hijra.
Refer to Khizanat al-Adab (treasury of literature), vol. 6 p. 69.

was the source that supplied with arms the forces that fought against
Muslims.

The Prophet (a.s.) marched with his army to conquer the forts of
Khaybar. When he was close to Khaybar, he prayed Allah saying, “O Allah
the Lord of the heavens and what they have shaded, the Lord of the
earths and what they have born, the Lord of Devils and what they have
misled, and the Lord of winds and what the have scattered, we ask You
for the best of this village, the best of its people, and the best of
what there is in it, and we seek Your protection from its evil, the evil
of its people, and the evil of what there is in it.”

Then he ordered the army saying, “Move forward in the name of Allah the
High!”

He made Abu Bakr a leader over the army. When Abu Bakr approached the
fort, he faced a shower of missiles and he went back with the army
disappointedly. On the next day, the Prophet entrusted the leadership of
the army to Umar bin al-Khattab who did like his friend Abu Bakr did,
and went back disappointedly while the fort of the Jews remained
untouchable.

When the army was unable to break into the forts, the Prophet (a.s.)
announced that he would appoint a leader that Allah would grant victory
to Muslims at his hand. He said, “I will give the banner tomorrow to a
man who loves Allah and His messenger and whom Allah and His messenger
love. He shall not go back until Allah will make him prevail.”**[1]**

The army impatiently looked forward to know who that leader would be. No
one thought that the expected leader would be Imam Ali (a.s.), because
he was suffering trachoma. When the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol. 1 p. 62, Sifat as-Safwah, vol. 1 p, 163,
Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, tradition no. 778.

light of morning spread, the Prophet (a.s.) sent for Imam Ali (a.s.)
whose eyes were bandaged. He (the Prophet) removed the bandage and spat
in Imam Ali’s eyes which recovered soon. He said to him, “Take this
banner so that Allah will grant the victory at your hand…”

Imam Ali (a.s.) received the banner from the Prophet (a.s.) and said, “O
messenger of Allah, shall I fight them until they become like us
(Muslims)?”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Move slowly until you arrive in their yard,
and then invite them to Islam and tell them of their duties to Allah. By
Allah, if Allah guides one man by you, it shall be better to you than to
have all properties.”**[1]**

Imam Ali (a.s.) hurried to the battlefield feeling a bit of neither fear
nor worry. He advanced towards the fort, plucked out its great gate, and
took it as a shield**[2]** that protected him against the arrows and
missiles of the Jews who were terribly terrified when they saw Imam Ali
(a.s.) take out the gate of their fort.

Marhab, the most courageous hero of the Jews, came towards Imam Ali
(a.s.) to fight him while reciting some poetry. The imam received him
with a strike that split his head and made him fall down to the ground
bathing in his blood, and soon the imam finished him off.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sifat as-Safwah, vol. 1 p. 164, Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol. 7 p.
121, and in Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol. 6 p. 3, it is mentioned in this way:
“O Ali, you do not fight anyone except after inviting him to Islam.”  
 **[2]** The taking out of the gate of Khaybar was a miracle, because it
was opened by forty men together as mentioned in the books of history
such as, Tareekh Baghdad, vol. 11 p. 324, Mizan al-I’tidal, vol. 2 p.
218, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6 p. 368, and in ar-Riyadh an-Nadhirah, vol. 2
p. 188, it is mentioned that seventy men gathered together to return the
gate to its place after great efforts.

Soon, Khaybar was conquered at the hand of Imam Ali (a.s.) and the Jews
were subjugated, disgraced, and taught a lesson that they could not
forget throughout history.

The Prophet (a.s.) was delighted by this great victory by which the
Muslims became glorious and powerful. It happened that on that very day
Ja’far at-Tayyar had come back from Abyssinia, and so the Prophet (a.s.)
said, “I do not know with which of them I am more delighted; is it the
coming back of Ja’far or the conquer of Khaybar?”**[1]**

### A poisoned ewe

Zaynab bint al-Harith, a Jewish woman, offered a poisoned ewe to the
Prophet (a.s.) with more poison in the arm because she new that the
Prophet (a.s.) liked more the arm of a ewe. The Prophet (a.s.) took a
piece of the arm, chewed it, and spat it out. Bishr bin al-Bara’ ate
from it, and that caused his death. The Prophet (a.s.) said that it was
poisoned. He sent for Zaynab who confessed that she had poisoned the
ewe. The Prophet (a.s.) asked what made her do that and she said, “You
have done to my people what is not unknown to you, and I said to myself:
if he is a king, I shall be relieved from him, ad if he is a prophet, he
shall be inspired.” And so the Prophet (a.s.) pardoned her.**[2]**

### The faith of al-Hajjaj bin Ilat

It may be pleasant to mention the beginning of al-Hajjaj’s faith. He
became a Muslim at the Prophet’s hands. He had properties here and there
in Mecca and he feared that they may be seized if the people of Mecca
knew that he was a Muslim. He asked the Prophet’s permission to go to
Mecca and the Prophet (a.s.) permitted him. When he was near Mecca, he
met some men  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 4 p. 128.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 3 p. 352.

from Quraysh who did not know that he had turned a Muslim. They asked
him about the news of the Prophet (a.s.), and he said to them, “I have
pleasant news to you. Muhammad was terribly defeated and his companions
were terribly killed. Muhammad was taken a prisoner, and the Jews said:
we do not kill him, but we send him to the people of Mecca to kill him
there in order to avenge themselves on him for those whom he had killed
from their men.”

These men hurried to Mecca delightedly crying out: ‘It is Muhammad! He
shall be brought to you to be killed before you.’ Joys spread everywhere
among the people of Mecca.

By this trick, al-Hajjaj could gather his properties safely. Al-Abbas,
the Prophet’s uncle, who was very distressed for that news, asked
al-Hajjaj whether that news was true or not, and he said to him, “I
shall tell you the truth when we are alone.” When they were alone,
al-Hajjaj said to al-Abbas, “Keep my speech secret until after three
days, and then you can say whatever you like.” Al-Abbas agreed and
al-Hajjaj added, “By Allah, I have left your nephew while he was a
bridegroom with the daughter**[1]** of their (the Jews of Khaybar) king.
Khaybar was conquered and the Muslims obtained all its properties.”

Al-Abbas was astonished and said, “What do you say, O Hajjaj?”

Al-Hajjaj said, “Yes, by Allah, it is what I said to you. Keep it
secret. I have become a Muslim and come here just to take my properties,
for I fear that if they (the people of Mecca) know I am a Muslim, they
will plunder all what I have. After three days, you can tell the
people.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** When she was taken a prisoner, the Prophet (a.s.) made her free
to choose; either to be released from bondage and get married to the
Prophet (a.s.) or to go to join her family, and she agreed to get
married with the Prophet (a.s.).

After three days, al-Abbas came to the Kaaba, and he was received by the
people of Quraysh. He said to them, “Muhammad has conquered Khaybar and
got married to the daughter of their (the Jews) king and he obtained all
their properties.”

They asked him, “Who brought to you this news?

He said, “It is the very man, who told you the news of his (the Prophet)
defeat. He was a Muslim. He came to take his properties, and then he set
out to join Muhammad and his companions to be among them.”

They were upset and they said, “The enemy of Allah has slipped away. If
we knew, we would deal with him elsewise.” It was not long when the
certain news came to them about the conquest of Khaybar by the Prophet
(a.s.).**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 3 p. 359-360.
