Expeditions
===========

Here we discuss the raids of the Prophet (a.s.) against some areas,
provinces, and tribes. I think, after deep thinking, that the goals of
those raids were as the following:

**First**, Allah the Almighty had sent his messenger as mercy to all the
peoples and nations of the world to save them from their painful
realities and guide them to the best.

The tribes at the time of the Prophet (a.s.) lived in utmost ignorance
and bad habits besides idolatry. Therefore, the Prophet (a.s.) was
ordered by Allah to carry out His mission to His people and take them to
knowledge, guidance, high morals, and noble life.

**Second**, to repel the dangers expected from some tribes and provinces
against Islam such as the Jews who plotted day and night against the
Prophet (a.s.) and his mission and who were a base joined by the
hypocrites to overthrow the Islamic authority; therefore, the Prophet
(a.s.) was obliged to attack them to save Islam and the Muslims from
their dangers.

**Third**, in any case, the raids against those tribes and peoples did
not aim at subjugating them and possessing their properties, but to make
them believe in Allah and His messenger, practice the rituals of the
religion, and give up the bad habits of the age of ignorance.

The expeditions
---------------

**1. The expedition against** **the** **Banu Sulaym**

The Prophet (a.s.) and his army marched to the Bani Sulaym and stopped
at one of their wells. They remained there three

days and went back without facing any resistance,**[1]** because the
people of the tribe scattered here and there. 

**2. The expedition of as-Suwayq**

Historians say that the reason behind this expedition was that Abu
Sufyan had sworn that he would not sleep with his woman at all except
after fighting against Muhammad. So, one day, he and some men from
Quraysh set out roving in the desert until they went to the Bani
an-Nadheer near Medina. There, they found a Muslim man from the Ansar
with a companion of his and killed them both. When the Prophet (a.s.)
was informed of that, he with his men set out chasing the killer after
leaving Basheer bin Abdul Munthir as the wali over Medina. When they
arrived in the Bani an-Nadheer, they found that the killers had fled
back to Mecca. The Prophet (a.s.) and his army went back to Medina with
no any loss in Muslims.**[2]** 

**3. The expedition of al-Furu’**

The Prophet (a.s.) appointed ibn Umm Kulthoom the wali over Medina, and
he with his army marched to face Quraysh. When they arrived in the
village of al-Furu’, they stayed there for two months teaching the
people of that village the rulings and teachings of Islam and the
Qur'an. Then, they went back to Medina after having faced no clash or
plot.**[3]** 

**4. The expedition of Buwat**

The Prophet (a.s.) and two hundred men from his companions set out to
attack a caravan of the polytheists that was traveling towards Sham.
There were two thousand and five hundred camels in the caravan with
Umayyah bin Khalaf and one  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 3 p. 46.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 48.  
 **[3]** Ibid., P. 50.

hundred men from Quraysh. The Prophet (a.s.) and his companions stopped
at the mountain of Buwat, one of the mountains from which rocks were
taken to build the Kaaba. The Prophet (a.s.) and Muslims stayed there
for some period, but without meeting fight or harm.**[1]**

**5. The expedition of al-Asheera (the tribe)**

The Prophet (a.s.) and his companions moved to capture a great caravan
of Quraysh that was going to Sham. It was the greatest trading caravan
of Quraysh that all the people of Quraysh had had shares in it, and
therefore it was called ‘al-Asheerah’. This event was the reason that
had led to the battle of Badr. The Muslims missed the caravan that had
preceded to Mecca.**[2]**

**6. The expedition of the Bani Qaynuqa’**

Some people of Jews, who were famous for courage and were in alliance
with Ubadah bin as-Samit and Abdullah bin Ubayy bin Salool, showed
hostility and envy after the battle of Badr and broke their covenant
with the messenger of Allah (a.s.) who had entered into a covenant with
them, with the Bani Quraydhah, and the Bani an-Nadheer not to fight
against him or support any of his enemies. However, they were the first
Jews that betrayed the Muslims. One day, a woman, who was the wife of a
Muslim man from the Ansar, brought some of her camels and sheep to sell
them in the market of the Bani Qaynuqa’. After selling them, she sat
beside a goldsmith from them (Bani Qaynuqa’). Some Jews tried to tempt
the woman to uncover her face, but she refused. The goldsmith tied the
end of her garment to her back, and when she got up, her body was
unveiled. Some Muslim man hurried to the Jewish goldsmith and killed
him, and then some Jews attacked the Muslim man and killed him.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 46.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 126.

When the Prophet (a.s.) was informed of this event, he said, “It is not
on this that we have entered into the covenant with them.” The Prophet
(a.s.) asked Ubadah bin as-Samit to exempt himself from them and to
break his covenant with them. Ubadah said, “O messenger of Allah, I
follow Allah, His messenger, and the believers, and I exempt myself from
the covenant of the unbelievers.” As for Abdullah bin Ubayy, he did not
break his covenant with them (the Jews of Bani Qaynuqa), and then this
verse was revealed concerning him ***(O you who believe! do not take the
Jews and the Christians for friends; they are friends of each other…then
surely the party of Allah are they that shall be triumphant).*[1]**

Then the Prophet (a.s.) gathered the Jews and said to them, “O community
of the Jews, beware from Allah of like the resentment He has sent down
on Quraysh in the battle of Badr, and be Muslims, for you have already
known that I am a sent prophet. You find that in your Book and the
promise of Allah to you.”

They replied cruelly to him, “You think that we are like your people
(Quraysh)! Let it not deceive you that you met a people who were not
expert in war and you could find an opportunity over them. By Allah, if
we fight you, you shall know that we are the very people (of it).”

They hurried to protect themselves in their forts. The Prophet (a.s.)
marched with his army to them where the banner-man was his uncle Hamza.
The Muslim army blockaded their forts tightly for fifteen days. Then
Allah cast terror and fear in their hearts. They were seven hundred men.
Then, they begged the Prophet (a.s.) to let them free and they would
leave Medina with their women and offspring, and all their properties
and lands  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 5:51…56.

and even their weapons would be for the Prophet (a.s.). The Prophet
(a.s.) agreed to that. The Prophet (a.s.) divided the properties among
Muslims after deducting the khums though they were the Prophet’s pure
possession, because they were not gained by fighting.**[1]**

**7. The expedition of Qarqarat al-Kudr**

The Prophet (a.s.) was informed that a group from the Bani Sulaym and
Ghatafan wanted to attack Medina after the Prophet (a.s.) had raided
them. Thus, the Prophet (a.s.) marched to them with twenty men and the
bannerman was Imam Ali (a.s.). When the Muslim force arrived in Qarqarat
al-Kudr, no one was there. The Prophet (a.s.) sent some of his
companions to look for that group of men, and they saw five hundred
camels with the herdsman. After deducting the khums (fifth), the Prophet
(a.s.) gave every warrior two camels whereas the herdsman was set
free.**[2]**

**8. The expedition of Thee Amarr**

The Prophet (a.s.) was informed that a man from Ghatafan called Du’thoor
was gathering people in Thee Amarr (a place of the tribe of Ghatafan) in
order to attack Medina. The Prophet (a.s.) with four hundred and fifty
men set out to meet the man and his followers. By accident, the Prophet
(a.s.) met with a man from them who told the Prophet (a.s.) what they
had intended to do. He said to the Prophet (a.s.), “If they knew about
your march towards them, they would run away to the tops of mountains.
As for me, I shall go with you.” The Prophet (a.s.) invited the man to
Islam and he turned Muslim. The man began guiding the Muslims to the
right way. When the man and Muslims approached those people, they ran
away to the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 208-209.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 212.

mountains. It happened that it rained heavily. The Prophet (a.s.) took
off his clothes and spread them on a tree to dry, and he lay down before
the eyes of those polytheists. Du’thoor, the leader of the group of
polytheists, said, “May Allah kill me if do not kill Muhammad!”

He took his sword and came to stop at the head of the Prophet (a.s.)
saying to him, “Who can protect you from me today?”

The Prophet (a.s.) answered steadfastly, “Allah protects me from you.”

The man was affected by the Prophet’s gravity, his hand shook, and the
sword slipped to the ground. The Prophet (a.s.) took the sword and said
to the man, “Who can protect you from me?”

He answered, “No one can protect me.” Then, he declared his faith in
Islam and the Prophet (a.s.) gave his sword back to him. He went back to
his people inviting them to Islam. Then, this verse was revealed, ***(O
you who believe! remember Allah's favor on you when a people had
determined to stretch forth their hands towards you, but He withheld
their hands from you, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; and on
Allah let the believers rely).*[1]**

Then, the Prophet (a.s.) with his companions went back to Medina after
eleven days without fighting.**[2]** 

**9. The expedition of That ar-Riqa’**

The Prophet (a.s.) was informed that the Bani Muharib and Bani Tha’labah
were gathering their men to attack him. He with four (or seven) hundred
men marched to face them. When the Muslim army arrived in Najd, they
found no one there. They  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 5:11.  
 **[2]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 212.

kept on marching until they stopped at some valley in the night. The
Prophet (a.s.) asked his companions to start guarding the army in the
night. Ammar bin Yasir and Abbad bin Bishr volunteered to guard the
force. They sat at the mouth of the valley. Abbad suggested guarding
during the first part of the night and Ammar the second part. So Ammar
slept and Abbad began offering prayers. While he was offering the
prayer, an arrow hit him. Then a man came to kill the Prophet (a.s.). He
shook the sword and said to the Prophet (a.s.), “O Muhammad, do you not
fear me?”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “No, and what shall I fear you for?”

The man said, “Do you not fear the sword in my hand?”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Allah the Almighty protects me from you.”

The man was confused and affected by the Prophet’s gravity, and gave him
the sword.

The Prophet (a.s.) said to him, “Who can protect you from me?”

The man said to the Prophet (a.s.), “Be the kindest taker of the sword!”

The Prophet (a.s.) pardoned, and asked him to embrace Islam, but he
refused. He went back to his people saying to them, “I have come to you
from the best one of all people.” Later on, he turned a Muslim.**[1]**
Then, the Prophet (a.s.) and his force went back without fighting,
whereas fright prevailed the villages around, that were still
worshipping idols.

**10. The expedition of Dawmat al-Jandal**

The Prophet (a.s.) was informed that there was a band of highwaymen in
Dawmat al-Jandal (a place in Sham near  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 270-273.

Tabuk). They had determined to attack Medina. The Prophet (a.s.) with
one thousand Muslim warriors marched towards that place at the end of
the fourth year of Hijra. The Muslim army moved in the night and hid in
the day for secrecy. When the Muslim army was near to that place, those
people ran away leaving behind them their cattle and herdsmen. Muhammad
bin Maslamah could captivate one of them who turned a Muslim. Then, the
Prophet (a.s.) and his army went back to Medina.**[1]**

**11. The expedition of the Bani al-Mustaliq**

The news came to the Prophet (a.s.) that al-Harth bin Dhirar, the chief
of the Bani al-Mustaliq, mobilized his men to fight against the Prophet
(a.s.) who sent Buraydah bin al-Haseeb to explore the truth. When
Buraydah reached that tribe, they asked who he was, and said to them, “I
am from you. I have come to you when I heard that you have gathered
together against this man (Muhammad), so that I with whoever obeys me
from my people will go together (with you) to do away with them
(Muslims).” In fact, Buraydah had asked the Prophet (a.s.) to permit him
to say as he liked. Their chief said to him, “We have agreed on that. So
let us hurry up!”

When Buraydah went back and told the Prophet (a.s.) about the intention
of those people, the Prophet (a.s.) prepared Muslims for the fight. Many
Muslims joined him among whom there were some hypocrites who wished for
gaining loots.

A man was arrested, and then it was clear that he was a spy to those
people and he was killed. When his news reached his people, they felt
afraid and many of them left the gathering. The Muslim army attacked,
killed ten men, and arrested the rest of them. The loot was about two
thousand camels and five  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2, p. 277.

thousand sheep. Then, the Prophet (a.s.) and his army went back to
Medina.**[1]**

**12. The expedition of Mu’tah**

The Prophet (a.s.) sent to Mu’tah (a village in Sham) in the eighth year
of Hijra an army of three thousand men under the leadership of Zayd bin
Haritha who if would be killed, should be replaced by Ja’far bin Abi
Talib who should be replaced by Abdullah bin Rawaha if would be killed.
The army set out until it arrived in Ma’an in Sham when the news came to
them that the king of Rome had stopped at Ma’ab with an army of one
hundred thousand soldiers. And then, another one hundred thousand men
joined him from other tribes. When the Muslims knew of this great army
that had come to face them, their leaders met to discuss the situation.
Some suggested writing to the Prophet (a.s.) telling him about the great
number of the enemy’s army that he might either send other troops or
issue some other order to be carried out. Then, Abdullah bin Rawaha
addressed the army saying, “O people, by Allah, that which you hate is
the very martyrdom that you have come looking forward to. We do not
fight against people by number, power, or muchness, but we fight them by
this religion with which Allah has honored us. So go on, and it shall be
one of the two good things; either victory or martyrdom…”

The army believed in what Abdullah bin Rawaha said and became more
determined to fight. The Muslim army marched on until arriving in
Mu’tah. The army of the king of Rome as well marched to Mu’tah, and the
two armies clashed too violently. Zayd bin Haritha, the leader of the
Muslim army, fought too heroically until he was martyred in the middle
of the battlefield. After him, Ja’far bin Abi Talib took the banner,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 279.

killed his horse, and attacked the enemy while reciting enthusiastic
poetry. He fought courageously and steadfastly until his right hand was
cut. Then, he lifted the banner with his left hand and kept on walking
about in the battlefield until his left hand was cut too. He embraced
the banner by his upper arms until he was martyred. He was a unique,
intelligent Muslim leader during the age of the Prophet (a.s.) who often
and always fought the enemies of Islam with high courage and daring.
When martyred he was thirty-three years old. The army, the Prophet
(a.s.), and the Hashimites wept for him too much.

After Ja’far, Abdullah bin Rawahah carried the banner and became the
leader of Muslims. He fought with great courage until he was martyred in
the way of Allah.

The Prophet (a.s.), who was in Medina, was inspired from the heaven
about the martyrdom of his cousin Ja’far bin abi Talib. He went to
Ja’far’s wife Asma’ bint Umays asking her to bring him Ja’far’s two
sons. When she brought them, he began kissing them and weeping. Asma’
was astonished and said to the Prophet (a.s.), “May my father and mother
die for you! What makes you cry? Has anything bad come to you about
Ja’far and his companions?”

The Prophet (a.s.) replied sadly and faintly, “Yes, they have been
killed today.”**[1]**

After the leaders of the Muslim army had been killed, the leadership was
entrusted to Khalid bin al-Waleed who ordered the army to stop fighting
and go back to Medina, and soon the army set out back to Medina. Khalid
was blamed for that because he did not prefer fighting in that
situation.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 4 p. 15-22.  
 **[2]** Ibid.

**13. The expedition of Wadi al-Qura (the valley of villages)**

Wadi al-Qura was inhabited by Jews whom the Prophet (a.s.) invited to
Islam, but they denied and chose to fight. Muslims fought those Jews and
killed eleven men from them most of whom were killed by Imam Ali (a.s.).
Muslims possessed the properties and lands of the Jews and dealt with
them like in Khaybar.**[1]**

14. The conquest of Mecca
-------------------------

The conquest of Mecca caused the greatest victory to Islam and the total
defeat to idolatry and polytheism. After this victory, the enemies of
Islam from among Quraysh and the Jews were so disgraced and lowered that
they were able to do nothing against Islam that prevailed over most of
the Arabia.

The conquest of Mecca was so important in the history of Islam, because
Mecca was the greatest fort of polytheism and atheism and it was the
main source that supplied the enemies of Islam with the means of
resistance. The people of Mecca had undertaken the resistance of the
Prophet (a.s.) and the torturing of his followers since the first moment
of the mission. At the same time, Mecca was the greatest power in the
Arabia for its wealth and economic prosperity which all was used to
fight Islam and Muslims.

However, we shall discuss here in brief some matters that led to the
conquest of Mecca.

### The truce of al-Hudaybiyyah

The Prophet (a.s.) concluded a truce between him and the tribe of
Quraysh. From the articles of that truce was that whoever (from other
tribes) wanted to join the truce of the Prophet (a.s.)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Insan al-Uyoon, vol. 3 68-69.

could do, and whoever wanted to join the truce of Quraysh could do.
Therefore, the tribe of Bakr entered into the truce of Quraysh, and the
tribe of Khuza’ah entered into the truce of the Prophet (a.s.). And
really, the truce was regarded for some time.

Between the tribes of Khuza’ah and Bakr there were bloods and
vengeances. After the battle of Mu’tah, some men from Quraysh thought
that Islam was defeated forever, and so the Banu Bakr thought that it
was the best opportunity to attack the tribe of Khuza’ah. They discussed
that with some men from Quraysh and they encouraged them to do that and
supplied them with arms. While the men of Khuza’ah were at a well of
theirs, the men of Bakr attacked and killed some of them. Some men from
Khuza’ah headed by Amr bin Salim went to Medina and told the Prophet
(a.s.) about what had happened and that the Banu Bakr and Quraysh had
broken the truce. The Prophet (a.s.) promised Amr bin Salim to support
him and his people.

Abu Sufyan felt afraid of the consequences of these happenings, and so
he set out to Medina to meet the Prophet (a.s.) in order to put an end
to the expected sedition. He went to his daughter Umm Habeebah who was
the Prophet’s wife after having been a Muslim. Abu Sufyan wanted to sit
on the Prophet’s rug, but Umm Habeebah (though she was his daughter)
folded the rug so that he would not sit on it. When he asked her why,
she answered him, “This is the rug of the messenger of Allah and you are
an impure polytheist, and I do not like you to sit on it.”

Abu Sufyan went to some of the Prophet’s companions in order to
intercede for him with the Prophet (a.s.) to preserve the truce and keep
it valid, but no one of them responded to him. Then, he went to Imam Ali
(a.s.) begging him to talk with the Prophet about the matter. Imam Ali
(a.s.) told Abu Sufyan leniently that no one could dissuade the
messenger of Allah from a thing that he had already determined. Abu
Sufyan went to Fatima az-

Zahra’, the Prophet’s daughter, (a.s.) asking her for intercession, but
there was no use too. Abu Sufyan returned empty-handed taking with him
disappointed to Mecca.

### The Prophet determines to conquer Mecca

The Prophet (a.s.) saw that the conclusive victory could not be achieved
for Islam except by conquering Mecca whose people fought him when he was
in it and when he left it. He began preparing everything for that great
task, and he was confident and had trusted in the support of Allah to
him to defeat his enemies and opponents.

The Prophet (a.s.) prepared an army of ten thousand well-armed men or
more. The Prophet (a.s.) kept that secret and even his troops did not
know where they would go to fight for fear that the people of Quraysh
might know, and so they would get prepared for the war, and then bloods
would be shed in the Inviolable Town (Mecca) that he hated (the
bloodshed); therefore, he kept that secret.

Hatib bin Abi Balta’ah wrote a letter to Quraysh telling them that the
Prophet (a.s.) had determined to march to conquer their country. He gave
the letter to some woman after insisting on her to keep the matter
totally secret. He promised to give her a camel if she could take this
letter to Quraysh. The woman hid the letter under the hair of her head.
The Revelation came to the Prophet (a.s.) telling him about the matter.
The Prophet (a.s.) asked Imam Ali (a.s.) and az-Zubayr bin al-Awwam to
arrest the woman and take the letter from her. They both followed after
the woman until they found her. When they asked her about the letter,
she denied it. Imam Ali (a.s.) shouted at her saying, “I swear by Allah
that neither the messenger of Allah nor we tell lies. Either you take
out the book to us or we shall search you.”

Feeling afraid, she took out the letter from her hair and gave it to
Imam Ali (a.s.). They went back and handed the letter to the Prophet
(a.s.) who sent for Hatib and asked him, “What made you do that?”

Hatib said, “By Allah O messenger of Allah, I am faithful in Allah and
His messenger and still on my faith with no change, but I am a man who
has no origin or supporters in the tribe (of Quraysh in Mecca) and I
have children and a wife among them, and so I flattered them (in order
not to harm my family).”

The Prophet (a.s.) accepted his excuse and pardoned him. Then, this
verse was revealed concerning him, ***(O you who believe! do not take My
enemy and your enemy for friends; would you offer them love while they
deny what has come to you of the truth…).*[1]**

The Muslim army marched until it reached the outskirts of Mecca whose
people were aware of nothing. The army surrounded the town and got
prepared to occupy it. The Prophet (a.s.) kept all the matter secret
just for peace and to avoid blood-shedding in the inviolable town.

The Prophet (a.s.) ordered his men to collect firewood, and great
quantities were collected. When darkness prevailed, the Prophet (a.s.)
ordered fire to be set to the firewood. The numerous flames of fires
appeared in the horizons of Mecca whose people became too terrified. Abu
Sufyan was very worried and he said to Badeel bin Warqa’ who was with
him, “I have never seen such fire like this of tonight.”

Badeel said to him, “By Allah, it is Khuza’ah that might be milled by
war.”

Abu Sufyan said, “Khuza’ah is meaner and less than to be of such fires
and armies.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 60:1.

Fright occupied Abu Sufyan’s heart and he became certain that it was the
armies of Muslims coming to conquer Mecca.

Al-Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle, knew about the coming of the Muslim army
to occupy Mecca and felt fear for his people. He said, “What a morning
for Quraysh it shall be! by Allah, if the messenger of Allah enters
Mecca by force before its people come to ask him for security, it shall
be the perishment of Quraysh until the last of time.” He tried his best
to find someone to go and tell the people of Mecca to hurry up to the
Prophet (a.s.) asking him for pardoning. While he was thinking of the
matter, he saw Abu Sufyan. He said to him, “O Abu Sufyan, it is the
messenger of Allah with the people (Muslims). How terrible the morning
of Quraysh shall be!”

Abu Sufyan was upset and he said to al-Abbas, “May my father and mother
die for you! What shall we do?”

Al-Abbas said, “By Allah, if the messenger of Allah takes hold of you,
he will behead you. Come on! Ride behind me on this mule so that I take
you to the messenger of Allah to ask him for protection to you.”

Abu Sufyan rode on the mule behind al-Abbas who took him to the Prophet
(a.s.) passing through the troops of Muslims who said when seeing Abu
Sufyan, “Who is this?” But, when Umar bin al-Khattab saw him, he cried
out, “It is Abu Sufyan; the enemy of Allah.” Then, he added, “Praise be
to Allah who has subjugated you with no truce or covenant.”

In the morning, al-Abbas brought Abu Sufyan before the Prophet (a.s.)
who said to him, “What, O Abu Sufyan! Is it not time for you to know
that there is no god but Allah?”

Abu Sufyan said, “May my father and mother die for you! How patient, how
generous, and how kind to kin you are! By Allah, I

think that if there was with Allah anyone other than Him, he would
suffice me.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said to him leniently, “O Abu Sufyan, is it not time
for you to know that I am the messenger of Allah?”

Abu Sufyan said, “May my father and mother die for you! How patient, how
generous, and how kind to kin you are! As for this, there is something
in my soul about it until now.”

Al-Abbas said to him, “Woe unto you, O Abu Sufyan! Be Muslim and bear
witness that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah before you are beheaded.”

This villain found no way except to claim his faith in Islam unwillingly
and for fear of the sword while his heart was still full of disbelief
and hypocrisy.

The Prophet asked his uncle al-Abbas to hold back Abu Sufyan in the
valley until the soldiers of Allah would pass by him so that he would
warn Quraysh of standing against the Muslim army to avoid
blood-shedding.

Troops after troops passed by Abu Sufyan carrying the banners of
definite victory. Whenever a troop passed by him, he asked al-Abbas
which tribe they were and he answered him. There, Abu Sufyan declared
his astonishment and disability to stand against such an army. He said,
“No one has ability or power to stand against these…today the authority
of your nephew has become so great.”

Al-Abbas replied to him, “O Abu Sufyan, it is the prophethood.”

Abu Sufyan said mockingly, “Yes, then!” This ignorant man did not
perceive prophethood, but he just perceived authority and rule.

### The Prophet’s favor to Abu Sufyan

The Prophet (a.s.) was kind to Abu Sufyan though he was his bitterest
enemy and it was he who had led the tribes and armies to fight against
him since the beginning of the mission. He accepted his false faith in
Islam and showed him an example of the mercy of Islam and its great
values and principles.

Al-Abbas asked the Prophet (a.s.) to do a favor to Abu Sufyan because he
loved pride. He said to him, “O messenger of Allah, Abu Sufyan is a man
that loves pride; therefore, give to him something.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Yes, whoever (from the people of Mecca) enters
the house of Abu Sufyan shall be safe, whoever closes his door (remains
inside his house) shall be safe, and whoever enters the mosque (the
Kaaba) shall be safe…”

The Prophet (a.s.) gave a general amnesty to Quraysh and all the people
of Mecca. Such amnesty has never taken place in the history of all wars
at all. The Prophet (a.s.) did all his enemies, who met him with all
kinds of distresses and calamities, favors.

Abu Sufyan went back to Quraysh telling them what the Prophet (a.s.) had
said to him and declaring the Prophet’s great favor to all people of
Mecca who calmed down and stayed inside their houses while some others
resorted to the Kaaba.

Hind, Abu Sufyan’s wife, was so angry. She encouraged the people of
Quraysh to resist the Prophet (a.s.) and to kill her husband Abu Sufyan.
She began enthusing the public to fight against the Prophet (a.s.) and
his army, but Abu Sufyan warned them against the bad results they would
face and asked them no to listen to his wife Hind, and the masses of
people responded to him.

### The Prophet enters Mecca

The Muslim army entered Mecca rejoicing at this great victory that came
to them with no resistance or blood-shedding. The banner of Muslims was
carried by Sa’d bin Ubadah who began crying out, “Today is the day of
triumph. Today inviolable things shall be violated.”

When Umar bin al-Khattab heard him saying that, he went to the Prophet
(a.s.) and told him about what Sa’d said. The Prophet (a.s.) ordered the
banner to be taken from Sa’d and to be given to Imam Ali (a.s.) who
began calling out loudly, “Today is the day of mercy. Today inviolable
things shall be protected…”

All people of Quraysh felt relieved and safe. They became certain of the
mercifulness of the messenger of Allah and that he would not punish them
for what they had committed against him and against his followers.

The Prophet (a.s.) went to the Kaaba to offer greetings to the House of
Allah, but Uthman bin Talha closed the gate before him and went up the
roof of the Kaaba refusing to give him the key. Imam Ali (a.s.) followed
after him, twisted his hand, and took out the key from him to give it to
the Prophet (a.s.) who opened the door of the Kaaba and offered a
two-rak’a prayer inside it.**[1]** Then he gave the key back to Talha
saying to him, “Today is a day of piety and loyalty.”**[2]**

When the Prophet (a.s.) entered the Kaaba, he, before doing everything,
destroyed the idols that the tribes of Quraysh had put inside the Kaaba
to worship them away from Allah. The idols that were hung on the walls
of the Kaaba were about three hundred and sixty ones that every clan of
the Arabs had a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Subh al-A’sha, vol. 4 p. 269.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 4 p. 55.

special idol. At the gate of the Kaaba there was the greatest idol of
Quraysh ‘Hubal’ which was the idol of Abu Sufyan. The Prophet (a.s.)
began stabbing this idol in its eye by his bow while saying, “The truth
has come and falsehood has vanished away. Surely, falsehood is ever
bound to vanish.” Then, he ordered this idol to be destroyed, and this
was the greatest blow that Abu Sufyan and the arrogants of Quraysh
received.

The Prophet (a.s.) got on Imam Ali’s shoulders to destroy the idols, but
Imam Ali (a.s.) could not get up. The Prophet (a.s.) said to him, “You
cannot bear the heaviness of prophethood. Then, you get up.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) got on the Prophet’s shoulders while saying, “If I like,
I shall get to the horizon of the heaven.” Then he began plucking out
the idols and throwing them to the ground one after the other except one
idol of the tribe of Khuza’ah which was tied with iron rods. The Prophet
(a.s.) asked him to deal with it, and he began dealing with it while
saying, “The truth has come and falsehood hash vanished away. Surely
falsehood is ever bound to vanish”. Then, he could pluck it out and
throw it to the ground and it was broken into pieces.**[1]** Thus, the
House of Allah was purified from the idols of Quraysh at the hands of
the Prophet and his brother Imam Ali (peace be on them) as idols had
been destroyed before at the hand of Prophet Abraham (a.s.).

The destruction of the idols was the most painful blow to the people of
Quraysh who had devoted themselves totally to them and offered precious
sacrifices to them, besides that it was one of the important victories
that Islam got at that period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Insan al-Uyoon, vol. 3 p. 99-100.

### The Prophet’s sermon

Masses of the people of Quraysh surrounded the Prophet (a.s.) waiting
impatiently for what they would receive from him; would he avenge
himself and punish them severely for what they had done to him and to
his followers at the beginning of the mission and later on, or he would
pardon and treat them kindly?

The Prophet (a.s.) mounted the stage and addressed the attendants of
Quraysh, who were all ears, saying,

“There is no god but Allah alone with no associate to Him. He has
fulfilled His promise, supported His servant, and defeated the parties
alone. Every exploit, (shed) blood, or property that are claimed are
under my two feet except the custodianship of the House (the Kaaba) and
the offering of water to the hajjis.”

He added, “O people of Quraysh, Allah has taken away from you the
arrogance of the pre-Islamic era (of ignorance) and the priding on
fathers. People are from Adam and Adam is from earth. ***(O mankind! We
have created you male and female, and have made you nations and tribes
that you may know one another. Surely, the noblest of you, near Allah,
is the best in conduct).*[1]** O people of Quraysh, what do you think I
shall do to you?”

The all cried out, “You shall do good! (you are) a noble brother and the
son of a noble brother…”

Then the Prophet (a.s.) announced the general amnesty saying, “Go! You
are the freed…”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 49:13.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 4 p. 54-55, Tareekh
at-Tabari, vol. 2 p. 327.

It was the mercifulness of prophethood! The Prophet (a.s.) did not
avenge himself on those sinful people who caused to him and to his
followers all kinds of harms and troubles. He did not kill, punish, or
hurt anyone of them, nor did he confiscate a bit of their properties. It
was the high morals of the messenger of Allah (a.s.) that did not submit
to fancy or desire.

Then Bilal, the Prophet’s caller, got upon the Kaaba and recited the
Azan loudly. The arrogants of Quraysh were terrified when they heard
this azan that it was like a thunderbolt over their heads. Etab bin
Usayd said, “Allah has honored Usayd (Etab’s father who was dead) by not
hearing this (azan) that he might hear in it what enraged him.”
Al-Harith bin Hisham said, “By Allah, if I knew that he was true, I
would follow him (the Prophet).” Abu Sufyan said, “I say nothing. If I
speak, I shall inform about stones.’

The Prophet (a.s.) came out and said to them, “I have known what you
said.” Then, he mentioned to them what they said, and they became
astonished. Al-Harith and Etab said to the Prophet (a.s.), “We bear
witness that you are the messenger of Allah. By Allah, there was no one
with us that we might say he told you about it!”**[1]**

Then, some notables from Quraysh announced their faith in Islam.
Fudhalah bin Umayr was circumambulating the Kaaba while thinking with
himself of killing the Prophet (a.s.). The Prophet (a.s.) came near and
said to him, “Is this Fudhalah?”

Fudhalah replied, “Yes, O messenger of Allah.”

The Prophet (a.s.) asked him, “What were you thinking of with yourself?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 3 p. 101, as-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by
ibn Hisham, vol. 4 p. 56.

He said, “I was mentioning Allah.”

The Prophet (a.s.) smiled and said to him, “Ask Allah to forgive you
what you have intended to do.”

The Prophet (a.s.) put his hand on Fudhala’s chest and then took it
back. Fudhalah said, “By Allah, as he took back his hand from my chest,
he became the most beloved one of the creatures of Allah to me.”**[1]**

Safwan bin Umayyah, who was the chief of his people, wanted to run away
from the Prophet (a.s.) to Yemen because he had done wrong to the
Prophet (a.s.) before, but the Prophet (a.s.) pardoned him, and then he
turned a Muslim.**[2]** 

Ibn az-Zeba’ra, the famous poet, composed a poem in which he announced
his faith in Islam after seeking the Prophet’s pardon for the wrong he
had done to him (the Prophet).**[3]**

Ikrimah bin Abi Jahl fled to Yemen for fear of the vengeance of Muslims,
for he had harmed them too much. Umm Hakeem, Ikrima’s wife, became a
Muslim and she asked the Prophet (a.s.) to pardon her husband, and the
Prophet (a.s.) pardoned him. She traveled to Yemen and brought him, and
he announced his faith in Islam.**[4]**

Mirdas had a special idol of stone called Dhamar. He worshipped it and
he recommended his son Abbas to worship it too saying to him, “O my son
Abbas, worship Dhamar, because he (it) benefits and harms you.” But,
Abbas heard a caller crying out and scolding this idol and its followers
and praising the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 4 p. 59-60.  
 **[2]** Ibid., 4 p. 60.  
 **[3]** Ibid., 4 p. 61,62.  
 **[4]** Ibid., p. 61,62.

Prophet (a.s.) and the people of mosques. He burned the idol and joined
the Prophet (a.s.).**[1]**

### Men and women’s homage to the Prophet

The Prophet (a.s.) took the homage from men in Mecca that they would
bear witness that there was no god but Allah and that Muhammad was the
messenger of Allah. As homage was taken from men, it was taken from the
young in order to purify their minds and souls from atheism and
polytheism.

The Prophet (a.s.) also took the homage from women that they would
observe the following conditions as the Prophet (a.s.) said to them:

“They (women) have paid homage to me that they would not associate
anything with Allah, not steal, not commit adultery, not kill their
children, not commit any vice between their hands and legs, and not
disobey me.” Then, he accepted their homage.**[2]**

Historians say that the Prophet (a.s.) stayed in Mecca for ten, fifteen,
or eighteen days, and then he (with his army) went back to his capital
Medina where he found security after hardships and sufferings.

The people of Medina were afraid that the Prophet (a.s.) might remain in
Mecca and take it a capital in place of Medina, but he refuted that
worry and said to them, “Allah forbid! Life is with you and death is
with you.”**[3]** On the other hand, the people of Mecca asked him to
stay in their town, but he refused saying, “I do not live in a place
that I was driven away from.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** I As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 69.  
 **[2]** Ibid, vol. 3 p. 662.  
 **[3]** Ibid, vol. 4 p. 59.

The Prophet (a.s.) appointed an instructor in Mecca to teach its people
the rulings and teachings of Islam, lead them in prayer, solve their
problems, and judge between them according to the Book and the Sunna.
When Mecca was conquered, people embraced Islam groups by groups.

**15. The expedition of Hunayn**

The tribe of Hawazin was terribly terrified when the Prophet (a.s.)
conquered Mecca and made the tribes of Quraysh submit to the authority
of Islam and then masses of people turned Muslims. Malik bin Ouf, the
obeyed chief of Hawazin, invited his tribe and asked some other tribes,
at the head of which was the tribe of Thaqif, for support to fight the
Prophet (a.s.) and his followers. He expressed to them that their tribes
(polytheists and idolaters) would face great dangers if Islam would
prevail. He said to them that Muhammad would march with his armies to
occupy their countries. Therefore, all of them responded to him and a
great force was prepared from them.

When the news of Hawazin came to the Prophet (a.s.), he sent to them
Abdullah al-Aslami and ordered him to see what they had decided to do.
When he went there, he knew that they had determined to wage war. He
hastened back to tell the Prophet (a.s.) who marched with an army of
twelve thousand warriors among whom there were men that Islam had not
affected their hearts yet like Abu Sufyan and the like of him from
Quraysh who just wished for loots. The Muslim army marched until it
arrived in the valley of Hunayn.

The two armies clashed and it was a terrible fight that the Muslims had
not taken into account. The military plan that the tribe of Hawazin had
prepared was very exact. The warriors of Hawazin were distributed in all
the pockets of the valley, and when the Muslims entered the valley, they
(men of Hawazin) attacked them from every side while they were unaware.
They

were terrified and they ran away here and there. The Prophet (a.s.)
began calling them to be patient and fixed. He cried out, “O people,
come to me! I am the messenger of Allah, I am Muhammad the son of
Abdullah.” The Prophet (a.s.) remained in the battlefield shouting at
the runners away, “Whereto O people, whereto?”

It was rumored among Muslims that the Prophet (a.s.) was martyred, but
there was a caller calling out, “O people of the Ansar who have
protected and supported (the Prophet), O people of the Muhajireen who
have paid homage (to the Prophet) under the tree, Muhammad is alive, so
come on!” Then the runners away returned to surround the Prophet (a.s.)
and protect him from the enemies. It was a very bitter defeat Muslims
faced.

The hypocrites (among Muslims) rejoiced at this defeat of Muslims. Abu
Sufyan was very delighted and he said, “Their defeat does not end until
the sea.”

Shaybah bin Uthman bin Abi Talha, whose father had been killed by
Muslims in the battle of Badr, was very delighted at the defeat of
Muslims. He said, “Today, I get to my vengeance on Muhammad.”

Keldah bin al-Hanbal showed his great delight at the Muslims’ defeat and
said, “The magic has been annulled today.”**[1]** 

**The defeat of the polytheists**

When the hearts of Muslims rose up to the throats and they were shaken
severely and prevailed by fear and terror, Allah the Almighty supported
his servant and messenger and granted him with victory. Seventy men from
the heroes of the polytheists were killed and the rest of them ran way.
The Muslim warriors  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Life of Muhammad, by Hasanayn Haykal, p. 434.

followed after them and kept on killing and arresting them. And thus
Allah the Almighty returned their scheme and guile against themselves.

In this fight, Imam Ali (a.s.) showed incomparable courage. Historians
mentioned unanimously that he was the most courageous and most fixed in
defending the Prophet (a.s.). He with some Muslims fought with great
courage around the Prophet (a.s.) who was repeating his saying, “I am
the Prophet with no doubt. I am the son of Abdul Muttalib. Now the
battle has become fierce.” The most important role in the achievement of
the victory in this battle, which was one of the fiercest battles, was
Imam Ali’s.**[1]**

The Holy Qur'an described the battle of Hunayn, the defeat and the fear
that Muslims suffered, and then the victory obtained against the
polytheists at the end. Allah has said,

***(Certainly Allah helped you in many battlefields and on the day of
Hunain, when your great numbers made you vain, but they availed you
nothing and the earth became strait to you notwithstanding its
spaciousness, then you turned back retreating. Then Allah sent down His
tranquility upon His Messenger and upon the believers, and sent down
hosts which you did not see, and chastised those who disbelieved, and
that is the reward of the unbelievers. Then after this, Allah will turn
(mercifully) to whom He pleases, and Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful).*[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 59.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 9:25-27.

In this battle, Muslims got, as loots, twenty-two thousand camels, forty
thousand sheep, and four thousand okes of silver besides six thousand
prisoners of war.**[1]**         

Delegations from the tribe of Hawazin came to the Prophet (a.s.) begging
him to give back to them what he had got in the battle. He asked them to
choose either their women and children or their properties, and they
chose their women and children. The Prophet (a.s.) had pity on them and
so he gave to them his share of the loot and the shares of the children
of Abdul Muttalib. So did the Ansar, the Muhajireen, and the Banu
Sulaym, whereas other tribes did not do.

Then, the Prophet (a.s.) divided the camels and the sheep among the
soldiers who crowded around him and snatched his garment. He said to
them, “O people, give my garment back to me. By Allah, if I had camels
and sheep as much as the trees of Tihama, I would divide them among you,
and you would not find me stingy or coward.”

The Prophet (a.s.) did not give to the Ansar anything from these loots.
They became angry and distressed. The Prophet (a.s.) ordered Sa’d bin
Ubadah to gather the Ansar together. When they were before him, he said
to them, “What about the talks that were informed to me? Had I not come
to you while you were deviants, and Allah guided you by me, poor and
Allah enriched you by me, and enemies to each other and He reconciled
you?”

They said, “Yes by Allah, O messenger of Allah. The favor is to Allah
and to His messenger.”

He said, “Do you respond to me?”

They said, “With what?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Life of Muhammad, p. 436.

He said, “By Allah, if you like, you can say and be truthful: you had
come to us while (you were) denied but we believed you, let down but we
supported you, exiled but we sheltered you, and poor but we helped you.
O people of the Ansar, have you become angry for a transient pleasure of
this life which some people were given to be attracted to Islam, whereas
I have entrusted you to your faith in Islam? Are you not satisfied that
people shall go with camels and sheep while you shall go back to your
country with the messenger of Allah? By Him in Whose hand my soul is,
were it not for the emigration, I would be a man from the Ansar. If
people follow a way (and the Ansar follow another), I will follow the
way of the Ansar…O Allah, have mercy on the Ansar, the children of the
Ansar, and the children of the children of the Ansar.”

They all cried out while shedding tears, “We are satisfied with the
messenger of Allah as a share and luck.”**[1]** The Ansar went back to
their homeland while their souls were full of faith and satisfaction
after those kind words of the Prophet (a.s.).

The Prophet (a.s.) asked about Malik bin Ouf, the obeyed leader of the
tribes of Hawazin, who had run away after the battle of Hawazin. It was
said to him that Malik was in at-Ta’if with the tribe of Thaqif. He said
to his companions, “Tell him that if he becomes a Muslim, I will give
him back his family and properties, and give him one hundred camels.”
When Malik was informed of that, he slipped away from Thaqif, while they
were unaware, and came to the Prophet (a.s.) and announced his faith in
Islam. The Prophet (a.s.) delivered to him his family and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 4 p. 143, al-Kamil
fit-Tareekh, vol. 2 p. 268-272.

children and one hundred camels, and made him the chief over the Muslims
of his tribe.**[1]**

**16. The expedition of at-Ta’if**

Since the beginning, the Muslims armies were full of faith and love to
the martyrdom in the way of Allah. The Prophet (a.s.) determined to
attack al-Ta’if which was a fortified town and was difficult to be
approached or conquered, because its people shot with arrows from above
the forts whoever came nearer. Therefore, the Muslims were forced to
stay away. They stayed in the mosque that was built in at-Ta’if, and
from there, they imposed a blockade against the forts. The blockade
lasted seventeen days. The Muslims began throwing at the forts with
mangonels. However, they could not break into the forts. The Prophet
(a.s.) announced that he would pardon whoever would come to him from the
people of at-Ta’if. Twenty men joined him, and he understood from them
that there were enough supplies inside the forts which might suffice
them for a long period. The Prophet (a.s.) was certain that the blockade
might last long and he felt that the army wished to go back to Median;
therefore, he and his army went back to Medina.

**17. The expedition of Tabuk**

There were no people in the Arabia except that they became certain that
the Muslim government was powerful and could not be defeated. They had
but two options; either to resist the Islamic power or to embrace Islam
and submit to its religious and economic system.

While the Arabs were worried about the events that they would face from
Islam and Muslims, the news came that the Romans had prepared an army to
attack the Muslims and subjugate the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 3 p. 683.

countries that were under the authority of Islam. Hearing this news, the
Prophet (a.s.) prepared a powerful army to attack the Romans and defeat
them.

The hypocrites did not join this army and they justified that it was
very hot. A Qur’anic verse was revealed concerning them reciting,
***(Those who were left behind rejoiced at sitting still behind the
messenger of Allah, and were averse to striving with their wealth and
their lives in Allah's way. And they said: Do not go forth in the heat.
Say: The fire of hell is much severe in heat. Would that they
understand. Therefore, they shall laugh little and weep much as a
recompense for what they earned).*[1]**

The Prophet (a.s.) was informed that the hypocrites met in the house of
Suwaylim the Jew. They discouraged people and incited them not to join
the Muslim army. The Prophet (a.s.) sent them Talha bin Ubaydillah with
some companions. Suwaylim’s house was set to fire and those in it ran
away. Some hypocrites said to each other, “Do you think that the
fighting against the Romans is like the fighting of the Arabs against
each other? By Allah, as if we see you tomorrow tied with ropes.” They
did that to discourage the believers.

From behind the unseen, the Prophet (a.s.) understood what those
hypocrites said. He sent to them Ammar bin Yasir and ordered him to tell
them what they had said. When Ammar went to them, they came to the
Prophet (a.s.) apologizing and justifying that they just played. Then,
this verse was revealed to the Prophet (a.s.), ***(And if you ask them,
they will say: We did but talk and jest).*[2]**

Imam Ali (a.s.) was with the Prophet (a.s.) in all his battles except
the battle of Tabuk. The Prophet (a.s.) ordered him to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 9:81-82.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 9:65.

remain in Medina in place of him. The hypocrites rumored that the
Prophet (a.s.) did not bring Imam Ali (a.s.) with him because he hated
him. Hearing this rumor, Imam Ali (a.s.) inquired about it from the
Prophet (a.s.) who said, “They told but lies. I just made you my
successor there. Go back to be the guardian of my family and your
family. O Ali, are you not satisfied to be to me as was Aaron to Moses,
except that there shall be no prophet after me?”**[1]**

When the Prophet (a.s.) and his army arrived in Tabuk, Yohanna bin
Ru’bah, who was from the great notables of Tabuk, came to the Prophet
(a.s.) and made a truce with him and he agreed to pay the attribute to
Muslims. Then, the people of other tribes came to the Prophet (a.s.),
made peace with him, and agreed to pay the attribute. The Prophet (a.s.)
wrote a book reading,

“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is a covenant
of security from Allah and Muhammad the Prophet and messenger of Allah
to Yohanna bin Ru’bah and the people of Aylah and their ships and
caravans in the sea and on the land. They have the protection of Allah
the High and the protection of Muhammad the Prophet, so do those with
them from the people of Sham, Yemen, and the people of the sea. Whoever
of them commits a crime his property shall not protect his soul, and it
is lawful for anyone of people who takes it. It is not permissible to
prevent them from a source of water they may come to, or a way on the
land and in the sea they want to follow.”**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh ibn al-Atheer, vol. 2 p. 190, as-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by
ibn Hisham, vol. 4 p. 163.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 4 p. 169.

No fighting or shedding of blood took place. Then, the Prophet (a.s.)
and his army went back to Medina after remaining in Tabuk about two
weeks.

Three men from the famous companions of the Prophet (a.s.) did not join
this army and they remained at home with no reason that might prevent
them from that. They were Ka’b  bin Malik, Murarah bin ar-Rabee’, and
Hilal bin Umayyah. The Prophet (a.s.) ordered Muslims no to communicate
with these three men. Muslims refrained from meeting and talking with
them until the earth was so narrow to them in spite of its vastness.
They remained inside their houses living in total loneliness. They were
very distressed and regretful looking forward to the forgiveness of
Allah and their repentance to be accepted by Him. They remained so for
about forty days until the Prophet (a.s.) was inspired that Allah had
accepted their repentance and pardoned them. Allah revealed to the
Prophet (a.s.) these verses concerning them, ***(Certainly Allah has
turned (mercifully) to the Prophet and to the Muhajireen and the Ansar
who followed him in the hour of hardship after the hearts of a part of
them were about to deviate, then He turned to them (mercifully); surely
to them He is Compassionate, Merciful. And (He also turned mercifully)
to the three who were left behind, until the earth became strait to them
notwithstanding its spaciousness and their souls were also straitened to
them; and they knew it for certain that there was no refuge from Allah
but towards Him; then He turned to them (mercifully) that they might
turn (to Him); surely Allah is the Oft-returning (to mercy), the
Merciful).*[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 9:117-118.

### Imam Ali and the Sura of Bara’ah

The Prophet (a.s.) entrusted Abu Bakr to recite to the people of Mecca
some verses from the Sura of Bara’ah and the teachings of Islam
concerning the pilgrimage to the Kaaba. The following are some of these
teachings:

1. No one naked should circumambulate the Kaaba (for the habit in the
pre-Islamic era was that men circumambulated the Kaaba nakedly).

2. No one would enter the Paradise except one who believes in Allah and
His messenger.

3. Whoever has a covenant with the Prophet his covenant shall be valid
until its term.**[1]**

4. Allah the Almighty and his messenger are free from the
polytheists.**[2]**

Abu Bakr set out carrying with him the message of the messenger of Allah
to the people of Mecca. While Abu Bakr was on his way, the Revelation
came down to the Prophet (a.s.) ordering him to entrust this task to
Imam Ali (a.s.) and to depose Abu Bakr. Imam Ali (a.s.) hurried up
following after Abu Bakr and he could find him in the way. He took the
message from him**[3]** and went to recite it before the people of
Mecca. Abu Bakr was upset and worried. He went back to Medina. When he
saw the Prophet (a.s.), he wept and said to him, “O messenger of Allah,
has something happened concerning me?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tanbeeh wel Ishraf, p. 186.  
 **[2]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 47.  
 **[3]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 1 p. 3, Khasa’is an-Nassa’iy,
30, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 4 p. 246, Tafsir at-Tabari, vol. 10 p. 46,
Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 3 p. 51, Sahih of at-Termithi, vol. 2 p. 183,
Tathkirat al-Khawass, p. 37.

The Prophet (a.s.) said to him, “Nothing has happened concerning you
except good, but I have been ordered (by Allah) that no one should
deliver it except me or a man from me.”**[1]**

This event is one of the evidences that the Shia rely on in defending
Imam Ali’s right in the caliphate after the Prophet (a.s.). They say
that Abu Bakr was not well-qualified to deliver a Sura from the Qur'an
to the people of Mecca, which was a simple task, so how would he be
well-qualified to be the successor of the Prophet (a.s.) after his
death?

Imam Ali and the conquest of Yemen
----------------------------------

The Prophet (a.s.) sent an army under the leadership of Imam Ali (a.s.)
to Yemen inviting its people either to Islam or to fighting. When Imam
Ali (a.s.) arrived with his army in Yemen, he met the chiefs and the
notables there and offered to them the invitation of the Prophet (a.s.)
and explained to them the principles and teachings of Islam.

The people of Yemen highly admired the perfect personality of Imam Ali
(a.s.) with his high morals and virtues. Therefore, they responded to
him. The tribe of Hamadan, which was the biggest and most powerful tribe
in Yemen, embraced Islam and became very devoted to its values. Thus,
Yemen was conquered with no fighting**[2]** and it remained as a base of
adherence to Imam Ali (a.s.).

### The battles and the expeditions of the Prophet

The expeditions that the Prophet himself led were twenty-nine ones. Here
are they:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Amali al-Murtadha, vol. 1 p. 292, as-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn
Hisham, vol. 4 p. 190.  
 **[2]** Amali al-Murtadha, vol. 1 p. 292.

1.Waddan 2. Al-Abwa’ 3. Buwat 4. Al-Asheerah 5. The first expedition of
Badr 6. The great battle of Badr (where the heroes of Quraysh were
killed) 7. Banu Sulaym 8. As-Saweeq 9. Ghatafan 10. Thi Amr 11. Bahran
12. The battle of Uhud 13. Hamra’ al-Asad 14. Banu an-Nadheer 15. That
ar-Riqa’ 16. The last expedition of Badr 17. Dawmat al-Jandal 18.
Al-Khandaq 19. Banu Quraydhah 20. Banu Lihyan 21. Thi Qarad 22. Banu
al-Mustaliq 23. Al-Hudaybiyah 24. Khaybar 25. Umrat (minor hajj)
al-Qadha’ 26. Al-Fath (the conquest of Mecca) 27. Hunayn 28. At-Ta’if
29. Tabuk.

These are all the expeditions that have been mentioned by Ibn
Hisham**[1]** most of which we have discussed in the previous chapters.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 4 p. 256.
