The Immortal Disaster
=====================

After appointing Imam Ali (a.s.) in Ghadeer Khum as the caliph over the
nation after him, the Prophet (a.s.) set out back to Medina. But, a day
after another, his health got worse and illnesses began attacking him.
He suffered a bad fever for many days that whoever of his wives or
visitors put her\\his hand on his (the Prophet) body, felt its
heat.**[1]** A vessel of cold water was put beside him in which he put
his hand and put it on his holy face in order to lessen the heat of the
fever. Some sources of history mention that the Prophet’s illness was
because of a poisonous food offered to him by a Jewish woman. He often
said, “I am still feeling the pain of the food that I had eaten in
Khaybar. This is the time that I found my aorta is cut because of that
poison.”**[2]**

When the news of the Prophet’s illness spread among Muslims, they
hurried to visit him while being so distressed and sad. What made them
more distressed was that the Prophet (a.s.) himself confirmed to them
his soon death saying, “O people, I am about to be made die soon and
taken away. I speak to you to be excused before you; I leave among you
the Book of Allah and my progeny, my family.” Then, he took the hand of
Imam Ali, who was sitting beside him, and said, “This is Ali; he is with
the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali. They shall not separate until
they shall come to me at the pond (in the Paradise).”**[3]**

In this recommendation, the Prophet (a.s.) invited Muslims to keep to
the Holy Qur'an and to his progeny in order not to go astray or fall
into seditions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh, vol. 5 p. 226.  
 **[2]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 62.  
 **[3]** As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, vol. 2 p. 361.

The army of Usamah
------------------

The Prophet (a.s.) saw factionalism among his companions and he became
certain that they would fulfill their plans to take the caliphate away
from his family, who were the center of knowledge and wisdom, and
especially from his guardian and successor Imam Ali (a.s.). Hence, he
thought to rescue the situation by sending all his companions in an army
to fight the Romans so that his capital would be empty of them and thus
Imam Ali (a.s.) would assume the caliphate after his (the Prophet) death
easily and with no obstacles.

The Prophet (a.s.) ordered all the notables of the Muhajireen and the
Ansar to join the army of Usama whom he had appointed as the leader
though he was a very young man. Among those men there were Abu Bakr,
Umar, Abu Ubaydah bin al-Jarrah, and Basheer bin Sa’d, and all of them
were from the oppositionist party.**[1]** The Prophet (a.s.) said to
Usama, the leader of the army, “March to the place where your father was
killed and make the horsemen defeat them (the Romans). I have entrusted
you with the leadership of this army. In the morning, attack the people
of Ubna (in Syria) and meet them with fire. Hurry up to precede the
news. If Allah grants you victory over them, do not remain there too
long. Take guides with you, and make spies and pioneers in the front.”

On the twenty-ninth of Safar, the army mutinied and no one of the
notable companions joined his battalion. The Prophet (a.s.) was very
angry at that. He went out of his house in spite of his illness. He
encouraged his companions to join the army. He himself gave the banner
to Usama and said to him, “March by

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 85, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 5 p.312, Tabaqat ibn Sa’d, vol. 4 p. 46,
Tareekh al-Khamees, vol. 2 p. 46.

the name of Allah and for the sake of Allah. Fight those who disbelieve
in Allah.”

Usama marched with his army and camped in al-Jurf.**[1]** The famous
companions slackened in joining the camp. They criticized and disparaged
the leader, young Usama. Umar said to him, “The messenger of Allah dies
while you are an emir over me?!”

This saying was conveyed to the Prophet (a.s.) while he was badly ill
suffering bad fever and headache. He became very angry and distressed.
He went out of his house wrapped with a velvet garment and his head was
folded. He ascended the minbar and showed the people his anger about not
carrying out his orders. He said,

“O people, what for is the saying of someone of you that criticizes my
appointing Usama as the emir? You have criticized my appointing his
father as emir before. By Allah, he was worthy of the emirate and his
son after him is worthy of it…”**[2]**

He descended the minbar and went into his house. Then, he recommended
people to join the army of Usama by saying, “Prepare the army of Usama!”

“Let the army of Usama march!’

“May Allah curse whoever does not join the army of Usama!”

These firm orders and insistence of the Prophet (a.s.) at his last hours
of life did not move the people’s determination. They slackened in
joining the army and justified their doing with different excuses,
though the Prophet (a.s.) did not accept their excuses. Rather, he
showed them his anger and discontent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Three miles from Medina towards Sham.  
 **[2]** As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 3 p. 342.

As for the purpose of the Prophet (a.s.) behind his appointing of Usama
as the leader of the army though he was too young was as the following:

**First,** the Prophet (a.s.) wanted to refute all the points of
disagreement and criticism against the appointing of Imam Ali (a.s.) as
the caliph that he was young, for Usama was younger than him.

**Second,** to ignore old age and not paying attention to it in
entrusting the high positions in the state if an old man had no
sufficient abilities and talents, for the managements of the nation’s
affairs must be entrusted to well-qualified people.

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “He, who precedes some men of Muslims while
seeing that there are ones among them better than him, betrays Allah,
His messenger, and the Muslims.”**[1]**

Islam is totally careful in appointing the best of people in the posts
of the state to sincerely regard the public interests and be loyal in
serving the people, in collecting taxes, and in spending the general
wealth, and be just in judging among people. All this has nothing to do
with old age.

**Third,** appointing young Usama as the leader of that army refuted all
Imam Ali’s opponents who disliked him to be the caliph justifying their
intention that Imam Ali (a.s.) was a young man then.

### The calamity of Thursday

The political tendencies and opportunistic trends which the famous
companions adopted to turn the caliphate away from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
appeared clearly before the Prophet (a.s.). Therefore, he saw, in the
last hours of his life, that he should  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sunan of al-Bayhaqi, vol. 10 p. 111.

save his nation from deviation and assure to it happiness and
prosperity. He wanted to confirm the homage of Ghadeer Khum paid to Imam
Ali (a.s.) by registering it in a document. He asked his companions,
“Bring me a piece of paper and an inkpot to write you a book by which
you shall not go astray at all…”

It was the greatest blessing that the Prophet (a.s.) wanted to write a
book for the nation by which it would not go astray forever. It was a
very precious opportunity, but, unfortunately, those companions lost it
easily. And unfortunately, some of the Prophet’s companions understood
that the Prophet (a.s.) had intended to write down in that book the
decree of the caliphate to Imam Ali (a.s.) and that would make their
greed go in vain; therefore, one of them said, “The Book of Allah is
enough to us…”**[1]**

Undoubtedly, if this sayer knew that the Prophet (a.s.) wanted to
recommend of anything else in that book, he would not reply so
impudently, but he understood well that the Prophet (a.s.) wanted to
announce the caliph after him.

Anyhow, disputes and disagreements increased among the attendants that
some of them wanted to carry out the Prophet’s wish and some others
insisted on objection. The women from behind the curtain denied that
impudent situation towards the Prophet (a.s.), who was living his last
moments, and they cried out addressing the Prophet’s companions, “Do you
not hear what the messenger of Allah is saying? Do you not carry out
what the messenger of Allah wants?”

Umar, who was the head of the oppositionists then, harshly replied to
the women, “You are the friends of Yousuf (Prophet  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It was Umar bin al-Khattab as most historians have mentioned in
their books.

Josef). If he became ill, you would press your eyes (to shed tears), and
if he recovered, you would ride on his neck.”

The Prophet (a.s.) looked at him angrily and said, “Let them alone! They
are better than you.”

A terrible dispute broke out between the men. The party that wanted to
carry out the Prophet’s order was about to win, but someone (Umar) shot
a bad arrow against the Prophet’s order by saying harshly and
impudently, “The Prophet is raving!”**[1]**

How daring he was towards the Prophet (a.s.) and how impudent he was
before the messenger of Allah!

These events must be studied thoughtfully and exactly because they
concern the essence of our Islamic life. They have a clear criticism
against the messenger of Allah, who was accused of raving whereas Allah
has said about him, ***(Your companion does not err, nor does he go
astray, nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation
that is revealed. The Lord of Mighty Power has taught him),*[2]** and
***(Most surely it is the Word of an honored messenger, the processor of
strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of the
Dominion).*[3]**

Yes, by Allah! This sayer had heard these verses that Allah had revealed
about His holy prophet, but the political tendencies and the greed to
authority led him to face the messenger of Allah with these severe words
that hurt and threw Muslims into  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** All historians and narrators have mentioned this painful event.
Al-Bukhari mentioned it many times in his Sahih vol. 4 p. 68-69, vol. 6
p. 8, but he concealed the sayer’s name. In Nihaya of Ibn al-Atheer and
Sharh Nahjol Balagha by ibn Abil Hadeed, vol. 3 p. 194, the name of the
sayer was mentioned and it was Umar bin al-Khattab.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 53:2-5.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 81:19-20.

seditions, disasters, and great evils. When Ibn Abbas remembered this
painful event, he wept and his tears covered his cheeks. He often said,
“Thursday, and what Thursday is! The messenger of Allah (a.s.) said,
‘Bring me a piece of paper and an inkpot to write you a book by which
you shall not go astray after me at all’ and they said, ‘The messenger
of Allah is raving.’”**[1]**

Ibn Abbas wept because he knew well that the Prophet (a.s.) wanted to
write down the decree of Imam Ali’s caliphate after him. But alas! The
companions accused the messenger of Allah of raving which was a clear
criticism against his personality that had been chosen by the Lord of
the worlds, and that caused him to refrain from writing down that book
in order to preserve the sacredness of prophethood.

### Fatima’s distress

Sorrow and distress filled Fatima’s heart and pain hurt her too much
when she became certain that her father was going to leave her for the
other world. She sat beside and stared at him. She heard him saying,
“Ah, my anguish!”

She, shedding tears, said, “Ah, my anguish for your anguish father!”

The loving father said kindly to his darling daughter, “There is no
anguish for your father after this day!”**[2]**

She was very affected by these words because she became completely
certain that her father would leave her. When the Prophet (a.s.) saw her
very sad and distressed, he wanted to delight her. He asked her to come
closer to him. He whispered to her something and her eyes were filled
with tears, and then  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 1 p. 355, and others.  
 **[2]** The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol. 1 p. 128 quoted from
Kanzol Ummal, vol. 7 p. 110, Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 4 p. 4.

he whispered to her another thing and she began smiling. Aa’isha (the
Prophet’s wife) was astonished at seeing that and she said, “I have not
seen delight that is nearer to sadness like this of today.”

Aa’isha asked Fatima (a.s.) about what her father whispered to her but
she did not answer her. When days passed, Fatima (a.s.) told Aa’isha
saying, “He said to me: ‘Gabriel reviewed the (whole) Qur’an to me once
a year, but this year, he reviewed it to me twice. I do not think except
that my death has come.’”

This was the cause of her pain and weeping. As for the cause of her
delight, she said, “He said to me: ‘You are the first one of my family
that shall join me (die). I am the best ancestor to you. Are you not
pleased to be the principal of the women of this nation?’”**[1]** 

The Prophet (a.s.) comforted Fatima (a.s.) saying, “O my daughter, do
not weep! When I die, you say: ‘we are Allah’s and to Him we shall
return’. It has recompense for any dead one.”

She said, “And for you O messenger of Allah?!”

He said, “Yes, and for me.”**[2]**

When the Prophet (a.s.) began suffering more pain, Fatima (a.s.) began
weeping and she said to him, “By Allah, you are like what some sayer has
said:

“A white one by whose face it is prayed that clouds may rain;

the resort of orphans, the guard of widows.”’

The Prophet (a.s.) said to her, “It is the saying of your uncle Abu
Talib.” Then he recited this Qur’anic verse: (***And Muhammad is but a
messenger; the messengers have already passed away  ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ansab al-Ashraf, part one, vol. 1 p. 133.  
 **[2]** Ibid.

***before him. If then he dies or is killed, will you turn back upon
your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no means
do harm to Allah in the least and Allah will reward the grateful).[1]***

### The Prophet recommends of his family

Anas bin Malik narrated, “Fatima, with al-Hasan and al-Husayn, came to
the Prophet (a.s.) in his last illness. She embraced him and stuck her
chest to his while weeping bitterly. The Prophet (a.s.) ordered her not
to weep out of pitying her. He said while tears were falling down over
his cheeks, ‘O Allah, these are my family. I have entrusted them to
every believer…’ He repeated that three times.**[2]** He said that
because he understood from behind the unseen that his family would face
all kinds of calamities.

### The Prophet’s recommendation about his two grandsons

Three days before his departure to the better world, the Prophet (a.s.)
recommended Imam Ali (a.s.) to care much for his two grandsons saying to
him, “O father of the two darlings, I recommend you of my two darling
grandsons in all this life. How soon your two supports will be
undermined! May Allah be my guardian to you…”

When the Prophet (a.s.) died, Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “This is one of my
two supports that the messenger of Allah talked about”, and when Fatima
(a.s.) died, he said, “This is the second support that the messenger of
Allah told me about.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 3:144.  
 **[2]** Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 1 p. 133.  
 **[3]** Amali of Sheikh as-Saduq, p. 119.

### To the High Paradise

It was time for the Prophet (a.s.) to leave this world and join the
highest Paradise. The Angel of Death came down to him asking permission.
Fatima (a.s.) said to the angel, “He (the Prophet) is busy with
himself.” The Angel of Death left and came back later asking permission.
The Prophet (a.s.) woke up and said to his daughter, “Do you know him?”

She said, “No, O messenger of Allah.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “He is the establisher of graves, destroyer of
houses (families), and separator of gatherings.”

Fatima (a.s.) was shocked and sorrows attacked her. She said sadly, “O
Father! To the death of the last of prophets (he has come)? Alas! To the
death of the best of the pious and to the end of the master of choices?
Alas! To the cease of the Revelation from the Heaven? After today, I
shall be prevented from talking with you.”

The Prophet (a.s.) pitied his darling daughter and said to her, “Do not
weep! You will be the first one to join me…”**[1]**

Then, the Prophet (a.s.) permitted the Angel of Death to come in to him.
When he came in, he said, “O messenger of Allah, Allah has sent me to
you and ordered me to obey you in whatever you order me to do. If you
order me to take your soul, I shall do, and if you order me to leave it,
I shall do.”

The Prophet (a.s.) was astonished at the Angel’s courtesy. He said, “O
Angel of Death, would you do that?”

The Angel said, “I have been ordered to obey you in whatever you order
me to do.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Durratul Nassihin, p. 66.

No one of Allah’s prophets and messengers had ever got such preference
as Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) had. Allah had ordered the Angel of Death to
ask permission before coming in to him and to obey him in everything.

Then Gabriel came down saying to the Prophet (a.s.), “O Ahmed, Allah is
longing for you.”

The Prophet (a.s.) chose to be near his Lord, for the afterlife would be
better to him than this life. He permitted the Angel of Death to take
his holy soul.

Then he said to Imam Ali (a.s.), “Put my head in your lap, for the
decree of Allah has come. When my soul comes out, take it and rub your
face with it, and then direct me towards the qibla, prepare me, offer
the prayer on me, and do not leave me until you burry me in my grave.
Seek help from Allah the Almighty.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) put the Prophet’s head in his lap and put his (imam Ali)
right hand under his (the Prophet) chin. When the Prophet’s holy soul
left his pure body, Imam Ali rubbed his holy face with it.**[1]**

Mankind was afflicted with a great calamity; the leader, teacher, and
educator died, and that light, which lit this world with the divine
teachings, high morals, and noble manners, went to the other world.

Muslims were shocked by the disaster and they lost their minds. The
Prophet’s wives…began beating their chests. The women of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol. 1 p. 29. Many reliable sources have
mentioned that when the Prophet (a.s.) died, his head was in Imam Ali’s
lap. Refer to at-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 2 p. 51, Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.
1 p. 293, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 4 p. 55, Thakha’ir al-Uqba, p. 94,
ar-Riyadh an-Nadhirah, vol. 2 p. 219.

the Ansar beat their faces, and their throats were harmed because of
crying.**[1]**

As for Fatima (a.s.), she fell over the pure body of her father saying,
“O father! O prophet of mercy! Now, the Revelation does not come. Now,
Gabriel ceases coming to us. O Allah, let my soul join his (the Prophet)
soul, and have mercy on me by looking at his face, and do not prevent me
from his reward and intercession on the Day of Resurrection.”**[2]**

Then she mourned for him saying, “O Father, to Gabriel I mourn you! O
father, the Paradise is your abode! O father, you responded to the Lord
Who has invited you!”**[3]**

### Preparing the holy corpse for burial

Imam Ali (a.s.), alone, washed (ritually) and prepared the Prophet’s
corpse for burial due to his (the Prophet) own order. While washing the
Prophet’s body, Imam Ali (a.s.) sorrowfully said, “May my father and
mother be sacrificed for you O messenger of Allah! By your death,
something has ceased that it has not ceased by the death of any other
than you; prophethood, revelation, and the news of the Heaven. You have
been particular until you sufficed away from anyone other than you, and
you have been popular until people were the same in you. If you had not
enjoined on patience and forbidden from impatience, we would have
exhausted our tears for you, and disease would have lasted long, and
distress would have endured forever.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 1 p.574.  
 **[2]** Tareekh al-Khamees, vol. 2 p. 192.  
 **[3]** Siyer A’lam an-Nubala’, 2 p. 88, Sunan ibn Maja, vol. 1 p.
511.  
 **[4]** Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p. 255.

Imam Ali (a.s.) talked about this ghusl (ritual washing) saying, “I
undertook his ghusl while the angels were my assistants. The house and
the yards were full of clamor. Angels were coming down and angels were
going up. Their whisperings did not leave my hearing. They were praying
Allah for him.”  

Al-Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle and Usama gave Imam Ali (a.s.) water from
behind a curtain.**[1]** Good scent came out of the Prophet’s body. Imam
Ali (a.s.) said, “May my father and mother be sacrificed for you O
messenger of Allah! You are good scented alive and dead.”**[2]** The
water, which the Prophet’s corpse was washed with, was from a well
called al-Ghars that the Prophet (a.s.) used to drink from.**[3]**
Finishing the ritual washing, Imam Ali (a.s.) enshrouded the holy corpse
and put it on a bed.

### The prayer over the holy corpse

The first who offered the prayer on the great corpse was Allah from
above His Throne, then Gabriel, Israfel, and then the angels groups by
groups.**[4]** And then, Imam Ali (a.s.) offered the prayer on him.

When Muslims came to offer the prayer on the Prophet’s corpse, Imam Ali
(a.s.) said to them, “No one of you is to be an imam (in the prayer). He
(the Prophet) is your imam alive and when dead.”

So, Muslims came group by group to offer the brayer of the dead in lines
with no imam. Imam Ali (a.s.) was standing beside the Prophet’s corpse
and saying, “Peace be on you, O prophet, and Allah’s mercy and
blessings. O Allah, we bear witness that he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]**Al-Bidayeh wen Nihayeh, vol. 5 p. 263.  
 **[2]** At-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 2 p. 63.  
 **[3]** Al-Bidayeh wen Nihayeh, vol. 5 p. 261.  
 **[4]** Hilyatul Awliya’, vol. 4 p. 77.

has informed of what has been revealed to him, been loyal to his nation,
and struggled in the way of Allah until Allah glorified His religion and
perfected His word. O Allah, make us from those who follow what has been
revealed to him, and fix us (on that) after him, and gather us with
him.” People said, “Amen.”**[1]**

The masses of Muslims passed by the Prophet’s pure body to see him off
while overcome by sorrow and distress, because their savior, liberator,
and teacher, who had established to them a great civilization and state
that prevailed the world and had lit to them the life after their
ignorance and deviation, died.

### The burial

After the rituals of prayer on the holy corpse finished, Imam Ali (a.s.)
dug the tomb and buried the sacred body in the last abode. He stood
beside the tomb and said, “Patience is nice except for you, and
impatience is ugly except for you. The calamity of your death is so
great, and it is so great before and after you.”**[2]**

It was a very terrible day for all Muslims. The loss of their prophet
was so great affliction to them that they could not bear. The Light of
Allah and His great mercy that they used to see every moment was no
longer among them since that moment. Sorrows and weeping filled every
house everywhere. 

But as for the pure progeny of the Prophet (a.s.), they were so
terrified after his death. They feared that the Arabs, and especially
the tribe of Quraysh, might revolt to avenge on the Prophet’s family,
because the Prophet (a.s.) had killed their men for the sake of Islam.
The tendency of avenging was deep-rooted in the Arabs, and it was Imam
Ali (a.s.) who had killed their  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 4 p. 54.  
 **[2]** Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p. 224.

men and heroes, and so they were eager to avenge. Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.)
said,

“When the messenger of Allah (a.s.) died, his family spent the longest
night and they thought that there would be no sky to shade and no earth
to carry them, because the messenger of Allah had afflicted the near and
the far (for the sake of Allah).”**[1]**

Anyhow, the Prophet’s death was the greatest of calamities that the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) faced. It was the beginning of the terrible calamities
that they suffered later on. Quraysh avenged and announced openly that,
“Prophethood and caliphate should not gather together in one house.” And
indeed it was so! The Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) were deprived of their rights
and kept away from what Allah and His messenger had intended for them.
After fifty years, the Prophet’s progeny were killed in the desert of
Kerbala, their heads were carried on spears, and their women and
children were taken prisoners and made to go from place to another
unveiled before all classes of people who looked at their faces that
were unveiled unwillingly and by force though they were the Prophet’s
daughters! We are Allah’s and to Him we shall return.

Thus our study on the Life of our great Prophet (a.s.) comes to an end,
and I pray Allah the Almighty to accept this humble effort and make it
useful to readers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin Ali bin Abi Talib, vol. 2
p. 96-97.
