Publicity of the Mission
========================

Three years passed and the Islamic mission was still secret. After that,
Allah ordered the Prophet (a.s.) to publicize it by revealing to him
this verse, ***(And warn your nearest kin).[1]*** The Prophet (a.s.)
received the order of his Lord and was determined to open his mission.
He ordered his cousin Ali (a.s.) to invite the Hashemites, the children
of Abdul Muttalib, the children of Nawfal, and other children of Abd
Manaf, and asked him to serve a meal of a sheep leg, about one kilo of
wheat, and three liters of yogurt. The invitees, who were forty men
among whom were Abu Talib, Hamza, al-Abbas, and Abu Lahab, came. The
Prophet (a.s.) offered the food and said to them, “Eat in the name of
Allah!” They had food and yogurt until they were satiated. Though the
food was too little, they all were saturate. They were astonished at
that. The Prophet (a.s.) wanted to speak, but Abu Lahab said before him,
“We have not seen magic like this of today. Let us leave!” All of them
parted while mocking and making fun. The Prophet (a.s.) could not say
anything, for Abu Lahab interrupted his speech. The next day, the
Prophet (a.s.) invited them to have a meal too. They ate and drank, and
then the Prophet (a.s.) got up making speech before them saying,

“O children of Abdul Muttalib, by Allah, I do not know that a young man
among the Arabs has brought to his people a thing better than what I
have brought to you. I have brought to you the good of this life and of
the afterlife, and Allah the Almighty has ordered me to invite you to
it. Which of you shall support me in this matter to be my brother,
guardian, and successor among you?”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 26:214.

All of them kept silent except Ali who said zealously, “I, O prophet of
Allah, will be your vizier on it.”

The Prophet (a.s.) put his hand on Ali’s neck and addressed the
attendants saying, “This is my brother, guardian, and successor among
you. You should listen to and obey him.”

They began mocking saying to Abu Talib, “He orders you to listen to and
obey your son!”**[1]** 

The Prophet (a.s.) compared his invitation to monotheism with the
invitation to the caliphate, viziership, and imamate after him, and he
entrusted these positions to his brother and the gate of the city of his
knowledge Imam Ali (a.s.).

Anyhow, these people lent the Prophet (a.s.) deaf ears and no one of
them responded to him except his uncle Abu Talib and his son Ali (a.s.).

### Worry of Quraysh

The people of Quraysh were terrified by the Prophet’s mission. Their
life was troubled, and hatred spread in their houses, for some of their
children, wives, and slaves became Muslims. The weak and the disabled,
such as Yasir, Sumayyah, and their son Ammar, also embraced Islam.
Those, who became Muslims, were in disagreement with their parents,
spouses, and brothers. A Muslim child rejected his polytheist parents,
and a Muslim wife rejected her husband and left him because he was not a
Muslim. As for slaves and the disabled, the Prophet (a.s.) opened to
them new horizons of freedom, honor, and dignity,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh at-Tabari, vol. 2 p. 63, Tareekh ibn al-Atheer, vol. 2
p. 24, Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 1 p. 159, As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah
by ibn Katheer, vol. 1 p. 457-459. It is odd that ibn Katheer mentioned
the event but he distorted some information in it. Please, refer to his
Tafsir.

and brought them good news that they would be masters, and the tyrants
of Quraysh would submit to them. Thus, troubles, upsets, and disputes
were in all of the houses of Mecca.

### Severe procedures

The people of Quraysh agreed on resisting and standing against the
Prophet (a.s.) with all means of severity and violence they had. Quraysh
was unable to bear Islam at all. They tried their best to do away with
it by all means such as:

**Mocking**

At the beginning of the mission, the people of Quraysh began mocking at
the Prophet (a.s.) and saying, ‘This is the son of Abi Kabsha;**[1]** he
is spoken to from the heaven’ or ‘this is the boy of Abdul Muttalib; he
is spoken to by the heaven’. But, when the Prophet (a.s.) criticized and
scorned their idols, they were provoked and they agreed on plotting
against him.

**Inciting the children to harm the Prophet**

The people of Quraysh ordered their children and encouraged them to harm
the Prophet (a.s.). They threw stones, soil, and ashes on him. Quraysh
did that to be excused before Abu Talib that it was their little
children, who could not be punished, and not them who were responsible
for that. The Prophet (a.s.) felt much pain and was too affected by the
behavior of children. Imam Ali (a.s.), though very young then,
accompanied the Prophet (a.s.) to protect him from the children. Imam
Ali (a.s.) attacked children and beat them severely, and so they ran
away. After that, when the Prophet (a.s.) went out and Imam Ali (a.s.)
was with him, children ran away frightenedly.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abu Kabsha is said to be the husband of Halimah, the Prophet’s
wet-nurse.

**Accusing the Prophet of madness**

Because the Prophet (a.s.) came with a new law unlike the habits and
traditions of Quraysh, they accused him of madness, though he was the
most knowledgeable of all mankind. They accused him of madness to
frustrate his mission and prevent the public from following him and
embracing his mission. However, they failed and the mission moved like
light and reached all peoples and nations of the world.

Some men from Quraysh mocked at the Prophet (a.s.) and strove to tease
and harm him, but Allah the Almighty ordered him to be fixed and not to
pay attention to them. Allah revealed to him, ***(Surely We will suffice
you against the scoffers).[1]*** Those men ran after the Prophet (a.s.)
and mocked at him, but he raised his voice reciting, ‘in the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful’ and they went back. Then, this
verse was revealed to him, ***(and when you mention your Lord alone in
the Qur’an, they turn their backs in aversion).[2]***

Here, we mention the men who mocked at the Prophet (a.s.):

**1. Al-Waleed bin al-Mughirah**

Al-Waleed bin al-Mughirah was excessive in harming and mocking at the
Prophet (a.s.). However, Allah avenged on him. A fragment from an arrow
of a man from Khuza’ah hit him and cut his hand artery and he died while
saying, “The god of Muhammad has killed me.”

**2. Al-Aas bin Wa’il**

The Prophet (a.s.) suffered too much from this man’s harming and
mocking, but Allah afflicted him that one day a rock fell on him and
killed him.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 15:95.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 17:46.

**3. Al-Aswad bin Abd Yaghuth**

He scorned and mocked at the Prophet (a.s.) and at his companions.
Whenever he saw the Prophet (a.s.), he said to him mockingly, “Have you
been talked to by the heaven today?” He said when he saw the Prophet’s
companions, “The kings of the earth have come!” He said that because the
Prophet’s companions were with poor clothes and their living was very
simple.

One day, he and his servant went to receive his son. He sat in the
shadow under a tree. Gabriel took his head and beat it against the tree.
He asked his servant for help saying to him, “Protect me from this!” The
servant said to him, “I can see no one.” Then, he cried out loudly, “The
god of Muhammad has killed me.”

**4. Al-Harith**

He was one of those who scorned at the Prophet (a.s.). One very hot day,
he left his house to somewhere. His face turned black. When he came back
home, his family could not know him for his black face and so they
killed him.

**5. Al-Aswad bin al-Harith**

He scorned too much at the Prophet (a.s.) until Allah made him perish.
He ate a lot of salty whale meat and became too thirsty. He began
drinking water until he died while saying, “The god of Muhammad has
killed me.”

There was another group from Quraysh who wronged and hurt the Prophet
(a.s.). They were too severe to him. Here, we mention some of them:

**1. Abu Jahl**

He was one of the bitterest enemies to the Prophet (a.s.). He was filled
with grudge and enmity against the Prophet (a.s.).

Abdullah bin Mas’ud said, “Once, we were with the messenger of Allah in
the mosque while he was offering prayer. Abu Jahl said to his fellows,
‘Can anyone of you bring the placenta of the camel of so-and-so and
throw it on the shoulders of Muhammad when he is prostrating?

Uqbah bin Abi Ma’eet fetched the placenta and threw it on the Prophet
(a.s.) while he was prostrating. No one of the Muslims, who were in the
mosque, could remove the placenta from the Prophet’s back because of
their weakness and inability to stand against the Prophet’s enemies at
that time. Someone went to Fatima (a.s.) and told her what happened to
her father. She came, removed the filth from her father’s back, and
washed his body. The Prophet (a.s.) felt too pain and prayed Allah
against Quraysh saying, “O Allah, avenge on Quraysh!” He repeated that
for three times. Then, he kept on praying against those men saying, “O
Allah, avenge on Abu Jahl, Utbah bin Rabee’ah, Shaybah bin Rabee’ah,
al-Waleed bin Uqbah, Umayyah bin Khalaf, and Uqbah bin Abi Ma’eet.”

Ibn Mas’ud said, “By Him Who has sent Muhammad with the truth, I had
seen those, whom he (the Prophet) had named, killed in the battle of
Badr and then they were drawn to the well, the well of Badr and their
carrions were thrown into it.”**[1]**

One day, the Prophet (a.s.) was in the Thil Majaz Bazaar inviting people
to embrace Islam and saying, “Say: ‘there is no god but Allah’ and you
shall be successful.” Abu Jahl was behind him throwing earth on him and
saying to people, “Let this one not cheat you against your religion! He
just wants you to leave the worship of al-Lat and al-Uzza (two
idols).”**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih of Muslim, vol. 5 p. 180, Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol. 1 p.
65.  
 **[2]** Tareekh al-Islam, As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ath-Thahabi, p.
151.

Once, this villain tried to tread on the Prophet’s neck while he was
offering the prayer, but he receded and when he was asked why, he said,
“I saw that there was between me and him a terrible trench of fire and I
saw winged angels.” This was told to the Prophet (a.s.) and he said, “If
he approached me, the angels would snatch him part by part.” Then, these
verses were revealed to the Prophet (a.s.), ***(Have you seen him who
forbid a servant when he prays…)[1].[2]***

**2. Abu Lahab (the Prophet’s uncle)**

Abu Lahab was one of the most spiteful enemies of the Prophet (a.s.) and
the most daring and denying one against him. The Prophet (a.s.) suffered
from him too much. He threw filth on the Prophet’s door because he was
his neighbor. The Prophet (a.s.) removed the filth and said, “O children
of Abd Manaf, what neighboring this is!”

Abu Lahab’s wife Umm Jameel, who was Abu Sufyan’s sister, was not less
than her husband in her enmity and grudge against the Prophet (a.s.).
She often met the Prophet (a.s.) with abuse and revilement. Her grudge
against the Prophet (a.s.) increased when the Sura of al-Masad (111) was
revealed about her and her husband Abu Lahab. Allah has said, ***(Perish
both hands of Abu Lahab, and he will perish. His wealth and what he
earns will not avail him. He shall soon burn in flaming fire. And his
wife, the bearer of firewood. Upon her neck a halter of twisted
palm-fiber.)[3]***  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 96:9-…  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 18 p. 46, Dala’il an-Nubuwwah by
al-Bayhaqi, vol. 1 p. 438, Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 2 p. 270,
Tareekh al-Islam, As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ath-Thahabi, p. 151.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 11:1-5.

When the Prophet (a.s.) invited people to the faith in Allah, Abu Lahab
addressed the people of Quraysh saying loudly, “Let him not cheat you
against your religion and the religion of your fathers.”**[1]**

**3. Uqbah bin Abi Ma’eet**

He had great grudge against the Prophet (a.s.) and was excessive in
harming him. Once, he saw the Prophet (a.s.) offering the prayer inside
the Kaaba. He put his garment around the Prophet’s neck and tried to
throttle him, but Abu Bakr pushed him away from the Prophet (a.s.) and
said to him, “Do you want to kill a man just because he says: ‘my god is
Allah’ and has come to you with proofs from your God?”**[2]**

**4. Al-Hakam bin Abil-Aas**

Al-Hakam bin Abil-Aas bin Umayyah was the father of Marwan. He scorned
and mocked at the Prophet (a.s.). He walked behind the Prophet (a.s.)
and made ridiculous gestures with his nose and mouth. Once, the Prophet
(a.s.) turned and saw him do that. He said to him, “Let you be so then!”
His mouth began quivering until his death.

**5. Umayyah bin Khalaf**

He was one of the most malicious and spiteful men towards the Prophet
(a.s.). Whenever, he saw the Prophet (a.s.), he vexed and annoy him.
Then, Allah revealed these verses about him, ***(Woe to every slanderer,
defamer, who amasses wealth and considers it a provision (against
mishap)…).*[3]** This villain was killed in the Battle of Badr.**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh al-Islam, As-Seerah an-Nabawiyyah by ath-Thahabi, p.
151.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 1 p. 470.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 104:1-…  
 **[4]** Dala’il an-Nubuwwah by al-Bayhaqi, vol. 2 p. 335, and other
sources.

**Accusing the Prophet of magic**

The people of Quraysh accused the Prophet (a.s.) of being a magician,
for he recited before them the miraculous verses of Allah that they
could not keep up with, besides his wonderful maxims that attracted all
hearts. Moreover, he showed them miracles by the will of Allah to affirm
his mission and make people believe in it. They could not resist his
mission, so they accused him of being a magician.

**Preventing praisers from coming to him**

The people of Quraysh were so spiteful toward the Prophet (a.s.) that
they spent much monies to prevent poets from coming to him. Historians
mention that al-A’sha, the poet, had composed a poem in which he praised
the Prophet (a.s.). When the people of Quraysh knew about that, they lay
in wait for him. When they saw him, they asked him where he wanted to go
and he said, “I want to go to Muhammad to be a Muslim.”

They said to him, “Muhammad prohibits adultery, usury, drinks, and
gambling.”

He said, “Adultery has left me but I have not left it.” He became uneasy
when they mentioned to him that Islam had prohibited wine.

Abu Sufyan said to him, “Would you accept what is better than what you
want to do?”

He asked what it was and Abu Sufyan said to him, “You take one hundred
camels and go back to your country. You wait for what we shall do. If we
defeat him (the Prophet), you shall have taken your recompense, and if
he shall defeat us, you can come to him.”

He said, “I do not hate this.”

Abu Sufyan collected to him from Quraysh one hundred camels, and the
poet took them and went back to his country…and he could not be blessed
by meeting the Prophet (a.s.). Abu Sufyan made him lose that
blessing.**[1]**

**Preventing people from embracing Islam**

Quraysh tried the best to prevent those who were willing to be Muslims
from embracing Islam. One day, Marwan met Huwaytib and asked him about
his old. When he told him, Marwan said to Huwaytib, “O sheikh (old man),
your faith in Islam has been late and events have preceded you.”

Huwaytib said, “By Allah, I intended to embrace Islam more than one
time, but your father hindered me from that every time. He said to me:
You lose your honor. You leave your fathers’ religion for a new religion
and be inferior.”**[2]**

Thus was the situation of the people of Quraysh at the head of whom were
the Umayyads. It was a situation of absolute enmity to Islam and far
grudge against the Prophet (a.s.). They followed all means to put out
the light of Islam but they failed.

**Persecuting the believers**

The tyrants of Quraysh wreaked their wrath on everyone that believed in
the Prophet (a.s.) and became a Muslim. They pursued the weak and slaves
who had no supporters that could protect them against the oppression of
Quraysh. Those weak and disabled people were the base and the strong
fort of the Islamic mission. The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Allah gives
victory to this nation through its weak people; through their
propagandizing, prayers, and devotion…”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 2 p. 26-28.  
 **[2]** Al-Bidayeh wen-Nihayeh, vol. 8 p. 76.  
 **[3]** Rabee’ul Abrar, vol. 2 p. 198.

The men of Quraysh were excessive in scorning and oppressing those first
Muslims. Allah has said about them, ***(Lo! The guilty used to laugh at
those who believed, and when they passed by them, they winked at one
another, and when they returned to their own followers they returned
exulting, and when they saw them, they said: Most surely these are in
error.)*[1]**

However, they remained no long until Islam destroyed them and did away
with their ignorance and moldy minds, and then the weak and the disabled
became the masters of the earth.

As an example, the tyrants of Quraysh tortured Yasirs’s family with
unbearable torment. The Prophet (a.s.) passed by them when they were
being tortured and felt great pain and pity for them. He said about them
(Yasir, Sumayyah, and their son Ammar), “Be patient O Family of Yasir!
Your promise is the Paradise.”**[2]**

Yasir and his wife Summayah were martyred under the pressure of torment,
and their son Ammar remained receiving heavy torment. He could bear no
more. Consequently, Quraysh asked him to abuse the Prophet (a.s.), and
he responded unwillingly and they set him free. He hurried to the
Prophet (a.s.) crying and feeling very sad. He told the Prophet (a.s.)
what he did, but the Prophet (a.s.) wiped his tears and said to him, “If
they do again (punish you), you do the same (to abuse).” Therefore,
Allah revealed this verse, ***(He who disbelieves in Allah after his
having believed, not he who is compelled while his heart is content with
the faith).*[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 83:29-32.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol. 6 p. 85, Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol. 9 p. 293.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 16:106. Al-Qurtubi in his Tafsir, vol. 1 p. 239, and
Ibn Sa’d in his Tabaqat, vol. 1 p. 178, mentioned that it was revealed
about Ammar.

Ammar’s soul was filled with faith and devotedness until he was martyred
for the sake of Islam in the desert of Siffin with the leader of wisdom
and emir of justice; Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.).

Bilal al-Habashi was another one from those who were tortured in the way
of Islam. Umayyah bin Khalaf poured on him all kinds of torment. After
leaving him hungry and thirsty for a day and a night, he took him out at
midday and made him lie down on his back in the desert and ordered his
men to put a heavy rock on his chest, and then he said to him, “It is so
until you die or disbelieve in Muhammad and worship al-Lat and al-Uzza.”

From the other kinds of punishment against Bilal was that the men of
Quraysh tied him with ropes and made their children draw him in the
streets of Mecca. He did not care for all that, but he said: He is One.
He is One.**[1]**

Anyhow, the steadfastness of those tortured ones astonished the tyrants
of Quraysh and made them too angry. The most spiteful one of those
tyrants against whoever became a Muslim was Abu Jahl who whenever knew
that some man turned a Muslim, he went to him to scold him. If that new
Muslim was a notable man in his tribe, he (Abu Jahl) said to him, “You
have left the religion of your father who is better than you! We will
confute your opinion, refute your belief, and degrade you.” If he was a
merchant, he said to him, “We will stagnate your trade and deaden your
capitals.” And if he was a helpless one, he punished him and incited
others against him.**[2]**

Sa’eed bin Jubayr narrated, “I said to Abdullah bin Abbas, ‘Did the
polytheists punish the messenger of Allah’s companions to a degree that
they were obliged to give up their religion?’ Ibn  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 1 p. 494.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 320.

Abbas said, ‘Yes by Allah. They punished a companion, starved, and made
him thirsty until he was unable to sit erect because of the damage he
had, and then he would respond to their ill will. Then they said to him:
Are al-Lat and al-Uzza your gods away from Allah? He said: Yes. He said
that just to save himself from their torment.’”**[1]**

The Prophet asks Muslims to be steadfast
----------------------------------------

The men of Quraysh were excessive in harming and tormenting Muslims with
unbearable kinds of torment, until some of them could not resist more
and so they abandoned their religion; though some of them remained fixed
and did not yield to the severe punishment of Quraysh. The Prophet
(a.s.) invited Muslims to withstand and be patient with their
affliction. Once, al-Khabbab bin al-Art asked the Prophet (a.s.) to pray
Allah against Quraysh, but he said to him, “The believers (of nations)
before you were combed with iron combs. The flesh and nerves on their
bones were combed but that did not make them abandon their religion, and
saws were put on the partings of their heads and were split into two but
that did not make them abandon their religion. Surely, Allah will
complete this matter (Islam) until a rider shall move from Sana’a to
Hadhramaut not fearing except Allah the Almighty.”**[2]**

### Abu Talib protects the Prophet

Abu Talib was the strongest fort that defended and protected the Prophet
(a.s.) against the plotting and evil of Quraysh; otherwise, the Prophet
(a.s.) could not withstand determinedly to fulfill his mission.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 320.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 1 p. 496.

In his great revolution, Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) founded an intellectual
and social rise that made Quraysh fear for their habits and traditions
that the Prophet (a.s.) refuted. Therefore, they were angry and full of
spite against him. They resisted and fought him, but his uncle Abu Talib
encouraged him to be determined and steadfast. Abu Talib addressed his
nephew with these verses of poetry,

“Announce your mission and never mind anything,

and let your eyes be delighted.

You invited me and I knew that you were sincere to me.

You are the most truthful, the most honest.

I have known that the religion of Muhammad

is the best of religions among all of the peoples.

By Allah, they won’t reach you whatever numerous they were,

until I am buried under the ground.”

These verses declare Abu Talib’s deep faith in Islam and his devotedness
in defending the Prophet (a.s.). Abu Talib was too careful for his
nephew; he did not leave him alone or let him be liable to the expected
or unexpected evils of the polytheists of Quraysh. He was too kind to
him. He loved and pitied him more than his own children. He was very
loyal in defending and supporting him. He refuted the men of Quraysh who
asked him to leave the Prophet (a.s.) alone. He replied to them saying,

“I swear by the House of Allah that you have told lies!

We never give up Muhammad; we struggle and fight for him,

we support him until we are killed around him.

For him we ignore our wives and children.”

He added praising the Prophet (a.s.),

“And a white-faced, with whose face it is prayed,

so that the clouds bring goodness.

He is the shelter of the orphans and the guardian of the widows.

They know well that our son had never been a liar,

nor we care for absurdities.

I swear I love Ahmed as a passionate lover;

I sacrifice my soul for him,

I defend him with all I have…”**[1]**

Ibn Katheer commented on this poem saying, “It is a very great, eloquent
poem that no one can compose except that one to whom it is ascribed. It
is more perfect and more eloquent in delivering the meaning than all the
(famous) Seven Poems (hanged on the wall of the Kaaba).”**[2]**

In any case, Abu Talib was too loyal in his love and protection to the
Prophet (a.s.) and without him the Prophet (a.s.) would not be able to
announce the principles and values he adopted in his immortal mission.

### Quraysh ask Abu Talib to deliver them the Prophet

Some chiefs of Quraysh went to Abu Talib asking him to deliver Muhammad
to them to kill him and  to give Imarah, who was the noblest and most
handsome young man of Quraysh, to him (Abu Talib) instead. Abu Talib
replied to them saying, “O fools, you have not been fair to me. Fie and
woe be to you! Do you want me to give you my soul and son to kill him
and you give me your son to bring him up for you? How do you judge?! Do
you want me to replace Muhammad by Imarah bin al-Waleed? By  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 1 p. 488, 491.  
 **[2]** Al-Isaba, vol. 4 p. 116, Usdul Ghaba, vol. 6 p. 287.

Him in Whose hand my soul is, if you give me the whole world, I will not
replace it by a nail from Muhammad’s foot. Be away from me! Do not talk
to me; otherwise, I will strike your heads with the sword.”

They went back disappointedly, and Abu Talib left spite filling their
hearts against the Prophet (a.s.).

### Abu Talib orders Ja’far to follow the Prophet

One day, Abu Talib saw the Prophet (a.s.) offer prayer while Imam Ali
(a.s.) was on his right side. He turned to his son Ja’far and said to
him, “Protect the wing of your cousin and offer prayer on his left
side.”**[1]** Then, he recited these verses which he himself had
composed,

“Ali and Ja’far are my trusts,

whenever the time brings distresses and disasters.

O you both! Support your cousin and don’t fail him.

He is my blood-brother’s son.

By Allah I won’t fail the Prophet

Nor will any of my sons.”**[2]**

Once, the Prophet (a.s.) came into the Kaaba to offer the prayer. Abu
Jahl said, “Who would come to this man and interrupt his prayer?” Ibn
az-Ziba’ra fetched feces and blood and stained the Prophet’s face. The
Prophet (a.s.) stopped his prayer and went to his uncle Abu Talib who
asked him who had done that to him and he replied that it was Abdullah
bin az-Ziba’ra. Abu Talib got up, held his sword, and came to those men.
When they saw him coming, they tried to get up, but he said, “By Allah,
if any man  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isabah, vol. 4 p. 116, Usd al-Ghabah, vol. 6 p. 287.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjol Balaghah, vol. 3 p. 272, al-Ghadir, vol. 7 p. 356.

from you gets up, I will strike him with my sword.” They all sat down.
He took feces and blood and stained their faces and beards while abusing
them.**[1]**

### Abu Talib invites an-Najashi to Islam

Abu Talib invited the king of Abyssinia to embrace Islam. He sent him a
letter and ended it with these verses of poetry,

“You know O king of Abyssinia!

Muhammad is a prophet like Moses and Jesus, the son of Blessed Marry.

He came with guidance as they both had come with.

Each-according to the order of Allah-guides and educates.

You recite it in your Book as a true speech not a divination.

So don’t make a partner with Allah and let you come to Islam;

the way of the truth is not dark.”**[2]**

### Hamza becomes a Muslim

Hamza’s becoming a Muslim was a victory and honor to Muslims. He was
famous among all people of Mecca for his courage, intelligence, and true
determination. He was very respectable, honorable, and of a high
position near all the people of Quraysh. The sources of history mention
the reason behind his becoming a Muslim that once Abu Jahl passed by the
Prophet (a.s.) at as-Safa and was excessive in abusing and harming him
(the Prophet) and criticizing Islam. The Prophet (a.s.) kept silent and
did not answer him. One of Abdullah bin Jad’an’s maids heard Abu Jahl’s
impolite speech to the Prophet  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Islamiyyat, vol. 7 p. 335.  
 **[2]** Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 7 p. 37.

(a.s.). She went to Hamza (one of the Prophet’s uncles) and said to him,
“O Abu Imarah, I wish you saw what your nephew Muhammad met from Abul
Hakam bin Hisham (Abu Jahl). He found him sitting there- in as-Safa- and
he harmed, abused, and made him hear what he hated, and then he left,
but Muhammad did not spoke to him.”

Hamza became angry and lost his mind. He went to the mosque. When he saw
Abu Jahl, he struck his head with his bow that wounded his head. He
shouted at him, “Do you abuse him while I am on his religion? I believe
in what he says. Refute me if you can do that!”

Some men from bani Makhzum rose to assist their fellow Abu Jahl who
prevented them saying, “I had abused his nephew too impudently.”**[1]**

Hamza announced his faith and promised the Prophet (a.s.) to defend and
protect him and to sacrifice himself for supporting Islam. When Hamza
became a Muslim, the Prophet (a.s.) was relieved from much of Quraysh’s
harm, because Hamza was very courageous and daring and most of people
feared him. He announced his faith in Islam openly and withstood the
tyranny of Quraysh.

The first emigration to Abyssinia
---------------------------------

When the Prophet (a.s.) saw that his companions met much harm and
torment from the polytheists of Mecca, he ordered them to emigrate to
Abyssinia whose king was just and fair to everyone, until Allah would
grant them with a deliverance from what they were in.

A group of the first Muslims, who were punished and persecuted, fled to
Allah to keep their faith. They were eleven  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 311.

men and four women. Then, other Muslims joined them little by little.
Among the first group of emigrants was the martyr Ja’far at-Tayyar. Some
believers emigrated by themselves and others with their families. Negus,
the king of Abyssinia, welcomed very well and assured them with security
and protection, and they found under his care much kindness and comfort.

Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal sees that the purpose of the Prophet’s order to
the Muslims to emigrate to Abyssinia was not the escape from the
persecution of Quraysh, but it had an important political goal; it was
to propagandize for Islam and to show the Muslims’ sufferings. I myself
think that this thought is so far true, for the Prophet’s procedures
were not, in any case, spontaneous, but they were intentional and they
had important political purposes. The Prophet (a.s.) ordered the
believers to emigrate to Abyssinia and not any other place such as Yemen
that was near to Mecca, because the people and the rulers of Abyssinia
were Christians and their divine books had brought good tidings about
the appearance of the Prophet Muhammad (a.s.). Therefore, they would be
worthier of responding to Islam than the people of the towns dominated
by idolatry and Judaism. Anyhow, the emigrants were safe, there, from
the punishment and persecution of Quraysh.

The men of Quraysh were terrified by the emigration of Muslims to
Abyssinia. They feared that events might develop against them and
Abyssinia might be taken as a center for the Islamic mission. Therefore,
they sent a delegation to the King of Abyssinia asking him not to
protect the emigrant Muslims of Mecca and to deliver them back to
Quraysh. They chose for the delegation Amr bin al-Aas and Abdullah bin
Abi Rabee’ah and sent with them precious gifts. On the other side, Abu
Talib sent a letter to the king of Abyssinia asking him to protect and
be kind to the emigrant Muslims and he ended the letter with these
verses of poetry,

“I wish I knew what affairs of Ja’far among people there,

and of Amr and the kin enemies of the Prophet!

Did the goodness of Negus reach Ja’far and his companions,

or it was prevented by a seditious offender?

You know O Negus, glory be to you, that you are so generous,

that whoever resorts to you won’t be disappointed.

You know that Allah has given you great authority,

and every means of goodness,

that still keep to your high qualities.

And you are a fount of goodness,

that enemies and relatives can get its benefits.”**[1]**   

Anyhow, the two deputies of Quraysh came before Negus, and one of them
said to him, “O king, some silly young men from us have come to your
country. They have abandoned the religion of their people and they have
not embraced your religion. They have invented a religion that neither
we nor you know it. The notables of their people from their fathers,
cousins, and tribes have sent us to you that you may send them (emigrant
Muslims) back to them, for they are more aware of them and of what they
have done to and faulted them.”

The retinue of Negus asked him to respond to the delegation of Quraysh,
but he refused and said, “I do not deliver them to them. How can I do
that whereas they have come to my country and chosen me from among all
others? I will inquire them (Muslims) about what they (the delegation of
Quraysh) say. If they are as they say, I will deliver them to them and
send them  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 357.

back to their people; otherwise, I will protect them against them.”

When the emigrant Muslims appeared before Negus (and there were many
bishops in the palace), he asked them, “What about this religion by
which you have parted with the religion of your people and not embraced
my religion or any other religion?”

Ja’far bin Abi Talib said, “O king, we were a people of ignorance;
worshipping idols, eating dead animals, committing adultery, abandoning
kinship, doing badly to neighbors, and the strong eating the weak. We
were on that until Allah sent us a prophet from us that we know his
lineage, truthfulness, loyalty, and virtuousness. He invited us to
Allah; to believe in His oneness and to worship Him, and to abandon what
we and our fathers were worshipping of stones and idols away from Him.
He ordered us to be truthful in speech, give deposits back (to their
owners), maintain kinship, be good to neighbors, and to refrain from
sins and shedding of blood, and he prohibited us from adultery, vices,
falsehood, eating up the properties of orphans, and accusing chaste
women of adultery, and he ordered us to worship Allah alone without
associating any partner with Him, and ordered us to perform prayer,
zakat, and fasting…so we believed in and followed him in all what he had
brought from Allah. We worshipped Allah alone with no partner, refrained
from what he prohibited, and practiced what he permitted to us, but our
people oppressed, tortured, and tempted us to renegade our religion and
come back to idolatry away from Allah the Almighty, and to practice the
vices we practiced before. When they wronged, persecuted, pressed, and
tried to prevent us from our religion, we left to your country, chose
you from among others, wished to be your neighbors, and hoped that we
would not be wronged near you O king.”

The king asked Ja’far, “Would you recite to me from what he (the
Prophet) has brought from Allah the Almighty?”

Ja’far recited the Sura of Maryam from its beginning until he reached
these verses, ***(Then she pointed to him. They said: How should we
speak to one who is a child in the cradle? He said: Surely I am a
servant of Allah; He has given me the Book and made me a prophet, and He
has made me blessed wherever I may be, and He has enjoined on me prayer
and poor-rate so long as I live, and (has made me) dutiful to my mother,
and He has not made me insolent, unblessed. Peace on me the day I was
born, and the day I die, and the day I shall be raised alive.)[1]***

These verses occupied Negus and the bishops’ hearts and affected their
feelings that made them cry. Negus said to Ja’far, “This and what Jesus
has brought come out of one niche. (he addressed the delegation of
Quraysh) Go away! No, by Allah, I do never deliver them to you.” Then,
he ordered his men to drive away Amr bin al-Aas and his companion.

Amr bin al-Aas became very angry and tried to plot against the Muslims.
He said to Negus, “The Muslims say odd things about Jesus son of Mary.”
Negus asked the Muslims about what they said concerning Prophet Jesus
(a.s.), and Ja’far said, “Our prophet says: he (Prophet Jesus) is
Allah’s servant, messenger, spirit, and word that He has cast to Virgin
Mary.”

Negus became too delighted. He drew a line on the ground and said to
Ja’far, “There is nothing (different) between our religion and your
religion more than this line.”

Negus was certain that Muslims were true and their opponents were false.
He let Muslims live in Abyssinia and assured to them security against
the harms of Quraysh. The deputies of Quraysh  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 19:29-33.

returned empty-handed, whereas the Muslims lived under the full
protection of the king and became free in practicing their rituals. Umm
Salama narrated, “When we arrived in the land of Abyssinia, we
neighbored the best of neighbors; Negus who secured to us our religion.
We began worshipping Allah the Almighty without being harmed and without
hearing anything that we hated.”**[1]**

The second emigration of Muslims
--------------------------------

The news that Negus received and accepted the emigrant Muslims to be
under his protection and that the deputies of Quraysh were disappointed
spread among the Muslims in Mecca. Consequently, eighty Muslim men with
their wives and children emigrated to Abyssinia too. This emigration had
a great impact in Mecca and outside Mecca and it affected the public
opinion in those areas. It showed the Prophet’s political expertness
that he had planned to, and made people in those societies ask about
Islam and that made them embrace Islam as a result.

### Umar turns a Muslim

Umar was hot-tempered and he quickly became furious. Imam Ali (a.s.)
described him in his ash-Shaqshaqiyyah sermon as ‘the harsh region’. He
was fond of amusement and wine.**[2]** He was one of the cruelest men of
Quraysh towards Muslims. When he knew about the Muslims’ emigration to
Abyssinia, he became angry and distressed. Therefore, he decided to kill
the Prophet (a.s.) to relieve Quraysh from him, and so he set out to
fulfill his task. He met Na’eem bin Abdullah who asked him where he was
going and he said, “I want to go to kill Muhammad who  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imta’ al-Asma’, vol. 4 p. 106, Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol.
1 p. 461.  
 **[2]** The Life of Muhammad by Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal, p. 155.

separated the unity of Quraysh, refuted their thought, faulted their
religion, and abused their gods.”

Na’eem scolded him saying, “By Allah, your self has seduced you O Umar!
Do you think that bani Abd Manaf (the Prophet’s family) will let you
walk on the earth if you kill Muhammad? Would you not go back to your
family to reform them?”

Umar said, “Which of my family?”

Na’eem said, “Your brother-in-law and cousin Sa’eed bin Zayd bin Amr and
your sister Fatima bint al-Khattab. By Allah, they have become Muslims
and followed Muhammad’s religion. Go to them!”

Umar was shocked and angry. He hurried to his sister and brother-in-law.
Al-Khabbab bin al-Art was with them in their house teaching them the
teachings of Islam and reciting to them the Sura of Taha. When the three
heard Umar’s voice, they were terrified. Al-Khabbab hid himself in some
place for fear of Umar’s violence. Fatima hurried to hide the book in
which the Sura of Taha was written down. Umar had already heard the
recitation of al-Khabbab, and so he asked his sister what that reciting
was and she replied that there was nothing. He said, “But I have been
informed that you both have followed Muhammad’s religion.” Then, Umar
hit Sa’eed whose wife Fatima tried to defend him, but Umar hit her too
and wounded her head. She cried out inattentively to her brother’s
violence and severity, “We have become Muslims and believed in Allah and
His messenger. Do whatever you like!”

Umar was regretful for what he did to his sister and was certain that
Islam must prevail, and that there was no way to withstand it. He asked
his sister to give him the book in which the Sura of Taha was written
down. She told him that she and her husband feared for it from him. He
swore by the gods he worshipped that he would give it back to her after
reading it. She said to him,

“You are impure and on polytheism, and the Qur'an must not be touched
except by a pure person.”

After bathing himself, she gave him the Sura of Taha. When he read it,
he was overcome by the unequaled eloquence of the Qur'an and he felt
nearing to Islam. He said to his sister, “How beautiful and honorable
this speech is!”**[1]** He went to the Prophet (a.s.) and announced his
faith in Islam. Muslims became delighted for they would be safe from his
hostility.

Quraysh negotiates with the Prophet
-----------------------------------

The people of Quraysh had no patience with the principles and values the
Prophet (a.s.) declared and which were to destroy their idols and
beliefs, and instead, to build a new life that they were unfamiliar
with, based on true justice and truth. All means failed them to do away
with this new mission. Besides, many of their children, women, servants,
and slaves everyday turned Muslims. They found that the policy of
violence made no use. Therefore, they agreed on meeting the Prophet
(a.s.) directly. They formed a delegation headed by Utbah bin Rabee’ah
who was one of the notable chiefs of Quraysh. The delegation of Quraysh
met with the Prophet (a.s.) in the Kaaba. Utbah addressed the Prophet
(a.s.) leniently saying,

“O my nephew, you are to us, as you know, of honor in the tribe, and
high rank in lineage. You have brought your people a dangerous thing by
which you separated their unity, refuted their opinions, censured their
gods and religion, and considered their past ancestors as disbelievers.
Listen to me; I will offer to you some things to ponder on that you may
accept some of them.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Say, O Abul Waleed, I will listen.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 367-370.

Utbah said, “O my nephew, if you want, by this matter which you have
brought, money, we will collect to you from our monies until you shall
be the wealthiest of us. If you want, by it, honor, we will make you the
master over us that we shall not decide anything without you. If you
want, by it, authority, we shall make you the ruler over us. And if this
that comes to you is a vision that you cannot withstand, we will find
you a remedy and spend from our monies until we shall heal you from it.
Magic may overcome a man, but he can be cured from it.”

When Utbah finished his speech, the Prophet (a.s.) said to him, “Have
you finished (your speech) O Abul Waleed?”

Utbah said, “Yes, I have.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Would you listen to me?”

Utbah said, “Yes, I would.”

The Prophet (a.s.) recited,

***(In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.  Ha Mim. A
revelation from the Beneficent, the Merciful Allah. A Book of which the
verses are made plain, an Arabic Qur’an for a people who know. A herald
of good news and a warner, but most of them turn aside so they hear not.
And they say: Our hearts are under coverings from that to which you call
us, and there is a heaviness in our ears, and a veil hangs between us
and you…)*[1]** The Prophet (a.s.) kept on reciting the Sura, and Utbah
was astonished. Then the Prophet (a.s.) said, “You have heard, O Abul
Waleed, what you have heard. It is up to you then.”

Utbah went back to his people full of reverence to what he heard.
Changing and astonishment appeared on him. His companions asked him what
happened and he said,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, the Sura of Fussilat (41:1-5).

“I have heard a saying that, by Allah, I have never heard like before.
By Allah, it is neither poetry, nor magic, nor divination. O community
of Quraysh, obey me and leave this man alone with what he is in. leave
him alone! By Allah, to his saying that I have heard there will be a
great influence. If (other tribes of) the Arabs do way with him, you
shall be relieved from him by other than you, and if he prevails over
the Arabs, then his authority shall be yours and his glory shall be your
glory, and you shall be the happiest of people by him.”

They said to him, “He (the Prophet) has bewitched you O Abul Waleed.”

Utbah said, “This is my opinion about him. Do to him whatever you
like.”**[1]**

They gave Utbah deaf ears and remained insisting on their deviation.
They kept on resisting the Prophet (a.s.) with all means they had. If
they had had a bit of reason, they would have responded to win glory in
this life and in the afterlife. However, not many years passed when
people began entering in the religion of Allah groups by groups…when the
Islamic army attacked them and they remained at their houses surrounded
by horror and fear until the messenger of Allah (a.s.) did them a great
favor. He pardoned them and did not punish any of them for all the
oppression and harms they did to him before.

### As-Sahifah (document)

The men of Quraysh were very angry and were filled with spite against
the Prophet (a.s.) who faulted their idols and criticized their beliefs,
habits, and life that was full of sins and vices. They could bear no
more; their children, women, and slaves turned  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 293, 294, Kanzol
Ummal, vol. 6 p. 289.

Muslims. Disputes took place between children and parents, wives and
husbands because of faith and unfaith. The life of Quraysh was disturbed
and troubled. Therefore, the men of Quraysh held a meeting to discuss
their conditions. In this meeting, they decided:

1. Not to marry any of their women to any man from the bani Hashim or
bani Abdul Muttalib.

2. Not to get married to any Hashimite woman.

3. Not to sell anything to them.

4. Not to by anything from them.

They wrote down these items in a document and hung it inside the Kaaba
to affirm it and to be bound by it. The man, who wrote the document, was
Mansur bin Akrimah whom the Prophet (a.s.) prayed Allah against and some
of his fingers were paralyzed.**[1]**

### In the Shi’b (defile) of Abu Talib

The people of Quraysh imposed a house arrest on the Prophet (a.s.) and
the rest of the Hashemites and prevented them from mixing with people
lest they would brainwash them. The Hashemites stayed at the Shi’b of
Abu Talib suffering there the severest kinds of persecution. Khadijah
supplied them with all that they needed until she spent all her abundant
wealth.

The Prophet (a.s.) and the Hshemites remained in the Shi’b two years or
more suffering indescribable exhaustion and hardship. They were in total
isolation and all means of life were blocked before them.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 375.

Allah willed to save His messenger and his fellow believers from this
disaster and grant them deliverance. Woodworms ate the document of the
blockade hung in the Kaaba leaving only the name of Allah safe. Gabriel
told the Prophet (a.s.) about that, and the Prophet (a.s.) told his
uncle Abu Talib saying to him, “My Lord Allah the Almighty has sent the
woodworm to the document of Quraysh, and it left every name that was of
Allah safe in it (the document) and removed injustice, alienation, and
falsehood.”

Abu Talib asked the Prophet (a.s.), “Has your god told you about that?”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “Yes.”

Abu Talib set out to Quraysh saying to them, “O people of Quraysh, my
nephew has told me so-and-so. Look at your document; if it is as my
nephew has said, then give up our alienation and end what there is in it
(the document). And if my nephew is untrue, I will deliver him to you.”

The men of Quraysh agreed and they hurried to the document. They found
it as the Prophet (a.s.) had told. However, this only made them more
insolent and more spiteful.**[1]**

The Hashemites remained in the Shi’b under the burden of the severe
blockade suffering exhaustion until the news of the document that was
eaten by the woodworm spread among all people of Quraysh. Then, some men
of Quraysh headed by Zuhayr bin Abi Umayyah agreed to annul the
blockade. Zuhayr made a speech before the people of Quraysh saying, “O
people of Mecca, do we eat food and wear clothes while the Bani Hashim
are exhausted neither is sold to them nor is bought  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 2 p. 16-17.

from them? By Allah, I will not sit down until this unjust document will
be torn.”

Abu Jahl replied, “By Allah, it will not be torn.”

Some supporters of Zuhayr denied and opposed Abu Jahl who then said,
“This is a matter prepared in the darkness (it is a plot)!”

The oppositionists won and Abu Jahl could do nothing. The blockade was
broken and the Hashemites were free from the Shi’b. The Prophet (a.s.)
left the Shi’b more fixed and determined inviting people to believe in
Islam and reject idolatry. He enjoyed the protection of his uncle Abu
Talib who encouraged him every moment to fulfill his mission. He said to
him,

“So, reveal your mission openly feeling no fear,

And be delighted at that and rest in relief.

By Allah, they shall not reach you with all their crowds,

until I shall be buried in the ground.”**[1]**

The Prophet and the tribes
--------------------------

The Prophet (a.s.) began offering his mission to the Arab tribes and
inviting them to worship Allah the Almighty and reject idols. He spent
ten years following the pilgrims (of the Kaaba) to their abiding-places
in Mina and al-Mawqif (place of standing), and coming to them in the
seasonal markets like Ukadh, Mijannah, and Thul Majaz to inform of the
missions of his Lord.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Asnal Matalib fee Najat Abi Talib, p. 25.  
 **[2]** Fat~h al-Bari, vol. 3 p. 695.

The Prophet (a.s.) went to the abodes of the tribes of Kindah inviting
them to Islam, but they refused to respond to him.**[1]** He did the
same with the Bani Hanifah and they refused and replied to him
impudently. He went to the bani Aamir bin Sa’sa’ah and invited them to
Islam. Bayharah bin Firas said to him, “If we pay allegiance to you on
your matter, and then Allah makes you prevail over your opponents, will
the matter (authority) be to us after you?” Bayharah thought that the
Prophet’s mission was a matter of authority and rule, but the Prophet
(a.s.) said to him, “The matter is to Allah; He puts it wherever He
wills.”**[2]**

Bayharah said, “Are our necks cut by the Arabs for you, and when Allah
makes you prevail, the matter shall be to other than us? We are in no
need of your mission.”**[3]** The Prophet (a.s.) went back and they did
not respond to him too. Some men of this tribe told one of their wise
old men about the Prophet’s invitation, and he blamed them and said, “By
Him in Whose hand my soul is, no Isma’ili**[4]** had claimed it
(prophethood) falsely at all. He is true. Where was your
reason?!”**[5]**

The Prophet (a.s.) went to the tribe of Thaqif. He met three brothers
from the notables of the tribe. He invited them to Islam. One of them
said to him while he was tearing the clothing of the Kaaba, “If (it is
true that) Allah has sent you?!”

The second one said to him, “Has Allah not found other than you to send
him (as a prophet)?!”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hayat ar-Rasool al-Mustafa, vol. 1 p. 236.  
 **[2]** Nihayatol Irab, vol. 12 p. 204.  
 **[3]** Al-Kamil fee at-Tareekh, vol. 2 p. 61.  
 **[4]** A descendent of Prophet Ishmael (a.s.).  
 **[5]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 2 p. 66, as-Seera
al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 3.

The third one said to him, “I do not talk to you at all. If you are a
messenger from Allah-as you say-then you are much greater than refuting
your saying (by me), and if you fabricate lies against Allah, then I
should not talk to you.”

The Prophet (a.s.) was too distressed. The people of this tribe asked
him to get out of their land to anywhere he liked. They asked their
children and slaves to abuse and insult him. People crowded around him
in two rows and began shooting him with stones until they wounded his
legs. He sat on the ground and could not get up. Two men of them caught
him by his arms and made him get up. They again began throwing on him
stones while they were laughing. His head was wounded and his legs
bleeding.**[1]**

### The Prophet’s supplication

When the Prophet (a.s.) was saved from the tribe of Thaqif, he
supplicated Allah with this supplication,

“O Allah, to You I complain the weakness of my power, my inability, and
my insignificance near people, O the Most Merciful of the merciful. You
are the Most Merciful of the merciful and You are the Lord of the
disabled. To whom You leave me; to a far enemy that scowls on me or to a
near friend that You make overcome me? If You are not angry with me, I
do not care, but Your soundness is better to me. I seek refuge with the
light of Your face by which darks have shone, and the affairs of this
life and the afterlife have been right, not to let Your anger distress
me or Your wrath afflict me. We apologize to You until You will be
satisfied. And there is no power and strength except in You.”**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by Zayni Dahlan, vol. 1 p. 141.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 142.

The Prophet (a.s.) also invited to his mission many other Arab tribes
such as the Bani Abs, Bani Sulaym, Bani Muharib, Fazarah, Murrah, Bani
an-Nadhr, Uthrah, and al-Hadharimah, but they met him impudently. They
said to him, “Your family and tribe were more aware of you where they
did not follow you.”**[1]**

The Night Journey and the Ascension
-----------------------------------

Allah the Almighty had singled out Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) with the
Ascension from among the rest of the prophets (a.s.). Allah says in the
Qur'an, ***(Glory be to Him Who made His servant to go on a night from
the Inviolable Mosque to the Farthest Mosque of which We have blessed
the precincts, so that We may show to him some of Our signs; surely He
is the Hearing, the Seeing).*[2]**

The Prophet (a.s.) was made to journey in the night from the Inviolable
Mosque in Mecca to the Farthest Mosque in Jerusalem. The Prophet (a.s.)
had journeyed by his body and soul.**[3]**

Historians were different about the date of the Night Journey and the
Ascension; some said it was eighteen months before the hijra (the
Prophet’s emigration to Medina), **[4]** some said it was on Monday one
year before the hijra, some said one year and five months before the
hijra,**[5]** some said it was in the eleventh  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by Zayni Dahlan, vol. 1 p. 147.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 17:1.  
 **[3]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 16 p. 293.  
 **[4]** Fiqh as-Seera, p. 145.  
 **[5]** At-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 1 p. 214.

year after the Advent,**[1]** some said ten years and three months after
the prophethood,**[2]** and some others said other than that.

Historians were also different about the month and the night of the
Ascension. Some said it was on the seventeenth night of Rabee’ul
Awwal,**[3]** some said on the night of the twenty-seventh of
Rajab,**[4]** and others said it was on the night of Saturday, the
seventeenth of Ramadan.**[5]**

As for the place of the Night Journey and the Ascension, there are some
different traditions about it. Anas bin Malik narrated that the Prophet
(a.s.) had said, “While I was in the Inviolable Mosque (al-Masjidul
Haram) half asleep, Gabriel came to me with the al-Buraq (the means by
which the Prophet (a.s.) had ascended to the heavens).”**[6]**

Malik narrated that the Prophet (a.s.) had said, “While I was in the
House (the Kaaba) half asleep, a gold washtub was brought to me full of
wisdom and faith.”**[7]** 

Umm Hani narrated, “On that night, the messenger of Allah spent the
night with me in my house. He offered the Isha’ Prayer, and then he
slept and we slept too. Before the dawn, he wakened us. When he finished
offering the Fajr Prayer which we offered it with him, he said, ‘O Umm
Hani, I offered the Isha’ Prayer with you as you saw me, and then, I
went to Jerusalem  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tafsir of Rooh al-Ma’ani, vol. 15 p. 6.  
 **[2]** Hayat ar-Rasool al-Mustafa, vol. 1 p. 232.  
 **[3]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 16 p. 293.  
 **[4]** Seerat ar-Rasool, p. 101.  
 **[5]** Hayat ar-Rasool, vol. 1 p. 232.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** Ibid., p. 233.

and offered prayer in it, then I offered the dawn prayer just now as you
saw.’”**[1]**

Abu Tharr al-Ghifari narrated that the Prophet (a.s.) had said, “I was
in Mecca when Gabriel came to me and said: O the sleeping one, get up!
Then, he held my hand and took me up to the Lower Heaven.”**[2]**

During the Ascension, Gabriel ordered the Prophet (a.s.) to offer prayer
in Mount Sinai because Allah the Almighty had talked to Prophet Moses
(a.s.) there. Then, Gabriel ordered the Prophet (a.s.) to offer prayer
in Bethlehem because Jesus Christ (a.s.) was born in it. When the
journey ended in Jerusalem, Gabriel took the Prophet (a.s.) down to the
Mosque. He offered a two-rak’as prayer and the prophets offered the
prayer behind him.

### The Ascension

The Prophet’s Ascension declares the bright Islamic intellect that is
too far from intellectual stagnancy. It invites man to set out in this
wide universe to discover all the facts therein in order to have faith
in Allah based on knowledge and proofs not a faith of partisanship and
imitation. Passing from this universe to the outer space was impossible
at that time, but the Prophet (a.s.) proved that it was possible by the
will of Allah the Creator of everything. The Prophet (a.s.) passed the
great distances in a short period that even light cannot pass. In that
short time, the Prophet (a.s.) journeyed from Mecca to Jerusalem and
then he ascended to the high heavens and came back to the earth. The
Ascension was, in the scientific view, the strongest evidence on
monotheism and the exalt position of Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) near Allah.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hayat Muhammad, by Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal, p. 189.  
 **[2]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol. 1 p. 97.

In this divine journey, Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) met with his grandfather
Adam (a.s.), Jesus Christ (a.s.) who welcomed him with great reverence,
Prophet Joseph (a.s.), Prophet Moses (a.s.), and Prophet Idris
(a.s.).**[1]**

Besides these wonderful scenes of his meeting with the great prophets
(a.s.), Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) saw terrible scenes; he saw groups of
people being punished severely. They were the ones who slandered and
defamed innocent people (in the earth), and ones who ate the properties
of orphans wrongfully, and ones who were usurers. The Prophet (a.s.) saw
the severe punishment of those people just to inform his nation of the
heavy sins those people had committed lest no one of his nation would
follow the same way.**[2]**

### With the Exalted Creator

The Prophet (a.s.) got the honor of listening to the speech of his
Exalted Lord, either directly or by a means, as Prophet Moses (a.s.) had
got that honor before. The Prophet (a.s.) said, “When I was made to
ascend to the Heaven, I was called, ‘O Muhammad!’ I said, ‘My Lord, here
I am! You are blessed, exalted.’ I was called, ‘O Muhammad, you are my
slave and I am your Lord; worship Me and rely on Me because you are My
light among My slaves, and My messenger to My creatures, and My
authority on My people. To you and to whoever follows you I have created
My Paradise, and to whoever opposes you I have  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih of Muslim, vol. 1 p. 104, As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 1
p. 146, As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 2 p. 48-49, Safeenat
al-Bihar, vol. 1 p. 174.  
 **[2]** Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1 p. 176.

created My Fire, and to your guardians I have assigned My
honor.’”**[1]**

There is another tradition narrated in this way: The Prophet (a.s.)
said, “When I was made to journey in the night, Allah the Almighty
called me saying, ‘O Muhammad, your prophethood has come to an end, so
who shall be to your nation?’ I said, ‘O my Lord, I tested Your
creatures and I could find no one more obedient and more beloved to me
than Ali bin Abi Talib.’ Allah the Almighty said, ‘O Muhammad, inform
him that he is the banner of guidance, the imam of My guardians, and a
light to whoever obeys Me.’”**[2]**

### The goals of the Ascension

We think that the goals of this blessed Ascension were:

**First**, the Prophet (a.s.) saw the great kingdom of Allah the
Almighty and His wonderful creation in the outer world; the other
galaxies that any of their stars was million times greater than our
planet that we live on.

**Second**, this journey was one of the strongest, irrefutable proofs on
the existence of the Great Creator of this universe.

**Third**, this blessed journey had filled the Prophet’s soul with
patience and determination to fulfill the mission of his Lord and spread
the teachings of Islam to better the lives of all societies.

### The influence of the Ascension in Mecca

The news of the Prophet’s Ascension spread in Mecca and Muslims believed
and received it with satisfaction, but the unbelievers denied and
suspected it and their minds could not bear this great news.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1 p. 176.  
 **[2]** Amali of as-Saduq, p. 286.

Historians say that the Prophet (a.s.) told Umm Hani (his wife and Imam
Ali’s sister) about this ascension and wanted her to spread the news
among the people of Quraysh, but she hesitated and felt fear for the
Prophet (a.s.) from the tyrants of Quraysh. She said to him, “I ask you
by Allah not to talk to Quraysh about it that those, who believe you,
may disbelieve you.”

The Prophet (a.s.) paid no attention to her and he left. She asked her
maid to follow after the Prophet (a.s.) to see what he was going to do.
He went to some men from Quraysh in al-Hateem, between the Kaaba and the
Black Rock. Al-Mut’im bin Adiy and Abu Jahl bin Hisham were there. The
Prophet (a.s.) told them about his Night Journey to Jerusalim and his
ascension to the Heaven. Abu Jahl began mocking at the Prophet (a.s.).
He called people to gather together, and when masses crowded, he said to
the Prophet (a.s.), “Tell your people about what you told me.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “I was made to journey in the night to
Jerusalem. A group of prophets were made to receive me there among whom
there were Abraham, Moses, and Jesus (peace be on them). I led them in
prayer and talked with them.”

Abu Jahl said mockingly, “Describe them to me!”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “As for Jesus, he was neither short nor tall,
somehow reddish as if pearls were flowing down of his beard. And as for
Moses, he was big and tall as if he was from the men of Shanu’ah. And as
for Abraham, by Allah he was the most of people in looking like me in
shape and morals.”

People disagreed; the believers believed the Prophet (a.s.) and others
denied him. Al-Mut’im bin Adiy said to the Prophet (a.s.) denyingly,
“Before this day, your matter was easy except this saying today. It
proves that you are a liar. We beat the camels to Jerusalem a month in
going and a month in returning, and you claim that you have gone to it
and come back within one night!

By al-Lat and al-Uzza, I do never believe you and this, which you say,
could not happen.”**[1]**

Thus, some circles of Quraysh denied the news of the ascension and did
not believe it.

### The Ascension: spiritual or bodily?

Scholars are different about the Prophet’s ascension whether it was by
his soul or his body. The famous opinion is that the Night Journey and
the Ascension took place by the Prophet’s holy soul, but other scholars
say by his body. Allama At-Tabarsi says, “The apparent opinion in our
companions’ belief and the famous thing in their news is that Allah the
Almighty has made the Prophet (A.S.) ascend to the Heaven by his body
alive, until he saw with his eyes the Kingdom of the Heavens, and it was
not in sleep.”**[2]**

Allama al-Majlisi says, “Know that his (the Prophet) ascension to
Jerusalem and then to the heaven by his body within one night has been
affirmed through verses and recurrent traditions by the Shia and the
others, and denying this matter or interpreting it into the spiritual
ascension or in sleep, result from the lack of studying the traditions
of the immaculate imams, or the lack of faith, or the weakness of
certainty.”**[3]**

At-Tabari says that the Prophet’s ascension was by his soul and not
body. He quoted that from Huthayfah who narrated, “The Ascension was a
vision, and the Prophet’s body was not missed, but his soul was made to
journey in the night.” At-Tabari quoted that from Aa’ishah and Mo’awiya
too.**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of the Twentieth Century, vol. 6 p. 316, 317.  
 **[2]** Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 9 p. 174.  
 **[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 8 p. 229.  
 **[4]** Mafatih al-Ghayb, vol. 5 p. 266.

### Arguments

Those, who say that the Prophet (a.s.) had ascended to the Heaven by his
soul and not body, justify their opinion by saying:

**First**, the material movement in such a very high speed is not
reasonable.

**Second**, the ascension of the Prophet (a.s.) to the heavens required
the piercing of the orbit.

**Third**, if the Prophet’s Night Journey and Ascension by his body were
true, it would be one of his greatest miracles and this must be in the
presence of people so that they would believe him. What was the use of
his journey in the night while all people were inattentive?!

**Fourth**, man is considered as the soul alone that remains since the
beginning of his life until its end, whereas the bodily parts are in
continuous changing.

**Fifth**, they justify their opinion by referring to this Qur’anic
verse, ***(and We did not make the vision which We showed you but a
trial for men).*[1]** They say that this vision was the very matter of
the ascension and it was a trial for people because many of those who
had believed in the Prophet (a.s.), apostatized when they heard of this
matter.

These are some of their justifications that I may answer them here:

If the Prophet’s ascension within one night was impossible, the
descending of Gabriel from the Throne to Mecca in one moment would be
impossible too, and the same would be said about the movement of the
jinn and Satan. Allah had subjugated the wind to Prophet Solomon (a.s.)
that it made a month’s journey in the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 17:60.

morning (till midday), and a month’s journey in the afternoon (till
evening). Allah has said, ***(One who had the knowledge of the Book
said: I will bring it to you in the twinkling of an eye).*[1]** The
throne of Balqis was in Yemen whereas Prophet Solomon was in Sham…what
affirms this fact is what is said that the ray moves from the eye to the
planets in the same moment. This proves that the ascension is possible
in itself, but what makes it incredible is that it is a miracle and
unusual, and this is not limited to the ascension only but it includes
all miracles that are unusual to ordinary happening such as the cold and
peacefulness of the fire to Abraham (a.s.).

As for the use of the Prophet’s ascension, it gave the Prophet (a.s.)
great benefits. He saw the celestial world, the Throne, and all the
wonders there which made him absolutely devoted to Allah the Almighty.

Anyhow, what I see is that the power of Allah the Almighty is much
greater than to be described or limited. He is the Creator of miracles
in the space and no one can keep them except the might of Allah the
Almighty Who is the Creator of astonishing miracles, and the Prophet’s
ascension to the outer space is one of the simplest and easiest things
to Allah.**[2]** 

### Farid Wajdi’s opinion

Farid Wajdi was the only one who thinks that the Prophet’s Night Journey
was by his body whereas the Ascension was by his soul. He said, “The
Night Journey by the body and the soul from Mecca to Jerusalem was
something possible and not impossible. It has been proved by the
European scientists’ experiments in the spiritual matters that what they
called as  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 27:40.  
 **[2]** Encyclopedia of the Twentieth Century, vol. 6 p. 324, quoted
from Nidhamuddeen al-Hasan an-Naysaburi in his Tafsir.

spirits that brought to them fresh flowers from the farthest points of
the land, like china and India for example, and scattered them on them
while they were sitting in their rooms. This thing was proved to the
scientists who had spent tens of years on experiments and written that
down in their books. The denying of some stagnant persons, who have
neither attended such experiments nor written any book about them, has
no any value. If this is proved, a prophet can move from a country to
another far one by supernaturality, for Allah the Almighty is more able
to move objects and other things.”

He adds, “Those, who saw with their eyes spiritual experiments and read
what experimenters had written like William Crookes, Roussel, Parks,
Lodge, and other English, German, and French scholars who did not
consider this matter as impossible.

As for the matter of the ascension to the Heaven, it is impossible
because it has scientifically been proved that the sky is not a material
roof, but it is an infinite space where stars and planets swim; some of
which are burning like the sun, and others are cold, and there are
worlds like ours. What has been mentioned in the Qur'an is other than
this and it must be interpreted in some certain way.”**[1]**

This is some of what Farid Wajdi has mentioned about the Night Journey
and the Ascension (al-Isra’ wel Mi’raj). I think, after pondering, there
is no place for these details after believing in the infinite power of
Allah the Almighty, the Creator of all wonderful things that mind cannot
imagine.

Anyhow, there were some things that faced the Prophet’s Ascension by his
body such as the escaping from gravitation, the escaping from the
atmosphere, the escaping from meteors, the matter of weightlessness, and
some other things that some  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of the Twentieth Century, vol. 6 p. 328, 329.

writers consider as obstacles facing the ascension, but the exceptional
power of Allah that everything in the existence has submitted to refutes
that…He, who ponders on the wonders of the creation of Allah the
Almighty and His great wisdom, determines easily that the Prophet’s
Night Journey and Ascension were by his soul and body.**[1]**

The year of sorrow: Abu Talib’s death
-------------------------------------

After the Prophet (a.s.) had left the Shi’b where he and his followers
were forced to undergo home arrest, he began announcing his mission
among the tribes that came to Mecca. He felt safe in that under the
protection of his uncle Abu Talib who had devoted his life, position,
and all his abilities to serve Islam and protect the Prophet (a.s.)
though he was about eighty years old and attacked by illnesses.

The notables of Quraysh came to visit him. They said to him, “O Abu
Talib, you are to us (respectable and honorable) as you know, and now
has come to you what you see (death)…and you know what is there between
us and your nephew. So leave him alone and take to him from us and take
to us from him so that he may leave us alone and we leave him alone, and
he may leave us to our religion and we leave him to his religion.”

Abu Talib sent for the Prophet (a.s.) who when came and knew what those
men had intended, said to them, “One word that you give to me you shall
prevail by it over the Arabs and the foreign peoples shall submit by it
to you.”

Abu Jahl said, “Yes, by your father, ten words!”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “You say ‘there is no god but Allah’ and you
give up what you worship other than Him.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Prophet’s Ascension to the outer Space, (manuscript) by
Kadhim Shareef al-Qurashi that we have made use of in this study.

Some of them denied that and said to the Prophet (a.s.), “Do you want, O
Muhammad, to make the gods into one god?”

Those men of Quraysh were desperate of the Prophet’s response to them.
One of them said, “This man will not give you anything of what you
want.” They left while were angry and disappointed.

### Abu Talib’s will

Before leaving to the better world, Abu Talib recommended his children
and family members with this moral will and to care much for the Prophet
(a.s.). Here are some passages from Abu Talib’s will:

“I recommend you to glorify this building (the Kaaba), for in it there
is satisfaction to the Lord, a means of living, and affirmation of
settlement. Retain your kinship and do not cut it because the retaining
of kinship is a cause of delaying one’s death and increasing his family.
Refrain from oppression and help the needy! Keep to truthfulness in
speaking and give deposits back to their owners, because it causes love
among the near and honor among the public.”

He added, “I recommend you (to take care) of Muhammad because he is the
loyal one in Quraysh and the truthful among the Arabs, and he has had
all what I have recommended of. He has brought to us a thing that the
soul has accepted and the heart perceived.

By Allah, as if I see the paupers of the Arabs, the people of
countryside, and the disabled will have responded to his mission,
believed his saying, and glorified his matter, and then he will advance
by them and the heads and heroes of Quraysh will be subordinates and
their houses will be destroyed, and then the cruelest one of them to him
(the Prophet) will be the neediest of them to him, and the farthest of
them to him will be the nearest one to him. The Arabs will give him
their love and

deliver to him their leadership. O community of Quraysh, here is your
nephew! Be to him supporters and to his party protectors! By Allah, no
one follows the path of Muhammad except that he will be successful, and
believes in it except that he will be happy. If there is a space of time
in my life and a delay in the term of my death, I will save him from
troubles and defend him against disasters, but I acknowledge his witness
and glorify his beliefs.”**[1]**

### To immortality

Abu Talib faced many hardships in supporting the Prophet (a.s.),
protecting, and defending him against his opponents. Therefore,
illnesses attacked him and death approached him rapidly. At the last
moments of his life, he recommended his family and children to support
the Prophet (a.s.) and protect him against the plotting and oppression
of Quraysh. Then, he breathed his last and his pure soul ascended to
Allah the Almighty.

Imam Ali (a.s.) ritually washed his father’s body and enshrouded it.
Masses of people hurried to escort Abu Talib to his last abode and to
end, by this moment, the life of this great hero by whom Allah had
supported Islam and the prophet of Islam.

The Prophet (a.s.) was really afflicted by the death of his uncle who
was his supporter, protector, and defender. He stopped at the tomb full
of sadness and sorrow saying, “May mercy come to you O uncle! May you be
rewarded with good O uncle! You have brought up and adopted (me) when a
child (I was) and protected and supported when grown-up. By Allah, I
will pray  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p. 213, ad-Darajat ar-Rafee’ah, p.
61, Thamaratul Awraq, p. 294, Asnal Matalib, p. 20.

Allah to forgive you and intercede for you an intercession that will
make men and the jinn wonder at.”**[1]**

The Prophet (a.s.) felt much sorrow at his uncle until that year was
called ‘the year of sorrow’. The Prophet (a.s.) lost his supporter and
defender and the strong fort that he resorted to. After Abu Talib’s
death, Quraysh found the Prophet (a.s.) alone, and so they could harm
him too much. He said, “Quraysh could not harm me with anything I hated
until Abu Talib died.”**[2]**

The people of Quraysh were excessive in oppressing the Prophet (a.s.)
after his uncle’s death. They threw earth on him. One of them threw a
placenta of a sheep on him while he was offering the prayer,**[3]**
besides many other kinds of harming.

Anyhow, Abu Talib had done every Muslim a great favor by his services to
the religion of Allah. It is nonsense to say that this great mujahid
died while unbelieving. This was falsehood fabricated by the Umayyads
and the Abbasids who were spiteful toward Imam Ali (a.s.) and the rest
of the Alawids.

How would the Prophet (a.s.) be so sorrowful at the death of an
unbeliever and how would he call that year as ‘the year of sorrow’? How
could he pray Allah to have mercy on him and shed on him all kinds of
respect and reverence if he was an unbeliever? How could he eat and
drink in Abu Talib’s house whereas Islam considers the unbelievers as
impure?

May Allah reward Abu Talib with the best of reward and resurrect him
with His prophets and great saints.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abu Talib and his Children, p. 103.  
 **[2]** Al-Kamil fit-Tareekh, vol. 2 p. 34.  
 **[3]** Ibid.

### Khadijah’s death

Lady Khadijah stood beside the Prophet (a.s.) confirming and supporting
him in all his situations and relieving him from the sufferings he faced
from Quraysh. Ibn Isaaq narrated that whenever the messenger of Allah
(a.s.) heard something of spiting, denying, and disbelieving and became
sad, Allah relieved him by Khadijah when he came back to her. She
confirmed, relieved, and believed him, and made the troubles of people
easy to him. She helped him in bearing the burdens of life and she was
still doing so until she left to the neighborhood of her Lord.**[1]**

Khadijah spent all her abundant wealth to serve Islam. She spent
liberally her monies to spread the Islamic mission. When the Prophet
(a.s.) and all his family of the Hashemites were home-arrested in the
Shi’b and subjected to the severe blockade, she provided them with all
what they needed throughout the period of the blockade. She offered all
her wealth to Islam until she had nothing even a mat to sit on.

Because of her devotedness to Islam, Khadijah got a high position near
Allah Who thanked her services and sent her a greeting via the Prophet
(a.s.).**[2]** Allah has granted her with a palace in the High Paradise.
In a tradition the Prophet (a.s.) said, “I have been ordered (by Allah)
to bring good tidings to Khadijah that she shall have a house of reeds
in the Paradise wherein there shall be neither noise nor tiredness.”

As for the Prophet (a.s.), Khadijah had occupied his passion and
feelings and got an exalted position near him. He had great love and
reverence to her. Aa’isha narrated, “When the messenger of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isabah, vol. 4 p. 273, al-Istee’ab, vol. 6 p. 275.  
 **[2]** Al-Isabah, vol. 4 p. 274, quoted from Sahih of Muslim and
Mustadrak al-Hakim.

Allah wanted to leave the house, he often and always mentioned Khadijah
and praised her. Once, he mentioned her and I became jealous. I said,
‘Was she but an old woman that Allah has given you in place of her
better than her?’ The Prophet became angry until the front of his hair
shook of anger. He said, ‘No, by Allah! Allah has never given me in
place of her better than her; she believed in me when people
disbelieved, comforted me with her wealth when people prevented me, and
He gave me children from her where he deprived me of children from other
women (wives).’”**[1]**

One day, Halah sister of Khadijah came to the Prophet’s house. When he
heard her voice, which was like Khadijah’s voice, in the yard, he said,
“By Allah, she is Halah.”

Aa’ishah could not control herself and she said, “What do you remember
from an old woman from the old women of Quraysh?... She died since long,
and Allah has given you in place of her better than her.”

The Prophet (a.s.) became very angry and he shouted at Aa’ishah, “By
Allah, Allah has not given me in place of her better than her; she
believed in me when people disbelieved, believed me when people accused
me of lying, comforted me with her wealth when people denied me, and
Allah granted me offspring from her when he did not granted me from
wives other than her.”**[2]**

When the Prophet (a.s.) slaughtered a sheep, he said (to servants),
“Take (some meat) to the friends of Khadijah!”

Once, Aa'isha said to him, “Why do you do that?”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol. 5 p. 485, al-Isabah, vol. 4 p. 275,
al-Istee’ab, vol. 4 p. 278.  
 **[2]** Sahih of Muslim, vol. 7 p. 134.

He said, “I do like her beloveds.”**[1]**

Envy often overcame Aa'isha whenever she heard the Prophet (a.s.)
praising Khadijah. She said, “I did never envy a woman like I did to
Khadijah. The messenger of Allah (a.s.) did not marry me except after
her death.”**[2]**

### The gifts of Allah on her

Allah the Almighty had endowed Khadijah with gifts that no any other one
of the Prophet’s wives had been endowed with. From the great gifts of
Allah to her was that Allah had made her the mother of the best woman
Allah had ever created in the earth since the beginning of the creation
until the Day of Resurrection; Fatima (a.s.) the principal of the women
of the worlds, and made her the grandmother of the two grandson of the
Prophet (a.s.), two infallible imams, and two masters of the youth of
Paradise; Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (peace be on them), and the
grandmother of Lady Zaynab, the first wronged and oppressed woman in
Islam. Allah had made Khadijah the grandmother of the infallible imams
who were His authorities on His people. These heavenly gifts that
Khadijah had been endowed with had not been given to any woman other
than her at all.

### To the Paradise

Diseases attacked the Mother of Believers Khadijah and death approached
her soon. In the last moments of her life, she felt pain whenever she
looked at her only daughter Fatima az-Zahra’ (a.s.) who was a young
child then. She looked at Fatima (a.s) with pain and sigh. She
recommended the Prophet (a.s.) to take much care of her.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Istee’ab, vol. 4 p. 278.  
 **[2]** Al-Isabah, vol. 8 p. 62.

It was not long until Khadijah left to the better world and her pure
soul rose towards its Creator surrounded by angels and received by the
prophets of Allah.

The Prophet (a.s.) was afflicted by the great loss of Khadijah who
filled his life with satisfaction and tranquility, and relieved him from
the persecution of the oppressors of Quraysh. He was very sad when she
died.

Anyhow, he washed, enshrouded, and offered the prayer on her. He dug a
grave for her and buried her in it.**[1]** The loss of Khadijah caused
the Prophet (a.s.) a great sorrow until he called that year where also
his uncle Abu Talib died in as “the year of sorrow”.

Death took Khadijah, who was the most loyal to the Prophet (a.s.), the
most loving, and the best supporter to him and to his mission. Lady
Khadijah died in the month of Ramadan when she was sixty-five years and
after living with the Prophet (a.s.) twenty-five years.**[2]**

The first homage of al-Aqabah
-----------------------------

When Allah willed to confirm and honor His messenger, make His religion
prevail, and fulfill His promise of victory, the Prophet (a.s.) traveled
to the tribes propagating his mission publicly. When he was in
al-Aqabah, he met some men from the tribe of al-Khazraj who were
followers to the Jews. He showed to them Islam and its principles and
values and recited to them some verses from the Holy Qur'an which went
deep into their hearts. What made them believe was that the Jews they
lived with often propagated about the approaching advent of a new
prophet. When Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) invited these men to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ad-Durr al-Manthur, p.180.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by Zayni Dahlan, vol. 1 p. 139.

Islam, they said to each other, “O men, he is the prophet that the Jews
have promised you of. Let them not precede you to him!”

They responded to the Prophet (a.s.) and announced their faith. They
said to the Prophet (a.s.),

“We have left our people while there was enmity and grudge among them
which had no like among other than them. May Allah reconcile them by you
that you invite them to Islam and show to them the same that we have
responded to. If they respond to you, then no one shall be more honored
than you.”

Those men went back to their country. They announced their faith in
Islam and began propagating it. They were twelve men; Abu Umamah As’ad
bin Zurarah, Owf bin al-Harith and his brother Mu’ath, Rafi’ bin Malik,
Thakwan bin Abdil Qays, Ubadah bin as-Samit, Yazid bin Tha’labah,
al-Abbas bin Ubadah, Uqbah bin Aamir, Qutbah bin Aamir, who were from
al-Khazraj, Uwaym bin Sa’idah, and Abul Haytham Malik bin at-Tayyihan
who were from al-Ows.**[1]** After that, Islam spread in Yathrib
(Medina) and monotheism shone there.

The text of the homage to the Prophet (a.s.) was as the following: “Not
to associate with Allah anything as a partner, not to steal or rob, not
to commit adultery, not to kill their children, not to fabricate
falsehood, not to disobey Allah in any good deed…if they fulfill that,
they shall deserve to be in the Paradise, but if they do not, their
affair shall be up to Allah the Almighty; if He wills, He will pardon,
and if He wills, He will punish.”**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 2 p. 178.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 179.

### Sending Mus’ab a deputy to Medina

The people of Medina sent a delegation to the Prophet (a.s.) asking him
to send them a religious instructor to teach them the teachings and
rulings of Islam. The Prophet (a.s.) chose Mus’ab bin Umayr, who was
from the best Muslim youth in virtue and jurisprudence as he was from
the politest, most well-behaved, and most handsome youth of Quraysh, as
his deputy to the people of Medina. Mus’ab traveled to Medina and began
instructing the teachings of Islam among the people of the al-Aws and
al-Khazraj (the biggest tribes of Medina) and reciting to them the Book
of Allah. Islam spread so speedily, and no house remained there except
that some of its men and women embraced Islam.**[1]** Mus’ab was so
successful that he was the first deputy in Islam to be successful in his
task.

The second homage of al-Aqabah
------------------------------

Mus’ab came back to Mecca carrying with him the good news of the spread
of Islam in Medina and the response of the al-Aws and al-Khazraj to it
and their devotedness to defend it with all material and moral abilities
they had. The Prophet (a.s.) was so delighted and happy, and so were the
Muslims in Mecca who suffered persecution and oppression there.

The Muslims of Medina sent a delegation headed by al-Bara’ bin Ma’rur
and Ka’b bin Malik, to meet with the Prophet (a.s.) in Mecca. The
delegation met with the Prophet (a.s.) in the mosque and offered to him
their absolute reverence and conveyed to him the longing of the people
of Medina to get the honor of receiving the Prophet (a.s.) in their
town.

Al-Abbas, who was with the Prophet (a.s.), rose and made a speech before
the delegation of Medina saying, “O people of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 2 p. 76.

al-Khazraj, Muhammad among us is as you know; we have protected him from
our people who are on the belief of ours (the polytheists),**[1]** so he
is honorable among his people and secure in his country. He has refused
except to incline to and join you. If you see that you will fulfill what
you have promised him of and will defend him against his opponents, then
it is you and what you have undertaken, but if you see that you will
leave and betray him after his coming to you, then since now let him
alone, for he is in honor and security among his people and in his
country…”

### The Prophet meets with the Ansar

The Prophet (a.s.) agreed with the delegation of Medina that he would
meet with the people of Medina during the days of Tashriq.**[2]** A
group of seventy men and two women, who were Umm Imarah Nusaybah bint
Ka’b and Umm Manee’ Asma’ bint Amr, from the Muslims of Medina came to
perform the hajj. They concealed the matter for fear of the polytheists
of Quraysh. They waited until a third of the night elapsed, and then all
these seventy-two persons sneaked away to al-Aqabah and had the honor of
meeting the Prophet (a.s.) there. The Prophet (a.s.) welcomed and
recited to them some verses from the Qur'an. They said to him, “We
listen to you. Speak and take to yourself and to your Lord as you like.”

The Prophet (a.s.) said to them, “I accept your homage on condition that
you protect me as you protect your women and children.”

Al-Bara’ bin Ma’rur took the Prophet’s hand and said, “By Him Who has
sent you with the truth, we will defend you as we  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Abbas (the Prophet’s uncle) was still a polytheist then.  
 **[2]** Three days following the Day of Immolation during the hajj.

defend our women. O messenger of Allah, accept our homage for, by Allah,
we are people of war and arms. We have inherited that from one
another.”**[1]**

Ibn Rawaha asked the Prophet (a.s.), “If we do that, what shall we
have?”

The Prophet (a.s.) said, “You shall have the Paradise.”

Then, Abul Haytham bin at-Tayyihan informed the Prophet (a.s.) about the
danger of the Jews there. He said, “There is between us and the men (the
Jews) ropes (relations) that we will cut. If we do that and then Allah
make you prevail, will you go back to your people and leave us?”

The Prophet (a.s.) smiled and said, “But it is the blood the blood, and
the destruction the destruction! You are from me and I am from you; I
fight whomever you fight, and make peace with whomever you make peace
with.”

This situation of the Prophet (a.s.) and the Ansar**[2]** was as the
declaration of war against the Jews. Before these men paid the homage to
the Prophet (a.s.), al-Abbas bin Ubadah had said to his people, “O
community of al-Khazraj, do you know what for you pay homage to this
man? You pay homage to him that you will fight against the red and the
black of people. If you see that when your monies are exhausted and your
notables killed, you will give him up, then from now you should let him
alone. If you do (give him up), it shall be disgrace on you in this life
and in the afterlife, and if you see that you are loyal to what you have
promised him of exhausting the monies and killing of notables, then it
will be the goodness of this life and the afterlife.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 1 p. 332.  
 **[2]** They were the Muslims of Medina who assisted and supported the
Prophet (a.s.) and so they were called ‘Ansar: supporters’.

All of them cried out, “We take him in spite of the exhausting of monies
and the killing of notables. O messenger of Allah, what shall we have if
we fulfill that?”

The Prophet (a.s.) replied, “The Paradise.”

The text of the homage was as the following, “We have paid homage to the
messenger of Allah that we listen and obey (him) in activity and
laziness, and spend (money) in poverty and richness, and enjoin the good
and prohibit the wrong, and say (the truth) for the sake of Allah
fearing no blame of any blamer, and support the messenger of Allah when
he comes to us in Yathrib as we defend our selves, souls, and children,
and we shall have the Paradise.”**[1]**

This homage was called “the homage of ar-Radhwan”. Then, this verse was
revealed, ***(Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when
they swore allegiance to you under the tree, and He knew what was in
their hearts, so He sent down tranquility on them and rewarded them with
a near victory),[2] and this verse, (Surely those who swear allegiance
to you do but swear allegiance to Allah; the hand of Allah is above
their hands. Therefore, whoever breaks (his faith), he breaks it only to
the injury of his own soul, and whoever fulfills what he has covenanted
with Allah, He will grant him a mighty reward).*****[3]**

Women paid homage in Mecca by putting their hands in a vessel of water
and taking them out. Allah has said about that, ***(O Prophet! when
believing women come to you giving you a pledge that they will not
associate aught with Allah, and will not steal, and will not commit
fornication, and will not kill their children, and will not bring a
calumny which they have forged  ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 2 p. 203.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 48:18.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 48:10.

***of themselves, and will not disobey you in what is good, accept their
pledge, and ask forgiveness for them from Allah; surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful).*[1]**

When the blessed homage was completed, the Prophet (a.s.) asked the
pledgers to choose from among themselves twelve chiefs to be guardians
over their people. They chose nine men from al-Khazraj and three from
al-Aws. The Prophet (a.s.) made As’ad bin Zurara a chief over these
chiefs and said to them, “You are guardians over your people as they
are, like the guardianship of the disciples to Jesus son of Mary, and I
am a guardian over my people.”

This homage took place in the heart of night in the defile of al-Aqabah,
and then the pledgers went to their beds until the morning wakened them.

### Fear of Quraysh

When the people of Quraysh knew about the homage of the people of Medina
to the Prophet (a.s.) and their promise to protect him and defend his
religion, they felt great fear and were too worried. The people of
Quraysh were certain that they were meant by this treaty, because it was
they who disbelieved in this religion, tortured the weak who believed in
it, and harmed the Prophet (a.s.) bitterly; therefore, he must avenge on
them.

Anyhow, the chiefs of Quraysh hurried to the caravan of Medina and said
to them, “O people of al-Khazraj, we have been informed that you came to
our friend (the Prophet) to take him out of us and pay him homage to
fight us. By Allah, there is no tribe from the Arabs that is more hated
to us that a war may break out between us and them than you.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 60:12.

Some men from al-Khazraj, who had not yet embraced Islam, swore before
the people of Quraysh that nothing of that had taken place, while the
people, who had paid homage to the Prophet (a.s.), hurried to leave
Mecca soon to be safe from Quraysh’s harms.

However, the people of Quraysh were certain of the homage of the people
of Median to the Prophet (a.s.), and so they followed after them but
they only could reach Sa’d bin Ubadah in Athakhir (a place near Mecca)
and al-Munthir bin Amr who both were from the chiefs (nominated over the
people of Medina). As for al-Munthir, he could run away, whereas Sa’d
was taken and his hands were tied to his neck with the ropes of his
mount. They brought him back to Mecca while beating and drawing him by
his hair.

### Muslims’ emigration to Medina

After the homage of al-Aqabah, Yathrib became a strong center for
Muslims, for the Ansar (the Muslims of Medina) undertook their
protection and defense. There, Islam spread everywhere and people of all
classes talked about its high principles and rulings in their meetings
and clubs.

Muslims of Mecca, after suffering much from Quraysh, asked permission to
emigrate to Yathrib, and the Prophet (a.s.) permitted them. He gave them
a general permission of immigration to Yathrib by saying, “I have been
informed that the place of your emigration is Yathrib, so whoever wants
to emigrate let him emigrate to it.”**[1]**

The Prophet (a.s.) encouraged Muslims to emigrate to Yathrib (Medina)
saying to them “Allah the Almighty has made to you brothers and an abode
that you shall be safe in it (there).”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 1 p. 226.

Muslims began emigrating to Yathrib secretly**[1]** for fear of the
oppression of Quraysh. This emigration was based on a deep thought that
made the Ansar more active and determined to support Islam besides its
great influence on the Muhajireen (emigrants) who felt safe and free
there. The first one from the Prophet’s companions, who emigrated to
Yathrib, was Abu Salamah Abdullah bin Abdul Asad al-Makhzumi, and then
his wife Umm Salamah joined him after suffering too much from Quraysh.
From among the other first emigrant was Aamir bin Rabee’ah with his wife
Layla bint Abu Hathmah, Abdullah bin Jahsh bin Ri’ab with his wife and
his brother Abu Ahmed Abd bin Jahsh, Ammar bin Yasir, Bilal al-Habashi,
Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas, Umar bin al-Khattab, with Ayyash bin Abi Rabee’ah,
Hisham bin al-Aasi and other twenty riders.

### The Muhajireen in the hospitality of the Ansar {style="margin-top:.25in;margin-right:0in;margin-bottom:6.0pt;margin-left:
0in"}

The Ansar (Muslims of Yathrib) received and welcomed the Muhajireen
(emigrants) and made them live in their houses and they spent on them.
Umar bin al-Khattab and his companions lived in Rifa’ah bin Abdul
Munthir’s house,**[2]** Mus’ab bin Umayr lived in Sa’d bin Mu’ath’s
house, Hamza bin Abul Muttalib and Zayd bin Harithah lived in Kulthum
bin al-Hadm’s house.**[3]**

The people of Yathrib received the Muhajireen too welcomely. They were
too generous to them; they spent on them and offered their own houses to
them and to their families. They participated with them in all what they
had.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 6 p. 322, Tareekh at-Tabari, vol. 2 p.
342.  
 **[2]** As-Seerah al-Halabiyyah, vol. 2 p. 208.  
 **[3]** At-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 1 p. 226.

The method of the mission in Mecca
----------------------------------

It may be too useful to discuss the method of the Islamic mission in
Mecca which was the strong fort of idolatry and polytheism and a center
of bad habits and traditions that resulted from the deep ignorance of
those people. The Prophet’s mission in inviting people towards Islam was
based on the following methods:

**1. wisdom and good preaching**

Allah has said, ***(Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and goodly
exhortation, and have disputations with them in the best manner; surely
your Lord best knows those who go astray from His path, and He knows
best those who follow the right way).*[1]** Indeed, the Prophet (a.s.)
followed all kinds of wisdom and reasonable arguments to guide that
society and save it from its ignorance.

**2. good saying**

The Prophet’s invitation depended on the good saying that did not
provoke anyone’s passion or hurt his dignity. Allah has said, ***(And
say to My servants (that) they speak that which is best),*[2]** and
said, ***(and speak kindly to mankind).*[3]**

**3. leniency and mercy**

The Prophet (a.s.) depended in his mission on leniency and mercifulness
and he avoided harshness and strictness. Allah has taught and guided him
to these high morals. Allah has said,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 16:125.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 17:53.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 2:83.

***(and had you been rough, hard hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you).*[1]**

**4. repelling evil with what is best**

The Prophet (a.s.) repelled the oppression and severity of Quraysh
against him with being kind and charitable to them as Allah the Almighty
had said to him, ***(Repel (evil) with what is best, then lo! he between
whom and you was enmity would be as if he were a warm friend).*[2]**

**5. patience**

The Prophet (a.s.) armed himself with patience in fulfilling his
mission, for Allah had ordered him of that. Allah has said, ***(And bear
patiently what they say and avoid them with a becoming
avoidance),*[3]**and said, ***(And be patient, and your patience is not
but by (the assistance of) Allah, and grieve not for them, and do not
distress yourself at what they plan),*[4]** and said, ***(So wait
patiently for the command of your Lord, and obey not from among them a
sinner or an ungrateful one).*[5]**

Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) suffered from the people of Quraysh the severest
kinds of harms and distresses, but he did not mind. He tolerated all
that for the sake of Allah and he kept on fulfilling his mission until
Allah the Almighty granted him with the great victory over his enemies.
Allah ordered him to imitate His Arch-Prophets who were patient with the
hardships they met from their peoples. Allah has said, ***(So bear up
patiently as  ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 3:159.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 41:34.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 73:10.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 16:127.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 76:24.

***as did the Arch-Prophets bear up with patience and do not seek to
hasten for them (their doom)).*[1]**

**6. warning the unbelievers against Allah’s punishment**

From the methods of the Prophet (a.s.) in his mission was his warning
the society against the punishment of Allah the Almighty if people did
not respond to him. He recited before them the Qur’anic verses that
censured their disbelief and deviation. Allah has said, ***(And whoever
does not believe in Allah and His Messenger, then surely We have
prepared burning fire for the unbelievers)***,**[2]**and said, ***(and
We have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful
chastisement)***.**[3]** The Holy Qur'an has many verses warning the
unbelievers against the torment of Allah and confirming that they will
remain forever in the fire of the Hell under severe tortures.

**7. giving good tidings to the believers to be in the Paradise**

The Prophet (a.s.) always gave good news to the believers that they
would win the Paradise with all its bliss. Allah has said, ***(Surely
Allah will cause those who believe and do good deeds to enter gardens
beneath which rivers flow)***,**[4]** and ***(Surely the righteous shall
be in gardens and rivers, in the seat of honor with a most Powerful
King)***,**[5]** and ***(Those who believed in Our communications and
were submissive; enter the garden, you and your wives; you shall be made
happy. There shall be sent round to them golden bowls and drinking-cups
and therein***  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 46:35.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 48:13.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 4:37, 151.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 22:14.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 54:54-55.

***shall be what their souls yearn after and (wherein) the eyes shall
delight, and you shall abide therein).*[1]**

There are many other verses like these ones that the Prophet (a.s.) made
use of in carrying out his mission and spreading his values and goals.

The invitation to Allah
-----------------------

The first principle that the Prophet (a.s.) adopted was the invitation
to the Oneness of Allah; the only Creator of the universe and the only
Giver of life. He raised the motto of monotheism by saying, “say: there
is no god but Allah and you shall be successful!” This was too heavy for
that society which had been brought up on worshipping idols. Therefore,
the people of that society rushed out to put out this light and silence
this voice. The Prophet (a.s.) proved the oneness of Allah through
irrefutable evidences that, here, we shall show some of them.

### The existence of Allah

From the facts that can never be denied or suspected is the existence of
the Great Creator, the Manager of the universe, and the Giver of life.
The Prophet (a.s.) depended in proving this fact on some verses from the
Holy Qur'an. Allah has said, ***(Most surely in the creation of the
heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day, and
the ships that run in the sea with that which profits men, and the water
that Allah sends down from the cloud, then gives life with it to the
earth after its death and spreads in it all (kinds of) animals, and the
changing of the winds and the clouds made subservient between***  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 43:69-71.

***the heaven and the earth, there are signs for a people who
understand).*[1]**

This verse has irrefutable proofs on the existence of the Great Creator.
It talks about the creation of the heavens with millions of galaxies
flowing in the space with absolute accuracy and orderliness. Allah says
about the sun and the moon, ***(It is not for the sun to overtake the
moon, nor does the night outstrip the day. They float each in an
orbit).*[2]**

The alternation of the day and the night is also a clear sign on the
existence and great power of Allah Who says, ***(And a sign to them is
the night: We draw forth from it the day, then lo! they are in the
dark).*[3]**

Another sign is the running of ships in the huge seas and oceans
carrying goods from a place to another. Allah says, ***(And a sign to
them is that We bear their offspring in the laden ship).*[4]**

The coming down of water from the heaven that gives life to all
creatures is also a clear sign on the existence of the Creator. Allah
says, ***(Have you not seen how Allah has sent down water from the sky
and has caused it to penetrate the earth as springs, and afterward
thereby produces crops of different colors; and afterward they wither
and you see them turn yellow, then He makes them chaff. Lo! herein
verily is a reminder for men of understanding).*[5]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 2:164.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 36:40.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 36:37.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 36:41.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 39:21.

The movements of winds and clouds between the sky and the earth are also
signs proving clearly the existence of the Great Creator.

From the great signs of Allah the Almighty that prove His existence is
the creation of man. Allah says, ***(And certainly We created man of an
extract of clay. Then We made him a small seed in a firm resting-place.
Then We made the seed a clot, then We made the clot a lump of flesh,
then We made (in) the lump of flesh bones, then We clothed the bones
with flesh, then We caused it to grow into another creation, so blessed
be Allah, the best of the creators).*[1]**

From the great signs of Allah the Almighty is this earth; our mother
that supplies us with life and blessings and that has seas, rivers,
mountains, and everything. Allah says, ***(And He it is Who spread the
earth and made in it firm mountains and rivers, and of all fruits He has
made in it two kinds; He makes the night cover the day; most surely
there are signs in this for a people who reflect).*[2]**

The signs that guide to the existence of Allah are uncountable. In every
atom of the creatures there is a clear proof on the existence of Allah.
The Prophet (a.s.) recited these verses, signs, and evidences before
that idolatrous society, but no one believed in them except a very few.

### The oneness of Allah

Allah is only one with no partner with Him in His kingdom and might. The
impossibility of such partnership has been declared in the Holy Qur'an.
Allah says, ***(If there were therein gods  ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 23:12-14.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 13:3.

***beside Allah, then verily both (the heavens and the earth) had been
disordered).*[1]**

If there is a partner with Allah in this universe that has the same
powers as Allah the Almighty has, then everything in the universe will
be in disorder, because he will act according to his own wills and
wishes which leads to the corruption of the heavens and the earth. Allah
says, ***(and never was there with him any (other) god; in that case
would each god have certainly taken away what he created, and some of
them would certainly have overpowered others; glory be to Allah above
what they describe),*[2]** and He says, ***(Most surely your Lord is
One. The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, and
Lord of the easts).*[3]**

### The power of Allah

Everything in the heavens and in the earth is submissive to the might
and will of Allah the Almighty. Allah says, ***(Our word for a thing
when We intend it, is only that We say to it, Be, and it is),*[4]** and
***(The Originator of the heavens and the earth, and when He decrees an
affair, He only says to it, Be, so there it is).*[5]**

### The knowledge of Allah

As for the knowledge of Allah, it is indefinite; neither can be counted
nor perceived. Allah says, ***(And with Him are the keys of the unseen;
none knows them but He, and He knows what is in the land and the sea,
and there falls not a leaf but He knows it, nor a grain in the darkness
of the earth, nor anything green***  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 21:22.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 23:91.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 37:5.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 16:40.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 2:117.

***nor dry but (it is all) in a clear book),[1] and (And He is Allah in
the heavens and in the earth; He knows your secret (thoughts) and your
open utterance, and He knows what you earn).*[2]**

The Holy Qur'an talks about the vastness of Allah’s knowledge saying,
***(Allah knows what every female bears, and that of which the wombs
fall short of completion and that in which they increase; and there is a
measure with Him of everything. The knower of the unseen and the seen,
the Great, the Most High. Alike (to Him) among you is he who conceals
(his) words and he who speaks them openly, and he who hides himself by
night and who goes forth by day).*[3]**

The messenger of Allah (a.s.) recited these verses to the unbelievers of
Mecca and showed them irrefutable evidences on the existence and the
attributes of Allah, but none responded to him, for they were occupied
by total ignorance. Rather, they accused him of being a magician and a
liar. They oppressed and fought him until Allah gave him the great
victory over them.

### The legislation of wudu’ and prayer

At the beginnings of the revelation in Mecca, wudu’ and prayer were
legislated as obligations on Muslims. Historians mention that Gabriel
came down to the Prophet (a.s.) while he was at the outskirt of Mecca.
Gabriel (a.s.) beat the ground and a spring gushed out. Gabriel
performed the wudu’ while the Prophet (a.s.) was looking at him. Then,
the Prophet (a.s.) performed the wudu’ as Gabriel did. Then, Gabriel
offered the prayer and the Prophet (a.s.) did as he saw Gabriel
do.**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 6:59.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 6:3.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 13:8-10.  
 **[4]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol. 1 p. 244.

As the prayer was legislated, the azan was legislated with it too. The
first Muslim, who called out the azan, was the great companion Abu Tharr
al-Ghifari. He went above the Kaaba and recited the azan loudly. The men
of Quraysh hurried to and beat him severely until he was unconscious. He
was carried to the Prophet’s house, and he did not regain consciousness
until the night. In the morning, he mounted his horse and stopped before
the men of Quraysh reciting loudly the azan in order to anger them. They
ran toward him, but he hurried with his horse away and was safe from
them.

### The kiblah

The Prophet (a.s.) offered his prayers towards Jerusalem for thirteen
years when he was in Mecca. After his emigration to Yathrib, he offered
the prayers towards Jerusalem for seven months, and then Allah ordered
him to offer the prayer towards the Kaaba. The reason behind that was
that the Jews blamed the Prophet (a.s.) and said to him that he offered
his prayers towards their kiblah. The Prophet (a.s.) was sad and
distressed. In the heart of night, he went out looking at the heavens
waiting for an order from Allah the Almighty. The next day and while the
Prophet (a.s.) was offering the Duhr Prayer in the mosque of bani Salim,
Gabriel came down to him, held him by his two hands, and turned him
toward the Kaaba after he had offered two rak’as from the Duhr Prayer,
and revealed to him this verse, ***(Indeed We see the turning of your
face to heaven, so We shall surely turn you to a kiblah which you shall
like; turn then your face towards the Sacred Mosque).*[1]** The Jews
said as the Qur'an recites, ***(What has turned them from their kiblah
which they***  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 2:144.

***formerly observed?)*[1]** They were answered that it was the truth
from Allah the Almighty.**[2]**  

The Prophet’s miracles in Mecca
-------------------------------

Allah the Almighty assisted His messenger with wonderful miracles that
proved his mission and confirmed his authority as a deputy from Allah.
The following are some of the Prophet’s miracles:

**1. The Holy Qur'an**

The greatest miracle of Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) was the Qur'an that
***(falsehood can not come to it from before it nor from behind it).***
It was the firmest evidences on Muhammad’s prophethood and the
truthfulness of his mission. The most eloquent men were unable to keep
up with it nor could they compose a bit like it. Allah said, ***(Or do
they say: He has forged it? Say: Then bring a chapter (sura) like it and
invite whom you can besides Allah),*[3]** and said, ***(And if you are
in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our servant, then produce
a chapter like it and call on your witnesses besides Allah if you are
truthful).*[4]**

Besides its wonderful eloquence, the Holy Qur'an has all kinds of
knowledge and sciences. It includes civil laws, administrative decrees,
war arts, and all other fields of life. It has no contradiction or
conflict, and it has been kept safe from any forging. Allah says, (Do
they not then meditate on the Qur’an? And if it were from any other than
Allah, they would have found in it much discrepancy).**[5]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 2:142.  
 **[2]** Majma’ul Bayan, vol. 1 p. 222-227.  
 **[3]** Qur'an, 10:38.  
 **[4]** Qur'an, 2:23.  
 **[5]** Qur'an, 4:82.

If we notice the Bibles, we shall find in their editions contradictions
and discrepancies while the Qur'an has been safe from all that, praise
be to Allah.

The Holy Qur'an is a miracle in its legislations that keep pace with
man’s nature and are not a bit different to the rules of the universe.
Allah says, (Surely this Qur’an guides to that which is most
upright).**[1]** The Qur’an’s teachings and rulings have been built on
the mere justice and truth. Allah says, (Surely Allah enjoins the doing
of justice and the doing of good (to others) and the giving to the
kindred, and He forbids indecency and evil and oppression; He admonishes
you that you may be mindful).**[2]**

**2. The miracle of the Tree**

Imam Ali (a.s.) narrated, “I was with him (the Prophet) when the men of
Quraysh came and said to him, ‘O Muhammad, you have claimed something
very great that neither your fathers nor anyone from your family had
ever claimed. We will ask you for something that if you respond and show
it to us, we shall know that you are a prophet and messenger, and if you
do not, we shall know that you are a magician and a liar.’

He said, ‘what is it?’

They said, ‘You call this tree until it is plucked out with its roots
and then it stands before you.’

He said, ‘Surely, Allah is powerful over everything. If Allah does that
to you, will you believe and acknowledge the truth?’

They agreed and he said to them, ‘I shall show you what you have
requested though I know well that you do not submit to the truth, and I
know that there are from among you some ones  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 17:9.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 16:90.

who shall be thrown into the well and some shall gather parties (against
the Prophet and Muslims).’ Then he said, ‘O tree, if you believe in
Allah and the Last Day (day of resurrection) and know that I am the
messenger of Allah, let you be plucked out with your roots until you
stand before me by the will of Allah!’

By Him Who has sent him (the Prophet) with the truth, it was plucked out
with its roots and it came having great roar and sound like that of
birds’ wings until it stood before the messenger of Allah (a.s.), and
some of its branches touched my shoulders for I was at his (the Prophet)
right side. When the men saw that, they said haughtily, ‘Order it that a
half of it should come to you and the other half to remain in its
place.’ The Prophet (a.s.) ordered the tree, and a half of it came
wonderfully roaring until it was about to embrace the messenger of Allah
(a.s.). They disbelievingly and insolently said, ‘Order this half to go
back to its other half as it was.’ He ordered it and it came back as it
was. I (Imam Ali) said, ‘There is no god but Allah. I am the first one
to believe in you O messenger of Allah, and the first one to witness
that this tree did what it did by the will of Allah to confirm your
prophethood and exalt your mission.’ The men all said, ‘He is but a
magician and liar; wonderful and expert in magic. Would anyone believe
in your matter except one like this?’ They meant me (Imam Ali).”**[1]**

No one of those ignorant people, who were occupied by falsehood,
believed. Allah says, ***(and even if they see every sign they will not
believe in it).*[2]** Yes, only Imam Ali (a.s.), whom Allah had purified
from falsehood and uncleanness, believed.

**3. The split of the moon**

Some polytheists, among whom were al-Waleed bin al-Mughirah, Abu Jahl,
al-Aas bin Wa’il, al-Aas bin Hisham, al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p. 158-159.  
 **[2]** Qur'an, 6:25.

Aswad bin Abd, al-Aswad bin al-Muttalib, Zam’ah bin al-Aswad, an-Nadhr
bin al-Harith, and their like, met the Prophet (a.s.) and said to him,
“If you are truthful, let you split the moon to us into two halves; one
on Abi Qubays and the other on Qayqu’an.”**[1]**

The Prophet (a.s.) said to them, “If I do, will you believe then?”

They said, “Yes.”

The Prophet (a.s.) prayed Allah to do what those men wanted. It was no
long when the moon was split into two halves; one on Abi Qubays and the
other on Qayqu’an. The Prophet (a.s.) cried out, “O Abu Salamah bin
Abdil Asad and al-Arqam bin al-Arqam, witness this!”

However, no one of them believed. Rather, they all said, “This is
fabricated magic.”**[2]**

The Meccan Suras
----------------

As we are still with the Prophet (a.s.) in Mecca, it might be useful to
show the Suras that were revealed to him there. They were eighty-six
suras, and here are they according to the Qur’anic order:

Al-Fatiha, al-An’am, al-A’raf, Younus, Hud, Yousuf, Ibrahim, al-Hijr,
an-Nahl, al-Isra’, al-Kahf, Maryam, Taha, al-Anbiya’, al-Mu’minun,
al-Furqan, ash-Shu’ara’, an-Naml, al-Qasas, al-Ankabut, ar-Room, Luqman,
as-Sajdah, Saba’, Fatir, Yasin, as-Saffaat, Sad, az-Zumar, Ghafir,
Fussilat, ash-Shoora, az-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abu Qubays and Qayqu’an are two mountains in Mecca.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Katheer, vol. 2 p. 116-117, Sahih
of al-Bukhari, vol. 4 p. 243, Sahih of at-Termithi, vol. 3 p. 211,
Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 1 p. 413, As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by
Zayni Dahlan, vol. 2 p. 198. 

Zukhruf, ad-Dukhan, aj-Jathiyah, al-Ahqaf, Qaf, ath-Thariyat, at-Toor,
an-Najm, al-Qamar, al-Waqi’ah, al-Mulk, al-Qalam, al-Haaqqah,
al-Ma’arij, Nooh, al-Jinn, al-Muzzammil, al-Muddaththir, al-Qiyamah,
al-Mursilaat, an-Naba’, an-Nazi’aat, Abasa, at-Takweer, al-Infitar,
al-Mutaffifin, al-Inshiqaq, al-Burooj, at-Tariq, al-A’la, al-Ghashiyah,
al-Fajr, al-Balad, ash-Shams, al-Layl, adh-Dhuha, ash-Sharh, at-Teen,
al-Alaq, al-Qadr, al-Aadiyaat, al-Qari’ah, at-Takathur, al-Asr,
al-Humazah, al-Feel, Quraysh, al-Ma’oon, al-Kawthar, al-Kafirun,
al-Masad, al-Ikhlas, al-Falaq, and an-Naas.**[1]**

It is worth mentioning that these suras, which were revealed to the
Prophet (a.s.) in Mecca, deal with monotheism and the evidences on the
existence and oneness of Allah. Most of them do not show the religious
rites and the legal obligations. The suras that were revealed in Medina
deal with that.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hayat ar-Rasool al-Mustafa, vol. 2 p. 317.
