Translator’s Introduction
=========================

The Akhbari trend was destined to make of Karbala’ its centre, after
‘ilm al-’usul suffered a severe setback that was about to destroy it
totally. The sensitive intellect (‘aql) played a role that excited the
Akhbaris, prompting them to adopt an extreme position against it. All
circumstances remained to be on the side of the Akhbari trend, till the
very Karbala’ witnessed the emergence of a new school in fiqh and usul,
under its great revivalist leader Muhammad Baqir al-Behbahani (d. 1205
H.). Thereat a fierce struggle started between the two trends, that
ended with the triumph of ‘ilm al-’usul , and the defeat of the Akhbari
trend and its vanishment afterwards.

Al-Behbahani’s concerted efforts managed to lay down a separating
boundary between the two eras, of the history of scientific thought in
fiqh and usul.

This book may not be more than an attempt to review the documentary
aspect in the life of one of great dignitaries in our modern history,
and the door is still open for exploring the unknown dimensions of that
giant personality. Nevertheless, the dear reader will expressly witness
three brilliant signs in his bright life:

**First:** His peerless curiosity for krnowledge-seeking, as knowledge
used to be his permanent concern and only solicitude wherever he be.

**Second:** His profound zuhd (asceticism) toward the world and its
perishable means.

**Third:** His glorification for the humane reason, the essence of
Divine creation for choosing the way, that leads man toward bliss in the
two abodes - the world and Hereafter.

Further, we should never neglect that spiritual transparency which may
sublimate al-Behbahani the great, high to an elevated luminous world.

Hassan M. Najafi


