Chapter 5
=========

Mirza Shams al-Din
------------------

Al-Sayyid Mahdi al-Tabataba’i al-Brujerdi, Mirza Muhammad al-Majlisi
al-Shahristani, and al-Sayyid ‘Ali al-Tabataba’i, with other disciples
were sitting in the house of al-’Ustadh awaiting his arrival, whereat
Sayyid Mahdi said: “Do you know what for al-’Ustadh has asked us to come
here?

As Muhammad Mahdi intended to comment on the question, al-Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir arrived, so all the disciples stood up to welcome him. He
said: “Salam ‘Alaykan (peace be upon you).”

“And peace and Allah’s mercy be upon you.”

“My dear sons, I summoned you to tell you that I have become an aged old
man, unable to give lectures, or undertaking much reading, so I intend
to commit to you some affairs for relieving me of some of my burdens.”

“Does that mean you are going to suspend your lessons?” “Nearly ... I
will, everyday, read one line from Sharh al-Lum’ah for bless-seeking
only.” “Only Sharh al-Lum’ah?”

“Yes, and O Sayyid Mahdi, you have to go to Najaf for teaching there,
while Mirza Muhammad Mahdi stays here, with Sayyid ‘Ali and some other
brothers for administering the affairs here.

Sayyid Mahdi asked: “Where will the lessons of Sharh al-Lum’ah be held?”

“In this house at the early morning. Now go and prepare yourselves for
teaching.

After the disciples had left the house, Muhammad ‘Ali asked his father:
“So you have stopped everything, aren’t you?”

“No, my son, I am of the opinion that the youth should undertake
teaching, so that I can devote all my time for conducting the Eawzah
(theological school). Further, their academic level is encouraging, as
some days ago I went through a book authored by al-Mirza al-Qummi named:
Qawanin al-‘usul, that deserved my admiration.

Also, never forget Sayyid Mahdi[^1], who has become scholar (‘alim), and
Sayyid ‘Ali, your brother-in-law, who has turned to be a great faqih
(jurisprudent). You also are in need of a teacher, while I - as you
see - have almost reached my end, and it is time to sit and review all
my writings, as some of them need revision and modification, lest I
should cause others to deviate.

“O father, you are still in the best condition, and it is early for such
an utterance.”

“Don’t be courteous, for every human being there is a destined hour
(ajal), and I became an old man and a father of a 50-year old son. Bring
me the books please.”

“They are all inside this box, numbering more than seventy books and
treatises.”

“I have revised some of them, you can only read me their titles to see
whether they need revision or not.”

Muhammad ‘Ali opened the box and started taking out the books. “This box
needs to be repaired too, father.”

Then the son began to read the books’ titles:

“Sharh Mafatih al-Fiqh, by al-Faydh al-Kashani, from “kitab al-taharah”
up to “al-khums”, in eight volumes; Eashiyah ‘ala Mafatih al-fiqh; and
Eashiyah ‘ala Dibajah of the same book.

“I have finished revising them.”

“Al-Fawa’id al-Ea’iriyyah fi fusul al-fiqh.”

“I have reviewed most of it.”

“Eashiyah ‘ala al-Madarik, from “kitab al-taharah” up to the end of
“al-salat” (prayer).

“Put Sharh al-’Irshad aside, as it should be revised.” “There is someone
knocking at the door, father.” “You keep on your work, I’ll open the
door.”

Al-Sayyid stood up, holding his pen, and went toward the door.

“Who? Mirza Shams al-Din? Welcome!

“Peace be upon the teacher ... there is a delegation coming from the
King of Iran.”

“What do they want?”

One of the delegation members respectfully addressed him: “Peace be upon
you (al-salam ‘alaykum). Then, asking another one to approach al-Sayyid,
he added:

“This is a royal gift sent to you from the King Muhammad Khan al-Qajar,
with his wishes. Look, Sir, it is a unique Qur’an, decorated by precious
stones adding to its splendidness and nicety, with the lines being
inscribed with liquid gold.

“My sons, why do you place the Holy Books inside boxes away from people.
You had better sell these stones and distribute their earnings among the
poor and needy.

“What to do now, my master?”

“The holder of the Qur’an may keep it to read Allah’s words ... you may
go under Allah’s protection.”

After closing the door, he returned to his place. “Who were they,
father?”

“A delegation from the King of Iran, with a present.” “What was the
present?”

“A Qur’an (mushaf), set with precious stones and gold.”

What a misguidance is it! They claimed that they (stones) elevate one’s
status and position, adding to his worth.

“Where is it?”

“With the delegation.” “Haven’t you accepted it?”

“Yes, I have a Qur’an from which I recite Allah’s holy verses, I told
them to keep it with its holder to read from it. Let’s go back to work.

“Eashiyah ‘ala al-Wafi, Eashiyah ‘ala al-Kafi; al-Tahdhib;

Sharh al-Qawa’id and al-Masalik.

“Put it aside, I mean Eashiyat al-Masalik.”

“Al-’Ijtihad wa al-’akhbar, Rasa’il fi wujub al-taqlid fi zaman
al-ghaybah (Treatises on obligation of imitation during Occultation),
and Risalah fi istihalat ru’yat Allah (impossibility of sighting Allah).
Isn’t this the text of debate between you and a scholar from Ahl
al-Sunnah, father?

“Yes, it is.”

“Risalah fi al-jabr wa al-’ikhtiyar, and Risalah fi al-‘istishab, and
one on al-bara’ah.

“Keep them aside, they should be reviewed.” “The call for prayer is
raised.”

“Be ready for prayer then, people are awaiting.”

Come Back Soon Tonight
----------------------

The last days of Sharivar[^2] have passed, as al-Sayyid Muhammad Baqir
was engaged in reading, while his wife being busy in mending an old
dress, saying: “Aren’t you going to Behbahan?”

“Behbahan in these days ... have you missed your relation?” “Terrible
dreams are frightening me.”

“Don’t be afraid, haven’t we received good tidings some days ago?”

While looking at one side, he added:

“Who is that woman?” “Who? No woman is there.” “That one wearing a rosy
dress.”

“What do you mean? This is our daughter-in-law, the wife of ‘Abd
al-Husayn ... you engage yourself in reading to the extent that you
forget your daughter-in-law too. I will prepare supper food ... by the
way, come back soon tonight, we have guests.

“Who are they?”

“Your daughter with her husband.”

“They are not guests ... tell ‘Abd al-Husayn to come . After some
seconds, ‘Abd al-Husayn entered and was surprised when seeing his father
look gloomy, saying:

“What happened father? Have I done a mischief?

“I don’t like to see your wife with such clothes.”

“What for? Our purchases are like those of other people, which are not
unlawful (haram). Allah - the Glorified - said in His holy Book: “Say:
Who hath forbidden the adornment of Allah which He hath brought forth
for His bondmen, and the good things of His providing?”

“Yes, I too have heard this verse. But look at the way your neighbours
are living ... our clothes and food should be like theirs, so that life
hardships can be easily endured by them.

“You said the truth.”

“Now go back to your work.”

“By the way, father, I saw Mirza Yahya on my way.”

He intends to travel to Tabriz, wondering about an opportune time to see
you. I told him he can come two hours before sunset.

In the meantime, the door was knocked, ‘Abd al-Husayn said:

“I think it is him.”

The Heavens Garment
-------------------

A cold wind blew, foretelling of a biting winter. Al-Sayyid Muhammad
Baqir with his sons were going toward the haram (shrine), whereat
Muhammad ‘Ali, feeling the chilly cold,murmured:

“We have never experienced such a cold throughout the 27 years we have
been residing at Karbala’.

“They are thirty-two years; you are right, we have never suffered such
cold, though I am not feeling cold.”

“Why?”

“Your mother has woven me a warm overcoat, for which I am so grateful.”

“My master! My master! A pitiful voice came from a bare- footed
bony-faced man, wearing worn-out clothes, saying:

“O master, it is too cold, and I have nothing to protect my head against
the bites of cold.”

Al-Sayyid asked him: “Have you got a knife?”

“Yes, Sir. The man said this and inserted his hand into his pocket.”

“O Muhammad ‘Ali, help me cut the coat sleeve ... We have no other
alternative.

“Do you cut the sleeve of this new overcoat, father? Isn’t there any
other solution?

“Cut it, my son ... you should be pleased with such a deal: the overcoat
sleeve against thousands of Divine graces and Paradise.

Muhammad ‘Ali has cut the sleeve and handed it to the beggar, while
Sayyid Muhammd Baqir was gently addressing him:

“It is too warm, and will safeguard your head against the cold.”

When his wife saw the overcoat deformed, she fell sorry, saying:

“Where is its sleeve?”

“I have donated it to a needy man.”

“Do you know how much I toiled in weaving it?”

“It is not so considerable against its reward, one day we shall die
whereat the overcoat be worn out, but that sleeve will be turned into
one of heavens dresses.”

Never Do It Again
-----------------

In the morning of a Spring day, Sayyid Zayn al-’Abidin was going through
the alleys on his way to attend the class of al-Sayyid. He said to
himself: I will attend the lesson first, then I’ll go to the bathouse
for taking a ritual bathing, afterwhich I’ll perform morning prayer as
qadha’ (out of time). What had I to do as it was Spring and sleeping
being so pleasant?

He opened the door, entered and saluted.

Mirza Hasan al-Tabini and Mulla ‘Ali al-Tabrizi were waiting for
al-’Ustadh.

Mulla ‘Ali with Azari[^3] dialect, said:

“You have arrived at due time, al-Sayyid is busy conferring with Sayyid
Mahdi al-Brujerdi, otherwise you might have reached late as usual.”

After some seconds, al-Sayyid entered smiling, betaking himself to his
place, moving his sight over his disciples. Suddenly his smile
disappeared, in place of which frowning appeared ... keeping down his
face for a while, then he raised it saying:

“Today is off, go home.”

Mulla ‘Ali al-Tabrizi wondered:

“Are you all right, our master?”

“Yes, but no lesson will be given today, go home ... but you have to
stay here, O Zayn al-’Abidin.”

The disciples have all left the room. (Except Zayn al-‘Abidin).

Al-Sayyid sadly murmured:

“O Sayyid! Lift the (straw) mat edge, take the money under it, go soon
to the bathouse, and have a ritual cleansing. Never do it again, and
never attend any meeting when being ritually impure (junub).

“It was late, Sir, and I was interested in attending the lesson.”

“Never forget what I told you.”

Thereat Sayyid Zayn al-’Abidin rose, feeling too ashamed, walking, with
stumbling steps, toward the door.

Study, My Son
-------------

The sun of Mordad[^4] was too scorching, and al-Sayyid was wearing his
white dress, resting in bed. He got up and rose, walking toward the door
after hearing a consecutive knocking at the door.

“Al-Salam ‘Alaykum.”

“Wa ‘Alaykum al-salam, what is the matter, O Mulla Muhammad Ridha? What
caused you to come in such heat?

“Our master! Look there beside that tree. That man is an Isfahani
merchant, who has brought with him a piece of cloth, intending to gift
to you.”

“I thought that your coming was for asking about a scientific issue.”

As al-Sayyid uttered this, he intended to close the door.

“I beg you Sir, to accept it.” “What for?”

“Since he promised me to offer me a similar gift on your accepting it.
Pleace accept it Sir.”

Al-Sayyid smiled, saying:

“You seem badly needing it, I’ll accept it on condition that you never
be a medium for (exchanging) gifts, and never forget your lessons, as
learning is more important than all these things.

The Dream That Comes True
-------------------------

The Autumn sun was gradually cutting its way toward the horizon, and
al-Sayyid’s sons were busy making the room ready for the reception of
the disciples. The students were coming in ones and twos for spending
the thirteenth of Rajab with their great master.

The Ustadh, entered with a curved back, and a halo of light on his face.
All those present there rose up as a sign of veneration.

Some moments elapsed, during which he was sitting, Mirza Mahmud, the
eulogist, rose chanting with his sweet voice:

Peace be upon al-Mustafa Ahmad,

Guardian of intercession in the Hereafter,

Peace (salam) be upon al-Murtadha al-Haydari,

And his sons, the bright stars.

I have five with whom I extinguish, The Hellfire’s smashing heat,

Al-Mustafa and al-Murtadha

And their two sons and Fatimah.

Thereat salawat (blessings upon Muhammad and his Household) were raised,
filling all the corners of the muddy room with fragrance and
spirituality, with the glasses of sweet drink (sharbat) being
distributed among the attendants.

Al-Shaykh Ja’far has approached al-’Ustadh, asking:

“I have read the book Sharh al-Wafiyah of al-Sayyid Wadr al-Din
al-Hamadani, finding in it two different trends: in the first one he
follows the course of al-mujtahidun, while in the second one he adopts
the trend of the Akhbaris.

Al-’Ustadh replied:

“I used to attend his lessons, closing before him the door of the
Akhbaris in the first section, but I haven’t attended his lessons in the
second section.”

Mirza Muhammad Mahdi al-Shahristani inquired:

“He is known to be Akhbari, how could you influence him?”

Al-Sayyid smiled as usual, saying:

“Who told you that I have influenced him?”

“It is obvious, your acts are explicitly indicating your position.”

“The fact is not as you say. I too, at the outset of my learning, was
influenced with the Akhbaris’ thoughts, but with the passage of time I
recognized their wrong way; as the proofs of ijtihad, are irrefutable,
besides being not easily confronted.

Sayyid Mahdi inquired: You have held protracted arguments with al-Shaykh
Yusuf al-Bahrani; how could you recover him to the straight path?

“I haven’t done so but I found him disinterested with the Akhbari
school, criticizing them saying: They never bother themselves to think,
or rather they never act according to their belief. They blindly imitate
(their leaders).

One of the disciples, stood in awe of him, exclaimed:

“Our master, how have you attained this lofty rank?”

Al-Sayyid kept his head down modestly, saying: I am nothing, and rather
I can never consider myself in the position you have. The same question
reached me from another one, and

I answered him: If for every question there should be an answer, I have
never desisted for even one moment from extolling knowledge and ‘ulama’,
making knowledge-seeking at the top priority over all other matters in
my life.

A disciple, sitting beside Mirza Muhammad, mumbled:

“If he truly extols the ‘ulama’, so why did he behave with al- Shaykh
Yusuf in that way?!”

Mirza Muhammad, with a low voice, whispered:

“It is said that whatever occurred was with the concurrence of both
sides. Let me ask him: Our master, Mirza Muhammad al-Muttalibi has a
question.”

“No, Sir.”

Al-Sayyid then resumed his utterance:

“Watch yourselves in every act or saying, for attaining Allah’s
pleasure. Never feel tired or be bored of knowledge- seeking, may Allah
support you. I remember that one night at Isfahan, I saw in dream the
Messenger of Allah surrounded by men who were annoying and harming him.

I rushed toward him to keep them away from him, saluting him afterwards,
whereat he reciprocated my greeting, wiping my head, handing me a
half-cubit roll. I took it and set out toward Karbala’, passing through
the courtyard and portico reaching the tomb. The wonderful point here
that on being honoured with visiting Karbala’, I saw the courtyard and
portico being exactly in the same image I saw in dream. More wonderful
is that when I have compiled Sharh al-Mafatih, its cover was similar to
the roll handed to me by the Messenger of Allah in the dream.

I am almost finished, but you should be careful and strive for attaining
the blessingness of the Infallible (Ma’sumun).

[^1]: He was later known with the name Bahr al-’Ilm, and considered one
of his age outstanding ‘ulama’. He spent two years in the two holy
shrines teaching al-Fiqh ‘ala al-madhahib al-’arba’ah, giving solutions
for their hard judicial questions, with which he embarrassed the Hijaz
‘ulama’, to the extent that some of them said: “If the Shi’ah be right
in their claim about the reappearance of al-Mahdi Wahib al-Zaman, he is
verily non- other than this man.”

[^2]: It is the sixth month of the Iranian calendar year.

[^3]: According to Azerbaijan country.

[^4]: It is the fifth month of the Iranian calendar year.


