Chapter 6
=========

The Hard Days
-------------

The days of Shawwal were passing away, and cold winds were blowing
through Karbala’ alleys foretelling of hard days to come. Al-Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir, leaving behind eighty-nine winters, has been laid up at
the bed of disease, sorrounded by Sayyid ‘Ali al- Tabataba’i, his elder
son Muhammad ‘Ali, and Sayyid Mahdi al- Tabataba’i al-Brujerdi, his most
eminent disciple, and his envoy to the holy City of Najaf, with others.
Clouds of grief and concern were overshadowing all those present there.

“Have you called in the physician?”

“Some of the doctors can identify the useful medicine and some may be
mistaken. On last Saturday the physician came and prescribed a medicine
that was of no effect.”

“Shall we stand pinioned up in this way?”

“‘Abd al-Husayn went to call upon one of the physicians, and he may be
on his way back now.”

In the meantime, al-Sayyid Muhammad Baqir opened his eyes and uttered
vague words, whereat Muhammad ‘Ali rushed for giving ear to what he
would say.

The tired lips moved, bringing out feeble tired words:

“Turn my bed to the qiblah direction.”

Muhammad ‘Ali, dispirited, came toward Sayyid Mahdi and Sayyid ‘Ali,
informing them of the approaching of the destined fate.

Silence prevailed all over the muddy room, to the extent that the lying
patient’s moaning could be clearly heard.

Sayyid Mahdi asked: Hasn’t the doctor arrived yet? Muhammad ‘Ali opened
the Qur’an, embarking on reciting some holy verses, with low voice.

At that moment his daughter entered carrying a tray of herb, as
prescribed by the physician. Al-Sayyid opened his eyes, while Allah’s
verses were spreading all over the house, whereat Muhammad ‘Ali seemed
trying his best to keep off the overshadowing spectre of death.

On the Wings of Verses
----------------------

“Hurry up please, the medicine was of no effect, and my father’s
condition is deteriorating.”

These words were desperately exclaimed by ‘Abd al-Husayn.

The doctor scrubbed his white hair, saying:

“Has he had the combination?” “Yes.”

“You may have left mixing it to the women?”

“On the contrary, I myself have mixed it. Come with me.”

As the physician and ‘Abd al-Husayn intended to enter the alley, they
heard a loud wailing raised from al-Sayyid’s house, mixed with Allah’s
verses. The grieved son rushed to throw himself upon the laid body,
while the Qur’anic verses were loudly recited holding with them the pure
spirit up toward the Malakut (Sovereign Power).


