Account N. 12
=============

**al-Baladhuri**

Other fragments of the \`Uthmaniyya version of events survive in the
Ansab al-Ashraf of al-Baladhuri. In the first, Wahb b. Jarir describes
briefly the coming of Ibn Ziyad to Kufa and his demanding Hani b. \`Urwa
to hand over Muslim. When he refuses, he has him executed and then
seizes Muslim. He takes Muslim out on the balcony and demands that
Muslim say: \`I am Muslim b. \`Aqil, the leader of rebels.' Muslim says
it and then Ibn Ziyad executes him[^52].

This isolated report manages again to undermine the bravery of such men
as Muslim, and by implication the ahl al-bayt, by making Muslim repeat
such words. Such a story is not to be found elsewhere in the sources.

Another report, again from Wahb b. Jarir, concerns the Imam al-Husayn
addressing the army of \`Umar b. Sa\`d before the battle. It is not
surprising that even this tries to undermine the Imam al-Husayn. He is
reported to have asked the Kufans: \`Shall I submit to the rule of
Yazid?' To which the reply came: \`You must submit to the rule of Ibn
Ziyad.' This the Imam al-Husayn refused to do, and the battle took
place. The implication of the report is that the Imam al-Husayn was
prepared to submit to Yazid. This seems to attempt to undermine his
stature and to make an unfavourable comparison with Ibn al-Zubayr, the
hero of the later \`Uthmaniyya resistance to Yazid[^53].

Al-Baladhuris account, which is split up into sections in his life of
Muslim, his life of Yazid, and his life of the Imam al-Husayn, gives the
impression of being the most historically balanced, in the sense of
presenting all possible versions.

The kernel of the account is presented with a collective qalu (= they
said) but if the earlier surmise is correct, it is probably based on
al-Mada'inis monograph, which, in turn, was based on Abu Mikhnaf.
However, al-Baladhuri also gives the more hostile reports of Wahb b.
Jarir, as well as other sources. As already noted, he gives some reports
from \`Awana, but not through Ibn al-Kalbi. He also uses a brief account
from Husayn b. \`Abd al-Rahman[^54].

This account is also used by al-Tabari. This account is brief and adds
nothing to our knowledge of the historical tradition. It does present
the view that the Imam al-Husayn was prepared to submit to Yazid but
refused to submit to Ibn Ziyad. It also reports that Yazid wept when the
head of the dead Imam was brought to him.

From the point of view of historiography, al-Baladhuris version is very
useful. It is, however, questionable whether al-Baladhurri was just
being an unbiased historian reporting all the accounts available to him.
On occasions al-Baladhuri is known to mention two accounts and say which
one is correct. Nowhere in his presentation of the martyrdom of the Imam
al-Husayn does he do this.

The use of the collective qalu makes much of the account sound very
unverifiable, whereas the alternatives to the general account are given
with full chains of authority. This makes them look more authentic. Thus
accounts which undermine the stature of the Shi’i Imam are included in a
way that seems to be intended as a correction of the general account.

This in no way means that he is not sympathetic to the plight of the
Imam. He clearly is, but he is concerned to undermine the Shi’i
conception of the Imamate, and this will be the case if he brings
forward accounts which in some way undermine the stature of the man. A
particularly good example of that is his report of the three options the
Imam al-Husayn is said to have offered \`Umar b. Sa'd and the Kufans. He
reports that fully, but ignores Abu Mikhnaf's earlier report that no one
knew what \`Umar b. Sa'd and the Imam al-Husayn talked about.

He merely adds a paragraph of the third account, without giving it the
authority of \`Uqba b. Sim'an, the Imam's servant. In fact, he reports
that \`it is said' that Ibn Ziyad only asked the Imam to return to
Medina. The very use of the words \`it is said' implies that this should
not be accepted as a truthful report, but rather should be considered as
an unidentified and unlikely claim.

At the end of his account al-Baladhuri includes some of the reports of
the sky raining down blood, but these reports would suggest that the
tragedy of the death of the Imam al-Husayn was such because of his blood
relation with the Prophet rather than because of his status as an
Imam[^55].

**Notes:**

[^52] Al-Baladhuri, Ansab al-Ashraf, (Beirut, 1974), II, 86.
[^53] Al-Baladhuri, op. cit., III, 227.
[^54] Al-Baladhuri, op. cit., III, 173.
[^55] Al-Baladhuri, op. cit., III, 182.

