Account N. 15
=============

**Ibn Aâ€™tham al-Kufi**

Ibn A'tham al-Kufi gives us the most embellished account of the
martyrdom of the Imam al-Husayn. He prefaces his account by including
lists of isnads, which he claims are his sources[^63].

These lists are muddled, and seem like an attempt to show that this is
indeed an authoritative account. Ibn A'tham's exaggeration in his
authorities sets the tone for the rest of the account. It is based on
what has become the standard version, but it is that standard version in
a very embellished form. Each individual battle is prefaced by verses,
most of which are not reported by any other source.

The prowess in the battle of the Imam al-Husayn's followers and the
Imam himself is such that one is surprised that they were not
victorious. In his partisan approach, Ibn A'tham forgets that it is a
tragedy which is taking place. The same tendency to exaggerate is a
feature also of the account attributed to Abu Mikhnaf. Such treatment
diminishes the real story of the Imam's sufferings and places it in the
realm of a peculiar kind of hagiography. Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani deals
with the martyrdom of al-Husayn in his Maqatil al-Talibiyyan.

The work, as its name suggests, is a survey of the persecution of the
descendants of Abu Talib. His account is brief in comparison with
al-Tabari and al-Baladhuri, but he does give a useful account[^64].

His main authority is Nasr b. Muzahim but he also uses al-Mada'ini. A
third authority of Abu al-Faraj-and one he uses throughout his book-is
Yahya b. al-Hasan. The latter is also an authority of al-Mufid for his
Kitab al-Irshad, and he seems to have written a The other annalistic
historians, al-Ya'qubi, al-Dinawari, work on the descendants of the Imam
'Ali b. Abi Talib. The account supplements the reports of Abu Mikhnaf,
but by and large it acts as confirmation that al-Tabari's use of Ibn
al-Kalbi is authentic.

**Notes:**

[^63] Ibn A\`tham, Kitab al-Futuh (Hyderabad, 1971), IV, 209-10. The
whole narrative is IV, 209-24, and V, 8-252.
[^64] Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani, op. cit., pp. 51-81.

