Women or Half of the Body of Society
====================================

by Ayatullah Mohammed Taqi Misbah al-Yazdi

The Solution to Social Problems
-------------------------------

The greatest difficulty that one encounters while solving social
problems is that one is bound to be influenced by factors like local
customs, traditions, habits, emotions, blind imitation and so on.
Subsequently, one is very likely to deviate from the path of truth, and
fail to distinguish between right and wrong.

In problems pertaining to logic and science however, this difficulty
does not arise. In science, one first gathers primary premises and
through logical inferences, one can arrive at a correct conclusion. In
other words, in case differences or misunderstandings do crop up in
scientific or philosophical issues, these can be usually attributed to a
lack of adequate means and equipment or an absence of logical
inferences.

Social problems, on the other hand, concern the benefits and losses,
ideals and desires of the various classes in society, and here, most
differences and disputes emerge as a result of rights and duties coming
very often into conflict, and the reason why some individuals adhere to
certain theories, opposing the views of others is because they do not
base their motives which are other than truth­ seeking, social justice
and assuring an orderly functioning of society, on reason.

It is here that often oratory, poetry, and misleading propaganda replace
rational thinking. The result is that instead of seeking the help of
experts, impartial scientists and scholars and initiating conferences to
be attended by leading scholars, unbiased discussions and
investigations, resort is often made to hooting, brawls and rows and
efforts are directed at misleading and inciting the fickle-minded.

Following this, things are likely to get worse. The enlightened, the
genii and pride of humanity, may be forbidden from guiding the people
and freedom of expression and of the pen may severely be repressed. The
lewd tongues and hireling poisonous pens would not only come to
dominate, but would be further encouraged in their selfish endeavours.
With such a corrupt order prevailing, one can easily imagine what
society's destiny would be.

Thus, one basic condition for making well-grounded judgements in such
issues, will be to analyze them from an objective angle which seeks only
the truths devoid of all emotions, the thick veils of passion or all
influence that habits or customs may exercise. In this way only, can one
arrive at truth and proper judgements be made.

Moreover, while objectively investigating such issues and for an under­
standing true to the facts, one must bear in mind the various dimensions
which govern mans' life, his social interactions and the law of
causality. So, before a categorical conclusion, the weak and strong
points of the material, spiritual, individual and social aspects must be
weighed carefully. So also, on finding that some factors contravene
others, the more important ones should be given priority.

Unfortunately, in the analysis of these issues, there usually is a
strong subjective inclination. Consequently, rational and peaceful ways
give place to colonialistic and violent ones.

Blind imitation is one factor which has exerted a negative influence
upon the solving of social problems. Indeed, too many rights are being
trampled and a high degree of deviation can be witnessed as a result of
blind, ignorant imitation of the ancestors and aliens' cultures,
crippling many societies which come to find themselves in a sad state of
helpless strangulation.

So, as said before, for a rational, logical study of these issues and
opinions true to scale, one must beware the negative influence that such
factors may exercise. One should further have an objective mind, free
from all subjection, whether by westerners or easterners, and a pure
insight free from all passion or selfish motive

The Logic of Human Nature
-------------------------

The woman's rights issue, lately, has come to shed a lot of ink in our
country. This was followed by events of which all of us are more or less
aware. However, here is not the place to discuss them. For a
well-founded study of the woman's rights, (note that she forms half of
the world's population), we should consider her position in nature and
society and find out what are he privileges and values granted her in
nature or in religious terms, by Divine Power and Wisdom.

The Holy Quran-the last, perfect Divine Book and man's eternal guide,
leading him towards prosperity and salvation both in this world and the
hereafter, tells us that social laws must be framed in accordance with
human nature:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… فِطْرَتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا ۚ لَا تَبْدِيلَ
لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ
النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***..The nature made*** ***by*** ***Allah*** ***in*** ***which He has
made men; there*** ***is*** ***no altering of Allah*** ***15 creation,
that is the right religion, but most people do not know. (30:30)***

The logic of the Quran is unique and no scholar or scientist till now
has been capable of such logic, no matter how much we study them. We
challenge all those claiming to have found a better logic, to prove the
contrary. Indeed, is there any logic as good and decisive? This question
will be clearly answered once it is explained why human nature should be
the basis of all laws and regulations.

It is a commonly accepted fact, both by past and present philosophers,
that every living being is endowed with a mechanism through which its
survival becomes possible. Experimentation and the subsequent results
have proved this beyond all doubt. Obviously there is little need for
proofs or advanced technical reasoning and a brief study of the life of
living beings, plants or animals will easily point to this fact.

For instance, it is common knowledge that a living being needs food for
its survival. However, every living being or species needs different
kinds of food according to its bodily needs. Moreover, nature has
equipped each living being with a certain digestive mechanism which
speaks for itself, for the purpose it has been created and the food that
suits it.

A study of the digestive system of the herbivorous and carnivorous
animals and the existing differences between their teeth, stomachs,
bowels and so on, can be a true testimony and a decisive evidence to
prove our point. Hence, a scientist, instructing how animals should be
fed, must take into account the difference in the digestive mechanism of
these animals and upon which, he should subsequently base his
instructions.

Of course, since animals act through instinct, and not reason, they do
not need to be instructed as far as their nourishment goes, though
animal husbandmen may need instruction in feeding and breeding the
animals.

Again, so as to obtain an optimum use from a living being's potentials,
one should study its natural mechanism to better understand its
potentials, its strength, its limitations and the way it functions. So,
the best way to determine the duties or rights of a human being will be
to study its natural potentials and qualities. No measure is in fact
better than human nature.

Woman's Natural Constitution
----------------------------

Man, being a spiritual, materialistic and intellectual animal, in
addition to his individual characteristics, his social relations must
also be considered. Therefore, a comprehensive disct1ssion on the rights
of the woman should include studies in physiology, psychology, sociology
and other related sciences.

An attempt to explain the basics of each of these may prove too much
time, consuming. But for a proper under­ standing of our discussion, a
brief explanation of these disciplines is deemed necessary.

That both man and woman are human beings is indisputable. Likewise, they
both possess common human characteristics and values. But these cannot
be taken as yardsticks in measuring the differences which exist between
their rights and duties. Such differences do exist because of their
peculiar characteristics on the basis of which they can be
distinguished. To begin with, we must consider those differences present
in the physical constitution of both the man and the woman. In other
words, we must find out what does the concept of womanhood mean and what
is its basis.

The most pointing difference between a man and a woman is their sex.
They do differ of course in their nervous systems as well as their other
systems, but a study of such differences lies within the confine of
physiology.

Man differs from the woman to a large extent from a psychological
viewpoint. Women are normally more emotional, while in man, the
intellect dominates over the emotions. This difference is directly
related to their nervous systems and a critical psychological and
physiological examination can prove very fruitful here. From a
sociological viewpoint, studies in the emergence of the family unit as a
strong factor and the role it plays in uniting the married couple must
be undertaken.

Though the difference in sex of both the male and the female may seem
normal and be regarded as a weak factor in determining their rights and
duties, careful examination will prove that this very difference may
determine to a high degree, their social status, material rights and
duties. To even claim that other differences in their nervous systems,
in their psychological set-up and so on are basically rooted in this
basic difference will not be an exaggeration.

Between the woman and the man, there exists a reciprocal love and
affection. A strong mutual sexual attraction and the pleasures that come
with it help to lay the foundation of their union, enabling nature in
this way to arrive at its goal, which is man's survival. Yet the man and
the woman do not play an equal role in realizing this goal.

For instance, if man has to some extent, a certain degree of freedom in
sexual activities, (like he cannot be forced into sexual intercourse),
with the woman, the opposite holds true. Again, man's reproductive role
is instantaneous, while the woman has to bear the burden of pregnancy
for several months. If we add to it the time she must spend on suckling,
nurture, cherishing and bringing up her child, then we see that her role
is much longer than the man's.

Oddly enough, a certain woman representative in the ex-regime's Senate
had stated: "Childbirth is the simplest of things coming naturally to
women, the same way as man would make a simple move to meet his needs."
But as we all know, pregnancy and childbirth are sacred duties which are
arduous, time consuming and momentous, and should not be compared in any
way to ordinary daily activities or discussed so crudely as done by this
woman senator.

A pregnant woman has to bear the indispositions and cravings that come
with pregnancy and needs rest and medical treatment like does a sick
person. As the doctors say, the pregnancy period resembles an illness.
All through that period, the woman must see to it that she remains in
good physical and mental shape, while at the same time, and avoid
getting nervous, excited or exhausted. A neglect of these might prove
detrimental to both the mother and the foetus.

Childbirth must also by no means be regarded as something instantaneous.
Rather, it is preceded, accompanied and followed by pains,
indispositions and possible side-effects. It is further known that after
delivery, the woman needs rest for the first few weeks, so as to regain
her normal disposition.

Now, it is fitting to note that the reason as to why the Quran has
restricted the woman's role in social affairs is not because it looks
upon her as a means to procreating more people. Neither do we intend to
argue to the contrary. We rather want to stress the more important
reproductive role of the woman. We mean that man's role in the
reproduction process cannot be compared to that of the woman, which
entails a long period of pregnancy, pains of delivery and the sufferings
that follow it.

Thus, we should recognize the woman's natural and innate role and duty
in society and consider why has she been endowed with such natural
characteristics and what are her natural demands and capabilities.

Since the burden of reproduction is the woman's only, Almighty God has
bestowed on her such a power as to enable her to perform this important
natural task, while at the same time to derive pleasure in the
performance of it. This divine gift is the spiritual force of motherly
affection.

No doubt, man would have found it unbearable had he been the one to bear
the burden of motherhood. But this is the greatest ambition of a woman
possessing a sound morale and a healthy temperament. In fact, there are
many barren women who are ready to spend a fat sum so that they can be
impregnated through medical treatment.

Usually, man does find it a pleasurable experience to have children, but
is he ready to bear the same troubles as does the woman for her child's
sake? Is he ready to wash his young child as affectionately as would do
a mother? Will he sacrifice his rest, comfort and leisures for the child
or more important still, does he derive satisfaction in such arduous,
exhausting tasks?

If you do come across such a man, then rest assured that he is an
exception to the rule. And as we know, while framing social regulations,
such exceptions cannot be considered. Furthermore, the mentalities of
the man and the woman about concepts like child bearing differ
basically.

Can we rightly claim that both sexes manifest an equal, natural
inclination towards the duty of child rearing and it’s like? Here we can
say that the difference between the man and the woman in their
psychological and physical make-up is very well-defined.

Man is usually more aggressive and quarrelsome, which qualities do not
accord with motherly sentiments and care. On the contrary, woman is more
convivial and peaceable in her feelings, in particular, motherly
affection which can be regarded as the main source of her other
emotions, the driving force behind her most willing acceptance of these
heavy duties, of which she makes ideals in life.

Here, it must be pointed out that to argue (taking into consideration
man's physical and psychological make-up) that man should shoulder
equally the duties of motherhood with the woman (which duty is
considered a most sacred one for the woman and a determining factor in
maintaining the existence of man), would be wrong.

Likewise, one cannot argue that the woman should engage in certain tasks
which have been designed especially for man by creation and act shoulder
to shoulder in cooperation with him. This reality becomes more pointing
after a study of man's anatomy, which study would show how the apparatus
of creation has constituted and built man so that he can naturally
perform certain tasks, which fact will be discussed in the pages to
come.

Physiologists and anatomists have also pointed to the difference which
exists between the autonomic nervous system of the male and that of the
female. For example, man's brain has been found to be anatomically
larger than the woman's and is, .on the average, one-hundred grams
lighter than a man's. So also, the front half of the woman's brain is
more than fifty cubic millimeters smaller than the man's. In addition,
as far as the brain structural components of both sexes go,
physiologists have proved that the male's brain is anatomically
distinguished from the female's, showing signs of superior intelligence
and mental growth.

These were some of the most remarkable differences between a normal man
and a normal woman. There might be exceptions, like in cases where a
woman's brain proves to be larger than a man's. But as already
mentioned, such exceptional cases cannot be taken into account while
framing regulations and rules for society.

The Root of the Family Unit
---------------------------

So far, in as much as the scope of this discourse has permitted, we have
pinpointed the most striking structural differences between both sexes,
whether physical or psychological, the former having a direct relation
to the latter.

Now we come to a third point, namely the natural attraction of both
sexes and the formation of the family. It is an indisputable fact that
man, in the course of his life, finds himself in perpetual need of
cooperation and assistance from his fellow-creatures, so much so, that
he is regarded to be by nature, a social animal. This characteristic has
indeed been decisive in the establishment of human societies which have
existed since ages.

But can one consider this need for cooperation and assistance for
survival, for defense against the enemy and for keeping the economy
going, as the fundamental factor behind the creation of the family
unity? Or should this assertion be rejected? Is it the same factor which
brings man to cooperate with his fellow-creature that leads both sexes
to a union to form a family?

In other words, is the most genuine and natural human union, the result
of man's pecuniary needs, his need to defend himself and so forth, or is
it above all, the result of the mutual sexual attraction that naturally
manifests itself in both sexes and the love for children that are the
actual factors behind the establishment of the family?

Has not the same Creator Who has created both the male and the female as
to be mutually attracted to each other (a feeling exerting a tremendous
influence in the course of our life, dominating all other feelings and
one of the most powerful forces in nature) meant this attraction to be
the motive force behind the establishment of the social unit called the
family?

As mentioned earlier, a similarity characterizing two creatures cannot
be taken as the cause behind the occurrence of a phenomenon peculiar to
one of them. Further, if cooperation between two persons were to lead to
the formation of the family unit, then two persons of the same sex could
establish a family considering the principle of similarity and
group-cooperation.

The necessity would not arise for the union of two members of the
opposite sex whereas the foundation of a family unit invariably
necessitates such a union, where exists a perpetual appeal between each
other.

Therefore, a study of the natural being of the human male and the
female, taking into account the sexual instinct, the natural, spiritual
peace, tranquility and pleasures govern­ ing family life, and the unique
marital relation, there will remain no doubt if any, that the family is
basically founded on that very natural, mutual attraction between them.

Nature's Guidance in Determining the Woman's Role
-------------------------------------------------

Humanity and the characteristics in common to both sexes would be
meaningless if any human being[^1] is denied certain fundamental rights;
rights which are natural, genuine and innate. Some of these rights are
the right to be· independent, the right to think and act freely, the
right to property, the right to equal justice, the right to defense of
one's legitimate rights and so on.

No person can be deprived of these rights on the basis of his colour,
sex, status, nationality or academic level. One and all should enjoy the
e rights equally regardless of their being white or black, male or
female, ruler or subject, Eastern or Western, city-dweller or villager,
educated or uneducated.

Thus, the rules governing ancient civilizations, encouraging social
privileges, bestowing the right to owner­ ship, freedom, education and
other material and spiritual rights upon an exclusive class, or those
civilizations where the woman was considered a merchandise and
salvation, a prerogative belonging only to the male sex, both in this
world and the hereafter, went against human nature.

Unfortunately, even at present, in some western nations, which are
regarded by many as the pioneers of the so-called "caravan of
civilization", one can still witness vestiges of these anti-human rules.
One obvious example is the current discrimination against the black man
on the basis of his colour.

However, there are those who by birth, possess superior qualities and
peculiar aptitudes and when we come across them, we should not ignore
them. The same thing applies to the difference that exists in the
biological and physical constitution of the man and the woman. In fact
in the legislation of the social rules, this factor should be seriously
considered.

For instance, after conception, the woman, as per her physical build-up,
becomes ready for suckling. Thus the right to suckle the baby becomes an
innate right of hers. No law can deny her this right. If a particular
law stated that a father had full authority to give his child to anyone
he. pleased for suckling, then this law would definitely be against
human nature.

Likewise, if a law stated that the woman should go on the battle-fields
to fight and defend the country against the enemy, this law would be in
contravention with human nature, because man, by birth, is endowed with
a stronger physique, is mentally more strong and therefore, naturally
more fit to fight than the woman.

Of course, if it happens that there is not enough men to fight, then the
right of defense which belongs to both sexes exacts that the woman too
should come forward to fight; but when the number of men suffices for
defense, and there is no need for women, it would not be right to ask
the latter to fight on the ground that she also has an equal claim to
the right of defense.

In such a case, it would be wrong to place the heavy and arduous burden
of war and fighting upon the woman's shoulders, because the laws and
regulations based on the common human characteristics can be applied
only in cases pertaining to those very basic and common human rights and
not in cases where the human characteristics differ. This is so because
individual characteristics call for particular regulations as per the
individual nature.

Therefore, regarding the woman, it is necessary to consider the demands
of her natural constitution in connection with social regulations.
Nature has gifted her with the unique emotion of motherly affection,
which certainly is one of her inborn qualities.

The momentous role that such emotions play in human society and their
considerable influence upon the child's upbringing and the human
emotions that they encourage in the young child is meat for discussion.
Unfortunately, the limited scope of this discourse does not permit us to
do so. We content ourselves with just mentioning that many proponents of
free sex are now giving up this crazy, corrupt philosophy on realizing
that it results in illegitimate offspring who are denied motherly
affection during their growth and the supreme human emotions that it
entails.

So, while formulating rules and regulations pertaining to the female
sex, one should invariably keep in mind that these should in no way
contradict the sacred duty of motherhood or be incompatible with the
innate, divinely gifted emotions of the female.

Moreover, researchers have proved beyond all doubt, that a society based
on the family system is the most natural and genuine of societies. Such
a society is the outcome of the natural urge that both sexes feel
towards each other. Any law contravening this natural order will
therefore be inhuman, detrimental to society and repressive to the woman
and the whole of mankind.

Another noteworthy point is that, the same as the woman[^2] by birth is
more emotional than the man, the latter is physically and mentally
stronger. It is this very difference between them that makes the
evolution of human society and man possible. The wide research of
physiologists and psychologists tells us that this superiority is an
indisputable reality. History also, all through, has pointed to this
truth.

So, certain tasks which accord with man's physiological and mental
structures, tasks like fighting which demands a lot of courage, should
be reserved for him, whether they bring pleasure or pain. Indeed, this
shall benefit mankind as a whole and be in accordance with the natural
order.

The Woman in Islam
------------------

Before plunging into this discussion, we must mention a few points:

1- For a realistic understanding of the fund aments of Islam, a primary
careful examination of the Quranic verses, the undistorted narrations of
the Holy Prophet of Islam (S.A.W.) and the impeccable Imams (A.S.) and
their life becomes imperative.

One must not analyse the dictates of Islam on the basis of the action of
some Muslims at a certain time or place. For instance, if some Muslims
abuse the woman's rights, this injustice should not be attributed to
Islam.

Likewise, it would be wrong to affirm that Islam has ignored the
legitimate rights of the woman on hearing or observing that somewhere or
at a certain period, the Muslims have been denying the woman her
legitimate rights. When one observes Islamic tenets being negated in
some Muslim lands, which prefer rather to copy Western cultures, one
should not conclude that the governing laws agree with Islam, even if
millions of Muslims do follow these Westernized ways.

Again, the distortions, carried so often to extremes and the wrong
conceptions of the Westerners cannot be attributed to the religion of
Jesus Christ (A.S.). We know that some Christian sects hold that the
woman is not a full human being and that she is a link between animals
and mankind or that her soul (excepting that of Virgin Mary) is not
eternal, eternal salvation being the prerogative of man alone. These
far-fetched conceptions cannot be attributed to Christ's teachings. So
also, it would be totally wrong to associate the reigning corruption and
prostitution in the Western world with Christianity.

2- Civil and Penal Laws are framed while considering the average normal
citizen of a society and exceptions have no room here. There are in fact
very few constitutional articles which are based on exceptions. Thus, if
there are exceptional cases which contravene existing laws, these laws
cannot be called invalid. One cannot blame the legislator when such
cases do crop up.

3- The religious laws and precepts, do not only preserve the order of
society and safeguard its material interests, but also take stock of the
spiritual and intellectual aspects. It would be wrong to imagine that
Islamic injunctions bother themselves only with worldly interests.

In fact, how can one suppose that the Exalted Legislator-Almighty God,
Who has given utmost importance to man's eternal salvation and Who has,
so splendidly exhibited the spirit of Tawhid (Divine Unity) and Divine
worship in all the manifestations of life, has neglected the spiritual
aspect, giving sole importance to what is material?

This however does not imply that in the sacred teachings and precepts of
this perfect Divine religion, the material is totally absent. Indeed,
how can one believe that God-the Almighty Legislator, Who has
established such a perfect balance between body and soul to fulfil the
goal of creation and has made of this world a farm where man sows the
seeds of his eternal life and reaps the fruits in the here­ after
according to his deeds and beliefs in this world, could have neglected
the material aspects in the religious teachings of this sacred religion.

We should be invariably mindful that God has created man in this earthly
world so that he can attain perfection for which he has been ordained in
the evolutionary course of his life. His earthly life is the foundation
for his eternal life. His beliefs, ways and deeds in this world will
directly determine his eternal life, a life of salvation or chastisement
as the case may be.

Divine Legislation directs man, in the course of his life, to recognize
the straight path in the light of Divine Guidance and instructions so
that journeying on that divinely illuminated path he can reach the ideal
destination. Man by instinct, like the animal fails to recognize and
distinguish between good and evil. This explains his need for Divine
Legislation as a discussion on prophecy would reveal.

Thus, man's instincts do not help him to differentiate between right and
wrong in this earthly world, affecting life in both the worlds. His
intellect also fails to satisfy this purpose of creation.

The human brain, limited in its capacity, cannot fore­ see all things
which bring salvation, in particular, salvation in the next
world-eternal life. Having not yet entered the next world, the human
intellect fails to perceive the means, conditions and causes which bring
prosperity and salvation in that world, or the obstacles on the way to
eternal salvation.

Due to this, man often fails to distinguish between good and evil in the
course of his life, preventing him from directing his actions in the way
of eternal salvation. That is why he becomes in need of Divine
revelation by the One Who has command over all lives, affairs and Who
Knows the ins and outs of the apparatus of creation.

So, both Divine Creation and Divine Legislation have one goal. Each
complements the other. It is obvious! that the Creator of man Who places
him on the Divine Path in nature through guidance and instructions about
Divine Creation and Legislation so that he may attain the ideal, does so
for man's progress and well-being. He is the One and Only, the
All-Knowing and All-Seeing, whether it stands in relation to the
material, the spiritual or the world after.

Is there anyone besides God, the One and Only, Who can be All-Knowing
and All-Seeing and Who can frame regulations governing man's life in
such a comprehensive way which covers all aspects, whether material or
spiritual?

Hence, we can state that Muhammad (S.A.W.), the Seal of all Prophets,
was sent Divine Revelation which he communicated to mankind so that the
latter through Divine Guidance, can attain an ideal state of perfection
and well­ being in both worlds and that this Revelation does not err in
the least.

So, anyone who considers himself a Muslim and who believes Islamic
injunctions to be defective and inadequate in meeting society's needs,
or that they are relevant only at a certain time or place, is either
definitely ignorant of the fundaments of Islam, or lacks the intellect
for its understanding.

4- With the conflicting opinions and thoughts ever since the beginning
of man's history and the continuous advance in some fields of knowledge,
we know that the ideal, the highest stage of perfection has, till now,
not yet been experienced by man. At no period of time, and in no places,
has he been able to grasp all the mysteries and truths of creation.

At present, scientists are perplexed by many mysteries and realities of
creation which they have not yet come to solve. And no one, in his right
mind, can claim that man will not gain new fields of knowledge. Some
have foolishly asserted that man of the atom age has solved all the
mysteries of creation. Yet, it has been a long time since they have
realized how baseless their assertions have been.

One cannot expect to understand all the puzzles of creation. The same as
we do not understand the enigmatic being of a human, we certainly cannot
expect to understand the complex system of Divine Legislation in regard
to the material, the physical, intellectual and other worldly aspects.

No doubt, new mysteries will become known to man of the future, the same
way the unknown of the past few centuries have become the known to
contemporary man. And still, there are mysteries yet to be discovered by
man and there are others which go beyond his understanding.

5- The fact remains that the invaluable collection of Islamic teachings,
comprising beliefs, morals, and individual and social rules is an
electuary healing the pains and ailments of society and ensuring
salvation of man in this world and the hereafter. Yet it shouldn't be
concluded· that Islamic injunctions and rules will all by themselves
bring the ideal result under any condition.

And hence, statements like, "This rule of Islam is anachronistic to our
contemporary society" must be avoided. The time factor must not be
attributed to Islamic dictates and these must not be thought defective.

Careful examination will reveal that if an Islamic dictate seems
apparently ineffective (if at all it is), this is due to a neglect of
other Islamic dictates, inadequate religious education, moral and
spiritual decadence in our present society and not because Islamic laws
are defective or are limited to a certain period of time or place.

Concerning the woman's position in Islam, it is to be noted that Islam
regards the woman as an independent, perfect member of society and
places no difference between her and the man as far as human virtues go.

Islam maintains that salvation will be attained only through piety,
virtue, knowledge and good deeds. As says the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ
أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ .. 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Oh*** ***you men! surely We have created you of a male and a female,
and made you tribes and families that you may know each other, surely
the most honourable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful
(of his duty)…" (49: 13)***

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنِّي لَا أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ مِنْكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْثَىٰ ۖ
بَعْضُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْضٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"I will not waste the work of a worker among you, whether male or
female, the one of you being from the other."(3:195)***

Therefore, Islam does not differentiate between the virtuous, dutiful
man and the woman possessing the same qualities. In Islamic society, the
woman has the right to own and sell property, to inheritance, to seek
knowledge and even to engage in legitimate trade. In Prophet Mohammad's
(S.A.W.) time, there was a woman named Zeinab 'Aattaare who sold
perfumes and had the Prophet as one of her clients. In Islam, the woman
can also take pan in social activities in so far as her participation is
consistent with chastity and virtue:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا فَعَلْنَ فِي أَنْفُسِهِنَّ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"There is no blame on you for what they do for themselves in a lawful
manner," (2:234)***

In Early Islam, the women used to accompany the Muslim combatants
(Mujahedeen) to the war fronts and helped in cooking and nursing the
wounded and so forth.

There however does exist a certain difference between the rights and
duties of both sexes in Islam. For instance, only the men can engage in
the administration of justice, in governing, and embarking on Jihad
(excluding defense). Also, the woman's share in inheritance is half
against that of the man.

The right to divorce and polygamy under certain conditions belong to man
alone. The woman must obey her husband in the marital relations and that
is why she should not leave her home without prior permission from him.
The latter on his part, should support his wife and provide her with the
necessities of life to the best of his financial capacity. In some cases
even, Islam says that, if necessary, the husband must employ a servant
for his wife.

In Islam, the duty of house-keeping like laundry, cooking, cleaning and
even child-rearing does not necessarily belong to the woman and she can
claim a salary from her husband in return for such tasks.

All these are considered legal in Islam. Again, when religious training
and Islamic morality is encouraged, the family enjoys peace, pleasure,
respect, mutual love, affection and sincerity. Obviously, in those
families, educated and trained in accordance with Islamic precepts and
values, few cases of dispute are reported.

Now, we should see whether Islam contradicts the natural order when it
differentiates between the man and the woman as far as their rights go.
As said before, a proper understanding of this question would
necessitate a careful examination of the demands of both sexes' innate
dispositions in view of their rights and duties. The time factor however
does not permit a detailed explanation of this. So we shall be content
with giving only a brief account, hoping that in future, an elaborate
discussion can be presented.

As common experiences have proved, man is physically and intellectually
superior to the woman who herself is more emotional. Hence, jobs
demanding more of intellect and where emotions are impediments should go
to man as per the natural order. This must be so because it is the
rulers and judges who must preserve the rights of all classes in
society. If emotions are allowed to permeate government and judgement,
then the rights of many will be violated by the authorities in charge.

So, government and legal judgement should lie where reason dominates
over feelings. But one should not conclude that the mere fact of being a
man is the sole criterion for governing and exercising judicial
functions. Other conditions which have been explained in Islam must also
be satisfied.

We rather mean that considering both sexes, man is naturally born for
certain activities. Thus, when Islam makes such a distinction between
them, it can in no way be said to be oppressive to the women or debasing
to their values and dignity. The same must be said when Islam calls the
man to be the bread-earner, or the warrior.

Man cannot take this to be derogatory to his status and values. These
Islamic dictates aim at ensuring cooperation and mutual assistance for
society's order and interests, through a proper usage of the divinely
bestowed gifts to all human beings, no matter their sex.

Since man is physically and mentally superior, he should indulge in
social activities calling for these two qualities, while the woman,
being more emotional, should undertake duties like house-keeping and
child-rearing so that she can bring up pious and dutiful children.

As mentioned, the Omnipotent Creator, in view of the family being the
core of society, has provided us with conditions which would establish
its foundation. For instance, the natural sex magnetism, to unite into a
lifelong companionship where peace and happiness can be sought.

The family also awakes that innate nature, namely the natural affection
that any human being feels towards its offspring. The illuminating
religion of Islam considers family life to be of great significance. In
Islam, the woman brings mental peace and happiness and the mutual
affection between the couples is in accordance with the natural order.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from
yourselves that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love
and compassion..." (30:21)***

This verse makes clear the harmony that exists between Divine
Legislation in the natural order of creation and human nature. Now we
should see what laws and regulations should be framed in relation to the
demands and requirements of the family institution.

The vital significance of the family society can be understood through
meditation on the Quranic verses, which significance has been testified
and confirmed by researchers and sociologists.

The family comprising these two main elements, namely man and woman,
calls for their mutual cooperation and provides for their needs. In
reality, both of them together form one body, enabling the tree of
humanity to grow and eventually bear fruit. So, it is through
cooperation that the couple can nurture and educate the seed of their
fruits.

No doubt, · man's natural role in the process of reproduction differs
from that of the woman. His is instantaneous while hers is
time-consuming and painful. A woman cherishes this fruit inside her body
for several months, nurturing it with the juice of her life and after
child-birth, she embraces it as she would her own life and soul, suckles
it and instinctively, sacrifices rest, comfort and peace for it.

Really, would not we be oppressing the woman, if apart from the heavy
duties that womanhood entails, we do impose the arduous, exhausting
duties of the man upon her? Does the natural order call the woman to
leave her child in nurseries and go struggling for a living? What will
the woman do with her breasts full of milk? How should she tolerate
being separated from her child since her motherly love and affection can
bring insanity to her if such a painful separation does occur? Should
not the man be the one to financially support the family to compensate
the woman for the heavy ordeal of pregnancy, child-birth, suckling,
nurturing and the other duties that come with motherhood?

Should the man think selfishly of satisfying his sexual desires and
forget all about the woman's heavy burden and duties? Can it correctly
be affirmed that the woman's sexual promiscuity thereby killing all her
motherly feelings, benefit her since by so indulging, she frees herself
from natural and innate bonds? Can it be claimed that when we deny the
child motherly affection, a divinely bestowed gift, making of the family
a cold and lifeless unit (as so often is the case with western
countries, especially America), is a fundamental step towards reforming
society and securing women's rights? Can such actions which go against
the natural order benefit society?

Answers to these questions can easily he found if one looks at the
ever-increasing social miseries, sufferings and the mind-blowing
statistics on suicide, murder, theft, and so on in the western world and
at the pains of the apparently so-called civilized world as a result of
its being deprived of the comfort, mental peace and happiness of family
life.

As a famous orientalist says: "The pleasure that a Muslim derives from
kissing his child is not imaginable to many westerners, because in the
civilized world of today, few men are positive that their· children are
really their own." He adds: "I do not think that the westerners can bear
to see the easterners enjoying this privilege. Perhaps they will take it
away from them soon."

Those who are under the illusion of the industrialized world of the
westerners, and allow themselves to be subject to their poisonous
propaganda, still imagine the west to be like paradise, that anything
western is worthy of commendation and imitation. These people, upon
realizing their wrong conceptions, will regret painfully. But this
painful realization, however, comes to them too late, i.e. when the
person or the family has already been ruined through continuous
deviations.

As a matter of fact, many western scientists and writers are beginning
to realize the harm done by such misconceptions of life and values and
are now directing efforts at solving this dilemma. Unfortunately,
western societies, in corruption and immorality, have already reached a
state of no return.

As states an· American writer: "To remove these problems, it is
necessary to reform and strengthen the family life and once more, put
into practice the useful principles and rules which once governed the
happiness of the family members and nations and which have been lost
now. Women should obey and respect their husbands while the latter
should love their wives and observe their respective rights."

An English woman writes: "I wish our country were like the Muslim
countries, where an atmosphere of chastity and purity has embraced even
the bondswomen. Really, why isn't such an atmosphere encouraged in our
society where women, as per their nature, would engage in house-keeping,
leaving outdoor jobs to men, whereby safeguarding their own honour?

Here we recommend those who upon witnessing the western cabarets and
other centres of corruption, argue that scientists and inventors like
Pasteur, Edison and Einstein are products of such centres of corruption
to at least take a glance at the unprejudiced investigations and
writings of some western researchers, scientists, writers and
publications. By so doing, they might recognize the value of Islamic
teachings and not give away the divinely bestowed, invaluable gift that
is Islam.

Now, having shown that the social rules should be so formulated as to be
in accordance with human nature, it· becomes clear that child-rearing
and house-keeping are duties which should go to the woman. On the other
hand, those duties which accord with man's natural constitution, such as
the duty of supporting the family should be reserved to him. Thus, the
family unit which guarantees the survival of the human race and nurtures
competent, pious individuals will serve its purpose in the best way.

When we regard the duties of both sexes, we see that the greater share
of man in property inheritance is quite just and moreover, in reality,
the woman does share this property with him. In this connection, can it
be said that Islam violates the woman's rights? We leave it to the just
to answer this question.

We should further not neglect to mention that man has not been merely
created for material and sexual pursuits. Rather, the sexual instinct is
one among many endowed in human nature for the attainment of certain
goals, though one should not neglect one's sexual instinct for
satisfying other instincts by going to extremes.

Nor is it proper to undermine all humane virtues and supreme goals of
creation so as to satisfy the sexual instinct. Today, many are the
sexual perverts, who in their vain attempt to satisfy their sadistic
sexual desires, supposedly fight for the emancipation and freedom of the
woman. Their only aim is to satisfy their sexual desires while watching
the exposed bodies and painted faces of the women and indulge in
illegitimate, anti-human sexual relations with them.

But Islam which looks at all matters from all possible angles and
recognizes only the truth, distinguishing between good and evil,
strictly prohibits unchastity and sexual exploitation of women,
regarding this to be detrimental to humane virtues and the family.

Islam commands the woman to cover herself from head to toe once she
leaves her house and outside the family environment (according to many
Islamic jurisprudents, the covering of the face and hands up to the
wrists is not necessary). This is so to prevent men other than her
husband, or close relatives with whom marriage is prohibited, such as
brothers, uncles and so on from seeing her physique. The woman outside
the family environment must also not use make-up so as to attract the
men and engage in coquetry in any way. As says the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَلْيَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلَىٰ جُيُوبِهِنَّ وَلَا يُبْدِينَ
زِينَتَهُنَّ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And let them wear their head-coverings over their bosoms and not
display their ornaments." (24:31)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا تَخْضَعْنَ بِالْقَوْلِ فَيَطْمَعَ الَّذِي فِي قَلْبِهِ مَرَضٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Then be not soft in (your) speech, lest be in whose heart is a
disease yearn," (33:32)***

Islam also regards the right to divorce as exclusive to man. To
understand why that is so, we must consider the following basic points:

On one hand, the preservation of the family institution is of vital
importance while on the other hand, there are factors which do cause
disagreement and discord in the family, so that the couple finds life
unbearable together. Here, it becomes important for the marriage
contract to be terminable.

The woman, being by nature more emotional and quick to take offence, is
likely to misuse the right of divorce had it rested with her. Being hurt
for a trivial reason, out of emotions, she can ruin the family by a
misuse of this right.

The rising rate of divorce in European and American societies are clear
testimonies to this fact. As statistics reveal, a least one out of every
five marriages in America, ends m divorce and eighty percent of the
appeals for divorce come from women, on petty excuses. Therefore, man, a
more rational and less emotional animal, has a right claim to the right
of divorce.

Yet, in Islam, divorce is regarded as a bitter medicine which should not
be applied except in extreme cases, with hard conditions and careful
observance of the rights of both parties. In the Quranic verses
pertaining to divorce, Allah­ e Compassionate strictly addresses men,
giving them instructions, advices, admonitions and warning them not to
misuse this right:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاءَ فَبَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ فَأَمْسِكُوهُنَّ
بِمَعْرُوفٍ أَوْ سَرِّحُوهُنَّ بِمَعْرُوفٍ ۚ وَلَا تُمْسِكُوهُنَّ
ضِرَارًا لِتَعْتَدُوا ۚ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَقَدْ ظَلَمَ نَفْسَهُ
ۚ وَلَا تَتَّخِذُوا آيَاتِ اللَّهِ هُزُوًا ۚ وَاذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ
اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَمَا أَنْزَلَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ
وَالْحِكْمَةِ يَعِظُكُمْ بِهِ ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ
اللَّهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And when you divorce women and they reach their prescribed time,
then either retain them in good fellowship or set them free with
liberality, and do not retain them for injury, so that you exceed the
limits, and whoever does this, he indeed is unjust to his own soul; and
do not take Allah's communications for a mockery, and remember the
favour of Allah upon you, and that which He has revealed to you of the
Book and the Wisdom, admonishing you thereby, and be careful (of your
duty to) Allah, and know that Allah is the Knower of all things."
(2:231)***

Thus, if one observes an abuse of the right to divorce, one should
understand that this is a result of deviation from the teachings of the
Quran and not because the Islamic dictates are defective in any way.
This deviation is effected by those who keep the people away from
Islamic teachings and keep them busy with corruptive entertainments like
pornographic films, immoral publications ......

Another right given to man by Islam is the right to polygamy. Now let's
see whether this is an extreme idea and against the natural order, or
whether it benefits society and accords with nature. The following
points will help in giving a better understanding:

1) Man becomes potentially reproductive in early puberty and till late
in his life, he is able to fulfil his own role in reproduction, while
the woman usually becomes barren after the age of fifty.

Thus, a twenty-year-old male married to a fifteen-year­ old female will
presumably be potentially reproductive for a thirty-five year period.
After this period, the man will still be potentially reproductive until
the age of ninety. However, the woman won't be so in the second phase of
her marital life. There will thus be no ground for rearing the seeds put
in man's loins by nature.

2) Man faces no natural obstacle, whether seasonal or non-seasonal in
his reproductive functions. But the woman is subject to these natural
obstacles which hinder her reproductive role even at a very early age,
such as menstruation which occurs monthly and lasts for a few days and
all through her menstruation, the woman is not fit for sexual coitus.

In addition, during pregnancy, when the womb is nurturing the foetus as
well as a few weeks after conception, the woman's reproductive organs
cannot rear new seeds and that is so also in many cases during the
suckling phase.

3) It is harmful for a woman to have sexual intercourse at the time when
her womb is not ready for impregnation. Hence, Islam has prohibited
sexual intercourse during the menstruation and Lochia period. Obviously,
if in such cases, men are not allowed to satisfy their sexual urge in a
legitimate way, they may seek illegitimate relations, in particular,
those men living in tropical countries and those who are sexually
hot-blooded.

4) Girls naturally become ready for marriage several years earlier than
boys, and this difference is so pointing that while determining the
legal age of marriage, this fact has to be taken into account.

Thus, even if we suppose that both sexes are equal in number (though the
number of women mostly exceeds that of the men), still we have to admit
that there will invariably be more females of marriageable age than
males.

5) Since man is more likely to be exposed to dangers like war, mine
accidents, explosions and the like, there are invariably many widowed
women and many girls who are ready for marriage but remain unmarried. As
in Germany and some other countries where, though many years have passed
since the end of World War II, its effects are still being felt,
explaining the reason for the high number of those who are in favour of
polygamy in those regions.

The above facts and taking notice that the natural goal of the marriage
institution is the survival of the human race and the magnification of
the human generation, clearly show why Islam allows polygamy for men.

However, it should be noted that in Islam, the prescription for polygamy
is subject to the perfect observance of justice among the wives. That
is, Islam holds that a man is allowed to practice polygamy on condition
that he can treat all his wives on an equal basis. Moreover, Islam has
also presented ways which can enable the woman to restrict this right of
man as well as his right to divorce.

It is known by all that in countries where the law of polygamy is not
officially recognized, actually men do not content themselves with one
wife and indulge in illegitimate extra-marital promiscuous relations
(single and double adultery), whether temporary or permanent. In a
lecture given at a gathering of members from the churches of Germany,
Isaac Teeler disclosed this fact. He said: "It is true that apparently
the Christians do not marry more than one woman, but we know that how
heinously they engage in illegitimate extra marital relations in
secret."

Moreover, in such Christian communities, homosexuality is shamefully so
common, as in England where presumably this satanic act is considered
somewhat more disgraceful than it is in other western countries. The
'Kenzy' and 'Lefindon' reports and others on this issue reveal how the
so-called aristocrats indulge in this shameful act which has so often
ended in suicide and murder.

It is indeed extremely surprising that in countries where "concubinage"-
(practice of living as man and wife when not lawfully married) is not
legally prohibited, abnormal sex is the rule. Again, more shocking
still, is the fact that in spite of such rampant corruption and sexual
deviations in these countries, they are still pessimistic about polygamy
and temporary marriage-factors which aim at checking corruption and
adultery.

[^1]: The expression "any human being" is here meant to include every
mature and intelligent person who is rated as a perfect member of
society by religion and the intellect. Children and those insane are
excluded.

[^2]: Of course, the woman is superior to the man in certain qualities,
one of which is her power of resistance against certain diseases and
ailments.


