Islam and Women's Rights
========================

by Muhammad Jawad Bahonar

Introduction
------------

The story of woman's rights and her liberty is one of the live and
attractive issues being discussed over the last few years in the Eastern
circles. Islamic countries are also faced with this debate, and
different societies have different views in this regard, positive and/or
negative.

Occasionally the matter extends beyond the limits of a debate and
quietly enters the field of action making some special appearances in
the Islamic environment. This issue of freedom and equality of rights is
occasionally extended to such lengths; rightly or wrongly, that it
reaches sensational limits, sometimes to the extent of being dangerous
and repulsive.

Naturally in these discussions or actions, the name of Islam is also
dragged in and various interpretations of the Islamic viewpoint are made
in this regard. Some say that Islam is totally opposed to any liberty or
progress for women and declare that Islam regards woman as a lowly
weakling totally captive in the hands of man, deprived of all rights and
social privileges.

She, according to them, has no right to property or dignity, not even in
the selection of her husband and determination of her own destiny. She
is deprived of the blessing of letters and is required to stay, with her
eyes and ears closed, in the corner of her house, detached from society,
to obediently perform every whim of her husband. She is condemned to
live the life of a miserable creature that has no wider role to play in
the human society. The life envisaged for her is the mean life of a
helpless captive condemned to live and die without rights and without
dignity. This is one type of thinking in regard to Islam's view of
women's rights.

There is another group of extremists who feel that they can stretch
Islamic laws in accordance with their whims and fancies and make the
sacred laws of Islam march in step with their own imagination at all
cost. They feel that Islam has granted all sorts of rights and freedom
to woman so as to permit her to intervene in all social spheres along
with men, working shoulder to shoulder with him.

At times she is pictured as being present on the battlefront and,
sometimes, supposed to decorate the seat of a deputy or a minister. She
may roll up her sleeves and work to launch missiles, hold the command of
an army or sign a treaty of peace.

She is also, at times, required to dance in rhythm with men and twine
her arms in the arms of any friend or stranger or appear in her bikini,
bathing in public swimming pools or at the beaches. They are those who
do not consider it wise, in view of social considerations, to formally
negate the Islamic doctrines. They, therefore, try as far as possible,
to explain and interpret Islamic laws so as to meet their objectives.

There is another group which, without the least reservation or
hesitation, openly and clearly pursue their objectives. It is none of
their business that the country is an Islamic state or its people
followers of the teachings of Islam. Irrespective of all this, they move
ahead in the direction of their whims and fancies and senseless
imitation of others.

As to the question how this debate started, what its origin is, here are
the clues.

Change in Woman's Legal Position in Europe
------------------------------------------

A woman in the tribal and barbaric societies was considered a sub­human
beast or a chattel used to fulfil sensual needs and required to perform
menial and worthless jobs. She was a bonded labourer who lived only to
be exploited by man in whatever manner he deemed fit. She did not live
to enjoy life or exercise human rights and privileges.

Later, in semi‑barbaric or half‑civilized human societies, woman
continued to be the subject of debate, and different opinions were
expressed about her such as:

• Woman is the abominable creation of the devil;

• She does not have a human soul, hence no life in the Hereafter;

• Women's deeds are not acceptable to God;

• Being a means of satanic seduction, she should be physically tortured;

• Death, poison, fire and the serpent are lesser evils compared to her;

• Girls should be buried alive to wash away the scars of disgrace;

• Women are human beings, but were created to serve man.

These and other such views in regard to woman have been expressed by the
ancient Romans, Arabs, Frenchmen and Athenians.

Europe's civilized societies recognize woman as a human being but
deprive her of many a human right. They even did not consider her to be
a citizen of the state, nor granted her any personal rights. A girl was
required to accept anyone selected by her guardians as her husband.

She was only the means of fulfilling the carnal desires of man and
maintained for this purpose. She was used to work on farms and at home
on the one hand, and, on the other, to satisfy man's sexual passions;
beyond this she had no significant legal protection.

Before the advent of the Industrial Revolution, European families lived
a simple and modest life; women helped in agriculture and house­hold
affairs. They occasionally kept themselves busy with some small
handicrafts within the household.

However, the family and social life of a woman, along with her husband
and children, was confined to the premises of her home, enriched by the
environment of mutual love and affection. The Industrial Revolution
brought into existence large industrial complexes and heavy industries.
The need for large numbers of workers resulted in the break-up of the
family.

Women and children had to leave the warm family atmosphere of their
villages and were dragged into industrial cities and towns. Hard and
tiring working conditions, break-up of families, unlawful mixing of
women with men in the work premises, the pressure of sexual urges on
both sides, the erosion of familial sentiments, the exploitation of
unprotected and unsheltered women by the managers of industrial houses
in order to satisfy their lusts, resulting in the spread of corruption,
prepared the ground for a revolution.

The women felt that the burden of life had fallen on their shoulders and
they had been deprived of all sentiments and privileges of a pleasant
family life. They had lost their husbands, their children, their honour,
their chastity and everything else.

They realized that although the war had devoured millions of men and
youth, and the factory owners were in urgent need of women to keep the
wheels of industries moving, yet they never attached any value to them
and continued to oppress them.

Moreover, they were not even paid proper wages. Discrimination between
men and women continued. The women were dragged into all types of
corruption and moral pollution. The unsheltered and unprotected women,
crushed under the pressure of such a life, were compelled to surrender
to this forced life of indignity and sub‑human existence.

They felt that they had lost everything: they had to turn the wheel, to
carry the burden and yet keep their mouths shut. They had to tolerate
oppression yet abstain from protests under its crushing weight,
Apparently, they were working shoulder to shoulder with men, but, in
fact, they were no more than the oppressed beasts of burden fallen
captive in the hands of a handful of profiteers. Every hour they had to
surrender to all and sundry, suffering severe indignities for meagre
wages.

The pressures caused by this atmosphere aroused their feelings and
encouraged them to protest and strike resulting in their eventual
arrests and killings.

Finally as a result of continued efforts, through speeches and writings,
they found their way to the centres of authority and penetrated into the
legislative assemblies. Slowly and gradually, they not only achieved the
goal of equal pay for equal work, but also achieved equal rights with
men with the right to participate in all spheres of activity. The
question is, how far has this freedom and equality of rights in all
spheres been to the benefit of men and women or how far has it been
harmful to them? This is the subject of another debate to be discussed
some other time.

Woman's “Liberation” Comes to Eastern Countries
-----------------------------------------------

Europe with its industrial advancement achieved industrial hegemony over
the world. This was followed with expanded activities in other fields as
well. The European civilization with its big row and fanfare succeeded
in snatching the leadership of the world and attracting the attention of
the backward nations.

The nations of the East were so impressed by European developments that
for them any­thing that the Europeans did was exemplary. Their food,
their dress, their mode of thinking, their etiquette, their morals,
laws, their system of public rights and everything else were regarded as
flawless and to be diligently imitated. They felt that whatever the
Europeans did and said must be accepted with folded hands and closed
eyes.

They felt that they should lay down their determination, their
individual respect, their moral and material wealth, their religion and
national customs and traditions at the feet of these Europeans and in
turn put the chains of slavery around their necks without any complaint.

Following this allurement mixed with moral and spiritual weak­ness,
these lovers of the West turned their eyes towards it anxiously waiting
to welcome whatever came from Europe. The tumult of woman's liberation
and its practical off‑shoots found their way to the Islamic countries,
where they received a warm welcome as souvenirs from the West,
forgetting that it was a creation of special circumstances and
developments in the West that demanded such an outcome; whereas those
conditions did not prevail in Islamic countries.

Islam, for the last so many centuries, had granted a dignified
personality to woman, bestowing all human rights and privileges upon
her, including some special rights in particular spheres. It will be
discus­sed in detail as to how Islam did provide a special privileged
position to the female sex and favoured her with a sublime position in
accordance with her physical and spiritual structure.

It may be pointed out that the explosive conditions of industrial
development, resulting in the break-up of families, leading to the
suffer­ing and oppression of women, and calling for a revolution in
Europe, did not exist in these countries. But it was only the urge for
doing what others had done that obliged the people in Islamic countries
to follow suit.

They thought that whatever came from Europe was a heavenly command to be
followed. On the other hand, all this had a strong appeal based on
sensual and carnal desires. All these factors put together brought a
group into existence that started struggling for the so‑called women's
liberation. They gathered under this slogan and the result is what we
see today.

The Relationship between Woman's Natural Structure and Her Rights
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Here, as we enter the main subject itself, we shall discuss the question
of women's rights from the Islamic point of view, setting aside all
fanaticism and keeping ourselves aloof from the pressures of the
environment and the uproar of the supporters of \`civilization'. Let us
first of all briefly consider men and women from the point of view of
physical structure, biological and psychological make‑up and see whether
or not these two creatures have any difference from these

points of view. If they have, do these differences demand that each of
them should have a particular limitation or special rights? Also,
whether or not these legal differences in such special circumstances are
incompa­tible or inconsistent with the human personality and social
status of either of them?

The world is full of different objects and phenomena, each having its
own peculiarities as different from the others. Each has its own
limitations and special features that bring elegance and grace to them.
There is variety amongst animals, the fauna and flora, and simi­larly
between individuals of the same species.

Similarly, human beings are different and have particular
characteristics. Whereas differences between species are deep, the
differences amongst individuals are super­ficial. However two persons
are not the same in all respects, so much so that even the fingerprints
of two persons are sufficient to distinguish one from another, leave
alone other aspects. One notices differences amongst people in their
thoughts, capabilities, sentiments, mental and physical abilities, the
intensity of instincts, outward appearance, height and weight and other
internal and external factors.

The effect of these superficial differences is witnessed in the status
and ranks these individuals obtain in society. Each according to his
capabilities and circumstances shares the burden of the society: It is
this variety that fulfils all the requirements of the society and
perpetuates the movement of life.

In regard to men and women, there are some deeper observable differences
that make the two sexes separate from each other and call for special
duties and status for each of them. As far as the physiologi­cal
structure is concerned, the male is on an average endowed with stronger
nerves, physical structure, greater weight, height, and brain quantity.
This by itself indicates that he is made for hard and difficult jobs.'

The part of the brain that is related to emotions is more in a female,
whereas the portion of the brain dealing with thought and deliberation
is greater in a male. As against this one notes that a female's body is
equipped with organs to carry a child and feed it with her milk. This is
a special feature bestowed upon her, indicating that a child's training
is her obligation.

Training a child needs strength and richness of feelings so that the
child's growing and ever‑changing demands are catered to. Undoubtedly,
woman, with her special physical features meant to bring up children,
has also been equipped by nature with the required emotions and strong
feelings of love and affection for the child. This maintains the
discipline and order in human life.

The very fact that the woman is endowed with great affection and tender
sentiments as compared with a man goes to prove her special
responsibi­lities towards human society and there is no need for any
elaborate argument in this respect.

Role of Thought and Emotion
---------------------------

Affection is a deep, tender sentiment that creates a sense of tolerance,
courage and patience. It is soon provoked and makes a deep immediate
effect. It is a sentiment that needs no deliberation or any long drawn
out preliminaries. Its objective is quickly attained and no careful long
term planning is needed. Affection, in other words, is deep interest and
strong passion that is superficial and not deep rooted but at the same
time elegant and glorious.

A child's cry or his smile soon provokes the loving heart of the mother
and attracts her deep affection. It is with the mother's burning
affection that children's continual demands are fulfilled. The
lamentations and bitter sighs of a pale‑faced patient and his bony frame
can affect only a sensitive heart, which would provide it with untiring
nursing care.

The scene of untiring and ceaseless efforts of a man in his struggle for
a living, his perspiring forehead, his tired face and exhausted nerves
invoke the sentiment of affection in a woman. It is out of this
senti­ment that she tries to make her house a well‑managed refuge full
of joy, so that the exhaustion caused to her husband due to his,
struggle in life can be compensated for in the warmth and affectionate
atmosphere of the family.

It is under the shadow of this affection and the freshness of this
loving sentiment that man forgets his fatigue. It is the aesthetic sense
of a woman and her flair for elegance that affects the dress of her
husband and children and gives a look of charm and luxury to the home
and makes it glow with life and the spirit to live.

As against this, the search for livelihood and struggle for life need
far‑sightedness and perseverance, both of which require thoughtfulness.

Sentiment cannot tolerate to view objectives and goals from a far‑off
distance. It cannot rear into its heart a love which may ripen and bear
fruit ten years later, which would at first appear like a fairy tale or
myth for whose achievement it has to tolerate all kinds of hardships. It
cannot traverse this long distance, overcome obstructions on its way and
pave the path towards success.

The emotive spirit does not get along well with deceptive and colourful
manifestations in the path of the search for a living. This strenuous
and crooked path needs strength that, despite tender sentiments, is
accompanied by a fiery doggedness that does not easily surrender, but
exhibits a tolerance and coolness that supersedes sentiment and emotion.
It is through such hardhearted­ness and connivance that a man has to run
the race of reaching pros­perity and achieving his objectives.

It is up to a man to maintain and protect his family in the tumult of
life, whether it is by cutting wood in a jungle, or by operating huge
industrial machines and installations, or participation in the
battlefield or managing the affairs of the government and society.

All need hard work, far‑sightedness and planning. This cannot be
achieved by gentle sentiments, or emotional ethos or tender‑heartedness.
Every organization has its own peculiar interests. The administration of
different aspects of life needs different qualities, sometimes
thoughtfulness and at other times sympathy, sometimes finesse and
feeling, and at other times, strength and serenity.

Since all the wheels of society must con­tinuously move, the system of
creation has equipped each man and woman with a particular type of
constitution. Each is greatly valuable in its own place and useful and
worthy in its own manifestations.

Despite this difference and variety in structure, the personality of
neither is crushed. Instead each has a specified path to cover.

This was a description from the physiological and psychological points
of views.

Equal Rights of Men and Women and the Islamic Viewpoint
-------------------------------------------------------

Islam considers men and women equal as far as the basic human rights are
concerned. It not only recognizes a human personality for both, but also
considers them equal in all rights and human privileges. The following
verses of the Qur’an support this statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ
نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ وَخَلَقَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا وَبَثَّ مِنْهُمَا رِجَالًا
كَثِيرًا وَنِسَاءً ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O, mankind, fear your Lord who created you from a single soul and
from it created its mate, and from the pair of them scattered abroad
many men and women ....” (4:1)***

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ
أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O mankind! We have created you male and female and appointed you
races and tribes, that you may know one another. Surely the noblest
among you in the sight of God is the most God fearing of you
....”(49:13)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنِّي لَا أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ مِنْكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْثَىٰ ۖ
بَعْضُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْضٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I waste not the labour of any that labours among you, be you male or
female ‑the one of you is from the other ....”(3:195)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتُ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ
يَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ وَيُقِيمُونَ
الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَيُطِيعُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ ۚ
أُولَٰئِكَ سَيَرْحَمُهُمُ اللَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the believers the men and the women, are friends one of the
other; they bid to honour and forbid dishonour; they perform the prayer,
and pay the alms, and they obey God and His Messenger. Those upon them
God will have mercy .... “(9: 71)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُسْلِمِينَ وَالْمُسْلِمَاتِ وَالْمُؤْمِنِينَ
وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَالْقَانِتِينَ وَالْقَانِتَاتِ وَالصَّادِقِينَ
وَالصَّادِقَاتِ وَالصَّابِرِينَ وَالصَّابِرَاتِ وَالْخَاشِعِينَ
وَالْخَاشِعَاتِ وَالْمُتَصَدِّقِينَ وَالْمُتَصَدِّقَاتِ
وَالصَّائِمِينَ وَالصَّائِمَاتِ وَالْحَافِظِينَ فُرُوجَهُمْ
وَالْحَافِظَاتِ وَالذَّاكِرِينَ اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا وَالذَّاكِرَاتِ
أَعَدَّ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةً وَأَجْرًا عَظِيمًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Men and women who have surrendered (unto Allah), believing men and
be­lieving women, obedient men and obedient women, truthful men arid
truthful women, enduring men and enduring women, humble men and humble
women, men and women who give in charity, men who fast and women who
fast, men and women who guard their private parts, men and women who
remember God much, for them God has prepared forgiveness and a mighty re
ward. “(33:35)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا يَسْخَرْ قَوْمٌ مِنْ قَوْمٍ عَسَىٰ
أَنْ يَكُونُوا خَيْرًا مِنْهُمْ وَلَا نِسَاءٌ مِنْ نِسَاءٍ عَسَىٰ أَنْ
يَكُنَّ خَيْرًا مِنْهُنَّ ۖ وَلَا تَلْمِزُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَلَا
تَنَابَزُوا بِالْأَلْقَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O believers, let not any people scoff at another people who may 'be
better than they; neither let women scoff at women who may be better
than they. And find not fault with one another, neither revile one
another by nick­names ....” (49:11)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَصَّيْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ حَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ وَهْنًا
عَلَىٰ وَهْنٍ وَفِصَالُهُ فِي عَامَيْنِ أَنِ اشْكُرْ لِي
وَلِوَالِدَيْكَ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have charged man concerning his parents‑his mother bore him
in weakness upon weakness, and his weaning was in two years‑be thankful
to Me and to your parents ....”(31:14)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…هُنَّ لِبَاسٌ لَكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لِبَاسٌ لَهُنَّ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They (women) are a vestment for you, and you (men) are a vestment
for them ....”(2:187)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلرِّجَالِ نَصِيبٌ مِمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَالِدَانِ وَالْأَقْرَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To the men a share of what parents and kinsmen leave and to the
women a share of what parents and kinsmen leave ....”(4:7)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… لِلرِّجَالِ نَصِيبٌ مِمَّا اكْتَسَبُوا وَلِلنِّسَاءِ نَصِيبٌ مِمَّا
اكْتَسَبْنَ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To the men a share from what they have earned, and to the women a
share from what they have earned ....(4:32)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّانِيَةُ وَالزَّانِي فَاجْلِدُوا كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمَا مِائَةَ
جَلْدَةٍ ۖ وَلَا تَأْخُذْكُمْ بِهِمَا رَأْفَةٌ فِي دِينِ اللَّهِ إِنْ
كُنْتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The fornicatress and the fornicator‑scourge each one of them a
hundred stripes, and in the matter of God's religion, let not tenderness
for them seize you if you believe in God and the Last Day ....”(24:2)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَيَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ذَٰلِكَ أَزْكَىٰ لَهُمْ …وَقُلْ لِلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ
مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِنَّ وَيَحْفَظْنَ فُرُوجَهُنَّ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say to the believers, that they cast down their eyes and guard their
private parts; that is purer for them ....And say to the believing
women, that they cast down their eyes and guard their private parts
...”.(24:30‑31)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّارِقُ وَالسَّارِقَةُ فَاقْطَعُوا أَيْدِيَهُمَا جَزَاءً بِمَا
كَسَبَا نَكَالًا مِنَ اللَّهِ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the thief, male and female: cut off the hands of both as a
recompense for what they have earned and a punishment exemplary from God
....”(5:38)***

These Verses were quoted as examples only, for there are many more
verses clearly mentioning both the men and women and specifying the
directions in their regard. Apart from this, there are hundreds of
verses that take the form of address, “O mankind!” or “O believers!”
which cover both men and women.

The above‑mentioned verses, in short, mean as follows: Both men and
women are human beings, both are expected to follow Islam, be faithful
and obedient believers. The good reward, paradise and God's grace are
for both. Both have similar duties to perform; for instance, the ritual
prayer, fasting, *Zakat*, to command to good and to prohibit from evil.

The criterion of their personal superiority is based on piety and
guarding themselves against evil. Moral virtues such as tolerance,
sublimity, truthfulness, help to the poor ....are desirable for both.
Both are required to observe chastity and keep their looks cast down.

Moral vices, such as obscene acts, backbit­ing and mockery are not
desirable for either of them. Both inherit pro­perty. The right to
property and usage of property is granted to both men and women. The
father and mother both deserve extreme respect.

Both men and women are responsible for their deeds, which shall not go
un-reckoned. Both are equal in the eyes of the Law and are to be
punished for crimes committed. Finally, if a woman is at some loss in a
particular case from the legal point of view, at another place the Law
compensates for this loss and effects a legal balance in her favour.

Other verses in the Qur’an independently mention woman's rights,
occasionally ordaining men to preserve those limits. At times the
attitude of the pre‑Islamic culture in regard to women is criticized.
For example, a verse condemns the practice of slaying girl‑infants in
the words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْمَوْءُودَةُ سُئِلَتْ بِأَيِّ ذَنْبٍ قُتِلَتْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when the buried infant shall be asked*** **for** ***what sin she
was slain. “(81:8‑9)***

In addition to this, the Qur’an discusses well‑known women of religious
history and describes their lives to the extent that falls within the
scope of its objective. Such women are twelve in number. Even one of the
Surahs of the Qur’an is named Surat al‑Nisa', which glorifies women.

In the above paragraphs, a general discussion regarding the respect
shown by the Qur’an to the woman has been mentioned. A description has
also been made of the equal rights of men and women. This prepares the
grounds for a future debate.


