13. the Codex of Al 'imam Al-husayn (a)
=======================================

It consists of 41 folios of deerskin in the Kufic script with the
inscription the sixteenth juz' of the Qur'an starting from verse 72 of
Surat al-Kahf and ending with the last verse of Surat Ta Ha. 65 Each of
the pages of this pocket-size codex have seven lines. Its serial number
is 14.

**14. The Codex of 'Aqabah ibn 'Amir**

It was written in the Kufic script in 52/672 by 'Aqabah ibn 'Amir, a
Companion of the Prophet (S) who lived in Damascus. He was appointed in
44/664 by Mu'awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan as the governor of Egypt where he
died in 58/678. He used to recite the Qur'an in a good voice. 66 In
Taqrib al-tahdhib, his tenure in Egypt is mentioned as three year and it
goes on to add that he was a faqih and a scholar. Al-Suyuti, in Husn al
muhadarah writes: He was an eloquent qari and a faqih among the sahabah.
67

This Qur'an is kept at the al-'Amanah Library, Istanbul, with the
serial number 40. Its microfilm, numbered 10, exists at Mahad al
Makhtutat al-'Arabiyyah, Cairo.68

**15. The Codex of Khadij ibn Mu'awiyah**

Another codex exists in the Maghribi script by Khadij ibn Mu'awiyah ibn
Salamah al-'Ansari, who is definitely other than the father of Rafi' ibn
Khadij, a Companion, because the grandfather of Rafi (the father of
Khadij) is 'Adi and the father of this Khadij is Mu'awiyah. 69 Khadij
completed this codex in 47/667 at the city of Qayrawan for Amir 'Aqabah
ibn Nafi' al-Fahri. It is kept at the al-'Amariah Library, Istanbul,
with the number 44. Its microfilm, numbered 9, is at Ma'had al Makhtutat
al 'Arabiyyah, Cairo.

**16. The Codex of al 'Imam Zayn al 'Abidin (A)**

It is attributed to al-'Imam al Sajjad Zayn al Abidin 'Ali ibn
al-Husayn (A) and is kept at the library of Astaneh-ye Quds-e Radawi,
under the serial number 15. Its deerskin folios of 30x20 cms size
contain from verse 180 of Surat al-Baqarah to the end of the Qur'an.
Subsequently the original folios were bound and the margins were
illuminated.

**17. The Codex of al Imam al-Sadiq (A)**

The codex attributed to Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (A) is kept at the
al-'Amanah Library, Istanbul, and has been given the number 39. Its
microfilm bearing number 11 is at the Ma'had al Makhtutat al-'Arabiyyah
70

**18. The Codex of al-'Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (A)**

The codex attributed to Musa ibn Ja'far (A) contains verses beginning
from verse 265 of Surat al-Baqarah and ending with verse 84 of Surat Al
'Imran. It is written on medium octavo folios with each page comprising
6 lines. It is kept at the library of al-'Imam al-Rida's shrine and
bears the serial number 20. It has been endowed to the sacred shrine by
Shah 'Abbas Safawi. In earlier times the text and the margins of this
Qur'an written on parchment were pasted with a thick paper of the same
color.


