Introduction
============

**( 5 )**

###### In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Beneficent

If God is introduced to thy soul constantly gaze at Ali

By God I knew Him only through Ali.

It is difficult to talk of Ali-bin-Abi Talib, the legendary hero of
Islamic and human history and the ideal personified, in fact he is
manifestation of the Truth. The magnanimous and multidimensional
personality of Ali is too immense to be comprehensively assimilated by
one individual. Ali as an individual is no more but as a school he
perpetuates. The school of Ali is the school of wisdom and thought and
also the school of movement and revolution. It is the school of charm
and beauty and of inspiration and activation. His personality, which is
the fountainhead of his school, has two faculties and its impact on men
is either attractive or repulsive, hence he attracts some of them to,
and repels others from himself. The basic thought of this book is an
analytical description of this phenomenon, and of the rule, which
enjoins to discern the fact from fallacy.

It quotes Ali, saying that Ali has held the Truth itself to be the
criterion of truth and not the individuals, the personalities, the
authorities or the gray-hair. We should be aware of the fact and the
fallacy and not of the persons and personalities. And this is the spirit
of the Shiite faith, an enlivening ideology adherence to which lends
life. Humanity must seek solace from it as human perfection and
perpetual bliss lies in it. Solemnity, sincerity, justice and wisdom
adhere to and co-exist with it. The undersigned, in this view of the
matter and for his anxious commitment with these views, for popularising
the basic ideas of the Islamic Culture, for maintaining profound
solidarity between two contiguous and co-believer countries Iran and
Pakistan and for the benefit of all concerned, decided to get this
analytical and peculiar thesis translated into English.

The translation has been carried out by my friend Ayyoob Bukhari, a
scholarly personality and well-known advocate of the Supreme Court of
Pakistan. He accomplished the task from no motive other than his own
anxiety, sincerity and a sense of cultural attachment with the thesis.
The translation itself is the evidence of its grace, correctness and the
pains taken by Ayyoob Bukhari.

**( 6 )**

This book is the collection of four lectures delivered in Hussainia
Irshad during the four days of 18th to 21st Ramzan 1364 . Hussania
Irshad is one of the main Islamic centers in Tehran. In the days prior
to accomplishment of revolution it used to be the meeting center of the
intelligentsia and the revolutionary minds. They would assemble there to
listen to the great philosophers like Dr. Ali Shariati, and others
including the author of this book. I have had the privilege of being
among most of such gatherings and of having benefited from those
discourses. The combatant revolutionary youth of Iran by attending such
assemblies learnt to rely on the dauntless Oracle of Ali, his
encouraging behest and revolutionary phraseology in Nehjul Balagha
whence they were inspired and activated to overthrow the cursed Pehlvi
Regime. They frustrated the lethargic and ill-based logic of the
tyrannical supporters of the regime of evil with the powerful logic of
Ali.

The main theme of the book, that is, attraction and repulsion of Ali and
other subjects like Ali's concept of a Government, the uprising and
insurgency of the Kharijites, and the necessity of combat against
hypocrisy have been deAli with in a very scholarly, philosophic,
authentic and sagacious manner. From the viewpoint of arrangement,
editing, chapterisation, the manner in which the themes have been
explored and deAli with and the selection of topics, the book gives a
happy look and lends novelty to the subject.

**( 7 )**

Its author is the late Murtaza Mutahhari who devoted his life to the
sacred cause of Islam. He was with little match a high-ranking Islamist
well versed in various branches of Islamic knowledge and the Holy Quran.
He was a philosopher and a writer, aware of Schools of East and West and
a research scholar of fortitude. He was an active and pious personality.
With this all he was a logician. He has left behind immense and
analytical writings. His works as a whole pursue the course advocated by
his school. He was a contemporary pious and combatant thinker. His pen,
his pace and his eloquence remained always busy in promoting the cause
of revolution and in participating in the teamwork of compatriots. On 12
Behman Mah 1298 H.S. i.e. in Jamadi-ul-Awal of 1338 H.Q he was born in a
noble radical cleric's family of village Fareeman near the holy city of
Mashhad. He received primary instructions from his father and before
attaining majority he joined Hoza-i-Ilmiya-i-Mashhad, which was at that
lime richly staffed with teachers of renown. After some time he joined
Hoza-i-Ilmya-i-Qum. for studying literature, logic at medium and higher
level and jurisprudence and fundamentals, thereafter he started basic
and research studies from 1322. 1323.

Mutahhari grasped the lessons of his teachers like Ay-Haj Mirza AH
Aqa-i-Sheerazi Asfahani. Ay-Syed Muhammad Taqi Khawn Sari, Ay-Syed Ahmad
Khawnsari, Ay-Syed Muhammad Hojjat Koh Kamri,' Ay-Syed Muhammad Damad
Ay-Syed Muhammad Raza Gul-pai-Gani and Ay-Haj Syed Sadr-ud-Din Sadr. He
has very often and respectfully remembered his. great teachers like
Ay-Haairi, Ayat Ulalh Uzma Broojardi Ay-Haaj Syed Muhammad Hussain
Taba-Tabaai Tabraizi and Ayat Ullah Uzma Imam Khomeini. It is his
peculiar charm that he always mentioned the names of his teachers with
respect and gratitude.

**( 8 )**

After the completion of his research and education he left for Tehran to
join the University as a Lecturer. There he developed contacts with
Islamic organisations of enlightened combatants. He through lectures and
debates with the staff and the students of the University and through
literature and platform started political and social activities. His
political struggle, shoulder to shoulder with his like-minded clerics,
formally started after Imam Khomeinf's revolt and the historic tragedy
of 15 Khordad 1342 H.S. and after the materialisation of the revolution
in the year 1357 he joined the Revolutionary Council as its permanent
member.

He was martyred on 24 Jamadi-us-Sani 1399 H.Q equal to 11-Ardi-Bahisht
1358 in a terrorist attack. All the world over the Revolutionary and the
Liberation organisations and personalities and his own people were
deeply afflicted by his martyrdom.

Ustad Mutahhari has left many published and unpublished and even some
unedited works. His unedited diary dates back to when he was 14 years
old. It starts with his notes recording the preliminaries of
Jurisprudence Arabic etc. and ends in his mature and sagacious notes
pertaining to the last few years of his graceful life. In short they
cover numerous subjects in various social, cultural and political fields
covering history, languages, nationalities, philosophy. Jurisprudence,
Mysticism, morals etc. And his writings whether in form of brief essays
or long theses, notebooks, detailed commentaries or short annotations on
some books are also available. Their list is available in Journal
'Yadnama' (Memorial Magazine) Published (under the supervision of Dr.
Abdul Karim Sarosh) in the memory of the Martyred Scholar in three
decent volumes: Alphabetical Notes, Topical notes, and Diaries. He was a
voluminous writer. His published books are more than two scores in
number. These books cover Sociological, Historical, Economic, Moral,
Philosophic, Literary, Critical, Mystical, Spiritual, and Theological
subjects. There are his published speeches discourses and lectures on
all such topics, which agitate the modern mind:

**( 9 )**

1. The principles of Philosophy and Behaviour of Realism, a commentary
on Allama Muhammad Hussain Tabatabaai's Text. It is in 5 Volumes.

2. The stories about the Virtuous (Declared to be the Best Book of the
year 1366 by UNESCO. Its first of the two volumes has been published in
English as well. It consists of 125 stories of Islamic history).

3. Lyrical Discourses Twenty lectures broadcast by Radio Tehran from
1338 to 40.

4. The legal Rights of Women in Islam, comprising 32 articles.

5. Man and Destiny (Published in Arabic as well. Its Urdu Edition is
under print).

6. Unseen Supports in Human life.

7. Contributions of Islam and Iran.

8. The Scandal of book Burning in Iran and Egypt, (its Urdu Edition has
been published).

9. The Finality of Prophet-Hood.

10. The Issue of (Female) Seclusion.

11. The Unlettered Prophet.

12. Sexual Morality (Urdu Edition has been published).

13. Divine Justice.

14. Ali's Attractions and Repulsions (its English version is the present
book).

15. Vilas and Vilayats.

16. The causes of Materialistic Tendencies (its Arabic translation has
been published in Beirut).

**( 10 )**

17. Rambles in Nehj-ul-Balagha (it has been translated in Arabic as
well).

18. Logic and Philosophy (Towards Understanding Islamic sciences).

19. The Letter and the Spirit.

20. The Fundamentals of Jurisprudence.

21. The Revolution of Mehdi.

22. Ten Discourses.

23. Islamic Movements in the last century, (its English translation has
been published).

24. Man and Faith (Translated and published in Urdu) (Preface to World
view of Islam).

25. The world view.

26. Revolution and Prophet-The Preface to World view.

27. Man as in the Quran.

28. The Eternal Life or the Life Hereafter.

29. About Islamic Revolution.

30. The History and the Society (preface to World view of Islam).

31. Jihad and Justification of its objects in the Quran.

32. Understanding the Quran.

33. The First Hamad and the Second Baqara chapters of the Quran.

34. "Tasheh-wa-tahliq al-tehsil" by Bin Almarzban, the student of Bu Ali
Sina. (The correction and annotation of al-tehsil with a preface).

The above is the chronological order of the publication of the books.
The books like the following are in manuscript form and have not so far
been published.

i) Irfan-i-Hafiz.

ii) Magalat-i-Philosophy.

**( 11 )**

iii) Man's Social Perfection.

iv) Towards understanding the Quran.

v) Visage of Man in Marxism and Islam.

vi) Economy of Islam.

vii) Human Nature and its Beauties.

viii) Philosophy of History.

ix) Islam and the Challenges of Time.

x) The Issue of Slavery.

xi) The Biography of the Holy Prophet.

xii) The Perfect man.

xiii) Philosophic lectures on Marx and Marxism.

xiv) Lectures about Asfar.

xv) Lectures about Manzooma.

xvi) The Collection of Lectures on Understanding.

xvii) The Chivalry of Hussain.

Likewise numerous articles by him on different subjects have been
published, in form of books, and pamphlets for students.

Besides this numerous cassettes containing his speeches in different
centers on different topics are left in legacy. The number of those
cassettes preserving his unpublished speeches and lectures exceeds 1068.

Qasim Safi

1 Sept. 1982

Translated by

S.M. Ayub Bukhari

4 Sept. 1982
