Shi'ite Faith: School of Love and Affection
===========================================

**( 41 )**

Of all the great distinctions, which the Shi'ite faith enjoys among all
the religions of the world, one is that its very basis and foundation
lay in love. Since the lifetime of the Prophet himself when this
religion was founded, it has been a source of love and fraternity; along
with the Holy Prophet having said "Ali and his shi'ites are exultant",
we find hosts of 13 men rallying around Ali -- fond, warm and devoted to
him. Hence shi'ite faith, a religion of devotion and dedication.
Alliance with him is the school of love and devotion. Element of love
operates with full vigor in Shiaism. History of Shiaism is the other
name of biography of a ceaseless line of dedicated, selfless and
venturesome devotees.

Ali is that very person from whom men never resiled even if he enforced
Hadd (Punishment Prescribed by the Quran) on them and lashed them.
Virtually in accordance with the rule of Shariat he cut off the hand of
one of them, but nothing could impair their love with Ali. He himself
says:

"Even if you find me striking a faithful with this sword so as to offend
him, he will never show enmity towards me, and if I bestow the whole
world on a hypocrite, so that he may become my friend, he will not
accept me as his friend, because the Prophet has said: "Oh! Ali faithful
will not become your enemy and the hypocrite will not make friends with
you".

**( 42 )**

Ali is the scale and yardstick to measure the natures and temperaments.
He who has a pious nature and sound temperament is never annoyed with
him, let Ali's sword fall on him; and he who has a polluted nature will
not associate with Ali, let Ali be kind towards him, because Ali is
nothing but the Truth personified. There was a gentleman of distinction
and faith from amongst the friends of Amir-ul-Momineen. Unfortunately he
defaulted and the default involved corporeal punishment.
Amir-ul-Momineen got his right palm cut off. Holding it in his left hand
the convict went ahead bleeding, Ibn Kawa, a Kharijite rebel wanted to
capitalize the situation for the benefit of his own band and to the
detriment of Ali. Pretending pity, he approached the convict and said,
"Who has chopped off your hand?" He said, "My hand has been cut off by
the foremost of Prophet's successors, the leader of the brilliant of the
doomsday, the nearest to Truth among the faithful, Ali-Ibn-Abi Talib,
the Imam of guidance, the first to reach the beneficence of the heavens,
the champion of the intrepid, revengeful against followers of the evil,
the munificent in alms, the leader to the path of virtue and perfection,
the oracle of truth and magnificence, the gallant Meccan and the
magnanimous of the believers". Ibn Kawa said, "You be cursed, he chops
your hand off and you praise him like this?" He said "Why should I not
praise him while the fact is that his affinity is blended in my flesh
and blood. By God, he did not remove my hand except as 'ordained by
Allah". Such devotion and alliance as we find in the history of Ali and
his friends, invite our attention to the phenomenon of love and devotion
and its effects.
