The Alchemy of Love
===================

**( 43 )**

The poets of Persian describe devotion( Ishque ) as alchemy: Alchemists
believed that there is a matter in the universe with the name ' Ikseer '
or 'Kimia' which has the capacity to transmute the matters. They
exhausted centuries to discover it. The poets borrowed this term and
said that the real Alchemy, which has the potential to cause a change,
is love and devotion, because devotion can change the nature. Devotion
is absolute "Ikseer" and has the quality of alchemy, i.e., it transmutes
one metal into another. Men are also of different metals like gold and
silver. It is devotion which makes a cardiological organ the heart; if
there is no love there is no heart, it is only a piece of mud and water
that each heart which lacks pangs is not a heart, The melancholic heart
is nothing but a handful of mud:

Oh! God give me a warm, enkindling bosom.

In that bosom a heart which should be all affectionate.

The vigor and strength are from the by-products of devotion; love
generates vigor and makes a brave out of a coward.

A domestic hen, as long as it is all alone, collects the plumage on its
back, walks leisurely, becomes restive for finding an insect to eat,
flees away on a slight alarm and shows little resistance even against a
child; but when this very fowl, has a brood, love and devotion get
entered into its living figure and its habits are changed: It. drops
down the plumage, collected on its back as an indication of preparedness
and self-defense, assumes the warring position, so much so that its echo
becomes more forceful and braver. Earlier, it would flee on apprehending
a danger but now it would assault in case of such an apprehension and
would lead a bold aggression; this is love that has made a daring animal
out of a timid hen.

**( 44 )**

Love and devotion transforms the ugly and sluggish into handsome and
smart. So much so that it makes a brilliant out of a stupid. The boy and
the girl who in their single life never worried themselves about
anything, unless it directly concerned them, but as soon as they enter
into mutual attachment and organize a matrimonial life, each of them for
the first time finds concerned with the fate of the other. At that time
the canvas of their desires expands. And when they have become parents
of a son, their whole nature is completely changed. That boy who was
lazy and sluggish has now become smart and active, and that girl who
would never rise from her bed even per force would now leap like
lightning on hearing the cry of her cradle-rider. What is that power
which has made both of them so sensitive? That is nothing but love and
devotion. Devotion makes a generous out of a miser, a powerful and
forbearing out of a weak and impatient.

This is because of devotion, that a selfish hen, which was always
worried to collect grain for self preservation, as soon as it became of
brood on finding a single grain it calls the chickens to feast. Or to
that mother, who till yesterday was a listless daughter always
slumbering and eating, weak and irritant, love has now given her the
strength to resist hunger, to forbear toil, to resign indolence, to be
patient and forbearing and to withstand all the labours of being a
mother.

In the parlance of poetry and literature, in chapters about the effects
of love, we often enjoy one phenomenon and that is the intuition as
bounty of love.

The nightingale has learnt to sing from bounty of flowers, otherwise

All this eloquence and lyric were never arranged in her beak.

**( 45 )**

Although prima facie the bounty of flower is a factor external to the
figure of nightingale yet in fact it is nothing but the power of love
itself.

Do not think that Majnoon became Majnoon himself.

It was Laila's attraction which pulled him from the fish to the star.

Devotion awakens the latent potentialities and liberates the stifled and
suppressed faculties, like splitting of an atom and discharge of atomic
energy. Devotion is intuitive and emboldening. Many poets, philosophers
and men of art are people of love and devotion hence powerful. Love
gives perfection to soul and reveals marvelous latent potentialities.
From the viewpoint of perception it is intuitive, and from the view
point of qualities of sentiments it enhances the will power; and when it
ascends to the climax, it performs wonders and miracles.

It purifies the soul from contamination and pollution, in other words,
love is a purifier. Love, by washing away the beastly qualities arising
out of selfishness, apathy and indifference like miserliness, parsimony,
cowardice lethargy, arrogance and self-conceit; destroys and annihilates
hatred and vindictiveness. No doubt, failure and deprivation may happen
in love and it may generate problems and animosities.

**( 46 )**

Love makes bitterness sweet.

Love transmutes copper to gold.

If the love is relatable to spirit, it enlightens and enriches the soul;
but if it is relatable to body, it would result in its deterioration and
degeneration. The effect of spiritual love is just the converse of
material love. Material love brings about pessimism, pale face, feeble
limbs and defect in digestion and indisposition in muscles. Perhaps the
consequences of material love are all destructive but this is not so in
the case of spiritual love. Then what should the object of love be? and
how should one benefit from it? Leaving aside its social effects, the
effect of spiritual love on individual is perhaps complimentary because
it generates vigor, tenderness, unification and determination, and
eliminates weakness, impurity, dissension and stupidity. It removes
deviations that are called "intrigue" by the Quran, eradicates fraud and
transmutes impostor to virtuous:-

The master soul annihilates the body, thereafter reconstructs it,

**( 47 )**

Virtuous is the soul who for the sake of love and happiness,

Gave away his home and hearth, property and wealth,

He robbed his house of the precious treasure, and filled it with wealth
more,

He sucked away the water from the riverbed,

Thereafter he inundated it with water and benefited from it,

He pierced the skin with the spear, thereafter he spread a new layer,

The perfect, who know the secret of quest,

Are perplexed, intoxicated and enamored,

Not so much perplexed as to turn back on him (beloved),

Rather so perplexed as (to be) absorbed and lost in the loved one.
