Breaking the Barrier
====================

**( 49 )**

Regardless of its kind, whether carnal (animal) biological (animal) or
human, and regardless of the charms and qualities of the beloved, may be
he is brave, gallant, efficient, scholarly or has moral values, and any
other special merits or qualifications, love and devotion takes one out
of selfishness. Selfishness is a limitation and a barrier, and loving
another virtually breaks this barrier. Man remains weakling, timid,
miser, jealous, malicious, intolerant, selfish and arrogant as long as
he does not step out of himself. His soul has no spark and no
brilliance, it lacks charm and anxiety, it is always cold and
slumbering, but instantly he steps out of himself and breaks the barrier
of "self", these evil characteristics also vanish away. Whosoever has
torn off his garb while in love, becomes purged of greed and blemish!

Breaking the barrier of selfishness does not mean that one should sever
all relations with one's personality, nor does it mean that man should
so strive as to detach relations with his own person.

It does not mean that in order to get rid of selfishness man should
sever the relations, which he has with himself. It does not mean that
man should endeavour to dislike himself. The relation with oneself,
which is named as "Love of Self" has not been misplaced as to be
removed. The reformation and perfection of man does not presuppose that
a tissue of redundance has been planted in man, and that these weeds and
harmful elements should be removed from him. In other words the
reformation of man does not lie in impairing him. It rather lies in
complementing and supplementing him. The function assigned to man by
nature is towards propagation, i.e. it lies in perfection and
augmentation and not in reduction and elimination.

**( 50 )**

Combat with selfishness is combat with ego-centricism. The self should
get expansion. This hedge drawn about ego, which wards off everything as
alien, foreign and extraneous, which does not concern him as exclusively
personal, must be removed. Personality should so expand as to embrace
the whole mankind, rather the whole of nature. Hence combat with
selfishness, combat with ego-centricism. As such, selfishness is nothing
but limitation of aims and objects. Love rouses man's feelings and
tendencies to advert to something external. It expands his personality
and changes his outlook towards life. For this reason, love and
affection is a great moral and instructive factor provided it is well
guided and properly exploited.
