Constructive Or Destructive
===========================

**( 51 )**

When alliance with a person or a thing develops to extreme intensity so
much so that it dominates man and becomes his absolute ruler, is called
(Ishque). Love is climax of feelings and alliance.

However, it should not be understood that what has been so named is of
one kind. It has got two absolutely different kinds. That which is said
to bear good consequences is of one kind, but the other kind leads to
absolutely harmful and negative consequences.

Human feelings have kinds and degrees. A part of them is for category of
lust, particularly sexual lust. It is, for reasons, common to men and
all animals. With this difference that, for peculiar and inexplicable
reasons, it is found in incalculable proportion and intensity in man,
whence it is called love. In animals it is not found to this extent.
However, for its nature and kind it is nothing but fury. Reversion and
turmoil of sex originates from sexual sources and ends therein. Its
intensity and dissipation are concomitants, on the one end is indulgence
in sexual intercourse particularly in youthful years, and on the other,
i.e. with advance in years, is the diminution of satisfaction and
potency or may be their total dissipation. A young man who, on seeing a
pretty face and a curly hair, spontaneously shudders, and on touch of a
soft hand instantly twists, must know that it is nothing but a material
animal phenomenon. Such loves are quick to erupt and still quicker to
fade away. It is not dependable or commendable. It is dangerous and
humiliating. It yields benefits to man only when it is reinforced with
virtue, continence and non-submission i.e., of itself the stimulant
leads to no virtue. However, if it penetrates in a man, and is
co-existent with virtue and continence and also the soul has withstood
its pressure without submitting to it, it would invigorate and augment
the soul.

**( 52 )**

Man has other feelings also which for their kind and nature are
different to lust. It is better to call them affection or in the
parlance of the Quran to describe them as 'respect' and 'compassion'
Man, as long as he remains under the influence of his lust, does not
step out of himself. He wants with intensity the person or the object of
his attraction for himself. If he thinks of his beloved, he does so for
finding opportunity for cohabitation and maximum satisfaction. It is
obvious that conditions like this are neither complementary to nor
reformative of human world nor do they purify man's soul. But when man
submits to the influence of superior human affection, his beloved enjoys
respect and prestige in his view and he wishes the beloved prosperity.
He is ready to sacrifice himself for the beloved's object. Such
affections bring about purity, rectitude, benevolence, tenderness and
selflessness; contrary to this is the first category which gives rise to
fury, savagery and debauchery. The love and affection of mother to the
son are from this category. The love with and dedication to the saints,
the divines, the country, and the ideologies are also from this
category.

When the sentiments of this category reach the climax and perfection,
they yield all those virtuous consequences that we have detailed above.
This is the category, which lends grandeur, individuality and sublimity
to the soul as against the first category, which is humiliating.
Moreover, this category of love is durable and becomes more forceful and
warmer by reunion, as against the first category which is short lived,
and fruition is considered to be its grave.

**( 53 )**

In the Holy Quran alliance between wife and husband has been described
as (respect) and (compassion). It has great significance, it gives
indication towards human conjugal life's being superior to animals. It
means that the factor of sex is not the only natural relationship
between spouses. The real tie is to be found in virtue, rectitude and
the unity of two souls: In other words, what unify the spouses are the
love, respect, virtue and rectitude and not the lust which exists in
animals as well.

Maulvi, in his own beautiful style, by creating distinction between lust
and respect calls the former to be animal and latter to be human:

Fury and lust are attributes of animals,

Love and tenderness are human qualities;

Such merits are (found) in man;

Love is lacking in animals and it is for their deficiency. :

Even the Philosophers of materialism could not deny this abstract
condition in man, which for its being metaphysical is not consistent
with their theory of man's being only a superior material animate.

Bertrand Russell in his Book "Marriage and Morals" says:-"Work of which
the motive is solely pecuniary cannot have this value, but only work
which embodies some kind of devotion, whether to persons, to things, or
merely to a vision. And love itself is worthless when it is merely
possessive; it is then on a level with work, which is merely pecuniary.
In order to have the kind of value of which we are speaking, love must
feel the ego of the beloved person as important as one's own ego, and
must realize the other's feelings and wishes as though they were one's
own".

**( 54 )**

Another point, which may be dealt with, and which does invite our
attention, lies in our assertion that even sensual love may be
beneficial when continence and virtue are its attendants, i.e., once
inaccessibility and parting and then continence, virtue and piety bring
such poignant grief and anguish, pressure and hardship to soul as yield
good and beneficial results. It is in this context that the mystics say
that "even carnal love may get transformed into spiritual love, i.e.
love with God". This tradition has also been narrated in the same
context: Whosoever fell in love, became reticent and practised
continence till death, he had a martyr's end. This point should not be
lost sight of that this sort of love with all the benefits that in the
special circumstances it carries, is not commendable. It is in fact
dangerous. Viewed from this aspect it is like a misery, which, if faced
ungrudgingly and patiently by a man whom it befalls, is complementary
and purifying for him; it ripens the raw and purifies the contaminated.
But none would opt misery for himself so as to benefit from this
instructive factor, nor on this pretext he can invent misery for others.

Russell elaborately writes on this subject:-

"To a man of sufficient energy, pain may be a valuable stimulus, and I
do not deny that if we were all perfectly happy we should not exert
ourselves to become happier. But I cannot admit that it is any part of
the duty of human beings to provide others with pains on the off chance
that it may prove fruitful. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, pain
proves merely crushing. In the hundredth case it is better to trust to
the natural shocks that flesh is hair to."

**( 55 )**

As we know that in teachings of Islam much has been devoted to the
benefits and effects of miseries and hardships, and they have (at times)
been described as an index of Divine bounty, but on this excuse no one
has been allowed to cause misery to himself or to others.

There is yet another difference between love and misery, i.e. love is
greater "adversary of wisdom" than any other factor is. Wherever it
treads, it dislodges wisdom from authority.

For these reasons love and wisdom have been introduced as two rivals in
saintly literature. The rivalry between the philosophers and the saints
emanates from this very source, because the former place reliance on and
seek confidence from the authority of wisdom while the latter do so from
the force of love. In the saintly literature, in the field of this
rivalry wisdom has always been recognised to have been dominated and
overpowered. Sa'di says:

"The well wishers advise throwing bricks on the Ocean is useless.

Anxiety has upper hand on patience

Claim of wisdom over love is false

Another (poet) says:

"I think the scheme of wisdom in the course of love (is),

"Like dew attempting script on an Ocean".

**( 56 )**

The power, which has assumed these proportions, snatches the reins of
authority, and in the words of Maulvi "it pulls man from one side to the
other as does the storm to a petal of grass".

How could something which according to Russell is "out of anarchic
impulses" be commendable?

However, to be occasionally of good effects is one thing and to be
commendable is the other.

From here it becomes clear that the objection and criticism of some
Muslim jurists on some of the sages of Islam, who have introduced this
moot in theology and have described its consequences and effects, are
not appropriate because the former have (wrongly) thought that these
sages believed that such a pursuit was desirable and commendable, while
the fact remains that they have expressed their views only about useful
consequences which it might yield if it is coupled with continence and
virtue, without holding it to be desirable and commendable; just like
miseries and hardships.
