the Potential of Love in Society
================================

**( 61 )**

Sociologically love is a potential and effective force. The best of the
societies is that which is organized on the basis of fraternity i.e. the
love of the administrator and the ruler towards the subjects, and the
devotion of the people towards the ruler and the administrator.

The love and the affection in the ruler is a major factor for the
solidarity and continuity of a government. As long as a ruler is
divested of love, he may not be able to, or with difficulty may, give
lead to the people and make them disciplined and law abiding. But as
soon as he establishes harmony and justice in society, people will
become law abiding because they find their ruler also having respect for
the same. It is his respect, which persuades people to obedience and
submission. The Quran addressing the Prophet says that you have power of
persuasion and ability to organise a society:

"Because of Allah's bounty and benevolence, you are of tender heart for
them. Had you been harsh and snobbish, people would have scattered away
from you. So forgive them, beseech their emancipation and in your
affairs consult them".

Herein, firstly, Allah traced the cause, for which the people would
rally around the Prophet, in the love and affection, which he had for
them. Thereafter, Allah commands him to forgive them, to seek their
emancipation and to take them in confidence in the administration of
affairs.

All these are consequences of love and affection because kindness,
forbearance and tolerance flow from love and equity.

He, with the sword of tolerance, redeemed so many people,

**( 62 )**

When the sword of iron was going to cut the throats of many;

Yes it is more victorious than hundreds of armies.

The Quran again says, "The virtuous and the vicious are not alike. Repel
mischief in a better manner so that enmity that exists between you and
him may change into friendship for you".

"Oh! my son forgive, because man may be captivated with favour and beast
with trap. Behumble an enemy with kindness. This lasso cannot be cut
with a sword."

Amir-ul-Momineen, while designating Malik-ul-Ashtar to the governor-ship
of Egypt, made him a behest for public dealing in the following words:

"Awaken, in your heart, the feelings of love, fraternity and tenderness
towards the people. Grant them share from forgiveness and pardon, as
your love with God ensures you His forgiveness and pardon".

The heart of a ruler must be full of love and affection for the nation.
Power and authority is not enough. It is possible that with power and
authority men may be driven like sheep, but it will neither awaken their
latent potentialities nor utilize them. Nay! power and authority is not
sufficient. Even if justice is administered with aridity, it will not be
enough. The ruler must be as affectionate as a father and must love the
people from the depth of his heart. He must show them kindness. He
should possess an attractive and inspiring personality, so that he may
be in a position to utilize their will, their vigor and their great
potentials. He himself must keep the service of the people as his goal.
