Another Instance:
=================

**( 77 )**

As we know, the tale of Ohod has a tragic aspect. Seventy Muslims,
including Hazrat Hamza, the uncle of the Prophet, were martyred. To
start with the Muslims had won the battle. Subsequently, due to
indiscipline of a battalion who were posted at a hillock, the Muslims
were subjected to a surprise attack. Many were martyred, some scattered
away. A small group got distant from the Prophet. Ultimately the same
small group once again rallied the forces and halted the further enemy
advance. The rumour that Prophet was martyred mainly contributed to the
Muslim's scattering away. But instantly they realised that the Prophet
was alive, they regained their morale. A number of the injured had
fallen to the ground. They were absolutely indifferent to their end. One
of the injured was Sa'd bin Rabi'. He sustained twelve grievous
injuries. In the meantime, when he lay injured, one of the deserters
came to Sa'd and said, "Have you heard that the Prophet has been
killed?" Sa'd said, "If Muhammad has been killed, may be.But Muhammad's
God has not been killed. Faith of Muhammad survives, why are you evasive
to defend your faith?"

On his side, the Prophet collected his companions. Called out each of
his companions to see who was alive and who was dead? He did not find
Sa'd bin Rabi'. He said, "Who is there to go and fetch me exact
information about Sa'd bin Rabi'? One of the Ansarites said, "I offer
myself. When the Ansarite reached Sa'd, he had some symptoms of life
left in him. He said, "Oh Sa'd! I have been sent by the Prophet to
collect information about your life or otherwise". Sa'd said, 'Say he is
from amongst the dead, because no more moments of life are left to him'.
Tell the Prophet that Sa'd has said, 'God may bless you with the best of
the Prophet's rewards". In the same behest he said to the Ansarites and
all other companions of the Prophet, "God will accept no excuse from you
if your Prophet is harmed while you are alive".

**( 78 )**

The pages of early Islamic history are rich in such dedications,
devotions and graceful events. In whole of the history, we cannot find
any one else to have been so profoundly loved and endeared by his
friends, his contemporaries, his wives and his children, from the depth
of their hearts, as the Holy Prophet has been.

In his commentary on 'Nehj-ul-Balagha" Ibn Abi Hadeed says: "None who
had heard him (The Prophet) could avoid love and attraction rising in
his heart for him. In Mecca the Qureish called the Muslims, "devoted and
dedicated", and would say, "Our apprehension is lest Walid bin Mugheera
accepts Mohammed's faith, and if Walid, who is crown flower of Qureish,
ever does so the whole of the Qureish would follow his suit". They used
to say, "His words are magic and they intoxicate deeper than liquor
does. They would forbid their children to join his sittings lest he
attracted them with his words and inspiring personality. Whenever the
Prophet would sit along the Ka'ba in Hajar-i-Ismail and recite the Quran
or beseech God, they would put their fingers in their ears lest they
were bewitched by his words and got attracted to him.

They would wrap their heads and veil their faces to avoid being
attracted by his captivating demeanour. Thus many people embraced Islam
only on hearing his discourse, or on seeing his mien, or on having a
glimpse of his, or by tasting his luscious diction.

Of all the historic facts about him, one that astonishes most a critic,
a humanist or a sociologist, is the revolution, which Islam brought in
the ignorant Arabia. In ordinary course, if such a society is sought to
be reformed by popularising education and by adopting customary
instructive measures, it would require long time to elapse, so that the
old generation which was vice-addicted has worn away and a new
generation has been founded. But we should not ignore the influence of
attraction. As we have said like flames of fire, which burn the roots,
it would burn the evils to ashes.

**( 79 )**

Majority of Prophet's companions extremely loved him and it was by
carriage of love that they travelled this long distance in such a short
period and revolutionalised their society so briskly:

Our wings and feathers are lasso of his love,

It drags (us) by our forelock to beloved's street;

Why should I enlighten my whereabouts,

When my beloved's light never fails,

His light is to the right and to the left above and below

On my head like crown and round my neck like a collar.
