In Allah's Name
===============

**( 13 )**

FOREWORD
--------

The excellent and magnanimous personality of Amir-ul-Momineen Ali (A.S)
is too immense and multidimensional to be conceived in all its aspects
and dimensions by a man, let his fancy fly. What, in maximum, is
possible for a man is to select for his study and research one or a few
specific and defined aspects of personality of Ali and feel contented
with the same.

One of this illustrious personality's aspects and dimensions is the
positive or negative influence which he had exerted on different classes
of humanity, in other words, his active attraction and repulsion which
up till now continue to exert their influence. In this book we will deal
with this aspect.

For producing reactions on minds and souls, human personalities are not
identical. The more pygmean personality the lesser it engages people's
mind and produces still lesser excitement and anxiety in their hearts.
Whoever is a greater stalwart and more forceful invokes minds more and
produces greater reaction, whether the reaction is positive or negative.

**( 14 )**

The personalities, invoking minds and producing reactions, who are often
talked about, become subjects of confrontations and controversies. They
become the pride of poetry, painting and other fine arts. They emerge as
heroes of stories and legends. In case of Ali, he dominates with
excellence all these media and venues of expression. In this respect too
he is peerless or has few rivals. It is reported that Muhammad bin Shahr
Ashob Mazindrani, who has been amongst the stalwarts of Imamite
scholars, while in the seventh century, undertook writing his famous
book "Manaqib", had in his library one thousand books with the name of
"Manaqib" eulogising Ali. This single instance leads us to observe that
in the whole span of history, immense multitudes of minds have been
engaged by the inspiring personality of our Master. The basic
distinction of Ali and also of all men enlightened by the beam of Truth
is that besides engaging the minds and stirring up the thoughts, they
illuminate hearts and souls and bless them with faith, satisfaction and
determination. Philosophers like Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Bu Ali Sina
and Descartes are also heroes of conquests of thoughts and agitation of
minds. Leaders of social revolutions in the last two centuries, besides
this have generated prejudices in their followers' minds. The mystic
divines lead their followers to such a stage of submission that if so
indicated by peer-i-mughan (the spiritual guide) they may soak the
prayer mat of liquor. But in none amongst them we see warmth and fervour
twin with humility, chastity, purity and tenderness as history reveals
amongst Ali's followers. If the Safavides organised an effective
combatant force out of dervishes, it was in the name of Ali and not in
their own name.

**( 15 )**

Abstract beauty and charm, which produce love, are from one category.
Leadership, advantage and welfare of life, which are the stuff of social
reformers, and wisdom and philosophy, which are the stuff of
philosophers, are from another category. It is well known that one of Bu
Ali Sina's pupils said to him, "With this exceptional wisdom and
sagacity, which you have, if you proclaim to be a prophet people will
rally round you". Bu Ali kept silent till when they were together in a
winter journey. During the matutinal hours, Bu Ali got up and waking up
the pupil he said, "I am feeling thirsty, bring me some water". The
pupil became reluctant and started coining excuses. The more Bu Ali
insisted the more he was evasive to leave the cosy bed in that cold
winter. In the meantime the call of mo'azzin rose from the booster tower
(of the mosque): "Allah is Great, I bear testimony, there is no God but
Allah, I bear testimony, there is no God but Allah, I bear testimony
Muhammad is his Prophet". Bu Ali availed himself of the opportunity to
give a retort to the student, "You were claiming that if I proclaim to
be a Prophet people will start believing in me. Now look at this, you
who have been my student for years together and have learnt from my
lectures, my orders and that also in my immediate presence, do not
command so much of the obedience from you so that you may leave the cosy
bed for a while to bring me water. But this moazzin four hundred years
after the Holy Prophet, submits to his commands, gets out of his cosy
bed, climbs the tower and proclaims (at the top of his voice) testimony
to Oneness of God and Apostle's Prophethood. See, whence and whereto the
roads depart".

Rightly, the philosophers make pupils but not the followers; the social
reformers make prejudiced followers but not civilized men. The saints,
the mystics and the virtuous people make disciples but no active
crusaders.

**( 16 )**

In Ali the qualities of a philosopher, of a revolutionary leader, of a
saint and qualities peculiar to Prophets exist in simultaneous harmony.
His school is a school of thought and ideology, a school of revolution
and progress, a school of faith and discipline, a school of beauty and a
school of emotions and activation too!

Prior to his being a judicious Imam for others, and prior to his having
administered justice among the people, he himself was personally a
judicious and harmonious personality. He had mustered in himself all the
glories of humanity. His thought was deep and penetrating and he had
tender and profound tendencies. The physical and spiritual perfection
coexisted in him. During his nocturnal prayers, he totally disassociated
from all others (except Allah) and in the daytime he was in the thick of
the society. The human eyes saw in him in the broad day light fraternity
and selflessness and their ears heard his advice, his behest and his
wise oracle. During nights, the stars saw his devotional eyes showering
tears and the heavens heard his devotional supplications. He was a judge
and a sage, he was a saint and a social leader, he was a devout and a
soldier, he was an arbiter and an architect, he was an orator and a
writer; in short he was a perfect man with all human grace. .

This book is a compilation of four discourses made within 18 to 21
Ramazan 1388 in Hosainiyah Irshad. This book consists of one preface and
two parts. In the preface the rules of attraction and repulsion in
general and human attractions and repulsions, in particular, have been
discussed. In the first part Ali's attraction, which has perpetually
been attracting and continues to attract the souls, its philosophy its
advantages and its influences have been made subject matter of
discussion. In the second part his forceful repulsion, and what elements
it forcefully repelled and ousted, have been described and explained. It
is confirmed that Ali has been a personality with two faculties and
whosoever wants to take discipline in his school must be a person with
two faculties. It should always be kept in view that to be of two
faculties alone will not be sufficient to establish identity with Ali's
school. In this part an attempt has been made to indicate to a possible
extent the types of people who were attracted by Ali's attraction and to
point out the sort of people his repulsion, repelled.

**( 17 )**

Pity on some of us! who claim to be followers of Ali's school but repel
those whom Ali attracts and attract those whom Ali repels. In the part
concerning Ali's repulsion, the discussion has been confined only to the
Kharijites, while the fact remains that there are other classes too,
which fall to Ali's repulsion. May be at another occasion or at least by
the publication of the second edition of this book this defect like
others may be remedied.

The great scholar Aga-e-Fath Ullah has under-taken the pains to vet and
correct my speeches. Half of the book is in his hand. After transcribing
from the recorded cassettes, he has occasionally either corrected them
or completed them. The other half of it is either my oral version or an
occasional addition in his script.

I hope it will have a wholesome and informing effect. We pray that Allah
may make us from amongst the true followers of Ali.

Tehran

12-Asfand Yar 1349 H.S.

4-Moharam 1391 H.Q.

Mortaza Motah-hari
