Abodes of Piety and Purity
==========================

**( 83 )**

Love with and devotion to them results in nothing but obedience to the
Truth and pursuit of Virtue. Their love is like alchemy that transmutes
and augments. Of all conformable to Quraba (kith and kin), Ali is the
most befitting. Fakhr-i-Razi says, "Zamakhshari reports in Kashaf: when
this verse was revealed, they asked from the Prophet, 'Who are those of
your kith and kin whose love has been made obligatory on us'? The
Prophet replied: "Ali, Fatima and their sons".

This tradition proves that these four personalities are Prophet's
Quraba, i.e. the near ones from love with whom people should benefit. To
this effect, arguments may be advanced from some other angles also:

1. The verses about "mowadat fil qurba" (affection with near ones).

2. Undoubtedly the Prophet loved Fatima most of all and said. "Fatima is
part and parcel of myself; whatever offends her offends me". He also
loved Ali and Hasnain as is clear from abundant and consistent
traditions reported in this context.

Hence love with them obligatory on the whole of the Umma. Because the
Quran says "Follow the Prophet (so that) you may find the right course
and get guided." It again says: "For you, virtuous precedent is
instituted in the life style of messenger of Allah". It proves that love
with the progeny of Muhammad, i.e., Ali, Fatima and Hasnain is
obligatory on all the Muslims.

**( 84 )**

There are numerous traditions reported from the Prophet, enjoining love
with and affection towards Ali:

1. Ibn Aseer cites (from traditions) and says: Prophet said, "Oh Ali.'
God, has enriched you with merits which are the most coveted for by His
men. Avoidance of worldly benefits: He constructed you in such a manner
that neither you benefit from the sordid world nor does it from you. He
endowed you with the love for the have-nots. They are happy with your
leading them and you are happy with them because they follow you.
Blessed is the one who loves you with rectitude. Cursed is the man who
has animosity with you and fabricates lies against you".

2. Suyooti reports that the Prophet said, "Love with Ali is the faith
and, enmity with him is the hypocrisy."

3. Abu Naeem narrates the Prophet having said while addressing the
Ansar, "Should I tell you a thing which if you hold fast you will not
get astray?" They said, "Yes, O! Prophet of God". He replied, "It is
Ali. Love him for the sake of my love, because Allah through Jabra'eel
has bade me to tell you this".

The Sunnis have also narrated from the Prophet, inter-alia, that a
glance at Ali's face and description of his merits is like offering a
prayer. Tabri narrates from 'Aisha saying, "I saw that my father would
constantly gaze at Ali. I asked him, 'My dear father! I see you often
looking at Ali, why so'? He replied 'O my daughter, I have heard the
Prophet saying: 'a glance at Ali's face is like saying a prayer". Ibn
Hojr reports from 'Aisha that the Prophet said, "The best of my brothers
is Ali and the best of my uncles is Hamza. Remembrance and mention of
Ali is like saying of a prayer".

**( 85 )**

By Allah and by Prophet, Ali was the most loved. Hence he is the best of
the loved ones. Anas bin Malik says, "One of the boys from Ansar would
be detailed each day for attending the Prophet. One day it was my turn,
when Umm-i-Aiman brought a roasted fowl to the Prophet. She said 'Oh
Prophet of God! I myself have caught it and have roasted it for you'.
The Prophet said' 'Oh Allah! Send Thy cherished servant to join me in
this feast'. In the meantime the door was knocked and the Prophet asked
me to open it. I said to myself may be he is an Ansar. But I saw Ali at
the back of the door. I told him that the Prophet was busy, and I
returned to my own position. Once again there was a knock; the Prophet
asked me to open the door. Again I prayed: may he be an Ansar. I opened
the door, but again it was Ali. I said to him that the Prophet was busy,
and I myself resumed my position. Again there was a knock and the
Prophet said, 'Anasr go and open the door and let him in. You are not
the first to be clannish. He is not an Ansar'. I went and conducted Ali
in. He joined the Prophet in eating the roasted fowl".
