The Secrets of Ali's Attraction
===============================

**( 87 )**

What is the cause of Ali's love and affection in hearts of men? The
secret of love has not till today been discovered by anyone. It is not
possible to evolve a formula saying that had it happened so this would
have been the result and had it happened the other way that would have
been the result. However, it has a secret. There is something in the
beloved, which attracts the lover and is bewitching for him. The love
and attraction in the foregoing chapters has been named as "Ishq". Ali
no doubt is the beloved of and coveted by men. Why? and to what end? Why
this is exceptional with Ali that he inspires love and allures the souls
to himself. Why has he become a perpetual phase and why does he live to
eternity? Why do the hearts feel that they are acquainted with him? Why
did people not feel that he is dead and it is why that they find him
alive?

Admittedly the object of love is not his body because he is not bodily
present amongst us and we do not feel him as such. Moreover, love with
Ali is not equivalent to hero-worship of all nations. It will be
doubtful if we say love with Ali is sequel to love with his human and
moral merits and that love with Ali is love with humanity. Doubtless,
Ali is an embodiment of a perfect man. It is also correct that man loves
great models of human virtue. But let Ali possess all these human
merits, let him possess wisdom, knowledge, devotion, sacrifice,
humility, decorum, kindness, affection, love for the weak, justice,
freedom, independence, regard for humanity, selfless-ness, chivalry,
bravery and kindness even towards his enemy; (and according to Maulvi:
you are in chivalry, the Lion of Allah; We cannot define what you are in
benevolence), generosity, benevolence, and all that Ali had let him
have; if he would not have enjoyed the complexion of God, he would not
have been so much captivating and inspiring as he is even today.

**( 88 )**

Ali is loved because he has connection with Divinity. He, imperceptibly,
from the depths of our hearts attracts us towards the Truth and towards
determination. And when we say Ali is one of the greatest signs of
Allah, it is for the reason that we find in him the manifestation of
Truth. Hence men's love for him. In fact what reinforces people's love
with Ali is the bondage of love of God hidden in their souls. As the
souls are eternal, so is love for Ali. There are so many brilliant
points in Ali's personality, but what is always sublime and illuminating
is his faith and sincerity, which has blessed him with Divine
determination.

Sauda Hamdani is a lady fond of Ali. She in presence of Mo'awiyah paid
salutation to Ali and described his merits: "Blessed is the soul who has
been hurried and with him justice has been buried. He was so committed
to truth that no other heart could do. He was conjoined with faith and
belief. Saasaa-b-Sohan Abdi is another devotee of Ali. He is from
amongst those who joined Ali's funeral on the fateful night. When they
burried Ali and heaped dust on his body, Saasaa put one of his hands on
his heart and threw dust on his head with the other, saying, "Death be
happy to you! You were born in pious premises. Your perseverance was
vigorous, your efforts were marvelous. You had control on your thoughts
and your bargain was profitable".

"You have reverted back to your Creator and He has happily welcome you.
His angels have rallied around you. You have resided in the proximity of
the Prophet. Allah has brought you closer to Himself and has put you in
the vicinity of your brother Mustafa. He has made you drink from his
cup".

**( 89 )**

"I wish Allah may grace us to follow you and trace your footsteps. We
should keep your fiends to be our friends and your enemies to be our
enemies and may be we are resurrected among the company of thy friends".

"You discovered what others could not. You reached where others could
not. In the view of thy brother, the Prophet, you have battled. With
Allah's Faith you stood fast in a befitting manner upto enforcement of
Sunnah, eradication of opposition to it and establishment of Faith. Best
salutations to you.

"Through you the Muslims were fortified, their ways became clear and
Divine commands were enforced. No single person would ever possess all
those merits and charms which you singly possessed. You were responsive
to the Prophet's call. You were foremost among others to receive
Prophet's approval. You hastened to his assistance. You defended him at
the risk of your life. In the moments of dread and horror you assaulted
with your sword, The Zulfiqar, and broke the aggressor's spinal cord.
You uprooted idolatry and meanness. You dragged the transgressor through
sand and blood. May you rest in peace, O the leader of the faithful!"

"You were nearest to the Prophet. You were the first to embrace Islam.
You were full of confidence. You were of the firm mind. You were rich in
virtue. May God not deprive us of our reward for our missing you. May He
not abandon us after you".

"By God! Thy life was key to virtue and lock to vice. Thy death is key
to every vice and lock to every virtue. Had the people benefited from
you, blessings would have showered on them from heavens. But they
preferred the sordid world".

**( 90 )**

Yes they preferred the sordid world. They could not face justice and
Ali's determination. Ultimately rigidity and stagnation came out of the
sleeves of such a people and they martyred Ali

Ali is matchless in having such friends and selfless devotees who laid
down their lives in the cause of his love and affiliation. They marched
even to the gallows. The pages of Islamic history are proud of their
blossoming, beautiful and marvelous biographies. Hands of the ignoble
criminals like Ziyad, son of unknown, his son Obaidullah, Hajjaj bin
Yusuf, Mutawakkil and, above all, Mo'awiyah bin Abi Sufian are soaked to
elbow of the blood of such a cream of humanity.
