Ali's Antagonisation
====================

**( 91 )**

We will confine our discussion to four years and a few months of Ali's
Caliphate. Ali has always been a personality with two faculties. Ali has
always had attraction as well as repulsion. Especially from the
beginning of Islamic era we have been seeing a class of people
circumambulating Ali. The other group has had no love last for him; they
would rather feel annoyed with him.

However, the period of his caliphate and the times after his death,
i.e., the periods of his historical reassertion have been the main
periods of his attraction and repulsion, as his public contacts prior to
his caliphate were lesser, therefore, his attraction and repulsion found
lesser manifestation.

Ali antagonises and offends. This is yet one among many of his great
distinctions. Every man of conviction and principles and particularly a
combatant revolutionary, who is after accomplishing his goals in
conformity with these words of Allah: "They struggle in Divine Path and
are not subdued by threats", rightly antagonises and offends. Therefore,
in his own lifetime, if his enemies were not more, they were in no way
less than his friends. If today Ali's personality is not mis-described
and if it is faithfully projected, many a claimant of his love would be
found standing amidst his enemies.

**( 92 )**

The Prophet sent Ali in Command of an army to Yemen. On his way back, in
order to see the Prophet, he decided to go to Mecca. Near Mecca, on
making one of his men in-charge of the affairs, he himself hurriedly
proceeded towards Mecca. The Second-in-Command distributed amongst the
soldiers the robes, Ali had brought along, so that they may enter Mecca
in new clothes. On his return, Ali objected to it. He considered it to
be an act of indiscipline, because it was not desirable to distribute
the robes before seeking the approval of the Prophet. In fact, in Ali's
estimation spending from National Treasury without the sanction of the
head of the Muslims would be an act of criminal misappropriation. In
these circumstances, Ali ordered that the robes should be removed from
their persons and be entrusted to the Prophet at an appropriate
juncture. The Prophet himself might deal with them. The men of Ali's
army got offended by his action. Asoon as they reached the Prophet, he
enquired about their welfare. They started complaining against Ali's
displeasure over the distribution of the robes. Addressing them, the
Prophet said: "O Men! Do not complain against Ali! By God, he is more
strict in way of Allah than anyone who might complain against him".

Ali never showed any latitude to anyone in the way of Allah. If he ever
showed favour to anyone, it was for God's sake. Naturally, such a policy
is antagonising and offends the greedy and selfish at heart.

**( 93 )**

Amongst the Prophet's companions, none had such selfless friends as Ali
had likewise, none of them had such daring and desperate enemies as Ali
had. He was a man whose even funeral was apprehended to be assaulted by
his enemies. He himself was aware of such a situation. He had
anticipated it. He, therefore, made the will that his grave should be
kept secret from all except his sons. So much so that after the passage
of one century, i.e., after the downfall of Omeyyades, extinction and
liquidation of Kharijites, and after animosities and vengeance had
subsided, his sacred grave was made known to public by Imam-i-Sadiq.
