The Deviators, the Renegades and the Rebels:
============================================

**( 95 )**

During his caliphate Ali repelled three elements and drew sword against
them, i.e., the people of the Camel, whom he himself called "the
Deviators", the people of Siffeen, who were called by him "the
Renegades", and the people of Nahrwan, known as the Kharijites, who by
him were called "the Rebels".

"So when I (Ali) issued decrees of caliphate, one group betrayed
allegiance, the other became Renegade, and the third became recalcitrant
and Rebellious".

The deviators were mentally greedy people, they were voracious and
advocated inequality. Most of Ali's discourses, underlining justice and
equality, are often meant for them.

The mentality of the Renegade was that of diplomacy, duplicity and
hypocrisy. They struggled to usurp power and to root out the authority
of Ali. Some of them had made offers of getting close to him, meaning
that in this way he might fulfil their ambitions. He did not accept it
because he was not used to it. He had come to fight against tyranny and
not to acquiesce in it.

On the other hand, Mo'awiyah and his type were against the very basis of
Ali's government, they wanted to capture the seat of Islamic caliphate.
In fact, Ali's battle against them is a battle against hypocrisy and
duplicity.

The mentality of the third group viz. the rebels was a mentality of
unfair prejudices, dry asceticism, and dangerous ignorance. Ali had
forceful repulsion against all of them. He adopted a non-compromising
attitude towards them.

**( 96 )**

One of the manifestations of Ali's being a perfect man and a magnanimous
personality is that from the position of authority and assertion he had
to confront multifarious groups and divergent resilences and he combated
them all. Some times we find him in the battlefield fighting with the
greedy and voracious", "camelists", and at others we find him in the
battlefield confronting the multifaceted treacherous diplomats and at
times facing idiots and perverts of the self-styled sacerdotalism.

We revert to our debate about the last group viz. the Kharijites.
Although they have been liquidated yet they have left an instructive and
admonitory piece of history. Their thoughts have circulated amongst all
the Muslims. Consequently, during the fourteen centuries, inspite of the
fact that their manpower and even their name stand extinct, their spirit
has been always and continues to dominate the formalists and is held to
be the greatest resistance in the way at progress of Islam and the
Muslims.
