Emergence of the Kharijites
===========================

**( 97 )**

Kharijites, that is, rebels, is a derivative of 'Khorooj' which means
revolt or rebellion. They emerged from "arbitration". In the battle of
Siffeen the last day was going to end in victory of Ah. Mo'awiyah in
consultation with Amr bin 'As took a very clever step. He saw that all
his pains and efforts had failed and defeat was just a pace ahead. He
thought that but for creation of confusion nothing would lead to their
escape. He ordered that Qurans should be hoisted atop the launces.
Thereby meaning: "O Men! We are people of the Quran and the Qibla, let
us make it our arbitrator amongst us". It was not a plea to have been
innovated by them. Earlier Ali had proposed in the very same words, but
they did not agree. Even now they would not agree. It was an excuse to
avoid a total defeat.

Ali rose his voice: "Kill them, they now exploit the leaves and the
letters of the Quran as a hidey-hole but soon hereafter they will
continue in their anti-Quranic manners. The leaves and the letters of
the Book have no supremacy over and preference to its spirit. I am the
spirit and the real manifestation of the Quran. They have hoisted the
Quran while they mean to destroy its significance and spirit".

A group of the ignorant the vague and spurious divines who were in large
numbers, among themselves looked through Ali: "What does he say"? They
cried out, "Should we fight with the Quran? Our war is for restoration
of the Quran; if they have submitted to the Quran why this fighting
affair?"

**( 98 )**

Ali said, "I also say fight for the sake of the Quran. But they do not
have any interest in the Quran. They want to have only a shelter in its
letters and script".

In Islamic jurisprudence, in the Chapter of 'Al-Jehad' (the Crusade)
there is a proposition called "The Infidels Warding off harm through
Muslims".

The proposition means that if the enemies of Islam, while at war with
the Muslims, use the Muslim prisoners of war as a means to their own
protection and keep them ahead of themselves as a shield and themselves
keep busy in their rear to cause damage to the Muslim fighters, in such
a manner that if the Muslim forces want to defend themselves or to lead
an advance or to halt the enemy offensive, they will be inevitably
killing their enemies' human shield device viz. their own co-believers,
on the principle of necessity, because without that a combat with the
warring and aggressive enemy will not be possible. In such circumstances
in the larger interest of Islam the killing of the Muslims has been held
to be justified. They are also the soldiers of Islam. They are martyrs
of the Divine cause. At the most their relatives bereft may be paid
blood money from the Islamic budget. This rule is not peculiar to Islam.
In the International Law of Belligerency and Armed forces, it is a
recognised rule that if the enemy want to utilise the captive forces,
they (parent army of the captives) may destroy such prisoners of war to
get hold of the enemy and to repulse them.

**( 99 )**

In these circumstances when Islam says "Kill and do away with a living
Muslim so as to achieve triumph of Islam", the paper and the binding
cover are no exception to it. The leaves and the volume are sacred only
for their significance and substance. Today the war is war of survival
of the message of the Quran. They have taken its paper as an instrument
to obliterate its significance and the substance.

However, ignorance and idiocy had blindfolded them. They could not
comprehend truth. They said, "not only that we ourselves do not fight
with the Quran but also, because fighting with the Quran is itself a
vice, we must try to enforce prohibition against it, and those who fight
with the Quran we must fight against them".

The ultimate victory of Ali was just a few moments ahead.
Malik-ul-Ashtar, a loyal, devoted and venturesome officer, was about to
reach the commanding tentage ofMo'awiyah and to raze it to the ground so
as to remove the thorn from the pious body of Islam. In these very
moments this group staged their revolt against Ali and said, "We will
assault you from behind". All that Ali could do was to convince them but
they had become more obstinate in their refusal and insisted upon
refraction. Ali sent a message to Malik to cease-fire and return from
the battlefield.

He, in reply to Ali's message, said: "If I am given some moments more
the war will end and the enemy will be completely annihilated". They
drew their swords saying: "Either order him to come back or we will cut
you to pieces".

He again sent a message "If you want to see me alive suspend the battle
and come back". He returned and the enemy was happy that his fraud had
worked.

**( 100 )**

The battle was halt so that the Quran may be made arbiter, so that an
arbitration council may be constituted and the arbitrators of both the
sides as is enacted in the Quran and Sunnah may sit to decide the
matters and remove the animosities or it may add yet another difference
to the existing ones and may make worse what was bad. Ali said, "They
should appoint their arbitrator so that we may appoint ours". They
without little difference rather unanimously appointed Amr-bin-'As, the
craftiest of the world, to be their arbitrator. Ali proposed that
Abdullah bin Abbas the well-known statesman or Malik-ul-Ashtar, the
devoted and far-sighted faithful, or a man of their caliber may be
appointed (as arbitrator). But the asinine went in search of their own
homogeneous and proposed Abu Moosa, an unwise person who had no
mutuality with Ali. The more Ali and his friends asked them that Abu
Moosa was not a man fit for the job, the more they disagreed with each
else. He said: "If the things have assumed these proportions, then do
whatever you like". Ultimately he, with the assumptive authority of an
arbitrator from the side of Ali and his friends, joined the arbitration
council. After months of consultations, Amr bin 'As said to Abu Moosa,
"It is better that in the larger interest of Muslims, neither Ali nor
Mo'awiyah should be there. We must elect a third person and he could be
no other than your son-in-law, Abdullah bin Omar. Abu Moosa replied,
"You are right. What is now the difficulty? " He said, "You should
remove Ali from Caliphate and I shall remove Mo'awiyah. Thereafter the
Muslims should go to elect a befitting person. They will definitely
elect Abdullah bin Omar. Thus the disputes will be out rooted".

**( 101 )**

They agreed to this proposition and made proclamation for the public to
assemble for hearing the results to be announced.

People collected, Abu Moosa looked towards Amr bin 'As to take the
pulpit and declare his verdict. Amr bin 'As said, "I? You are the
gray-hair and veteran companion of the Prophet. I will never take
courage to have precedence on you in expressing my views". Abu Mossa
moved from his seat and sat on the pulpit. Hearts were beating fast.
Eyes were dazzled and breaths were held up in the bosoms. All were
zealously expectant of what could the result be? He started giving out
his views: "After deliberations we found it to be in the interest of the
Ummah that neither Ali nor Mo'awiyah should be there and that let the
Muslims elect whomsoever they like".

He removed the ring from one of his right fingers saying, "I remove Ali
from Caliphate in the like manner as I have removed this ring from my
finger" Having said this he demounted.

Amr bin 'As moved upto the pulpit, sat there and said, "You have heard
Abu Moosa removing Ali from Caliphate. I also dismiss him from Caliphate
as Abu Moosa has done". He removed the ring from one of his right
fingers and put it on one of the left and said, "I install Mo'awiyah to
the Caliphate in the like manner as I have just put this ring on my
finger". With this he stepped down the pulpit.

There was pandemonium in the assembly. People pounced upon Abu Moosa.
Some of them lashed him. He took to his heels to Mecca. Amr bin 'As also
left for Syria.

**( 102 )**

Kharijites, who were authors of this situation, for themselves saw the
outrage to arbitration and discovered their fault. However, they did not
realize where did the fault lie. They did not admit that it was their
fault to have fallen prey to the fraud of Mo'awiyah and Amr bin 'As and
to have suspended the war. They also did not say that after conceding to
arbitration they had erred in the choice of the arbitrator and appointed
Abu Moosa to match Amr bin 'As. They rather said that the very
appointment of the two persons as arbitrators and Judges in matters of
Divine Faith was an act un-Islamic and of infidelity because Allah alone
is the arbiter and not the men.

They came to Ali saying, "We did not realize. We accepted arbitration.
You have become a renegade and we too. We have repented. Let you too
repent". The misery revived and became manifold.

Ali said, "Repentance is good in all circumstances. God may forgive us
for our sins. We always express repentance for every sin". They said,
"It will not suffice, say arbitration was a sin', and you repent this
sin". He said, "Virtually I did not invent this proposition of
arbitration. On the other hand how could I declare something to be a sin
which is permissible in Islam? Why should I confess a sin which I have
not committed".

**( 103 )**

Hence they organised a religious denomination. To start with, they were
a rebellious and an insurgent faction, therefore, they were called
"Kharijites". By and by they evolved basic doctrines for themselves. The
party that initially had political semblance gradually adopted religious
complexion. Very late the Kharijites on the excuse of being supporters
of a religion, started active poignant propaganda. In course of time
they started thinking that by their own appreciation they should trace
out the root cause of the malady of the Muslim world. They came to the
conclusion that Osman, Ali and Mo'awiyah, all of them, are at fault and
sinners. We must fight against the vices so produced. We should enjoin
virtue and prohibit vice. Therefore, the Kharijites religion emerged for
enforcing "Virtue" and prohibiting "Vice".

There are two pre-requisites for enforcement of virtue and prohibition
of vice: Insight in precept and insight in practice.

If insight is lacking in precept, as it appears in the traditions, its
demerits are more than its merits.' However, the insight in practice has
two prerequisites that are juridically called as "producing effect" and
"avoiding side effects". These two pre-requisites can be achieved only
when logic is allowed to operate. Kharijites neither had insight in
precept nor the insight in practice. Kharijites possessed neither of the
insights. They were idiots, devoid of insight. They were basically
abnegators of insight in practice. They asserted that' there must be
automation in practice and a blind performance.
