Ritual Or Spirit ?
==================

**( 111 )**

###### RITUAL OR SPIRIT ?

It is exercise in futility to dilate upon Kharijism or Kharijites as a
religious issue, because today such a religion is existing nowhere in
the world. However, the present debate about Kharijites and the nature
of their works will serve as a warning to our people and our society.
Because inspite of extinction of Kharijites' religion, its spirit has
not died away. The spirit of Kharijism has transmigrated into the souls
of many of us.

It is essential to say a few introductory words:

May be some religions are dead 'Ritual-wise' but they are not so
'Spirit-wise'. Likewise, the contrary is also possible, i.e., may be a
religion is alive 'Ritual-wise', but it is dead Spirit-wise. Therefore,
this is also possible that a man or men may be Ritual-wise followers of
and adherents to one religion, but in reality may not be the followers
of that faith. Its contrary is also possible, i.e., some may be actually
followers of one religion but their practice may give no evidence of
their faith.

For instance, as we all know after the demise of the Prophet, for two
reasons Muslims were divided into two sects, viz. Sunni and Shiah. The
Sunnis are within the four-corners of one belief and practice, and
Shiahs are within the four-corners of the other.

A Shiah asserts that Ali is immediate successor of the Prophet. He had
appointed Ali to his succession and Caliphate per Divine command, and
after the Prophet he had exclusive right to this office. The Sunnis say
that Islam in its legislation has not specifically anticipated the
question of Immamate and Caliphate and that it has in fact left the
resolution of this important issue to the discretion of the people
themselves, the maximum restriction being that election must be made
from amongst the Qureish.

**( 112 )**

Shiahs make Propeht's many companions, who are considered to be men of
status, stature and renown, susceptible to criticism and the Sunnis hold
just the opposite of Shiahs' view. Everyone who is said to be a
companion (Sahabi) is viewed with strange credulity. They say, "All the
companions of the Prophet are just and righteous". Shiaism is based on
critical appreciation, investigation, incredulity and hair splitting.
Sunnism is based on credulity and excuse "God willing, it might have
been a cat".

In this age, where we happen to be, whosoever says, "Ali is the
immediate successor of our Prophet", we readily declare him to be a
Shiah expecting nothing more from him. Let him belong to any
denomination or to any way of thinking.

But if we go to the period of advent of Islam, we come across a distinct
spirit that happens to be the soul of Shiaism. They were the minds
capable of faithfully, accepting the behest of the Prophet about Ali and
did not suffer from any disbelief or distrust. The opposite of this
spirit and this way of thinking has been another mentality and school of
thought who with all the completeness of faith, which they had in the
Prophet, accepted the behests with a sort of reservation and with such
interpretation and construction as were never intended.

**( 113 )**

In fact schisms and divisions in Islam originated from here. One schism
was in majority. They were shallow and looked only to the surface. Their
vision was neither sharp nor deep so as to discern the implications and
the consequences of every event. They looked to the surface and attached
presumption of correctness to it. They used to say, "A number of elderly
companions (of Prophet), the veterans and the seniors in Islam have
followed this course; therefore, it cannot be said that they have
erred." But the other group who were in minority would at the same time
say, "Personalities are held in esteem by us only when they themselves
show respect to the truth. However, if we find that Islamic principles
are being violated by the veterans, they cease to enjoy respect (with
us). We uphold principles and not the personalities". Shiaism emerged
with this spirit.

When we go through Islamic history in search of Salman-i-Farsi, Abu Zar
Ghifari, Miqdad Kindi, Ammar-i-Yasir and the likes, we wish to know what
were the factors which persuaded them to take Ali's side and to ignore
the majority? We will find them to be men of principles, and the men
aware of principles. They were Faithful and knew what was the Faith.
They would say, "We should not hand our intellect and wisdom over to
other because there is apprehension of our erring when he errs". Checked
02-01-01 page on book 60

In fact, their's was a mind ruled by facts and principles and not by
persons and personalities.

**( 114 )**

One of the Amir-ul-Momineen's (Ali's) companions, during the battle of
Jamal, fell in serious doubt. He looked to both the sides. On the one
side he saw Ali and stalwarts of Islam wielding their swords under Ali's
Command! On the other side was Aisha a harem (wife) of the Prophet, and
about Prophet's wives the Quran laying down: "His wives are mothers of
the Ummah", and under her command was Talha, a senior in Islam, of happy
antecedents, a sharp shooter and a veteran strategists of Islam who had
a rich record of services for the cause of Islam; moreover there was
Zubair with nobler antecedents than Talha's, who even on the day of
Saqeefa had been among those who took shelter in Ali's house. He was
awfully confused, "What is this all? After all Ali, Talha and Zobair are
amongst the veterans of Islam and have been volunteers of Islam in the
worst of odds. Now they have arrayed themselves against each other?
Which of them is nearer to truth? What to be done in this confusing
conflict?" Beware! He is not to blame much; perhaps even if we would
have been in those very circumstances, where he happened to be, the
personalities and antecedents of Talha and Zobair might have blurred our
vision too.

Now when we visualize Ali, Ammar, Awais Qarni and others confronting
Aisha, Zubair and Talha, we feel no hesitation to hold that the latter
were a group of men of vicious countenance, i.e., impressions of vice
and dishonesty were writ large on their faces. Their eyes, their
appearances and their faces betrayed their ambitions. But if we would
have been there and would have seen their antecedents from close
quarters, haply we too could not have helped falling in doubt.

**( 115 )**

Today, when we hold the first group to have been on the right and the
second in the wrong, it is because of history's verdict, and the facts
having become clearer. We, having identified the nature of Ali and Ammar
on one side and the nature of Zubair, Talha and 'Aisha on the other, can
make a better judgment between them, or at least even if we were not
students of or experts in history we have been taught so from our
childhood. However, on that day none of these factors was available.

Anyhow, this gentleman appeared before Ali and said: "Is it possible
that Talha, Zubair and 'Aisha may concur on untruth. How could
personalities like them, from among the old companions of the Prophet,
err and take to wrong course? Is it possible?"

Ali replied in such a conclusive and authoritative phrase, which
according to Dr. Taaha Husain, the Egyptian writer and the Philosopher,
"had never been heard elsewhere-since the cessation of Divine Voice and
discontinuance of revelation".

"You suffer from illusion and you have fallen in confusion. Right and
wrong are not measured in scales of personalities and statures of
individuals. It is incorrect to first hold personality to be a
yard-stick, thereafter to measure Right and Wrong on those standards and
then to hold that this thing is Right because such and such persons have
acquiesced in it and that thing is wrong because such and such persons
are opposed to it". Nay! personalities should not be made the measure
sticks for Right and Wrong. It is Right and Wrong which should be the
criterion of individuals and their personalities.

**( 116 )**

That means, "you should be cognizant of Right and Wrong. You should not
go after persons and personalities. Individuals, whether
personality-wise great or small, must be compared with truth. If they
are found conformable to it, accept them, otherwise do not. The question
is not as to whether Talha, Zobair and Aisha can or cannot be Wrong?"

Here Ali has held Truth itself to be the touchstone of Truth. The spirit
of Shiaism is nothing other than this. In fact, Shiaism is schism sequel
to a specific view, which gives importance to the Principles of Islam.
Necessarily, Shiahs have emerged as critics and iconoclasts.

Ali, a Youth of thirty three years, after the Prophet, led a minority of
less than the number of his fingers against him were men of sixty years
with majority and multitude. The logic of the majority was, "This is the
course of the veterans and seniors, and the veterans never err. Hence we
follow their course". The logic of the minority was, "It is Truth that
never errs. The seniors must make themselves conformable to Truth".

From here it becomes obvious that how numerous are the men whose
practice may be shi'ite but their precept is not.

The goal of Shiaism, like its spirit, is to recognise the Truth and to
follow it, and of its greatest effects are "attraction" and "repulsion";
but not every attraction and repulsion. We have earlier said some times
attraction is attraction of fallacy, sin and the sinner; and repulsion
is repulsion of Truth and human merits. The repulsion and attraction
must be of the kind of Ali's attraction and repulsion, because a Shiah
must be a copy of Ali's life-style. A Shiah must also, like Ali, be a
personality with two faculties.

**( 117 )**

This introduction was intended to realize that it is possible that a
religion may be dead but its spirit may survive amongst such a people
who may not only prima-facie be not its followers, but may also be
taking themselves to be its opponents. The Kharijites' religion is today
dead, i.e., no significant group exists on globe who under the same
title may be following it. But has the spirit of Kharijites died out?
Has this spirit not transmigrated into other religions? Has, God forbid,
this spirit not been breathed into us, particularly in our 'clerics'
claiming piety?

These are the subjects to be separately dealt with. If we correctly
identify the spirit of Kharijism, we may be in a position to answer this
question. The discussion about Kharijites may also be useful only from
this angle. We must know why did Ali repel them, i.e why did Ali's
attraction not attract them and, to the contrary, why did his repulsion
repelled them.

**( 118 )**

Admittedly, as we will subsequently see, all those idealistic elements,
which influenced the formation of the personality and spirit of
Kharijites, were such as they could not withstand the thrust and impact
of Ali's repulsion. Their spirit had many such prominent and brilliant
merits, which could be a subject of Ali's attraction, had the same not
been concomitant with a chain of dark points. But the dark aspects of
their spirit were so abundant that they pushed them amongst Ali's
enemies.
