Law of Attraction and Repulsion
===============================

**( 19 )**

It is a general law, the entire system of creation is subject to it. All
modem human sciences conclusively assert that not a single atom from
amongst the atoms of the cosmos lies beyond the jurisdiction of
universal attraction, rather all happen to be subservient to it. From
the largest organism and bodies of the universe to its smallest atoms,
all possess this intrinsic force called attraction, and simultaneously
(somehow or the other) they happen to be under its influence.

Man of earlier ages was not cognizant of this all-pervading faculty of
attraction. Nonetheless, they did discover it in some of the bodies, and
recognized them as symbol of this faculty, e.g. magnet and amber. Till
late man did not know that these bodies have relative attraction for
everything else also, he had rather presumed a specific co-relation
about them, i.e., a co-relation between magnet and iron and grass and
amber:

Every atom which is in this atmosphere

For its own genus is a petal as well as amber

But for these (two) we find no mention (in their volumes) of existence
of faculty of attraction in the rest of the solid bodies. They have only
discussed as to why the earth had hAlied amidst the heavens. They
believed that the earth was held in suspension in the middle of the sky
and was 3 pulled by the celestial attraction from all its sides They
thought that as the attraction was comprehensive, so the sphere had to
stay where it was, without leaning on any side. Some of them believed
that the sky did not attract the earth, it rather repelled the sphere,
and as the repulsion was equally comprehensive, so it had to stay on, at
a specific point and could not change place.

**( 20 )**

They believed in the existence of the faculties of attraction and
repulsion in plants and animals, in as much as they held them to possess
the faculties of nutrition, growth and procreation. In the context of
the faculty of nutrition they acknowledged the existence of secondary
faculties of (i) attraction (ii) repulsion (iii) digestion and (iv)
retention, and said that the stomach had the faculty of attraction, and
because of that it pulled the food to itself and, in the same course, it
excreted the diet whence it was found improper. In the same stance, they
said that liver had the faculty of attraction because it attracted water
to itself:

"Stomach pulls food to the point. Liver pulls water to itself".
