Democracy of Ali
================

**( 119 )**

Amir-ul-Momineen dealt with Kharijites in an extremely liberal and
democratic manner. He was their ruler and they were his subjects. They,
to their capacity, indulged in all political activities without his
sending them to prison, nor he lashed them. So much so he did not even
cut the stipends of the impudent from the public exchequer. He viewed
them in the same manner as he viewed all others. Such instances may not
be foreign in Ali's biography, but they are no doubt found less
elsewhere in the world. They were everywhere free to express their
beliefs. Ali himself and his companions faced them without any curb on
their freedom of belief. They held moots. The parties argued their own
cases and rebutted the other side's arguments.

Perhaps this much of liberty that a government should be so democratic
to its opponents goes in -the world without a precedent. They would come
to mosque interfere in the sermons and discourses of Ali. One day Ali
was on the pulpit a man came there and posed a question to which Ali
gave a prompt reply. A kharijite from 'amongst the people cried out,
"God may kill him, what a wise he is". Others wanted to manhandle the
Kharijite but Ali said, "Leave him. He has abused me alone".

**( 120 )**

Kharijites would not offer their prayers if Ali led the congregation,
because they held him to be an infidel. They would come to mosque and
would not offer prayers with Ali, and thereby caused him anguish. One
day Ali was leading the congregation, a Kharijite with the name of
Ibn-i-Kawa came there and with insinuations at Ali loudly recited the
verse of the Quran which addresses the Prophet, "It has been revealed to
you and to your precursors that if you get Polytheists all your
achievements will be ignored, and you will be from the losers". By
reading this verse Ibn-i-Kawa warned Ali, "I am aware of your
antecedents in Islam. You are the first Muslim. The Prophet opted you as
brother. On the eve of migration your dedication was inspiring, when you
slept in Prophet's bed. You left yourself at the mercy of the swords.
Finally your services in the cause of Islam cannot be ignored. But God
has warned the Prophet himself, 'If you go Polytheist your achievements
will be ignored'. As you have now become infidel, so you have effaced
your past record".

What was Ali's reaction? He assumed silence till Ibn-i-Kawa recited the
verse to its end. As soon as the verse was complete, Ali continued with
the prayers. Inb-i-Kawa once again repeated the same verse, and Ali
instantly resumed silence. Ali would keep silent because the Quran says:
"When the Quran is being recited, lend it your ears and be silent". For
this very reason during the prayers the led are supposed to be silent
and attentive when the Imam is busy reciting.

**( 121 )**

After repeating the verse, a few times Ibn-i-Kawa wanted to disturb the
formation of the prayers. Ali recited this verse, "Be patient. Allah's
promise is true. It must materialise. These men devoid of faith and
conviction cannot harass you, nor they can impair your determination".
He took no further notice and continued the prayers.
