Kharijite's Insurgency And Revolt
=================================

**( 123 )**

###### KHARIJITE'S INSURGENCY AND REVOLT

To start with, the Kharijites were peaceful and would feel contented
with free dialogue and criticism. Ali had also been extending the same
treatment to them as we have alluded to above. He in no way interfered
with them. So much so that he did not cut their dues from the Public
Treasury. But gradually when they became disappointed of Ali as he would
not repent, they changed their policy and decided to wage a
'revolution'. They gathered in the house of one of their collaborators.
He made a fiery and provocative speech and invited his friends to rise
in arms and to launch revolt in order to enjoin Virtue and enforce
Prohibitions. He said in his speech:-

"After His praise. I swear by God! it is not befitting of that people
who have faith in the merciful God and accept the commands of the Quran
that the sordid world be more attractive for them than the decree to do
good and to avoid evil and the words of Allah may be that they (the
decree and the Divine words) bring losses and involve risks. Whosoever
has fallen in loss or risk in this world he will be rewarded by Divine
pleasure and a life of heavens on doom's day. My brethren! Let us leave
this city of the tyrant's seat for the hills or for some other cities,
so that we may rise up and arrest these innovations of mis-guidance".

By these words their inflammable spirit got more volcanic. They moved
from that place and rose up in revolt and rebellion. They threatened the
peace of the routes. They adopted dacoity and mischief as a profession.
In this way they attempted to weaken the integrity of the state and to
dislodge the sitting government.

**( 124 )**

From here onward no more latitude could be given to them; because it was
not a matter of expression of belief, it was rather a question of
disturbance of social peace and tranquility and of an armed insurgency
against a legitimate government. Hence Ali pursued them. Along 'Nahrwan'
he confronted them. He addressed and advised them and served them with
the final warning. At that time he gave the banner of peace to Abu Ayub
Ansari, and whosoever rallied under it he was protected. Out of twelve
thousand rebels eight thousand retraced their steps. The rest showed
resistance. They suffered a defeat and but for a few, no one survived.
