The Diplomacy Of Raising The Quran Atop The Launces:
====================================================

**( 139 )**

###### THE DIPLOMACY OF RAISING THE QURAN ATOP THE LAUNCES:

The diplomacy of Raising the Quran atop the launces has by and large
been in practice for the last thirteen centuries; specially wherever
fanatics and formalists multiply and ostentation is received as
equivalent of continence and piety, the opportunists practice the
politics of Raising the Quran atop the launces. The lessons, which may
be learnt from it are:

(a) The first lesson is whenever the idiots, the ignorant and the
ill-informed are recognised as manifestation of continence and piety and
the Muslims acknowledge them as symbols of virtue, it provides effective
means to self-seeking genius. These 'wise-men' always take them as tools
to achieve their objects, and exploit them as a solid obstacle to impede
the genuine reformers. It has often been noticed that anti-Islamic
elements utilize forces of Islam against Islam itself. Western
imperialism has vast experience in exploiting such instruments.
According to its choice and for its own advantage among Muslims, it
creates false emotional sectarian uprisings. How shameful it is that the
afflicted Muslim who issues to eradicate the extraneous influences, and
the same people whom he wishes to give him emancipation, step up as a
wall against him in the name of faith and religion. Yes if the hosts of
people idiot, ignorant and hypocrite are available in the fortress of
Islam itself the enemy will exploit them to his own advantage. In Iran,
where our people have the distinctive love with and affiliation to the
pious 'House of Prophet', the hypocrites in the sacred name of the House
of Prophet and within the sacred fort of allegiance with the House of
Prophet, erect a fortress against Islam to the advantage of the usurper
Jew. (It was said about ante-revolution days). It is one of the wicked
tyrannies against Islam, the Quran, the Prophet and his illustrious
House. The Holy Prophet says:

**( 140 )**

"I am not afraid of miseries and poverty showering on my Ummah. Of what
I am afraid is perverse thinking. The paucity of wisdom renders that
harm to my Ummah which economic poverty cannot."

(b) The other lesson is that we should try to deduce correct analogy
from the Quran. The Quran is guide and Leader only when it is correctly
understood and scholarly interpreted. The guidance provided by the
people of the Quran whose knowledge of the Quran is authentic must be
availed of. So long as our method of deducing from the Quran is not
correct and so long as we have not had acquaintance with the rules and
the principles of interpretation of the Quran we cannot benefit from it.
The opportunists and the fools, when they read the Quran, impute
incorrect meanings to it. As you have heard through Nehj-ul-Balagha,
they say a right thing but mean a wrong one. This is not an act in
obedience to the Quran or an act for its revival, it is rather a
betrayal to the Quran". Acting in accordance with the Quran is possible
only when its appreciation is a correct appreciation. The Quran always
outlines the issue in form of basic principles but their correct analogy
and application is subject to our correct appreciation and
understanding. For example, it is not written in the Quran that a battle
which takes place on such and such day between Ali and Mo'awiyah, Truth
will be on Ali's side; only this much has come in the Quran.

"If two groups of the Muslims fight with each other, attempt a
compromise between them, and if one of them has committed aggression and
excess against the other then you should also fight against the
aggressor, so that he reverts to Allah".

This is the Quran and its diction. But the Quran never says such and
such 'person' is on the right in the conflict and 'the other' is on the
wrong.

**( 141 )**

The Quran does not mention each one by his name. It does not say that
after forty years or more or less, a man with the name of Mo'awiyah will
be born and he will fight with Ali and you should also enter the fight
for Ali's cause. Nor should it give details. The Quran is not supposed
to enumerate subjects and then to point out which is wrong, because this
is not possible. The Quran has, come to hold on perpetually. Therefore,
it was to lay down only the fundamental rules and principles so that
whenever 'wrong' confronts 'Right', people may follow those standards.
It is another responsibility of the people themselves to distinguish the
rebels from the believers by comparing them with the fundamentals. When
two groups from among the Muslims are warring-They should open their
eyes to distinguish between the rebel and the otherwise. If the rebels
submit and surrender they should be pardoned, but if they do not give up
and only pretend to avoid themselves defeat, by finding fresh time to
make another assault and to up rise once more then in view of the
following verse:

'Hold on. Do not accept his excuse".

The diagnosis of all this is for the people themselves. The Quran wishes
the Muslims sociological and rational maturity, and on the bases of that
maturity they must distinguish between Man of the Right and Man of the
Wrong. The Quran has not come to so deal with men as guardian of minor,
deals with the ward, nor it should deal with the details of life as a
guardian of person and explain every special subject with physical
symbols and indications.

Basically identifying men, evaluating their worth, knowing the extent of
their merits and their commitment with Islam and, ascertaining their
intrinsicality is itself an obligation and perhaps we are indifferent to
this obligation.

**( 142 )**

Ali (PBH) says: "You can never identify the truth, and you cannot adopt
the right course unless you with objectivity identify the right course".

That is to say, only the knowledge of the fundamentals and the basic
principles will not be enough, unless it is applied in letter and
spirit. Because it is possible that for having misunderstood the
individuals and personalities and for having not identified the objects
you may (prima facie) be acting in name of Allah and Islam but in fact
to the benefit of falsehood.

In the Quran, tyranny and tyrant, justice and truth have occurred, but
the conformable to them are to be seen. We should not tell (Right' for
injustice and injustice for 'Right', lest with these very principles and
injunctions of the Quran-because of our whims-We undo truth and justice.
