The Necessity Of Fight Against Hypocrisy
========================================

**( 143 )**

###### THE NECESSITY OF FIGHT AGAINST HYPOCRISY

The most difficult of all the fights is the one with hypocrisy, because
it is fight with such crafty people who exploit the idiots. In degree it
is a combat more difficult than the one with infidelity. Fight against
infidelity is the fight against an open, explicit and exposed current.
The fight against hypocrisy is a fight against infidelity in disguise.

Hypocrisy has two faces, the one obvious being that of Islam and
Muslim-hood and the other hidden one being that of evil and infidelity.
The correct identification of groups and people is ordinarily very
difficult and sometimes impossible. Probably fight against hypocrisy is
a losing battle, because no mass of luminous rays (ALPHA or BEATA) can
pass their surface to bring the hidden to light, it does not have
penetration to the depths of souls.

Amir-ul-Momineen (PBH) in his epistle written to Muhammad bin Abu Bakar
says, "The Prophet said to me 'for my Ummah, I am not afraid of Momin
and Polytheist because God will abstain the Momin because of his faith,
and will humiliate the Polytheist because of his idolatry. But, for you,
I am afraid of a fair tongue tenanted by a fiendish soul because he says
what you like and does what you hold vicious".

Herein the Prophet of Allah has alerted against the posture of hypocrisy
and the hypocrites. The Ummah, in general ignorant and not well
informed, may be deceived by the spurious.

**( 144 )**

Be mindful! When the idiots multiply the business of hypocrisy
flourishes more. Fight against idiocy and ignorance is a fight against
hypocrisy also, because the idiot strengthens the hands of the hypocrite
and fight against the idiots is for disarming the hypocrite and
snatching the sword from his hands.
