Men Who Have Attraction But Not Repulsion:
==========================================

**( 25 )**

They are fond of every one and warm to all; they make their fans from
amongst all classes of people. In their lifetime everyone is their
friend and no one disowns them. When they die, the Muslims give them
funeral wash with waters of Zamzam and the Hindus bum their cadavers to
ashes:

"Urfi so behave with virtuous and vicious both that after your death the
Muslims give you wash with Zamzam and the Hindus burn your cadaver to
ashes."

As desired by this poet, if you happen to live in a bi-national society,
half of which are Muslims and dispose of the dead bodies of the
co-believers by respectfully washing the same and as a token of greater
respect give them funeral wash with the holy waters of Zamzam,
preceeding the ante-burial prayers; and the other half of this society
are Hindus who put their dead a-pyre to be burnt to ashes; then in such
a society, you should so conduct yourself that after your death the
Muslims take you as their co-believer and give you ante-burial wash with
waters of Zamzam and Hindus take you to be theirs and burn your dead
body on pyre.

Probably they believe that by sweet manners and smooth co-existence or,
in today's parlance, by "being social" they can befriend the whole
mankind. But from the perspective of a man with principles and
conviction, who wants to selflessly pursue the ideas and thoughts in
multitude of humanity, it is inevitable to be one-sided, curt and
out-spoken; albeit a dual personality is possessed only by a hypocrite.

**( 26 )**

As all men neither think alike nor feel alike, nor their likes and
dislikes are identical, e.g. among men are avengers and offenders, good
and bad, society has judges and also aggressors, it has arbiters and
criminals; all of them cannot simultaneously be friendly to a man who is
pursuing definite goals, because his pursuits are unavoidably
detrimental to the interests of one class. Only a liar and a mendacious
person can afford to carry on friendship with people of divergent
classes and flirt with people of different ideas. He expresses himself
in parlance and exhibits in fashion suited to the moment. A
straightforward man or a man with principles has to befriend some and to
offend others. Those who follow his course rush to him and those who go
contrary to his way reject and oppose him.

Some of the Christians, who show themselves of and their religion as the
herald of love, contend that a perfect man must he nothing but loving,
and that is all. Hence man to have attraction alone. Probably some
Hindus have also identical belief.

In Christian and Hindu philosophies lot has been devoted to love. They
say, "We should be loving to everything and when we love all, nothing
will obstruct them from reciprocating with the same to us. The vicious
will also love us when they have seen love from us".

Let these gentlemen know! it does not suffice to be lover alone, one
must have principles as well, as Gandhi has said, "Our religion lies in
love coupled with reality; and if love is blended with reality, it
becomes a commitment to principles". Commitment by a man to principles
inevitably generates enmity, this, in fact, is repulsion, which
instigates some to confrontation and rejects others.

Islam no doubt is a religion of love and affinity. The Quran introduces
the Prophet as a blessing for the universe: "and We commissioned you but
as a blessing for all the worlds", i.e. for the worst of your enemies
also you should be a blessing and affectionate.

**( 27 )**

However, the love preached by the Quran does not mean that we should so
behave as to please everyone and to act according to every one's likes
and delight, so that everyone is allured by us. To let everyone loose in
his own choice or to ditto his likes is of no love with him, it is in
fact hypocrisy and deception. Love must be blended with reality; such a
love imparts virtue and Lo! the virtue so imparted has not been
adulterated with the love of the adversary. Very often, while pursuing
his course, such a man comes in contact with many persons, and when they
find his likes opposed to their objects, they give him an affront
instead of an appreciation. Besides this, the wise and the logical love
and friendship embraces the welfare and is in the interest of the whole
mankind and not of an individual or a special class. There are many
makings of love and deliveries of goods to individuals, which are in
effect harmful and antagonistic to the society.

In the annals among reformers, we find many stalwarts who struggled for
eradication of evils from society and suffered pains during their
struggle, but men rewarded them with injury and vengeance. Hence love is
not always an attraction, rather at times it displays the most forceful
repulsion and antagonizes hosts of men against such a stalwart.

Abdur Rahman Ibne Moljum was from worst of Ali's enemies. Ali knew well
that Ibn Moljum's deep animosity against him was fatal for him. People
also often tried to convince Ali to do away with Ibn Moljum as he was a
dangerous man. Ali would always refute them by saying: "He is my
assassin. I am not his. How could I kill my own killer?" It was about
him, that Ali said." I wish him life and virtue while he intends to take
my life. I have tender feelings for him while he has become my enemy and
nourishes grudge against me".

Finally, love alone is not a panacea for ailments of humanity. For some
tastes and temperaments roughness is also needed and so is required a
combat, a repulsion and an aversion. Islam too is religion of love and
attraction and of hatred and repulsion.
