Men Who Have Repulsion But Not Attraction
=========================================

**( 29 )**

They make enemies but do not make friends, they are deficient
individuals; and this assertion is based on the fact that they lack
positive human qualities, because if they would have possessed such
qualities they must have made a group of friends or at least a few ones;
needless to say that may be, though, very small in number yet men with
virtue do live among the masses. Had all men at a time on globe, been
mendacious and tyrannical, all feuds would have been evaluated as truth
and justice. However, at a time all men are not vicious, in the same
manner, as all men are not virtuous at a time. Naturally, fault lies
somewhere with him to whom all are foes, otherwise how is it possible
that a man having merits could not win a single friend? Such persons do
not have any positive point in themselves and their negative points are
also totally bitter, and bitter for all; they do not have such a single
point as might be cherished by any one person.

Ali says, "The weakest of men is he who is too weak to attract a friend;
and still weaker is the one who loses friends and gets isolated".

Men who have attraction and repulsion both are men of principle, who
struggle for the glory of their own faith and conviction; they attract
groups to themselves, they are held in esteem and are loved by many a
soul, and along with this they ward off and drive away many from their
vicinity. They befriend and offend; they are benevolent friends and
noble foes.

**( 30 )**

Attractions and repulsions have a few categories, in some case
attraction .and repulsion both are forceful, in others both are weak,
while in the rest of the cases the degrees of the strength of attraction
and repulsion are at variance interse. The dignified are those whose
attraction and repulsion both are forceful, and this is relative to the
strength of positive and negative values in their nature. Of course, the
force also has degrees, so that it should reach the point that
captivates friends who lay down their lives for his sake and may
sacrifice themselves at his pleasure; on the other hand, their enemies
are also headstrong and heedless about themselves while acting in their
opposition. Their power of attraction and repulsion becomes so
predominant that it permeates the vast canvas of the generations for
centuries to come and this three dimensional attraction and repulsion is
among the special charms of the saints, as to be a three-dimensional
mission is the special distinction of the Apostolic missions.

Yet another aspect for us to see is what types they attract and what
types they repel, e.g., sometimes the wise are attracted and the fool
arc repelled and sometimes vice versa. Sometimes the noble and the
virtuous are attracted and the ignoble and the vicious are repelled and
sometimes vice versa. Hence the friends and the adversaries of and those
attracted and repelled by a man form the irrefutable evidence of his
intrinsic faculty

Only a person's having attraction and repulsion, or even his faculties
being forceful, will not suffice it to say that he has a commendable
personality; it is rather an index of the origin of his personality, and
nobody's personality alone is evidence of his virtue. All great men and
leaders of the world, including the cunning criminals like Changaiz,
Hajjaj and Mo'aviyha, were men having both attraction and repulsion.
Without some "positive" points, no one can oblige thousands of warriors
to submit to him and be subdued to his designs, unless one has the
quality of leadership, one in one's time cannot muster the people around
oneself.

**( 31 )**

Nadir Shah is one of such figures. How many men were beheaded and how
many eyes were extracted by him from the sockets, but he had an
exceptionally powerful personality. From amongst the relics of a
defeated and outraged Iran of the last days of Safavide dynasty he
raised an army and like magnet attracting fragments of iron, he rallied
warriors around him and not only liberated Iran from the foreigners but
also conquered the extremes of India. He annexed new territories to
Iranian sovereignty.

Hence every person has attraction for his homogeneous and repulsion for
the divergent. A personality with grace and righteousness would attract
the benevolent and the righteous, to him and would repel the selfish,
the mercenary and the hypocrite. A criminal personality would rally the
sinners around him and would repel the virtuous. As alluded to above,
another difference lies in the proportion of force of attraction. It is
said about Newton's Theory of Gravitation, "Increase in force of
gravitation is proportionate to the mass of the bodies and lessening of
the distance between them". Likewise, amongst men also attraction and
repulsion vary proportionately to their proximity.
