Ali, a Personality With Two Faculties
=====================================

**( 33 )**

Ali is from among those who have both the faculties of attraction and
repulsion, and both these faculties in him are extremely forceful.

Probably, throughout the bygone centuries and during all the times to
come, we may fail to trace an attraction and repulsion as forceful as
that of Ali. He has marvelous and historic, devoted and forbearing
friends, who in his love aflame like a pyre burn and enlighten. They are
fond and proud of laying down their lives for his cause; they in his
love have ignored everyone else. Though years, rather centuries, have
passed since his demise yet Ali's attraction perpetually intensifies,
and bewilders the onlookers.

In his lifetime of his contemporaries who were God loving, devoted and
selfless, kind and forbearing, just and philanthropist rallied around
him. Everyone of them has left in legacy an inspiring piece of history.
After his death, particularly during the rule of Mo'awiyah and the
Omayyed dynasty, hosts of such people were put to the worst of
victimization, but they never fell short of love and devotion for Ali
and stood fast till their last, though invariably they had to lose their
lives.

With the death of worldly personalities, all their belongings diminish
and their merits are buried along with their dead, but the personalities
of the faith, though themselves may die yet their faith and love, which
they enkindled, becomes brighter and sublime by afflux of time;

**( 34 )**

We read in history that after Ali's demise, for years, rather for
centuries, men have been abreast against the darts of his enemies.
Twenty years after our Master's assassination, from amongst his devotees
and those attracted to him, we see Maisam-i-Teemar reciting atop the
gallows hymns of Ali's merit and superiority. Those were the days when
whole of the Muslim world was gagged in suffocation, all liberties had
been forfeited, souls were stifled in the bosom, dreadful silence like
the dust of death had shrouded the faces, but Maisam from the top of the
altar cries "Here! Here! For you I say what Ali was" people thronged
around him to listen to what he might be allowed to say. The iron-fisted
Omayyed government apprehending jeopardy to its interests ordered to
rein his mouth and thus within a few days his life was brought to an
end. History has abundant instances of suchlike devotees of Ali. These
peculiar sentiments have not worn out by the passage of time. In all the
times, these forceful sentiments have been ever more effective.

The dauntless Ibn Sokayyat is from the galaxy of scholars and the
stalwarts of Arabic literature and those having literary taste count him
never lesser to Saiboya and the likes. He lived in the times of
Motawakkil Abbassi, i.e., two centuries after the martyrdom of Ali.
Sokayyat was brandished as a Shiah by Motawakkil's spying network, but
as he was a distinguished and well-versed scholar, Motawakkil appointed
him as tutor of his sons. One day the children came to Motawakkil's
court when the tutor was also there. They had fared well in a test held
earlier on the same day. Mutwakkil, either on the pretext of
appreciation of Sokayyat's services or to fathom his known commitment to
Shiah faith, inquired from the tutor as to whether he liked those two
(his two sons) more or Hassan and Hussain, the two sons of Ali.

**( 35 )**

Ibn Sokayyat, on hearing this sentence and formulation of such a
comparison, flew into rage; his blood boiled and he said to himself,
"This pigmy has inflated himself so much that he compares his sons with
Hassan and Hussain! It is my fault that I have undertaken to educate
them". He said to Mutwakkil, "By God! I hold Qamber, the slave of Ali,
in a far higher esteem than in which I find both of your sons and their
father".

Mutwakkil forthwith ordered that Ibn Sikayyat's tongue be extracted
through the back of his neck.

History knows many enchanted who spontaneously laid down their lives in
course of Ali's love. Wherefrom to find such a forceful attraction. I
doubt if the world will ever have a match to it. Likewise, Ali has
obstinate enemies: Enemies who bite themselves when they hear Ali's name
being mentioned. No doubt, as an individual Ali has left, but as a
school he perpetuates. He in the very same manner continues to pull one
group to himself and push away the other. Oh! Ali is the personality
with Two Faculties.
