Useful Glossary
===============

• ‘*Adil*: fair, just

• ‘*Adl*: the concept of the justice of God

• *Aadath*: singular of *adath*, a statement (usually attributed either
to the Prophet [pbuh] or to one of the members of his Progeny or
companions)

• *Ahilla*: plural of hilal, crescent

• ‘*Alim*: scholar, theologian, a highly knowledgeable person

• *A*’*mal*: highly recommended acts of adoration

• ‘*Arsh:* literally: throne, symbol of the Almighty's Authority

• *Asar*: plural of *saar*, the time immediately preceding daybreak

• *'Athan*: the call for prayers; *mu'aththin* is one who performs
*'athan*.

• *Ayat*: verse (from a sacred scripture); plura: *ayat*

• *Barzakh*: the place and time wherein the souls of the dead live till
the Day of Judgment; see the Holy Qur'an, 23:100.

• *Basmala:* the uttering of: *“Bismillahir-Ramanir-Raam’* (In the Name
of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful)

• *Beed*: plural of *abyad*, white

• *Dahr*: time, age, eternity

• *Dinar*: an Islamic (now Arab) gold currency varying in weight

• *Dirham*: an Islamic silver currency weighing approx. 3.12 grams

• *Diyya:* blood money, monetary compensation for manslaughter or
intentional murder

• *Du* ‘*a'*: supplication, invocation

• *‘Iid*: an Islamic feast, a joyous celebration, a merry occasion

• *Fa'izeen*: (or *Fa'izoon*) winners

• *Fajr*: daybreak

• *Faqah*: jurist, one who is knowledgeable in Islamic jurisprudence

• *Farasikh*: plural of *farsakh*, parasang (a loan Persian word), a
measure of length (distance). According to *Lisan al-’Arab*, it may be
three to six miles. “It is called so,’ the author of *Lisan al-’Arab*
goes on, “because one who walks one *farsakh* will have to sit to rest,’
suggesting that the original meaning of the word is: to halt, to come to
a stand still, to rest.

• *Fatawa*: plural of *fatwa*, a religious edict or decision

• *Fiqh*: the science of Islamic jurisprudence

• *Firdaws*: Paradise

• *Fira*: the amount (in cash or kind) paid to the needy at the end of
the month of Ramadan; see text for more details

• *Ghazwa*: a military campaign, an invasion

• *Ghusul*: ceremonial bath

• *adith*: (singular:) tradition, a statement made by Prophet Muhammad;
plural: *ahadith*

• *Hadi*: sacrificial animals offered at Mecca's holy precincts

• *Hafi:* one who has learned the entire text of the Holy Qur'an by
heart; plural: *huffaz*

• *Hajj*: Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca during the prescribed period

• *Halal*: Islamically permissible, admissible, allowed

• *Haram*: Islamically prohibitive, inadmissible, forbidden

• *Hijab*: veil, curtain

• *Hilal*: crescent, singular of *ahilla*

• *hizb:* literally, it means: party (plural: *azab*); another meaning:
the 60th part of the Holy Qur'an

• *ujja*: proof, argument, authority

• *Huri*: heavenly wife with large lovely eyes married to the male
residents of Paradise

• *Ihram*: pilgrimage garb, white unwoven cotten shroud worn by pilgrims

• *Ijtihad*: the degree one reaches in order to be qualified as a
*mujtahid*, one who is capable of deriving religious decisions on his
own

• ‘*Illiyeen*: the highest pinnacle of Paradise; see Holy Qur'an, 83:18.

• *Imam*: leader of an *ummah*, a group of people (small or big); he may
be the one who leads others in congregational prayers, or a supreme
relgious authority, or one of the Twelve Infallible Imams (as)

• *Iman*: faith, conviction

• *Iqama:* the prouncement of certain statements in preparation for the
performing of the prayers, usually following the athan

• ‘*Isha'*: nighttime, evening

• *Isnad*: the method whereby one *adath* is traced and in the end
attributed to a *muhaddith*, traditionist, one who transmitted it the
first time

• *I*’*tikaf*: the act of remaining most of the time at a mosque for
prayers and supplications

• *Ifar*: the time or the meal to break the fast

• *Iqama*: the statements recited immediately before starting the ritual
prayer

• *Isra'*: night journey; usually a reference to the Prophet's night
journey from Mecca to Jerusalem

• *Jahiliyya*: pre-Islamic period of ignorance

• *Jami* ‘*a*: inclusive, universal, university; it also means:
handcuffs

• *Janaba*: uncleanness caused by seminal discharge

• *Jannat*: heaven, Paradise, garden, singular of *jannat*

• *Jihad*: a struggle, an effort exerted, or a war waged in defense of
Islam

• *Jizya:* protection tax paid to Muslims by non-Muslims residing in
areas under Islamic control whereby the Muslims protect their lives and
property and extempt them from the military service

• *Kaffara*: atonement from sin

• *Kafir*: infidel, apostate, atheist, one who does not believe in the
existence of the Creator; noun: *kufr*

• *Kalima*: synonymous to ‘*shahada*,’ it is a Muslim's declaration of
faith (that is, to testify that there is no god except Allah, and that
Muammad is the Messenger of Allah), and it is always pronounced in
Arabic

• *Kantar*: in Arabic: *qintar*, avarying weight of 100 *rals* (rotls);
a *ral* in Syria is roughly 3.202 kg., whereas in England it is 449.28
grams, and in Lebanon it is 2.566 kg.

• *Khandaq*: moat

• *Khums*: one-fifth of one's savings (usually paid by Sha’a Muslims)
set aside from annual income

• *Kunya*: the use of “Abu ‘ (father of) or “Umm ‘ (mother of) often as
a prefix for one's name

• *Kursi*: literally: chair, symbol of the Almighty's Seat of Judgment
and Authority; see Holy Qur'an, 2:255

• *Khuba*: lecture, sermon; a speech delivered on a specific occasion

• *Kufr*: apostacy, infidelity, disbelief

• *Labbayk:* an exclamation conveying the meaning of “At your service!’
or “Here I am!’

• *Ma*’*ad*: the Return: a reference to the returning of the souls to
their new bodies after the period of *barzakh* (see above), and their
ultimate returning to their Maker for judgment; generally, it is used to
refer to death and the life hereafter.

• *Mahr*: dowry paid by the groom to the bride (or *vice versa* as is
the case in some cultures)

• *Majalis*: meetings or gatherings held to commemmorate certain
religious occasion, mostly applied to those held during the month of
Muarram or to recite the *Faiha* for a deceased person; singular of
*majlis*, a place where people sit

• *Marji’* *taqlid*: the highest theological authority-referee followed

• *Ma’soom:* infallible, divinely protected against sinning

• *Mash* ‘*ar*: a place where certain rites are to be conducted, a
sacred area or place or precinct

• *Mawla*: depending on its usage, it may mean either “master’ or
“slave,’ or it may mean one who is most fit for a specific position of
honor and prestige. Derived from the adjective *awla* (one who is best
qualified), it means: the person who is best suited to be the religious
and temporal leader of all Muslims.

• *Mi* ‘*raj*: the Prophet's ascension from Jerusalem to the heavens

• *Mithqal*: a weight equivalent to 24 karats or 4.68 grams

• *Mufassir*: a theologian who is well-versed in the exegesis of the
Holy Qur'an

• *Muaddith*: traditionist, one who quotes statements of Prophet
Muhammad

• *Mujahid:* one who practices *jihad* (se *jihad* above)

• *Mujtahid*: one who acquires the degree of *ijtihad* and thus becomes
capable of deriving religious decisions on his own

• *Mu'min*: believer, one who has *iman*, conviction, true belief

• *Munafiqeen*: hypocrites

• *Musnad*: a compilation of traditions (*aadath*) which are
consecutively and chronologically traced to their transmitters

• *Mutawatir*: consecutively reported, traced by a perfect chronological
chain of ascertained narrators of *hadith*

• *Mu'aththin*: caller to prayers (usually at a mosque)

• *Mu'min*: (Muslim) believer, a man of conviction

• *Nafl*: optional, non-compulsory, supererogatory, highly recommended
act of worship; plural: *nawafil*

• *Najasa*: uncleanness, impurity; adjective: *najis*

• *Nathr*: One's pledge to do something very good to show appreciation
for the Almighty's favorable response to his supplication and the
attainment of his worldly wish

• *Noor*: divine or celestial light

• *Nubuwwah*: prophethood, the belief in prophets and their messages

• *Qanieen*: those who are constantly supplicating

• *Qaa*: compensatory, making up for a missed rite

• *Qibla*: direction towards the Ka’ba, Mecca

• *Qiyam*: standing

• *Qudsi*: divine, related to the Almighty

• *Qunoo*: supplication during prayers

• *Rek*’*at*: prostration (during prayer or a ritual)

• *Rukoo*’: kneeling

• *Sabeel*: path, way, avenue

• *Sadaqa*: (singular:) charity offered voluntarily; its plural is:
*sadaqat*

• *Sadeed*: pus collected from bleeding wounds to be served to the
sinners in hell when they ask for water to quench their thirst

• *Sahaba:* companions of the Holy Prophet Muhammad; its plural is:
*sahabi*

• *Saha fa:* tablet, scroll, parchment, a written document

• *Sihah:* literally: authentic, correct, accurate; it is generally used
to refer to the collection, group of collections, or book, of verified
and authenticated *aadath* of Prophet Muhammad

• *Sajda*: prostration

• *alat*: Islamic prayers, optional or mandatory; plural: *salawat*

• *Salatul-’Id:* late morning prayers comprised of two *rek’at*
(prostarations) performed in the day that follows ‘Id al-Fitr (the feat
of fast-breaking) signaling the end of the fast of the month of Ramadan

• *Sara ya*: (plural) military campagins personally ordered by Prophet
Muhammad; singular: *sariya*

• *Shahada*: martyrdom; it also means: testimony

• *Shahr*: month

• *Shaikh*: also *syakh*, an honoring title with many meanings;
literally, it means an old man; in Islamic theology and philosophy,
however, it is used to denote a mentor, professor, or scholar of a high
calibre

• *Shara’a*: Islam's legislative system

• *Shirk*: polytheism, the belief in the existence of partners with God

• *Shubha*: (singular) doubt, suspicion; its plural is: *shubuhat*

• *Shu'ra*: the principle of mutual consultation, Islam's form of
democracy

• *Siddeeq*: one who testifies to the truthfulness of a prophet

• *Sirat*: path, highway; same as *Sabeel*

• *Siyam*: Islam's norm of fast

• *Suoor*: time or meal taken before daybreak in preparation to fast
during the day

• *Sulan*: ruler who rules in the name of Islam, a Muslim monarch

• *Sunan*: plural of *sunnah*: a highly commended act of worship or way
whereby a Muslim seeks nearness to Allah

• *Sura*: (also *Surah*) a chapter of the Holy Qur'an

• *Tabi*’*een*: plural of *tabi’*, one who accompanied for a good period
of time, learned from and afollowed a *aabi*, a companion of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad; its plural is: *tabi*’*een*

• *Tafsir*: (singular:) exegesis or explanation of Qur'anic verses; its
plural is: *tafasir*

• *Tahajjud*: night devotions; a *mutahajjid* is one who keeps religious
vigilance, spending the night in prayer

• *ahara*: purification, the act of removing *najasa*, uncleanness or
impurity

• *Takbeer*: the act of glorifying Allah by declaring in an audible
voice: “Allaho Akbar!’ Allah is Great!

• *Taqiyya*: one's way of exerting precaution in order to save his creed
or life when either is in jeopardy, Sha’as' way of trying to survive in
the presence of sure perils

• *Taqleed*: the concept of following a *mujtahid* or an authority
recognized as the *a*’*lam*, the most knowledgeable in Islamics

• *Tarwiyah*: The Day of Tarwiyah is the 8th of Thul-ijjah when the
pilgrims fill their water bags and prepare to go to Mina.

• *Tashahhud*: the testimony regarding Allah being the Lord and Muammad
being His Servant and Messenger; it is the uttering of ‘*Ashhadu an la
ilaha illa-Allah, wa anna* *Muhammad* *abdoho wa rasooloh*’

• *Tashreeq*: the cutting and sun-drying of sacrificed meat

• *awaf*: circling around a certain sacred site

• *Tawatur*: consecutive reporting, the tracing of one particular
*hadith* to its respective chronological chain of narrators

• *Tawhad*: the concept of the absolute Unity of God, the belief that
God is One and indivisible, One\_\_and Only One\_\_God

• *Tawwabeen*: the penitent ones, those who repented their reluctance to
go to the rescue of Imam usain when he was confronted with Yazid's
armies and who enlisted under the military command of al-Mukhtar and
pursued those who massacred Imam Hussain ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib and
killed them

• *Thakireen*: those who often mention the Name of the Almighty and
Glorify Him

• *Thayyib*: a deflowered woman, a widow or divorcee

• *Thireed*: pieces of bread cut and dipped in stew

• ‘*Ulema'*: plural of ‘*alim*, scholar-theologian

• *Umma*: nation, group of people

• ‘*Umra*: pilgrimage to Mecca during any time other than the prescribed
(first ten) days of the month of Thul-ijjah

• *Uool*: the basics of jurisprudence

• *Wajib*: compulsory, obligatory, binding

• *Wali*: person to whom *wilayat* is obligatory; a *wali*, however, is
a governor appointed by a Muslim ruler of a higher authority (such as a
caliph, a ultan, etc.)

• *Waqf*: a trust, property dedicated to serve any specific good cause,
an endowment

• *Wai*: successor to a prophet

• *Wilayat*: a binding supreme authority that combines both temporal and
religious powers

• *Wial*: fasting the last day of every lunar calendar month

• *Wuu*: ablution

• *Zakat*: Literally, it means “purification;’ it is a compulsory 2.5%
tax on one of three categories of wealth: 1) metal coins (gold, silver,
etc.), 2) grain crops (barley, wheat, grain, rice, etc.), and 3) animals
raised for food consumption. *Zakat* is somehow a complicated issue, and
for details, readers are advised to consult books dealing with *fiqh*.
Among its types are: *zakat al-mal* (taxable wealth accumulated during
one full year), and *zakat al-fitr* (a tax to be paid by the head of a
household at the end of the fast of the month of Ramaan).

• *ihar*: the making of a similitude between the back of one's wife with
that of his mother; i.e. saying that his wife's back looks similar to
his mother's back

Surely Allah knows the truth.


