Muhammad: Background and Immediate Family
=========================================

To know Allah is know His creation, and the best of His creation is
Muhammad, Prophet and Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him and his progeny, the one loved most by Allah. To love
Muhammad is to love Allah, and to love Allah is to love Muhammad.
Whoever loves Muhammad is loved by Allah, and whoever is loved by Allah
will have nothing to worry about. And how can anyone *not* love Muhammad
unless he is sick in the heart and in the mind, sick with prejudice and
arrogance, with ignorance and conceit?!

One who studies the life of this greatest personality that ever walked
on the face of earth will come to realize why he is so much loved by the
Almighty, why he is so holy, so pure, so refined. Such knowledge, it is
hoped, will benefit the Muslims who wish to follow in his footsteps and
be gathered in his company on the Day of Judgment; this is the ultimate
desire and hope of every true believer. May Allah count us and your own
self among them, *Allahomma Aameen*.

Prophet's Genealogy
-------------------

He is Muhammad ibn (son of) ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim ibn
‘Abd Munaf ibn Qusayy ibn Kilab ibn Murrah ibn Ka’b ibn Ghalib ibn Fahr
ibn Malik ibn Nadar ibn Kinanah ibn Khuzaymah ibn Mudrikah ibn Ilyas ibn
Mazar ibn Nazar ibn Ma’ad ibn ‘Adnan ibn Isma’eel (Ishmael) ibn Ibrahim
(Abraham), peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, his progeny, and
righteous ancestors, especially his great grandfathers Isma’eel and
Ibrahim.

Prophet's Immediate Family
--------------------------

***Prophet's Grandfathers***

**Hashim ibn** **‘Abd Manaf**

**Al-Mutallib ibn** **‘Abd Manaf**, from him come the Mutallibis. Imam
al-Shafi’i was one of them.

**Nawfal** **ibn** **‘Abd Manaf**; from him, the Nawfalis descend.

**‘Abd Shams ibn** **‘Abd Manaf**; from him descend the Umayyads.

**‘Abdul-Mutallib** **ibn Hashim**. He was called “Shaybatul-amd’ (gray
of praise) because he was born with some gray hair. While returning home
from a visit to his maternal relatives, Banu Najjar, the boy rode behind
al-Mutallib. The Quraishis asked him, “Who is this boy?’ The uncle
(jestingly) said “This is my slave;’ henceforth, he was called
“Mutallib's slave’ (‘Abdul-Mutallib). The exact date of birth of
‘Abdul-Muttalib is unknown; he died in 578 A.D. when the Prophet (s.a.w)
was eight years old. When he prayed for rain, invoking the name of
Allah's Blessed Messenger (s.a.w), the little one, his prayers were
answered.

***Prophet's Father***

**‘Abdullah** **ibn** **‘Abdul-Mutallib** (545 - 570 A.D.). The Blessed
Prophet's father, ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abdul-Mutallib, was born in 545 A.D.,
25 years before the Year of the Elephant. Abu Talib and az-Zubair were
his brothers by the same father and mother. So were the girls, except
afiyya. When his father died, the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w) was two
months old, though reports about this differ. ‘Abdul-Mutallib loved
‘Abdullah immensely because he was the best of his children, the most
chaste and the most noble among them. Once ‘Abdul-Mutallib sent his son
on business, and when the caravan passed by Yathrib (Medina), ‘Abdullah
died there. He was buried in the house of Arqam ibn Ibrahim ibn Suraqah
al-’Adawi.

***Prophet's Foster Father***

**Al-Arith**, the Prophet's foster father and husband of alima, son of
‘Abd al-’Uzza ibn Rifa’ah ibn Millan ibn Nairah ibn Fuayya ibn Nar ibn
Sa’d ibn Bakr ibn Hawazin.

***Prophet's Foster Mothers***

**Thawbiyya**, the Prophet's foster mother. She was a bondmaid of Abu
Lahab, the paternal uncle of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). She
breast-fed him with the milk of her son Masruh.  
**Halima**, the Prophet's foster mother. She was the daughter of “Abu
Thu'aib’ ‘Abdullah ibn Shajnah ibn Jabir ibn Rizam ibn Nairah ibn Sa’d
ibn Bakr ibn Hawazin al-Qaisi. She breast-fed the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) with the milk of her son ‘Abdullah and reared him (s.a.w) for
four years (till the year 574 A.D.).

***Prophet's Paternal Uncles***

The Prophet's paternal uncles are the offspring of ‘Abdul-Mutallib ibn
Hashim. These are:

**Abu Talib**. His mother was Fatima al-Quraishiya daughter of ‘Amr ibn
Makhzum. She was the mother of the Prophet's father ‘Abdullah and also
the mother of Zubair and of all daughters of ‘Abdul-Mutallib. Called
“al-Mumalliq’, he undertook the guardianship of the Prophet (s.a.w). He
was son of ‘Abdul-Mutallib.

**Al-’Abbas ibn** **‘Abdul-Mutallib (567 - 655 A.D.)**. He left behind
him offspring, and he used to be called “Abul-Fal’ (father of al-Fal).
His mother was called “Umm irar’. He was older than the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w). He was born 30 year before the Year of the Elephant. His
mother's full name was: Qubaila daughter of Hyyan ibn Kulaib ibn ‘Amr
ibn ‘amir ibn Sa’d ibn Khazraj ibn Taim ibn Allat ibn An-Nimr ibn Qasi
ibn Haib ibn Quayy ibn Da’mi ibn Judailah ibn Asad ibn Rabi’ah al-Faras
ibn Nizar ibn Ma’add ibn ‘Adnan. Al-’Abbas was three years older than
the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w). The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) loved his
uncle ‘Abbas and held him in high esteem.

While in Mecca with the idol-worshipers, ‘Abbas kept his faith secret,
but he joined the ‘Aqaba group in swearing the oath of allegiance to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). When Mecca was conquered by the Muslims (630
A.D.), ‘Abbas openly declared his belief in Islam and took part in the
battles of Hunain, a-a'if and Tabuk. Chivalrous and noble, he stood by
the Blessed One in the Battle of unain, holding the reins of the
Prophet's mule, demonstrating the zenith of steadfastness and courage.
During his caliphate, ‘’Omar ibn al-Khaab placed him in charge of water
provisions which, till then, had been the task of his brother, Abu
Talib. ‘Abbas spent 56 years of his life during the pre-Islamic period
of *jahiliyya*, ignorance, and 32 years in Islam. Every time ‘’Omar ibn
al-Khaab and ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan came across him during their caliphate,
they paid him their profound respect.

**Hamzah** (566 - 625 A.D.). His father was ‘Abdul-Mutallib and his
mother Hala daughter of Uhaib ibn ‘Abd Manaf ibn Zuhrah ibn Kilab.
Hamzah was nicknamed “Abu Ya’li’ and also “Abu ‘Ammar’. He was four
years older than the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). Through him, Allah
strengthened Islam when he accepted the faith. He declared his faith in
the second year of the revelation (611 A.D.). However, it is also said
that he embraced Islam in the sixth year of the Blessed Prophet's
calling (616 A.D.). Ibn ‘Abd al-Bar says, “I do not think it is correct
that he was four years older than the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) (i.e.
born in 568 A.D.) because he was his foster brother. They were both
breast-fed by Thawbiyya, a bondmaid of Abu Lahab, who did not live long
to be a Muslim except that she might have breast-fed them during two
different periods.’

It is also said that Hamzah was only two years older than the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w) (i.e. born in 568 A.D.). He took part in the Battle of
Badr (624 A.D.) and was graced by Allah for his good performance that
made him become a hero. He killed ‘Uqbah ibn Rabi’ah in a duel, but it
is also said that he killed Shaibah and Tu’mah ibn ‘Udayy, both of whom
he killed in a duel. It is also said that he killed aba ibn al-Khuza’i,
but some say he killed him during the Battle of Uud before he himself
was killed. In the Battle of Uhud (625 A.D.), Hamzah was martyred at the
hands of Washi ibn Harb, the Ethiopian slave of Jubair ibn Mu’im ibn
‘Udayy whose uncle, u’mah ibn ‘Udayy, Hamzah had killed.

Washi killed amzah according to his master's orders. It is also said
that lying in ambush for amzah, Washi attacked him with a spear and
pierced it all through him, causing him a quick death. May Allah be
pleased with amzah. As soon as he was martyred, Hind daughter of ‘Utbah
ibn Rabi’ah had sworn to seek revenge on Hamzah because, some say, he
had killed her father during the Battle of Badr. She promised to
emancipate Washi if he would kill amzah. Once amzah was killed, she went
to his corpse and chewed his liver then mutilated his body. amzah was
shrouded in a gown then buried after the Messenger of Allah had prayed
seventy time for him as he lied in state with other martyrs.

**‘Abd al-Ka’ba**. His father was ‘Abdul-Mutallib. There are some
scholars who omit ‘Abd al-Ka’ba's name, saying that he and al-Muqawwim
were one and the same person.

**Hajal** (or Hijl). His real name was Mughirah, and he had no children.
His father was ‘Abdul-Mutallib, and his mother was also the mother of
Hamzah.

**Qatham ibn** **‘Abdul-Mutallib**. His mother was Umm al-arith and his
father ‘Abdul-Mutallib. He died young.

**Al-Harith ibn** **‘Abdul-Mutallib**. Al-arith had children. His mother
was Samra' daughter of Jundab ibn Hujair ibn Ri'ab ibn Surat ibn ‘amir
ibn a’a’ah ibn Qais ibn ‘Abdul-Mutallib. His father got his nickname
“Mutallib’ because of him. Together they dug the well of Zamzam.

**Az-Zubair ibn** **‘Abdul-Mutallib**. He is known by his nickname “Abu
ahir’; he left no children behind. His father was ‘Abdul-Mutallib ibn
Hashim.

**Dirar ibn** **‘Abdul-Mutallib**. He left no descendants. When he lost
his way during a pilgrimage season, causing his mother to almost lose
her mind fearing for his life, she made an oath to clothe the Ka’ba if
Allah returned him to her, and a man of Jutham brought him back.

**Al-Muqawwim**. His father was ‘Abdul-Mutallib.

**Al-Ghaidaq**. His father was ‘Abdul-Mutallib. Some scholars omit
al-Ghaidaq's name, saying that he was none other than Hajal (or Hijl).
In either case, he left no offspring. Some say that al-Ghaidaq's real
name was Nawfal.

**Abu Lahab, nicknamed “‘Abd al-’Uzza’, ibn** **‘Abdul-Mutallib**. His
father was ‘Abdul-Mutallib and his mother was Lubna daughter of Hajar
ibn ‘Abd Manaf ibn Shair ibn Habshah ibn Sallul ibn Ka’b ibn ‘Amr
al-Khuza’i. Abu Lahab died an apostate and was one of the most hostile
of all enemies of the Prophet (s.a.w).

***Prophet's Paternal Aunts***

**Afiyya daughter of** **‘Abdul-Mutallib**. Her mother, Hala daughter of
Uhaib, was also the mother of Hamzah, al-Muqawwim and Hajal. Among the
Blessed Prophet's paternal aunts, only afiyya embraced Islam, may Allah
be pleased with her, as some historians say, yet there is no difference
of opinion about her conversion. She was the wife of ‘Awwam ibn
al-Khuwailid, brother of Khadija, Mother of the Believers, peace be with
her. Az-Zubair ibn al-’Awwam is son of the above-mentioned afiyya, a
disciple of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). She also gave birth to
al-Sa'ib who was martyred at Yamama. She is buried in al-Baqi’ and her
well-known grave is famous among the people of Medina. It is said that
except for herself, no other paternal aunt of the Blessed Prophet
(s.a.w) embraced Islam, although some say that Arwa and ‘atika also
converted.

**‘Atika daughter of** **‘Abdul-Mutallib**. She was married to Abu
Umayyah al-Mughirah ibn ‘Abdillah ibn Makhzum ibn Yaqaah ibn Taim ibn
Murrah ibn Ka’b ibn Lu'ayy ibn Ghalib ibn Fahr, the latter known as
Quraish. She gave birth by him to ‘Abdullah, Zuhair, and Qaribat
al-Kubra.

**Umaima daughter of** **‘Abdul-Mutallib** (d. 685 A.D.). Her mother was
the mother of both ‘Abdullah and Abu Talib. She gave birth to al-Jash
ibn Ri'ab ibn Ya’mur ibn abrah ibn Murrah ibn Ghunm ibn Thudan ibn Asad
ibn Khuzaimah. She also gave birth to ‘Abdullah, who became a martyr
during the battle of Uud, and to “Abu Amad’, the blind poet, whose name
was ‘Abd, and who migrated to Medina. Another son of hers was
‘Ubaidullah who converted to Christianity in Ethiopia.

He was the one who advised the Blessed Prophet's Companions to migrate
to Ethiopia. Umaima also gave birth to Zainab (daughter of Jahsh), wife
of Allah's Blessed Prophet. Prior to that marriage, which was done
according to a Divine Order, she was married to Zaid ibn Harithah who
was raised by the Prophet, and to Habiba, who married ‘Abdur-Raman ibn
‘Awf, but had no children. Umaima also gave birth to Hamna daughter of
Jash who married Mus’ab ibn ‘Umair ibn Hashim. But Allah knows best.

**Barra daughter of** **‘Abdul-Mutallib** ibn Hashim. Her mother was the
mother of ‘Abdullah, Abu Talib and Az-Zubair. She was married to ‘Abd
al-Asad ibn Hilal ibn ‘Abdillah ibn ‘Amr ibn Makhzum. She bore him “Abu
Salamah’ ‘Abdullah. After him she married “Abu Rahm’ ibn ‘Abd al-’Uzza
ibn Abu Qais ibn ‘Abd Wudd ibn Nar ibn Malik ibn Hisl al-’amiri, and she
bore him Abu abra. Allah knows best.

**Arwa daughter of** **‘Abdul-Mutallib**. Her mother was the mother of
‘Abdullah, Abu Talib, and Fatima daughter of ‘Amr ibn ‘abid ibn ‘Umran
ibn Makhzum. Arwa's husband was ‘Umair ibn Wahb ibn ‘Abd Manaf ibn ‘Abd
ad-Dar ibn Quayy ibn Kilab ibn Murrah ibn Ka’b ibn Lu'ayy ibn Ghalib ibn
Fahr, to whom she bore ulaib, who was among the first to migrate. He was
at Badr and remained childless. She also gave birth to al-Kaladah ibn
Hashim ibn ‘Abd Manaf ibn ‘Abd ad-Dar ibn Quayy ibn Fatima.

**Umm Hakim al-Baia' daughter of** **‘Abdul-Mutallib** **ibn Hashim**.
Her mother was the mother of ‘Abdullah, father of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w), and the mother of Abu Talib. She married Kuthayyir ibn Habib
ibn Rabi’ah ibn ‘Abd Shams ibn ‘Abd Manaf. She bore him ‘amir and Umm
alah, whose real name was Arnab, and Arwa, the mother of ‘Uthman ibn
‘Affan and who was one of the Ten who swore allegiance to the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w).

***Prophet's Maternal Uncles***

**‘Abdullah ibn Arqam ibn al-Aswad ibn** **‘Abd Yaghuth**. His mother
was Hind daughter of Mazin ibn ‘amir ibn ‘Alqamat al-Yemen. There was an
occasion when the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) made ‘Abdullah his scribe.
During the caliphate of ‘’Omar, ‘Abdullah supervised the treasury.

**Abu Wahab ibn** **‘Abd Manaf** ibn Zuhrah ibn Kilab, brother of amina,
mother of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) from her father's side. His
mother was a’ufa daughter of Hashim ibn ‘Abd Manaf ibn Quayy ibn Kilab
ibn Murrah ibn Nizar. He is the one to whom the name of al-Miqdad ibn
al-Aswad al-Kindi is attributed. The latter's real name was al-Miqdad
ibn ‘’Omar al-Nahrawani, of Buhra' of Qua’ah. The one referred to as
“al-Aswad’ had married al-Miqdad's mother and adopted al-Miqdad, making
an alliance with him during the time of *jahiliyya*, so he came to be
known as “al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad.’ He is called “al-Kindi’ (of the
Kindah tribe) because his father, ‘Asmi ibn Tha’labah, was an ally of
Kindah.

**Al-Aswad ibn** **‘Abd Yaghuth**, “Abu Wahab’, ibn ‘Abd Manaf ibn
Zuhrah ibn Kilab. ‘Abd Yaghuth and Amina, the Blessed Prophet's mother,
were born for the same father. His mother was a’ufa daughter of Hashim
ibn ‘Abd Manaf ibn Quayy ibn Kilab ibn Murrah ibn Nizar. This Aswad is
the one to whom the lineage of al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad al-Kindi has been
linked. He is also called al-Miqdad ibn ‘’Omar al-Nahrawani of Buhra' of
Qua’ah. Aswad married al-Miqdad's mother and adopted him as his son.
That was in (the pre-Islamic era of) ignorance. When he left Mecca
seeking refuge in Ethiopia, he was joined by six other persons. He was
called al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad, also al-Kindi, because his father, ‘Asmi
ibn Tha’labah, was an ally of the Kindah tribe.

**Prophet's Foster Brothers and Sisters**

**Unaisa**. Her mother was Halima as-Sa’diyya daughter of Abu Thu'aib,
and her father was al-Harith ibn ‘Abd al-’Uzza, a paternal cousin of
Halima, the Blessed Prophet's foster mother.

**‘Abdullah**. His mother was Halima as-Sa’diyya daughter of Abu
Thu'aib. He was son of al-Harith ibn ‘Abd al-’Uzza, a paternal cousin of
Halima, the Prophet's foster mother.

**Khuthama**. Her mother was Halima daughter of Abu Thu'aib ‘Abdullah
ibn al-Harith ibn Shijnah ibn Jabir ibn Razzam ibn Nairah ibn Fuayyah,
mentioned in the lineage of her husband, and she was the foster-mother
of Allah's messenger (s.a.w).

**Masruh**. His mother was Thawbiyya, the bondmaid of “Abu Lahab’
(father of the flame) ‘Abd al-’Uzza ibn ‘Abdul-Mutallib, paternal uncle
of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). It was the milk for Masru from which
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) was fed.

**Hamzah**. He was a son of ‘Abdul-Mutallib, paternal uncle of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). Before it was the turn of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w), Hamzah was breast-fed by Thawbiyya, bondmaid of Abu Lahab
who was a paternal uncle of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). Hamzah was
four years older than his foster brother, the Prophet (s.a.w).  
**Muslamah**. He was the son of ‘Abd al-Asad al-Makhzumi, the husband of
Umm Salamah, mother of the Believers. He was breast-fed by Thawbiyya,
bondmaid of Abu Lahab, paternal uncle of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w).
She was feeding him four years before she began feeding the Prophet
(s.a.w).

Descendants of the Prophet's Paternal Uncles
--------------------------------------------

**Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib** (600 - 661 A.D.). Among
his offspring are the Talibis and Ja’faris. A man of many virtues, Ali
ibn Abu Talib was the “brother of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)’, his
paternal cousin and son-in-law and right hand, the Imam of the
righteous. He used to be nicknamed “Abu Turab’, the man who humbles
himself in the dust. Due to his courage, he was also called “Haidara’,
the Lion. He was born inside Allah's Holy House, the Ka’ba, in Mecca,
according to some reports, on the 13th of Rajab in the year 30 of the
Elephant (600 A.D.). Attacked on the 19th of the month of Ramaan in the
year 40 A.H., which corresponded to January 29, 661 A.D., he died during
the night of the 21st. (January 31, 661 A.D.). He was killed by
‘Abdur-Rahman ibn Muljim al-Muradi, may Allah curse him. During the
battle of Badr, an angel called out, full of admiration: “There is no
sword like Thul-Fiqar and no knight like Ali!’

**Talib ibn Abu Talib.**

**‘Aqil ibn Abu Talib.** He was ten years older than the Commander of
the Faithful. ‘Aqil was killed during the reign of Mu’awiyah.

**Ja’far** **ibn Abu Talib.** Nicknamed “the Flying One’ (al-ayyar), he
died a martyr in the Battle of Mu'ta (629 A.D.).

**Umm Hani daughter of Abu Talib**.

**Hulaib ibn Abu Talib**. He narrated the biography of the Prophet
(s.a.w).

**Hamna daughter of Abu Talib**. She was one of those who swore the oath
of allegiance to the Prophet (s.a.w) in 622 A.D. She gave birth to
al-Harith and ‘Abdul-Mutallib by her cousin (husband).

**‘Abdullah ibn** **‘Abbas**, the scholar of this nation. ‘Abdullah was
born in 619 A.D., three years before the Hegira (migration from Mecca to
Medina) in the Shi’b (of Abu Talib). This was before the Hashimi clan
had left (following the end of the siege enforced on the Prophet (s.a.w)
and his clansmen by Quraish). When the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) died,
‘Abdullah was fifteen years old.

**Kathir ibn** **‘Abbas (b. 618 A.D.)**. He and his brother ‘Abdullah,
the renown scholar, were of the same mother. Kathir was one year younger
than ‘Abdullah.

**Sa’ud ibn** **‘Abbas**. He and his brother ‘Abdullah were of the same
mother. Sa’ud died as a martyr in Africa, leaving children behind.

**Al-Fal ibn** **‘Abbas**. He begot one daughter.

**Qatham ibn** **‘Abbas**. He and his brother ‘Abdullah, the Islamic
nation's scholar, were by the same mother. Qatham died as a martyr in
Samarkand.

**Al-Harith ibn** **‘Abbas**. He had offspring. His mother belonged to
Banu Hilal.

**‘Abdur-Raman ibn** **‘Abbas**. He and his brother ‘Abdullah were of
the same mother. He had no offspring.

**Safiyya daughter of** **‘Abbas**

**Amina daughter of** **‘Abbas**

**Tamam ibn** **‘Abbas**. He and his brother Kathir were of the same
mother. Tamam had no offspring.

**Mihrab ibn** **‘Abbas**. He and Sub were of the same mother. Mihrab
had no offspring.

**Subh ibn** **‘Abbas**. His mother was a bondswoman. He had no
offspring.

**Umm Habiba daughter of** **‘Abbas**

**‘Abdullah ibn az-Zubair**. He died without leaving any offspring. He
stood firmly on the Prophet's side in the Battle of Hunain. His mother,
‘atika al-Makhzumiya, was the daughter of Abu Wahab. ‘Abdullah died a
martyr's death during the battle of Ajnadain during the reign of Abu
Bakr.

**ahir ibn az-Zubair**. He was among the most victorious of the young
warriors of Quraish, even of the Hashimites. The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) named his own son, a-Tahir, after him. He had no children.

**Umm Hakim daughter of az-Zubair**

**Suna’a daughter of az-Zubair**. She was married to Rabi’ah ibn
al-Harith ibn ‘Abdul-Mutallib. una’a is one of the companions, sahaba,
to whom we owe reports about the Prophet (s.a.w). May Allah be pleased
with her.

**‘Abdullah ibn al-Harith**, the Prophet's paternal uncle. His name was
“Servant of the Sun’ (‘Abd Shams), but the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
called him “Servant of Allah’ (‘Abdullah). He died during the Prophet's
lifetime and had no offspring.

**Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith** al-Mughirah, the poet. He was one of those
who stood firmly by the Prophet (s.a.w) when other people fled away.

**Umayya daughter of al-Harith**

**Arwa daughter of al-Harith**. She married Abu Wada’ah ibn abrah ibn
Sa’d as-Sahmi and gave birth to al-Mutallib, Abu Sufyan and Abu Wada’ah.
After marrying Hilal, she gave birth to ‘’Omar.

**Nawfal ibn al-Harith** (his father was al-arith). Nawfal was older
than both his paternal uncles, Hamzah and al-’Abbas, and also older than
his own two brothers. He was among those who stood by the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w) during the battle of Hunain. Nawfal had children.

**Rabi’ah ibn al-Harith**. He used to be called “Abu Raw’a’. He was
older than both his paternal uncles, amzah and al-’Abbas. He did not
witness the battle against the idol-worshippers at Badr, because he was
in Syria at that time. Every year he used to provide the Prophet (s.a.w)
with food and drink. He died during the reign of ‘’Omar.

**‘Umarah ibn Hamzah**. His wife was Ruqayya, step-daughter of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), and he had no children.

**Fatima daughter of Hamzah**. She was married to the renowned Miqdad
al-Aswad al-Bahrani, also known as al-Kindi. She narrated details about
the Blessed Prophet's life.

**Ya’li ibn Hamzah**

**Qurra daughter of Hajal**

**Hind daughter of al-Muqawwim**

**‘Utbah ibn Abu Lahab**

**‘Utaibah ibn Abu Lahab**

**Tharra daughter of Abu Lahab**

**Khalida daughter of Abu Lahab**

**Ghurra daughter of Abu Lahab.** She was married to Awfa ibn Umayyah
ibn Harithah ibn al-Awqa.

**Mu’attib ibn Abu Lahab**. He embraced Islam on the conquest of Mecca
(in 630 A.D.). The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) prayed for him, and
Mu’attib stood by him during the battle of unain in the course of which
he lost an eye.

Children of the Prophet's Paternal Aunts
----------------------------------------

**‘Abd al-Ka’ba son of az-Zubair and afiyya, the Prophet's paternal
aunt.**

**Umm Habib daughter of az-Zubair and Safiyya**

**As-Sa'ib son of Az-Zubair and Safiyya**. As-Sa'ib participated in the
Battle of Uhud and in all other battles of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w). He died a martyr's death during the battle of Yamama. May Allah
be pleased with him.  
 The father of all the three was az-Zubair ibn al-’Awwam ibn Khuwailid
ibn ‘Abd al-’Uzza ibn Quayy ibn Kilab, brother of Khadija, may Allah be
pleased with both of them. Khadija was the Blessed Prophet's first wife.

**Az-Zubair ibn Safiyya**. He and the Commander of the Faithful, Ali,
were born in the same year (600 A.D.). He stood by the Prophet (s.a.w)
in the Battle of Hunain (630 A.D.), and, according to some reports, the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) said, “Every prophet has a disciple, and my
disciple is az-Zubair.’ Az-Zubair took part in the Battle of Badr. He
also participated in the Battle of the Camel. There, he fought for an
hour, but when he saw Ali, he went over to him and remembered what the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) had told both of them when he made them
commit themselves to one another: “One day you will fight Ali, and you
will be transgressing against him.’ Reminded of those words, Az-Zubair
withdrew from the battleground, followed by Ibn Jarmuz ‘Abdullah, others
say ‘’Omar, or ‘’Omar as-Sa’d, who killed him in a place known as the
Lions' Valley. He brought his sword to Ali who said to him, “Be
forewarned, O killer of afiyya's son, of hellfire!’ This happened on a
Thursday, the 10th of Jumada al-Awwal of the year 36 A.H. (November 7,
656 A.D.).

**Qurnabah ibn** **‘Abdullah** ibn ‘atika. His grandmother ‘atika was
the Prophet's paternal aunt. He was one of the fiercest enemies of the
Muslims, opposing the Prophet and rebelling against Allah. Qurnabah is
the one who said to the Prophet, “We shall not believe in you even if
you made a well gush forth for us from under the earth.’ Later he went
out toward Medina in search of the Prophet (s.a.w) who happened to be
heading in the other direction towards Mecca. This was in the Year of
the Conquest of Mecca. They met between Shaqiyah and al-’Araj, but when
the Prophet (s.a.w) saw Qurnabah, he turned his face away from him.

**Zuhair** **ibn** **‘atika**. Hhis grandmother, ‘atika, was the
Prophet's paternal aunt. He was one of those whose heart was won for
Islam early on. His father was ‘’Omar ibn Wahab ibn ‘Abd al-’Uzza ibn
Quayy ibn Kilab. Zuhair migrated to Ethiopia (in 615 A.D.). Then he
participated in the Battle of Badr (in 624 A.D.). One of the Prophet's
best companions, he died a martyr's death, may Allah be pleased with
him. Zuhair had no children.

**Tulaib ibn Arwa**, the Prophet's paternal aunt. He used to be called
Abu ‘Adiyy.

**Fatima** **daughter of ulaib** ibn Arwa. Her grandmother, Arwa, was
the Prophet's paternal aunt. Her father was Kaladah ibn ‘Abd Manaf ibn
‘Abd ad-Dar ibn Quayy ibn Kilab.

**Hamna daughter of Abu Amad**, the man who participated in both
migrations to Abyssinia.

**‘Ubaidullah ibn Abu Ahmad**, the man who went on both migrations, son
of ‘Abdullah “the one Mutilated in the Path of Allah’ son of Umaima, the
Prophet's paternal aunt. He converted to Christianity in Ethiopia and
died there as a Christian. His wife, Umm Habiba, daughter of Abu Sufyan,
had a daughter by him. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) married her.

**Umm Habiba daughter of Abu Ahmad**, the man who went on both
migrations, son of ‘Abdullah “the one Mutilated in the Path of Allah’
son of Umaima, the Prophet's paternal aunt. Her father is al-Harith ibn
Harb ibn Umayyah ibn ‘Abd Shams. She was married to Mu’ab ibn ‘Umayr ibn
Hashim ibn ‘Abd Manaf ibn ‘Abd ad-Dar ibn Quayy, who was killed in the
Battle of Uhud. She then married alah ibn ‘Abdillah.

**Zainab daughter of Abu Ahmad**, the man who went on both migrations,
son of ‘Abdullah “the one Mutilated in the Path of Allah’ son of Umaima,
the Prophet's paternal aunt. Zainab was the wife of the Prophet (s.a.w)
about whom Allah said in His revelation: “When Zaid had dissolved (his
marriage) with her…’ (Qur'an, 33:39).

**‘Abdullah** “the one Mutilated in the Path of Allah’ son of Umaima,
the Prophet's paternal aunt. ‘Abdullah was among the first to migrate
(to Ethiopia), taking part in both migrations. He was martyred in the
Battle of Uhud and people said about him that he was mutilated in the
path of Allah. As his sword was snatched away from him, the Prophet
(s.a.w) gave him a date-stalk. In his hand it turned into a sword which
he held unflinchingly; it was then called “the Help.’ Their father was
Jash ibn Ri'ab ibn Ya’mur ibn abrah ibn Murrah al-Asad.

**Umm Talhah daughter of** **‘amir** ibn al-Baia'. Her grandmother,
al-Baia' (“the white one’), was the Prophet's paternal aunt.

**Arwa daughter of** **‘amir** ibn al-Baia'. Her grandmother, al-Baia',
was the Prophet's paternal aunt.

**Abu Shabrah ibn Barra**, the Prophet's paternal aunt. His father was
Abu Rahm ibn ‘Abd al-’Uzza ibn Abu Qais ibn ‘Abd Wadd ibn Nar ibn Malik
ibn Hisl ibn ‘amir ibn Lu'ayy ibn Ghalib ibn Fahr (the latter is known
as Quraish). He took part in both migrations to Abyssinia (Ethiopia).
The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) joined him in brotherhood to Salamah. Abu
Shabrah had children.

**‘Abd al-Asad ibn Hilal** ibn ‘Abdillah ibn ‘’Omar ibn Makhzum,
nicknamed “Abu Salamah’. He migrated to Ethiopia (in 615 A.D.) with his
wife Umm Salamah daughter of Abu Umaima al-Makhzumi, daughter of his
paternal uncle. Having participated in both migrations, he took part in
the Battle of Badr and was fatally wounded at Uhud, dying afterwards of
his wounds.

**Prophet's Children**

the Prophet's son Ibrahim, 2) the Prophet's son ‘Abdullah; 3) the
Prophet's son al-Qasim; 4) the Prophet's daughter or stepdaughter Zainab
(d. 629 A.D.); 5) the Prophet's stepdaughter Ruqayya (d. 624 A.D.), 6)
the Prophet's stepdaughter Umm Kulthum (d. 630 A.D.); 7) the Prophet's
daughter Fatima, peace be upon her and her progeny.

Children of the Prophet's Daughters, and Those Among them who had Descendants
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Imam al-Hasan**, peace be with him, was born in mid-Ramaan in the year
three of the Hegira (March 3, 625 A.D.). The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
slaughtered a ram to celebrate the occasion, and he shaved his head, as
he also shaved usain's head. He weighed their hair and distributed their
weight in silver as charity among the poor. Fatima then became pregnant
with usain. It is said that Husain was born when the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) returned from Badr. According to some reports, this took place
sixteen or seventeen months after the battle of Badr.

Perhaps it was after Uhud because Ali, the Commander of the Faithful,
married Fatima four months after that. Allah knows best. The name
al-Hasan (“the good one’) was bestowed upon him by the Archangel Gabriel
who brought it to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) in a piece of cloth
made of the silk of Paradise. His brother's name, al-Husain (“al-asan
Junior’), was derived from the name “al-asan’. The Blessed One called
him “al-Hasan’ in analogy to Shabar son of Aaron, brother of prophet
Moses.

**Imam Husain**; he was born in the fourth Hijri year (626 A.D.),
although it is also said that it was in the year 5 (627 A.D.). The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) celebrated usain's birth by slaughtering a
ram as he had done on the occasion of his brother's birth. Among all
people, Imam usain was the one who resembled the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) the most. May Allah be pleased with him. He was martyred on a
Friday, the 10th of Muharram of the year 61 A.H. (corresponding to
October 13, 680 A.D.), at a place called Kerbala', in the vicinity of
Kufa, Iraq. The place is also known as a-aff. His head was cut off by
Shimr ibn Thul-Jawshan a-Dubabi. Shimr was a leper. The commander of the
troop that killed him was ‘’Omar ibn Sa’d ibn Abu Waqqa az-Zuhri.

**Umm Kulthum** granddaughter of the Prophet. She is daughter of the
Prophet's daughter Fatima. Her father was the Commander of the Faithful,
Ali ibn Abu Talib, may Allah be pleased with him. ‘’Omar ibn al-Khaab
asked for her hand in marriage, so Ali entrusted her guardianship to her
uncle, ‘Abbas. ‘’Omar ibn al-Khaab then married her, according to some
reports. It is also narrated that she gave birth before the death of the
Prophet (s.a.w).

For this reason, Ibn ‘Abdillah an-Nimri, in a book which he wrote about
the Prophet's companions, has counted her among those who were born
during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). ‘’Omar asked for
her hand. He said to Ali, “O Abul-asan! Give her to me in marriage. I
shall take care of her honor as nobody else does.’ Ali's answer was: “I
am going to send her to you. If you like her, I shall marry her to you.’
He then sent her to him with a garment, telling her that she should say
to him that this was the garment he had told him about. She did what she
was told, and ‘’Omar said, “Tell him that I like it.’ Allah knows best.

**Muhsin**, grandson of the Prophet's daughter Fatima. It is said that
he was miscarried. If you wish to know the whole tragic story about
Muhsin, read one of my translations titled *Tragedy of (Fatima)
al-Zahra* written by Ayatullah Allamah Sayed Ja'far Murtadha Al-'Amili
and published by Imam Hussain Foundation of Beirut, Lebanon. A number of
Internet websites post some or all of this translation.

**Zainab** daughter of the Prophet's daughter Fatima. She married
‘Abdullah ibn Ja’far “the Flying One’ son of Abu Talib and gave birth by
him to Ja’far, ‘Awn al-Akbar, Umm Kulthum, and Ali, who had offspring.
His descendants are called the Zainabis because of their mother.
Whatever this Zainab narrated about her mother, Fatima, has been
mentioned by Yaya ibn al-Hasan ibn Ja’far al-’Abdi, the genealogist, who
wrote the book *The Best People of Medina*. May peace and blessings be
upon the city's inhabitants.

**‘Abdullah** son of the Prophet's daughter Ruqayya. Some scholars
emphatically claim that Ruqayya was a stepdaughter of the Prophet, that
she was daughter of his first wife, Khadija, who had twice married
before marrying the Prophet. This book will later discuss Khadija and
introduce you to both her husbands and their offspring. ‘Abdullah son of
Ruqayya was born in Ethiopia during his mother's sojourn in that country
where she stayed with her husband ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan, the Umayyad ruler.
The child stayed in Medina until the age of two, according to other
reports until the age of six. While he was playing in his father's
house, a cock picked him in his eye, causing a swelling of his face from
which he then died. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) led the funeral
prayers for him and buried him.

**Ali** son of the Prophet's daughter (or stepdaughter) Zainab. His
father was Ibn al-’a Laqi ibn ar-Rabi’ ibn ‘Abd al-’Uzza ibn ‘Abd Shams
ibn ‘Abd Manaf. He was a maternal cousin of Zainab daughter (or
stepdaughter) of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) because his mother was
the maternal aunt of Khadija daughter of Khuwailid. Ali ibn Zainab was
nursed with the Banu ‘a. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) then took him
home, saying that as a close relative he had a greater right to the
child because in those days the boy's father was still an idol
worshipper. But the child died before the age of puberty.

**Umama** daughter of the Prophet's daughter (or stepdaughter) Zainab.
Her father was the above-mentioned Ibn al-’a ibn ar-Rabi’. The Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w) loved her a lot and may have carried her on his neck
during prayers. Once someone presented him with a necklace of onyx, but
he said that this was for her. Allah knows best.

His Governors
-------------

Ali ibn Abu Talib  
 Abu ‘Ubaidah  
 Al-’Ala' ibn al-Harami  
 Hilal  
 Ibn al-Laithiyya  
 Qais ibn ‘aim  
 Az-Zuburqan ibn Badr  
 Malik ibn Nuwairah  
 ‘Udayy ibn atim  
 Ziyad ibn Labud  
 Al-Muhajir ibn Abul-’Aqaba

His Judges
----------

Ali ibn Abu Talib  
 Mu’ath ibn Jabal

His Police Officers and Law Enforcers
-------------------------------------

Abu ‘Ubaidah ibn al-Jarra  
 Bilal ibn Raba  
 Abu ibn Abu Fatima

His Police Officers and Law Enforcers
-------------------------------------

Ali ibn Abu Talib  
 Az-Zubair ibn al-’Awwam  
 Al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad  
 Muhammad ibn Maslamah  
 ‘Aim ibn Thabit

**Qais ibn Sa’d ibn** **‘Abadah**. His full name is Qais ibn Sa’d ibn
‘Abadah ibn Dulaim, one of the ansar, of the Khazraj tribe. He was very
generous and a genius. His form was large; whenever he rode a donkey,
his feet would be dragging. He was the standard bearer of the ansar,
fighting on the side of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). His judgment was
always sought, and he participated with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
in all military campaigns and battles. He also participated in the
conquest of Egypt where he built a house, then he became its ruler
during the caliphate of Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s). He used to be regarded
as the head of the Prophet's police force. On the Conquest of Mecca, the
Messenger of Allah took the standard from Qais's father, Sa’d ibn
‘Abadah, chief of the ansar, and handed it over to him. He kept the
Prophet company for ten years. During a time of extreme hardship, he
slaughtered animals to feed the Muslim army that had been consumed by
acute hunger. He participated in the Battle of iffin siding with Ali
(a.s), and he died during the last years of the rule of Mu’awiyah. The
Prophet (s.a.w) lauded the generosity and open-handedness of Qais. Qais
once sold merchandise to Mu’awiyah for 90,000 dinars then ordered a
crier to cry out throughout Medina urging anyone who needed a loan to go
to the house of Qais ibn Sa’d. He loaned forty to fifty thousand dinars
and kept the rest, taking a receipt from all those who borrowed from
him. It is also said that he once lent a man 30,000 dirhams, and when
the man wanted to pay him back, he refused to take it.

**His Confidants**

**Fatima**, may Allah be pleased with her. She is the daughter of the
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (s.a.w). Her mother is Khadija daughter of
Khuwailid, and she used to be called “Ummu Abeeha,’ mother of her
father, due to the extreme care with which she surrounded him. She was
the youngest of the Prophet's daughters and the dearest to him. History
books record several reports about when she was born. Some say she was
born in the same year when the Ka’ba was rebuilt, that is, when the
Prophet was 35 years old. Others say she was born only a few months
before the inception of the Prophetic mission. Ali ibn Abu Talib, cousin
of the Prophet, married her at the beginning of the month of Muarram of
2 A.H. when she was 18 years old, but others say differently

‘A’isha is quoted as having said, “I never saw anyone better than Fatima
other than her father.’ Abu Huraira has quoted the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) as saying, “The best of all the women of the world are four:
Mary (mother of Jesus), Asiya (wife of Pharaoh), Khadija (wife of
Prophet Muhammad) and Fatima.’ In two *ahih* books, it is recorded that
the Messenger of Allah said the following as he was sitting on his
pulpit: “Fatima is part of me; whoever harms her harms me, and I am
disturbed by anyone who disturbs her.’ The Prophet supplicated to Ali
and Fatima when they got married saying, “O Allah! I implore You to
bless them, to let Your blessing descend upon them, and to bless their
offspring.’

Umm Salamah, wife of the Prophet, said once, “It was at my house that
the verse saying, ‘Surely Allah only desires to keep away all
uncleanness from you, O People of the House (of the Prophet, i.e. Ahl
al-Bayt), and to purify you a (thorough) purifying' (Qur'an, 33:33) was
revealed, whereupon the Prophet ordered to bring Fatima, Ali, al-Hasan,
and al-Husain to him then said, ‘These are my Ahl al-Bayt.'‘

She gave birth to al-Hasan, al-Husain and Zainab, and she died six
months after her father's demise, but there are reports indicating
differently.

**Anas ibn Malik Huthaifah (al-Yemani)**

His Missionaries
----------------

Yasar, who was killed by the ‘Arnites  
 Abu Salma, also said to be Abu Salamah

His Financial Secretary
-----------------------

Bilal, may Allah be pleased with him. He (s.a.w) said to him, “Spend, O
Bilal, and do not fear any decrease from the Lord of the Throne (the
Almighty).’

His Standard Bearers
--------------------

Ali ibn Abu Talib  
 Az-Zubair ibn al-’Awwam  
 Sa’d ibn ‘Abadah  
 Zaid ibn arithah  
 Ja’far ibn Abu Talib  
 Khalid ibn al-Walid  
 ‘Abdullah ibn Ruwaah

His Stable-Masters
------------------

Al-Asla’ ibn Sharik  
 ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud

His Poets
---------

**Ka’b ibn Zuhair**. He is Ka’b ibn Zuhair ibn Abu Sulma, a poet. His
father, Zuhair ibn Abu Sulma, was a pre-Islamic poet known as one of
those whose poems were hung on the Ka’ba (*al-mu’allaqat*). Ka’b ibn
Zuhair once went out with his brother Bujair, who also was a poet, to
meet the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). When they reached a place known as
Abraq al-’Azzaf, Bujair said to Ka’b, “Stay with our herd till I see
this man (meaning the Messenger of Allah) and listen to him.’ Ka’b
remained with the flock as Bujair went to meet the Messenger of Allah
who invited him to embrace Islam, and he did. When news of his brother
accepting Islam reached him, Ka’b instantantly composed these lines of
poetry:

*I beg you convey a message from me to Ka’b:*  
*To what did he lead you, may someone else perish?*  
*To what neither your mother nor your father do?*  
*Nor did you find a brother of yours accepting it.*  
*May Abu Bakr give you a drink*  
*So the one who drinks of it chews and dies.*

When the Messenger of Allah heard about these lines, he permitted
killing him. Bujair wrote his brother Ka’b saying, “Seek help! I do not
think that you can survive this one!’ Then he wrote him again saying
that anyone who came to the Prophet to testify that there is no god
except Allah, and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, he would
accept his testimony and would not hold him accountable for anything
which he had done before. “So,’ he went on, “once this letter reaches
you, come and declare your acceptance of Islam.’ Ka’b did, indeed, go
there.

He delivered a poem in praise of the Prophet. He went and tied his camel
at the Mosque's gate then entered as the Messenger of Allah was talking
to people. Ka’b took a few more steps till he sat close to him, declared
his acceptance of Islam then sought asylum. When the Prophet asked him
who he was, he said, “I am Ka’b ibn Zuhair.’ The Prophet then turned to
Abu Bakr and asked him about the phrase of Ka’b stating “… so the one
who drinks of it chews and dies.’ But Ka’b was quick to alter the
wording so as to mean “the one who is granted asylum;’ therefore, the
Messenger of Allah said, “You, by Allah, are now safe and secure.’ Then
Ka’b delivered his famous poem in praise of the Prophet which came to be
known as the “burda’ (garment) because the Messenger of Allah took off
his garment which he was then wearing and gave it to Ka’b. Some of its
lines (roughly) run like this:

*Su’ad could be seen, and I could see*  
*How weak with love my heart came to be,*  
*Like an orphan following her, bearing love not light.*  
*Surely the Prophet is a sword that emits light*  
*One of Allah's swords, ever unsheathed is he.*  
*I was told that death did the Prophet promise me,*  
*But pardon from Allah's Messenger*  
*Is anticipated, from peril it does deliver.*

**Hassan ibn Thabit**. His full name is Hassan ibn Thabit ibn
al-Munthir, poet of the Messenger of Allah. He belonged to the ansar
from the Khazraj tribe. It is said that he lived for 60 years during the
pre-Islamic period and 60 more thereafter. He did not participate in the
Prophet's invasions because he did not feel strong enough to do so.
Whenever he wanted Hassan to compose a satiric poem defaming the
polytheists, the Messenger of Allah used to say to him, “Assault, may
the Holy Spirit be with you!’ The Prophet used to put a pulpit for him
at the Mosque so that he would stand on it to defend the Messenger of
Allah (with his poetry). When he wanted once to blast Quraish with his
poetry, the Messenger of Allah said to him, “But I am related to
Quraish! Go to Abu Bakr, for he is the most knowledgeable of Quraish's
genealogy, and he will trace for you my kinship thereto.’ He once
responded to Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith (who abused the Prophet) by
composing these lines:

*You attacked Muammad, whereas behind him I stand,*  
*And for this I shall have from Allah my reward;*  
*My father, my father's father, and my honor*  
*Are for Muhammad a shield from you and a cover.*  
*Do you really defame him while you are not his peer?!*  
*Your worst be sacrificed for one held by Allah as dear.*

It is also said that assan was quite articulate and brave, but an
ailment afflicted him, rendering him unable to bear arms. Hassan died in
54 A.H. (674 A.D.), but some say in 40 A.H. (660 A.D.).

**‘Abdullah ibn Ruwaah**

His Weapon Bearers
------------------

Al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah  
 Abu alhah

His Caravan Leader
------------------

‘amir ibn ‘Abdillah ibn Ruwahah

His Preacher
------------

Thabit ibn Qais ibn Shammas  
 May Allah be pleased with them all.

Mu'aththins of The Prophet (s.a.w)
----------------------------------

Abu Mathurah  
 Sa’d al-Qur  
 Al-A’ma (the blind man) ibn Umm Maktum  
 Bilal ibn Raba

His Chamberlain
---------------

Abu Masra, Anasah ibn Badah, who was raised by al-Aswad.

His Messenger
-------------

Salamah ibn al-Akwa’

His Guard
---------

Sa’d ibn Mu’ath; he guarded him during the battle of Badr.  
 Muhammad ibn Maslamah; he guarded him during the battle of Uhud.  
 ‘Abbad ibn Bishr, his guard.  
 Bilal, his guard.  
 Az-Zubair ibn al-’Awwam; he guarded him during the battle of the
Khandaq (moat).  
 Sa’d ibn Abu Waqqa, his guard.  
 Abu Ayyub (al-ansari), his guard.

His Bondmaids
-------------

Umm ‘Abbas; she was mentioned by al-Baghawi.  
 umaira; she was mentioned by Ibn Kathir.  
 Maimuna daughter of Hafsa; she was mentioned by Ibn Mundah.  
 Maimuna daughter of Sa’d; she was mentioned by Imam Amad.  
 Maria (Mary) the Copt, the mother of Ibrahim. She was given to him
(s.a.w) as a present by the Muqauqas of Egypt.  
 Laila, ‘A’isha's bondmaid.  
 ‘Unquda the Ethiopian, mother of ubai.  
 Sirin, the Copt, Maria's sister, whom the Prophet gave to his poet
Hassan ibn Thabit..  
 Salma, Rafi's mother. She was Abu Rafi's wife.  
 Salama, Ibrahim's nurse.  
 Sudaisa; she was mentioned by Abu Na’um.  
 Amatullah daughter of Razuna. She was mentioned by Abu Ya’li.  
 Umaima; she was mentioned by Ibn al-Athir.  
 Tirka, Umm Ayman. She was wife of Zaid ibn arithah and mother of
Usamah.  
 Khara; mentioned by Ibn Mundah  
 isliya; mentioned by Ibn al-Athir  
 Ruzaina; mentioned by Ibn ‘Asakir  
 Raawi; mentioned by Ibn al-Athir  
 Raiana; mentioned by Ibn Kathir  
 Razuna; mentioned by Ibn Kathir  
 Sa'iba; mentioned by Ibn al-Athir

His Freed Slaves
----------------

Salman al-Farisi  
 Zaid ibn arithah  
 Abu Rafi’ the Copt  
 Usamah ibn Zaid  
 ‘Ubaidah  
 Abu Masruh  
 Ayman ibn ‘Ubaid  
 Batham  
 Faalah  
 Thawban ibn Kaidad  
 Hunain  
 Thakwan  
 Ruwaifi’  
 Rabah al-Aswad  
 Abu Rafi’, also called simply “Rafi’’  
 Abu Yasar  
 Abu ‘Abdir-Rahman  
 Damrah ibn Shaqra ibn al-Habashi  
 Faqur; he is mentioned by al-Baghawi.  
 Kaisan; he is mentioned by al-Baghawi.  
 Mabor the Copt; he was presented to him (s.a.w) by the Muqauqas
together with Maria the Copt and her sister Sirin, and he was a
eunuch.  
 Kadar  
 Mudgham the Black  
 Nafi’; he used to carry his shoes.  
 Rabu’; he was presented to him by some man of fame, and he was
killed.  
 Waqid; he is mentioned by Ibn ‘Asakir.  
 Hurmuz; some say he is called Masruh, and he is mentioned by Ibn
Kathir.  
 Hisham; he is the father of Kaisan, although some say he is the father
of Waqid; he is mentioned by Abu Na’im.  
 Yasar; he is mentioned by Ibn Sa’d in his *Tabaqat*.  
 Abul-Hamra'; it is said that he was killed by the ‘Arnites.  
 Abu Salma; it is said that his name is Hilal ibn al-Harith.  
 Abu afiyya; he is his shepherd.  
 Abu amura; he is mentioned by al-Baghawi.  
 Abu ‘Ubaid; he is mentioned by Imam Amad.  
 Abu ‘Usaib; he is mentioned by Ibn Kathir.  
 Abu Muwaihabah; he is mentioned by Ibn Kathir; his name is Salum but
some say it is ‘Amr.

His Free Servants
-----------------

Anas ibn Malik, who served him for ten years  
 Al-Ala’ ibn Sharik. He was mentioned by Ibn Badr and by others.  
 Qais ibn Sa’d  
 Asma’ ibn Harithah; mentioned by Imam Amad  
 Bilal ibn Rabah, slave of Abu Bakr  
 Bakr ibn ash-Shadakh, mentioned by Ibn Mundah  
 Hasbah, mentioned by Imam Amad  
 Thu Mikhmar, nephew of the Negus (Emperor of Ethiopia who died in 9
A.H./630 A.D.)  
 Rabi’ah ibn Ka’b, mentioned by al-Awza’i  
 Sa’d ibn Abu Bakr, mentioned by Abu Dawud  
 ‘Abdullah ibn Ruwahah, mentioned by Ibn Kathir  
 ‘Uqbah ibn ‘amir, mentioned by Imam Amad  
 ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud, who used to carry his sandals  
 Al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah, mentioned by Ibn Kathir and others  
 Al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad, mentioned by Imam Amad  
 Muhajir, slave of Umm Salamah, mentioned by a-abrani  
 Hind ibn Harithah, mentioned by Ibn Shakir and Ibn Kathir  
 Hilal ibn al-Harith, mentioned by Ibn Shakir and others  
 Zaid ibn Himyar, mentioned by Ibn Shakir  
 Al-Aswad ibn Malik, mentioned by Ibn Shakir  
 Al-Jarjan ibn Malik, mentioned by Ibn Shakir  
 Al-Jarah ibn al-Jarjan, mentioned by Ibn Shakir  
 Tha’labah ibn ‘Abdir-Raman, mentioned by Ibn Shakir  
 Salim, slave of Tha’labah, mentioned by Ibn Shakir  
 Na’im ibn Rabi’ah, mentioned by Ibn Shakir  
 Abus-Samh, mentioned by Ibn Ishaq  
 Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, mentioned by Ibn Shakir

His Tools and Other Belongings
------------------------------

***Clothes, Shoes, Accessories and Other Household Items***

Dyestuff called stonelight  
 A kohl container, scissors  
 A mirror  
 Four slippers (two pairs)  
 Two *sabiya* shoes  
 A shawl;  
 An Omani loincloth  
 Two desert garments  
 A desert shirt  
 A *sijuli* shirt  
 A Yemeni coat and a Syrian coat  
 A white gown  
 Small caps  
 A long shirt  
 A square overcoat  
 A bed of skin stuffed with fibers  
 Four turbans: a woven turban which he wore most of the time; a tuft
turban which he rarely wore; a white turban which he wore most of the
time; a black turban which he wore on festive occasions  
 He entered Mecca on the day of conquest wearing a black turban with
both ends dangling down to his shoulders  
 A clod of earth to rub onto his skin  
 A waterskin from which he used to drink and perform his ablution  
 A knife  
 A pot in which food was cooked for him  
 A skin-covered rod with three inlaid silver buttons and a ring probably
made for trips  
 Three glasses  
 Henna coloring substances  
 A utensil called as-Sadura  
 A washing sink made of leather  
 An Alexandrian ivory box in which he used to keep his comb, scissors,
and mirror. This box was a present from Muqauqas (the ruler of Egypt).  
 A kettle  
 A bedstead  
 A piece of velvet plush  
 A red outfit which he used to wear frequently  
 An outfit made of (camel) hair  
 A black outfit  
 A handkerchief to wipe his face  
 A pot into which to urinate at night  
 A “armal’ mat  
 A basket in which to keep his perfumes  
 A comb to comb his hair  
 An overcoat  
 A rug called al-Karr

Three Rings:
------------

A gold ring which he threw away and did not wear  
 A silver ring which he used to wear  
 An iron ring with silver plating

His Animals
-----------

**Mules:**  
 The mule al-Shahba'; it was presented to him by the Muqauqas (the ruler
of Egypt). It is said that it was also called “Duldul.’  
 A mule called “Silver’ which was presented to him by Farwah.  
 A mule presented to him by the ruler of Dumat al-Jandal.  
 A mule presented to him by Khosrau (Emperor of Persia). Reports about
this differ, and the correct one is that this is not true.  
 A mule presented to him by the Negus (emperor of Ethiopia).  
 Donkeys:  
 A donkey called Ya’fur  
 A donkey called ‘afir

**She-Camels**

Al-’Aba'  
 Al-Jad’a'  
 Al-Qaswa'

**Nine Mixed Breeds**

Ash-Shaqra'  
 Al-Mihra  
 Ad-Daba'  
 Ash-Shariya  
 Al-Baghum  
 As-Sa’diyya  
 Al-’Arus  
 As-Samra'  
 Al-Khana'

**Seven Goats**

It is said that he had 100 ewes, and whenever a lamb was born, he
slaughtered a ewe. Their shepherd was the son of Umm Ayman.

**21 Horses**

As-Sakab, which he bought from a Bedouin,  
 Malawih  
 Al-Murtajiz, which he had during the battle of Khuzaimah ibn Thabit  
 Lizaz, presented to him by the Muqauqas (governor of Egypt)  
 A-arb, presented to him ibn Abul-Bara'  
 Al-Lahuf, presented to him by Farwah  
 As-Sidad  
 Al-Ward, presented to him by Tamim ad-Dari  
 Sanjiya  
 Al-In  
 Al-Murtahal  
 As-Sarhan  
 Al-Ya’sub  
 Al-Bahr  
 Al-Ghayyub  
 Al-Adham  
 As-Saa  
 As-Sajil  
 Al-Murwa  
 An-Najib

**… and Seven Sheep**

Itlal, Zamzam, ‘Ajwa, Itraf, Saqiya, Baraka, and Warisa

Miscellaneous Military Items
----------------------------

**Seven Armor Plates**

That al-Fuul  
 That al-Wishah  
 That al-Hawashi  
 As-Safdiyya  
 Fia  
 Al-Batra  
 Al-Kharnaq

**A Quiver**  
 This was a quiver for arrows called al-Jam’.

**Three Shields**  
 Al-Zaluq  
 Al-Fataq  
 Al-Muwajjar

**A Cane**  
 Made of Shua wood; it was called al-Mamshuq.

**Two Helmets**  
 Al-Musawwigh  
 Al-Muwashsha

**Five Bows**  
 Az-Zura  
 Al-Katum  
 Ar-Rua, made of the Naba’ tree  
 A-afra', made of the Naba’ tree  
 Al-Baida', made of the Shua tree

**A Baton**  
 called ‘Arjun

**Nine Swords**  
 Al-atf, which originally belonged to the armor of the (Jewish) Qainuqa’
tribe;  
 Ar-Rusub, which he got as a booty from an idol worshipped by Tay;  
 Al-Makhtham, which he got from items given by ay (tribesmen) to an idol
as an offering;  
 Ma'thur, which he inherited from his father;  
 Al-’Ab, which he got from Sa’d ibn ‘Abadah (as a gift);  
 Thul-Fiqar, which he acquired during the battle of Badr;  
 A-amama, the sword of ‘Amr ibn Ma’addi Karb;  
 Al-Qal’i, from the armor of the Qainuqa’ tribe;  
 Al-Battar, from the armor of the Qainuqa’ tribe.

**Three Spears**  
 An-Nab’a, which was mentioned by al-Suhaili;  
 Al-Baia', a large spear;  
 Al-’Anza, on which he leaned during prayer.

**A Saddle**  
 The Blessed One (s.a.w) also had a saddle called as-Siraj.

**A Hooked Stick**  
 This was al-Haukan, an arm's length, called ar-Rifq.

**Three Banners**  
 Ar-Raya was white; in its center read: “There is no god except Allah,
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.’  
 A-afra' (the yellow one) was mentioned by Abu Dawud and others;  
 Al-’Uqab was black and square, and in its midst there was a white
crescent.

**Five Lances**  
 Al-Mathwi;  
 Al-Munthani;  
 Three lances taken from the Qainuqa’ tribe

**A Tent**  
 It was called Ar-Rukn.


