Birth and Ancestors
===================

Setting: Hijaz
--------------

Most of the events and incidents narrated in this chapter took place in
Hijaz, the northern part of today's Saudi Arabia. Hijaz is the region
along the mountainous Red Sea coast of the Arabian Peninsula from Jordan
on the north to the region of ‘Asir on the south. Its northern part was
occupied as early as the 6th century B.C. when the Chaldean kings of
Babylon kept Taym (or Tayma') as its summer capital. Later, Hijaz became
part of the Nabataean kingdom which lasted for three hunded years: from
100 B.C. to 200 A.D. Its center was Mada'in Salih. This is the place
where the Arabian prophet Salih and his people lived. The province was
again placed under Baghdad's control till 1258 A.D. when it fell to the
Egyptians and, in 1517 A.D., to Ottoman Turks. The most important cities
in Hijaz are: Mecca, Medina, Jidda and Taif.

What Does ‘Muhammad’ Mean?
--------------------------

According to the great traditionist Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari, may
Allah be pleased with him, the Messenger of Allah has said, “I more than
anyone else look like Adam, peace be upon him, while Ibrahim, more than
anyone else, looks like me and deals with people as I do. Allah, from
His *‘Arsh,* gave me ten names. He conveyed the glad tidings of my
advent to every messenger whom He sent to his respective people. In the
Torah and in the Gospel (Bible), He included my name and taught me to
speak divinely; He raised me in His heavens and derived a name for me
from one of His Own, calling me ‘Muhammad,' while He Himself is the
‘Mahmood.'

And He extracted my seed out of the best from among my *umma*, making my
name in the Torah ‘Aheed,' for it is through *tawhid* that He has
forbidden the bodies of my *umma* from entering the fire. In the Gospel,
He called me ‘ Ahmad,' for I am more praised by the people of the
heavens (than by those on earth), making the members of my *umma* the
*hamidin* (those who laud me). In the Psalms, He made my name ‘Mahi,'
for Allah, the Most Exalted, the Most Sublime, wiped out through me
idol-worship. And in the Qur'an,

He made my name ‘Muhammad,' for I am praised by everyone on the Day of
Judgment when decrees will be issued, and none besides me will receive
such praise. On the Day of Resurrection, He will call me ‘Hashir,' for
people will be gathered together from underneath my feet. And on the Day
of Standing, He will call me ‘al-Mawqif,' for I will make all people
stand before Him for judgment. And He called me ‘al-’Aqib,' for I am the
last of His prophets; none shall succeed me as such. And He made me the
Messenger of mercy and repentance, the Imam of all those who stand
before others and lead them in the prayers, since it was I who led all
the prophets for congregational prayers. Moreover, I am also al-Qayyim,
al-Kamil, and al-Jami’.'‘

First, It was the Light of Muhammad
-----------------------------------

When Allah intended to create the living beings, He first created the
*noor* (light) of Muhammad. Refer to al-Qastalani's *Al-Mawahib
al-Ladunniyah*, Vol. 1, pp. 5, 9, and 10, where he quotes the Prophet's
traditions to this effect as transmitted by Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah
al-Ansari[^1] and Ali ibn Abu Talib. In his *Muruju al-Thahab*, the
well-known historian al-Mas’udi[^2] quotes a lengthy tradition from Ali
to the effect that when Allah created, first of all, the Light of
Muhammad, He said to it: “You are My chosen one and the Trustee of My
Light and Guidance. It is because of you that I am going to create the
earth and the skies, lay down reward and punishment, and bring into
being the Garden and the Fire.’

Then the tradition goes on to speak about the family of the Prophet,
about the creation of angels, the souls, the cosmos, the covenant taken
from the souls which combined the belief in the One God with acceptance
of Muhammad's Prophethood. This is why Ibn ‘Abbas narrates saying that
the Prophet said: “I was Prophet when Adam was between soul and body
(i.e. when Adam's creation was in its preliminary stages)’ (see
at-Tabrani's book *Al-Mu’jam al-Kabir,* and Vol. 1, p. 4, of
*Al-Khasa'is al-Kubra*).

Muhammad's Light adorned the ‘Arsh (Throne) of God. Aeons later, Adam
was created. That Light was then placed in his forehead. It continued
its journey, generation after generation, through numerous prophets and
their successors till it came to Prophet Ibrahim. From Ibrahim
(Abraham), it came to his eldest son, Prophet Isma’il (Ishmael).

The Prophet said: “Verily Allah chose Isma’il from the progeny of
Ibrahim, and chose Banu Kinanah from the progeny of Isma’il, and chose
Quraish from Banu Kinanah, and chose Banu Hashim from Quraish, and chose
me from Banu Hashim.’ At-Tirmithi has narrated this tradition from
*Wasilat ibn al-Asqa'* and has said that this tradition is *sahih*
(correct or authentic).

Abu al-Fida' quotes in his *Tarikh* (book of history) a tradition
wherein the Prophet says: “Gabriel said to me: ‘I looked at the earth
from the east to the west, but I did not find anyone superior to
Muhammad, and I looked at the Earth from the east to the west but did
not find any progeny superior to the progeny of Hashim.’

The Children of Isma'il
-----------------------

Prophet Ibrahim had brought his eldest son Isma’il with his mother
Hajira (Hagar) from Ken’an to the barren valley of Mecca. He used to
visit them once a year. When Isma’il was old enough to help him, Prophet
Ibrahim built the House of Allah known as the Ka’ba.  
 There was no water in the land when Isma’il and Hajira were left there.
The well of Zamzam miraculously appeared for Isma’il. Read how this
miraculous event is portrayed in the Bible:

*And God heard the voice of the lad [Ishmael]; and the angel of God
called to Hagar out of heaven and said to her: What aileth thee, Hagar?
Fear not, for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is. Arise and
lift up the lad and hold him in thy hand, for I will make him a great
nation. And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water.*  
 Genesis, 21:17-20

Finding the well, the tribe of Jurham sought the permission of Hajira to
settle there. During Prophet Ibrahim's annual visit, permission was
given to them, and ultimately Ishmael married in the same tribe. He
begot twelve sons; the eldest was called Qidar (Cedar).

The Ishmaelites increased in number, thus fulfilling the promise of
Allah to Ibrahim to multiply Ishmael exceedingly, as we read in Genesis.

The Ishmaelites, by and by, spread all over Hijaz. They were not
organized and consequently had no power. About 200 years before Christ,
‘Adnan from the children of Qidar arose to some fame. The genealogy of
‘Adnan up to Qidar is not agreed upon. The Arabs have narrated various
genealogies. The Prophet, in order to emphasize the Islamic ideology
that personal qualities, rather than genealogy, was the criterion of
excellence, and with a view not to entangle himself in such unnecessary
and useless arguments, ordered the Muslims thus: “When my genealogy
reaches ‘Adnan, stop.’

In the third century of the Christian Era (CE), there arose a leader
named Fahr in that family. He was son of Malik, son of Nadar, son of
Kinanah, son of Khuzaymah, son of Mudrikah, son of Ilyas, son of Mazar,
son of Nazar, son of Ma’d, son of ‘Adnan.

Some people think that this Fahr was called Quraish, and that is why his
children came to be known as Quraish.  
 In the fifth generation after Fahr, in the fifth century of the
Christian era, a very powerful personality appeared on the scene. He was
Qusayy, son of Kilab, son of Murrah, son of Lu'ayy, son of Ghalib, son
of Fahr.

Many people say that it was not Fahr but Qusayy who was called Quraish.
The famous Muslim scholar Shibli al-Nu’man, writes: “Qusayy became so
famous and achieved such a high prestige that some people say that he
was the first man to be called Quraish, as Ibn ‘Abdi Rabbih has written
in his book *Al-’Iqd al-Farid*, clearly saying that as Qusayy gathered
all the children of Isma’il from far and wide and made them leave the
nomadic way of life, settling them around the Ka’ba, he was called
Quraish (the gatherer).’ Al-Tabari quotes ‘Abdul-Malik ibn Marwan as
saying that Qusayy was Quraish, and that nobody was given this name
before him.

A man from the tribe of Khuza’ah named Hulail was the trustee of the
Ka’ba when Qusayy came of age. Qusayy married his daughter and,
according to Hulail's will, got the trusteeship of the Ka’ba after
Hulail. Qusayy established many new institutions:  
 It was Qusayy who established Dar al-Nadwa (Assembly House). It was
there that discussions were held to settle important matters like war
and peace. Caravans assembled there before going out, and marriages and
other ceremonies were conducted.

It was Qusayy who established the system of *siqaya* (making
arrangements to supply water to the pilgrims during the *hajj* days) and
rifada (to feed the pilgrims during those days).  
 It appears from al-Tabari that this system was followed in Islam up to
his time, i.e. 500 years after Qusayy.

It was Qusayy who made arrangements for the pilgrims to stay at
al-Mash’arul al-Haram at night. He used to illuminate the valley with
lamps, making their stay comfortable.  
 It was Qusayy who rebuilt the Ka’ba and who dug the first well at
Mecca. Zamzam was filled up long ago and nobody knew of its actual
location.

Arab historians unanimously say that he was generous, brave, and
sympathetic; his ideas were pure, his thinking clean, and his manners
very refined. His word was followed like a religion during his lifetime
and even after his death. People used to visit his grave at Hajun
(present day Jannatul Ma’alla). No wonder that he was the undisputed
chief of the tribe which owed its strength and power to his leadership.
To him had converged all the responsibilities and privileges of the
tribe: He was the trustee of the Ka’ba (*hijaba*), he was the chairman
of Dar al-Nadwa which he himself had established; he fed the pilgrims
(rifada); he arranged to provide them with drinking water (siqaya); he
was the standard-bearer of Quraish in wartime (liwa), and he was the
commander of the army (*qiyada*).

These were the six privileges which were looked upon with great respect
and before which all of Arabia bowed down. The most wonderful aspect of
his life is his selflessness. In all the accounts of his life, there
never appears any hint that by being the undisputed leader of the tribe,
he had gained anything for himself.

Qusayy had five sons and a daughter: ‘Abduddar was the eldest, then
Mughirah (known as ‘Abd Munaf). Qusayy loved his eldest son very much,
and at the time of his death, he entrusted him with all the six
responsibilities mentioned above.

But ‘Abduddar was not a very able man, whereas ‘Abd Munaf was
acknowledged as a wise leader even during the life of his father, and
his words were dutifully obeyed by the whole tribe. Because of his
nobility and benevolence, he was commonly known as “generous.’ Thus, it
came to pass that ‘Abduddar shared all his responsibilities with ‘Abd
Munaf. ‘Abd Munaf even became the paramount chief of Quraish.

‘Abd Munaf had six sons: Hashim, Muttalib, ‘Abdush-Shams, and Nawfal
were the most famous among them.

There was no trouble while ‘Abduddar and ‘Abd Munaf were alive. After
their death, a dispute started between their children concerning the
distribution of the six responsibilities. A war had almost started
before it was agreed upon that *siqaya*, *rifada*, and *qiyada* should
go to the children of ‘Abdu Munaf, and *liwa'* and *hijaba* should
remain with the children of ‘Abduddar, while the chairmanship of Dar
al-Nadwa should be shared by both families.

Hashim
------

Hashim's name will always shine in the history of Arabia and Islam not
only because he was the great grandfather of the Prophet, but in his own
right due to his tremendous achievements.

He may well be compared with any great leader of his time. He was the
most generous, the most prestigious, and the most respected leader of
Quraish. He used to feed the pilgrims during *hajj* with royal
open-handedness. But the best testimonial to his benevolence is his
title “Hashim’ whereby he came to be known. Once, there was a great
famine in Mecca. Hashim could not look silently at the sorry plight of
the Meccans. He took all his wealth, went to Syria, purchased flour and
dried bread, brought it to Mecca and daily slaughtered his camels for
gravy; the bread was broken into the gravy and the whole tribe was
invited to partake of it. This continued till the famine was averted and
all lives were saved. It was this extraordinary feat that earned him the
name “Hashim,’ the one who breaks (the bread). Hashim's real name was
‘Amr.

Hashim was the founder of the trade caravans of Quraish. He obtained an
edict from the Byzantine emperor which exempted Quraish from all kinds
of duties or taxes when entering or leaving the countries under his
domain. He obtained the same concession from the emperor of Ethiopia.
Thus, Quraishites started taking their trade caravans in the winter to
Yemen (which was under the Ethiopian rule) and in the summer to Syria
and beyond up to Ankara (under Byzantine rule). But the trade routes
were not safe; therefore, Hashim visited all the dominant tribes between
Yemen and Ankara and entered into agreements with them. They agreed that
they would not attack the trade caravans of Quraish, and Hashim
undertook on behalf of Quraish that their trade caravans would bring all
their necessities to their places of abode and would buy and sell at
reasonable prices. Thus, in spite of all the looting and plundering that
prevailed in Arabia then, the trade caravans of Quraish were always
safe.

It is to this achievement of Hashim that Allah refers in the Qur'an,
counting it as a great bounty of God upon Quraish:

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful***

***For the security and safeguard enjoyed by Quraish, their safety
during (their) journeys by winter and by summer, let them worship the
Lord of this House Who provides them with food against hunger and with
security against fear.*****(Qur'an, 106:1-4)**

There was a pathetically pessimistic tradition in Quraish known as
*ihtifad*. When a poor family could not feed itself, it would go out to
the desert and, entering a tent, remain there till death claimed all of
its members one by one. They thought that nobody would know of their
plight and, by thus starving to death, they would protect their honour.

It was Hashim who persuaded Quraish to actively combat the poverty
instead of succumbing to it. His scheme: He joined one rich person with
a poor one, provided that their dependents were equal in number. That
poor person was to help the rich one during the trade journey. Whatever
increase of capital accrued by way of profit would be shared equally by
both. Thus, there would be no need for *ihtifad*.

This scheme was wholeheartedly accepted and implemented by the tribe.
This wise suggestion not only removed poverty from Quraish but also
created a feeling of brotherhood and unity among them.

These achievements were enough to justify a very long life. But our
wonder knows no bounds when we learn that Hashim was only 25 years old
when death overtook him at Gaza, Palestine, in approximately 488 A.D.
His grave is preserved, and Gaza is also called “Ghazzat Hashim,’ i.e.
Hashim's Gaza.

Hashim was very handsome, and because of his looks and prestige, many
chiefs and even rulers wanted him to marry their daughters. But he
married Selma daughter of ‘Amr (from the tribe of ‘Adi Banu Najjar) of
Yathrib. She was the mother of Shaybatul-Hamd who was an infant when
Hashim died. According to a number of sources, ‘Abdul-Muttalib is also
known as “Shaybatul-Hamd.’ “Shayba’ means: gray hair; it is said that
when he was born, one gray hair was found on his head, hence his name.

‘Abdul-Muttalib
---------------

Hashim had five sons: ‘Abdul-Muttalib, Asad, Nadlah, Saifi and Abu
Saifi. But the last three had no children; Asad had only a daughter,
Fatima bint Asad, mother of Ali ibn Abu Talib. Thus, it was only through
‘Abdul-Muttalib that the progeny of Hashim survived.

‘Abdul-Muttalib was born in Yathrib (later named Medina) in his maternal
grandfather's house, and he was only a few months old when Hashim died.
After Hashim, his brother Muttalib succeeded him in all the privileges
mentioned earlier. After some time, Muttalib went to Yathrib and brought
his nephew to Mecca. When Muttalib entered Mecca with his nephew behind
him on his camel, some people said: “This is the slave of Muttalib!’
Muttalib said: “No! He is my nephew and son of my deceased brother
Hashim.’ But the name stuck, and nowadays few people know that the real
name of ‘Abdul-Muttalib was Shaybatul-Hamd.

Muttalib loved ‘Abdul-Muttalib and looked after him very well. But
‘Abdush-Shams and Nawfal were hostile towards him. At the death of
Muttalib, ‘Abdul-Muttalib succeeded him in the two privileges held by
him, i.e. *siqaya* and *rifada*.

In spite of the enmity of his own uncles, his personal virtues and
qualities of leadership earned him in later days the title of
“Sayyidul-Batha’ (the Chief of Mecca). He lived to the ripe age of 82. A
carpet was put for him before the Ka’ba and nobody else dared to put his
foot on it. In later days, this rule was broken only by the orphaned son
of ‘Abdullah (i.e. the Prophet) who used to sit there and
‘Abdul-Muttalib forbade Quraish from interfering with the child because,
he told them, “This child of mine is to have a special dignity.’

It was ‘Abdul-Muttalib who had forbidden his children from using
intoxicants. It was he who used to enter the cave of Hira during the
month of Ramadan to spend the month in remembrance of Allah and in
feeding the poor. Like his father and uncle, he used to feed and provide
water for the pilgrims during the *hajj* season. During the whole year,
even the beasts and birds were fed from his house and, accordingly, he
was called “Mut’imut-tayr’ (feeder of the birds).

Some of the systems originated by ‘Abdul-Muttalib were later adopted in
Islam. He was the first person to make *nathr* and to fulfill it, to
give one fifth (*khums*) of the treasure in the way of Allah, to forbid
marriage between prohibited degrees, to cut a thief's hand, to make
intoxicants unlawful, to forbid fornication and adultery, to discourage
the system of killing the daughters, to discourage the *tawaf* around
the Ka’ba without clothes, and to fix the compensation of manslaughter
(killing someone by mistake or unintentionally) at 100 camels. All these
systems were adopted by Islam. It is not possible to give the whole
history of ‘Abdul-Muttalib in this short chapter, but two important
events must be mentioned: the recovery of Zamzam and the attempted
attack on the Ka’ba by Abraha, governor of Yemen on behalf of the
Ethiopian Negus[^3].

ZamZam
------

Hundreds of years ago before the birth of Prophet Muhammad, Zamzam was
filled up and nobody knew where it was. One day, ‘Abdul-Muttalib was
sleeping in Hatim of the Ka’ba. Someone told him in a dream to dig the
Taybah and to get water. He asked where Taybah was, but the vision
vanished without any reply. The same vision was repeated the second and
the third day, but the names were changed every time. On the fourth day,
he was told to dig Zamzam. ‘Abdul-Muttalib asked where Zamzam was. He
was given the signs. ‘Abdul-Muttalib, with his eldest (and at that time
the only) son, al-Harith, dug the place where Zamzam is nowadays. On the
fourth day, the wall of the well appeared, and after some more digging,
the water level was reached. Inside the well there was a treasure of two
gold deer, swords and shields.

At this success, ‘Abdul-Muttalib cried: ‘*Allahu Akbar!*’ and said:
“This is the well of Isma’il!’ The Quraishites gathered around him and
started arguing that since the original well was the property of
Isma’il, the recovered well, too, belonged to the whole tribe.
‘Abdul-Muttalib rejected their claim, saying that it was given
especially to him by Allah. Quraishites wanted to fight and fill up the
well then dig it up again.

At last, they agreed to put their case before the wise woman of the
tribe of Sa’d in Syria. Every clan sent one man to represent it.
‘Abdul-Muttalib, with his son and a few companions, were in the same
caravan, but he had his separate arrangements. The water with
‘Abdul-Muttalib was depleted when the latter was in the middle of the
desert. The whole group was suffering from acute thirst. The leaders of
the other party refused to give them any water. They were near their
death. ‘Abdul-Muttalib advised his group to dig some graves so that when
anybody died, others would bury him. Thus, only one person, the last to
die, would remain unburied. They dug up their own graves. The opposite
party was enjoying the scene.

On the second day, ‘Abdul-Muttalib exhorted his companions that it was
cowardice to succumb to death like that without making a last ditch
effort. Thus, he rode his camel, and the camel arose. In doing so, its
foot hit the earth and Lo! A stream of cool sweet water appeared!
‘Abdul-Muttalib cried: ‘*Allahu Akbar!*’ His companions, too, cried
‘*Allahu Akbar!*’ They quenched their thirst, filled their water-skins,
and then ‘Abdul-Muttalib invited the opposite group to fill their
water-skins from that fountain. His own companions objected, but he
said, “If we do the same as they had done, there would be no difference
between us and them.’

The whole caravan gathered around that fountain. They drank and filled
their water-skins. Then they said: “O ‘Abdul-Muttalib! By Allah! Allah
has decided between you and us. He has given you victory. By Allah, we
will never dispute with you about Zamzam. The same God Who has created
this fountain here in this desert for you has given Zamzam to you.’  
 Zamzam became the personal property of ‘Abdul-Muttalib.

[^1]: Jabir ibn \`Abdullah al-Ansari is one of the greatest sahabis of
Prophet Muhammed (s.a.w), a first-class traditionist and a most zealous
supporter of Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s). According to Al-Isti\`ab, he
died at the age of 94 in 74 A.H. (some say in 77 and others in 78), and
his funeral prayers were led by Aban ibn \`Uthman, then governor of
Medina. He was the very last to die from among the Prophet's close
sahaba.

[^2]: He is \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Abdullah al-Mas\`udi. He died in 165
A.H./781 A.D. His descendant, Yahya ibn Muhammed ibn Abi \`Obaydah ibn
Ma\`n was one of the major isnad authorities upon whom Abu Ja\`fer
Muhammed ibn Jarir al-Tabari (839 - 923 A.D.) relied in writing his
famous work Tarikh al-rusul wal muluk (history of the Messengers and the
kings).

[^3]: “Negus” means “king” in the Amheric language, title of the supreme
ruler of Abyssinia (Ethiopia).


