The Call to Islam
=================

Muhammad Receives Revelation (610 A.D.)
---------------------------------------

Muhammad was forty years old when the first verses of the Holy Qur'an
were revealed to him. They were the first verses of Surat al-Alaq
(chapter 96), and they were revealed during the month of Ramadan 13
years before the Hijra, at the cave of Hira, his favourite place for
isolation and meditation, a place which is now visited by many pilgrims.
Muhammad went back home heavy-hearted, profoundly perplexed, deeply
impressed by the sight of arch-angel Gabriel and by the depth of meaning
implied in these beautiful words:

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***  
***Proclaim (or read)! In the Name of your Lord and Cherisher Who
created (everything). (He) created man of a (mere) clot of congealed
blood. Proclaim! And your Lord is the Most Bountiful Who taught (the use
of) the pen, Who taught man that which he knew not…*** **(Qur'an,
96:1-5)**

He felt feverish, so he asked to be wrapped and, once he felt better, he
narrated what he had seen and heard to his faithful and supportive wife.
“By Allah,’ Khadija said, “Allah shall never subject you to any
indignity…, for you always maintain your ties with those of your kin,
and you are always generous in giving; you are diligent, and you seek
what others regard as unattainable; you cool the eyes of your guest, and
you lend your support to those who seek justice and redress.

Stay firm, O cousin, for by Allah I know that He will not deal with you
except most beautifully, and I testify that you are the awaited Prophet
in this nation, and your time, if Allah wills, has come.’ After a short
while, Khadija told her husband about the prediction of the Syrian monk
Buhayrah regarding Muhammad's Prophethood, and about her dialogue with
both her servant Maysarah, who had informed her of what Buhayrah had
said, and with her cousin Waraqah ibn Nawfal. She then accompanied her
husband to Waraqah's house to narrate the whole incident. “Let me hear
it in your own words,’

Nawfal said to Muhammad, adding, “O noble master!’ Having heard the
Prophet's words, Nawfal took his time to select his words very
carefully; he said, “By Allah, this is the prediction which had been
conveyed to Moses and with which the Children of Israel are familiar!
[Moses] had said: ‘O how I wish I could be present when Muhammad is
delegated with Prophethood to support his mission and to assist him!'‘

It was only natural for Khadija to receive her share of the harassment
meted to him by none other than those who, not long ago, used to call
him *al-Sadiq, al-Amin*. Khadija did not hesitate at all to embrace
Islam.

Yahya ibn ‘Afeef is quoted saying that he once came, during the period
of *jahiliyya* (before the advent of Islam), to Mecca to be hosted by
al-’Abbas ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib, one of the Prophet's uncles mentioned
above. “When the sun started rising,’ says he, “I saw a man who came out
of a place not far from us, faced the Ka’ba and started performing his
prayers. He hardly started before being joined by a young boy who stood
on his right side, then by a woman who stood behind them. When he bowed
down, the young boy and the woman bowed, and when he stood up straight,
they, too, did likewise.

When he prostrated, they, too, prostrated.’ Then he expressed his
amazement at that, saying to al-’Abbas: “This is quite strange, O
‘Abbas!’ “Is it, really?’ retorted al-’Abbas. “Do you know who he is?’
al-’Abbas asked his guest who answered in the negative. “He is Muhammad
ibn ‘Abdullah, my nephew. Do you know who the young boy is?’ asked he
again. “No, indeed,’ answered the guest. “He is Ali son of Abu Talib. Do
you know who the woman is?’ The answer came again in the negative, to
which al-’Abbas said, “She is Khadija daughter of Khuwaylid, my nephew's
wife.’

This incident is included in the books of both Imam Ahmad and
al-Tirmithi, each detailing it in his own *Sahih*. And she bore
patiently in the face of persecution to which her revered husband and
his small band of believers were exposed at the hands of the polytheists
and aristocrats of Quraish, sacrificing her vast wealth to promote
Islam, seeking Allah's Pleasure.

Among Khadija's merits was her being one of the four most perfect of all
women of mankind, the other three being: Fatima daughter of Muhammad,
Maryam bint ‘Omran (Mary daughter of Amram), mother of Christ and niece
of prophet Zakariyya, and ‘Asiya daughter of Muzahim, wife of Pharaoh.
Prophet Zakariyya, as the reader knows, was the father of Yahya (John
the Baptist), the latter being only a few months older than Prophet
Jesus.

The Prophet of Islam used to talk about Khadija quite often after her
demise, so much so that his youngest wife, ‘Ayisha daughter of Abu Bakr,
felt extremely jealous and said to him once, ‘… But she was only an old
woman with red eyes, and Allah has compensated you with a better and
younger wife (meaning herself).’

This caused him to be very annoyed, and he said, “No, indeed; He has not
compensated me with anyone better than her. She believed in me when all
others disbelieved; she held me truthful when others called me a liar;
she sheltered me when others abandoned me; she comforted me when others
shunned me; and Allah granted me children by her while depriving me of
children by other women.’ Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Abu Hatim, al-Dulabi,
al-Tabari, and many others, all quote ‘Ayisha saying: “One day, the
Messenger of Allah mentioned Khadija affectionately, so I was carried
away by jealousy and said about her what I should *not* have said.

It was then that his face changed colour in a way I never saw it change
except when he was receiving revelation, so I realized what I had done
and felt overwhelmed by regret to the extent that I could not help
uttering these words: “O Lord! If You remove the anger of Your Messenger
right now, I pledge not to ever speak ill of her as long as I live.'
Having seen that, he forgave me and narrated to me some of her merits.’

Both Muslim and Bukhari indicate in their respective *Sahih* books that
among Khadija's merits was the fact that the Lord of Dignity ordered
Jibraeel (Gabriel), peace be upon him, to convey His regards to her.
Gabriel said to Muhammad: “O Muhammad! Khadija is bringing you a bowl of
food; when she comes to you, tell her that her Lord greets her, and
convey my greeting, too, to her.’ When he did so, she said: “Allah is
the Peace, and He is the source of all peace, and upon Gabriel be
peace.’

Khadija died of an attack of fever on the tenth or eleventh day of the
month of Ramadan, ten years after the start of the Prophetic mission (in
the year 620 A.D.), 24 years after her marriage with Muhammad, and she
was buried at Hajun in the outskirts of Mecca. The Messenger of Allah
dug her grave and buried her… Funeral prayers (*salat al janaza*) had
not yet been mandated in Islam. It is reported that by the time she
died, her entire wealth had already been spent to promote Islam; she
left neither a single gold dinar nor a single silver dirham, nor
anything more or less…

***soul that are at rest! Return to your Lord, well-pleased (with Him),
well-pleasing (Him), so enter among My servants, and enter into My
garden.*****(Qur'an, 89:27**-**30)**

The Dawn of Prophethood
-----------------------

It was a man from among themselves who was to lift the Arabs from their
slough of ignorance and depravity into the light of faith: devotion to
one God.

Because of its geographical position and connection by land and sea
routes with the continents of Asia, Africa and Europe, Arabia had been
powerfully influenced by the superstitious beliefs and evil ways
prevailing in many parts of these continents. But once it forsook
disbelief and unbecoming practices, it could, as a result of the same
geographical position, easily become the center of enlightenment,
radiating guidance and knowledge to the entire world.

When Muhammad was 38 years old, he spent most of his time in meditation
and solitude. The cave of Hira, which overlooks the Ka’ba from a
distance of about three miles north of Mecca, was his favourite place.
It is there that he used to retire with food and water and spend days
and weeks in remembrance of Allah. Nobody was allowed to go there except
Khadija and Ali. He used to spend the whole month of Ramadan therein.

The period of waiting had come to a close. His forty years of life had
varied experiences, and from the world's point of view, he had developed
a maturity of mind and judgement, although in reality he was the
embodiment of perfection from the very beginning. He has said: “I was a
prophet when Adam was between water and clay.’ His heart was overflowing
with profound compassion for mankind and a pressing urge to eradicate
wrong beliefs, social evils, cruelty and injustice.

It was during the month of Ramadan of the year of the elephant (610
A.D.), 13 years before the Hijra, that revelation descended on Muhammad
for the first time. This event will always be immortalized in the
history of the human species. It changed the history of mankind for all
time to come. Nobody has ever influenced the events on our planet more
than Muhammad. Nobody ever will.

The flow of the Divine message which continued for the next twenty-three
years had begun with that date, and the Prophet had arisen to proclaim
the Unity of God and the unity of mankind, of the human family, to
demolish the edifice of superstition, ignorance, and disbelief, to set
up a noble concept of life, and to lead mankind to the light of faith
and celestial bliss. Revelation was received in different ways:
sometimes the Almighty inspired him to do something or say something,
sometimes through visions, sometimes Gabriel came to him in human form
and sometimes in his angelic appearance…

Inception of The Mission (610 A.D.)
-----------------------------------

The task was stupendous. The Prophet, therefore, started his mission
cautiously, confining it initially to his own close relatives and
friends. He was met with immediate success. His wife Khadija testified
to his truth as soon as she heard the news of the revelation from God.
Then his cousin Ali, and his liberated slave and adopted son Zayd ibn
Harithah, readily accepted the new faith, Islam, “submission to the Will
of God.’ The fourth was Abu Bakr, and his conversion's story is
excerpted here from *Al-Seera al-Halabiyya,* *Usd al-Ghaba*, and *Tarikh
al-Chamois*:

Abu Bakr ibn Abu Quhafah was thirty-eight years old when he made a trip
to Yemen where he met an old and learned sage of the Azd tribe who
predicted that a prophet was to appear in the near future in Mecca. Upon
his return from the trip, he paid a visit to his friend Muhammad who
invited him to accept his religion, Islam, declaring himself the
Prophet. Abu Bakr asked Muhammad to prove his Prophethood, and Muhammad
at once related to Abu Bakr the prediction which Abu Bakr had heard when
he was in Yemen. Muhammad was not there to witness the incident which
involved only Abu Bakr and the sage of the Azd tribe. He was at Mecca
during the entire period while Abu Bakr was in Yemen. Abu Bakr accepted
Islam.

Ibn Hajar al-’Asqalani in his book *Al-Isabah*, and ‘Abdul Malik ibn
Hisham in his book *As-Sifah* have written that Ali was the first male
to accept Islam and pray (offer *salat*), and that he accepted whatever
was revealed to the Messenger by the Lord. At that time, Ali was only
ten years old and Muhammad forty. After Ali, Zayd ibn Harithah accepted
the Islamic creed and prayed and then Abu Bakr embraced Islam as stated
above. The companions of the Prophet, Muhammad ibn Ka’b al-Qarzi, Salman
the Persian, Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad al-Kind,
Khabbab ibn ‘Arrat, Abu Sa’eed al-Khudri and Zayd ibn al-Arqam testify
that Ali was the first to proclaim Islam. These celebrated companions
have given Ali preference over others.

Justice Ameer Ali writes the following in his *Spirit of Islam*:  
 It is a noble feature in the history of the Prophet of Arabia, and one
which strongly attests the sincerity of his character, the purity of his
teachings and the intensity of his faith in God, that his nearest
relations, his wife, beloved cousin and intimate friends, were most
thoroughly imbued with the truth of his mission and convinced of his
inspiration. Those who knew him best, closest relations and dearest
friends, people who lived with him and noted all his movements, were his
sincere and most devoted followers.’

John Davenport writes the following:  
 It is strongly corroborative of Muhammad's sincerity that the earliest
converts to Islam were his bosom friends and the people of his
household, who, all intimately acquainted with his private life, could
not fail to have detected those discrepancies which more or less
invariably exist between the pretensions of the hypocritical deceiver
and his actions at home.

Slowly the message spread. During the first three years, he gained only
thirty followers. In spite of the caution and care exercised, Quraish
were well posted with what was going on. At first they did not make much
note and only jeered at the Prophet and the plight of his followers.
They doubted his sanity and thought he was possessed. But the time had
come for proclaiming the will of God in public.

Inviting The Near Ones (613 A.D.)
---------------------------------

After three years, the call from Allah came thus: ***“And warn thy near
relations’ (Qur'an, 26:214).*** This *ayat* (verse) ended the period of
secret preaching and heralded the open proclamation of Islam.

“Abu Muhammad’ Husain al-Baghawi, in his *Tafsir MaAlim al-Tensile*,
Shaikh ‘Ala'uddin Ali ibn Muhammad al-Baghdadi, known as Khazin
al-Baghdadi, in his *Lubabut-Ta'wil,* best known as *Tafsir Khazin*, Abu
Bakr Ahmad ibn Husain al-Bayhaqi (in his *Dalailun-Nubuwwah*),
Jalaluddin al-Sayyuti (in his *Jam’ul Jawami’*), ‘Ala'uddin Ali Muttaqi
(in *Kanzul-’Ommal*), Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari (in
*Tarikh al-Rusul wal Muluk*), Abu Sa’dat Mubarak ibn Athir al-Jazari (in
*Tarikhul-Kamil*) and Isma’il Abul-Fida' (in his history work
*Kitabul-Mukhtasar fi Akhbaril-Bashar*) have quoted Ali as saying:

“When the verse *Wa anthir* *‘ashiratakal-aqrabin* was revealed, the
noble Messenger called me and ordered me, ‘O Ali! The Creator of the
world has commanded me to warn my people about their doom, but in view
of the condition of the people and knowing that when I give them the
words of Allah, they will misbehave, I felt depressed and weakened and,
therefore, I kept quiet until Gabriel came again and informed me that
there should be no more delay. Therefore, O Ali, take a measure of food
grain, a leg of a goat and a big bowl of milk and arrange for a feast,
then call the sons of ‘Abdul-Muttalib unto me, so that I may deliver to
them the words of Allah.' I did what the Prophet had told me and the
sons of ‘Abdul-Muttalib, who numbered about forty, assembled together.
Among them were the uncles of the Prophet: Abu Talib, Hamzah, ‘Abbas and
Abu Lahab.

When the food was brought, the Prophet lifted a piece of meat and tore
it into small pieces which he scattered on the tray and said, ‘Start
eating in the Name of Allah.' All people present there had the food to
their fill although the milk and the food were just sufficient for one
man. Then he intended to speak to them, but Abu Lahab interferred and
said, “Verily, your comrade has bewitched you!'‘ Having heard this, all
of them dispersed and the Messenger did not get a chance to speak to
them.

“On the next day, the Messenger of the Lord again said to me: ‘O Ali!
Make arrangements again for a feast as you had done yesterday, and
invite the sons of ‘Abdul-Muttalib.' I arranged for the feast and
gathered the guests as I was asked to do by the Prophet. Once they had
finished eating, the Messenger addressed them thus: ‘O sons of ‘Abdul-
Muttalib, I have brought you the best blessings of this world and of the
next, and I am appointed by the Lord to call you unto Him. Therefore,
who amongst you will help me in this cause so that he may be my brother,
vizier, and successor?'

Nobody responded. But I, although the youngest of the congregation,
said, ‘O Messenger of Allah, I am here to be your helper in this task.'
The Prophet then patted my neck very kindly and said, ‘O my people! This
Ali is my brother, my vizier and my successor amongst you. Listen to him
and obey him.' Having heard it from the Prophet, they all burst laughing
and said to Abu Talib, ‘Hearken! You are ordered to obey and follow your
own son!'‘

This event has also been recorded by Thomas Carlyle in *Heroes and Hero
Worship*, by Gibbon in *Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire*, by
Davenport in *Apology for* *Muhammad* *and The Koran* and by Washington
Irving in *Muhammad* *And His Successors*, with all its details.

Persecution Begins
------------------

Then one after another came the Divine commands:

***Disclose what has been ordained to thee.*** **(Qur'an, 15:94)**

***thou wrapped (in thy mantle)! Arise and warn, and thy Lord do
magnify. And thy raiment do purify. And uncleanness do shun. And show
not favour seeking gain! And for the sake of thy Lord be patient.***
**(Qur'an, 74:1-7)**

The method to be employed was:

***Call to the way of thy Lord with wisdom and goodly exhortation, and
dispute with them in the best way.*** **(Qur'an, 16:125)**

The Prophet proclaimed the Oneness of God in the Ka’ba. Quraish were
aghast. Their reaction was sharp and violent. They mobbed the Prophet.
Al-Harith son of Abu Halah tried to protect him but was slashed to
death. It was the first martyrdom in the cause of Islam. Till then,
Quraish had held the Prophet and his followers in contemptuous disdain,
but now they were genuinely alarmed. The new movement amounted to a
denunciation of their forefathers. It meant the termination of their
authority and privilege as the guardians of the Ka’ba.

Quraish retaliated violently. A life and death struggle for Islam
ensued. The Prophet was not allowed to worship in the Ka’ba, thorns were
strewn in his way, dirt and filth were thrown at him while he was
engaged in prayers, and street urchins were incited to follow him,
shouting and clapping their hands in derision. When he prayed, they made
loud cries, hooted or sang wild songs in order to drown his voice.

To their great disappointment, they could not prevent him or discourage
him. Such is the mark of great men. Such are men of God; nobody and
nothing stands in their way. He and his followers were subjected to all
types of calumnies and humiliation. His followers were taunted and
insulted. Oppression and relentless persecution were let loose. In an
effort to force the believers to renounce the new faith and to go back
to the older cults, they were subjected to extremes of physical torture.
They were mercilessly beaten, made to lie on burning sand while heavy
blocks of stones were placed on their chests. Nooses were put around
their necks and their bodies were dragged.

One of the faithful, named Yasir[^1], succumbed to toture and, when his
wife Sumayya, an African, protested, her legs were tied to two camels,
and the animals were driven to opposite directions, tearing her body in
halves. The believers, under the inspiration of their great Teacher,
were, however, fired with holy zeal. They braved all persecution and
danger and bore up against all agonies and torture.

Two Hijras To Abyssinia (615 A.D.)
----------------------------------

In around 615 A.D., when endurance was reaching its limits and
persecution became unbearable, the Prophet advised a group of his
followers to migrate to Abyssinia (Ethiopia) where a benign Christian
king reigned. This was the first *hijra* (migration) in Islam and
fifteen people, eleven men and four women, including ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan
and his wife Ruqayya, took part in it:

***And those who become fugitives for Allah's sake being oppressed,
verily We shall give them good abode in the world and surely the reward
of the Hereafter is greater, if they only knew.*** **(Qur'an, 16:41)**

What was all this tyranny and persecution for? They were just for
believing in one God and for leading a chaste and pious life! Further
migration of some people led to intensified persecution of those left
behind. The Prophet advised a second Hijra to Abyssinia. Thirty men and
eighteen women left Mecca individually or in small groups fleeing to
Abyssinia. Ja’far ibn Abu Talib, the elder brother of Ali, followed them
with fifty more; thus, one hundred and sixteen refugees reached
Abyssinia safely. Quraish sent a deputation headed by ‘Amr ibn al-’As
and ‘Ammara ibn Rabi’ah to the Negus (Nijashi), king, of Abyssinia, to
demand the deportation of the emigrants back to Mecca to be punished by
death. Having won the favour of the clergy, the deputations tried to
prejudice the king against the fugitives. Asked to explain the position
of the Muslims, Ja’far delivered a speech which is a brilliant summary
of the fundamentals of Islam and all that it stands for:

king! We were plunged into the depth of ignorance and barbarism; we
adored idols; we lived in unchastity; we ate dead animals, and we spoke
abomination. We disregarded every feeling of humanity, and the duties of
hospitality and neighbourhood. We knew no law but that of the strong. At
that time, God raised from among us a man of whose birth, truthfulness,
honesty and purity we were aware, and he called us to the Unity of God
and taught us not to associate anything with Him.

He forbade us from worshipping idols and enjoined us to speak the truth,
to be faithful to our trusts, to be merciful, and to regard the rights
of neighbours. He forbade us from speaking ill of women and from eating
the subsistence of orphans. He ordered us to flee from vices, to abstain
from evil, to offer prayers, to render alms, and to observe the fast. We
have believed in him; we have accepted his teachings and injunctions to
worship God, and not to associate anything with Him. For this reason,
our people have risen against us and persecuted us in order to make us
forego the worship of God and return to the worship of idols of wood and
stone and other abominations. They have tortured us and injured us.
Having found no safety among them, we have come to thy country and hope
thou wilt protect us from their oppression.

The king refused to oblige the deputations, and the latter had to return
disappointed. Muslim traditions indicate that the king later on secretly
converted to Islam.

Some European critics, with the objective of assigning some ulterior
motives for the migration, go to the length of saying that persecution
was only slight and at worst confined to slaves and the poorer people
who could find no clans to protect them. There is a mass of historical
data recorded in original sources about the names and numbers of persons
put to physical torture, the names of their tormentors and the manner of
their physical torture and persecution. Although these critics admit
that even Abu Bakr had to undergo the indignity of being bound to a
clansman and to solicit the protection of a nomadic chief, they would
still suggest that the persecution was limited to persons who had no
clans to support them. Such people received, no doubt, the worst
treatment, but when people of a clan were oppressing their fellow
clansmen for accepting Islam, clan protection could not help the
victims.

What protection could be expected from the clan when a father chained
his son, a brother tortured his sister, or a husband injured his wife?
Furthermore, the slaves and the poor people constituted the bulk of the
disciples at that stage. A Western historian surmises that the migration
was caused either by a rift in the Muslim ranks, as some Muslims might
not have liked the attitude of the Prophet towards the Meccan
opposition, or was undertaken with the goal of making Abyssinia a base
of attacking Meccan trade or to solicit military help to enable the
Prophet to seize control of Mecca.

If such fantastic conjectures can be made when the Muslims were yet a
handful and survival was the only consideration before them, when all
along they stood solidly behind the Prophet, when no Meccan caravan was
ever attacked from Abyssinia, when that country never provided any
military help to the Muslims, and when the Prophet did not seize control
of Mecca even when it lay at his feet, what fairness in exposition and
presentation can be expected from such historians?

Prophet ar Al-Arqam's House
---------------------------

Following the migration of such a number of his loyal followers, the
Prophet realized how precarious his position in Mecca had become. Having
felt insulted at the mere fact that their deputation to the Negus had
failed in its mission, Quraish now is even more than ever bent on
avenging their wounded pride. They intensified their persistence in
opposing his preachings. The Prophet, therefore, after years of his
struggle to disseminate the Islamic faith, sought refuge at the house of
al-Arqam al-Makhzumi, a highly respected Meccan dignitary. The house was
near the sanctuary of the Ka’ba.

One day, Muhammad was sitting outside the house as Abu Jahl happened to
pass by. Abu Jahl blasted his nephew with a barrage of abusive language.
Muhammad felt it very sorely but could not utter a single word. A slave
gird of ‘Abdullah ibn Ju’dan, who lived nearby, was very much moved by
such uncalled for insults. A short while later, she narrated the
incident to Hamzah, Muhammad's other uncle, who was passing by her house
on his way home from a sporting excursion. Hamzah was famous among the
Arabs for his great valour and chivalry, and he felt deeply resentful of
Abu Jahl's behaviour; so, he proceeded straight to Abu Jahl's house.

Remonstrating with him, Hamzah hit him with his bow, striking a blow on
his head. Abu Jahl's men stood up to avenge Abu Jahl who stopped them.
Trying to pacify Hamzah, Abu Jahl told him that he had abused Muhammad
only because he vilified their gods. Hamzah, thereupon, boldly declared
that he, too, despised the stony gods and challenged Abu Jahl to do
anything at all about it. Hamzah loudly recited the Islamic declaration
of faith: “There is no god but the One and only God, and Muhammad is the
prophet and messenger of God,’ thus publicly announcing his acceptance
of the Islamic creed. Ever since then, Hamzah proved to be a staunch
follower of Islam till the last moment of his life. When he was martyred
at Uhud, which will be discussed later, he was given the title of
*sayyid al-shuhada,* “Master of the Martyrs,’ a title which remained his
till the martyrdom of Muhammad's younger grandson Husain…

Hamzah's conversion was surely a great victory for the Prophet in
particular and for the small band of Muslim believers in general
especially at that very juncture when they so badly needed a valiant
supporter to defend them and to rally their cause. Following the
conversion of Hamzah, the Prophet, accompanied by some of his followers,
ventured twice to offer his prayers at the Ka’ba publicly. There was
also no need any longer (at least for the time being) to conduct secret
meetings at the house of al-Arqam.

Attempts to Kill Muhammad (615 A.D.)
------------------------------------

Now we have reached the sixth year after the Declaration of Prophethood
(615/616 A.D.). In spite of the persecution and exodus of some people,
the Prophet was laboring quietly but incessantly to wean his people from
the worship of idols.

Once, on the suggestion of Abu Bakr, the Prophet came into Al-Masjid
al-Haram and Abu Bakr started a lecture. Quraish violently stopped him
and the Prophet had to once more take refuge in the house of al-Arqam
near the hill of Safa. (Now, that house has been included into the
extension of al-Masjid al-Haram where the Ka’ba, the Muslims' *qibla*,
is housed).’Omar ibn al-Khattab accepted Islam in those days. How did
’Omar accept Islam?

Abu Jahl set a reward for one hundred camels or one thousand ounces of
gold for anyone who brought him the head of his nephew Muhammad. Abu
Jahl was the maternal uncle of ’Omar ibn al-Khattab who aspired to win
this coveted prize. He was 33 years old. Armed by his sword, he went to
the house of al-Arqam where Muhammad and the Muslims used to meet. On
his way, he met Sa’d ibn Abul-Waqqas to whom he confided that he
intended to kill Muhammad, not knowing that Sa’d had already accepted
Islam!

Sa’d first warned ’Omar against committing such a crime, reminding him
that he would do better taking care of his sister and her husband who
had both embraced Islam. ’Omar now decided to go after his sister and
brother-in-law instead of pursuing his attempt to kill Muhammad. Having
reached his sister's house, he over-heard a recitation of the Holy
Qur'an by Khabbab ibn ‘Arrat who was then teaching the Holy Qur'an to
Amina, ‘’Omar's sister, and to Sa’eed ibn Zayd, her husband. ‘’Omar
abruptly entered the house and proceeded directly to Sa’eed with whom he
wrestled, throwing him down on his back and sitting on his chest with
the intention to kill him. It was then that Amina interceded and was
slapped so hard that she bled, yet she, in a fit of anger, cried out, “O
son of al-Khattab! Do what you sought to do, for verily I (too) have
changed my faith!’ She admitted that both she and her husband were
adherents to the Islamic faith.

Feeling ashamed of having driven his sister to such impudence, ‘’Omar
stood aside and asked her to recite to him what she was learning. She
rectied the first 14 verses of Surat Taha (Chapter 20) with such
solemnity that the very core of ‘’Omar's heart was moved. Here are those
verses:

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful***  
***Ta Seen Meem. These are the verses of the Book that makes (things)
clear. We recite to you from the account of Moses and Pharaoh with the
truth for people who believe. Surely Pharaoh exalted himself in the land
and made its people into parties, weakening one party from among them;
he slaughtered their sons and let their women live; surely he was one of
the mischief-makers. And We desired to bestow a favour upon those who
were deemed weak*** ***in the land, and to make them the Imams, and to
make them the heirs, and to grant them power in the land, and to make
Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts see from them what they feared. And We
inspired to the mother of Moses saying: Nurse him, then when you fear
for him, cast him into the river and do not fear, nor should you grieve;
surely We will bring him back to you and make him one of the Messengers.
And Pharaoh's family took him up so that he might be an enemy and a
(source of) grief for them; surely Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts
were wrongdoers. And Pharaoh's wife said: A refreshment of the eye to me
and to you! Do not slay him; maybe he will be useful to us, or we may
take him for a son, and they did not perceive. And the heart of the
mother of Moses was free (from anxiety); she would have almost disclosed
it had We not strengthened her heart so that she might be of the
believers.*****(Quran, 20:1-10)**

‘’Omar was quite amazed at the excellence and beauty of the language
which had such a supernatural effect on him, one which he could no
longer resist. Finally, he asked both of them to take him and introduce
him to Muhammad. Khabbab ibn ‘Arrat, the teacher who had hidden upon
seeing ’Omar approaching, now came out. The whole group went to
al-Arqam's house.

‘Omar met Hamzah at the door. ’Omar was brough into the presence of the
Prophet. ‘’Omar was so over-awed that he could not help shuddering as he
stood before the Prophet. The kind and gentle Prophet caught ‘’Omar by
the hand and said to him, “Will you not cease, O ‘’Omar, till God sends
upon you a calamity and a chastisement such as the one He sent upon
al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah?!’ He invited ‘’Omar to accept Islam, which he
did. ‘’Omar's conversion to Islam took place only three days after
Hamzah had embraced the Islamic creed; six years had passed since the
inception of the Prophet's historic mission.

Al-Walid Ibn Al-Mughirah
------------------------

What calamity was the Prophet referring to above and what
chastisement?  
 Al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah, father of the famous Khalid ibn al-Walid, was
a man of experience and cunning, a senior among Arab seniors of his
time, a man of great wealth according to the testimony of the Holy
Qur'an as we read in Surat al-Muddaththir (Chapter 74 of the Holy
Qur'an). All the clans of Quraish used to collectively share the expense
of the covering sheet of the Ka’ba one year, and in the next year,
al-Walid would pay the entire expense all by himself. In Mecca alone, he
had ten sons and ten slaves, and each one of his slaves used to trade in
a merchandise valued at one thousand dinars, each dinar weiging one
*qintar*, talent, of gold (equivalent to four thousand dinars).

He used to always ridicule Prophet Muhammad. The Prophet used quite
often to recite the Holy Qur'an (and sometimes he would ask others to
recite it in his presence). The Quraishis assembled at the house of
al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah and said to him, “O ‘Abd al-Shams! What is this
that Muhammad is saying? Is it poetry, sorcery, or oratory?!’ “Let me
hear it myself,’ said he, going close to where Muhammad was as he
recited the Qur'an. “O Muhammad!’ said al-Walid, “Recite to me some of
your poetry.’ The Prophet said, “It is not poetry; it is the speech of
Allah with which He blessed His angels and prophets.’ “Recite some of it
for me,’ said al-Walid. The Messenger of Allah recited these verses of
Surat Ha-Meem al-Sajda (Chapter 41 of the Holy Qur'an):

***In the Name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.***  
***Ha Meem. (This is) a revelation from the most Beneficent, the most
Merciful, God: a Book of which the verses are made plain, an Arabic
Qur'an for a people who know: a herald of glad tidings and a warner, but
most of them turn aside, so they hear not. And they say: Our hearts***
***are under coverings from that to which you call us, and there is a
heaviness in our ears, and a veil hangs between us and you, so do
(whatever you please), we, too, are doing (whatever pleases us). Say: I
am only a mortal like you; it is revealed to me that your God is one
God; therefore, follow the right way to Him and ask His forgiveness, and
woe unto the polytheists, those who do not give*** **zakat*****, and
they do not believe in the hereafter. (As for) those who believe and do
good deeds, they shall surely have a reward never to be curtailed. Say:
What?! Do you indeed disbelieve in Him Who created the earth in two
periods, and do you set up equals with Him?! That is the Lord of the
Worlds. And He made in it mountains above its surface, and He blessed
therein and made therein its foods, in four perioods, alike for the
seekers. Then He directed Himself (His attention) to the heavens and it
is a vapor, so He said to it and to the earth: Come both willingly or
unwillingly. They both said: We come willingly. So He ordained them
seven heavens in two periods, and revealed in every heavens its affairs,
and We adorned the lower heavens with brilliant stars and (made it) to
guard; that is the decree of the Mighty, the Knowing. But if they turn
aside, then say: I have warned you of a scourge like the scourge of (the
people of)*** ***‘Ad and (the people of) Thamud.*** **(Qur'an,
41:1-13)**

When the Prophet finished reciting the last verse quoted above, al-Walid
shuddered and his hair stood up. He went home without giving Quraish an
answer.  
 Quraish, therefore, went to Abu Jahl and said, “O Abu al-Hakam! ‘Abd
al-Shams is inclined towards Muhammad's creed; have you seen how he did
not come to us with a follow-up?’ Abu Jahl went to him and said, “O
uncle! You have caused our heads to stoop down in humiliation and have
exposed us and made our enemies happy on our account by you inclining
towards Muhammad's creed.’ Al-Walid said, “I have not inclined to his
creed, but I heard something he said which is quite weighty, a speech
because of which the skins shudder.’ “Is it an address that he
delivered?’ asked Abu Jahl.

Al-Walid said, “No, it is not, for an address is a continuous speech,
and this is prose some parts of which are not similar to others.’ “Is it
poetry?’ asked Abu Jahl. “No,’ al-Walid answered, “for I have heard all
types of the Arabs' poetry; it is not poetry.’ “Then what is it?’ asked
Abu Jahl. “Let me think about it,’ answered al-Walid. On the next day,
he was asked again, “O ‘Abd al-Shams! What do you say about our query?’
He said, “Tell people that it is sorcery, for this will affect people's
hearts better.’ It is then that the Almighty revealed the following
verses to express His Wrath at what al-Walid had attributed to Him and
to His Prophet:

***Leave Me and him whom I created alone and gave him vast riches, and
sons dwelling in his presence, and I adjusted affairs for him
adjustably; and yet he desires that I should add more! By no means!
Surely he opposes Our Signs. I will make a distressing punishment
overtake him. Surely he reflected and guessed, but may he be cursed how
he guessed! Again, may he be cursed how he guessed! Then he looked, then
he frowned and scowled, then he turned back and was big with pride, then
he said: This is naught but sorcery narrated (from others); this is
naught but the word of a mortal. I will cast him into hell. And what
will make you realize what hell is? It leaves naught, nor does it spare
aught. It scorches the mortal. Over it are nineteen
(keepers).*****(Qur'an, 74:11-30)**

Muhammad Frustrates Quraish
---------------------------

Yet because of the prestige of Abu Talib, Quraish did not dare to kill
the Prophet. But they were making him suffer as much affliction as
possible. No less was the heartache caused to him by the sufferings of
the helpless Muslims. He himself said: “No prophet was ever made to
suffer such afflictions as I was.’

All along, Islam was gaining adherents not only from Quraish but also
from the neighbouring tribes. The oligarchy of Mecca was now desperately
trying to stem the movement.  
 The forbearance of the Prophet was making Quraish wonder as to why a
man should put himself in such a precarious situation. Their outlook was
materialistic, their ideals were: wealth, beauty and power. They,
naturally, ascribed the same motives to the Prophet.

‘Otbah ibn Rabi’ah, father-in-law of Abu Sufyan, was sent to him to
convey the message of Quraish: “Muhammad! If you want power and
prestige, we will make you the overlord of Mecca. Or do you want
marriage in a big family? You may have the hand of the fairest maiden in
the land. Do you want hoards of silver and gold? We can provide you with
all these and even more. But you should forsake your nefarious preaching
which implies that our forefathers, who were worshipping these deities
of ours, were fools.’

Quraish were almost certain that Muhammad would respond favourably to
this offer. But the Prophet recited Sura 41 in reply which, *inter
alia*, contained the following warning:

***“But if they turn away, then say: I have warned you of a thunderbolt
like the thunderbolt of the people of*** ***‘Ad and of the Thamud’***
**(Qur'an, 41:13).**

‘Otbah was overwhelmed with this ringing warning. He did not accept
Islam (till death overtook him) but advised Quraish to leave Muhammad
alone and to see how he would fare with other tribes. Quraish said that
he, too, was bewitched by Muhammad.

Then a deputation was sent to Abu Talib. They demanded that Abu Talib
should either persuade his nephew to desist from his mission or hand him
over to suffer the extreme penalty or be prepared to fight the whole
tribe. Finding the odds too heavy against him, Abu Talib said to the
Prophet: “O son! Do not put such a burden on my shoulders which I am
unable to bear.’ The Prophet's reply to his uncle gives an indication of
his indomitable will, profound trust in God, and confidence in his
Mission. Said he:

*O uncle! If they placed the sun on my right hand and the moon on my
left to persuade me to renounce my work, verily I would not desist
therefrom till God makes manifest His cause or I perish in the attempt.*

Having said this, he was overwhelmed with grief. Abu Talib was moved by
this reply and said: “By Allah, Quraish can never reach thee in spite of
their great number till I am buried in the earth. Therefore, pronounce
what order thou hast; nobody can do any harm to thee; be happy with this
(promise) and keep thy eyes cool (i.e. be consoled).’

In their final attempt, they took a young man, ‘Ammarah ibn al-Walid, to
Abu Talib, offering to exchange him with Muhammad. They said to him:
“This young man is a well-known poet of the tribe; he is also very
handsome and wise. You better exchange Muhammad with him. You may adopt
him as your son: he will be a good helper to you. And give us your
Muhammad; we will kill him. Thus, you will not suffer any loss because
you will have ‘Ammarah in place of Muhammad, and by eliminating
Muhammad, all this strife and friction in the tribe will come to an
end.’

Abu Talib was extremely furious on hearing this outrageous proposal. His
voice was raised in wrath as he said: “What a worst bargain you have
proposed! Why, you want me to give you my son, so that you may kill him,
and are giving me your son so that I should feed him and look after
him?! Go away! This bargain is nothing if not foolishness.’

Clans of Hashim and Muttalib Sanctioned (616 A.D.)
--------------------------------------------------

Frustrated, the idolaters decided to ostracize the whole clans of Hashim
and Muttalib and thus destroy them completely. Urged by Abu Sufyan, the
heads of the different opposing families decided to form a league in
order to sever all ties with Muhammad, his followers, and Banu Hashim
altogether. An agreement, therefore, was signed seven years after the
inception of the Prophet's mission (in about 616 A.D.) to implement a
boycott[^2]. It was written by Mansur ibn ‘Ikrimah, signed by forty of
Quraish's chieftains then sealed. In order to give it an air of
solemnity, it was hung on the Ka’ba. One of he Meccan dignitaries,
namely Mut’im ibn ‘Adiyy ibn Nawfal ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib ibn ‘Abd Munaf,
refused to sign it, saying that it was unjust.

The Prophet was now 47 years old. The agreement said that they would
neither take the daughters of these two clans nor will they give them
their daughters in marriage; they would neither sell anything to them
nor buy anything from them. Not only that, they would not have any
contact with them nor even allow any food or drink to reach them.

“This boycott would continue till these clans agree to hand over
Muhammad to Quraish,’ it stated.

Abu Talib had no alternative but to take these two clans (who had always
stood together) into the valley called Shi’b Abu Talib. All members of
Banu Hashim, with the exception of Abu Lahab and his family, were now
lodged there. It was a place in Mount Hajun which belonged to Abu Talib.
There were 40 adults in the clans. For three long years, they were
beleaguered. It had begun in Muharram, 7th year of Bi’that (Declaration
of Prophethood) and continued up to the beginning of the 10th year.

They were made to undergo the most acute hardships and privations, so
much so that at times they had nothing but tree leaves to sustain them.
Only twice a year did they dare to come out: in the months of Rajab and
Thul-Hijjah, when every type of violence was taboo according to the
Arabian custom. If any relative sent them any food, and the news leaked
out, that relative was publicly insulted and put to shame. Quraishites
used to express their pleasure on hearing the cries of the hungry
children.

During the entire time, however, Muhammad did not stop his mission. He
used to go out during the pilgrimage season to meet with Arab tribesmen
and to say to them, “Let me recite for you from the Book of your Lord,
and your reward shall be Paradise.’ But Abu Lahab was always behind him.
“Do not agree to listen to him,’ Abu Lahab would then tell those
tribesmen, “He is nephew, and he is a lying sorcerer[^3].’

Abul-’as ibn al-Rabee’, husband of Zainab daughter of Khadija and
Muhammad's step-daughter, used to bring his camels laden with wheat and
dates to the entrance of the Shi’b at night, telling them to proceed.
They would enter the Shi’b, and Banu Hashim would unload them[^4].

Some Miracles of The Prophet (618 A.D.)
---------------------------------------

Books have already been written detailing the miracles performed by
Prophet Muhammad. One of the best references detailing the Prophet's
miracles is no doubt *Bihar al-Anwar* by *‘allama* al-Majlisi. As many
as two hundred and four pages, that is, from page 225 to page 421, Vol.
15, narrate numerous incidents involving the Prophet performing
miracles. Surely there is no room here to quote all or even some of
them, yet reference to the Prophet's miracles has been made throughout
this book: The early childhood of the Prophet and his trips to Syria,
the Prophet at the cave of Mount Thawr, the story of Umm Ma’bad, the
incidents of the physicians who tried to “cure’ the Prophet of his
alleged “madness,’ and, most importantly, the miracle of the Holy
Qur'an, his very greatest miracle, which concludes this Chapter and this
book as a whole. Here is one more for the kind reader:

Among the earliest converts to Islam were some princes or heads of
tribes. The latter's conversion spurred that of their tribesmen. Here is
the summary of the story of one of those princes who accepted Islam
which can be reviewed on pp. 57-60 of Washington Irving's book *Life of*
*Muhammad*:

Habib ibn Malik, surnamed “the wise’ on account of his vast knowledge
and erudition, was one such convert. He was deeply versed in magic and
the sciences and acquainted with all religions to their very
foundations, having read all that had been written about them and
acquired practical information about them. He had belonged to them all
by turn: First he was a Jew, then Christian, then a Magi[^5]. When he
died, he had reached the age of 140 years. He came to Mecca in 618 A.D.
as head of a powerful host of twenty thousand men, bringing with him his
young daughter Satiha for whom he was praying at the Ka’ba.

She had been struck dumb, deaf, blind and paralyzed in her limbs. Abu
Sufyan and Abu Jahl thought that the presence of this very powerful,
wise and, most importantly, idolatrous prince, being the head of such a
formidable host, was a favourable opportunity to effect the ruin of
Muhammad and his creed. They accordingly informed Habib the wise of the
“heresies’ of the “pretender prophet’ and prevailed upon him to summon
him into his presence at his camp in the Valley of Flints and challenge
him to defend his doctrines. They hoped that his insistence upon error
would draw upon him either banishment or death.

The men of Quraish arrayed themselves in splendid formations on
horseback and on foot, having put on their best, led by Abu Sufyan and
Abu Jahl. Habib the wise was seated in pomp and splendor under a tent of
crimson on a throne of ebony inlaid with ivory and sandal-wood and
covered with plates of gold.

When summoned to attend this formidable tribunal, Muhammad was at home
with his wife Khadija (and the date was two years before her death which
took place in 620 A.D.). Khadija was alarmed, and so were her daughters,
who were visiting her. They hung about Muhammad's neck weeping and
lamenting, thinking that he was going to a certain death. But he gently
calmed their fears and bade them place their trust in Allah, their
Protector and his.

Unlike Abu Sufyan and Abu Jahl, he approached the scene of trial in
simple guise clad in a white garment with a black turban and a mantle
which had belonged to his grandfather ‘Abdul-Muttalib and which had been
woven in ‘Aden, southern Arabia. His hair floated on his shoulders, the
mysterious light of prophecy beamed from his countenance. Although he
had not anointed his beard, nor did he use any perfume at the moment[^6]
except a little musk and camphor for his moustache, yet wherever he
passed, a bland of sweet smell diffused itself all around him, being the
fragrant emanation from his own holy person.

A silent awe fell upon the vast assembly as the Prophet approached. Not
a murmur, not even a whisper could be heard; even the very brute animals
were charmed to silence. The neighing of the steed, the bellowing of the
camel, and the braying of the ass were all mute.

The venerable Habib received him graciously. His first question was
direct and to the point: “They say that you pretend to be a prophet sent
by God. Is it so?’ “Even so,’ replied Muhammad. “Allah has sent me to
proclaim the veritable faith,’ he continued. “Good!,’ rejoiced the sage,
“but every prophet has produced a proof of his mission by signs and
miracles. Noah had his rainbow, Solomon his mysterious ring, Abraham the
fire of the furnace that became cool at his command[^7], Isaac the ram
which was sacrificed in his stead, Moses his wonder-working rod, and
Jesus brought the dead to life and appeased the tempests with a word.
If, then, you are really a prophet, show us a miracle in proof.’

Muhammad's followers trembled for him when they heard this request,
while Abu Jahl clapped his hands and extolled the sagacity of Habib the
wise. But the Prophet rebuked Abu Jahl with scorn. “Peace! Dog of your
race!’ exclaimed Muhammad, “Disgrace of your kindred and of your tribe!’
He then calmly proceeded to carry out Habib's wish.

The first miracle demanded of Muhammad was to reveal what Habib had
inside his tent, and why he had brought it to Mecca. Muhammad bent
towards the earth and traced figures upon the sand. Then he raised his
head and replied, “O Habib! You have brought here your daughter Satiha,
deaf and dumb, lame and blind, in the hope of obtaining relief of
Heaven. Go to your tent; speak to her, and hear her reply, and come to
know that God is All-Powerful.’

The aged prince hastened to his tent. His daughter met him with light
step and extended arms, pefect in all her faculties! Her eyes were
beaming with joy, her face clothed with smiles, and she was more
beautiful than the moon in an unclouded night!

The second miracle demanded by Habib was that the Prophet should cover
the noontide heavens with supernatural darkness and cause the moon to
appear upon the top of the Ka’ba. The Prophet prayed. Instantly,
complete darkness covered the daylight and the glorious orb of the moon
shone above the sanctuary. The Prophet made a sign with his finger and
the orb was divided into two halves so that Mount Abu Qubays stood
between them. After a while, he again made a sign and both halves were
reunited.

More details can be reviewed in the famous work titled *Al-Mawahib
al-Laduniyya* which includes names of eyewitnesses. As a matter of fact,
the Prophet caused the moon to be rent asunder into two halves in
response to his command on two different occasions. The list of
eyewitnesses who saw such miracles includes: Ibn Mas’ud al-Aswad, Anas
ibn Malik, Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Abdullah ibn ‘’Omar ibn al-Khattab, Huthyafah
al-Yemani, Jubayr ibn Mut’im, Ali ibn Abu Talib, and Abu Huthayfah
al-Arhabi.

The prince, four hundred and seventy of his followers, and a number of
Meccans, all embraced the Islamic creed there and then to the outrage of
both Abu Jahl and Abu Sufyan and the infidels who rallied behind them.
This incident took place five years before the Hijra, that is, in 618
A.D., two years before the death of Abu Talib, Muhammad's uncle and
protector.  
 Imam Ali son of Muhammad has said,

Al-Harith ibn Kildah al-Thaqafi was the most skilled physician of the
Thaqif tribe. He came once to the Messenger of Allah and said, “O
Muhammad! I have come to heal you from your madness, for I have treatted
many madmen and healed them all.’ The Messenger of Allah said to him,
“You yourself are doing what madmen do, yet you attribute madness to
me!’ Al-Harith asked him, “What madness have I done?’ “Your own
attributing madness to me,’ the Prophet answered, “without first
examining me or putting me to the test, and without looking into my
truth or falsehood.’ Al-Harith said, “Have I not come to know about your
madness from the claim you have put forth to prophethood of which you
are not capable?’

The Messenger of Allah said, “And your own claim that I am incapable of
it is another act typical of madmen! This is so because you did not ask
me why I put forth such a claim, nor did you demand any proof so that
you would conclude that in the lack of proof, I am incapable of it.’
Al-Harith said, “You have said the truth; I should test you by a miracle
I require you to produce; so, if you are truly a Prophet, call that tree
(and it was a huge one very deeply rooted) to come forth. If it comes to
you, I will conclude that you are, indeed, the Messenger of Allah, and I
shall testify to you to the same. Otherwise, you are the same mad person
about whom I have been informed.’ The Messenger of Allah raised his
hands to that tree and beckoned to it to come forward. The tree was
uprooted at once, and it came to him boring a huge hole in the ground
like a river canal till it came near the Messenger of Allah and spoke in
an articulate voice saying, “Here I am, O Messenger of Allah! What do
you order me to do?’

The Messenger of Allah said to it, “I order you to testify to my
Prophethood after testifying to the Unity of Allah and then to testify
to this Ali as the Imam, and that he is the one upon whom I depend, my
supporter and helper, my pride and dignity, and that had it not been for
him, Allah, the most Exalted and the most Sublime, would not have
created anything at all.’ The tree spoke out thus: “I testify that there
is no god except Allah, the One Who has no partner at all, and I further
testify that you, Muhammad, are His Servant and Messenger; He sent you
in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner and a caller to Allah
by His permission and a lantern of light. And I testify that Ali, your
cousin, is your Brother in creed and the one who is the most informed of
Allah's creation of the creed and the one whose portion of promoting
Islam is the very greatest, that he is your supporter and helper, the
one who subdues your foes and helps your friends, the gate of your
knowledge in your nation.

And I further testify that your friends, those who befriend him and who
are antagonistic towards his enemies, are the stuff of Paradise, and
that his enemies who befriend his foes and who are antagonistic towards
his friends, are the stuff of the Fire.’ The Messenger of Allah at that
juncture looked at al-Harith ibn Kildah and said, “O Harith! Is anyone
who produces such a miracle regarded as a madman?!’ Al-Harith ibn Kildah
said, “No, by Allah, O Messenger of Allah! But I do testify that you are
the Messenger of Allah and the master of all creation.’ His conviction
proved to be firm[^8].

Here is another testimony by Imam al-Hasan al-’Askari:

As for the mountains, the rocks, and the stones saluting him, when the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny, abandoned trading in Syria, spending all his earnings by way of
charity, all what Allah Almighty bestowed upon him of wealth from those
trade trips, he used to go daily to the Hira cave. He would ascend it
and look from its height at the Signs of the Mercy of Allah and the
norms of the wonders of His Mercy and the beauty of His wisdom. He would
look at the heavens and the countries of the earth and of the seas, at
the deserts and the valleys.

So he would derive wisdom from those norms and would remember his Lord
through those Signs and worship Allah as He should be worshipped. When
he became fully forty years old, Allah looked at his heart and found it
the best of hearts, the most honourable, the most submissive to Him the
most obedient. So He opened the gates of the heavens, and Muhammad kept
looking at them. He permitted the angels to desced as Muhammad looked
on. And He ordered Mercy to descend upon him from the leg of the ‘Arsh
to Muhammad's head, overwhelming it. He looked at Gabriel, the trusted
spirit, the one circled by light, the peacock of angels, who descended
to him, and he held him and shook him saying, “O Muhammad! Read (or
Recite)!’ He said, “What should I read?!’

He said, “O Muhammad! Read (or Recite) in the Name of your Lord Who
created…’ Then he inspired him whatever His Lord, the Sublime, the most
Exalted One, wanted to inspire him. Then he (Gabriel) ascended. Fever
overtook him and he was greatly upset that Quraish would call him a liar
and would attribute madness to him, and that the demons possessed him
although he was, from the very beginning, the most wise of Allah's
creation, the most honoured of His beings, and the most hated thing to
him were: Satan and the deeds and statements of mad people.

Allah, the most Exalted and the most Sublime, therefore, wanted to
please him and to encourage him, so He permitted the mountains, the
rocks, and the rain to speak to him. Whenever he reached any of them, it
would say to him, “Assalamo ‘Alaikom, O Muhammad! Assalamo ‘Alaikom, O
friend of Allah! Assalamo ‘Alaikom, O Messenger of Allah! Good news to
you! Allah, the most Exalted and the most Great, favoured you,
beautified you, showered you with His honours, and preferred you over
all His creation, the first and the last! Let not Quraish's accusation
of your being mad and deviated from their creed grieve you, for virtuous
is the one who is favoured by the Lord of the Worlds, and honourable is
the one who is honoured by the Creator of all creation!

Do not be grieved when Quraish and the arrogant ones from among the
Arabs belie you, for your Lord will bestow upon you the ultimate of all
favours, and He will raise you to the most lofty of stations, and He
will bring bliss and happiness to your friends and will appoint Ali ibn
Abu Talib as your *wasi* who will disseminate your knowledge among the
servants and throughout the lands, through your key and the gate of your
knowledge Ali ibn Abu Talib! He will cool your eyes through your
daughter Fatima, and out of her and of Ali He will bring into the world
al-Hasan and al-Husain, the masters of the youths of Paradise!

He will disseminate your creed throughout the land and will best honour
those who love you and who love your brother, and He will place in your
hand the standard of praise, so you will place it in the hand of your
brother Ali, so much so that each and every prophet, testifier to the
truth, and martyr will be in a status lower than his. He shall be their
leader, all of them, into the Gardens of bliss!’ The Prophet used to
wonder, “Lord! Who is this Ali ibn Abu Talib whom you have promised me?
(Ali was then a child) Is he the same as my cousin?’ When Ali moved a
little, he asked again, “Is he this one?!’ Whenever he thus inquired,
the Scales of greatness would descend upon him, so Muhammad and Ali
would be weighed in one of them and all his nation in the other, and
their scale would weigh heavier. The Messeger of Allah then knew exactly
who he was and what his attribute was. And Muhammad was addressed within
thus: “O Muhammad! This Ali ibn Abu Talib is the one whom I chose to
support this religion (Islam), and he weighs heavier than all members of
your nation with the exception only of your own self.’

This is how Allah expanded the Prophet's breast in order to carry out
the Message, thus making the burnden of struggling with the nation
lighter, facilitating for him to combat the arrogant ones and the
tyrants of Quraish.[^9]

Boycott Ends (619 A.D.)
-----------------------

For three long years, from 616 to 619 A.D., Muhammad, his small band of
followers, and Banu Hashim, tasted the bitterness of the boycott
enforced by Quraish. During all those years of sufferings, Abu Talib had
only one concern: how to keep the Prophet out of harm's way. Historians
unanimously say that it was the habit of Abu Talib to awaken the Prophet
after all people had gone to sleep and to take him to another place and
order one of his own sons or brothers to sleep in the Prophet's bed
instead. This was done so that if an enemy had seen where Muhammad was
sleeping, and if an attack was made on him at night, his own son or
brother would be killed while the Prophet would be saved. History is
unable to produce another example of such devotion and loyalty. And
imagine that this continued not for one or two days or weeks, but for
three long years.

One day the Prophet said to Abu Talib: “I have been informed by Allah
that the agreement of Quraish has been eaten up by insects, and no
writing has been left therein except the Name of Allah.’  
 Abu Talib never had any doubt about anything Muhammad said.

Thus he came out of his place at once and went to Al-Masjid al-Haram
where Quraish had gathered. As luck would have it, the subject of
discussion was the same boycott. Hisham, son of ‘Amr, Zubayr, and a few
others who were related to Khadija and the clans of Hashim and Muttalib
and whose houses were near the Shi’b of Abu Talib used to hear the cries
of the children day and night. So did Mut’im ibn ‘Adiy, Zam’ah ibn
Aswad, Abul Bakhtari, and a number of other Quraishites. These had
decided to persuade Quraish to abrogate the infamous agreement. The
arguments became very heated and reached a climax when they saw Abu
Talib approaching.

Abu Jahl and others who opposed the idea of abrogating the boycott said:
“Abu Talib is coming! It seems that now he is tired and wants to hand
over Muhammad to us. Thus, the boycott would end to the satisfaction of
us all. Let us keep silent and hear what he wants to say.’ But Abu Talib
had not gone there to surrender but to challenge them. He stood before
the gathering and said: “My son says that the agreement which you had
written has been eaten up by insects, and that nothing remains therein
except the Name of Allah. Now look at that paper. If the news given by
my son is correct, then you must end your injustice and high-handedness;
and if the news is wrong, then we will admit that you were right and we
were wrong.’

The agreement was taken out and opened, and lo! There was nothing left
of it except the Name of Allah in one place!  
 Now Abu Talib's voice thundered on as he condemned them for their
tyranny. Those who wanted that boycott ended said that now there was no
agreement at all to adhere to. Abu Jahl and others tried to outwit them
but failed, so the boycott ended with a total moral victory for Islam
over the infidels.

Abu Talib and Khadija Die (620 A.D.)
------------------------------------

The sufferings and privations of those three years took their toll.
Within nine months, Abu Talib (533 - 620 A.D.) died at the age of 87 in
the middle of Shawwal or Thul-Qi’dah, ten years after the *bi’that* and
shortly after him Khadija (465 - 620 A.D.) also left this world.
Muhammad wept bitterly at Khadija's and Abu Talib's graves and put on
black clothes as is the custom of the Arabs. He was so grieved that he
called that year “‘amul-Huzn’ (The Year of Sorrow).

With the disappearance of their protecting influence, the Meccans had a
free-hand and redoubled their persecution. These two deaths, at a time
when the Prophet was in dire need of both, left a very deep impression
on him. How valuable their support was may be judged from the fact that
Allah has counted them as two of His highest Graces and Favours upon the
Prophet. He says in Surat 93:

***Did He not find thee an orphan and give thee shelter, and He found
thee lost (in thy tribe) and guided (them towards thee), and found thee
in need and made thee free from want?*** **(Qur'an, 93:6-8)**

All the commentators of the Qur'an say that the first *ayat* means: “Did
He not find you an orphan and give you shelter with Abu Talib?’, and the
last *ayat* means: “He found you poor and made you rich through
Khadija.’ If we think about the early history of Islam, without the
prestigious influence of Abu Talib, we cannot see how the life of the
Prophet could have been saved. And if we were to take out the wealth of
Khadija, we cannot think how the poor Muslims could have been sustained,
and how the two *hijras* to Abyssinia could have been financed.

It is not the place here to fully explain the share of Abu Talib in the
foundation of Islam. The best tribute, therefore, would be to quote some
of his poetry lines which overflow with love for, and devotion to,
Muhammad. Abu Talib has said these poetic lines:

And you have called me and I know that you are truthful, and, in fact,
you were truthful and trustworthy from the beginning. And I certainly
know that the religion of Muhammad is the best of all the religions of
the world… Did you not know that we have found Muhammad the Messenger of
Allah the same as was Musa (Moses)? It is so written in the
scriptures.  
 Compare this poetry with this *ayat* of the Qur'an:

***Verily, We have sent you a Messenger to be a witness over you as We
had sent a Messenger to Pharaoh.*** **(Qur'an, 73:15)**

Somewhere else Abu Talib says these poetic lines:

And the Lord of the world has strengthened him with His help, so he
proclaimed the religion which is true, not false. Do not they know that
our son is not doubted by us and that we do not care about the false
sayings (of his foes)?

Abu al-Fida', in *Kitabul-Mukhtasar fi Akhbaril-Bashar,* states that
some of the poetic verses composed by Abu Talib prove the fact that he
had accepted the Prophethood of the Prophet from the core of his heart.
A translation of a few poetic verses of his is given here:

You have called me (to Islam) and I believe that you are truthful,
straightforward and trustworthy. And there is no doubt in my belief that
the religion of Muhammad is the best of all the religions of the world.
By God! As long as I am alive, not a single person from among Quraish
can harm you.

Abu Talib asked his son Ali once, “What is this religion which you are
following?’ Ali said: “I believe in Allah and in His Messenger, and I
pray with him.’ Abu Talib said: “Surely Muhammad will not call us but to
a good thing. Never leave Muhammad; follow him faithfully.’  
 Once he saw the Prophet praying, with Khadija and Ali behind him.
Ja’far was with Abu Talib. Abu Talib told Ja’far to go ahead and to join
them in their prayer service.

When Hamzah accepted Islam in the sixth year of *bi’that* (inception of
the Prophetic mission), Abu Talib was over-joyed and said these poetic
lines:  
 Be patient, O Abu Ya’li (Hamzah), on account of the religion of Ahmad.
And proclaim the religion with courage, may Allah help you. I was glad
when you said that you were a *mu'min* (believer). So help the Messenger
of Allah in the cause of Allah. And announce to Quraish your decision,
and tell them that Ahmad was never a sorcerer.

If any reader wishes to examine these poetry lines, one of the
references is al-Majlisi's *Bihar al-Anwar*.

It was Abu Talib's policy to keep Quraish guessing and in suspense about
his true belief: Had he announced that he had accepted the religion of
Muhammad, his position as a respected leader of the tribe would have
been undermined, and then he could not extend his protection to the
Prophet. Thus, while always declaring his firm belief that Muhammad
could not tell anything but the truth, exhorting his children and
brothers to follow Muhammad's religion, he assiduously refrained from
declaring in so many words that he himself was a Muslim. Thus, he
maintained his position with the hierarchy of Quraish, protecting the
Prophet through his influence.

Even on his death-bed, while there was still a chance that he might
recover, he very diplomatically announced his faith in such a way that
Quraish could not understand what he meant. When they asked him on which
religion he was dying, he replied: “On the religion of my forefathers.’
As explained before, ‘Abdul-Muttalib and all his ancestors were
followers of the Divine religion; hence, one cannot but admire Abu
Talib's prudence and wisdom in that difficult situation.

During the last moments of his life, the Prophet advised him to recite
the *kalima* loudly (as is the custom of the Muslims). ‘Abbas, who had
not accepted Islam yet, saw Abu Talib's lips moving. He put his ears
near Abu Talib then said to the Prophet: “O nephew! Abu Talib is saying
what you wanted him to say!’

‘Allamah ibn Abil-Hadid, the Mu’tazilite scholar, has said the following
poetic lines:  
 If it were not for Abu Talib and his son (Ali), the religion of Islam
could not take any shape, nor could it find its feet. Thus, Abu Talib in
Mecca gave shelter and protected (him), and Ali in Medina rubbed
shoulders with death.

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq said: “The ancestors of the Prophet will be in
Paradise and ‘Abdul-Muttalib will enter Paradise having upon him the
light of the Prophets and the dignity of kings, and Abu Talib will be in
the same group.’

There are some ignorant writers the extent of whose knowledge is very
limited (“Little knowledge is a dangerous thing[^10]‘) and who cast
doubt about Abu Talib's faith, citing a mass of fabricated *ahadith*.
Abu Talib certainly did not do anything for them to warrant such vicious
and uncalled for publicity; so, in my view, their real target is not Abu
Talib but his son Ali who exposed their hypocrisy to the world. Such
writers are the remnant of the followers of Abu Sufyan, Mu’awiyah, and
Yazid, bitter enemies of Ahl al-Bayt, the Prophet's pure and holy
family. Unfortunately, there are many of them living among us even
today, and most likely they will always remain so…

As for Khadija, she was so much respected that the Meccans called her
*tahira* (the pure one). All the children of the Prophet were born by
Khadija except Ibrahim who was the son of Muhammad and Maria (Mary) the
Copt[^11]. Khadija was the first person to testify to the truth of the
Prophet. She spent all her wealth in the cause of Islam. And she was a
source of comfort and consolation to the Prophet.

The Prophet said: “Four women are the supreme-most among the women of
Paradise: Maryam mother of ‘Isa (May mother of Jesus), Asiya wife of
Pharaoh, Khadija bint Khuwaylid, and Fatima bint Muhammad.’

‘Ayisha said: “I never envied any woman as much as I envied Khadija. The
Prophet always remembered her. Whenever any sheep or goat was
slaughtered, the choicest parts were sent to Khadija's relatives and
friends. I used to say, ‘It appears that Khadija was the only woman in
the world.' Hearing this, the Prophet was very much annoyed and said:
“Khadija had many virtues which others do not have.’

She also said: “Once the Prophet remembered her and I said, ‘How long
will you go on remembering a woman so old that she had no teeth in her
mouth? Allah has given you a woman better than her (meaning herself).'
The Prophet was so crossed that the hair of his head was raised. He
said: 'By Allah, I do not have better than Khadija. She believed in me
when others were steeped into infidelity. She testified to my truth when
others rejected my claim. She helped me with her wealth when others
deprived me. And Allah gave me children by her.’ ‘Ayisha says that from
then on she decided not to say any unkind word about Khadija, as we are
told in Vol. 3 of al-Bukhari's *Sahih.*

Khadija was buried at Hajun. Her grave was demolished by the Wahhabi
rulers of Saudi Arabia in 1925 like those of ‘Abdul-Muttalib, Abu Talib
and others.

Muhammad Visits Taif (620 A.D.)
-------------------------------

After the death of Abu Talib and Khadija, finding that the Meccans had
turned a deaf ear to his preaching, the Prophet decided to go to Taif
accompanied by Zayd ibn Harithah, perhaps its people would be more
responsive. But a big disappointment was in store for him. Located about
seventy miles east of Mecca, Taif was a stronghold of idolatry where the
stony statue of al-Lat goddess, whom the pagans regarded as God's wife,
covered with gems and jewels, was believed to be inspired with life.
Muhammad spent a month in Taif only to be scoffed and ridiculed. When he
persisted in his preaching, the people of Taif drove him out of their
city pelting him with stones, causing him to be bruised and wounded. In
this desperate situation, he prayed to God thus as his wounds kept
bleeding:

Allah! I make my complaint to You regarding the feebleness of my
strength, the insignificance of my devices, and my humiliation in the
sight of people. O Most Merciful One! You are the Lord of the oppressed,
You are my Lord. To whom would You entrust my affairs? To a stranger who
would scowl at me? Or to an enemy who would control me?

If you are not displeased with me, then I do not care (about any
hardship), but an ease bestowed by You will be more accommodating to me.
I seek refuge in the light of Your countenance (by which all darkness is
dispersed and all affairs of this world and of the hereafter are kept
straight) from pouncing Your anger or the coming of Your wrath. I seek
your pardon in order that you may be pleased with me. There is no power
nor strength except in You.  
 Grief-stricken, the Prophet returned to Mecca.

Jinns Accept Islam (620 A.D.)
-----------------------------

Jinns are surely hidden from human eyes, but not from the eyes of
prophets and friends of God, and certainly not from the eyes of the
master of the prophets of God, Muhammad. We have written about the jinns
earlier in this book; so, the reader may refer to that part.

On his way back home, Muhammad halted one night at a grove at Nakhla,
where he recited some verses of the Holy Qur'an after having finished
his prayers, as was his habit. A party of seven or nine jinns happened
to pass by as they were en route to Yemen. They were deeply impressed by
the melodious tone of the Prophet, the excellence of the language of the
recitaiton, and the depth of the meaning in those verses. Appearing
before the Prophet, they accepted his doctrines, and when they reached
their destination, they disseminated them among their folks who also
embraced Islam. Let us shed more light on this incident by referring to
the books of exegesis (*tafsir*) of the Holy Qur'an where we read the
following in *Tafsir al-Qummi*:

The Messenger of Allah was reciting the Qur'an in the depth of the night
when a group of jinns happened to be passing by. When they heard the
recitation by the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny, they listened to it attentively. Having seen
that he finished his recitation, they came to the Messenger of Allah,
accepted Islam, believing in him. The Messenger of Allah taught them
Islam's legislative code (the *Shari’a*), whereupon the entire Chapter
(titled “al-Jinn,’ the jinns) was revealed. They used to always return
to the Messenger of Allah from time to time; therefore, the Messenger of
Allah ordered the Commander of the Faithful (Ali) to teach them and to
explain everything to them[^12].

Da'wah Beyond Mecca
-------------------

After his return from Taif, Muhammad reached the cave of Hira where he
stopped, sending Zayd to negotiate with a number of sympathetic Meccans
for protection. He could not venture to enter the city where he knew
fully well that his pagan opponents would not welcome his return. After
prolonged negotiations, Zayd successfully secured the help of Mut’im ibn
‘Adiy, one of those who had sided with Abu Talib in demanding an end to
the sanctions against the Hashemites. He personally went to Muhammad,
offered him security and escorted him to his house in Mecca. Now the
Prophet could appear in public only during the months of Rajab and
Thul-Hijjah to preach the doctrines of Islam to the pilgrims and to the
stubborn Mec­cans.

Yet despite all these disappointments and persecutions, Islam was
spreading in other tribes too, although very slowly and not on a grand
scale. Its simplicity and rationality were such that it only needed to
reach the ears of the people to stir their souls. For thirteen years,
Quraish did their very best to stifle the new religion, but their
opposition itself provided the necessary publicity. Tribes from all
corners of Arabia flocked to Medina during the time of the annual
pilgrimage.

Lest they should be influenced by Muhammad's message, Quraish,
particularly Abu Lahab and Abu Jahl, used to post themselves outside the
city to warn the pilgrims that: “An infidel has been born in our city
who dishonours our idols; he even speaks ill of Lat and ‘Uzza; do not
listen to him.’ People naturally became curious and wanted to know more
about this man. A disciple of the Prophet, recalling his earlier days,
stated: “When I was young, I used to hear from the people going to Mecca
that a person claiming Prophethood had been born there.’

When the news spread, most people laughed and jeered at Muhammad, yet
there were a few seekers of the truth who listened to his message and
were influenced by it. Hafiz Ibn Hajar, in his book *Al-Isabah*,
mentions the names of several companions who had come from Yemen and
other distant places and, after secretly accepting Islam, had gone back
to work among their tribes. The clan of Abu Musa al-Ash’ari of Yemen
accepted Islam in this manner.

Tufail ibn ‘Amr, of the tribe of Daws, was a famous poet who could by
his poetic fervor sway the feelings and attitudes of the Arabs. He had
come into contact with the Prophet and was so enthralled by the
marvelous diction of the Qur'an recited to him that he accepted Islam
instantly. He was able to win some converts in his tribe, but in general
the tribe did not listen to him. He came back to the Prophet and
requested him to curse the Daws, but the Prophet prayed thus: “O God!
Guide the Daws and send them to me (as Muslims)!’ It was not long before
the entire tribe had accepted Islam.

Dhamad ibn Tha’labah was a chief of the Azd tribe and a childhood friend
of the Prophet. He came to Mecca and was told that Muhammad had gone
mad. He approached the Prophet and said that he could cure him. The
Prophet replied, “All praise be to God; I praise Him and seek His
forgiveness. If God were to guide anyone, he cannot go astray, and if He
leaves anyone to stray, none can guide him. I declare that there is no
god but Allah. He is one and has no partner, and further (I declare)
that Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger.’

It is almost impossible to reproduce the vibrating force and captivating
charm of the Arabic text which so much impressed Dhamad that he accepted
Islam immediately and through him his entire tribe submitted to it.
Another physician, namely al-Harith ibn Kildah al-Thaqafi, the most
skilled physician of the Thaqif tribe, attempted to likewise “cure’ the
Prophet of his alleged madness. The reader will come across what went on
between him and the Prophet later in this book *Insha-Allah*.

Abu Tharr of the tribe of Ghifar was one of those who were disgusted
with idol-worship. When he heard about the Prophet, he went to Mecca and
incidentally met Ali with whom he stayed for three days. Ali introduced
him to the Prophet and Abu Tharr accepted Islam. The Prophet advised him
to go back home, but in his zeal he publicly announced in the Ka’ba:
“There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is His Prophet.’

He was given a sound thrashing by Quraish and was rescued by ‘Abbas who
reminded Quraish that their trade caravans passed through routes under
the control of Abu Tharr's tribe. Returning to his tribe, he invited it
to accept Islam. About half of his tribesmen accepted Islam and the rest
followed suit after the Prophet's migration to Medina. Since the Ghifars
were on very friendly terms with the tribe of Aslam, the latter were
influenced by the former and also accepted Islam.

Quite a number of persons had incidentally heard the Qur'an being
recited and were captivated by it. Jubayr ibn Mut’im had come to Medina
to pay ransom for the prisoners of the Battle of Badr. He happened to
hear the Prophet reciting the following verses:

***Or were they created out of naught? Or are they the creators? Or did
they create the heavens and the Earth? Nay, but they have no
certainty.*** **(Qur'an, 52:35-36)**

Jubayr later stated that when he heard these verses, he felt that his
heart was about to soar.

‘Ayisha Engaged to Muhammad (621 A.D.)
--------------------------------------

Abu Bakr could sense the impact of the great loss the Prophet suffered
at the death of his first loving and supportive wife Khadija. He noticed
how his friend Muhammad looked forlon and depressed, and he was awaiting
an opportunity to cheer him up and to cement his friendship with him.
Abu Bakr, therefore, offered to marry his daughter ‘Ayisha, who was born
in 613 A.D., to Muhammad, an offer which Muhammad first politely
declined. But Abu Bakr was not to give up easily.

He kept persuading him till he consented on the condition that the
wedding should be postponed for the time being. ‘Ayisha was thus
formally engaged to Muhammad in 621 A.D. and the wedding took place two
to three years later in 2 A.H./623 A.D. Having seen how his friend Abu
Bakr succeeded in marrying his daughter to Muhammad, ‘’Omar ibn
al-Khattab now expressed his desire that the Prophet should marry his
daughter Hafsa, a desire which was fulfilled a few years later: in 624
A.D. to be exact, as it will be discussed later.

The news that a Prophet had arisen was spreading. A deputation of about
twenty Christians from Nazareth came to meet him and embraced Islam. In
the same year, that is, 621 A.D., when the Prophet was preaching at
Aqaba, a place between Mina and ‘Arafat, six men belonging to the tribe
of al-Khazraj and residing in Yathrib happened to come to Mecca to
perform the pilgrimage. They listened to him attentively. Hearing the
fundamental principles of his faith and discerning his own sentiments,
they were captivated by the truth of his words and immediately embraced
Islam. Upon their return to Yathrib, they disseminated the doctrines of
Islam among their people and announced their conversion to the Islamic
creed, praising Muhammad greatly for his truth, character, affectionate
nature, high moral conduct and attractive personality.

First Pledge of ‘Aqaba (622 A.D.)
---------------------------------

Similarly, in the next year (622 A.D.), at the time of the annual
pilgrimage, twelve Yathribites, who were drawn by curiosity at the
reports given by those six Yathribite converts, came along with five of
the same six Yathribites and undertook a pledge known as the First
Pledge of ‘Aqaba (mountain-pass), so named because it was done in an out
of the way mountain-pass outside Mecca. The pledge was: “We will not
associate anything with God; we will neither steal nor commit adultery
nor fornication; we will not kill our children; we will abstain from
calumny and slander; we will obey the Prophet in everything, and we will
be faithful to him in weal and sorrow.’

Mus’ab ibn ‘Omayr, a grandson of Hashim, and ‘Abdullah ibn Umm Maktum,
who were two of the Prophet's disciples, were sent along with them to
teach them the Qur'an and the fundamentals of Islam. These men were
required to inform the Prophet of their success in their efforts at the
same place in the following pilgrimage season. It is worth mentioning
here that before accepting Islam, Mus’ab ibn ‘Omayr used to enjoy a life
of luxury with his family, being the favourite of his parents. But when
he accepted Islam, his parents and the rest of his family severed all
ties with him, rendering him in all reality without a family. This is a
typical case of most of the early converts to Islam. They were disowned
by their families and tribes and deprived of the most basic needs from
the latter who treated them as though they were now enemies.

On the same day after having accepted Islam at the hands of Mus’ab ibn
‘Omayr, Sa’d ibn Ma’ath, a Meccan dignitary, went to the quarters
inhabited by the offspring of ‘Amr ibn ‘Awf and shouted as loudly as he
could: “O Banu ‘Amr! O Banu ‘Awf! Let no man or woman or a virgin or a
married woman or an old man or a young one stay without coming out! This
day is not the day of a veil or a curtain! Come out!’ When they all came
out of their houses to see what he had to say, he asked their crowd the
following question: “What is my status among you?!’

They said, “You are our master and the one whose word is obeyed among
us; we shall never disobey you; so, order us whatever you please.’ Sa’d
ibn Ma’ath then said, “I shall never speak one word to your men or women
or children unless you testify that: There is no god except Allah, and
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. Praise be to Allah Who has
bestowed upon us such a blessing. It is a blessing about which the Jews
used to talk to us.’ Not a single person in the crowd hesitated to
pronounce this sacred testimony, becoming Muslims, each and every one of
them. Holding and turning Mus’ab ibn ‘Omayr to face him, he said to him,
“Manifest your affair, and invite people to Islam publicly.’[^13]

The period between the First and the Second Pledges was one of anxious
waiting. The Meccans were sternly adamant, the people of Taif had
rejected Muhammad, and the mission was making a slow progress. Yet hope
had been engendered by its diffusion to the distant city of Yathrib and
the conviction was very much there that the truth would ultimately
prevail.

Describing this period, Muir says:  
 “Mahomet, thus holding his people at bay, waiting, in the still
expectation of victory, to outward appearance defenseless, and with his
little band, as it were, in the lion's mouth, yet trusting in his
Almighty's power whose messenger he believed himself to be, resolute and
unmoved, presents a spectacle of sublimity paralleled only in the sacred
records by such scenes as that of the prophet of Israel, when he
complained to his Master, ‘I, even I only, am left.’

Mi'raj: Ascension of The Prophet (622 A.D.)
-------------------------------------------

The date is the 27th of Rajab, twelve years after the inception of the
Prophetic mission. It was then that God Almighty, in His infinite Mercy
and Benevolence, bestowed upon the Prophet the unique distinction of
being lifted to the furthest limit of heaven and of being shown the
gorgeous splendor of the heavens and the universe:

***Glory to (Him) Who took His servant for a journey by night from the
Sacred Mosque (Ka’ba) to the Furthest Mosque (Jerusalem) whose precincts
We have blessed, in order that We might show him some of Our signs, for
He is the Hearer and the Seer.’*****(Qur'an, 17:1)**

There has been a good deal of controversy over the question whether the
ascension (*mi’raj*) was only a vision or an actual bodily journey. The
majority of the traditionists agree that it was a real physical journey,
much like the bodily ascension of Jesus to heaven and the descent of
Adam to earth.

The fact is that this controversy was created by Banu Umayyah whose
interest in Islam was based not on faith but on politics and who did not
like the idea of any miracle of the Prophet gaining ground in the
Muslims' minds. Their department of forgery obliged them in this respect
also. Both Abu Bakr and his daughter ‘Ayisha did not believe in the
Prophet's bodily ascent to heavens, and the Umayyads' department of
fabrication coined *ahadith* casting doubt about such a physical
ascension. The cadre of this department of fabrication forgot that
‘Ayisha was not married to the Prophet when the ascension took place;
she was still living with her family; the Prophet did not marry her
except two years later.

Two “traditions’ from that department are repeatedly cited by the
Christians, the Ahmadis, and a group of Sunnis; these are:

‘Ayisha is supposed to have said that during the whole night of the
Ascension, the body of the Prophet was on the bed.  
 Mu’awiyah said that the *mi’raj* was a “true dream.’

Now the fact is that the *mi’raj* (whatever its interpretation) took
place in Mecca before the Hijra.  
 ‘Ayisha did not enter the house of the Prophet till one year after the
*hijra*. How could she say that she did not miss the body of the Prophet
at that time?!  
 There is only one possible explanation: This “tradition’ was forged by
someone who did not know the chronology of Islamic history. Otherwise,
he could not have attributed this “tradition’ to ‘Ayisha.

Mu’awiyah was such an enemy of the Prophet that 8 years after the
*hijra*, Mecca was conquered without bloodshed and Abu Sufyan, his
father, seeing no alternative, pretended to have accepted Islam.
Mu’awiyah fled to Bahrain and wrote a very nasty letter to his father
condemning him for his acceptance of Islam. It was not till the 9th year
of Hijra that Mu’awiyah brought himself to profess Islam, yet his deeds
belied his words. And the *mi’raj* took place several years before then.
How could he know what the facts of the *Mi’raj* were?! He does not
mention his source of information, and the inference is that there was
no such source.

If you want to witness how politics controlled the version of Islam
professed by the Umayyads, read one more ‘tradition' invented in their
laboratory:  
 The king on the throne of Damascus is ‘Abdul-Malik ibn Marwan. Iraq and
Hijaz are in the hands of ‘Abdullah ibn Zubayr. ‘Abdul-Malik does not
like the idea of the pilgrims of his domain being obliged to go to Mecca
(which is in the enemy's hands); so, he wants to enhance the prestige of
Baitul Maqdis (Jerusalem), which lies within his domain and plans to
establish “hajj’ to Baitul Maqdis. As part of that plan, all previous
declarations that the *Mi’raj* was a dream are forgotten, and a
tradition is forged that the final destination of the journey of *the
mi’raj* was Baitul Maqdis.

Soon thereafter, ‘Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr is defeated and Hijaz comes
under Syrian control; otherwise, we would surely have seen two centers
of *hajj* in the Muslim world!

The footprint of the Prophet is still visible on the stone of a rock at
Jerusalem where the Prophet ascended to heaven. A mosque was built by
caliph ‘’Omar to preserve the memory of the footprint on the stone which
still stands at the same place.

Second Pledge of ‘Aqaba (622/623 A.D.)
--------------------------------------

On their return to Yathrib, the converts to the faith spread the
doctrines of Islam and a large number of Yathribites became adherents to
the faith. In the following year, seventy-three men and two women from
among the converts of Yathrib's Aws and Khazraj tribes, including the
twelve who took the first pledge, accompanied Mus’ab ibn ‘Omayr to the
Prophet together with a Jewish caravan of three to five hundred men
headed by Ibn Ubay in order to accept Islam and to invite the Prophet to
their city. They all swore allegiance to him. This pledge is known as
the Second Pledge of ‘Aqaba. The Prophet took with him his uncle ‘Abbas,
now the head of the family and formally his protector, although not a
Muslim yet. ‘Abbas exhorted the Yathribites to protect the Prophet.

In the Spring of the same year, 13 years after the inception of the
Prophetic mission, an exodus of the believers to Yathrib had already
started. This immigration went on quietly. Within two months, about one
hundred and fifty Meccan Muslims succeeded in reaching Yathrib. Finally,
the open departure of ‘’Omar ibn al-Khattab in the company of twenty
other converts alarmed Quraish a great deal. Fearing none in Mecca,
‘’Omar departed in broad daylight. Both Ali and Abu Bakr, however,
remained with the Prophet in Mecca to keep him company.

Another Attempt to Assassinate The Prophet
------------------------------------------

When the Meccans realized how Islam had struck roots in Yathrib and was
fast spreading there, their animosity knew no bounds. Their chiefs, such
as Abu Jahl, Abu Lahab, Abu Sufyan, and ‘Otbah, gathered at Dar al-Nadwa
and, after rejecting suggestions to imprison or banish Muhammad, they
planned to assassinate him.

***And remember when the unbelievers plotted against you to imprison
you, or to kill you, or to drive you out, they plotted and planned and
Allah, too, planned.*****(Qur'an, 8:30)**

In order to escape the vendetta of Banu Hashim, it was decided that
every clan should provide one man, and that they should collectively
assault the Prophet as soon as he came out of his house. But God had
apprised His Prophet of this plan well in advance through arch-angel
Gabriel who revealed to him these verses:

***And when those who disbelieved devised plans against you that they
might confine you or slay you or drive you out (of their city), and they
devised plans and Allah, too, had arranged a plan, and Allah is the best
of planners.*****(Qur'an, 8:30)**

Gabriel conveyed the Almighty's order to Muhammad to leave Mecca and to
go to Yathrib where the Almighty, as the verse above implies, had
already had a plan for him; surely Allah is the best of planners.
Muhammad informed Ali of this divine command, ordering him to sleep in
his (Prophet's) bed. When Ali heard that his life was to be the ransom
for the Prophet's, he prostrated before Allah to thank Him for this
unique honour. It was the first *sajda* of “shukr’ (prostration of
gratitude) in Islam. The Prophet covered Ali with his own green sheet.
Thus, Ali slept soundly on the Prophet's bed as the Prophet walked out
of the house under the infidels' very noses.

The moment Muhammad stood at his house door, he heard the infidels
saying, “Muhammad claims that if you swear the oath of allegiance to
him, you will rule the Arabs and the non-Arabs. Then, after your death,
you will be resurrected to reside in gardens like the earthly gardens.
And if you do not swear it, you will be slaughtered, then, after your
death, you will be resurrected where there will be a fire for you to
burn you!’ The Prophet responded by saying, “Yes, I say so,’ but they
did not hear him, being busy chatting with each other. Then he took hold
of a handful of dust as he recited the first eight verses of Surat
Ya-Sin. He threw the dust over their heads. None of the enemies saw him
going out. The verses he recited are:

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***  
***Ya-Sin. I swear by the Qur'an (which is) full of wisdom, (that) most
surely you are one of the prophets, on a right course. (This is) a
revelation of the Mighty, the most Merciful. So that you may warn people
whose fathers were not warned, so they are heedles. Certainly the word
has proved true of most of them, so they do not believe. Surely We have
placed chains on their necks, and these reach up to their chins, so they
have their heads raised aloft.(Qur'an, 36:1-8)***

Muhammad had also ordered Ali to return the things which people had
entrusted to him for safe keeping (since burglaries were quite common)
to their respective owners.

The polytheists of Quraishite clans all the time thought that it was the
Prophet who was sleeping and were anxiously waiting to kill him.

According to *Usudul Ghabah* of Ibn Athir al-Jazri, *Ihya' ul* *‘Oloom*
(of al-Ghazali) and *Tarikhul Khamis* of *qadi* Husain al-Diyarbakri,
when Ali slept in Muhammad's bed, God said to arch-angels Gabriel and
Michael, “I establish brotherhood between you two and increase the life
of one of you over that of the other. Having done so, I ask which of you
is prepared to sacrifice his life for his brother?’ Both Gabriel and
Michael heard this address from the Lord but each held his life dearer
than the other's and was not prepared to help his brother by sacrificing
his own life.

God then addressed them again, “Can you not be like Ali ibn Abu Talib?
See, I created brotherhood between Muhammad and Ali, and now Ali is
sleeping in Muhammad's bed determined to sacrifice his own life for his
brother. Now you both go to earth and guard Ali from the mischief of the
enemies.’ Then the two nearest-to-God angels came down and took their
positions near the head and the feet of Ali. Gabriel said: “Hail to
thee! Hail to thee! Who can be like thee, O son of Abu Talib, so that
the Lord is proud of thee and exalts thy virtue before the angels?!’ And
so it happened. When the Prophet was on his way to Yathrib, God revealed
to him the following verse in praise of Ali:

***And amongst men there is one who sells his life seeking the pleasure
of Allah. And Allah is most benevolent to His slaves.*****(Qur'an,
2:207)**

The Prophet went to the mountain of Thawr in the dead of night
accompanied by Abu Bakr and hid in a cave near its summit. This place is
about 5 miles from Mecca.

There are two versions as to how Abu Bakr came to accompany the Prophet.
One narrative says that the Prophet himself went to the house of Abu
Bakr and told him to accompany him.

The other narrative says that when the Prophet went away, Abu Bakr came
there and asked Ali as to where the Prophet was. Ali told him that he
had already left for Yathrib. Abu Bakr went out looking for the Prophet.
The night was dark; therefore, when he came nearer, the Prophet thought
that an infidel was pursuing him. He started going faster and faster,
till his shoe-lace was broken and his toes were badly wounded. Then Abu
Bakr called him. Recognizing his voice, the Prophet stopped. Abu Bakr
caught up with him and asked permission to accompany him. Thus, they
went together till they reached Thawr.

At dawn, the infidels, including Meccan dignitaries such as Abu Jahl,
al-Hakam ibn Abul-’as, ‘Oqbah ibn Mu’eet, al-Nadir ibn al-Harith,
Umayyah ibn Khalaf, Ibn al-Ghaytalah, Zam’ah ibn al-Aswad, Tu’mah ibn
‘Adiy, Abu Lahab, Ubayy ibn Khalaf, and both Nabeeh and Munbih sons of
al-Hajjaj, broke into the Prophet's house.

They were flabbergasted upon finding Ali in the bed instead of the
Prophet. “Where is Muhammad?’ they asked Ali who told them that he did
not know. It is said that they beat and confined Ali for about an hour
then released him. At once they started looking for Muhammad, tracking
him right up to the mouth of the cave. The searching party was headed by
one Suraqah ibn Malik who was motivated by greed rather than by zeal for
paganism and its man-made gods.

Still, they never thought of looking into the cave. Why?  
 As soon as the fugitives entered the cave, a spider wove cobweb at the
entrance and a pair of pigeons built their nest at the mouth of the very
cave in the darkness of the night and laid eggs at once. It was that
cobweb and the nest with the eggs that made the blood-thirsty enemies
believe that Muhammad could not be in that cave; otherwise, the cobweb
would have been destroyed and the nest and the eggs broken! It was at
this moment that they got so near to the cave that Abu Bakr started
weeping, being afraid of the possible discovery. But the Prophet
consoled him saying,

***“Grieve not; surely Allah is with us’*** **(Qur'an, 9:40).**

Having seen how the pigeons and the spider helped save his life, the
Messenger of God supplicated to the Almighty for them, praying that He
reward them on his behalf. As a token of his appreciation, Muhammad
prohibited Muslims ever since from killing spiders or pigeons.

Both men[^14] left Mecca on the first night of Rabi’ul-Awwal, reaching
the cave of Thawr before dawn and remaining therein up to the 4th of
Rabi’ul-Awwal. On the 5th, they started their journey to Yathrib.
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Orayqit al-Daylami was hired to show them the way. Abu
Bakr offered one of his she-camels to the Prophet for the journey. The
Prophet accepted it on the condition that Abu Bakr accepted its price.
Thus, Abu Bakr sold one she-camel (which had cost him 200 dirhams) to
the Prophet for 900 dirhams.

Seeing how they missed the opportunity to kill Muhammad, Abu Jahl
announced a prize of one hundred camels for anyone who brought Muhammad
to them alive or dead. He hired a crier to cry out throughout the city
saying, “O Meccans! Whoever brings Muhammad or leads us to his hiding
place will receive one hundred camels! And whoever brings us the son of
Abu Quhafah (Abu Bakr) or leads us to his hiding place will receive one
hundred camels!’

Lured by the promise of such a generous reward, “Abu Sahl’ Buraydah ibn
al-Hasib al-Aslami rode in command of seventy of his tribesmen seeking
to capture Muhammad. Having left the cave a short while ago, Muhammad
found himself face-to-face with Buraydah! “Who are you?’ asked Muhammad.
“I am Buraydah,’ the man answered without asking about the identity of
the inquirer. Muhammad turned to Abu Bakr and said, “Our affair is made
easy (*barada*[^15]) and is amended!’ Then the Prophet asked Buraydah,
“Who do you belong to?’ Buraydah said, “From Aslam (Banu Aslam, the
offspring of Aslam[^16]).’

The Messenger of Allah then said, “We sure are now safe (*salimna*)!’
“From whom?’ asked Buraydah. “From Banu Sahm! Your arrow (*sahm*) is now
out[^17]!’ “And who are you?!’ asked Buraydah. “I am Muhammad son of
‘Abdullah, the Messenger of Allah,’ answered the Prophet. “I testify,’
responded Buraydah, “that there is no god except Allah and that Muhammad
is His Servant and Messenger.’ All those who were in Buraydah's company
embraced Islam there and then, having been impressed and captivated by
the Messenger of Allah.

In the morning, Buraydah advised the Prophet thus: “Do not enter Yathrib
without carrying a standard.’ Buraydah took off his own turban, tied it
to a post and carried it in front of the Prophet. Since they were still
in the outskirts of Mecca, Buraydah asked the Prophet, “O Prophet of
Allah! Would you like to be my guest?’ Muhammad said, “My she-camel
receives her own orders [as to where the Prophet should spend the
night].’ Buraydah said, “Praise be to Allah! The Banu Sahm have
submitted to the will of Allah willingly, not unwillingly!’[^18]

During the first day of the trip to Yathrib, the Prophet halted for a
short while at a place called Qadid where he and his companions met a
virtuous lady named Umm Ma’bad of the tribe of Khuza’ah. Her tribe is
actually an ally of Quraish. The men asked her as she sat in the shade
of her tent to sell them some dates and meat, but she did not have any.
The Messenger of Allah saw a she-camel tied next to the tent. “What is
this she-camel, O Umm Ma’bid?’ asked the Prophet. She told him that was
a worn-out she-camel that could not produce any milk. “Do you permit me
to milk her?’ was the Prophet's next question.

The old woman told Muhammad that he was welcome to milk the she-camel
only if he could find any milk in her udders at all. Muhammad
supplicated to his Lord then passed his holy hands on the she-camel's
udders. He asked for the largest container with which the woman could
provide him. He milked the she-camel till the container was completely
full. First he let the old woman drink of that milk, then he let Abu
Bakr and his slave drink, then the road guide. He was the last to drink
of it… Such humbleness is typical only of the prophets of God. Before
leaving, he milked the she-camel again and left the container full with
the old woman.

When Abu Ma’bad, the old woman's husband, came back from the pasture
with his animals suddenly fattened, another miracle, he listened to his
wife describing the person of the Prophet, whereupon he was very excited
and wished he had been at home to pay him homage. He then spontaneously
composed verses of poetry describing both miracles: the milking of the
she-camel that had no milk at all before Muhammad touched her udders,
and that of his own herd suddenly becoming healthy and fat. These poetic
verses can be reviewed on pp. 42-43 of Vol. 19 of al-Majlisi's work
*Bihar al-Anwar*. As a matter of fact, when the great poet Hassan ibn
Thabit came to know about these miracles and about the poetry composed
by Abu Ma’bad, he was inspired to compose poetry of his own on the same
theme, using the same rhyme and meter employed by Abu Ma’bad. His poetic
lines are cited on the same page…

When the Prophet got up to resume his journey, he performed the ablution
in preparation for his afternoon prayers, throwing some water over a
plant near the tent. The plant was found the next day to have
miracuously grown into a tree laden with fruits. Its leaves were larger
than they had ever been. People who tasted its fruit found it very
delicious and aromatic. The tree was henceforth considered blessed, and
soon the sick from various parts of Arabia went there to be cured by its
fruit and leaves. It soon acquired fame all over the Arabian Peninsula.
People from distant places thronged around it. Exactly ten years later
(in 11 A.H./632 A.D.), it suddenly shed all its fruit.

The incident coincided with the day when the Messenger of Allah died.
About thirty years later (42 A.H./662 A.D.), on the day of Imam Ali's
martyrdom in Kufa, Iraq, the fruits of the tree again fell down all at
once. It never produced any fruit ever since, yet people kept going
there in order to be cured by its leaves. Finally, on the day of the
martyrdom of Imam Husain, grandson of the Prophet, in Kerbala, Iraq, a
red fluid was found flowing profusely from its trunk and the tree dried
up. Reference to this tree and to its miraculous benefits is recorded in
al-Hakim's book titled *Al-amali* and also on p. 41, Vol. 18, of
al-Majlisi's work *Bihar al-Anwar*.

As a matter of fact, a voluminous book can be written about the miracles
performed by the Prophet of Islam, and there are books already written
about this subject. If the reader wishes that I write one such book,
then I request him/her to supplicate to Allah to enable me to do so;
his/her supplication will *Insha-Allah* be answered. If you thus
supplicate, I plead to the Almighty to grant you a handsome share of the
rewards of writing it, one that will last as long as you live and beyond
that till the Day of Judgment; He is the most Generous of the generous
ones; nobody can ever surpass Him in His generosity; He surely can do
anything at all; He hears the supplication, and He responds…

On the second day of the trip to Yathrib undertaken by Muhammad, Abu
Bakr and the two other men, and just when they thought that they were
out of danger, they saw in the distance behind them a man in hot pursuit
of them. It was Suraqah ibn Malik who was tempted by the one hundred
camels' prize; he had not yet given up the search. At the sight, Abu
Bakr again began to tremble for fear of being captured. “We are lost!’
he cried out.

Muhammad comforted him again by repeating what he had said to him when
they were inside the cave: “Do not be afraid; Allah is with us.’ Saying
so, the Prophet prayed God for protection. As the pursuer advanced, his
charger reared and sank motionless in the sands. Both the rider and his
mount were now helpless. Bewildered and astounded, Suraqah became
convinced of the interference of Divine Providence on behalf of
Muhammad, so he entreated the forgiveness of the Messenger of God,
promising never to betray him again. The Prophet prayed for him, and his
charger got up. He rode back home to Mecca, and Muhammad was once again
free to pursue his course along the sea coast.

Journeying by unfrequented routes, the men safely reached Quba (2 miles
south of Yathrib) one  
 week later, on the 12th of Rabi’ul-Awwal, 1 A.H. (September 27, 622
A.D.). The Prophet's camel sat down on its own at the place called
Al-Taqwa where the Prophet alighted and was hosted by Sa’d ibn
Khath’amah. Abu Bakr proceeded to Yathrib and became the guest of Zayd
ibn Kharj who lived at Sonh, a suburb of Yathrib.

There, the Prophet, now 53 years old, halted at Quba for four days
waiting for his right hand Ali to join him before proceeding to Yathrib.
He did not want to triumphantly enter the city without Ali, his main
supporter and confidant. There, he laid the foundations of the first
mosque in Islam, the mosque of Quba which has been mentioned in the
Qur'an as “the Mosque founded on piety (*taqwa*),’ hence it is also
referred to as “Masjid al-Taqwa.’ After four days, Ali joined the
Prophet and his party at Quba after having journeyed, all by himself and
on foot, travelling at night and hiding during daytime, the entire
distance of about 250 miles. His feet were sorely lacerated and
bleeding. Upon his arrival, the Prophet expressed his thrill to see him,
received him with open arms and, finding him tired, exhausted and his
feet bleeding, he shed tears out of his affection for him. Muhammad
subsequently applied the moisture of his mouth to Ali's wounds and
prayed for him. That was sufficeint to bring him an instant relief by
the power of God.

Then the Proph­et and his band of faithf­uls proceeded to Yathr­ib
shortly before noon, entering it on Friday the 16th of Rabi’ul-Awwal
corresponding to October 1, 622 A.D. with a group of followers who had
come from Yath­rib to welcome the Pro­phet. This was the Hijra from
which dates the Islamic (*hijri*) calendar.

***Whoever obeys the Prophet surely obeys Allah.’ (Qur'a­n, 4:80)***

Why the Persecution?
--------------------

Let us stop here for a minute to analyze the reasons behind the
persecution to which Prophet Muhammad and his followers were exposed.  
 The Prophet of Islam and his devoted band of followers had patiently
endured untold hardships, tyranny and oppression for thirteen years and
ultimately had to abandon their hearths and homes, sacrificing whatever
worldly possessions they had. They did not pursue any worldly gains, nor
had they aspired for any position of worldly eminence or share in any
authority.

The Prophet had unequivocally told the Meccans, “I desire neither riches
nor eminence nor dominion. I am sent by God Who has ordered me to
announce glad tidings to you. I convey to you the words of my Lord. I
admonish you. If you accept the message I bring you, God will be
favourable to you both in this world and in the next. If you reject my
admonition, I shall be patient and leave God to judge between you and
me.’

The early Muslims were harassed and persecuted simply because they
believed in One and the Only God, the Lord of the universe, and
worshipped Him without ascribing to Him any partner or colleague. They
had not exercised any compulsion, for the Qur'an had said:

***There is no compulsion in religion; truly the right way has become
clearly distinct from error; therefore, whoever disbelieves in the
rebels (false deities) and believes in Allah, he indeed has laid hold of
the strongest handle which shall not break off.*** **(Qur'an, 2:256)**

The Qur'an only appealed to the inner consciousness of man, to his
reason and intellect. Nevertheless, the new religion was in sharp
contrast with the cults practiced by Quraish which ages of observance
and belief had sanctified for them. The Prophet preached the equality of
man and stressed that in righteousness alone lay the superiority of one
over the other. Quraish saw in this leveling of distinctions the end of
their authority and privileges as the guardians of the Ka’ba, of their
political and social hegemony, and of their vested interests at large.

The new religion placed restraints upon the promiscuous and unbridled
license wherein the society indulged. It heralded the end of licentious
ways, of sensual pleasures and drunken orgies to which Quraish were, by
and large, espoused. It imposed spiritual discipline in the form of
prayers, fasting and charity and frowned upon avarice, greed, slander,
falsehood, indecency and other vices with which the society was
permeated. In short, it meant the giving up of old ways and the taking
to a new life of austere piety and chastity. The opposition of the
Meccans was, therefore, sharp and violent.

They relentlessly persecuted the followers of the new faith and made
life so difficult for them that ultimately the Prophet and his followers
had to abandon their hearths and homes for more congenial surroundings.
The Prophet did not even invoke the wrath of God on them. When once he
was requested by Khabbab son of ‘Arrat[^19] to curse Quraish, the
Prophet pulled him up saying, “People have gone by who were sawn and
torn to pieces in the cause of God, but they did not desist from their
duties. God will accomplish His plan till a rider will go from Sinai to
Hadramaut fearing none except God.’ What a true prophecy!

[^1]: Yasir's son, \`Ammar, is very well known in the history of Islam.
His full name is “Abul-Yaqzan” \`Ammar ibn Yasir al-\`Ansi, one of the
foremost to accept Islam at the house of al-Arqam ibn Abu al-Arqam
al-Makhzumi, “the house of Islam” where those who wished to embrace
Islam would then go. \`Ammar was martyred during the Battle of Siffeen
at the age of 94 after having participated in both migrations to
Ethiopia. He also participated with great courage in the Battle of Badr
and was one of those who took part in “Bay\`at al-Ridwan” to be
discussed later in this book.

[^2]: This boycott reminds me of the suffering of my people in Iraq at
the hands of “Muslims” and non-Muslims who joined ranks in their satanic
effort to starve and kill our people.

[^3]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 19, p. 2. According to this
reference, the boycott continued not for three but for four years.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 3.

[^5]: A Magi is a Zoroastrian priest, a possessor of magic powers.

[^6]: Prophet Muhammed was legendary for his passion for perfume! He
would prefer to buy perform when he went to the marketplace rather than
food, opting to fast instead. Once he said, “I have enjoyed of your life
only three (pleasures): prayers, perfume, and women!”

[^7]: Actually, it did not become cool at his (Abraham's) command;
rather, the Almighty ordered it, as the Holy Qur'an tells us, “We
[Allah] said: O fire! Be a comfort and peace to Abraham” (Qur'an,
21:69). Habib did not know any better!

[^8]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 17, pp. 316-317.

[^9]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 17, pp. 307-311. The pages
following these ones narrate numerous other miracles of the Prophet.

[^10]: Alexander Pope, Essay on Man.

[^11]: Mary the Copt was one of two Christian bondmaids, the other being
her sister Sirin, presented to Muhammed, who freed her then married her,
by the Roman governor of Egypt who had received a letter from Muhammed
inviting him to accept Islam. The Prophet gifted Sirin to Hassan ibn
Thabit, the famous poet and companion of the Prophet.

[^12]: Abul-Hasan Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi, Tafsir al-Qummi, Vol. 2, pp.
274-275 (Beirut, Lebanon: Al-A\`lami Foundation for Publications, 1412
A.H./1991 A.D.). The original text is, of course, written in Arabic.

[^13]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 19, p. 11.

[^14]: According to al-Majlisi, they were not two but four men: The
Prophet, Abu Bakr, the latter's slave \`Amir ibn Faheerah, and their
road guide \`Abdullah ibn al-\`Urayqat.

[^15]: The name “Buraydah” spurred the Prophet to be optimistic.
Literally, it means “easy” or “cool.” It is a noun derived from the verb
barada (past), yabradu (present); barid, easy, cool or cold, is the
adjective. The reader can easily sense the Prophet's confidence in his
Maker's protection as well as his courage and sense of humor even in the
most critical of situations.

[^16]: 2The word “aslama” means “became Muslim.”

[^17]: 3This is a figure of speech in Arabic meaning: “You have now
won.”

[^18]: These details and many more can be reviewed on p. 40, Vol. 19, of
al-Majlisi's voluminous book Bihar al-Anwar.

[^19]: The reader remembers Khabbab from the incident detailing the
conversion of \`Omer ibn al-Khattab. His nickname is Abu \`Abdullah, and
he was one of those who were persecuted by Quraish for accepting Islam.
He participated in the Battle of Badr then went to reside in Kufa where
he died in 37 A.H. (some say in 39 A.H.). The Commander of the Faithful
Ali ibn Abu Talib praised him at the time of his death saying, “May
Allah have mercy upon Khabbab; he willingly accepted Islam, obediently
migrated, lived as a mujahid, and supported Islam with his might. Surely
Allah rewards the doers of good.”


