Rules Regarding Internal Examination of a Dead Body
===================================================

Question 95: What ruling does the internal examination of a dead Muslim
body have?

Answer: It is not permissible unless saving another Muslim’s life is
dependant on it or the medical needs of an Islamic country would not be
taken care of unless this operation is performed.

Question 96: The bodies of some unidentified people are used for
learning anatomy and are sold for cheaper prices to different
institutions. Is it permissible to perform internal examinations on
these bodies?

Answer: If they are found in an Islamic country they are counted as
Muslims and the ruling regarding this is mentioned in the previous
question.

Question 97: Nowadays, some people make a will for there bodies to be
given to medical institutions in order to help people learn medicine. Is
this permissible for a Muslim?

Answer: There is no problem if it is done to fulfill the needs of Muslim
doctors, especially if saving a respected life is dependent on it. Put
if the needs of Muslims are fulfilled by the bodies of disbelievers,
then this should be sufficed by them.

Question 98: Can a person’s representatives donate one’s body for organ
transplants even if the person himself did not give permission for this?

Answer: If separating some of the parts of a dead body does not cause
disrespect for the dead person there is no problem.

Question 99: Can a person’s representatives not donate one’s body who
gave permission for his body to be used for organ transplants?

Answer: As a precaution one should not perform this action without
permission unless in cases which where it is necessary.

Question 100: What ruling does performing an autopsy have in cases where
a crime is suspected have?

Answer: If an obligatory action is dependant on this then there is no
problem.

Question 101: Is it permissible to dig up one’s grave and perform an
autopsy in order to save the live of the defendant of a murder, find the
murderer, or any other action which is more important than the
disrespect of digging up a Muslim’s grave?

Answer: If the obligatory action is more important than there is no
problem.


