Rules Regarding Organ Transplants
=================================

Question 102: Can one transplant the organs of brain-dead (people who
cannot breathe on their own, do not have any form of intellect, feelings
or voluntary movement, but their heart beats) patients in order to save
the life of another person? Is this conditional upon the permission of
the patient before he became brain-dead or of his representative?

Answer: If this operation does not cause him to die faster then with his
permission or his representatives permission there is no problem.

Question 103: In the case where a patient has a sickness which does not
have a cure and the doctors say that death will definitely come soon, is
it possible to transplant the patients organs, for example his heart,
liver, or kidneys, in order to save another patients life?

Answer: If he has not died yet and these organs would be taken from a
live person then there is a problem with it. But, if generally people
say that he is dead, it would be permissible with the mentioned
conditions.

Question 104: Suppose on a battlefield where Muslims are fighting
non-Muslims the life of a Muslim soldier depends on an organ transplant.
Is it permissible to transplant the organ of a dead non-Muslim to the
Muslim? If it is permissible would dīyyah (blood-money) become
obligatory? Is the dīyyah obligatory on the patient or the person who
performed the operation? Does the organ that was transplanted create a
problem for prayer?

Answer: There is no problem in cutting out an organ from a dead
non-Muslim and transplanting it. Dīyyah does not become obligatory and
after the organ is transplanted to the body of a Muslim it is ruled as a
part of the Muslims body.

Question 105: Some people, with the intention of helping sick patients,
sell their blood or other organs such as a kidney or eye. What ruling
does this have?

Answer: There is no problem in it if there is no harm which needs to be
adhered to.


