Rules Regarding Prayer
======================

Question 17: What should a person do if urine, feces, or stomach gases
are constantly released from his body, to such an extent that he cannot
perform a prayer with wudū’ and also does not have the ability to
perform wudū’ before every prayer?

Answer: In the cases where one is unable to perform wudū’ he must
perform tayammum. The rulings of the maslūs and the mabtūn are mentioned
in detail in the books of Islamic jurisprudence.

Question 18: Does a person who has an open wound or broken bone one the
top of his head or on his foot have to perform tayammum if it is harmful
for him to pour water over the wound? What must he do in other cases?

Answer: If he is not able to wipe it he must place a spiritually clean
piece of cloth over it and wipe that, and as a recommended precaution he
should perform tayammum as well. If one is unable to put a piece of
cloth over the wound he must perform tayammum in place of wudū’, and
also perform a wudū’ without wiping.

Question 19: What must a person who cannot feel his hands, and as a
result of that, cannot wash his face and arms or wipe his head or feet
in wudū’ do regarding wudū’?

Answer: He must find a representative to perform the wudū’ for him if he
cannot do it himself.

Question 20: Does a sick person who was unconscious a day or more due to
his sickness or due to being made unconscious for an operation have to
make up the prayers that he missed?

Answer: If one becomes unconscious involuntary he does not have to make
up his prayers, or else, as an obligatory precaution, he must make up
his prayers.

Question 21: Does a person who has had one or two legs amputated have to
wipe in wudū’? If he does, how?

Answer: Wiping is not obligatory if the whole part of the body that has
to be wiped is amputated.

Question 22: Does a person have to wipe his artificial leg while
performing wudū’?

Answer: No.

Question 23: Can one wipe with an artificial hand if his hand has been
amputated above the wrist?

Answer: No, and he must wipe with the remaining wetness, if there is no
problem with his other hand he must wipe with the palm of his other
hand.

Question 24: How should one perform the funeral prayers for one who has
committed suicide?

Answer: If he was a Muslim it is obligatory to perform the funeral
prayers in the same way as all other Muslims. The funeral prayer must be
performed for him.

Question 25: Is it permissible to perform the prayers when one has blood
on his body or clothes in two different places where each one is around
the size of a dirham?

Answer: The prayer would not be correct if both of the spots of blood
equal more than a dirham.

Question 26: Is it permissible to pray with gloves or shoes, even if
they are spiritually clean?

Answer: There is no problem, but one’s big toe must reach the ground
while performing prostration.

Question 27: What ruling does glasses whose frame is made from a
substance mixed with gold worn by a man in prayer?

Answer: If it is gold and used for beauty it would be forbidden for a
man to wear and it would invalidate his prayer.

Question 28: Suppose a sick person started his prayer standing up and
then in the middle of his prayer he felt light-headed and weak. Is it
permissible for him to perform the rest of his prayer sitting or lying
down?

Answer: There is no problem in it if he is forced, but if there is time
remaining and he is able to perform the prayers standing later during
the time of prayer, he should perform them then.

Question 29: Are the prayers of an unconscious person who does not have
any feeling, movement or thought excused? If he dies does his inheritor
have to make up the prayers that were missed in this state?

Answer: An unconscious person does not have to pray nor does he have to
make up the prayers he missed unless he purposely did something to
become unconscious.

Question 30: The bodies of some of patients in a hospital are
spiritually unclean due to injections and other reasons and other
patients wear clothes that have become spiritually unclean. How should
they pray if they cannot make themselves spiritually clean nor do they
have access to spiritually clean clothing?

Answer: If one is unable to perform prayers in a spiritually clean state
he must perform them in a spiritually unclean state. There are different
scenarios regarding the clothes, if he is unable to remove them then he
must perform prayers in his spiritually unclean clothing.

Question 31: Is one able to perform prayers with external or internal
hemorrhoids?

Answer: One may perform the prayers with the blood from hemorrhoids,
even if it is internal.


