Rules Regarding Surgery
=======================

Question 58: A doctor has certainty that performing surgery on a certain
patient will not make him live longer. He knows that if the patient has
surgery or not he will not live for more than a short period of time. Is
it permissible for him to perform surgery because of the insistence of
the patient’s family or the rules of the hospital?

Answer: There is no problem, with the condition that it does not have an
affect on his death.

Question 59: Some patients are adults and sane and need surgery, but
because of fear or any other reason choose to endure pain and refrain
from surgery. The patient’s family also does not give permission for
surgery. The doctor knows that if the patient does not have surgery he
will die or be inflicted with a serious injury. In this case can the
doctor perform the surgery?

Answer: If saving his life is dependent on the surgery there is no
problem.

Question 60: A woman wants to give birth but a specialist determines
that either the mother or child will die in surgery so that one of them
will live. Without the surgery both of them will die and with the
surgery there is a good chance that one of them will live. Is surgery
permissible in this case? If so, which life should be saved?

Answer: As per the question, it is permissible to perform the surgery
and which ever person has the better chance of living should be saved.

Question 61: Does a doctor need to explain the side effects that a
surgery might have to the patient?

Answer: He does not need to.

Question 62: Sometimes doctors have to tie a child’s legs while
performing circumcision, or, due to the baby’s screams, hold the mouth
of the baby. All of this could be prevented by putting the baby to sleep
and then performing the operation. In this case what should be done?

Answer: as per the question, the opinion of the doctor is important. He
should perform the operation in whatever way is easier and the chance of
success greater.


