Rules Regarding Pregnancy and Methods of Preventing Pregnancy
=============================================================

Question 66: What is the ruling about having intercourse but ejaculating
outside of a woman? Does this action need the permission of one’s wife?

Answer: There is no problem in it and the permission of the wife is not
important.

Question 67: Putting AUD inside a woman for childbirth is not possible
without looking and touching. In this case is it permissible for a
female or male doctor to perform this operation?

Answer: It is not permissible to look or touch even though the operation
is permissible in itself conditional upon the permission of one’s
husband.

Question 68: Is performing a vasectomy with the permission of the man
permissible? Does this operation need the permission of one’s spouse?

Answer: There is no problem with this operation in itself but one must
refrain from forbidden looks and forbidden touches. There is no need for
a man to get his wife’s permission.

Question 69: Does the permission of vasectomy with the purpose of
population control have a secondary ruling (hukm thānawīyyah) and when
there is no need for such a measure the permission will be taken away?

Answer: The ruling is not a secondary or governmental ruling.

Question 70: Tying one’s tubes will result in permanent barrenness.
Reversing this operation is dependant on another operation that has only
a 50 percent chance of success. Is it permissible to perform this
operation due to population control?

Answer: There is no problem with this operation in itself but one must
refrain from forbidden looks and forbidden touches. A woman must also
get permission from her husband to perform this operation.

Question 71: Is it permissible to permanently prevent a woman who has
the conditions of bringing defective babies into the world from having
children, especially if this has been proved from earlier childbirths?

Answer: There is no problem with this operation in itself if the husband
gives permission. One must stay away from other forbidden actions that
might accompany this action though.

Question 72: Can a woman take pills which prevent childbirth without the
permission of her husband? Or can she get an AUD?

Answer: She must not do this without the permission of her husband.

Question 73: Many pregnant women who are able to have natural
childbirths insist upon having cesareans so that they do not feel so
much pain. What is the ruling regarding this?

Answer: There is no problem with it in itself but all of the other
religious rulings must be observed.

Question 74: There are many ways to prevent pregnancy or for population
control. Can people who have knowledge about the different ways and
their side-effects choose which way they want?

Answer: With keeping in mind other religious rulings there is no problem
in it.


