Translatorâ€™s Note
=================

The ideological conflicts caused by the world's dominating cultures have
produced negative effects on the Muslim community. The alien Western
ideals flooding the Islamic world have tried to uproot Islamic concepts
and beliefs.

This methodical foreign invasion has greatly damaged the successive
Muslim generations. The slogans of freedom, equality and justice have
swept the Islamic world and distorted the Islamic culture. As a result,
the Muslim Ummah is suffering today from cultural chaos and deviation,
which is damaging the core of the community.

Deliberate falsehoods have been perpetrated by the enemies of Islam to
degrade the sublime religion of Islam. Due to such conspiracies, Muslim
women and men have forgotten their religious beliefs, duty and
commitments.

Hence it is necessary to take serious steps to save the society from
falling into the abyss of disbelief, which could not only crush the
whole community but could also destroy the religious belief still
surviving.

Such a situation has compelled the Muslim intellectuals to know their
duty in saving the society. It is a very difficult task to bring the
deviated generation to the right path of Allah's religion.

Hence our aim is to assist such achievements and to help Islamic
concepts and values to spread throughout the world, guiding the youth to
the right direction. Such a motive is behind translation and publication
of Bint ul-Huda's books. The famous Iraqi woman writer presents Islamic
ideals in her stories within a framework of interesting and modern
circumstances. Through her characters she exposes the contradictory
behavior of some Muslims.

Her stories are guiding lights for the young generation currently misled
by the brightness of pseudo-civilization. Bint ul-Huda, through her
heroes' logical conversations, attempts to reach young men and women and
awaken their awareness. She deals with topics of particular interest to
Muslim women, presenting various models, which, though imaginary, have
their counterparts in present-day life. In these stories Goodness and
Virtue are engaged in an everlasting struggle against Evil and Vice. We
hope such efforts produce the effective result that the martyred writer,
Bint ul-Huda, has aimed at.  
 In conclusion, we must inform our readers that we have used more
familiar Islamic names instead of the Arabic names in the original
stories.  
 Moreover, a free translation of such stories is a necessity due to the
different features of both Arabic and English literature. ***Virtue
Prevails*** is the third book of the martyr's works to be published by
our foundation.


