Chapter 9
=========

Meanwhile, Fitnah was still scheming about how to get revenge. She felt
that her husband did not deeply care for her, but just enjoys himself,
yet she knew that she could handle him when she decided what role he
would play in her little drama. Finally Fitnah devised a plan in which
Hamid could help her achieve her aim. She slept soundly that night and
woke up feeling quite happy. She rang the bell to summon her maid, who
helped her to bath and dress. Fitnah put on her best silk robe, perfumed
herself and walked out of her room.

Her maid was surprised, "Are you expecting visitors, mistress?"

Fitnah replied, "Oh, no. How could I greet anyone while I'm wearing
these house garments?"

Nadia then asked, "Where are you going?"

Fitnah answered, "To see my husband".

The maid was vexed and Fitnah felt great humiliation when she reflected
that her rival was her maid. Yet she considered the great wealth of her
husband and knew it was best for her to endure the odd situation.

She knocked at Hamid's door and entered, saying, "May I come in?"  
 Hamid was just about to leave the home, but he changed his mind upon
seeing Fitnah.

"Am I disturbing you?" Fitnah smiled.

Hamid replied, "Not at all. You are always welcome."

"It looks as if you have an important engagement", she told him.

"You are more important than anyone else", Hamid said, embracing her.

"Oh, thank you! You are such a good-hearted man", Fitnah flattered her
husband.

In fact, Fitnah was well-aware of his good nature and that she could
easily influence him.  
 They sat down and she began talking about some friends.

She was saying, "There is a great struggle going on between the rich man
and the artist. Both are determined to get a beautiful girl that I know.
Yet I think neither of them will succeed."

"Why not?" Hamid asked.

Fitnah explained, "Years ago there was a similar situation, and she
chose someone else."

"Then she is married."

"Oh, no" Fitnah said. "He was her boyfriend for some time, and she gave
him up a few months ago."

His curiosity aroused, Hamid asked why.

Fitnah surmised, "Perhaps she is looking for someone more rich, even
richer than her present suitor."

"Where do they meet her?" her husband asked.

"Well, at several places. She is clever enough at attracting men to her.
Sometimes she claims she is married or engaged. She also often pretends
to be a decent girl and a pious Muslim."

Hamid was intrigued by the description of this girl.

Fitnah left his room without saying anything more about her. She
returned to her room and thought to herself, 'I can lose nothing in this
game. It makes no difference to me whom Hamid has affairs with. In any
case, his other mistresses are of no use to me, while this one will help
me achieve my revenge.

Yes, I will get back at Ahmad, his belief and his morals. This proud
beauty, my cousin, can be trapped by Hamid's immense wealth and charm.
All women adore money. Since I cannot bring Sumayah to my group, I'll at
least show Hamid the way to her. I don't care whether Sumayah or Nadia
is his lover. As long as his wealth is under my control, I won't feel
jealous. Hamid is nothing to me. Sumayah is a simple-hearted girl, and
she has never heard words of love from a stranger.

It will be very flattering to her and surely she will soon give in to
Hamid's declarations of love. I think she may soon regret her
engagement. The last time I spoke with her, she was very quiet. My words
have affected her. I'll go on talking until I take off the mask that
Ahmad has covered her with. Now I must know where she spends her free
time. It's best that I wait until Ahmad leaves again for Europe. If he
is nearby, he will spoil my plans.'


