Chapter 10
==========

Ahmad's next trip was drawing near. He enjoyed the few days that
remained with his fiancée. He took her to a public park near a mosque.
They sat and watched the people walking by and were pleased to see
several worshippers enter the mosque.

"How wonderful Islamic prayer is," Sumayah said. “It causes one to feel
security and happiness."

Ahmad agreed, "That is quite true. Mosques are the best places for
Muslims to meet and to manage the affairs of an Islamic state, as it was
at the advent of Islam. Decisions were reached in the mosque and the
laws were created which ruled half of this globe. The eternal call of
Allahu Akhar to prayer echoed throughout dozens of Islamic countries."

Sumayah mused, "How wonderful those days must have been."

"Yes, and it is useful to study them. Since we are committed Muslims,
and we live according to Islamic instructions, we are happy. Our
happiness is to be derived from our firm stand against all deviated
ideologies. It means a lot when we defeat the evil intentions of the
self.” The Prophet (S.A.W.) says, 'Whoever adheres to my Sunnah when the
ummah is corrupted, has the reward of a hundred martyrs.' "

"The early Muslims were the masters of the world", Sumayah remarked.

Ahmad corrected her, "Actually they were leaders, since Islam considers
all people as free human beings. There are no masters or slaves in
Islam. A Muslim is evaluated only with regard to his piety and
righteousness. The early Muslims did not want to dominate and exploit
others. They wanted to guide people to the right path, to purify their
thinking. Islam is a universal doctrine, and is beneficial for all ages
and all countries. Dominating or enslaving others cannot result in a
nation's progress. With such ideas, the Muslims reached the Persian
Court and the Roman Imperial fortresses."

"Did any women play significant roles in the early days of Islam?"
Sumayah inquired.

Ahmad told her, "Of course they did. Woman participated in shaping
Islamic history. She proved her ability and personality as a human being
entrusted with a mission. She was no less active or less brave than a
man."

"What is the difference between the Muslim woman of those days and the
Muslim woman of our time?" Sumayah asked.

Ahamd said, "Woman today is misled. Man has fooled her and deprived her
of all her innate dignity. She has been pulled down to the bottom of
society. Our duty is to awaken her from her slumber. We should save her
from this pitiful situation into which she has fallen."

"I am afraid it is difficult to reform the Muslim women who have decided
to follow Western ways," she said, thinking about her cousin.

Ahmad said, "A real Muslim woman cannot be fooled easily. She knows the
true nature of her religion and is secure in the knowledge that Islam
has given her all her rights. Anyway, it is not too late to reform the
misled ones. Even a misguided Muslim woman still has good qualities
within herself, which can remove her blindness one day."

"When and how?" Sumayah asked.

Ahmad said, "1 think the time is drawing near. Women who imitate the
West suffer terribly in the end. The breaking up of Muslim marriages has
increased due to this blind imitation. Such marriages, if they are
unIslamic, cannot be happy ones, or survive for long."

Sumayah said, "Some of the misled women claim that *hijab* is imposed on
woman by man and it undermines her status."

Her fiancé replied, "This is mere nonsense and an echo of foreign
propaganda. The obligation to dress modestly is not confined to women
only. However women are more attractive and can have a stronger
influence than men; therefore, her *hijab* is more significance. *Hijab*
acts as a sort of protection for women. Islam wants women to cover the
source of their beauty, as a means of increasing their dignity. Muslim
women at the advent of Islam participated in battles, attended the
wounded and encouraged the Muslim combatants. The Islamic modest dress
they wore did not hinder them from having an effective role in their
society."

Sumayah sighed, "How I wish we were like them."

Ahmad told her, "Every woman can be like them."

Sumayah asked, "How?"

Ahmad said, "Struggling for the sake of a belief has many degrees. A
Muslim woman can achieve this any time. The struggle against temptation
and corruption and enjoining the good and forbidding the evil can all be
forms of struggle for belief. In tact, the struggle against selfish
desires is of more use than all other struggles. Imam Ali (A.S.) said,
'To purify the self of corruption is more difficult than any actual
struggle'."

The call to prayer could be heard, so Sumayah and Ahmad arose and
entered the mosque to perform their prayers.


