Chapter 12
==========

Two days later, Fitnah visited Sumayah and they sat in the garden
talking. Fitnah told her cousin, "I usually have a walk in the morning.
Does Ahmad allow you to do such a thing?"

Sumayah was annoyed by the question, but she acted indifferently,
replying, "Sometimes I take walks in the public park near the mosque."

"You do not go to other places?" Fitnah inquired.

"No."

"Do you go alone?" she then asked.

"Usually, but sometimes I go with my father.‚Äù Sumayah said, wondering
why Fitnah was asking her.

"I thought you didn't go to public places due to religious traditions",
Fitnah told her.

"Religious traditions do not contradict polite behaviour. Any action or
practice should be in conformity with Islamic ethics," Sumayah replied.

Fitnah sighed, "Oh, what injustice. How can a pretty girl like you have
such a meaningless role in life? Your beauty is hidden under this long
coat and scarf. Your ideas are buried in the pages of books. You are
worthy of the title "Miss Universe", but you do not know your real
importance. A teenager cannot understand the influence of her beauty on
others until someone whispers words of love to her. Then she will see
love all around her. Why should you spend all of your time alone while
Ahmad enjoys himself in Europe? You avoid the friendship of men in your
homeland while he enjoys his time with European girls."

"Fitnah, be serious! What sort of life can a girl have when she becomes
the object of men's desires? Most men think that the physical beauty of
a girl is the most important aspect, whereas it is only temporary and
superficial. Hence a girl's role is determined by men and her
development is limited as a result. A girl with sound thinking and
wisdom can develop without the influence of men. Religion guides girls
and teaches them the meaning of life. A Muslim girl is not deprived of
her freedom and she submits to Allah only. A girl who does not respect
her feminism and who has no dignity becomes a mere commodity."  
 She continued, "As a matter of fact, I pity you for having such a life.
I think you are a slave to fashion and cosmetic sellers. I don't know
how to reform you; perhaps my mother can influence you. I shall call her
to talk with you."

Fitnah stood up, saying, "Oh, no. I am leaving now. I expect some guests
tonight."

Sumayah also stood up and walked her cousin to her car, glad that their
conversation had ended.

Fitnah went straight home and told Hamid he could sometimes find Sumayah
at the park. As she had predicted, Hamid thought her cousin was very
beautiful, and he assumed that the man who had been with her at the
airport was her boyfriend.


