Chapter 18
==========

Hamid returned home feeling the joy of an awakened conscience. He felt
deep regret for all his past actions regarding Sumayah. In the past
three weeks Hamid ceased all his indecent behaviour. It seemed as if he
had awakened from a deep sleep. He kept thinking about the things
Sumayah had said. He felt he owed her a lot. She had inspired him. Hamid
asked himself if he was in love with her, but he was not. His feelings
were based on respect and high esteem. He wished he could see her often
in order to learn from her strength and good will. He decided to
continue visiting the public park in order to see her again.

The next morning, Hamid stayed in his room. He did not allow anyone to
disturb him. As he recalled his past life, he was shocked to realize
that he had gained nothing from life but the wealth he inherited from
his father. He had wasted nearly half of his fortune. What would happen
to him in the next ten years, when his money came to an end? He thought
about how important it was for a person to have a decent life and a
faithful wife. He knew his friends would give him up as soon as his
money was exhausted. Even his wife would leave him if he was not rich.
He knew Fitnah loved his wealth and never valued his love. Hamid wished
he could escape from his corrupt life and go back ten years in time to
when he was quite innocent and pure.

Sumayah's ideas dominated his thinking. He never thought he would meet
such an ideal girl who would bring him to such a reality. Since he had
met her, he looked with open eyes and realized much more than before. In
fact, he had recovered from blindness.

He turned his thoughts to his wife and wondered why she had misled him.
He could not justify her behaviour. Could it be from malice? But Sumayah
was not her type. In any case, there must be a reason, He was sure she
longed to hear from him about his adventures, but he would never satisfy
her curiosity. He was sure she would not ask him herself. Fitnah tried
often to begin a conversation to make him mention Sumayah, but he was
clever enough to disappoint her. In fact, he was surprised at his firm
stand. He used to think he would never have enough courage to resist his
wife.

**x----x----x----x----x**


