Chapter 3
=========

Sumayah was anxious to meet Ahmad to ask him about women's status in
Islam. He usually called on her every day on his way home from work.
That afternoon, she welcomed him with a lovely smile. He felt that she
had something to say, so he encouraged her to speak her mind. She asked
him if he was ready to listen to her.

Ahmad told her, "By all means, I always like listening to you."

"I would like to know the difference in rights between a male and a
female in Islam."

"There is no difference", Ahmad replied. "They have equal rights. They
are both created of the same clay."

"Why, then, are limits imposed on women rather than on men?" Sumayah
asked him.

"No limits are imposed on women except that which is necessary in regard
to their nature and biological structure. Islam does not put woman under
any kind of pressure."

Sumayah persisted, "Doesn't *hijab* hinder her from enjoying life as she
likes? Is it due to my *hijab* that I cannot travel with you to Europe?"

"Oh no, *hijab* cannot prevent woman from doing anything. I would take
you with me to Europe, if it were a healthy, decent society. I oppose
Muslim girls' travel to Europe for fear that they may become deviated.
If it were a useful journey, I would surely take you with me."

Sumayah asked, "Don't you think that seeing western civilization can be
useful?"

Ahmad said, "This is exactly the point which is the source of much
trouble. We Muslims should not think that civilization is a western
phenomena. In fact, if the matter is explored deeply, you will see that
it is Islamic civilization that has brought to Europe its present
scientific progress. European so-called civilization is nothing but an
expression of the *jahillia* (Pre-Islamic Age of Ignorance), with regard
to European women."

Sumayah then asked, "Well, does not the European woman have her rights
in full, the same as man?"

Ahmad disagreed, "Absolutely not. Through recent European laws, the
European woman has gained only a part of woman's rights that are already
granted by Islamic laws. The European woman has lost her feminism. She
has become a mere commodity and is a tool manipulated by men. Islam has
granted woman her independent identity. She is free to handle her own
financial affairs and personal life. European women have been trapped by
the false, bright colours of life expoused by the so-called liberation
of woman. Freedom is just a cover with which man hides his own
exploitation of woman at all levels. Believe me, my dear, if Europe was
a good place, I would encourage you to go."

"I am quite aware of this. I only wanted sound evidence to answer anyone
who doubts our Islamic morals and beliefs," Sumayah replied.

Ahmad said, "You won't find a better, happier life except in Islam and
when Islamic instructions are respected and applied. I wish you really
knew about the great misery that engulfs families deviated from Islamic
norms. A marriage based on Islamic foundations will be quite successful.
Our future life will certainly be happy."

Sumayah smiled and said, "I know you will do your best to ensure such a
happy life. By the way, have you decided when you will begin your trip?"

Ahmad said, "I am on my way to settle that. It is a matter of a few
days. Then we will be able to plan living together in our own home when
I return."

At this point, he said good-bye to Sumayah and left to his home. He
promised to return later for further discussion.  
 Sumayah was sure of her Islamic belief; she just wanted to know the
best answers to all the questions raised by her cousin and others.

On his way home, Ahmad thought about his fianc√©e. He was sad that some
deviated girls were trying to confuse her thinking. He decided to
explain any matters that were unclear for her. Above all, he wanted her
to be in thorough harmony with him in his beliefs and ideals. What
caused him to seek her hand in marriage was her good conduct and strong
personality. Ahmad recalled an old incident when an unreligious girl
used many tricks to try to tempt him and trap him. He wondered what had
become of her. He couldn't even remember her name. He is quite happy
with the choice he made in his future wife.


