Lecture 6 : the Book of the Gospel Rediscovered
===============================================

Wherever I go to lecture I hear one question first of all: “What is the
true Gospel of Jesus (as)?” There is always someone who wants to know
whether the book of the Gospel has been irretrievably lost, or whether
it is to be found among the apocryphal gospels not included by the
Church fathers in the canon of the New Testament. I have invariably had
to answer that unfortunately all of the books which claim to be the
Gospel of Jesus (as) contain passages that are clearly corruptions of
the original text, so that even if we could point to one or another book
as that received by Jesus as the Gospel, it would not be perfectly
intact. This is an area in which historical criticism has serve us
well.

The canonical gospels, or the books in the Christian Bible which are
called gospels, do not claim to be the message of God sent down to Jesus
(as). They do not correspond to what the holy Qur’an calls the Injil or
Gospel, nor is such a document mentioned in them. They bear the title in
Greek, evangelion, from which comes the Arabic word Injil, but they do
not claim to be divine messages as such. Rather, they are collections of
stories about what Jesus (as) did and said. As such, they are much more
in the character of Islamic hadith literature than they are in the
character of a revealed book as Muslims think of it. Some of the gospels
not included in the Bible are collections of sayings, but even these
generally remind us more of ahadith than of the holy Qur’an or the
Hebrew prophetic writings. None of the so-called gospels even claims to
be a book sent down from God to Jesus (as). All of them claim to be the
work of one author-witness, not always an eye-witness, but historical
criticism leads us to doubt even that in most cases.

Much has been written about the value and validity of the Gospels, both
canonical and apocryphal, that we have in our possession. This
scholarship might make us turn our sights towards other sources, such as
new archeological finds, in our search for the Injil mentioned in the
holy Qur’an. So far little in that way has turned up. The Qumran texts,
to cite the most popular source, might contain some passages worthy of
examination by the criteria presented below, but do not provide us with
a book that in itself could be considered the lost Gospel of Jesus
(as).

There is another possibility. It may be that the true Gospel, the book
of revelation sent down to Jesus (as) lies buried, not in a cave or
under debris of dust and stones, but under the encrusted additions to
one or another of the Gospels we possess. The possibility that the true
Gospel might be a portion, rather than the whole, of any one of the
candidates, seems to have escaped the notice of most seekers.

An examination of the extant Gospels may well bring to light such a
document, a book which can be truly considered the revelation once sent
down to Jesus the Messiah (as). Before beginning such an examination,
however, it is necessary to lay down some criteria by which we might
recognize a book of revelation. I offer the following criteria.

1) The Gospel might exist as fragments of the original, part of which
has been lost and part of which may have been preserved imperfectly.

2) A book of revelation will be couched mainly in words that can best
be ascribed to God Himself, rather than to the prophet.

3) A book of revelation will be highly relevant to the specific
religious problems of the time. It will point out innovations as false,
and call people to return to forgotten or neglected principles in
earlier revelation.

4) A book of revelation will not conflict with the basic principles of
faith declared in earlier revelations.

Thus there are considerations of the state of the document, style of
speech, relevance, and consistency. By applying these four criteria,
there is every likelihood that if any portion of the true Gospel of
Jesus (as) remains hidden within the extant gospels, we shall be able to
identify it. The criteria are precise enough to distinguish the true
Gospel from other material.

Although the material at first appears rather abundant, the second
criterion, that of style, requires us to examine only the discourses,
and to chose among them those which are couched in words that might best
be ascribed to God rather than the prophet. Such an exercise immediately
excludes the bulk of material. Some passages in the apocryphal gospels
might require further examination, but among the canonical Gospels only
the following remains as a candidate after applying the criterion of
style: Matthew 23. The contents of this passage are found scattered
through discourses in Luke 11-13, but far more fragmented than in
Matthew 23. This suggests that other parts of Jesus’s discourses may
also be quoted from the original Gospel, without this being apparent.
The passage in Matthew 23, however, is clearly one which demands closer
examination.

The criterion of style is difficult to apply in detail, because the
Gospel must have been originally given in Hebrew or possibly Aramaic,
while it has come down to us in Greek. The original language is lacking
altogether, although the Syriac versions may come closer to it than the
Greek ones, despite the fact that they are probably further translations
from the Greek.

The first stylistic criterion is the ascription of speech to God. The
whole passage is consistent with this beginning with verse two and
ending with verse 35. Verse 36 begins with the words “Truly I say to
you” and this may mark the point at which Jesus (as) speaks with his own
words.Verses 37 and 38 are therefore ambiguous as to whether they form a
part of the divine revelation or constitute the commentary attached to
the revelation by the prophet. Verse 39 includes the expression “you
shall not see me,” with the word “me” clearly referring to the speaker,
that is, the prophet himself. Thus verse 39 forms the last possible
limit of the divine revelation. We can conclude that at least verses
2-35 may form the text of the Injil sent down to Jesus (as) or a part of
it.

A second stylistic criterion might be whether the text shows any
likeness to earlier texts of revelation. In terms of length, it is
short, but within the bounds of known texts of revelation. The book of
the prophet Obadiah consists of only 21 verses, and several others are
not much longer. On that basis, the passage in question could actually
be the entire text of the Injil, or the greater part of it. As it stands
it forms a coherent whole. Most prophetic writings echo something of the
revelation to Moses (as). The greater portion of Matthew 23 consists of
woes. Woes are known as a literary device in several prophets and are
one of the most prevalent forms of Hebrew prophetic utterance. The
canonical paradigm is in Deuteronomy 27:15-26, but the form is otherwise
common. Jesus himself (as), like other prophets before him, uses the
device in his own words in Luke 6:24-26.

In sum, the criterion of style, based on literary form, length of the
document, and ascribability of the speech to God, is consonant with the
theory that Matthew 23 is a text of divine revelation.

The third criterion is that of relevance. The times of Jesus (as) gave
evidence of very particular problems. These were based on the ways in
which the various sects of Judaism, faced with Roman rule, sought to
accommodate the principles of their faith in view of survival. Two
issues were crucial: first, to minimize the principle of divinely
appointed leadership which might be seen as a threat to Roman power, and
second, to circumvent any practices which might conflict with Roman
life. Finally, we should expect to find a condemnation of any who
engaged in these two forms of accommodation to Rome. In brief, we should
expect Jesus to point out 1) a weakened reliance on divinely appointed
leadership which might be a threat to Roman rule, 2) specific features
of neglecting the law or misapplying it, and 3) condemnation for such.
An examination of the text of Matthew 23 reveals that every verse falls
into one of these three categories. The text is thus established as
relevant to the times, and therefore consonant with the theory that it
is a text of divine revelation.

The fourth criterion is whether or not the text conflicts with earlier
revelation. An examination of the passage does not reveal any point
which is in conflict with the earlier extant revelation as we have it in
the Hebrew writings. Several passages of the law are cited and commented
upon in ways consonant with the Hebrew prophets, namely, in terms of
justice. The final criterion is satisfied in this. However, the unicity
of God is the central issue of revelation, and it is also explicitly
maintained in verse 9. The passage can thus be seen not to conflict with
earlier revelation, but rather to agree with it in both content and
spirit, and to cite it in several matters.

On the basis of all four criteria, it is possible to say that Matthew
23:2-35 is a likely candidate as the Injil of Jesus referred to by the
holy Qur’an, or a portion of it. The rest of the canonical gospel
material is largely of the character of hadith or tradition, and
describes more or less accurately, to the extent one can rely on the
opinion of researchers, the words and actions of Jesus (as).

**The True Book of the Gospel: Matthew 23**

1¶ Then Jesus spoke to the multitude, and to his disciples, 2 And said,
The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' place: 3 So everything they
tell you to observe, observe and do; but do not follow their example,
because they do not act as they speak. 4 For they mandate heavy burdens
and hard to carry, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves
will not move them with one of their fingers.

The Beginning of the discourse establishes the theme of divine guidance
and its misuse. The reference to Moses’ seat (as) reveals this clearly.
Those who have usurped this appointment are called scribes and
Pharisees. The scribes probably relate specifically to the Saduccees,
who were the official guardians of the faith, collaborators with Rome.
They limited the application of the law to its narrowest sense, thus
minimizing any conflict with the ruling power. The Pharisees dispensed
with the need for divine guidance by laying down scholarly principles of
interpretation. This rejection of the divinely appointed leader made it
possible to apply the law, through rabbinical interpretation, to a
broader segment of life without becoming a threat to Roman hegemony.

In verse three the Gospel recognizes that these two sects maintain the
law in some sense, so that when they say that the law must be upheld,
they are correct and may be followed. However, their own behaviour is
not according to the law, at least in that they ignore divine guidance
or the divinely appointed leadership.

This seems to be a citation of the prophet Malachi 2:7,8. For the
priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his
mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. But you are
departed out of the way, you have caused many to stumble at the law; you
have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts. This text
is relevant to the situation, but more importantly situates this passage
as a continuation of Malachi, that is, as a prophecy which logically
follows the book of Malachi. The book of Malachi is the last book of
prophets, and in the Christian Scriptures immediately precedes the
Gospel of Matthew.

There is some textual variation in verse four in regard to heavy
burdens, but it does not modify the meaning. Verse four adds that their
interpretation, which ignores divine guidance, is actually more
difficult to observe than verdicts made under divine appointment. That
is, qiyas or rabbinical method, is a burdensome approach and turns
divine law into a harsh system difficult to carry out.

5 But everything they do, they do to be seen by others: they make their
phylacteries broad, and enlarge the borders of their garments, 6 And
love the highest places at feasts, and the chief seats in the
synagogues, 7 And greetings in the markets, and for people to call them,
Rabbi, Rabbi.

This text points out that the rabbinical method of attaining a verdict,
or the use of qiyas, leads to action which may be termed mura’i, or
action performed for the purpose of being seen and respected by others.
Two examples of this are given in making phylacteries large, and
lengthening the fringes on their garments. The enlarged phylacteries and
the extravagantly long garment fringes have become standard in modern
Jewish practice, so that they are no longer a sign of mura’i action. The
size of these no longer varies. It does not appear that phylacteries and
fringes as such are condemned here. Both are based on Mosaic law, but it
seems that the phylacteries arose through a misapprehension of
Deuteronomy 6:8. Once Hebrew lost its character as the spoken language
of the people rabbis often erred in misplaced concreteness. The abstract
meaning of the terms of Deuteronomy 6:8 are implicit from Exodus 13:9,
where the same expressions are applied to unleavened bread, which cannot
be placed between the eyes or worn on the hand.

By the same token, fringes refer in Mosaic law to the tied ends of the
woof of a woven outer cloak in one piece, corresponding to a modern
blanket. The application of such to an undergarment has no prophetic
justification. Thus both practices as a form of spiritual show are
irrelevant to modern life, but specifically relevant to first century
Palestine.

The expressions of these verses make no comment on the validity of
using phylacteries and fringes as such, or attending feasts, synagogues,
and markets. The comment is purely in reference to seeking admiration
and status. The use of the term rabbi is dealt with in the next verse.

8 But you, do not be called Rabbi: for your Master is one, even Christ;
and all of you are brothers.

The use of the term rabbi is forbidden on the basis that it conflicts
with the authority of the Messiah. The text here concentrates on the
aspect of Jewish accommodation to Rome which denigrates divine guidance,
that is, the divinely appointed leader.

9 And call no one on earth your father: for your Father, who is in
heaven, is one.

This text continues the argument against the proliferation of religious
authorities to the detriment of the authority of the divinely appointed.
It does not refer to the physical, biological relationship, but to the
use of the word father as a term of respect for those in authority. At
the same time the text affirms the unicity of God. The reference is
oblique, because the unicity of God was never questioned in the context
of Jesus (as) and first century Judaism. There is no need to belabour
it.

10 Do not be called masters either: for your Master, even Christ, is
one.

Here the text reaffirms the divine appointment of leadership. The
reaffirmation takes the local situation into account. This was the
principle that first century Judaism, particularly its leadership,
denied.

11 But the one who is greatest among you shall be your servant. 12 And
whoever exalts himself shall be humbled; and whoever humbles himself
shall be exalted.

Status-oriented Roman society had had an effect on Jewish society. The
text here attempts to reverse that.

13 ¶ But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you
shut people out of the kingdom of heaven: for you do not go into it
yourselves, neither do you let those enter it who want to go in.

Here begin the woes, or condemnations. It has been established that the
major sects and leadership of first century Judaism had accommodated to
Rome by denigrating the role of the divinely appointed leader and by
adopting illicit ways of interpreting and applying the law. These are
condemned, with the series of woes following. As compared to the New
Testament generally, this chapter is particularly well preserved. In
some manuscripts, however, this and the following verse are reversed.

14 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you eat up
widows' houses, and make long prayer for a pretence: therefore you shall
receive the greater condemnation.

The social concern here is typical of the Hebrew prophetic utterance,
and another evidence that this passage may be the lost Gospel of Jesus
(as).

15 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you go across
sea and land to make one convert, and when he is made, you make him
twice the child of hell as you yourselves.

Unlike today, first century Judaism was a proselytizing faith. The
matter dealt with here is the fact that the proselyte would be unaware
that changes had taken place in the faith through accommodation to Rome,
and thus would be more likely to embrace the wrong system
whole-heartedly. The convert is more enthusiastic than one born in the
faith.

16 Woe to you, blind guides, who say, Whoever swears by the temple, it
is nothing; but whoever swears by the gold of the temple, he is
responsible. 17 Fools and blind ones: which is greater, the gold, or the
temple that sanctifies the gold? 18 And, Whoever swears by the altar, it
is nothing; but whoever swears by the gift that is on it, he is
responsible. 19 Fools and blind ones: which is greater, the gift, or the
altar that sanctifies the gift? 20 Whoever therefore swears by the
altar, swears by it, and by everything on it. 21 And whoever swears by
the temple, swears by it, and by the one him that dwells in it. 22 And
the one that swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by the
one who sit on it.

This is a reference to the kind of misapplication of the law which
arises through the use of a false method of attaining a verdict.
Application by the divinely appointed leader is always just, but
application by the machinations of a scholar will provide means of
circumventing the law for those who look up to his expertise. The
relationship which automatically arises between a scholar and an
authority demanding a verdict from him is a corrupting one. The specific
matter here is the formulation of a legal oath, with the specification
that a formal error relieves the client of responsibility. The practice
thus would be to include a formal error whenever one wished to give the
impression of making an oath, yet with the intention of disregarding it.
The obvious injustice of such an action cannot be missed by the poorest
observer, yet all non-imamic law is based on such circumvention. The
common term is loophole.

The word “fools” in verse 19 is missing in some manuscripts.

23 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you pay tithe
of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of
the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: you should have done these, and not
have left the other undone. 24 Blind guides, who strain at a gnat, and
swallow a camel.

Here the text reverts again to the typical social concern to be found
in the Hebrew prophets. Again, this is evidence that this passage
belongs to the same tradition as the Hebrew prophets in contrast to the
rest of the material in the Gospel of Matthew. The clear implication is
that this is a part of the book called Injil in the holy Qur’an and sent
down to Jesus (as).

25 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you make the
outside of the cup and the platter clean, but inside they are full of
extortion and excess. 26 Blind Pharisee, first clean what is inside the
cup and platter,so that the outside of them may be clean also. 27 Woe to
you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you are like
white-washed sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful on the outside,
but inside are full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. 28 Even
so you also outwardly appear righteous to people, but inside you are
full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

These condemnations turn on the matter of hypocrisy. The implication is
that false methods of attaining verdicts, methods invented for the
purpose of accommodating with Rome for survival, lead to hypocrisy if
only because the verdicts so obtained do not correspond with the real
needs of humankind, as do those attained through the intervention of a
duly appointed divine representative. Justice cannot be attained or
maintained except by following the divinely given process of prophecy
and divine guidance.

29 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you build the
tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous, 30
And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have
participated with them in taking the blood of the prophets. 31 So you
are witnesses about yourselves, that you are the children of those who
killed the prophets. 32 Fill up then the measure of your fathers. 33
Serpents, generation of vipers, how can you escape the damnation of
hell?

The awfulness of these final woes perhaps goes beyond the expressions
of the Hebrew prophets themselves, but is a logical continuation of
them. The question of how to escape damnation is answered in the
following verse, which is to follow the prophets, the divine guides
(sophos), and scribes or transmitters of the written law.

Jesus (as) does not condemn building the tombs of the prophets and
garnishing their sepulchres as such, any more than he condemns paying
tithes. What he condemns is the hypocrisy of doing so while failing to
follow the prophets. This is therefore an oblique justification for
caring for and visiting the tombs of the prophets and divine guides (the
righteous), a practice which has given rise to some division in Islam.

34 ¶ So see, I send to you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and
some of them you will kill and crucify; and some of them you will beat
in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city:

The way of salvation is clearly given: it is to follow the instruction
of the prophets, submit to the authority of the divinely appointed
leaders (sophos), and follow those who transmit the written law. This is
followed by the prophecy that the first century Jews will fail to do
this, and rather participate in the destruction of those sent to them by
God.

35 That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth,
from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zacharias son of
Barachias, whom you killed between the temple and the altar.

This prophecy probably refers to the destruction of Jerusalem in 70
A.D., although the whole condemnation is addressed not to the Jewish
people but to their leaders. Nevertheless, the innocent died with the
guilty.

36 Truly I say to you, All these things shall come upon this
generation.

Here no doubt begins Jesus’s (as) commentary on the Gospel. He notes
that it will be fulfilled on the contemporary generation, which we see
to be historically accurate. The attempted collaboration with Rome did
not succeed, partly because of the irritation to the Romans caused by
the Zealots and partly because of the perfidity of the Sadduccees. The
Pharisees survived to bring rabbinical method to a point of perfection.
Rabbinical method cannot be treated with the same condemnation as it is
here, for it is no longer an attempt to accommodate to Rome, but has
become crystalized into a religious system in its own right. It must be
judged in part today for other features: 1) the misapplication of
certain features of law, 2) failure to recognize the Messiah, 3) failure
to recognize the final prophet, and 4) failure to integrate divine
guidance into the establishment of right practice. These obviously have
their roots in the original accommodation to Rome. This should have been
avoided (hindsight is unfortunately more clear-sighted than foresight)
by recourse to taqiyya or disimulation following the example of Abraham
(as), rather than any form of accommodation with Rome.

It ought to be pointed out that if this is the Gospel or Injil more or
less as Jesus (as) received it, there are vast implications for
Christianity. First of all, the Gospel relates primarily to the specific
problems within first century Judaism. It does not support or imply the
establishment of a system of faith distinct from first century Judaism,
not to mention the faith implicit in the Hebrew Scriptures now contained
in Christian Bibles. The content of the Gospel emphatically opposes all
accommodation with Rome. Unfortunately, Christianity as a historical
phenomenon is hardly anything but an accommodation to Rome. The Gospel
text does not support the doctrine of the Trinity. Rather, it opposes it
with the clear presupposition of the unicity of God. The Gospel text
does not support the atonement for sin on the cross. Rather, it states
categorically that salvation is the product of obedience to divine law
as transmitted through the prophets, the divinely appointed leaders, and
those who transmit the written law. Finally, there is no justification
for the establishment of any such institution as the Christian Church
has become. On the contrary, the authority of divine guidance in the
divinely appointed leader is maintained throughout. If the Gospel
contains strong language in condemnation of the Jewish leadership in the
first century, its implied condemnation of the Christian establishment
is devastating.

Despite the fact that the text relates clearly to a particular time and
place with its particular problems, it can still serve as a witness of
what has always been the right way. First, there is a strong witness of
the unicity of God in verse 9. Social concerns imply divine justice time
and again. Then the principle of prophecy is strongly expressed. The
need for adherence to the divinely appointed leader is a central issue.
Finally, human responsibility is maintained even in the face of
oppression and the temptation to accommodate for survival in a world
without respect for divine law. All comes to a head in the proclamation
of divine judgment. These five great principles of true faith are the
core of the Gospel.

