Lecture 9 : the Word ‘ali in the Bible
======================================

The word cali is used 226 times in the Hebrew scriptures. The following
study examines all of these occurrences at least briefly. The Massoretic
text of the Hebrew Bible is the source, but I have ignored the
Massoretic pointing of the word cali, rather examining each context for
clues to which pointing and consequently which meaning of the word is to
be preferred.

Most of the time the word cali is a preposition, either with or without
the first person singular pronominal suffix. The first occurrence with
the pronominal suffix is in Genesis 20:9 Then Abimelech called Abraham,
and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended
thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou
hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done. The following texts,
the great preponderance of passages including the word cali, seem to
have the same meaning, that is, “upon me” or something similar. Genesis
27:12; 13; 30:28; 33:13; 34:12; 34:30; 42:36; 48:7; 50:20, Numbers
11:11; 14:35; 22:30; Judges 7:2; 19:20; 20:5; 1 Samuel 17:35; 21:15;
22:8,13; 23:21; 2 Samuel 1:9; 3:8; 14:9; 15:33; 19:38; 1 Kings 2:4;
14:2; 22:8,18; 2 Kings 16:7; 18:14; 1 Chronicles 22:8; 2 Chronicles
18:7; 18:17; 36:23; Ezra 1:2; 7:28; Nehemiah 2:8; 2:18; 6:12; 13:22;
Esther 4:16; Job 7:12; 7:20; 9:11; 10:1; 13:13,26; 16:9,10,13,14,15;
19:5,6; 19:11; 19:12; 21:27; 29:13; 30:1,12,15,16; 31:38; 33:10; Psalm
3:1(2); 3:6(7); 13:2(3); 13:6(7); 16:6; 17:9; 22:13; 27:2,3; 31:13;
32:4,5; 35:15; 35:21; 35:16,26; 38:2(3); 38:16(17); 40:7,12; 41:7;
41:9(10); 41:11; 42:4(5); 42:5(6); 42:7(8); 42:11(12); 43:5; 54:3(5);
55:3(4); 55:4(5); 55:12(13); 56:5(6); 59:3(4); 60:8; 69:9(10);
69:15(16); 86:14; 88:7(8); 88:16(17); 88:17(18); 92:11(12); 109:2;
109:5; 116:12; 119:69; 139:5; 142:7(8); 143:4; Proverbs 7:14;
Ecclesiastes 2:17; Song of Solomon 2:4; Isaiah 1:14; 61:1; Jeremiah
8:18; 11:19; 12:8,11; 15:16; 18:23; 49:11; Lamentations 1:15;
3:5,20,61,62; Ezekiel 3:22; 8:1; 11:5; 35:13; 37:1; 40:1; Daniel 4:34;
4:36; 7:28; 10:8; 10:16; Hosea 7:13; Hosea 11:8; Joel 3(4):4; Jonah
2:3(4); 2:7(8); and Malachi 3:13.

The first occurrence of the word as a preposition without suffix is in
Genesis 49:17, which is a poetic passage. Indeed, the form is typical of
poetic style. Genesis 49:17 Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder
in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall
backward. Similarly the word appears to be used as a simple preposition
without suffix in Genesis 49:22; Deuteronomy 32:2; Job 6:5; 8:9; 9:26;
15:27; 18:10; 20:4; 29:3,4; 30:4; 33:15; 36:28; 38:24; 41:30; Psalm
49:11; 50:5,16; 92:3(4); 94:20; 108:9(10); 131:2; 142:3(4); Proverbs
8:2; 30:19; Isaiah 18:4; Lamentations 4:5; and Micah 5:(6)7.

In 1 Samuel 1-4 is found the story of the house of Eli. The name is
also mentioned in 1 Samuel 14:3; 1 Kings 2:27; This proper name of the
high priest and judge of Israel before Samuel is written cAli. The
pointing with the long e merely reflects the more complex vowel system
of Hebrew as compared to Arabic. Arabic cognates with a appear in Hebrew
with either a or e, and often preferably e. The segholate character of
Hebrew thus clouds the fact that the name is precisely the same as the
Arabic c Ali. There are some striking parallels as well as direct
contrasts between the Biblical Eli and Imam cAli (as). The first cAli
had two unrighteous sons who led the people into disaster. The second
one had two sons who became righteous leaders. There is a parallel
between the two figures from a historical perspective as well. The
Samaritans claim that Eli caused the rift between Samaritans and Jews by
his false claim to the priesthood. The division between Shi’ite and
Sunnite Islam surrounds the claims of the figure of Imam cAli (as).

The first clear passage in which the word must be translated as the
imperative singular of the verb “to go up” is in 1 Samuel 25:35 So David
received of her hand that which she had brought him, and said unto her,
Go up in peace to thine house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and
have accepted thy person. Similarly the word occurs in Isaiah 21:2;
40:9; Jeremiah 22:20; and 46:11.

The word appears with the meaning of “leaves of” in Nehemiah 8:15 And
that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities, and in
Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive branches,
and pine branches, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and branches
of thick trees, to make booths, as it is written.

The first text that requires reevaluation is Exodus 8:(5)9.

And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat for
thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs
from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river only?

It is not likely that anyone would pretend that the phrase “glory over
me” makes any sense at all. The assumption of the translator is that the
word here is the preposition with the pronominal suffix, which is of
course the dominant usage of the word in the Torah, especially in the
prose passages. There seems to be no questioning of the preposition and
suffix themselves, while the hesitancy about how to understand the verb
placed with the preposition and suffix is of longstanding debate, going
back to the Septuagint (LXX) underlying the Vulgata expression constitue
mihi, appoint me (a time). Reference to the Masoretic text has led most
translators to reject the Septuagint and Vulgata alternative for
something presumably based on the Hebrew text, whether or not it makes
sense.

Those translators requiring meaning in their translation have tended to
read an unwarranted expression into the Hebrew in the sense of “do me
the honor to...” an interpretation that goes back at least to Luther.
Wavering between sense and nonsense is illustrated by the Webster
original, which was “Glory over me” and the revised Webster which is
“Command me,” apparently accepting the LXX over the Masoretic text. In
sum, three alternatives are to be found in the more commonly known
translations. The first follows the LXX-Vulgata tradition. The second
tries to make sense of the Hebrew Massoretic text by attributing
unattested meanings to the preceding verb. The third translates the
Massoretic verb correctly, producing nonsense in the word cali by
insisting that it is a preposition with suffix.

An alternative is to accept the Massoretic verb as it stands and
attribute a non-prepositional meaning to the word cly. The choices are
one of the verb forms “to rise,” or one of the proper or common noun
meanings. The position requires the latter, rather than the imperative
verb. The choices are thus basically “glorify my leaf,” “glorify a
pestle or pistil” or “glorify cAli.” The common nouns do not make sense,
and the second meaning is not even attested in Scriptural Hebrew. An
Arab will immediately suggest a reference to the Deity, as “exalted.”
This word, however, in the Hebrew text, would consist in an Arabicism.
We are thus left with the enigmatic “glorify cAli,” in reference to an
unknown named figure, or reference to God under the term, something that
appears to be more or less without precedent in Biblical Hebrew. The
reflexive sense of the verb could be thought to imply the necessity of a
preposition before the object. However, the lack of the preposition is
almost the rule in poetic passages, and is not lacking in the Torah as
well. Thus these two alternatives are otherwise perfectly feasible.

The rest of the texts must be examined in the light to two questions.
The first is whether or not the word should be translated as one of the
common alternatives noted above (as a preposition, a preposition with
the suffix, the verb imperative, or as “leaves of” or “pestle.”). Once
these meanings are eliminated, we are left with the alternatives of
Exodus 8:(5)9. The second task is to determine whether the text refers
to Imam Ali (as) or some other figure.

There is nothing in Exodus 8:(5)9 to indicate whether a human or divine
figure is meant. The Muslim reader will immediately doubt whether the
word is an epithet of God, since it is generally used so in the holy
Qur’an. The translators of the Bible, however, have generally neglected
that possibility, probably from hesitance to impose an Arabicism on the
Biblical Hebrew text rather than bias. We can only hope to answer the
question by an examination of all of the texts. Failing that, recourse
to extra-biblical sources will be necessary

Such texts as Numbers 11:13 and 14:27 could conceivably be translated
cAli as well as a form of interjection, something on the order of “ya
Ali!” Numbers 11:13 Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this
people? for they weep unto me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat.

Numbers 14:27 How long (shall I bear with) this evil congregation,
which murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of the children of
Israel, which they murmur against me. The second occurrence, however, in
Numbers 14:27 can only be translated as in the Authorized Version. Even
without this evidence, however, the structure of the sentences makes the
authorized translation preferable.

The structure of Numbers 14:29 is neutral, and would actually as such
allow the translation with cAli as easily as “against me.” The witness
of verse 27, however, speaks against cAli as the better alternative.
Numbers 14:29 Your carcases shall fall in this wilderness; and all that
were numbered of you, according to your whole number, from twenty years
old and upward, which have murmured against me.

Numbers 21:17 is the second text that translators have been willing to
leave in a form void of meaning, in the figure of the flying well. It is
doubly troublesome in lacking an explanatory context.

Numbers 21:17 Then Israel sang this song, Spring up, O well; sing ye
unto it. The authorized translator writes words more appropriate to
Alice in Wonderland than to scriptural translation. Most others do
little better. Douay, Darby, The Jewish Publication Society Bible, The
Twenty-first Century King James, Green’s Literal Translation, The Modern
King James Version, The New King James Version, la Bible nouvelle
edition de Geneve, the Webster and most other are satisfied with this
interpretation. The Bible in Basic English tries to avoid the problem of
the flying well by replacing it with the obedient well that comes when
called: Then Israel gave voice to this song: Come up, O water-spring,
let us make a song to it. Other translators have recognized the problem
and tried to make sense of it by referring to the springing up of the
water from a fountain. Among these are Finnish translation of 1938, the
Swedish translation of 1917, and la nuova Diodati 1991. These are
roughly “surge out, o well!” English translators are willing to depend
on the ambiguity of the word “spring” in English. A few translators
assume a preposition between the verb and the noun, thus making the noun
the direction of movement rather than the vocative. This relieves us of
the rather forced speech to a well. Among these are the redivierte
Schlachter Bibel 1951 Da sang Israel dieses Lied: «Kommt zum Brunnen!
Singt von ihm! It is rare to find help from the LXX in this dilemma, but
perhaps Luther’s original is such an example Da sang Israel dieses Lied,
und sangen umeinander über dem Brunnen. The translators in the revision
of Luther have succumbed to the general fascination with nonsense. Even
the Vulgata is surprisingly interpretive with the LXX with tunc cecinit
Israhel carmen istud ascendat puteus concinebant. Young makes a novel
contribution by rejecting the Masoretic pointing of the word, thus
changing it from an imperative to the preposition. (Young’s literal
translation. Then singeth Israel this song, concerning the well--they
have answered to it. In so doing, Young is the only translator to write
a grammatically sensible translation. However, by doing so, he
suppresses the song itself, thus raising the issue of what “this” can
possibly refer to. In sum, almost every possible configuration has been
tried. The implication is that no translator actually knows what the
verse means.

There is a construction that is completely normal and understandable in
Hebrew, whereby cAli is the subject and the well the predicate: cAli is
a well. It is not clear, however, to whom this proper name refers.

It is possible, but not necessary, to translate cAli as a proper name
in Numbers 24:6.

The Authorized Version is As the valleys are they spread forth, as
gardens by the river's side, as the trees of lign aloes which the LORD
hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters. All translators seem
to accept the interpretation “by the river.” Furthermore, it parallels
what follows, “beside the waters.” Semantically and syntactically there
seems to be no better alternative. If one understands cAli as a proper
name here, the translation might read (following the Authorized Version
otherwise): Ali is like the valleys that spread forth, like gardens, a
river: as the trees... No linguistic arguments favour this
interpretation. However, its position so close to Numbers 21:17, the
similar references to water (well, river), and the further consideration
that almost the entire book of Numbers contemplates the question of
leadership authority, are factors that speak in favour of cAli as a
proper name in this text also.

Deuteronomy 17:14 also deserves attention. The Authorised Version has
this as When thou art come unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I
will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me...
The significant phrase is “a king over me” or cAli melekh. If cAli were
an epithet (exalted), it should come after the word “king” rather than
before it. As it stands, it could be translated “I will set cAli king
like all the peoples that are around me.”

This implies that the personage of cAli is king of all the peoples
around. The Authorised Version also has hermeneutical problems. The
actual narrative relative to the establishment of kingship in Israel is
found in 1 Samuel, and is clearly ill-advised. It requires the
establishment of the unacceptable monarchy of Saul as a bridge to the
acceptable dynasty of David (as). The critical study of Deuteronomy
would date it as a later text, in which case there would be no problem.
As it stands, the acceptability (with reservations) of the monarchy in
Deuteronomy conflicts with the policy of Samuel. Probably the verse
should stand as interpreted by the Authorised Version, whatever the
hermeneutical problems may be.

In 1 Chronicles 28:19 there is an occurrence of the word that could
well be translated as an epithet. The Authorised Version has this as All
(this, said David,) the LORD made me understand in writing by his hand
upon me, even all the works of this pattern. The relevant phrase is
“miyyadh YHWH cAli.” The translator has rearranged the words in
translation probably because he does not, on the basis of philological
reasons, accept the possibility of understanding cAli as an epithet. A
Qur’anic translator would have thought of this alternative first and
perhaps have ignored the other altogether, but would at the same time
lay himself open to charges of Arabicism. Many translators have noticed
the awkwardness of including “upon me” in the text, and have merely
disregarded it, as does the American Standard Version: All this, (said
David,) have I been made to understand in writing from the hand of
Jehovah, even all the works of this pattern. Others reinterpret it as a
preposition with an eliptical object as does the Revised Standard
Version All this he made clear by the writing from the hand of the LORD
concerning it, all the work to be done according to the plan. In the
latter cAli is translated with some imagination as “concerning it.”

The more straightforward translation would be “The whole in writing
from the hand of YHWH cAli made clear...” This could be understood as
“He made clear the whole in writing by the hand of YHWH cAli.” The
interpretation “cAli made clear the whole in writing by the hand of
YHWH” ignores Hebrew syntax. cAli must therefore refer to God in this
text. The concrete meanings of the words should probably give way to
their more abstract meanings, thus “The whole by decree from the
authority of YHWH cAli made clear...” If this is an acceptable
interpretation, it would provide a Hebrew precedent for the use of the
word as an epithet, the exalted, as in Arabic.

A strange syntactical configuration is one found in Nehemiah 5:7. The
Authorised Version has this as Then I consulted with myself, and I
rebuked the nobles, and the rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury,
every one of his brother. And I set a great assembly against them. The
relevant phrase is “with myself” which seems to translate libbi cali.
The full phrase is “my heart reigned cali. The word is syntactically in
the position of a prepositional phrase. This is the only occurrence of
the expression in the Scriptures, and it may well not mean “I consulted
with myself.” It would seem more likely to suggest that his heart, the
seat of his cogitations, reigned over him, thus influencing him to act
as follows. In any case no reference to a proper name can be inferred.

Much of the Book of Job is ambiguous, but the word cali appears in such
a context only once, in Job 29:7. The Authorised Version has it When I
went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat in the
street! No translators seem to see real alternatives to this
interpretation. Several Spanish translations disregard the prepositional
meaning and read “judicial” or something similar for cali. Another
adjectival alternative might be “leafy,” but neither of these is
relevant to the proper name Ali.

Psalm 7:8(9) has an interesting case. The Authorized Version renders
this The LORD shall judge the people: judge me, O LORD, according to my
righteousness, and according to mine integrity (that is) in me. There is
no reason whatsover to add “that is” to the text. The final word is just
as clearly a vocative as is the word YHWH at the pausal midpoint of the
verse. The two words parallel each other. In this case the word Ali most
readily relates to God, and is thus possibly a second precedent for the
epithet. On the other hand, there is no reason to prohibit addressing a
human figure in the second clause, that is, appealing to Ali as judge.

An interesting expression appears in Psalm 42:6(7). This is rendered in
the Authorised Version as O my God, my soul is cast down within me:
therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the
Hermonites, from the hill Mizar. The relevant phrase is cali nafshi.
There are several cases when the preposition occurs before a noun with
the same suffix, and these are merely circumlocutions expressing
possession. The same structure appears here. However, it appears
ambiguously, since cali appears between Elohay and nafshi, and could
stand as easily with one as the other. The expression could be
interpreted as “my God exalted.” In this case cali would be an epithet
referring to God, either as a proper name or as an attribute, but again
an Arabicism unrecognized by Biblical scholars.

Another case of possible reference to God may be seen in Psalm
56:12(13). The Authorised Version gives Thy vows (are) upon me, O God: I
will render praises unto thee. A more straightforward interpretation
would render both words at the beginning as vocatives, thus cAli Elohim.
This interpretation would require the third word, “thy vows,” to go with
the rest of the sentence. The midpoint pausal does not exclude that
possibility. The translation would then read “O exalted God, (by) thy
vows will I render praises unto thee.” Again, this would require the
acceptance of an Arabicism.

Psalm 57:2(3) presents another possibility of a vocative parallel. The
Authorised Version gives I will cry unto God most high; unto God that
performeth (all things) for me. Here again the Qur’anic translator would
immediately see two parallel epithets after the word El. Many verses of
the Qur’an terminate in precisely this way. Thus we should read “I will
cry unto God most high; unto God Accomplisher, Exalted.” This is
especially interesting, since it uses the expanded word from the same
root as Ali, celyon. This form of the word Ali is the one generally used
in Hebrew in reference to God.

Psalm 86:13 is ambiguous, and could be translated in either of two
ways. The Authorized Version gives For great (is) thy mercy toward me:
and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell. The alternative
would be “For great (is) thy mercy, O cAli...” In this case the name
again would refer again to God.

There is a final verse in Ezekiel 3:14 where the word could just as
well be translated as an epithet of God. The Authorised Version gives So
the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in bitterness, in
the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the LORD was strong upon me. The
alternative translation would be “...the hand of the LORD exalted was
strong.”

The texts examined may be placed in several groups. The first includes
cases of ambiguity which do not contribute toward finding the word cAli
used as a proper name or epithet. The second includes cases of ambiguity
in which the word cAli could just as well be translated as a proper name
or epithet, but in which cases the translators have never chosen to do
so. The third group includes cases of ambiguity in which the word cAli
could best be translated as a proper name or epithet, but in which cases
the translators have sought awkward alternatives, often adding words not
found in the original.

The texts remain troublesome. There are texts that can clearly best be
translated as referring to a proper name or epithet. These suggest that
others, ambiguous ones, might also best be interpreted in this way. As
we examine these to determine whether the name Ali (or the Hebrew
segholate form Eli) is meant, we see that some of these, if they are
interpreted as epithets or proper nouns, must refer to God. In that
case, an Arabicism produces a parallel term to the common Hebrew term
Elyon.

Nevertheless, there are two considerations to note. The first is that
several of the ambiguous names, notably those in the Torah, associate
the name cAli with a source of water. This brings to mind Qur’anic
associations, specifically the pool of Kauthar and the role given to
cAli (as) in that regard. While it is not possible to state that the
word cAli in the Hebrew Scriptures is used in a prophetic sense in
regard to cAli (as), there are passages that seem to be evocative of
that. They are ambiguous, and perhaps refer to God, but the possibility
remains that they are faint intimations, or perhaps more than faint
intimations of a promised figure to come.

The second consideration is that non-Muslim Biblical scholars have not
taken note of the fact that the epithet cAli as applied to God in the
Qur’an has striking parallels in the Hebrew Scriptures, not only in the
Psalms but in several other passages. This failure is only to be
expected, since it requires the acceptance of an Arabicism. The positive
result of this study is to show that the Hebrew Scriptures and the holy
Qur’an are perhaps closer to each other in expression than has generally
been acknowledged. In any case, either the acceptance of the term as
meaning “exalted” on one hand, or as a proper name on the other, seems
to be the best way of accommodating those texts of Scripture that until
now have been glossed over with translations having little or no
meaning. Either solution brings the Bible closer into accord with
Islam.

