Section 1: Knowing Allah
========================

Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, has said, "One among you who knows
Allah best is the one who fears Him most, and I fear Him even more than
him." Ibn \`Abbas[^1] says that a bedouin once came to the Messenger of
Allah and said, "O Messenger of Allah! Teach me of the most unusual of
knowledge!" He asked him, "What have you done with the peak of knowledge
so that you now ask about its most unusual things?!"

The man asked him, "O Messenger of Allah! What is this peak of
knowledge?!" He said, "It is knowing Allah as He deserves to be known."
The bedouin then said, "And how can He be known as He ought to be?" The
Messenger of Allah answered, "It is that you know Him as having no
model, no peer, no antithesis, and that He is One and only: He is the
One Who is Apparent yet Hidden, the First and the Last, having no peer
nor a similitude; this is the true knowledge about Him."

Accurately knowing Allah is the pillar whereupon Islam in its entirety
hinges. Without such knowledge, any action in Islam does not have any
real value whatsoever: it has neither essence nor value. The Question
is: "How can we get to know Allah, and what is the venue for attaining
such knowledge?"

The answer is crucially conditional: If we do not know the right course,
we can never reach our destination. Any erroneous approach to knowing
Allah is a major contributor to distancing a large number of people from
accurately getting to believe in Allah. The Holy Qur’an narrates to us
stories about those who disbelieved in Allah in every age and time,
depicting for us how they insisted, in order to believe in Him, on
hearing or seeing Him, relying on their senses. Following are only a few
examples: Allah Almighty has said,

***And those who have no knowledge say: Why does not Allah speak to us
or a sign come to us? Even thus did those before them say; (they said)
the like of what such people say; their hearts are all alike. Indeed, We
have made the signs (leading to belief in Him) clear for people who are
sure. (2:118)***

***And those who do not hope for Our meeting say: Why have no angels
been sent down upon us, or (why) do we not see our Lord? Certainly they
themselves are too proud and have revolted in great revolt. On the day
they see the angels, there shall be no joy on that day for the guilty...
(25:21-22)***

***Pharaoh said: O Haman! Build me a tower so that I may attain the
means of access, the means of access to the heavens, then (I may be able
to) reach the God of Moses, and I surely think he is*** ***a liar. And
thus was the evil of his deed made fair-seeming to Pharaoh, and he was
turned away from the (right) course. (40:36-37)***

"Turned away from the (right) course" refers to the course that ends
with acquiring a sound and accurate knowledge of the Almighty. Such a
goal should be our first and foremost concern. Without properly knowing
Allah, how can we properly worship Him?

The Messenger of Allah Muhammad has said in a *qudsi* tradition, "For
everything there is a path, and the path to Paradise is knowledge." This
is a humble attempt to search for such sound and accurate knowledge, the
one that brings us closer to our Lord and leads us to the path of
salvation, to happiness both in this life and in the eternal life to
come.

Muslims Start Everything in the Name of Allah
---------------------------------------------

In one *hadith*, the Messenger of Allah is quoted saying, "Anything
which does not start with the Name of Allah is cut-off (from Allah's
blessing)." It is customary for Muslims to invoke the Name of Allah
whenever they do anything important, or whenever they seek His
protection against His arch-enemy and ours Satan the Accursed. Examples
are:

When they stand up or sit down, when they eat or drink, when they enter
their homes, when they open the door of their cars or bathrooms or any
room in the house, when they start the engines of their cars, when they
put on or take off their clothes, when they ascend or descend a ladder,
when they start writing something important, when they slaughter an
animal decreed by Allah as lawful for their food..., and even when they
cohabit with their wives in the hope Allah will bless them with
righteous progeny.

Such are the manners of good Muslims. So let us start in the Name of
Allah Who created and determined everything from nothing, the
ever-Living, the Eternal Who is never affected by time, nor space, nor
anything else, Who never initiated a place for His being, nor did He
attain His might after having created everything, nor was He weak before
then. In the Name of Allah Who never needed company before creating
everything.

In the Name of Allah the like of Whom there is none at all, nor was He
without His domain before the latter's creation. In the Name of Allah
Who hears without a hearing faculty, Who sees without vision. In the
Name of Allah Who is Mighty without having to derive His might from His
creation. In the Name of Allah the eyes of Whose creatures can never see
Him, the Most Exalted One, the all-Knowing. I testify that Allah is the
One and Only God; there is no partner with Him, the One and only

One upon Whom all things and beings depend. He does not beget, nor is He
begotten, nor is there anything like Him. I further testify that our
master Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger, bearer of His Message and
of the glad tidings, the one whom He trusted for His revelation;
blessings of Allah be upon him and his righteous and pure progeny.

How Prophet Muhammad Praised His Lord
-------------------------------------

Our master Muhammad has said,  
 All Praise is due to Allah, the One and only God. His being Eternal is
compounded by His being Divine. He is Proud in His own right and in His
Greatness. He creates whatever He wills and initiates the creation
without having to have a model for any of what He creates! Our Lord is
the One Who has always been beyond time as such; through His knowledge
has He split the seed; through His Might has He created all creation;
through the light of the morning has He started the dawn; there is none
that can alter what He has created, nor is there any that can change
what He has made, nor is there any that can revoke His decree or repeal
His command or be exempted from His call!

There is no extinction to His domain, nor is there a term for His
Divinity. He is the first to create, the One Who is eternal even beyond
eternity itself, the One Who has obscured Himself from His creation in
the horizon of ambition, in the lofty Exaltation, in the abundant
domain, higher than anything that is high. Yet He is close to
everything, so He manifests Himself to His creatures even without being
seen, while He is the most Sublime! By His Light He veiled Himself and
ascended the height, obscuring Himself from His creation.

He sent them messengers so that He would have the clear argument against
them, and so that His messengers would testify against His creation. He
sent prophets to them to bring them glad tidings and to warn them, so
that He would guide whomsoever He pleases after providing them with His
clear signs and bringing to life whomsoever He pleases with the same,
hence the creation will know about their Lord that which they did not
know, and they will know Him as their God after having rejected Him.
They will believe in His Unity after having persisted in denying it.

Commonly Asked Questions About "Allah"
--------------------------------------

Let us now try to answer a number of basic questions about the Almighty:

### 1. How can you describe Him?

Numerous verses of the Holy Qur’an point out to His existence. Consider
the argument of His Friend Ibrahim (Abraham, as) who said:

***"My Lord is the One Who brings life and Who causes death" (Qur’an,
2:258),***

and the argument of Moses who said,

***"[He is] your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of old" (Qur’an,
26:26).***

Also consider these verses:

***Our Lord is the One Who gave everything its creation, then He guided
it (to its destination). (20:50)***

***The Lord of the East and the West: there is no god but He; therefore,
take Him for a protector. (73:9)***

### 2. Can you define Him?

The Exalted One says that He defies definition:

***"... nothing at all is like Him" (Qur’an, 42:11).***

### 3. Can one ask: "What is He?"

***Pharaoh asked Moses, "And what is the Lord of the worlds?" (Qur’an,
26:23).***

***Moses answered by saying that He is "Your Lord and the Lord of your
fathers of old" (Qur’an, 26:26).***

There is no way to know Him by defining "what" He is; rather, one can
get to know the proofs of His Existence, Might, Knowledge, Wisdom, Mercy
and His being the Creator of everything. "Do not think about Allah,"
said Imam \`Ali, "rather, think about what Allah has created, for
thinking about Allah only increases one's bewilderment."

### 4. Is He one or more?

The Glorified One has required the Muslims to

***Say: He, Allah, is One. (112:1)***

***And your God is One God! (2:163)***

***Had there been in them any gods besides Allah, they would both have
certainly been in a state of disorder. (21:22)***

### 5. Is He confined to any place?

The Holy Qur’an tells us that:

***He is the Supreme (watching) over His worshippers. (6:61)***

***They revere their Lord High above them. (16:50)***

***The Beneficent God is firmly established on the throne (of
authority). (20:5)***

"Above them" in 16:50 refers to the Almighty being above His servants in
His Might, Power, Loftiness, not to being above them in place, space,
area, elevation, or physical location; these do not apply to Him. The
Messenger of Allah called upon His Lord during his ascension to heavens
pleading to Him thus, "You are as You have praised Your own Self," and
Prophet Younus (Jonah) son of Matti, while being in the bottom of the
sea, called upon his Lord saying,

***"There is no god but You! Glory to You! Surely I have become one of
those who commit injustice against their own souls!" (Qur’an, 21:87).***

The Messenger of Allah has said, "Do not exalt me over him [over Younus]
in nearness to Allah just because I reached the High Throne while he was
in the bottom of the sea, for the Adored One is above being confined to
a space or a direction." He has also addressed Him saying, "You and he
in the strata of the heavens;" the believers call upon Him saying,

"You and them on earth." Had He been in a particular area or place, all
these persons could not have differed from one another in His regard at
any given time. He is above being confined to place or direction:

***"All those in the heavens and the earth glorify Allah" (Qur’an,
57:1***).

### 6. When did He begin to exist?

***The Praised One has said, He is the First and the Last, the Evident
and the Immanent, and He has full knowledge of all things. (57:3)***

***Everything is to perish except He. (28:88)***

Anyone who asks when His existence came to be implies that there was a
time when He did not exist, i.e. that void preceded Him. He is not
"preceded" by anyone, nor is He "succeeded" by anyone. His continuation
is above being tied to time. His existence is too holy to be dependent
on time; such are characteristics of things or persons who come to be
then perish, or of those whose being is possible in the future, but they
do not apply to Him.

Another verse which similarly describes His eternity and perpetuity is
this one:

***"Everyone on earth will perish but will abide (forever) the Face of
your Lord, full of Majesty, Bounty and Honour" (Qur’an, 55:26-27)***,

and also this:

***"Blessed is He in Whose hands is the dominion" (Qur’an, 67:1).***

"Blessed," that is, *tabaraka*, is derived from *baraka*, blessing,
which connotes constancy and lack of acceptance to change. His existence
is everlasting, eternal, perpetual.

### 7. Over what does He rule?

The Almighty says,

***"Say: O Allah! Master of authority! You give authority to whomsoever
You please and take it away from whomsoever You please" (Qur’an,
3:26).***

He, and only He, is the King of kings; He grants others authority:

***"Blessed is the One in Whose hand is the kingdom" (Qur’an, 67:1)***.

Vanities and possessions owned by others will all disappear on the Day
of Judgment:

***"Whose will be the dominion that Day? It is Allah's, the One, the
Subduer (of all)" (Qur’an, 40:16)***.

### 8. What is [the extent of] His knowledge?

He has said,

***[He is] the One Who knows the unseen and the seen. (6:73)***

***And with Him are the keys of the unseen treasures: none knows them
except He. (6:59)***

***Slumber does not overtake Him nor sleep. (2:255)***

***And your Lord is not forgetful. (19:64)***

***And you are not (engaged) in any affair, nor do you recite concerning
it any portion of the Qur’an, nor do you do anything, except that We are
witnesses over you when you enter into it. (10:61)***

### 9. What is His speech?

The Most Glorified and Exalted has said,

***Were every tree on earth (made into) pens and the sea (to supply it
with ink), with seven more seas to add thereto, the words of Allah would
not have been exhausted; surely Allah is Mighty, Wise. (31:27)***

***Say: Were the sea (turned into) ink for the (recording of the) words
of my Lord, the sea would surely be consumed before the words of my Lord
are exhausted though We were to bring the like of that (sea) to add
thereto. (18:109)***

### 10. How is He?

The Exalted One says,

***Allah's is the command before (now) and thereafter. (30:4)***

***The day on which no soul shall control anything for (another) soul,
and the command on that Day shall be entirely Allah's. (82:19)***

### 11. Why is He the Praised One?

The Almighty has said that He is ***"... the Apparent and the Hidden"
(Qur’an, 57:3)***, that is, His Existence, Might and Wisdom are all
evident if one observes the indications thereto, yet His reality is
obscured from all intellects.

### 12. What is His will?

The answer to this verse is provided by verses such as these:

***And you do not please except if Allah [so] pleases. (76:30)***

***Allah chooses whomsoever He pleases especially for His mercy, and
Allah is the Lord of mighty grace. (2:105)***

***Allah grants His authority to whomsoever He pleases, and Allah cares
for all, and He knows all things. (2:247)***

***Allah sets on the right path whomsoever He pleases. (2:272)***

***He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He pleases. (3:6)***

 ***If He pleases, He may take you off and make whomsoever He pleases
successors after you. (6:133)***

### 13. Why is He the all-Knowing, the Omnipotent?

***He has responded to those who raised such a question by saying, He
cannot be questioned concerning what He does while they shall be
questioned. (21:23)***

All things are destined in the end to the One Who has facilitated their
being what they are, the One Who cannot be explained; therefore, the
attempt to analyze Him, His Attributes, and His actions, is simply
impossible.

### 14. Does He have sons, daughters, parents, or any family members or relatives?!

The God of Islam and of all mankind has said,

***"Say: He, Allah, is One. Allah is He on Whom everyone [and
everything] depends. He does not beget, nor is He begotten, and none is
like Him" (Qur’an, 112:1-4).***

### 15. Does He forgive?

He has said, ***"Inform My servants that I am the Forgiving, the
Merciful" (Qur’an, 15:49).***

### 16. What about His creation?

He has said,

***O man! What has beguiled you from your Lord, the Gracious One Who
created you then made you complete, then He made you symmetrical? Into
whatever form He pleased did He shape you. (82:6-8)***

***Have they not considered that Allah, Who created the heavens and the
earth and was not tired by their creation...? (46:33)***

***This is Allah's creation, so show Me what those besides Him have
created. (31:11)***

### 17. Can He be seen?

He, the Most Exalted, the Most High, has told that

***When Moses came to the place appointed by Us, and his Lord addressed
him, he said: "Lord! Show (Yourself) to me so that I may look upon You."
Allah said: "By no means can you see Me; but look at the mountain; if it
abides in its place, then shall you see Me." When his Lord manifested
His glory to the mountain, He made it like dust, and Moses fell in a
swoon. When he recovered his senses, he said: "Glory to You! To You do I
turn in repentance, and I am the first to believe." (Qur’an, 7:143).***

Sunnis, however, believe, as the reader will find out in a later part of
this book, that the believers will be able on the Day of Judgment to see
Allah. Shi\`as disagree with them as you will read later in this book,
*Insha-Allah*.

### 18. How does He command?

***He has said, His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to
it: Be, and it is. (36:82)***

***When He decrees an affair, He only says to it: Be, and it is. (40:68)
His creatures have always wondered about His Attributes, Praise and
Glory to Him, so He provided them with the following verses wherein they
can find the clear answer: And Allah's are the most Beautiful Names
(Attributes), so call upon Him thereby. (7:180)***

***Allah: there is no god but He; His are the very Best Names. (20:8)***

***Say: Call upon Allah or upon al-Raman; whichever you call upon, He
has the Great Names...(17:110).***

***He is Allah, besides Whom there is no other god; the King, the Holy,
the One Who grants peace, the One Who gives security, the Guardian over
all, the Mighty, the Supreme, the Possessor of greatness; Glory to Allah
from what they set up (with Him). He is Allah the Creator, the Maker,
the Fashioner; His are the most beautiful Attributes; whatever in the
heavens and the earth declares His glory, and He is the Mighty, the
Wise. (59:21-24)***

[^1]: Ibn \`Abbas was one of Prophet Muhammad's cousins: he was Abdullah
ibn \`Abbas ibn Abd al-Muattalib, of Banu Hashim, of Quraysh. Referred
to as the Islamic nation's scribe, he was a highly respected sahabi
whose hadith are classified by al-Bukhari and Muslim as "sahih"
accurate, authentic. He was born in Mecca, and he kept the Messenger of
Allah company and narrated his traditions. He fought on the side of Imam
\`Ali during the Battle of the Camel (which started on Friday, Jumada I
16, 36 A.H./November 10, 656 A.H.) against \`Ayesha and her supporters,
and also during the Battle of Siffin (which started in Thul-Hijjah 36
A.H./May 657 A.D.). During his later years, he became blind, so he
retired to 'if where he died in 68 A.H./687 A.D. In both al-Bukhari's
and Muslim's Sahih books, there are 1160 hadith transmitted through Ibn
\`Abbas alone.


