The Ninety Nine Attributes of Allah
===================================

In the Holy Qur’an, we read the following verses:

***Allah: There is no god but He; His are the Greatest Names. (20:8)***

***Say: Call upon Allah or call upon the Beneficent God (al-Rahman);
whichever you call upon, He has the Greatest Names." (Qur’an, 17:110)***

***To Allah belong the Greatest Names; therefore, call on Him thereby,
and leave alone those who violate the sanctity of His Names..." (Qur’an,
7:180)***

In order to familiarize ourselves with Allah's Attributes, we have to
consult the Holy Qur’an, traditions, or even common-sense. On page 220
of his Book of Unity (of Allah), Shaikh Muhammad ibn \`Ali ibn Babawayh
al-Qummi al-Saduq quotes Imam Ja\`fer al-Sadiq quoting his forefathers
quoting the Messenger of Allah saying,

"There are ninety-nine Attributes, one hundred minus one, of Allah;
whoever counts them will enter Paradise." He is also quoted saying that
whoever learns these Attributes by heart and comprehends their meanings
(and acts upon it) will enter Paradise. One should be familiar with the
meanings and implications of these names, not just with their count.
Nobody can sufficiently be acquainted with the Attributes of Allah as He
Himself says in 73:20: ***"He knows that you cannot (sufficiently) count
Him (His Attributes)."***

A tradition says, "Derive your manners from the Attributes of Allah."
Allah has willed to show His servant His Attributes which collectively
describe Him without His Name being a separate part thereof, even though
He is not identical to them in essence.

On page 112, Vol. 1, the renown scholar al-Kulaini al-Razi cites Hisham
ibn al-Hakam saying that when he once asked Imam Ja\`fer al-Sadiq about
Allah's Attributes and their derivation, as well as the derivation of
the word "Allah," the Imam said to him, "O Hisham! The proper noun
\`Allah' is derived from \`ilah;' the Creator requires the existence of
creation [to testify to His being its Creator]. This is a noun, not an
adjective.

Anyone who worships a name without worshipping what the name stands for
is actually committing kufr, apostasy; in reality, he does not worship
anything at all. One who worships the name and the meaning is also
committing kufr, for he will be worshipping two. Only one who worships
the meaning without the name is in line with the concept of Tawhid
(Unity of God). Have you understood all of this, O Hisham?"

He answered him in the affirmative, requesting him to provide more
explanations, whereupon the Imam said, "There are ninety-nine Attributes
of Allah. Had each Attribute been the same as it describes, each one of
them would have been a god by itself. But \`Allah' is the meaning one
deducts once he becomes familiar with all these Attributes. They all, O
Hisham, in their collective sense, are not the same as He Himself. Bread
is something you eat. Water is something you drink. A garment is
something you put on. And fire is something that burns. Do you
understand all of this, O Hisham, fully enough so that you would promote
it and fight the enemies of Allah for its sake?!"

Hisham answered him in the affirmative, whereupon the Imam added, "May
Allah grant you thereby benefits, and may He keep your feet firm
thereupon, O Hisham!"  
 Imam al-Sadiq has said,

O son of Adam! If a bird were to eat your heart, it would not have felt
satisfied. If the hole of a needle were put before your vision, it would
have covered it up. How dare you, using these two, expect to know by
them the domain of the heavens and the earth?! Had you been truthful,
you would have looked at this sun: it is one object among many of
Allah's creations. Had your eyes been able to see all of it, then, and
only then, would you have really been truthful. Allah, the Exalted and
the Great, says,

***"And to your Lord is the [end] goal" (Qur’an, 53:42)***.

So, when speech reaches the subject of Allah, it is then that you should
hold your tongue...

Explanation and derivation of the word "Allah"
----------------------------------------------

Views vary in this regard. One says it is derived from one who ilahs (as
a verb) another when the latter seeks refuge with him during the time of
fear or calamity, and he would grant him refuge and a safe haven; so,
the word would become ilah (as a noun) of people, just as one may be
their imam when he leads them in congregational prayers or becomes their
undisputed leader, or just as a robe becomes a rid' when it is worn, or
lihaf when used as a covering. Since it is an adjective for someone who
is great, ***"There is nothing like unto Him" (Qur’an, 42:11)***, people
desired to glorify Him by giving the word the prefix al, thus it became
Al-ilah.

But they found the hamza in the beginning and also in its midst, where
it is quite heavily stressed, heavy on the tongue, so they eliminated it
and it became just as it is revealed in the Holy Qur’an, that is,
"Allah." This viewpoint is supported by al-Harith ibn Asad al-Muhasibi
and a group of scholars, and there are dissenters.

### Derivation of the Word "Allah"

Some say that the word "Allah" is derived from the verb walaha (past
tense), yawlahu (present tense), from the root noun walah. The waw was
replaced with a hamza, just as the case with wisad and isad, wisha and
isha, wikaf and ikaf. Walah is extreme love. Prophet Yahya (John the
Baptist) used to be forlorn most of the time whereas Jesus used to be
mostly merry and always wearing a smile on his face. They both sought
the judgment of the Almighty in their regard, whereupon Allah inspired
them, "The nearest of you to Me is the one who thinks best of Me." And
surely Allah knows best.

The Almighty is Endless regarding His essence, perpetuity, eternity,
Attributes, qualities and blessings. His creation, on the other hand,
are described as reaching the end of their life terms, being limited in
their characteristics, thoughts, and spheres. The one who is
incapacitated cannot reach the Endless One. No wonder, then, that the
minds are forever overcome by the lights of His Independence, and the
reasons are too feeble to realize the brightness of His Greatness. He is
as He describes Himself when He says in 6:18 and 6:61, ***"He is the
Supreme above His servants."***

The Creator is the One Who is adored, and He is worthy of it; hence, He
is called ilah. He has made it clear for us that He is the One who
bestows His blessings upon those whom He creates in sundry ways. Adoring
is the ultimate form of glorifying. Reason testifies that the ultimate
end of glorification suits only the One Who is the source of benevolence
and bliss. It is to this fact that the Almighty refers when He says,

***"How do you deny Allah while you were dead and He gave you Life"?
(2:28).***

Nobody knows Allah as He deserves to be known except Allah Himself. In
sermon 186 in Nahjul Balagha, Imam \`Ali says the following:

One who assigns conditions to Him does not believe in His Oneness, nor
does one who likens Him to anything grasp the reality about Him. One who
illustrates an example for Him does not revere Him. One who points at
Him and imagines Him does not know the meaning of His Lordship. Anything
known by itself is a created thing, and everything that exists by virtue
of other things is the effect thereof. He does things but not with the
help of instruments. He assigns measures but not with the faculty of
thinking. He is rich but not by acquisition. Time does not keep company
with Him, nor does He seek help from any means.

His Being precedes time. His Existence precedes non-existence, and His
eternity precedes beginning. By creating the senses, it is known that He
does not have the same. By comparing antitheses, it is known that He has
no antithesis, and by striking similarities between things, it is known
that there is nothing similar to Him. He has made light the contrary of
darkness, brightness the opposite of dimness, dryness the opposite of
moisture, and heat the opposite of coolness.

He causes harmony among opposites. He fuses together diverse things; He
brings closer what is remote and distances what is joined together. He
is not confined to limits, nor computed by figures. Matters are
attracted to one another, and parts point out to what is similar to
them; the word "since" disproves their eternity, and possibility
disproves their perpetuity, while certain means keep them distant from
perfection.

Through them does the Creator manifest Himself to the intellect, and by
them is He veiled from vision. Stillness and motion do not apply to Him;
how can anything that He causes to have any effect on Him, and how can
anything which He has created revert in its effect unto Him? Or how can
anything have an impact upon Him while He Himself brought it to being?
Had it not been so, He would have become subject to diversity, His Being
would have become divisible (into parts), and His reality would have
been prevented from being Eternal.

Had He had a front, He would have had a rear! He would have needed to be
completed had there been any shortage in Him. In that case,
characteristics of His creatures would have appeared in Him, and He
would have become a sign (leading to other objects) instead of the
latter leading to Him. Through the might of His effectiveness is He
distanced above being affected by things. Neither change nor extinction
affect Him. He has not begotten anyone lest He should be said as having
been Himself born. He has not been begotten lest He should have been
confined to limits. He is too sublime to have sons, too pure to take
women.

Imagination cannot reach Him to assess Him. Comprehension cannot
conceive Him and fancy a shape for Him. Senses do not perceive Him to
probe Him. Hands cannot touch Him to feel Him. He does not change into
any condition. He does not pass from one stage to another. Nights and
days do not age Him. Light and darkness do not alter Him. It cannot be
said that He has a limb or extremity, an end or an expiration, nor do
things control Him to raise or lower Him, nor does anything support Him
to bend Him or keep Him erect. He is not inside things nor outside them.
He conveys news, but not with the tongue or voice. He listens, but not
with ear holes or organs of hearing. He speaks but does not utter words.

He remembers but does not memorize. He determines but not by exercising
His mind. He loves and approves without sentiments. He hates and feels
angry without any painstaking. When He intends to create a thing, He
says to it "Be" and it is, but not through a voice that strikes (the
ears). His speech is a manifestation of what He has created. His peer
never existed before, nor is He regarded as old; otherwise, He would
have become a second god. It cannot be said that He came into being
after He had not been in existence because in that case the effects of
creation would have been reflected on Him, and there would have remained
no difference between them and Him, and He would have no distinction
over them.

Thus, the Creator and the created would have become equal, and the
Initiator and the initiated would have been on the same level. He
created creation without any model made by someone else, and He did not
secure the assistance of any among His creation for creating. He created
the earth and controlled it without having to hold it, retained it
without having to support it, making it stand without poles, raising it
without pillars, protecting it against bending or curving, defending it
against crumbling or fragmenting.

He fixed mountains on it like pegs, solidified its rocks, caused its
streams to flow and expanded its valleys. Whatever He made did not
suffer any flaw, and whatever He strengthened did not permit any
weakness. He manifests Himself over the earth through His authority and
greatness. He is aware of what there is inside it through His knowledge
and understanding. He has power over everything on earth by virtue of
His sublimity and dignity. Nothing on earth that He asks defies Him, nor
does it oppose Him to overpower Him.

He is not in need of anyone to feed Him. All things bow down to Him and
are humble before His greatness. They cannot flee away from His
authority to someone else in order to escape His benefit or harm. There
is no parallel for Him who may match Him, and none is like Him to equal
Him. He will destroy the earth after its existence, till all that exists
on it will become non-existent. But the extinction of the world after
its creation is no stranger than its formation and invention the first
time. How could it be?

Even if all the beings on earth, be they birds or beasts, cattle or
pasture herds, of different origins and species, clever or not so clever
nations, all jointly combine efforts to create even a mosquito, they
will not be able to bring it into being nor understand the means to its
creation. Their wits are bewildered and they are aimlessly wandering.
Their powers fall short and they fail, returning disappointed and worn
out, realizing that they are defeated, admitting their inability to
produce it.

They will also realize that they are too weak (even) to destroy it.
Surely, after the extinction of the world, Allah the Glorified will
remain alone with nothing else besides Him. He will be, after its
extinction, as He was before then: without time or place, a moment or a
period. Age and time will not then exist, and years and hours will
disappear. There will be nothing except Allah, the One, the Omnipotent.
To Him is the return of all matters.

The initial creation of all matters was never within the power of the
latter, and the prevention of their own extinction was never within
their reach. Had they had the power to prevent such an extinction, they
would have existed forever. When He created any part of this world, its
making did not cause Him any difficulty, and the creation of anything
which He created and formed did not exhaust Him. He did not create it to
enhance His authority, nor did He do so for fear of any loss or harm,
nor to seek help against an overwhelming foe, nor to guard against any
avenging opponent, nor for the extension of His domain, nor for boasting
of it before a partner, nor because of His feeling of loneliness and
desire to seek company.

Then, after its creation, He will destroy it not because of any worry
that overcomes Him in maintaining and administering it, nor for any
pleasure that will accrue to Him, nor for the cumbersomeness of anything
over Him. The prolongation of its existence does not wear Him out to
induce Him to its quick destruction.

But Allah, the Glorified One, has maintained it with His kindness, kept
it intact with His command, and perfected it with His might. Then, after
its destruction, He will bring it back to being again not for any need
of His own for it, nor to seek the assistance of anything in it, nor to
change the condition of loneliness to that of company, nor from
ignorance to knowledge, nor from want and need to independence and
plentitude, nor from disgrace and lowliness to honour and prestige.

In another sermon, wherein he discusses the beginning of the creation of
the heavens and the earth, the Imam says,

Praise is due to Allah Whose worth cannot be described by orators, Whose
bounties cannot be counted by those who compute, the obedience to Whom
cannot be satisfied by those who strive to do so, Whom the height of
intellectual endeavor cannot appreciate, and the depths of understanding
cannot reach, for Whose description no limit can ever be set, nor praise
satisfies, nor time suffices, and no duration is fixed.

He brought forth creation through His might, dispersed the winds as an
act of His mercy, and He firmed the earth with the mountains. The
foremost in religious obligation is to acknowledge Him, the perfection
of acknowledging Him is to achieve His Pleasure, the perfection of
achieving His Pleasure is to believe in His Oneness, the perfection of
believing in His Oneness is to regard Him as the Pure, and the
perfection of His purity is not to attach adjectives to Him because
every adjective is an indication that it is different from that to which
it is best named, and everything to which something is best named is
different from the Best Name itself.

Thus, whoever attaches adjectives to Allah recognizes a peer like Him,
and whoever recognizes His peer regards two gods; and whoever regards
Him as One of two associate-partners with Him, and whoever associates
partners with Him errs in His regard and does Him injustice, and whoever
errs in His regard points out at Him, and whoever points out at Him
admits limitations for Him, and whoever admits limitations for Him
numbers Him.

Whoever wonders where He is maintains that He is confined to a place,
and whoever wonders above what He is maintains that He is not above
something else. He is a Being but not through phenomenon of coming into
being. He exists but not from non-existence. He is with everything but
not in physical proximity. He is different from everything but not in
any physical way. He acts but without connotations of movement or means.
He sees yet none among His creation can see Him. He is One and Only, so
there is none with whom He keeps company or whom He misses when absent.

The Attributes of Allah
-----------------------

Now let us discuss His Attributes in more details:

### 1. "Allah"

The proper noun "Allah" solely belongs to The Almighty God, the Truth.
Anything succeeding it is regarded as an adjective describing it, while
it remains a noun indicative of the True God. It combines all His
Attributes, and it needs no introduction from others, whereas the other
Attributes attain recognition when added thereto. "Allah" is not given
to anyone other than Him, nor should it ever be used for anyone besides
Him.

***"Allah" is the ever-Existent, the One Who causes existence, Who
maintains existence, Who creates everything that exists. Whatever He
creates shall perish; He never will: "... say: \`Allah!' then leave them
sporting in their vain discourses" (Qur’an, 6:91).***

### 2. "Al-Rahman"

Allah has said, ***"All those in the heavens and the earth will come to
the Beneficent God obediently" (Qur’an, 19:93).***

"Al-Rahman al-Rahim" are two of the Attributes of Allah which remind
people of His mercy, of the fact that His act of affecting goodness and
rewards reach whomsoever He pleases, thus warding off evil from them.
"Al-Rahman" and "al-Rahim" are two concurrent Attributes of His each
conveying more meanings of mercy than the other.

"Al-Rahman" is an Attribute specifically relevant to Allah; none besides
Him can be called or referred to as such, whereas "al-rahim" can be
applied to people: One may be described as "rahim," merciful or kind,
but a human cannot be "rahman".

In the Holy Qur’an, we read:

***"In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful"
(Qur’an, 1:1); "The beneficent God is firm in power" (Qur’an, 20:5***).

It is an Attribute demonstrating that mercy can be possible only through
Him. It means "the One Who grants mercy beyond which there is no other
mercy at all and the like of which does not at all exist."  
 Though derived from mercy, "al-Rahman" is both a noun and an adjective.
Neither contradicts the other.  
 It is commonly known that mercy means: one's desire or power of will to
bring goodness to one who is much less than him in status.

### 3. "Al-Rahim"

Allah, Praise and Glory to Him, has said,

***"Inform My servants that I am the Forgiving, the Merciful" (Qur’an,
15:49).***

"Al-Rahim" is derived from "rahmah," mercy or compassion. "Rahmah"
implies the salvation of those who receive it from harm and loss, and
their being blessed with guidance, forgiveness and sound conviction.
Al-Rahim, i.e. the One Who grants rahmah, is a superlative. It is the
highest derivative form of rahmah. Allah has said,

***"He it is Who sends His blessings on you, and (so do) His angels, so
that He may bring you out of utter darkness into the light, and He is
Merciful to the believers" (Qur’an, 33:43).***

Al-Rahim is the One Who bestows countless blessings. Some say that this
word is derived from "Rahim," and we have already come to know that the
root word for it is "rahmah," that is, favours from Allah and blessings;
surely His blessings cannot be counted, nor can they ever be exhausted.

The Messenger of Allah has said, "One who has no compassion towards
people is deprived from Allah's Compassion." He has also said, "One who
does not respect the seniors among us, nor shows compassion towards our
young, nor safeguards the rights of the scholars among us, is surely
none of us." Compassion among the servants of Allah is a sure path to
achieving the mercy of Allah. The Messenger of Allah has said, "Be
merciful unto those on earth so that those in the heavens may be
merciful unto you."

### 4. "Al-Malik"

God has said, ***"So exalted be Allah, the True King" (Qur’an,
23:116).***

"Al-Malik" conveys the meaning of "One Who is free, by virtue of His Own
merits and characteristics, from depending on anything in existence,
while everything in existence depends on Him." Nothing in existence can
do without Him, whereas everything that exists derives its existence
from Him or because of Him. Everything/everyone is His.

Al-Malik occurs in: ***"Master of the Day of Judgment" (Qur’an, 1:4)***.
Another method of recitation: Melik, King of the Day of Judgment.
Al-Maleek exists in this verse: ***"In the seat of honour with a most
Powerful King" (Qur’an, 54:55).*** "Malikul-Mulk" exists in: ***"O
Allah, Master of the Kingdom!" (Qur’an, 3:26).*** "Al-Malakoot" exists
in: ***"Therefore glory to the One in Whose hand is the kingdom of all
things" (Qur’an, 36:83).***

The Almighty has described Himself as being "Malikul-Mulk,***" the Owner
of everything, of the whole domain, saying, "Say: O Allah, Master of the
Kingdom!" (Qur’an, 3:26),*** and ***"Master of the Day of Judgment"
(Qur’an, 1:4)***, which is one of the first verses of the Holy Qur’an.  
 A land's owner is its "malik," one legally bound to obey the king, the
"malik," with regard to land-related laws issued by the latter, whereas
the opposite is not possible.

Among the Attributes of Allah Almighty, the word "al-Malik" has occurred
independently, whereas the word "Malik" is always added to something
else, such as "Maliki yawmid-Deen," Master of the Day of Judgment;
therefore, the first Attribute has to be more revered.

### 5. "Al-Quddoos"

Allah has said, ***"Whatever in the heavens and in the earth declares
the glory of Allah, the King, the Holy" (Qur’an, 62:1).***

"Al-Qudoos" means: the One Whose characteristics cannot be conceived by
the senses, nor can He be conceived by imagination, nor can He be
realized by any mind or reason or judged by any intellect.
Linguistically, it is derived from "quds," purity or cleanness. "Al-bayt
al-muqaddas" means the Purified House, the one in which people purify
themselves from the filth of sins.

Paradise is also called the place of quds because it is free from the
ills of the life of this world. Arch-angel Gabriel is called in Islam
"al-ruh al-quds," the Holy Spirit, because he is free from any fault in
delivering divine inspiration to the messengers of Allah. Allah has
described Himself as ***"... the King, the Holy" (Qur’an, 59:23),*** and
He has also said, ***"Whatever in the heavens and in the earth declares
the glory of Allah, the King, the Holy" (Qur’an, 62:1).***

Al-Qudds is the One Who is above need and Whose Attributes are above
being deficient. He is the One Who purifies the souls against sinning,
Who takes the wicked by their forelocks, Who is above being limited to
space or time.

The Messenger of Allah once sent one of his companions to teach Islam to
a group of new converts and to lead them in congregational prayers. That
companion used not to recite any chapter of the Holy Qur’an (besides, of
course, the Fatiha) other than Surat al-Tawhid (or al-Ikhlas), so those
believers went back once to the Prophet and told him about it. The
Prophet said to them, "Go back and ask him why he does so." Upon asking
him, the companion answered them by saying, "... because it contains the
Attribute of al-Rahman, and this is why I love to recite it so often!"
When they told the Prophet this answer, he said to them, "Go back and
tell him that the Praised and Glorified One loves him too."

Ibn \`Abbas spent a night once with his cousin the Messenger of Allah.
When the Messenger of Allah woke up and stood up on his bed, he raised
his head towards the heavens and thrice repeated the following
statement: "Subhanal Malik al-Qudds!" (Glory to the King, the Holy!)
Then he recited the last verses of Surat Ali-\`Imran starting with the
verse: "Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth..., etc."

### 6. "Al-Salam"

***Allah Almighty has said that He is "... the King, the Holy" (Qur’an,
59:23).***

"Al-Salam" means: the One Who is free from defect and shortcoming, Whose
qualities are above deficiency, Whose deeds are free from evil. Since He
is as such, there can be neither peace nor security in existence without
Him.

"Salam" means peace. Allah Almighty has said, ***"... and Allah invites
to the abode of peace" (Qur’an, 10:25),*** meaning Paradise: anyone who
abides therein will have been saved from agony and perdition. Allah has
said, ***"And if he is one of those on the right hand, then peace to you
from those on the right hand" (Qur’an, 56:90-91***), that is, rest
assured that they are enjoying peace and tranquility. "Salam!" is a
greeting; if a Muslim tells another Muslim "As-Salamu Alaikum!" he will
have assured him of safety and security, granting him immunity against
his evil or ill intentions. Allah Almighty praises Yahya, John the
Baptist, by saying, ***"And peace be on him on the day he was born..."
(Qur’an, 19:15).***

The most precarious situations to which human beings are exposed are
three: The time of birth, the time of death, and the time of
resurrection. So Allah honoured Yahya in all these three situations,
granting him peace, safety and security against their woes. He saved him
from the perils of all these three situations and granted him security
against fear.

Muslims are repeatedly enjoined by the Holy Qur’an to disseminate peace
and to be receptive to those who offer it:

***O you who believe! Enter into peace one and all... (2:208)***

***And if they incline to peace, do incline to it too and trust in
Allah. (8:61)***

***And the servants of al-Rahman are the ones who walk on earth humbly,
and when the ignorant ones address them, they say: Salam (Peace)!
(25:63)***

***And when those who believe in Our Signs come to you, say: Peace be on
you! Your Lord has ordained mercy on Himself... (6:54)***

***So turn away from them and say, Peace! For they shall soon come to
know. (43:89)***

Allah's Salam is His speech. Likewise, the Messenger of Islam used to
quite often enjoin the believers to disseminate the greeting of peace
among them. There are numerous traditions testifying to this fact; among
them are the following:

Assalamu minal Islam: The greeting of peace is an integral part of the
creed of Islam.  
 Afshu al Salama taslamu: Disseminate the greeting of peace among you so
you may achieve peace and security.

Whoever upholds three things will have combined in him the meaning of
conviction: 1) fairness to his own self, 2) disseminating of the
greeting of peace to everyone, and 3) spending wisely out of what he
saves.

Afshu al Salama baynakum: Disseminate the greeting of peace among you.

In one of his supplications, the Messenger of Allah used to say, "Lord!
Make us harbingers of peace to Your friends!" The Holy Qur’an tells us
that the name of Paradise is "Dar al Salam," the abode of peace; He,
Glory and Exaltation to Him, says,

***"They shall have the abode of peace with their Lord, and He is their
guardian because of what they did" (Qur’an, 6:127)***.

Allah will make the greeting of the believers, when they meet Him,
"Peace!" He says,

***"Their salutation on the Day they meet Him shall be: Salam! (Peace!)"
(Qur’an, 33:44***).

Referring to the believers, He says the following in Surat al-Ra\`d,
"... the gardens of perpetual abode which they will enter along with
those who do good deeds from among their parents and spouses and
offspring, and the angels will enter upon them from every gate (saying):

***Peace be on you because you were constant! How excellent, then, is
the issue of the abode!" (Qur’an, 13:23-24).***

Thawban, servant of the Messenger of Allah, has said,

***"Whenever the Messenger of Allah finished his prayers, he would seek
forgiveness of Allah thrice, saying, \`Lord! You are the Peace; from You
is the Peace; Glory to You! Greatness and Honour are in You!'"***

### 7. "Al-Mu'min"

Allah has described Himself as al-Mu'min:

***"... the One Who gives peace, Who grants security" (Qur’an,
59:23).***

"Al-Mu'min" means: the One to Whom peace and security are rendered: He
provides the means of their attainment, blocking all the avenues of
fear. There is no peace nor security in this life against the causes of
disease and perdition, nor in the life hereafter against the torment and
the Wrath, except that He provides the means to attain it.

"Iman," linguistically speaking, is an infinitive (to believe) derived
from two verbs: tasdeeq, testimony for the truth of something or someone
as: ***"... and you will not believe us though we are truthful" (Qur’an,
12:17***), and aman, asylum or a peaceful haven as in 106:4: ***"... and
gave them security against fear" (Qur’an, 106:4).*** Some linguists are
of the view that the derivation of iman is from this second verb.

If we say that the Almighty grants His servants security against
anything they dread, we must be understood in the light of the
circumstances of the life in this world and in the hereafter. As
regarding the life in this world, the removal of the cause of fear is
not reasonably accepted except when a precarious situation has actually
taken place.

Fear cannot be removed when the possibility of loss of life is present,
and nobody can remove such a possibility except Allah. Nobody can bring
about peace and security other than He. A blind person is apprehensive
of perishing on account of his inability to see the area from which
death may overtake him. Sound vision grants him security against being
annihilated. One whose arm is amputated fears the situation when he
cannot defend himself except through the use of his arm. His healthy
arm, then, is the cause of his feeling of security. The same can be said
about all our senses and bodily parts.

The One Who created all these parts is the same One Who has removed from
man the causes of fear by granting him such parts. The One Who has
created delicious food for man as well as good medicines and taught him
how to make useful tools, thus sparing himself a lot of trouble, is
surely the same One Who grants him security against all such dangers.
The Messenger of Allah has said, "Anyone who believes in Allah and the
Last Day should bring security to his neighbor against his own
misdeeds."[^1]

### 8. "Al-Muhaimin"

In 59:23, we read: "He is Allah besides Whom there is no other god, the
King, the Holy, the One Who grants peace, the One Who grants security,
the Guardian over all, the Mighty, the Supreme, the One Who possesses
greatness; Glory to Allah from whatever they set up (with Him)."

When applied to the Almighty, "al-Muhaimin" means that He is the One Who
oversees His servants' actions, Who provides them with sustenance, and
decrees their life-spans. He does so through His knowledge, control, and
protection. Anyone who oversees something is its guardian; so he has
full power over it. These Attributes can never be present in their
absolute meaning except in Allah.

This Attribute describes in 10:61 the One Who testifies for or against
His servants who enter into mutual transactions: ***"... We are
witnesses over you when you enter into it."*** Allah is al-Muhaimin, the
One Who witnesses all what His servants do, be it a speech or an action.
The meaning of this verse incorporates the meaning of the word
"muhaimin" thus: the One Who knows everything and from Whose knowledge
nothing at all can escape, not even the weight of an atom in the earth
or in the heavens.

Al-Khalil ibn Ahmed al-Farahidi says that "al-Mu'min" means: the One Who
ever watches, Who ever protects. It is common in Arabic to describe
someone as "muhaimin" if he protects someone else or is his guardian.

Al-Mibrad explains its meaning as: the One Who is most kind and
compassionate. Arabs describe the bird that stretches its wings to
protect its young as being "muhaimin" over them.

Al-Hassan al-Basri says it means the Guardian Who testifies to one's
truth. Applied to the Almighty, it may carry one of two meanings: His
testimony by word, hence His testimony informing us about His messengers
being truthful, and His empowering those messengers to produce miracles,
thus testifying to their truthfulness.

Al-Muhaimin is the One Who encompasses in His knowledge the management
of the affairs of all His creation from the smallest atom to the largest
planet in the cosmos.

### 9. "Al-\`Aziz"

The Almighty has said, ***"O Moses! Surely I am Allah, the Omnipotent,
the Wise" (Qur’an, 27:9).***  
 The root word of this Attribute is \`izz, might, power, strength,
victory, elevation, non-submission. Its verb means: to strengthen or to
support as in: ***"We sent them two [messengers] but they called them
liars, so We strengthened them with a third," (Qur’an, 36:14)*** that
is, supported them and their argument with a third messenger.
Linguistically, its verb means: to overcome, to gain the upper hand, to
subdue...

Al-\`Aziz is the One Who Alone has all honour; He is never humiliated,
nor is He ever wronged; neither imagination nor intellect can ever
conceive Him. He is the One Who cannot be overcome or in any way harmed,
the One Who has no peer nor a similitude, Who is very much needed, Who
is victorious and is never vanquished, the Mighty, the Omnipotent Who
can never be reached.

The Almighty has described Himself as al-\`Aziz, narrating in His Book,
the Holy Qur’an, an anecdote about Jesus pleading to Him thus

***"... if You forgive them, surely You are the Mighty, the Wise"
(Qur’an, 5:118)***.

He has also said, ***"And to Him belongs greatness in the heavens and in
the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise" (Qur’an, 45:37)***.

He has proven that He has in Him all the Attributes of Greatness,
saying, ***"To Allah belongs the might, and to His Prophet, and to the
believers" (Qur’an, 63:8),*** and also, ***"Glory to your Lord, the Lord
of Honour, above what they describe" (Qur’an, 37:180).***

While discussing Iblis, He quotes him saying,

***"... by Your Might I will surely make them live an evil life, all of
them" (Qur’an, 38:82).***

The Messenger of Allah used to say, "I seek refuge with Your Honour, for
You are the One Who is the One and Only God Who never dies, while the
jinns and men die."

### 10. "Al-Jabbar"

Allah has said,

"***He is Allah besides Whom there is no other god, the Sovereign, the
Holy, the Source of peace (and perfection), the Guardian of Faith, the
Preserver of safety, the One Exalted in Might, the Irresistible, the
Supreme; Glory to Allah! (High is He) above the partners they attribute
to (Him)" (Qur’an, 59:23).***

Linguistically, "al-Jabbar" is derived from jabr, the opposite of
breaking. It suggests the forceful mending of something broken,
fractured, shattered, crushed..., etc. It is also said that the
adjective jabbar means great, huge, inaccessible. Linguists say that
al-Jabbar is the Most Great. It is a superlative adjective derived from
jabr; He is the One Who not only mends what is broken but also enriches
the one who is incapacitated by poverty and want. In short, He is the
One Who repairs everything broken or impaired.

Abdullah ibn \`Abbas says that al-Jabbar is the Great King, while Ibn
al-Anbari says that al-Jabbar is the One Who is beyond anyone's reach.
Others have said that "al-Jabbar" means the One Who cannot be harmed by
any mighty oppressor, and nobody can dispute with Him about anything. It
is said that "al-Jabbar" conveys the same meaning conveyed by the
Attribute "al-Mutakabbir," the Proud or the Supreme One.

Pride and Supremacy are commendable Attributes only when applied to
Allah. If applied to anyone else, on the other hand, they become
abominable qualities. It is also said that the meaning of "al-Jabbar"
connotes: the One Who forces His will on others. Nothing can happen in
His domain except whatever He pleases, whether His beings like it or
not. Or it may mean the One Who repairs, improves, or reforms, as is the
analogy with one who mends, say, a broken limb.

One of its derivatives is jabaroot, supremacy or greatness. According to
one tradition, the Messenger of Allah has supplicated thus, "Glory to
the One Who has all the jabaroot and all the domain." In one of his
statements, Imam \`Ali ibn Abu Talib has said, "He is the One Whose will
has manifested itself on the nature of hearts," that is, He firmed the
hearts according to the way He created them and according to their level
of knowing Him; those who know Him are the happy ones, while those who
do not are the wretches.

"Al-Jabbar" connotes forcefulness and forcibleness. We can find out that
all parts of the body have been driven to perform their functions
without any will of their own. Cast a look at the sun as it moves in its
orbit without deviating from it as little as an inch, whether it likes
it or not. Man has no control over the time when Allah chooses his life
to begin, or how he is born, or when he dies, or the family in which he
is to be born. All these are predestined for him, and he has no control
over them. So is the case with all other beings on the face of earth.
They all have been created with the ability to adapt to life on earth,
and nobody has any choice in this matter:

***"It is He Who has spread out the earth for (His) creatures; therein
are fruits and date-palms, producing spathes (containing dates)"
(Qur’an, 55:10-11***).

All of these things are created without the choice of any human being.

### 11. "Al-Mutakabbir"

Allah has said,

"***He is Allah besides Whom there is no other god, the Sovereign, the
Holy, the Source of peace (and perfection), the Guardian of the Faith,
the Preserver of safety, the One Exalted in Might, the Irresistible, the
Supreme; Glory to Allah! (High is He) above the partners they attribute
to (Him)" (Qur’an, 59:23).***

Understanding "al-Mutakabbir" requires a good deal of reasoning and
insight. Its root word "kibriya'" means greatness and sovereignty, and
it incorporates the meanings of the perfection of one's self and
existence; nobody can be described as such except Allah. Greatness, as
far as Allah Almighty is concerned, is the loftiness of status:

***"By His command does He send the spirit (of inspiration) to any of
His servants He pleases so that it may warn (men) of the Day of mutual
meeting" (Qur’an, 40:15***).

Al-Mutakabbir is the One Who possesses all greatness, Who is above
having any of the qualities of His creatures, Who is above being harmed
by the oppressors among His creation, Whose greatness and pride are the
super-most. He is too great to be deficient in anything or in need for
anyone or anything, the One Who is above having any of the
characteristics and attributes of His creatures, the One Who Alone has
all greatness and pride. None besides Him is justified to conceive
himself as great, or as mighty, or as the sovereign.

He is the One Who is too Holy to be afflicted by any calamity; so, no
greatness is justified for anyone besides Him; He is the One Who has all
might and kingdom. This Attribute means: the One Who has combined in
Him, and Who rightly deserves so, all the attributes of greatness,
perfection, pride and glory, all at the same time.

He is too Great to submit to others; rather, submission is due to Him,
and only to Him. The Holy Qur’an bestows the Attribute of greatness upon
the Almighty in Surat al-Jathiya:

***"To Him be Glory throughout the heavens and the earth, and He is
Exalted in Power, full of Wisdom" (Qur’an, 45:37).***

Pride due to the sense of being great is of two kinds:

One is when actions of such a person are indeed great and better than
those of anyone else's; He is

***"... the Source of peace (and perfection), the Guardian of Faith, the
Preserver of security, the One Exalted in Might, the Irresistible, the
Supreme" (Qur’an, 59:23).***

The other is that one conceives himself artificially to be as such, and
this applies to most people:

***Thus does Allah set a seal over the heart of everyone who is proud,
haughty. (40:35)***

***Surely evil is the dwelling place of those who are proud. (16:29)***

***Isn't there in hell an abode for those who are proud? (39:60)***

Quoting the Lord of Greatness, the Almighty God, the Messenger of Allah
has said, "Pride is My cloak; Greatness is My garment; whoever disputes
with Me regarding either, I shall surely hurl him into the fire." Here
the Almighty informs and admonishes us that greatness, might and pride
are all His prerogatives, that none among His servants is worthy of
claiming any of them for himself.

In one of his supplications, the Messenger of Allah says, "I seek refuge
with You, Lord, against the evil of pride." He is also quoted as saying
that pride is an indication of ingratitude towards the Truth, the
Almighty; he has said, "Pride is ingratitude towards the Truth." Imam
\`Ali has said, "The son of Adam is truly amazing! A wound can end his
life, a bug can cause him a pain, his sweat can make him stink, so how
can he ever feel proud?"

The Messenger of Allah has warned us against pride and of being proud of
ourselves, saying, "Nobody will enter Paradise if he has even the weight
of a mustard seed of pride, and nobody will enter the fire if there is a
likewise weight of conviction in his heart." As the lucky[^2] ones enter
Paradise, their hearts will be purged of any pride and jealousy:

***"And we will root out whatever rancor there is in their hearts"
(Qur’an, 15:47).***

The Attribute "al-Mutakabbir" is mentioned only once in the text of the
Holy Qur’an in 59:23, and Allah knows best.

### 12. "Al-Khaliq"

Allah has said, ***"He is Allah the Creator..." (Qur’an, 59:24).***

"Al-Khaliq" is derived from khalq, creating. Allah, al-Khaliq, the
Creator, is the One Who brings things into existence after their
non-existence, Who invents and innovates without a prior model. Some
scholars say that al-Khaliq is the One Who creates things out of naught
then bestows upon them their characteristics of movement and other
qualities.

Others say that He is the One Who invents whatever the eyes can see, Who
perfects their creation. Still others say that He is the One Who
determined the measure of all things when they were enshrouded by void,
perfecting them by His bounties and goodness, bringing them into
existence according to His will, desire and wisdom. Anyone who thinks
that there is anyone else besides Him who creates is indeed one who
commits kufr, apostasy, blasphemy, disbelief. Allah Almighty has said
the following:

***... the Creator of everything; therefore, worship Him. (6:102)... is
there any creator besides Allah...? (35:3)***

***Yea, indeed! For He is the Supreme Creator, of (infinite) skill and
knowledge. (36:81)***

***... so blessed is Allah, the best of creators. (23:14)***

***Is it not His to create and to govern? Blessed is Allah, the
Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds. (7:54)***

Ibn \`Abbas is reported as saying that whenever the Messenger of Allah
looked in the mirror, he would say, "Praise to Allah Who has made both
my creation and my manners good, Who beautified in me what He has not
done in others." According to a narration by our master Imam \`Ali ibn
Abu Talib, the Messenger of Allah used to say the following whenever he
looked in the mirror, "Praise is due to Allah! Lord! Just as You have
made my form good, I implore You to make my manners, too, good." [^3]

### 13. "Al-Bari"

Allah has said,

***"He is Allah the Creator, the Evolver, the One Who bestows forms (or
colors) upon what He creates. To Him belong the Attributes" (Qur’an,
59:24).***

There are viewpoints regarding the explanation of "al-Bari": One says it
refers to the One Who brings about something out of nothing, the One Who
creates something which was never there before. It is said that Allah is
al-Bari of creation, the One Who brought about all things into existence
out of non-existence.

The other meaning conveys the cutting off or severing of something. The
root verb of this word means cutting and shaping something such as a
twig or a pencil. One may say that illness has parted from him, or that
he is free of a claim put forth by another. It can also be applied
metaphorically such as one person severing his partnership with another,
or a woman separating from her husband. Allah has bara'a, created or
initiated, the creation without a model; bariyyah means those whom He
has created. Another meaning is curing or healing.

A wise saying states that one who is cured should express gratitude to
the One Who cured him.  
 Ja\`fer ibn Sulayman is quoted as having said that he passed once by a
blind old woman grieving over herself and wailing, so he asked her,
"What does it take to sustain you?" She answered him saying, "Stop
sticking your nose where it does not belong; I have reached this stage
of life without needing you or others." Then she added, "Have you not
heard the statement made by the Friend of Allah who said, \`[Allah]
***Who created me then showed me the way, and He provides me with food
to eat and with water to drink, and when I am sick, He restores my
health to me' (26:78-80)?"***

One who knows the real meaning of "al-Bari", therefore, is one whose
heart is not affected by events, nor can momentous events overtake him
by surprise. It is also said that anyone who comes to know Who al-Bari
really is will dissociate himself from claiming to have anything to do
with his own form or shape, fearing his Creator's Might, knowing that he
is not doing Him a favour by worshipping and obeying Him.

It is also said that He is the One Who has dissociated Himself from
everyone else, the One Who is never surprised by whatever events take
place. It is also said that anyone who recognizes Him as al-Bari will
dissociate himself from committing anything prohibitive, seeking refuge
with the King, the Most Forgiving One.

### 14. "Al-Musawwir"

Allah has said,

***"He is Allah the Creator, the Evolver, the Bestower of forms (or
colors). To Him belong the Attributes" (Qur’an, 59:24).***

Al-Musawwir is the One Who fashions, Who gives something its distinctive
form and shape. The general human form is distinguished from that of
non-humans. Allah says,

***"... and He formed you and made your forms good" (Qur’an, 40:64),***

***"Into whatever form He pleased He shaped you" (Qur’an, 82:8),***

***"He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He pleases (3:6)."***

Al-Musawwir means: the One Who invents the forms and shapes of whatever
He creates, Who beautifies them according to His wisdom, giving
everything its own distinctive shape and form. He creates humans in
different forms and shapes, making some of them different from others in
physique, size, complexion, etc. This may be the meaning of the verse
saying,

***"And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and
the diversity of your tongues and colors; most surely there are signs in
this for those who have knowledge" (Qur’an, 30:22).***

***"He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He pleases; there is no god
but He, the Mighty, the Wise" (Qur’an, 3:6);***

***"And certainly We created man of an extract of clay, then We made him
a small seed in a firm resting-place, then We made the seed a clot, then
We made the clot a lump of flesh, then We made in the lump of flesh
bones, then We clothed the bones with flesh, then We caused it to grow
into another creation; so, blessed be Allah, the best of creators"
(Qur’an, 23:12-14).***

Whenever the Messenger of Allah prostrated, he used to say, "Lord! To
You have I prostrated, in You have I believed, and to You have I
submitted! My countenance has prostrated to the One Who created it and
shaped it, Who created hearing and vision for it; so, blessed is Allah,
the best of creators!"

Among the supplications of the Messenger of Allah when he prostrated is
this one: "My face has submitted to the One Who created and formed it
and Who made its form good." The Holy Qur’an has informed us a good deal
about al-Musawwir, Allah. In Surat al-A\`raf, for example, we read the
following:

***"And certainly We created you then fashioned you" (Qur’an, 7:11).***

In Surat al-Taghabun, we read,

***"He has created the heavens and the earth in just proportions, and He
has given you shape and made your shapes beautiful, and to Him is the
final resort" (Qur’an, 64:3).***

In Surat Ghafir, we read,

***"Allah is He Who made the earth a resting-place for you and the
heavens a canopy, and He formed you then made your forms good, and He
provided you with good things; that is Allah, your Lord; blessed then is
Allah, the Lord of the worlds (Qur’an, 40:64).***

In Surat Ali-\`Imran, we read,

***"He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He pleases; there is no god
but He, the Mighty, the Wise" (Qur’an, 3:6).***

In Surat al-Infitar, we read***,***

***"O man! What has beguiled you from your Lord, the Gracious One Who
created you then made you complete, then He made you symmetrical? Into
whatever form He pleased He constituted you" (Qur’an, 82:6-8)***.

And in Surat al-Hashr we read,

***"He is Allah the Creator, the Evolver, the Bestower of forms (or
colors). To Him belong the Attributes; all those in the heavens and on
earth declare His Praises and Glory, and He is Exalted in Might, Wise"
(Qur’an, 59:24).***

Allah Almighty has said,

***"And He created pairs, the male and the female, from the small seed
when it is adapted, and upon Him is its bringing forth a second time"
(Qur’an, 53:45-47).***

### 15. "Al-Ghaffar"

Allah has said,

***"Surely I am most Forgiving to whoever repents and believes and does
good deeds" (Qur’an, 20:82).*** ‘

Al-Ghaffar is one of Allah's Attributes derived from ghufr and ghufran,
both nouns which convey the meaning of: veiling, hiding, concealing.
Allah's maghifra, forgiveness, is His veiling of one's sins, and His
forgiveness by granting him His favour and mercy. Al-Ghaffar is the One
Who has manifested what is beautiful and veiled what is ugly in the life
of this world and Who does not inflict His penalty on him in the life
hereafter.

He is the One Who forgives sins, veils the shortcomings, wipes out the
sins by accepting one's repentance. He accepts His servants' repentance
and is pleased thereby, and the One Who forgives the sins and turns them
into good deeds by His great favour. He is the One Who forgives the sins
though they may be great, and He veils them though they may be numerous.

The words derived from forgiveness have mostly been associated with
Allah.

One of them is al-Ghafir as in this verse:

***"The One Who forgives the sins" (Qur’an, 40:3).***

The second is al-Ghafur; He has said,

***"... then [if he] asks forgiveness of Allah, he shall find Allah
Forgiving, Merciful" (Qur’an, 4:110).***

A third is al-Ghaffar as in:

***"And surely I am most Forgiving to one who repents and believes and
does good deeds" (Qur’an, 20:82),***

***"... seek forgiveness of your Lord; surely He is the most Forgiving"
(Qur’an, 71:10),***

***and "... surely He is the Mighty, the great Forgiver" (Qur’an,
39:5***).

It is proven, by making a reference to the Holy Qur’an, that all these
Attributes, which are derived from forgiveness, are applied only to
Allah, the Most Exalted One. Having killed a Copt, Moses implored his
Lord thus***:***

***"Lord! Surely I have harmed my own self; so, forgive me" (Qur’an,
28:16)***.

He first admitted his sin then sought His forgiveness. Allah also
revealed the fault of David then said, ***"So We forgave him this
(lapse)" (Qur’an, 38:25).***

He addressed Muhammad saying, ***"So that Allah may forgive your past
and future faults" (Qur’an, 48:2).*** Has He not in these examples
exposed a sin then forgiven it? In one of his supplications, Prophet
Muhammad says, "Lord! I implore You to forgive me an apparent
forgiveness and a concealed one, and to forgive open and secret sins."

The meanings of maghfira, the root word of al-Ghaffar, al-Ghaafir, and
al-Ghafur are clear in the verse saying:

***"The One Who forgives the sins and accepts the repentance, the One
Who is severe in punishment, the Lord of bounty; there is no god but He;
to Him is the eventual return" (Qur’an, 40:3).***

Al-Ghaffar is the One Who very often veils [the sins and faults of His
servants], so much so that He does not propagate one's sins in the life
of this world nor in the life hereafter. One of the companions of the
Messenger of Allah was asked once, "What did you hear the Messenger of
Allah say with regard to one's silent supplication?"

He answered by saying that he had heard the Messenger of Allah say,
"Allah, the most Honoured, the Most Great, will touch His servant who
believes in Him with His mercy by veiling his sin from the public in the
life of this world, and in the life hereafter He will ask him about each
and every sin and fault he had committed. Once he admits all of them and
realizes that he is going to perish on their account, the Almighty will
say, \`I have veiled your sins in the past short life, and in this one I
am going to forgive them.' Then he will be handed the book of his good
deeds."

All this happens to those who believe in Him; as regarding those who do
not, and the hypocrites, He will deal with them quite differently.

### 16. "Al-Qahhar"

Allah has said,

***"Say: Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the
Supreme" (Qur’an, 13:16).***

Linguistically, "al-Qahhar" is derived from qahr, conquest, subduing,
vanquishing, winning a victory. It means the overtaking of something or
someone with the intention to humiliate him. One who takes another by
way of qahr is one who takes him against his will. "Al-Qahhar" is a
superlative of "al-Qahir", the Victor or Subduer. Allah, indeed, is the
One Who, by His Might, has subdued everything He created to His
Authority and Power, using His creatures as He pleases, whether they
like it or not. Al-Qahir is the One Who has the upper hand over all
creation;

***"... and Allah is the master of His affair" (Qur’an, 12:21).***

Al-Qahhar is the One Whose vengeance nobody can withstand. He humiliates
oppressors, splits the spine of kings and emperors. He is the One
besides Whose Might all creation is powerless, without Whose Power all
beings are helpless. If we submit to Him, He will satisfy our needs, but
if we do not, He will make us suffer as we try to achieve our
objectives.

He is the One Who splits the spine of the tyrants and oppressors from
among His foes, subduing them by taking their lives away, and by
humiliating them, while there is nothing in existence that can escape
His Might and Power: everyone and everything is helpless in His grip.

Al-Qahhar effects His will with regard to His creatures, whether they
like it or not, whether they are willing or unwilling. He has subdued
the souls of the worshippers by instilling in the hearts the fear of His
retribution, and the hearts of those who are endowed with knowledge with
the Might of nearness to Him, and the souls of those who love Him by
unveiling the truth about Him to them.

He has subdued all beings by death, so none is safe from Him, not even
an angel who enjoys a special status with Him, nor a prophet, nor a
messenger. Allah will make even the angel of death, Israel, taste of
death; so, when his soul is taken out, the angel of death will say, "By
Your Honour do I swear that had I known the taste of death to be like
this, I would never have taken away anyone's soul at all!"

It is to such a meaning that the word qahr, upon the taking of the souls
of all beings, conveys as implied in the verse saying,

"***To whom does the kingdom belong this day? To Allah, the One, the
Subduer (of all)" (Qur’an, 40:16).***

If one who believes in Allah desires to personify within him the
meanings embedded in this Attribute, he has to subdue his own self, his
nafs, and control his evil desires, by not plotting in cooperation with
Satan, and by returning to Allah, submitting to His will in all matters.
The path whereby man derives light from the Attribute "al-Qahhar" is
that one should view his nafs, which is ever present within him, as the
worst of his enemies, so he subdues it and strangles it, doing exactly
the opposite of what it tells him to do, so much so that it will have no
choice except to submit to divine commandments.

Then he will have to subdue his stubborn opponent, i.e. Satan, staying
on his guard against his evil suggestions, blocking his avenues. Then he
will have to subdue his carnal desires and insinuations by not following
what they inspire him to do.

### 17. "Al-Wahhab"

Allah, the Most Exalted, the Most High, has said,

***"Lord! Do not let our hearts deviate after having guided us, but
grant us mercy from Your own Presence, for You are the Grantor of
bounties without measure" (Qur’an, 3:8).***

"Al-Wahhab" is derived from the proper noun hibah the verb of which,
yahib, means: to make someone else the owner of what the giver, the
first party (the doer), rightfully owns without asking the second party
for any compensation in return. It is the gift which is free from any
recompense or gain for the giver.

If someone gives out such gifts quite often, he will earn the titles of
jawad and wahhab, the generous one, the oft-giving, respectively. Allah
Almighty is described as the Most Generous, the Most Giving, i.e.
al-Wahhab, simply because He gives everyone according to his means.
Among Allah's Attributes are al-Wahhab and al-Wahib. The latter
Attribute means: the giver, whereas the first is a superlative of the
latter. One who is wahab is one who grants many gifts.

Al-Wahhab is the One Who gives away without a compensation; He bestows
His favours upon His servants without a selfish end; He grants even
without being asked; He is the One Who initiates giving, and He is the
oft-Giver. Allah is surely al-Wahhab because He is the Most Munificent,
the Most Giving, the One Who ever tries to get closer to His servants,
Who graciously bestows His favours upon them, Who gives them even before
they ask Him, the ever-Giver Who gives everyone what he needs. Al-Wahhab
bestows His blessings upon His servants, and this indicates His
inclusion of everyone as He continuously gives.

He does not give painstakingly, nor does He seek a benefit, or an
advantage, for Himself by doing so. Al-Wahhab showers you with His
blessings without having to have a reason or a means to do so. Al-Wahhab
gives away without being compensated for what He gives, and He causes
all beings to die without a particular purpose He seeks to achieve for
Himself. According to Surat al-Shura,

***"He bestows (children), male or female, according to His Will (and
Plan)" (Qur’an, 42:49).***

Whenever the Messenger of Allah used to wake up during the night, he
would supplicate thus: "Lord! There is no god but You! Glory to You!
Lord! I seek Your forgiveness for my sins, and I plead to You, by Your
mercy, O Lord, to increase my share of knowledge, not to permit my heart
to deviate after having guided it, and to grant me, from You, a mercy,
for surely You are al-Wahhab..." [^4]

### 18. "Al-Razzaq"

"Al-Razzaq" is derived from rizq, sustenance, or anything of any benefit
to man, animals, plants, etc., whereby the latter are sustained or are
helped in their growth. Rain is also called rizq; it helps sustain every
living being on our planet. In 51:58, we read: ***"Surely Allah is the
One Who bestows sustenance, the Lord of Power, the Strong One."***

Another verse referring to our sustenance is this***: "And in the
heavens is your sustenance and what you are threatened with" (Qur’an,
51:22).*** "In the heavens is your sustenance" may be a reference to the
rain that descends from the heavens, the sky[^5]. As to the phrase "and
what you are threatened with," this may be a clue that the end of life
on this earth will be terminated by a collision of an asteroid or a
large size cosmic debri with the earth, but this is not the place to
discuss such interpretations or speculations.

If Allah so wills, I intend to write a complete tafsr, an exegesis, of
the Holy Qur’an that will contain such interpretations and speculations
the like of which has never been written in English before. If the
reader wishes to see such a book published, he is requested to pray the
Almighty to make it happen. Prayers go a long way, had people only
known. Allah listens to each and every supplication no matter who the
supplicant is so long as the latter is a true believer in Him.

The word rizq may be used for means of income, livelihood, sustenance,
money, wealth..., or for the earning of something good, be it during the
life of this world or in the life to come, or it may be applied to one's
lot or fortune, or even to anything eaten. "Al-Razzaq" is a superlative
of "al-Raziq," the One Who provides rizq. Al-Razzaq is applied to none
other than Allah. There are two types of rizq: one sustains the body,
such as food and drink, while the other sustains the soul, which is
knowledge and true inspiration. The latter is the best type of
sustenance simply because what sustains the soul lasts forever, while
what sustains the body has a temporary duration.

Al-Razzaq is the One Who creates all types of sustenance, Who extends
His favour to cover making such sustenance attainable to His creatures,
Who provides means for getting them to attain their sustenance. He
sustains all His creation by whatever means needed to keep them alive.
He sustains the minds with knowledge, the hearts with understanding, the
souls with manifestations, the bodies with food, and so on. Only He can
do so. Anyone who realizes this fact will recognize the fact that his
own sustenance, and that of everyone and everything else, is controlled
by none other than Allah.

References to rizq have been made in several Qur’anic verses such as
these:

***... Allah provides means of subsistence to whomsoever He pleases
without a measure. (2:212)***

***Allah is Benignant to His servants; He gives sustenance to whomsoever
He pleases, and He is the Strong, the Mighty One. (42:19)***

***... and whoever fears Allah, He will make an outlet for him and give
him sustenance from whence he does not expect. (65:2-3)***

***... these are the believers truly; they shall have forgiveness and an
honourable provision. (8:74)***

***... and the sustenance (provided) by your Lord is better and more
abiding. (20:131)***

***Most surely this is Our sustenance: it shall never deplete.
(38:54)***

***Say: The (blessing) from the presence of Allah is better than any
amusement or bargain. (62:11)***

***... surely the things you worship besides Allah cannot sustain you.
(29:17)***

***There is no creature moving on earth except that its sustenance
depends on Allah. (11:6)***

One of the Islamic manners inspired by the Attribute "al-Razzaq" is that
a servant of Allah becomes convinced that there is no partner with his
Lord in providing sustenance, just as He has no partner in creating
everything. He, therefore, pleads to Him for anything small or big. He
also feels satisfied with what al-Razzaq has allotted for him, just as
He has said,

***"And they are the ones who, when spending, are neither extravagant
nor parsimonious but keep the just means between these [extremes]"
(Qur’an, 25:67),***

and also,

***"Those who, when spending, are neither extravagant nor niggardly but
hold a just (balance) between these (extremes)" (Qur’an, 17:29).***

The abundance of Allah's sustenance is without a limit. He is the One
Who says the following in Surat Hud:

***"There is no creature moving on earth except that its sustenance
depends on Allah: He knows the time and place of its definite abode and
its temporary deposit: all is in a clear record" (Qur’an, 11:6).***

### 19. "Al-Fattah"

The Almighty has said,

***"Say: Our Lord will gather us together and will in the end decide the
matter between us (and you) in truth and justice, and He is the One to
decide, the One Who knows everything" (Qur’an, 34:26).***

In Arabic, fataha, the verb, means "opened," and muftah means key,
whereas fath means victory or conquest. Fath also means flowing water, a
creak, or a river. It also means: to arbitrate between two opponents.
"Istiftah" means: seeking help or achieving victory. Both al-Fatih and
al-Fattah are among the Attributes of Allah.

They exist within the text of the Holy Qur’an. "Al-Fattah" is a
superlative of al-fath. To say that Allah is al-Fattah is to say that He
is the One Who judges between those whom He creates, His servants, the
obedient ones and the rebellious. It is derived from fath which means,
in such usage, arbitration or decision-making. It exists in this meaning
in the verse saying***,***

***"Lord! Decide between us and our people with truth, and You are the
best of those who decide" (Qur’an, 7:89).***

It also means: the One Who grants victory as in this verse of Surat
al-Anfal:

***"If you pray for victory, then indeed victory has come to you"
(Qur’an, 8:19).***

Al-Fattah is the One Who opens deadlocked matters and issues, Who
reveals the truth, Who simplifies whatever seems to be complicated, Who
controls the affairs of the heavens and the earth:

***"And with Him are the keys of the unseen treasures: none knows them
but He, and He knows what is in the land and in the sea" (Qur’an,
6:59).***

So He is the One Who opens what is closed and Who has the keys to
everything, Who widely opens the gates of sustenance and brings down
rain whereby He brings life back to dead lands, Who grants victory and
support for His prophets whom He sends to various lands so that the
light of the truth may shine therein, and so that He may purge their
souls from evil intentions. He opens the closed hearts and fills them
with His light, so they become tranquil, and they enjoy the feeling of
success.

The Attribute "al-Fattah" inspires good manners which ought to be
followed by anyone who correctly grasps the meanings it implies, who
deeply contemplates upon it, who sincerely desires to be blessed by it.
Among such manners is that one should maintain an attitude of beautiful
anticipation of the Grace of Allah, continuously expecting to receive
His favours, always looking forward to earning His blessings. He
abandons haste, feels satisfied with his lot and with whatever his Lord
has decreed for him. "Contentment is a treasure that never depletes,"
says an Arabic axiom. How true!

### 20. "Al-\`Aleem"

Allah has said,

***"... and trust in Allah; surely He is the Hearing, the Knowing"
(Qur’an, 8:61).***

"Al-\`Aleem" is derived from \`ilm, knowledge, which results from
comprehending the truth about something and from the sure conviction
which agrees with reality. "Al-\`Aleem," when applied to the Almighty,
is the One Who is most Knowing; surely His knowledge encompasses
everything in existence even before anything begins to exist. Nothing at
all can escape His knowledge.

He is the One Whose knowledge is inclusive, be it apparent or hidden,
minute or magnanimous. He knows its beginning and its end, what is above
or underneath it, and what results therefrom. Al-\`Aleem is also the One
Who knows what has happened and what will. The knowledge of the unknown
is with Him, and so is the knowledge of the Hour; He knows what the
wombs bear, when the rain falls, what every soul earns, what evil
intentions one harbors, what worldly desires he/she conceals, when and
where anyone will die.

Al-\`Aleem is the One Who knows the details of all things, the
particulars of things, what one's conscience and soul hide. Nothing at
all, not even the weight of an atom in the earth or in the heavens, can
ever escape His knowledge. From the word \`ilm have many other words
been derived. Al-\`lim is one. It occurs in Surat al-Ma'ida in this
verse:

***"... surely You are the great One Who knows the unseen" (Qur’an,
5:109).***

Another is al-A\`lam which occurs in Surat al-Ana\`m:

***"Allah best knows where He places His message" (Qur’an, 6:124).***

Al-\`Aleem is a superlative of al-\`alim.

The Holy Qur’an contains the following verses which demonstrate the
various meanings and types of knowledge:

***He knows that there is weakness in you. (8:66)***

***He knows that there will be sick ones among you. (73:20)***

***And surely We know that your breast straitens at what they say.
(15:97) Allah knows what every female bears. (13:8)***

"Al-\`Aleem," one of the ninety-nine Attributes of Allah, occurs in many
Qur’anic verses such as:

***... that is the ordinance of the Mighty, the Knowing. (36:38)***

***The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Knowing.
(40:2)***

***... surely He knows what is in the breasts. (11:5)***

***... We have no knowledge except what You have taught us; surely You
are the Knowing, the Wise. (2:32)***

***And the sun runs [its course] to a term appointed for it; that is the
ordinance of the Mighty, the Knowing. (36:38)***

This word is coined as a superlative derived from a verb meaning: "to
know or to be familiar with." The Messenger of Allah is quoted saying
that one who supplicates in the morning by thrice repeating, "In the
Name of Allah with Whose Name nothing at all, be it in the earth or in
the heavens, can ever harm, and He is the Hearing, the Knowing," will
not be afflicted by any sudden calamity till evening time, and if he
says so in the evening, he will not be afflicted by any sudden calamity
till daybreak.

### 21. "Al-Qabid"

Allah has said the following in the Holy Qur’an:

***"... and Allah straitens and amplifies..." (Qur’an, 2:245).***

Linguistically, qabd, root verb of "al-Qabid," means: to take, hold,
seize, grip, catch, handle, and the like. It is the holding of something
with the hand such as a sword's handle, etc. It is meant as a way to
forcefully take control of something or someone. Allah Almighty has said
the following in this sense: ***"... and Allah straitens and
amplifies..." (Qur’an, 2:245),*** meaning He straitens, withholds, His
sustenance of some while amplifying it for others.

"Al-Qabid" means: "the One Who takes hold of the souls by subduing them,
the spirits by effecting justice in their regard, the means of
sustenance by His wisdom, and the hearts by making them fear His Glory."
Al-Qabid is the One Who causes the souls to be taken away from their
bodies, their temporary homes, at the time of death. The angel who takes
the souls away (i.e. the qabid) is called in Islam "Israel."

Al-Qabid is the One Who takes hold of the hearts, Who controls them, Who
isolates them through their lack of knowledge, through their own
oversights. He takes hold of some hearts, so He unveils to them His
Greatness and Glory. He pleases other hearts through the means whereby
He gets closer to them out of His own Kindness, Munificence, and Beauty.
Al-Qabid is the One Who unveils His Glory to you, so He protects you; He
is the One Who makes you dread being distanced from Him.

Al-Qabid is the One Who controls the entire cosmos; in the following
verse, He makes a reference to His control over the earth:

***"... and the whole earth shall be in His grip on the Day of
Resurrection and the heavens rolled up in His right hand" (Qur’an,
39:67***).

The Almighty has neither a right nor a left hand; He has no hands at
all; this is only a figure of speech denoting His total control over the
heavens and the earth and everything in them.

The expansion of the earth is done by Him during the life of this world;
says He, ***"Have We not made the earth an even expanse?" (Qur’an,
78:6)*** meaning spread like a carpet. On the Day of Judgment, the earth
shall also be there, but it will look quite different from its present
appearance...; everything about how it will look and what will happen
above and underneath it is detailed in books of hadith, in traditions
that will, God willing, see the light for the first time in English...,
but let us not digress here by borrowing from another book of mine soon,
Insha-Allah, to be written!

Al-Qabid receives the knowledge of and appreciates acts of charity; to
be charitable is to be a true servant of His, a blessed one. He says***,
"... Allah accepts repentance from His servants and takes the alms"
(Qur’an, 9:104).*** He straitens the hearts, that is, places heavy
burdens on them, burdens of woes and worries, of fears or of aspiration,
and He also eases them.

### 22. "Al-Basit"

Linguistically, "al-Basit" means: one who stretches his hand, be it as a
gesture of good will (in order to shake hands with someone else), or
otherwise (to harm someone else, be it by inflicting a physical harm on
it, or by causing damage to his property or his own self). It may be
applied literally or metaphorically. The Almighty, for example, has
quoted Cain son of Adam saying the following to his brother Able:

***"If you stretch forth your hand towards me to slay me..., etc."
(Qur’an, 5:28***).

It also means: to please. According to one tradition, the Messenger of
Allah has said, "Fatima is part of me; whatever pleases her pleases me,
and whatever displeases her displeases me, too." Literally, it means: to
relax the facial muscles in order to express pleasure and happiness,
elation or excitement; all other meanings branch out of that. Inbisat,
its noun, means, among other things, abandoning modesty. "Al-baseeta" is
the outstretched tract of land, and "bast" is: expansion or propagation.

Al-Basit is the One Who pleases the souls by making them happy and
delighted. He is the One Who plants the seeds of life in the bodies to
signal the beginning of life therein. He, at the advent of resurrection,
brings life back to them in order to show people, in the life hereafter,
what they used to do during their temporary life in this world.

The Attribute "al-Basit" does not exist in the text of the Holy Qur’an,
yet its derivatives certainly do; these are examples where such
derivatives exist:

***Nay! His hands are spread out; He expends as He pleases. (5:64)***

***Allah has made for you the earth a wide expanse. (71:19)***

***Allah is the One Who sends forth the winds, so they raise a cloud,
then He spreads it forth in the sky as He pleases, and He breaks it up,
so you see rain coming forth from it; when He causes it to pour upon
whomsoever He pleases of His servants, lo, they rejoice! (30:48)***

The Holy Qur’an speaks of decorating the bodies with strength:

***"... and increased you in excellence in respect of physique" (Qur’an,
7:69).***

And it speaks of pleasing through both knowledge and excellence of
physique when it says,

***"... and He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and in
physique" (Qur’an, 2:247).***

We have to point out here that we ought to mention both divine
Attributes of al-Qabid and al-Basit together in order to convey the
meanings of might and wisdom. The Almighty is al-Qabid just as He is
al-Basit.

### 23. "Al-Khafid"

Some scholars say that both Attributes al-Khafid and al-Rafi\` ought to
be used simultaneously. If applied to our Islamic creed, both Attributes
connote misguidance and guidance respectively. If applied to knowledge
or obedience to Allah, they imply the highest and the lowest of ranks
respectively; it is in this sense that they occur in this verse:
***"Abasing (one party), exalting (the other)" (Qur’an, 56:3),***
meaning abasing the unbelievers who occupy the lowest ranks of hell
while exalting the believers to the highest ranks of Paradise.

Allah has said,

***"And be kind to him who follows you from among the believers"
(Qur’an, 26:215).***

Khafd is the opposite of raf\`: the first implies vanquishing, lowering
the status of, abasing, insulting, humiliating. The Hour is sometimes
described as such in: ***"Abasing (one party), exalting (the other)"
(Qur’an, 56:3),*** meaning abasing some people because of their
transgression, hurling them into the pit of hellfire. In Surat al-Hijr,
we read more about the khafd: ***"... be kind to the believers" (Qur’an,
15:88),*** and in Surat al-Isra' we read: ***"Be submissively gentle to
them, compassionate" (Qur’an, 17:24).***

Al-Khafid is the One Who humiliates the oppressors and tyrants, lowering
their ranks and insulting them. He abases at will. Al-Khafid is the One
Who lowers, through humiliation, all those who think of themselves as
being great, the arrogant and the conceited. He lowers entire nations.
He lowers falsehood. Al-Khafid is the One Who lowers the rank of all
those who disobey Him, Who humiliates those upon whom His wrath
descends, Who lowers the ranks of those who deserve to be treated as
such.

He humiliates the unbelievers by exposing them to misery, His foes by
distancing them from Him, and by exposing them to perdition.

Al-Khafid is the One Who has lowered the status of those who do not
believe in Him, of those who are arrogant, of the liars, and of those
who swerve away from His Path, the Path of Islam, His final Word of
truth.

### 24. "Al-Rafi\`"

The Holy Qur’an states the following: "***Allah will exalt those of you
who believe, and those who are granted knowledge, to high degrees"
(Qur’an, 58:11).***

Al-Rafi\` is one of the Attributes of Allah whose root word is raf\`,
lifting, raising, exalting, elevating, and the like. It can be used for
objects as in 2:63***:***

***"... and lifted the mountain over you,"*** and in 13:2: ***"Allah is
the One Who raised the heavens without any pillars so that you may see
[His might] and He is firm in power." It can also be used for raising
the structure of a building as is the case in the verse saying, "And
when Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the House..."
(Qur’an, 2:127***). It is also used for exalting or revering someone's
status as in this verse: ***"... and exalted your esteem" (Qur’an,
94:4).***

It is also used to exalt the status or degree of someone honoured as in
the verse saying, ***"... and We have exalted some of them above others
in degrees" (Qur’an, 43:32),*** and also, ***"... and exalted
thrones..." (Qur’an, 56:34)***, that is, thrones the status of which is
exalted by nearness to Him.

Al-Rafi\` is Allah Who exalts the status of His friends, granting them
victory over their foes and His, and that of the righteous, to the
highest degrees. He exalts the truth; He exalts the believers by
granting them happiness; He exalts His friends from among the believers
by getting closer to them; He exalts the status of His friends by
granting them the upper hand, and He exalts the status of those who
befriend Him in truth and in equity. Al-Rafi' raised the heavens without
pillars, raised the clouds over the winds, raised the birds in the air:

***"Have they not seen the birds above them expanding (their wings) and
contracting (them)? Who withholds them save the Beneficent God? Surely
He sees everything" (Qur’an, 67:19).***

Al-Rafi\` has raised the status of His friends in the life of this world
by making the believers humble themselves before them, and by making
people pay homage and respect to them even if they do not wield any
power, even if they have no wealth at all:

"***Now surely the friends of Allah shall have no fear, nor shall they
grieve. Those who believed and guarded (themselves against evil) shall
have glad tidings in the life of this world as well as in the life
hereafter; there is no alteration to the words of Allah; that is the
mighty achievement" (10:62-65).***

Al-Rafi\` exalts the reputation of those who are regarded as weaklings
among their own people, supporting the wronged against those who wrong
them.

In Surat al-Baqarah, the Almighty says,

***"We have made some prophets excel over others; among them are those
to whom Allah spoke, and some of them He exalted by (many degrees of)
rank" (Qur’an, 2:253***).

In Surat al-Ana\`m, He says***,***

***"And this was Our argument which We gave to Abraham against his
people; We exalt in dignity whomsoever We please; surely your Lord is
Wise, Knowing" (Qur’an, 6:83)***.

In the same chapter, the Almighty tells us that

***"He it is Who has made you successors in the land and raised some of
you above others by (various) degrees so that He may try you by what He
gives you; surely your Lord is quick to requite (evil), and He is most
surely the Forgiving, the Merciful" (Qur’an, 6:165).***

Other references occur in the following verses:

***Allah said: O Jesus! I am going to terminate the period of your stay
(on earth) and cause you to ascend to Me, to purify you from those who
disbelieve, and to make those who follow you above those who disbelieve
till the Day of Resurrection; then to Me shall be your return, so I will
decide among you concerning that in which you differed. (3:55)***

And mention Idris (Enoch) in the Book; surely he was a truthful man, a
prophet, and We raised him high in heaven. (19:56-57) And the heavens He
raised and established the balance. (55:7)  
 One who is granted a blessing through the inspiration of this Attribute
of Allah is one who rises above his abominable desires and inclinations;
such a person will be exalted by Allah to a status as high as that
enjoyed by the angels with Him or even higher...

### 25. "Al-Mu\`izz"

Allah has said,

***Whoever desires honour, to Allah belongs the honour all of it. To Him
do the good words ascend, and the good deeds He raises; (as for) those
who plan an evil plan, they shall have a severe chastisement, (as for)
their plan, it shall surely perish. (35:10)***

He has also said in Surat Ali-\`Imran:

***Say: O Allah, Master of the kingdom! You bestow the kingdom upon
whomsoever You please and take the kingdom away from whomsoever You
please, and You exalt whomsoever You please and abase whomsoever You
please; in Your hand is the good (all of it); surely You have power over
all things. (3:26)***

Allah has said,

***"Those who take the unbelievers for guardians rather than the
believers: do they seek honour from them? Surely all honour is Allah's"
(Qur’an, 4:139).***

"Al-Mu\`izz" conveys the meaning of: the One Who honours whomsoever He
pleases from among His servants. Linguistically, ma\`azza, the noun
derived from the verb yu\`izz, means power, strength, might. Allah is
surely al-\`Aziz, the Mighty One Who subdues and is never subdued, Who
strengthens His friends by His favour, protecting them against sinning,
forgiving their faults, permitting them to reside in Paradise, the abode
of His Munificence. Then He honours them by permitting them to witness
His manifestations and see His signs.

He is the One Who empowers His prophets by protecting them against
erring, granting them victory, protecting them, raising their status
among their people. He honours one who obeys Him even if poverty is his
lot, and He raises the status of a pious servant of His even if he were
an Abyssinian slave. Allah, God, The Truth, Praised and Glorified is His
Name, is referred to as such in various verses of His Book, the Holy
Qur’an. Among such references are the following:

***Do not let their speech grieve you; surely might is wholly Allah's;
He is the Hearing, the Knowing. (10:65)***

***Glory to your Lord, the Lord of Honour, above what they describe.
(37:180)***

***To Allah belongs the might, and to His Prophet, and the believers,
but the hypocrites do not know. (63:8)***

Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husain Zayn al-\`abidin is quoted saying, "If one
desires to be honoured even though his tribe is not distinguished, or to
be held in high esteem even though he has no authority, or to be a man
whose wealth does not diminish, he should get out of the humiliation of
disobedience and enter into the honour of obeying his Lord."

Essentially, the way how God honours His servants is by making them feel
satisfied, contented, for humiliation lies in one being greedy. Had it
not been for false hopes, no free man would have ever been enslaved by
anything which, in all truth, is insignificant. The Almighty places one
who persists in praising His Name in the center of honour, instilling
love and respect for him in people's hearts. A servant of Allah who
aspires to earn a good share of personifying this Glorified Name has to
honour the Messenger of Allah and those who are knowledgeable among his
own contemporaries, showing respect and humility to them.

### 26. "Al-Muthill"

The Almighty has said,

***"Those who oppose Allah and His Prophet shall be (herded) among the
most abased" (Qur’an, 58:20).***

"Al-Muthill" is one of the Attributes of Allah derived from the noun
thull, whatever results from subduing, vanquishing, overcoming,
conquering, someone. The Almighty says, ".***.. walk in the ways of your
Lord submissively," (Qur’an, 16:69***), that is, freely. He has also
said,

***"... its fruits shall be made accessible (to them), always easy to
reach" (Qur’an, 76:14).***

Al-Muthill is the One Who abases or humiliates whomsoever He pleases,
depriving them of all prestige. He is the One Who justly abases His foes
when they disobey Him and rebel against His commandments. He insults
them and dismisses them, causing them to be hurled into the abode of His
chastisement, the inferno of hell. Al-Muthill is the One Who abases His
foes by depriving them of knowing Him, enabling them to have their way
and to go against His injunctions. He will then have them transported to
the abode of His chastisement, insulting them by dismissing and cursing
them.

Al-Muthill is the One Who abases the unbelievers through the power of
the truth, Who subdues whomsoever He pleases. Allah has not honoured any
servant of His more than He has to one who abases his own
evil-insinuating self, his nafs, and He has not abased any servant of
His more than one who is preoccupied with trying to earn distinction,
prominence, and prestige for himself.

In Surat al-A\`raf we read the following verse:

***"(As for) those who took the calf (for a god), surely wrath from
their Lord and disgrace in the life of this world shall overtake them"
(Qur’an, 7:152).***

Anyone who looks niggardly at people to see how he can take advantage of
them, who is never satisfied with what he has had, one who is dragged by
his own schemes to elevate himself to prominence while keeping himself
in the darkness of ignorance..., is one whom Allah has surely disgraced
and deprived. Such an individual is implied in verses such as this:

***"But you caused yourselves to fall into temptation, and you waited
and doubted, and vain desires deceived you, till the threatened
punishment of Allah came while the arch-deceiver [Satan] deceived you
about Allah, so today ransom shall not be accepted from you" (Qur’an,
57:14).***

This is the lowest degree of humiliation. Thull, or bringing it about,
that is, ithll, comes in many types, shapes and sizes. Allah abases an
oppressor by making him fall a prey to disease, or to his lust for
women, or to his greed for wealth, or by making him in dire need of
others. Let us supplicate thus:

***"Lord! Take us out of the humiliation of disobedience to the honour
of obedience to You, and do not permit any of those whom You created to
disgrace us, and crown us with the crown of Your honour." Honour is in
needing nobody. The absolutely perfect degree of such honour, to be
sure, belongs to none other than Allah Who has said, "Surely all honour
is Allah's" (Qur’an, 4:139***).

Next in degree of being honoured is one who is closest to the Almighty:

***"... to Allah belongs the honour, to His Prophet, and to the
believers" (Qur’an, 63:8).***

### 27. "Al-Samee\`"

Allah has said, ***"***

***And to Him belongs whatever dwells in the night and in the day, and
He is the Hearing, the Knowing" (Qur’an, 6:13).***

Al-Samee' is the One - and Only One - Who listens to everything in
existence without the use of a faculty for hearing or a hearing aid.
Allah hears each and every sound and voice even if it is hidden from us.
His hearing encompasses everything: He hears the pleas of those who are
in distress; He responds to the supplications of those in need; He helps
those who are desperate for help; He hears the praising of those who
praise Him, so He rewards them for it, and the supplication of those who
plead to Him, so He responds to them. He hears the sound of the black
ant walking on a solid rock in the darkest night; and He hears what the
hearts contemplate and what scruples penetrate the conscience. His
response to the supplication of one person does not distract Him from
responding to another; He knows where the vision trespasses and what the
breasts conceal; He hears every silent plea; He hears you and me.
Nothing on earth or in the heavens can ever be hidden from Him.

"Al-Samee\`" is derived from "sam\`". It conveys the fact that Allah,
the Most High, realizes the truth about each and every sound even if it
is, to our limited ability, quite silent. He, Glory to Him, realizes and
distinguishes sounds as well as colors just as He realizes and
distinguishes everything else.

"Sam\`" may mean: acceptance of and a favourable response to. It exists,
for example, in a tradition wherein the Messenger of Allah says, "Lord!
I seek refuge with You against a statement which is not heard," meaning
a supplication which does not receive His favourable response. It is
also similar to one Muslims pronounce during their obligatory daily
prayers: "Sami\`a Allahu liman amidah," that is, Allah responds
favourably to the pleas of those who praise Him.

The Almighty has said,

***Surely I am with you both: I do hear and see. (20:46)***

***Or do they think that We do not hear what they conceal and their
secret discourses? Aye! And Our messengers (angels) are with them
writing (everything) down. (43:80)***

***Allah has indeed heard the plea of the [woman] who pleads to you
about her husband. (58:1)***

***And if they resolve to divorce, Allah is surely Hearing, Knowing.
(2:227)***

One who comes to realize that Allah knows everything will safeguard his
tongue against uttering falsehood. He will always say what is right. One
who realizes that Allah hears even our thoughts will adopt the manners
of one who watches over his conduct and who always holds himself
accountable for what he contemplates, says, or does.

A servant of Allah ought to know that Allah did not create the hearing
faculty for him except so that he would listen to the speech of Allah
which He revealed unto His Prophet in order to benefit from it and to be
guided by it.

If a servant of Allah seeks to be close to his Lord by offering nawafil
(optional acts of adoration), he will be loved by Allah Who will then
pour over his hearing of His divine light, thus making his insight very
sharp, so much so that such a person will be able to see beyond the
world of matter. If a servant of Allah remains straightforward in his
worship of Allah, continuously seeking to please Him, Allah will surely
provide him with goodness from Him and with divine light.

### 28. "Al-Baseer"

Allah has said, "He is with you wherever you are, and Allah sees
whatever you do" (Qur’an, 57:4). In language, seeing is achieved through
the faculty of vision; it is the reflection of light on what can be seen
and its impression on the eyes. Seeing is also an insight, a discretion,
an innermost conviction. One who is baseer is one who sees deeply, who
is knowledgeable, who is an expert. Also, to "see" means not to rush,
but to contemplate, to be acquainted with things, and to be firm in
adhering to the creed.

Al-Baseer sees everything, the apparent and the hidden, without using
the faculty of vision. When applied to the Almighty, Glory to Him,
vision receives the perfection whereby the qualities of anything that
can be seen are realized. Al-Baseer fully knows every visible thing, and
to Him the truth in their regard is apparent, evident. He knows where
vision trespasses and what the breasts conceal. He sees and oversees;
nothing in the high heavens nor in the earth, nor in what is between
them both, nor what is under the ground, can ever be concealed from His
vision, and He is the ever-Present Who is never absent.

One who realizes that Allah has such an attribute will be disciplined by
constantly keeping a vigil on his conduct, by being precise when holding
his soul to account. One who safeguards his hearing and vision against
incurring the wrath of the Almighty, not committing anything that does
not beseem him or is not commendable, is loved by Allah, and he will be
blessed with hearing and vision as indicated in sacred traditions.

### 29. "Al-Hakam"

The Almighty has said,

***"The judgment is only Allah's; He relates the truth and He is the
best of those who decide" (Qur’an, 6:57).***

Both "al-Hakam" and "al-Hakim" convey the same meaning; the origin of
the first means the same as that of man\`, prohibition, from which a
word such as hakama, an iron rein piece used to restrain horses, is
derived.

"Al-Hakam" means: the One Whose word is final in determining what is
right and what is wrong, in distinguishing between acts of righteousness
and those of sinning. He rewards each soul according to what it earns,
Who decides between His servants as He pleases, Who distinguishes
between the wretch and the lucky, tormenting the first and rewarding the
latter. Al-Hakam is the precise Arbitrator, the absolutely correct Judge
Whose decision none can overturn, nor can anyone repeal His decree.

Al-Hakam is the One in Whose promise there should be no doubt at all, in
Whose action there is no fault at all; He has decreed that the hearts
must be contented and pleased with Him, that the souls must be
submissive, obedient, to Him. He separates the truth from falsehood. In
Surat al-Ana\`m, we read:

***"Shall I then seek a judge other than Allah? He it is Who has
revealed to you the Book (which is) made clear" (Qur’an, 6:114).***

In Surat Younus we read:

***"Follow what is revealed to you and persevere till Allah gives His
judgment, and He is the best of judges" (Qur’an, 10:109).***

Other such references are:

***Then who calls you a liar with regard to the judgment after this? Is
not Allah the best of judges? (95:7-8)***

***Judgment is only Allah's; on Him do I rely, and on Him let those who
are reliant rely. (12:67)***

There are many derivations from this word in various places throughout
the Holy Qur’an. Among Allah's judgment with regard to His servants is
that everyone will receive the rewards of what he earns, and that his
endeavor will be witnessed, noted, recorded, preserved; those who do
good deeds will receive eternal bliss, whereas those who sin will
receive eternal damnation. He makes righteousness the path to heaven and
sinning the path to hell.

Shurayh ibn Hani has said that his father Hani ibn Yazid said, "I came
to see the Messenger of Allah once and he heard people calling me \`Abu
[father of] al-Hakam.' He said to them, \`Al-Hakam is Allah! Why are you
named like that?!' I said to him, \`Whenever my people dispute with one
another, I judge between them to the satisfaction of both disputing
parties.' The Prophet then asked me if I had any sons. \`Yes. They are:
Shuray, Abdullh and Muslim, sons of Hani.' \`Who is their oldest?' the
Messenger of Allah asked me. I told him it was Shuray. He then said,
\`You are Abu Shuray,' then he invoked Allah to bless me and my
sons."[^6]

### 30. "Al-\`Adl"

Allah has said,

***"Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and of good deeds (to
others) and the giving to the kindred, and He forbids indecency, evil,
and rebellion; He admonishes you so that you may be mindful" (Qur’an,
16:90).***

\`Adl means moderation; al-\`adl is above oppressing or being
inequitable to anyone in His decrees and actions. Rather, He grants
everyone what is due to him; He puts everything in its right place;
nothing ensues from Him except justice. He does whatever He pleases, and
His decree regarding His servants is carried out.

In Surat al-Ana\`m, the Almighty says,

***"And the word of your Lord has been accomplished truly and justly;
none can change His words, and He is the Hearing, the Knowing" (Qur’an,
6:115).***

He enjoins justice and equity and says the following in Surat al-Nisa'
(Women):

***"When you judge between people, you should judge with justice; surely
Allah admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah is Seeing,
Hearing" (Qur’an, 4:58).***

There are many traditions narrated about the Messenger of Allah pointing
out to \`adl and highlighting the status of those who act upon it. One
of them is his saying, "There are seven types of people whom Allah will
shade on a Day when there will be no shade except His: a just imam, a
young man who grows up adoring Allah, a man whose heart is always
attached to mosques, two men who love one another for the sake of Allah:
they meet and they part only accordingly, a man sought by a woman of
prominence and beauty [for illicit sex] and to whom he says, \`I fear
Allah,' a man who pays charity and hides his action, so much so that his
left hand does not know what his right hand gives away, and a man who
mentions the Name of Allah for the sake of remembering Him while his
tears overflow." This tradition is recorded by al-Bukhari and Muslim and
is quoted on pp. 164-165, Vol. 3, of Al Targheeb wal tarheeb, and on p.
30 of Qabasat min hadi al nubuwwah.

### 31. "Al-Lateef"

Allah has said,

***"... surely my Lord is benignant to whomsoever He pleases; surely He
is the Knowing, the Wise" (Qur’an, 12:100).***

"Al-Lateef" is one of Allah's Attributes derived from extreme kindness
and compassion in a way which no human faculty can ever fathom.
Al-Lateef continuously pours His blessings unto His servants; His
actions are good and beautiful. This Attribute also means: the One Who
cannot be sensed by human senses or those of all other beings, Who knows
hidden and minute matters. Al-Lateef has combined in Him terse and wise
compassion as well as minute and detailed knowledge of all affairs and
of the means to make them reach whomsoever He pleases from among His
creation.

Al-Lateef pleases His servants when He removes the clouds of His wrath
away from them, the One Who is compassionate towards His servants even
in matters related to His decree; He knows all hidden matters. He is the
One Whose knowledge encompasses everything minute regarding all facts.
His will is carried out, the will whereby He protects His creatures. He
knows the most intricate of details relevant to interests and their
obscurities; He gently makes them reach their destinations.

He is Most Kind and Compassionate to His servants even when they are not
aware of it; He manages their affairs and wishes everything good for His
servants. He desires their ease and makes for them the means of
righteousness and goodness attainable. He eases everything difficult,
Who joins everything broken. Allah has said,

***"Does He not know, being the One Who created (everything and
everyone)?! He knows the subtleties, the One Who is ever-Aware (of
everything)" (Qur’an, 67:14).***

One of the signs of His kindness towards His servants is that He has
given them more than enough and required them to do less than what they
can, thus making the achievement of eternal happiness attainable by easy
endeavor during a short period of time, i.e. one's life-span, which is
too short to be compared with the eternity of the hereafter.

Al-Lateef has conceived everything within the framework of its own
antithesis. Allah, for example, hid for prophet Joseph the prominence of
authority in the garb of slavery till he himself eventually came to say:

***"... surely my Lord is benignant to whomsoever He pleases; surely He
is the Knowing, the Wise" (Qur’an, 12:100).***

A man was taken once to prison although he was innocent of the charge,
so he kept repeating Joseph's invocation saying,

***"... surely my Lord is benignant to whomsoever He pleases; surely He
is the Knowing, the Wise" (Qur’an, 12:100).***

A young man came to him during one night and said to him, "Stand up so
that I may get you out of your jail." The man asked the youth how he
could get out since the doors were all locked, but the youth ordered him
for the second time to stand up. He walked with the young man till he
got out of town, then he said to him,

***"Recite: \`Surely my Lord is benignant to whomsoever He pleases;
surely He is the Knowing, the Wise" (Qur’an, 12:100).***

### 32. "Al-Khabeer"

The Most Exalted One has said,

***"Vision does not comprehend Him, while He comprehends all vision, and
He knows the subtleties, and He is the Aware" (Qur’an, 6:103).***

Al-Khabeer is one of the Attributes of Allah, and it means: the One Who
knows everything and from Whose knowledge nothing at all escapes. He
knows the essence of everything and is acquainted with the truth in its
regard. Al-Khabeer is familiar with the most intricate matters; He knows
the ailment and its remedy.

Al-Khabeer knows the innermost of everything; nothing takes place in His
domain without His knowledge; no atom moves nor stands still, nor a soul
is upset or eased, except that He knows about it. He is the One from
Whose knowledge nothing in the earth or in the heavens is hidden;
nothing moves in the heavens or in the earth except that He knows about
its final resting point or destination.

Scholars have distinguished between al-Khabeer and al-\`Aleem. The first
connotes knowledge, but when knowledge is applied to hidden matters, it
is then called khibra, and the One Who knows it is called al-Khabeer.

The Almighty has said, "What?! Do you think that you will be left alone
while Allah has not yet ascertained those of you who have struggled hard
and have not taken anyone as an adherent besides Allah and His Prophet
and the believers?! Allah is Aware of all what you do" (Qur’an, 9:16).
Anyone who has a certain need about which he likes to ask Allah for
something should recite the verse saying ***"Does He not know, the One
Who created?! He knows the subtleties, and He is the Aware" (Qur’an,
67:14)*** repeatedly till he falls asleep.

### 33. "Al-Haleem"

Allah has said,

***"... certainly Allah has pardoned them; surely Allah is Forgiving,
Forbearing" (Qur’an, 3:155).***

"Al-Haleem" is an Attribute of the Almighty derived from the root word
hilm which means: taking the time to do something. It also means care,
attention, and sensibility. Allah's hilm is His postponement of
chastising those who deserve to be chastised, so He delays the penalty
of some of those who deserve it. After that, He may penalize them or
overlook their faults.

Or He may swiftly penalize some of them. He witnesses the transgression
of transgressors and the disobedience of those who disobey Him without
being provoked by anger or overwhelmed by wrath, and He does not rush to
penalize despite His ability to do so. Allah has said,

***"Had Allah destroyed men on account of their iniquity, He would not
have left on earth a single creature" (Qur’an, 16:61).***

Al-Haleem does not bring about a swift vengeance; had He intended to
effect revenge at a later time, He would have been called spiteful,
vengeful, and if He does not intend to seek revenge at all, then surely
He is Forgiving. He can also be called al-Haleem if He does not intend
to seek revenge at all provided He does not declare His intention. If He
does declare it, He then is called Forgiving. Al-Haleem quite often
overlooks sins and covers up shortcomings. He forgives after having
covered up. He safeguards His affection for His servants.

His promise is good. He fulfills His promise. Al-Haleem shields those
who indulge in sins with His forgiveness, Who pardons those who violate
His laws, Who is not slighted by the rebellion of the rebellious, and no
oppression of any oppressor can ever provoke Him.

The Holy Qur’an has described some of Allah's messengers as Haleem; for
example, Abraham, the Friend of Allah, is described as, ***"... most
surely Abraham was very tender-hearted, forbearing" (Qur’an, 9:114),***
and in Surat Hud, he is praised likewise: ***"Most surely Abraham was
forbearing, tender-hearted, oft-returning (to Allah)" (Qur’an,
11:75).***

The Holy Qur’an states the following in Surat al-Saffat about Ishmael

"***So We gave him the glad tidings of a boy [Ishmael] possessing
forbearance" (Qur’an, 3:101***).

ilm is a gracious and a noble attribute, so much so that one tradition
recorded in Al-Athir cites the Messenger of Allah saying, "Hilm is the
master of all good conduct." It also records another such tradition
saying, "One who is Haleem is almost on the same footing with Allah's
prophets." Hilm enjoys a high status and esteem despite the abundance of
one's sins and the repetition of one's repentance.

Allah has said,

***"Allah does not call you to account for what is vain of your oaths,
but He will call you to account for what your hearts have earned, and
Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing" (Qur’an, 2:225).***

He has also said,

***"The seven heavens declare His glory and the earth, too, and those
who are in them, and there is not a single thing but glorifies and
praises Him, but you do not understand their glorifying; surely He is
Forbearing, Forgiving" (Qur’an, 17:44).***

A forbearing and munificent person, then, is one who often forgives the
sins and conceals the shortcomings.

He is the one who forgives after shielding one's sins, who safeguards
his compassion, who is true to his word, who forgives those who break
his law, who is not stirred by the rebellion of transgressors, nor is he
provoked by oppression. Allah's Munificence regarding the sinners is
great:

***"... and He is the Most High, the Great" (Qur’an, 2:255).***

It is narrated that Abraham saw a man committing a sin, so he prayed
Allah to cause him to perish, and so it happened. He saw a second and a
third, and he repeated his plea, and they, too, perished. Then he saw a
fourth and invoked Allah likewise to annihilate him. It was then that
Allah inspired him, "O Abraham! Stop! If We were to annihilate each one
of Our servants who commits a sin, then only a small number will
survive; but if one sins, We give him a respite; if he repents, We
accept his repentance, and if he persists, We postpone his penalty
knowing that he cannot escape from Our domain."

It is also narrated that a young man used to commit many sins, and he
used to persist in sinning; nay, he even used to repent and immediately
go back to sinning. Having done so quite often, he was addressed by
Satan thus, "For how long will you keep sinning and repenting?" Satan
wished that Allah would cause that man to lose hope in His mercy and
become despondent.

When night came, the man performed his ablution and offered two
reka\`ts, then he raised his eyes to the heavens and said, "O You Who
protects the righteous against sinning, Who safeguards those who are
protected from sinning, Who makes the righteous what they are! If You
neglect me, You will find me losing heart; my forelock is in Your hand;
my debts are before You! O You Who changes the hearts! I invoke You to
keep my heart firm on following Your creed!" Allah, thereupon, said to
His angels, "O angels of Mine! Have you all heard his statement? Bear
witness, then, that I have forgiven all his past sins and safeguarded
him against sinning for the rest of his life."

### 34. "Al-\`Azeem"

The Almighty has said,

***"So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Great" (Qur’an, 56:96).***

"Al-\`Azeem" is a superlative derived from the noun \`izam, greatness,
magnanimity, dignity, honour, esteem, pride... The Absolute Azeem is the
One Whose greatness cannot be grasped by vision; it is beyond all
limits, so much so that no human intellect can ever absorb it. Allah has
said, ***"He is the Most High, the Great" (Qur’an, 2:255).***

The most prominent person in a town is called its greatest. This is the
meaning of what the unbelievers say as the Holy Qur’an quotes them:
***"... to a man great in both towns..." (Qur’an, 43:31).*** Allah has
said, ***"... and the great Qur’an" (Qur’an, 15:87).***

When the Messenger of Allah wrote a letter to Heraclius (which will be
discussed later in this book Insha-Allah), he addressed him as "the
azeem man of Rome," that is, the greatest dignitary in Rome. Heraclius,
who ruled from 610 - 641 A.D., was a Byzantine emperor, ruler of the
Eastern Roman empire. was involved in many wars with the Persians from
634 - 642 A.D. He did not accept Islam; his armies were eventually
conquered by Islamic troops, so he lost Syria, Palestine and Mesopotamia
(upper Iraq) as well as Egypt, one after the other.

If you consider the greatness of al-Az\`eem, you will come to know that
anyone besides Him is insignificant. The human being, no matter how
knowledgeable, is limited in the scope and content of his knowledge. How
can you compare such a limited amount of knowledge with that of the
Almighty? An example of His might exists in 31:28:

***"Neither your creation nor your raising (bai\`th, the reunion between
the soul and the recreated body) is only like (that of) a single soul"
(Qur’an, 31:28).***

To the Almighty, the creation of the entire cosmos is as easy as the
creation of one single soul:

***"Our word for a thing when We intend it is only to say to it: Be, and
it is" (Qur’an, 16:40).***

***Allah has required us to revere His signs; He says, "That (shall be
so), and whoever respects the signs of Allah, it surely is (the sign) of
the piety of the hearts" (Qur’an, 22:32).***

One who highly regards the signs of Allah, respects religious rites,
holds in high esteem anything related to Allah, is surely held in high
esteem by both Allah and His servants.

The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad, has conveyed the following glad
tidings: "One who learns then becomes fully knowledgeable then acts upon
what he has learned is called great in the kingdom of the heavens."

Ibn \`Abbas quotes the Messenger of Allah saying, "If someone enters a
room to visit a sick person on the brink of death and he repeats seven
times the saying of: \`I plead to Allah the Great, Lord of the Great
Throne, to heal you,' that sick person will be healed by the Will of
Allah."

### 35. "Al-Ghafoor"

Allah has said,

***"... surely Allah forgives the faults all of them; surely He is the
Forgiving, the Merciful" (Qur’an, 39:53).***

"Al-Ghafoor" is derived from the root word ghafr, veiling or covering.
He is al-Ghafoor because He quite often veils the sins and forgives
those who commit them. He does not dispute about them with His servants.
Maghfira means the covering and the forgiving of sins. Allah's
forgiveness means His protection of a servant of His against His
torment. Its verb means: to openly overlook his sins.

Al-Ghafoor is the Master Whose power is perfect; He may unconditionally
forgive due to the favours He bestows upon His servants, and to His
benevolence.

The Holy Qur’an has referred quite often to forgiveness, and Allah has
diversified it so that the hearts of those who disobey Him may not lose
hope of His mercy, and so that no criminal will despond of the mercy of
Allah. He forgives the sins and accepts the repentance. In Surat Ghfir,
we recite this verse***:***

***"The One Who forgives the faults and Who accepts repentance, Who is
Severe in punishing, the Lord of bounty" (Qur’an, 40:3)***.

Other such references are as follows:

***... so forgive us and have mercy on us; You are the best of those who
forgive. (7:155)***

***Most surely I am the most Forgiving to one who repents and believes
and does good deeds then continues to follow the right guidance.
(20:82)***

***He has created the heavens and the earth with the truth; He makes the
night cover the day and the day overtake the night, and He has made the
sun and the moon subservient (to His will): each runs to an assigned
term; surely He is the Mighty, the oft-Forgiving. (39:5)***

As regarding the verse saying, ***"Inform My servants that I am the
Forgiving, the Merciful" (Qur’an, 15:49)***, some companions of the
Prophet were once indulged in laughter as the Messenger of Allah passed
by. He greeted them then said to them, "Do you laugh while the fire is
before you?" They regretted and felt extremely depressed. He soon went
back to them and said, "Gabriel has just come to me and said that Allah
asked why I caused some of His servants to lose hope in His mercy," then
he repeated 39:5 quoted above.

The lot of one who wishes to personify the Attribute "al-Ghafoor" is
that he constantly seeks His forgiveness; he forgives His servants time
and over again. This is the key to obtaining the forgiveness of Allah as
referred to in 24:22: "Do not let those among you who possess grace and
abundance swear against giving to the near of kin and the poor and those
who have fled in Allah's way; they should pardon and overlook. Do not
you love that Allah would forgive you? Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."

### 36. "Al-Shakoor"

Allah has said,

***"So that He may pay them back their rewards in full and give them
more out of His grace: surely He is the Forgiving, the One Who
multiplies the rewards" (Qur’an, 35:30).***

Linguistically, "al-Shakoor" is derived from the root word shukr which
conveys the meaning of: an increase. Arabs describe a land as such if
its plants are abundant.

They describe an animal as such if it is fattened. Plants sustained by a
little amount of water are called shakoor. Al-Shakoor thanks quite
often, Who appreciates acts of righteousness, charity and kindness. A
servant of Allah who is shakoor is one who perseveres to thank his Lord
by obeying Him and by carrying out the obligations which He has mandated
on him. Shukr is recognition and propagation of goodness.

Al-Shakoor, Allah, appreciates even the few good deeds His servants do,
doubling His rewards for them. His way of thanking them is by giving
them of His bounties though He was the One Who enabled them to do such
good deeds in the first place. He planted in their hearts the desire to
do them, then He provided for them all the means to carry them out. He
enables His servants to be grateful for the blessings which He bestows
upon them, so He rewards them even for small acts of obedience to Him
with an abundance of His good things. He grants for a few days' endeavor
a bliss in the hereafter that never ends.

Al-Shakoor accepts the little and Who gives a lot. Allah has called
Himself al-Shakoor in order to tell us that He rewards His servants for
thanking Him; hence, the reward for such gratitude is called shukr, just
as the penalty for a bad deed is called bad; He has said,

***"And the recompense of evil is a like punishment" (Qur’an, 42:40).***

One of the tokens of accepting one's expression of appreciation is that
he receives an increase of Allah's blessings according to 14:7: ***"If
you are grateful, I will certainly give you more, and if you are
ungrateful, My chastisement is truly severe."***

The truth about appreciation is not related to the qualities of Allah:
appreciation comes from people; it is simply the expending of the
blessings granted by Allah in the way for which He created them.

Linguistically, appreciation is coupled with blessing, grace, gratitude.
Nobody can do Allah a favour for which He has to thank him; therefore,
His appreciation must be understood metaphorically according to Tafsir
al-Manar. Allah's gratitude means that He is capable of rewarding the
doers of good, that He does not permit the deeds of such doers to be
wasted or unrewarded. It is in this sense that rewarding the doer of
good with what he deserves is called appreciation, and Allah has thus
called Himself appreciative. Allah has also promised those who
appreciate His blessings to increase His blessings upon them; so, such
gratitude also falls under the same type of appreciation.

The most Appreciative One has said,

***"... and whoever does good spontaneously, surely Allah is Grateful,
Knowing" (Qur’an, 2:158).***

Thus do we come to know that Allah, Glory to Him, has a conduct which is
surely the most perfect one when He called Himself appreciative of the
worlds although whatever good they do neither benefits Him nor harms Him
in the least; rather, its benefit is surely for our own good. It is, in
reality, a sign of His own blessings upon us that He guides and enables
us to do it; so, it does not beseem any sensible person to observe the
great favour bestowed upon him by Allah without thanking Him for it, or
without obeying Him.

Allah also says,

***"Therefore remember Me, so I will remember you, too, and be thankful
to Me, and do not be ungrateful to Me" (Qur’an, 2:152).***

In this verse, Allah teaches His servants to be appreciative, ordering
them to remember the blessings which He has bestowed upon them by their
hearts, tongues and senses. Their reward for it is that He reminds them
of His permission to continue to enjoy such blessings, and to increase
them, ordering them to praise Him by His Attributes, to discuss His
countless blessings, to glorify Him openly and secretly, so that He may
mention them in His high company and mention His being pleased with
them.

In a qudsi tradition, the Messenger of Allah quotes the Almighty saying,
"I am as My servant thinks of Me: I am with him; if he mentions Me
silently, I shall mention him likewise, and if He mentions My Name
before a crowd of people, I shall mention him before a better crowd; if
he gets closer to Me as much as a span, I shall get closer to him as
much as a yard; if he gets closer to Me as much as a yard, I will get
closer to him more than twice that much. If he comes to Me walking, I
shall come to him running."

Allah commands His servants to be grateful to Him and not to deny the
blessings which He has bestowed upon them. This is a warning for this
nation against that wherein previous nations had fallen due to the
latter's denial of the blessings which the Almighty had showered upon
them. He granted them the powers of reason, emotion, judgment, and other
such blessings.

A servant of Allah should never tire of thanking and praising Him,
incessantly and unhesitatingly.

In a supplications by the Messenger of Allah, he says, "Lord! I am
incapable of praising You enough; You are as You have praised Yourself."
Praising Allah and thanking Him as He really deserves is not within the
human capacity. A servant of Allah, therefore, must leave it to the One
Who can do so:

Allah, Praise is due to Him, and ONLY to Him. How can man acquire
perfection in such an area while he contemplates upon some blessings
bestowed upon him by Allah and says to himself: "I was mere naught and
Allah caused me to be, then He granted me the beautiful outward
appearance, and the power of reason which is the very best of my inner
qualities, then He granted me hearing and vision and guided me to know
Him, then He made His great rewards attainable and even praised me in
his Great Book"?

If you move your tongue and say: Alamdu-lillh (Praise to Allah),
thinking that mere saying so is sufficient to express gratitude for all
the great favours He has bestowed upon you, then you surely have taken
leave of absence from your sanity, for you surely will not have thanked
Him at all. "Talk is cheap," says an axiom, whereas "actions speak
louder than words." Express your gratitude towards your Maker by
actions, not only by words. A servant's true expression of gratitude is
his own admission that he simply is incapable of sufficiently express
his gratitude to His Maker, Sustainer, and Benefactor.

Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari has quoted the Messenger of Allah saying,
"If one is given something while being capable of finding a way to
likewise give, let him do so, but if he is not, then let him praise the
giver, for one who remains silent and says nothing commits kufr,
apostasy. And if one were to put on clothes which he was not given, he
would then be like one who wears two outfits of forgery."[^7]

### 37. "Al-\`Aliyy"

Allah has said,

***"... what they call upon besides Him is falsehood; Allah is the High,
the Great" (Qur’an, 22:61).***

"Al-\`Aliyy" is one of Allah's Attributes, and it is derived from uluww,
height, sublimity, or loftiness versus lowliness. The height referred to
here is that of status. Al-\`Aliyy is High, so High that He can never be
conceived nor visualized. Minds are at a loss regarding His Greatness;
intellects are incapable of conceiving His perfection.

According to Al-Mufradat, one who is \`aliyy is a prominent person, a
man of distinction. When applied to the Almighty, as in 22:61 cited
above, the implied meaning is that He is above being described by anyone
or truly known by anyone, and He is above what anyone says about Him.

He is the One above Whose status there is none at all, and everything in
existence is under His control. Allah has said,

***"He is the Most High, the Great" (Qur’an, 2:255),***

***"... judgment belongs to Allah, the High, the Great" (Qur’an,
40:12)***

***"... the Great, the Most High" (Qur’an, 13:9).***

"High" and "low" may be applied both to tangible as well as intangible
things. As regarding the tangible ones, the \`Arsh (Throne) is said to
be higher than the Kursi (the Seat of Authority), and the heavens is
higher than the earth. Such words are applied only to tangible things,
things which have dimensions. Since the Almighty is above having
dimensions, His being al-\`Aliyy is above being as such.

The One Who is al-\`Aliyy is above being conceived by any intellect, and
Whose Attributes are too great to be described. He is the One in Whose
Greatness minds are puzzled, and in trying to realize His Essence the
intellects fall short.

Among the good manners adorning a believer are: humbleness and
submissiveness before the Glory of the Almighty. It is only then that He
exalts his status. Al-Qushayri has reported saying that Allah inspired
Moses to go near a mountain so that He would address him. Every mountain
there vied with the others in the hope of being the one near which such
a divine address would take place.

Mount Sinai thought very humbly of itself saying, "Since when do I
deserve the honour of being the site worthy of the status of Moses when
addressed by his Lord?" For this reason, Allah inspired Moses to go near
Mount Sinai due to the latter's humility.

According to Al-Asma' wal sifat, where a qudsi tradition is quoted, the
Messenger of Allah heard during the Night of Isra (the night journey to
Jerusalem) a praising in the high heavens saying: Subhan al-\`Aliyy
al-A\`la, Subnahu wa Ta\`ala, that is, "Glory to the Most High, Glory to
Him and Exaltation." Iyas ibn Salmah has quoted his father saying that
he had heard the Messenger of Allah starting every supplication by
saying, "Subhana al-A\`la al-Wahhab," "Glory to the Most High, the
ever-Giving."

### 38. "Al-Kabeer"

We read the following in the Holy Qur’an:

***"They shall say: What is it that your Lord said? They shall say: The
truth. And He is the Most High, the Great" (Qur’an, 34:23).***

Linguistically, one who is kabeer is a great person, a dignitary, a
distinguished personality. Allah, Glorified and Exalted is His Name, is
greater than everything and everyone, and He is the Absolutely Great
One, the One Who is Great on His own merits, in His qualities and
Essence, above being in any way like any of His creatures; "There is
nothing like Him," the One Who is superior to the praise of any of those
who praise, glorify, or attempt to describe Him.

He is the most perfect of anything in existence, the One Who has all the
Glory, the Greatness, the Honour and the Sublimity. He is above what the
beings He has created conceive Him to be. He is too Great to be
described or His actions to be comprehended. The Almighty has said,

***He is the High, the Great. (40:12)***

***Proclaim His greatness magnifying (Him). (17:111)***

***And your Lord do magnify. (74:3).***

***To Him belongs greatness in the heavens and the earth. (45:37)***

The Almighty has been lauded with characteristics of this sort:

One is al-Kabeer. The other is al-Mutakabbir, the explanation of which
has already been dealt with. The third is al-Akbar as in 9:72: ***"...
and best of all is Allah's goodly pleasure" (Qur’an, 9:72),*** and in
29:45***: "... certainly the remembrance of Allah is the greatest."***

But it has not been used in the Holy Qur’an as a reference to the
Almighty, yet it occurs as an Attribute of His in the Sunnah such as our
saying: Allahu Akbar! The fourth is al-Kibriya'; Allah has said,

***"And to Him belongs greatness..." (Qur’an, 45:37).***

So, let us discuss these Attributes:

As regarding al-Akbar, there are two ways to look at it: First, He is
greater than anything else in existence. It is possible to view the
"Allahu Akbar!" which Muslims pronounce audibly when saying their
prayers in the same light, meaning that Allah is greater than anyone or
anything else; hence, one's mind will not be occupied by anyone or
anything else besides Him, nor is his heart attached to anyone or
anything else besides Him.

"Allahu Akbar!" is a statement derived from "al-Kabeer" and is
pronounced to initiate the obligatory prayers, during the time of
rukoo\`, sujood or qiyam, that is, when bowing, prostrating or standing
during the performance of obligatory prayers. It is called takbeer,
Glorification of al-Kabeer, the Great One, the Most Great. Takbeer is
required on several occasions such as the athan, iqama, prayers, both
feasts, funeral prayers, upon seeing the Ka\`ba, throwing the stones
[during the pilgrimage], and announcing the time for jihad, holy war.

The Messenger of Allah is said to initiate anything of significance with
"Allahu Akbar!"

Ibn \`Abbas is quoted saying that the Messenger of Allah used to teach
his companions a supplication whereby they could shun all ailments and
types of fever which said, "In the Name of Allah al-Kabeer; we seek
refuge with Allah al-Azeem from the evil of any feverish vein, and from
the inferno of hellfire."

The Attribute "al-Kabeer" is repeated five times throughout the text of
the Holy Qur’an.

### 39. "Al-Hafeez"

The Almighty has said in the Holy Qur’an,

***"And he has no authority over them, but so that We may distinguish
the one who believes in the hereafter from the one who is in doubt
concerning it, and your Lord preserves all things" (Qur’an, 34:21).***

"Al-Hafeez" is derived from the root word if, safeguarding something or
someone. Its antithesis is sahu, forgetfulness, negligence,
inattentiveness. Women who safeguard the property of their husbands when
the latter are absent are described in the Holy Qur’an as fhafizatin lil
ghayb. A book is called afee because its contents safeguard records of
actions and statements from being lost (from people's memory, etc.).

Al-Hafeez very much maintains the existence of everything that exists,
Who safeguards contradictory elements against overwhelming one another
such as what is hot and what is cold, what is moist and what is dry,
qualities which Allah has created, making them inherent in our creation
as well as in that of all animals and plants.

Had He not thus safeguarded them, by neutralizing them once and by
increasing the amount of what diminishes thereof another, they would not
have coexisted with one another, their mixing would have been annulled,
their composition would have diminished, and their ability to be
composed or amalgamated would have disappeared. Al-Hafeez carries a
stronger meaning than that of al-Hafiz. Al-Hafeez has two meanings: One
is the opposite of oversight or forgetfulness, and its meaning is
derived from knowing.

When we say that the Almighty safeguards things, we mean that He knows
them in all their quantities and intricacies, and that such knowledge is
not altered by diminution, oversight, negligence, or forgetfulness. The
other is that al-Hafeez safeguards things against loss: He guards them,
and all His characteristics and perfection are above extinction.

He has also said: ***"Attend constantly to prayers and to the middle
prayers, and stand up truly obedient to Allah" (Qur’an, 2:238),*** and,
***"... the preservation of them both does not tire Him" (Qur’an,
2:255).***

He protects His Divine statements, i.e. the Holy Qur’an, hence the
verse, ***"We have revealed the Reminder, and We are its Guardian"
(Qur’an, 15:9),*** meaning Protectors against alteration, distortion, or
any tampering with its sacred text, applied here particularly to the
text of the Holy Qur’an.

Despite the greatness of his status, the Friend of Allah Abraham
supplicated thus: ***"Lord! Grant me wisdom and join me with the
righteous" (Qur’an, 26:83)***, and, ***"Lord! Make us both submitting to
You" (Qur’an, 2:128).*** Moses, who spoke to the Almighty, also
supplicated saying, ***"Lord! Expand my breast for me" (Qur’an,
20:25).***

The Almighty has said the following to His Prophet and Messenger
Muhammad: ***"... had it not been that We had already established
you..." (Qur’an, 17:74), and, "... Allah will protect you from people"
(Qur’an, 5:67).*** He admonished the believers to pray by saying,
***"Lord! Do not make our hearts deviate after You have guided us
aright" (Qur’an, 3:8).***

One who contemplates on the meanings of al-Hafeez and eagerly longs for
Him with all his heart is one in whose heart the love for His Lord is
borne, the Lord Who protects His servant even when the latter is
disobedient to Him, falling short of worshipping Him, lagging behind in
adoring Him. He reawakens his heart from its inattentiveness. It is then
that Allah makes his heart like a preserved treasure of secrets, so he
takes courageous stands, safeguarding his senses against committing
sins, protecting his heart against spiritually harmful insinuations.

### 40. "Al-Muqeet"

In the Holy Qur’an, we read: ***"Whoever joins himself (to another) in a
good cause shall have a share thereof, and whoever joins himself (to
another) in an evil cause shall be responsible for it, and Allah
controls all things" (Qur’an, 4:85).***

"Al-Muqeet" is derived from the root noun qoot, sustenance, the food
that sustains the human body. Ibn \`Abbas has said that al-Muqeet is
al-Muqtadir, the Omnipotent. Al-Muqeet creates all beings, creating
likewise the means for their sustenance. He provides ways for them to
have access to such means of sustenance; He has made accessible to them
what is necessary and what is a luxury.

He sustains the bodies and the souls. He has taken upon Himself to
sustain His creation. Al-Muqeet hears the silent supplication and
responds to it and knows the affliction and removes it. "Al-Muqeet"
conveys the same meaning as that of "al-Hafeez," the Protector; so, He
protects and sustains the living beings.

Reference to qoot exists throughout the Holy Qur’an. For example, Allah
has said the following in Surat Fussilat:

***"And He made in it mountains above its surface, and He blessed
therein and made therein its foods, in four periods: alike for the
seekers" (Qur’an, 41:10)***.

He sustains the hearts through knowledge, so He is al-Razzaq but in a
more specific way, for sustenance includes both food and non-food items.
Qoot is food sufficient to keep someone's body alive. It may also mean
the One Who takes full control over something or someone, Who is Capable
of managing his/her affairs.

Al-Muqeet Alone is Capable and Knowledgeable of everything. One of the
good manners inspired by this Attribute is that when food is brought to
you, you must recognize al-Muqeet Whose sustenance is quite spacious and
encompassing, through Whose Grace are you provided with food. Such a
recognition will cause the light of this Attribute to lift you
spiritually. God will then make you the treasure-house for His servants,
enabling you to sustain others, teach them knowledge, and lead them to
the ever-Living, the Sustainer.

Do not seek the achievement of all your wishes and desires except from
Allah, for He surely holds the keys to the treasures of His sustenance.
According to one qudsi tradition, Allah said to Moses, "O Moses! Ask Me
with regard to everything, including your shoe strings and the salt for
your pot."

### 41. "Al-Haseeb"

Allah has said in the Holy Qur’an,

***"... those who deliver the messages of Allah and fear Him and not
fear anyone save Allah, and Allah suffices for taking account (of
everything)" (Qur’an, 33:39).***

Al-Haseeb is one of Allah's Attributes, and it is often explained as the
One Who rewards. Its meaning may also be understood as the One Who
provides sufficiently, Who grants whatever His servants need; He is the
Master upon Whom all rely; there is no haseeb besides Him, and all His
creation are in need of His help and support.

It is also said that al-haseeb is the One to Whom everything honourable
is referred, and with Him does every glory end. He calls His servants to
account for their deeds, Who tries those who obey Him and rewards them
for such obedience, Who calls those who disobey Him to account and
penalizes them for their disobedience; He, and only He, tries everyone.

Things are connected to one another, and in the end they are connected
to Allah Who has said,

***"O Prophet! Allah suffices you and the believers who follow you"
(Qur’an, 8:64).***

If we look at this great cosmos, which is fixed and unaffected by
external effects since millions of years, we will conclude that there is
a complex accounting system for it which is spontaneous.

It makes cosmic criteria fixed in order to guarantee the preservation of
human life on earth in the best way so that man may be able to perform
the function for which Allah created him, that is, to worship Him. The
number of computations required to run such a tremendous cosmos can
never be conceived by any human mind; so, how can one imagine the
spontaneous alterations of some while the rest remain the same?!

It is the Great al-haseeb, the computing One, the Great, the most swift
of all those who compute. It truly is an Attribute which deserves a
close look. If a thinking person were to remain thinking all life, he
will never be able to compute except very, very little indeed. Yet I
like through these simple statements to give the reader an idea that may
provide him with a glimpse of the greatness of this miraculous
Attribute:

The verb "hasaba" means: counted, computed, calculated, deducted a
total, etc. "hisab" means: counting, computing, calculating, or
accounting, and it is accomplished by adding, subtracting, and such
related steps. The science of hisab is arithmetics from which more
advanced sciences: algebra, mathematics, and calculus, are derived. The
Holy Qur’an contains references to al-haseeb and the derivatives of its
root word in verses such as these:

***... and though there may be the weight of a grain of mustard seed, We
will (still) bring it, and sufficient are We to take account. (21:47)***

***Then are they sent back to Allah, their Master, the True One; now
surely His is the judgment, and He is the swiftest in taking account.
(6:62)***

***They shall have (their) portion of what they have earned, and Allah
is swift in reckoning. (2:202)***

***There is none to repeal His decree, and He is swift to take account.
(13:41)***

***... there he finds Allah, so He pays him back his reckoning in full,
and Allah is swift in reckoning. (24:39)***

In order to be acquainted with the secret of Allah's Power as embedded
in His Attribute "al-haseeb", as it manifests itself upon His creation,
let us take a look at the chemical, physiological and astronomical
balance existing in the cosmos.

We will see that there is a high computing power too great to be
conceived, one capable of conducting such computations and controlled by
One Who is fully knowledgeable of the cosmos in its entirety, of the
smallest atom in it up to the largest planet. Had it not been so, its
cosmic computations would not have remained fixed. In order to form an
idea about the complexity of such computations, we have to provide an
example:

Were we to think for one moment about the number of computations which
take place inside our bodies, we will surely be unable to calculate
them. So, how can man conceive the number of computations in the whole
cosmos from the smallest atom to the largest planet in their various
types, orbits, and environments?

The mind, no matter how great, can never do so, and it will definitely
recognize Allah and His Absolute Power, and that He is the only capable
al-haseeb Who can make such computations; so, let us contemplate on this
Attribute so that we may honour and thank Him. Allah has pointed out in
the text of the Holy Qur’an the calculation according to which the
cosmos is arranged in accordance with places very well computed in their
locations, orbits and speeds:

***"Surely We have created everything according to a measure. And Our
command is but one, as (swift as) the twinkling of an eye" (Qur’an,
54:49-50).***

He has also said,

***But nay! I swear by the falling of the stars, and most surely it is a
very great oath, if you only know... (56:75-76)***

***The sun and the moon follow a reckoning. (55:5)***

***(As for) the moon, We have ordained for it stages till it becomes
again like an old dry palm branch. (36:39)***

***... and ordained for it mansions so that you may know the computation
of years and the reckoning. (10:5)***

***He causes the dawn to break, and he has made the night for (you to)
rest, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. (6:96)***

As a matter of fact, there is hardly any verse which does not contain
one indication or more about the computed system of the cosmos or of the
human body, but the Holy Qur’an highlights a specific significance for a
different type of calculations: the calculations of the sustenance of
Allah's servants according to the wisdom of Allah, some of which are
according to a measure, and some coming from whence a servant of Allah
does not know:

***"... and Allah gives means of subsistence to whomsoever He pleases
without measure" (Qur’an, 2:212***).

Such is usually the sustenance of the righteous whom Allah sustains from
whence they do not know or expect:

"... ***and whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah, He will make an
outlet for him and give him sustenance from whence he does not expect"
(Qur’an, 65:2-3).***

Also, Allah's giving is great, so great that its true value can never be
conceived or computed.

There is still a greater calculation: the calculation of the deeds and
the intentions behind them, their recording as well as the rewards for
them in the life of this world or in the one to come, or in both, for
the Almighty says the following in this regard:

***... only the delivery of the message is (incumbent) on you, while
calling (them) to account is Ours. (13:40)***

***So that Allah may requite each soul (according to) what it has
earned; surely Allah is swift in reckoning. (14:51)***

***... so We called it to account severely and We chastised it with a
stern chastisement. (65:8)***

***Surely to Us is their return, then surely upon Us is the taking of
their account. (88:25-26)***

***... surely Allah takes account of all things. (4:86)***

***"Whoever brings a good deed,"*** says the Almighty in the Holy Qur’an
as He refers to the Day of Judgment, ***"he shall have ten like it, and
whoever brings an evil deed, he shall be recompensed only with the like
thereof, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly" (Qur’an, 6:160).***

People on the Day of Judgment will be simultaneously judged just as they
are being judged in the life of this world. Their sustenance will be
forwarded to them at once, and Allah is never diverted by anything from
another:

***"So that Allah may requite each soul (according to) what it has
earned; surely Allah is swift in reckoning" (Qur’an, 14:51).***

Those who are endowed with understanding know the precision of the
Divine computation from their own dealing with Him, for He has said,

"***... and whether you manifest what is in your minds or hide it, Allah
will call you to account according to it, then He will forgive
whomsoever He pleases and chastise whomsoever He pleases, and Allah has
power over all things" (Qur’an, 2:284).***

God's management of the affairs goes on forever and ever. Our master
Muhammad has said, "Call your own selves to account before you
yourselves are called upon to account for them."

### 42. "Al-Jaleel"

Allah has said,

***"And the person of your Lord will forever endure, the Lord of glory
and honour" (Qur’an, 55:27),*** and also, ***"Blessed be the Name of
your Lord, the Lord of Glory and Honour" (Qur’an, 55:78)!***

Linguistically, the verb "yujill" means: to magnify or glorify someone
or deem him great. The Attribute "al-Jaleel" is derived from honour,
dignity, and greatness. He is too Great to do anything which does not
fit His Honour, Who purifies the heart by manifesting the qualities of
His Glory to it, Who reveals what is hidden by the attributes of His
beauty and what is in the world, all of it, of glory, perfection,
goodness and magnificence by the lights of His Essence and the effects
of His qualities. Al-Jaleel is worthy of bidding and forbidding; besides
Him, every great person is not great at all, and every gigantic thing is
dwarfed.

He grants glory to those who approach Him and humiliation to those whom
He dismisses from His presence.

The Absolute al-Jaleel is Allah. The Attribute "al-Kabeer" describes the
perfection of the Self, whereas "al-Jaleel" describes the perfection of
His qualities. "Al-\`Azeem" refers to the perfection of the Self. All
qualities of His are referred to according to the extent one can
conceive; so, He exhausts the mind and is not exhausted; He can never be
seen by anyone, yet He sees everyone. When the qualities of glory are
attributed to a reasoning mind capable of conceiving them, they are
called beauty, and the one they describe is called beautiful.

Originally, the Attribute "al-Jameel" was linguistically applied to a
picture which can be discerned by the eyes no matter what it represents,
one which suits and agrees with the vision. Then it was applied to an
inner picture which may be conceived by the mind such as one may talk
about "a beautiful conduct," for it is conceived by the mind rather than
the eyesight. Inner pictures, then, if harmonious and combining the
qualities of perfection that suit them, just as they ought to be, convey
an inner beauty just as they convey to whoever discerns and conceives
them a visual pleasure, and their inner beauty is more intense than
their outward one.

The share a servant of Allah may derive from the inspiration of this
Attribute is that he adorns himself with beauty and bears in mind that
it is He Who has bestowed upon him the blessings of beauty, be it the
beauty of a visible image or of the inner self. The inner beauty of the
soul is surely higher and greater than that of the beauty of the body.
The Messenger of Allah used to thus supplicate after his prayers:
"Allahomma anta as-Salam wa minka as-salam; tabrakta wa ta\`alayta ya
thal jalali wal ikram," that is, "Lord! You are the Peace and the source
of peace; Glory to You, You are the One with all the Greatness and
Honour!"

The Messenger of Allah has also said, "Hold Allah in high esteem so that
He may forgive you," that is to say, Glorify Him by obeying Him and by
distancing yourselves from committing any disobedience of Him, and seek
nearness to Him, Glory to Him, by performing what He has enjoined you to
perform.

### 43. "Al-Kareem"

Allah has said,

***"... whoever is grateful, he is grateful only for (the good of) his
own soul, and whoever is ungrateful, surely my Lord is self-Sufficient,
Honoured" (Qur’an, 27:40).***

Scholars say that anything regarded as good, precious, of great
importance, is kareem. Linguistically, a person who is out-giving is
also called kareem, generous. Anything held in its own category in high
esteem is called kareem. Allah is called "al-Kareem," an Attribute that
describes His benevolence and beneficence. Allah has always been
Generous, and He will always be so. He is high above any lowliness; He
gives abundantly, and He gives beautifully.

Al-Kareem forgives though He is capable of inflicting the most severe of
punishment; He fulfills His promise; He gives more than what one pleads
to Him for; He does not mind how much He gives and to whom; He does not
permit anyone who seeks refuge with Him to suffer loss; He does not need
means to do what He does. One Who can combine in Him all these qualities
is the Absolute al-Kareem; none other than Allah is as such.

The Almighty has said,

***"O man! What has beguiled you from your Lord, the Gracious One...?"
(Qur’an, 82:6),*** and, ***"Read and your Lord is the Most Honourable"
(Qur’an, 96:3).***

Arabs are used to calling anything kareem if it has a commendable merit
or quality.

Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, has said, "Yousuf is the most kareem
of people," meaning in lineage and descent. They may describe something
the presence of which can be identified by one of the physical senses as
kareem. For example, the Egyptian women, upon seeing Yousuf said,
***"... this is but a noble angel" (Qur’an, 12:31).***

Describing Paradise, the Almighty says it is a ***"... noble place"
(Qur’an, 44:26).*** This word may also be applied to anything
honourable; the Almighty has said, ***"... surely the most honourable of
you with Allah is the one who is most careful (of his duty towards
Allah)" (Qur’an, 49:13).***

Arabs may also apply it to something that has many benefits or
advantages, such as what is implied in this verse which narrates the
story of prophet Solomon: ***"Surely an honourable letter has been***
***delivered to me" (Qur’an, 27:29).*** According to exegesis, kareem in
this verse means quite significant and weighty, containing very good
statements.

One of the signs of His greatness and generosity is that He provides His
bounties even to those who do not deserve them. He doles out His
benevolence even without being asked. If a suppliant prays Him for
forgiveness, one of the signs of His greatness is that He will erase
that suppliant's sin if he truly repents, and He records a good deed for
him in its place. Allah has said,

***"The parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah is
like the parable of a grain growing seven ears (with) a hundred grains
in each, and Allah multiplies for whomsoever he pleases, and Allah is
ample-Giving, Knowing" (Qur’an, 2:261).***

Among the signs of His greatness is that in the life of this world He
covers the sins of the sinners and hide their shortcomings.

In one incident, the Messenger of Allah has narrated a story about the
forgiveness of the Almighty which is thought-provoking. He said, "I know
the last person who will enter Paradise and the last one to get out of
hellfire.

He is a man who will be approached and it will be said, \`Show him his
minor sins and suspend the major ones,' whereupon he will be shown his
minor sins. He will then be asked if on such-and-such a day he did
such-and-such, and he will answer in the affirmative, fearing the
penalty from his major sins. He will be told, \`In place of each of your
sins, you will be granted a good deed,' whereupon he will say, \`Lord!
But... I have committed other sins which I do not see here among them!'"
The narrator of the anecdote says that he saw the Messenger of Allah
smile at that juncture of the story till his front teeth became visible.

Allah is "al-Kareem mutaghafil," that is, the Great One Who deliberately
and quite often overlooks. One of the signs of His Greatness is that He
forgives whenever He is prayed for forgiveness; Allah has said, ***"Ask
forgiveness of your Lord; surely He is the most Forgiving" (Qur’an,
71:10).*** And among the signs of His Greatness is that He forgives
without reminding those whom He forgives of the types of sins and ugly
things they had committed.

And among the signs of His Greatness is that if they come to Him after
having obeyed Him only a little, He will grant them quite a generous
reward and will honour them by praising them beautifully. Among the
signs of His Greatness is that He includes them in His Covenant; He has
said, ***"... fulfill (your) covenant with Me, I will fulfill (My)
covenant with you" (Qur’an, 2:40).*** He even makes them worthy of His
love: ***"... He shall love them and they shall love Him" (Qur’an,
5:54).***

Among the other signs of His Greatness is that He has made this world
the loaned property of His servants saying, ***"He it is Who created for
you all that is in the earth" (Qur’an, 2:29),*** and the hereafter as
well, ***"... and a Garden, the extensiveness of which is like the
heavens and the earth, prepared for those who guard (themselves against
evil)" (Qur’an, 3:133).***

Also among the signs of His Greatness and generosity is that He has made
everything in the heavens and the earth subservient to man: ***"And He
has made whatever in the heavens and in the earth, all of it,
subservient to you, [a gift] from Him" (Qur’an, 45:13).*** One of the
signs of a believer's good conduct in as far as the Attribute
"al-Kareem" is concerned is that he directs himself wholeheartedly
towards His Lord.

He makes it his habit to feed and clothe the orphans and be good to his
kith and kin. In order to attract the attention of the Muslims to this
weighty matter, Prophet Muhammad has said, "If someone held in high
esteem by his folks comes to you, be generous to him." He has also said,
"Your Lord, Honour and Glory belong to Him, is ever-Living, Generous,
too shy to disappoint any of His servants who plead to Him."

It is a sign of good manners to habitually forgive the doers of evil
deeds, including repeated offenders, and to cover the faults of your
brethren in all circumstances. Such generosity of manners is surely more
precious than any materialistic generosity, for the latter preserves the
body whereas the first sustains the soul.

The Messenger of Allah has said, "You will not be able to please all
people with your wealth; so, do please them with your good manners." He
has also said, "Allah, Honoured is His Name, is Generous, and He loves
good manners and hates a lowly conduct." The Messenger of Allah has
said, "The generous one is close to Allah, close to [the hearts of]
people, close to Paradise, distant from the fire. A miser is distant
from Allah, distant from people, distant from Paradise, close to the
fire."

As for "al-Akram," i.e. the most Generous, surely it is Allah, the Most
Generous of all those who are generous. This Attribute may also bear the
same meaning embedded in that of "al-Kareem."

### 44. "Al-Raqeeb"

Allah has said,

***"... and be careful of (your duty to) Allah through Whom you demand
(your rights of) one another, and to the ties of kinship; surely Allah
ever watches over you" (Qur’an, 4:1).***

"Al-Raqeeb" is one of Allah's Attributes, and He is the Witness Who is
never absent from the scene. In language, a raqeeb is a vigilante, a
watchman who stands to protect and guard. In the army, the raqeeb is the
one in the vanguard. Al-Raqeeb is Allah Who safeguards everyone and
everything, the One from Whose knowledge nothing at all can escape.
According to one sacred tradition, the Messenger of Allah has said,
"Safeguard Muhammad in his household," meaning safeguard his name and
honour it. "Raqeeb" also means offspring.

The angel who writes down whatever we do and say is also called
"raqeeb":

***"He does not utter a word except that there is by him someone
watching at hand" (Qur’an, 50:18).***

Al-Raqeeb, that is, the One Who truly ever watches over us, is, of
course, Allah. One Who is raqeeb regarding Allah is one who acknowledges
that He oversees whatever we do and say, so he observes his duties
towards Him.

Allah, al-Raqeeb, knows our conditions and counts our breath. Al-Raqeeb
never laxes nor forgets, Who is always present and is never absent, Who
knows everything and nothing regarding the conditions of His creation
can ever escape His knowledge. He manages the affairs of His servants,
Who knows what they say, Who watches over His servants, Who observes
what they do, Who is familiar with their innermost thoughts.

Narrating the story of Jesus son of Mary, the Almighty quotes Jesus
saying,

***"... but when You caused me to die, You were the Watcher over them,
and You witness all things" (Qur’an, 5:117). He has also said, "... and
Allah is Watchful over all things" (Qur’an, 33:52).***

There are two viewpoints that explain the meaning of "al-Raqeeb":

One: Linguistically, He safeguards things, Who watches over everyone,
Who guards everyone, Who is free of any oversight or negligence. He
takes care of and safeguards everything. The Almighty has said***, "He
does not utter a word except that there is by him a watcher at hand"
(Qur’an, 50:18)***, meaning an angel who records his deeds and takes
note of everything he contemplates, says, or does, while Allah is
al-Raqeeb Who looks after His servants, knows their conditions and
whatever they utter.

As regarding observation, it is His saying: ***"... surely I (Allah) am
with you both: I hear, and I see" (Qur’an, 20:46).***

Regarding knowledge, it is His saying: ***"Allah knows what every female
bears, and that of which the wombs fall short of completion, and that in
which they increase" (Qur’an, 13:8).*** Other such references include:

***... and He knows what is in the land and the sea. (6:59) He knows
what goes deep down into the earth and what comes forth out of it.
(57:4)***

The other viewpoint says that this word is derived from irtiqab,
waiting. Allah has said, ***"Wait, therefore; surely they (too) are
waiting" (Qur’an, 44:59).*** Such a viewpoint is impossible to accept;
therefore, it is rejected on the ground that one who waits for something
needs to reach its commencement, desiring to find out its outcome. The
correct meaning of this latter verse is that Allah wants His servants to
reach out to Him, to make Him the goal of their adoration, submission
and humility.

Al-Raqeeb, then, is the Witness Who is never absent. The virtues of one
who watches himself is implied in a tradition wherein the Messenger of
Allah Muhammad says, "Ihsan (goodness) is that you worship Allah as
though you see Him, for if you do not see Him, He surely sees you."

It is narrated that a man once passed by a young slave tending sheep and
pointed to an ewe and said, "Sell me this ewe, young shepherd!"

The young slave told him that it was not his; therefore, he could not
sell it, whereupon the man said, "Where is your brilliance?! Can't you
tell its owner that a wolf ate one of his sheep?" He answered him by
saying, "Then where is Allah?!" The man was very impressed by his
answer, so he bought the young slave and set him free, then he bought
the herd and gave it to him as a gift. Since then, that man kept
repeating "Then where is Allah?!" quite often. It is, therefore, one of
the good manners of a believer towards Allah, al-Raqeeb, to keep in mind
that Allah ever watches over him and sees whatever he does.

He knows that his self, that is, his nafs, is his enemy, and that the
accursed Satan, too, is another, and that they both seize every
opportunity to make him lax and disobey his Lord; therefore, he must
always be on his guard. He must close all the pitfalls in which he may
fall and block all the avenues from which Satan may approach him. It is
also one of the signs of good manners of a believer in this regard to
watch himself and his senses, to keep vigil, and to make whatever he
does solely for the achievement of the Pleasure of his Lord in a pure
intention, to observe his obligations towards his Muslim brother, and
not to expose the latter's faults to others.

### 45. "Al-Mujeeb"

Allah has said,

***"And to Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said: O my people!
Worship Allah; you have no other god besides Him; He brought you into
being from the earth and made you dwell in it; therefore, ask
forgiveness of Him, then turn to Him; surely my Lord is Nigh; he ever
answers" (Qur’an, 11:61).***

Linguistically speaking, both nouns ijaba and istijaba mean basically
the same, and "al-Mujeeb" has two meanings: One is: the One Who answers
the pleas. The other is: the One Who grants what He is pleaded for.

Al-Mujeeb, Allah, responds to the plea of those who plead to Him and
helps them, Who favourably answers the supplication of those who
supplicate to Him, Who removes the need of those in need and gives them
sufficiently. He even gives prior to being asked and accepts even prior
to being pleaded.

He knows the need of those who are in need before they pray Him, and He
since eternity knows all their needs, so He has provided them with means
to satisfy all their needs: He creates foods and all types of sustenance
for them; He creates the tools and the means to get such tools to the
hands of those who need them. Al-Mujeeb responds to the pleas of those
who plead to Him. Since time immemorial, He knew in advance what they
needed. He goes to the rescue of those who are in dire need of help, and
He does not disappoint anyone who pleads to Him.

This theme recurs quite often throughout the Holy Qur’an. Examples are:

***And Noah called upon Us, and most excellent are We to answer the
prayer. (37:75)***

***So their Lord accepted their prayer: That I will not waste the deed
of one who does a good deed among you, whether male or female, each one
of you being from the other. (3:195)***

***And Job (Ayyub) cried out to his Lord: Harm has afflicted me, and You
are the most Merciful of the merciful. So We responded to him and
removed the harm from him, and We gave him his family and the like
(number) of them in addition: a mercy from Us and a reminder to the
worshippers. (21:83-84)***

***Or Who answers the [prayer of] the distressed one when he calls upon
Him and removes the evil, and Who will make you successors in the earth?
Is there a god with Allah? Little is it that you mind! (27:62)***

***... you sought aid from your Lord, so He answered you: I will assist
you with a thousand of the angels following one another. (8:9) When My
servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very near; I answer the
prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me. (2:186)***

***And your Lord says: Call upon Me, I will answer you; surely those who
are too proud to worship Me shall soon enter hell abased. (40:60)***

***For those who respond to their Lord there is goodness, and those who
do not respond to Him, had they had all that is in the earth and the
like thereof with it, they would certainly have offered it for a ransom.
(As for) those (latter ones), an evil reckoning shall be theirs, and
their abode is hell, and evil, indeed, is the resting-place. (13:18)***

***O you who believe! Answer (the call of) Allah and His Prophet when he
invites you to that which gives you life, and be informed that Allah
intervenes between man and his heart, and that to Him you shall be
gathered. (8:24)***

Allah is capable of responding in various ways. When some of His friends
are in need of something, He satisfies their need, and He may even make
some circumstances deliberately hard for them only to test them and
raise their status due to their perseverance, and to their thanking Him
during the time of ease as well as the time of hardship. So when they
almost lose hope, He comes to their rescue with beautiful rewards and
with indications of His being pleased with them.

Allah guarantees for His servant that He will respond favourably to his
supplication in the way which He knows to be in his best interest, and
at the time He chooses, rather than the time chosen by His servant; so,
do not lose hope because of His delay in answering your plea, for such a
delay may prove to be better for you. Allah May even opt to grant you
better than what you ask Him for; so, plead to Him as one convinced of
His favourable response.

The Messenger of Allah used to say, "Plead to Allah, being convinced of
His answer to your pleas, and be advised that Allah does not respond to
the pleas of one who is inattentive, indifferent." This tradition has
been recorded by al-Tirmithi. He has also said, "No Muslim pleads to
Allah a plea wherein there is no desire for committing a sin nor the
severing of the ties of kinship except that Allah will grant him one of
three good rewards: He will either grant him an immediate response, or
He may save the rewards for him in the life hereafter, or He may keep
its equivalent of evil away from him." His companions said, "Then we
will plead to Him a great deal, indeed." He said, "Surely Allah is
greater still!"

The Messenger of Allah has said, "When you have a plea, plead to Allah,
and whenever you need help, seek help from Allah." In another tradition,
he says, "Allah is too shy to disappoint any of His servants who pleads
to Him for something good."

### 46. "Al-Wasi\`"

The Most Exalted and Glorified One has said,

***"... whither you turn, there is Allah's purpose; surely Allah is
Ample-giving, Knowing" (Qur’an, 2:115).***

"Al-Wasi\`" is one of Allah's Attributes, and its root word is derived
from si\`a, spaciousness, expanse, capacity, abundance, plentitude, etc.
One may have an abundance of knowledge if he is acquainted with a good
deal of it, or he may have an abundance of means. In his book Al-Nihaya,
Ibn al-Atheer, who discusses Allah's Attributes, says that al-Wasi\` can
enrich everyone who is indigent, Whose mercy encompasses everything. His
authority never ends; His benevolence is unlimited; His domain is
endless.

He never stops giving; He is never distracted by knowing something from
knowing another, nor by one issue from taking care of another. His
knowledge encompasses everything. His knowledge encompasses everything;
His might suffices everything. His mercy is spacious; He is independent;
His authority is above everything; His knowledge, might, and benevolence
are the greatest. He is the One for the meanings of Whose Attributes
there can be no limit, Whose knowledge is spacious, and so are His mercy
and forgiveness; His domain is tremendous.

The Absolute al-Wasi\` is Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He. There is
no shore for the spacious ocean of His knowledge. Had the seas been ink,
they would have been consumed before His words can ever be exhausted.
There is no end for what He is capable of giving and blessing.

The Holy Qur’an has indicated that Allah's knowledge is vast and
endless; in Surat al-Ana\`m, the Almighty says,

***"And his people disputed with him. He said: Do you dispute with me
regarding Allah, and He has, indeed, guided me? And I do not fear in any
way those that you set up with Him unless my Lord pleases; my Lord
comprehends all things in His knowledge; will you not then mind"
(Qur’an, 6:80)?***

The Holy Qur’an has described Allah's mercy as vast; in Surat al-A\`raf
it is stated that,

***"And ordain for us good in this world's life and in the life
hereafter, for surely we turn to You. He said: (As for) My chastisement,
I will afflict with it whomsoever I please, and My mercy encompasses all
things; so I will ordain it (especially) for those who guard (themselves
against evil) and pay the zakat and those who believe in Our signs"
(Qur’an, 7:156***).

In Surat Taha, His knowledge is described as vast:

***"Your only God is Allah; there is no god but He; He comprehends all
things in (His) knowledge" (Qur’an, 20:98).***

Other references to the vastness of His knowledge, to His mercy and
might, are as follows:

***Our Lord comprehends all things in His knowledge; in Allah do we
trust: Lord! Decide between us and our people with the truth, and You
are the best of those who decide. (7:89)***

***Those who bear the Throne and those around Him celebrate the praise
of their Lord and believe in Him and ask protection for those who
believe (saying): Lord! You encompass all things in mercy and knowledge;
therefore, grant protection to those who turn (to You) and follow Your
way, and save them from the punishment of hell. (40:7)***

***And the heavens We raised high with power, and most surely We make
things ample. (51:47)***

We ought to ponder on Allah's vast knowledge, for He is the Absolute
al-Wasi\` Whose Grace has encompassed everything in existence, in fact,
even prior to their existence, and even before the existence of time
itself, since He has always been for all eternity. His knowledge
encompasses everything.

Nothing He knows distracts Him from knowing something else. His might
overwhelms everything; no issue distracts Him from another. His Hearing
encompasses everything; no person's supplication can distract Him from
hearing the supplication of another. His benevolence includes all His
creation; His helping one particular needy person does not prohibit Him
from helping another.

One of the ways for learning a code of ethics derived from this
Attribute, "al-Wasi\`," is that you should include all servants of Allah
in your good treatment and kindness at all times; be gracious to all
people. Help them when they seek your help, and treat all of them with
the best treatment.

A servant of Allah ought to remember and seek wisdom from the conduct of
the Messenger of Allah who was saying his prayers once when he overheard
a bedouin supplicating to his Lord saying, "O Allah! Have mercy on me
and on Muhammad, and do not be merciful to anyone else besides us." The
Prophet said to him, "You have prayed Him to limit what is limitless,"
meaning the mercy of Allah. The Messenger of Allah has also said, "If
Allah grants you an increase [of His blessings], do give your own self
an increase."

### 47. "Al-Hakeem"

Allah has said,

***"... and if You forgive them, then surely You are the Mighty, the
Wise" (Qur’an, 5:118).***

"Hakeem" is a superlative form, a form for the glorification of the One
Who has all the wisdom; hence, al-Hakeem is the very greatest in His
wisdom. Allah is the most wise in creating everything and in perfecting
such a creation. His wisdom means His prior knowledge of everything and
His bringing everything into existence most wisely and most perfectly.

Wisdom means: the best way of knowing something utilizing the very best
of means. "Al-Hakeem" carries the same meaning as that of "al-\`Aleem."
Nobody knows Allah except Allah; therefore, al-Hakeem cannot be anyone
but Allah: He knows the origins of all things through His eternal and
perpetual knowledge which nobody can ever conceive as being liable to
extinction.

"Al-Hakeem" may also mean His being Holy, too Holy to do anything which
does not beseem Him. In Surat al-Mominoon, Allah says,

***"What?! Did you then think that We had created you in vain and that
you will not be returned to Us?!" (Qur’an, 23:115).***

Some scholars have said that al-Hakeem is equitable in His assessment,
benevolent in His management of affairs, the One Who has determined the
measure of everything, the One Whose wisdom is the very ultimate end,
the One Who places everything in its right place. Nobody can really
appreciate Allah's wisdom other than Allah Himself.

Al-Hakeem is free from seeking any self-interest, nor can anyone object
to anything He does. Al-Hakeem is adorned with wisdom, and wisdom is
knowing the best of things through the best means. The best of
everything is Allah; so, He is the Absolute al-Hakeem; He knows
everything by the very best means of eternal and everlasting knowledge,
the knowledge which nobody can conceive as ever coming to naught, nor
can there be any doubt about it, and nobody can be described as such
except Allah.

Some scholars say that wisdom means getting to know the truth for its
own sake, and to know goodness in order to act upon it. A servant of
Allah, though his portion of knowledge and potential may be little, such
a shortcoming is evident in him when compared to Allah's knowledge and
might and to the knowledge and ability of the angels. Yet whatever
amount human beings have been given is quite significant by the token
that Allah Himself has deemed it great when he said***,***

***"... and whoever is granted wisdom is indeed granted a great deal of
goodness" (Qur’an, 2:269).***

Abraham prayed his Lord for wisdom saying, ***"Lord! Grant me wisdom"
(Qur’an, 26:83).***

Allah said the following about David (prophet David): ***"We granted him
wisdom and a clear judgment" (Qur’an, 38:20).*** Scholars have said that
wisdom means knowledge.

Knowledge may either be knowing what can exist without our choice or
doing, which is theoretical knowledge, or it may be knowledge of what
can happen by our choice and doing, which is practical knowledge.
Theoretical knowledge may either be the means towards an end, or it may
be an end by itself. The means, for example, may be the science of logic
the deduction of which is determined by what concepts and assertions
mankind can conceive in a way which does not permit except a very rare
margin of error.

As regarding what is considered as the ultimate end, be informed that
things may be classified into three categories: They may either comprise
a form, or they actually are not supposed to exist in a certain form, or
either case may be applicable to them. What is supposed to be in a form
should either be in a particular one, and the science which researches
such portion of what exists is called natural science or physics.

What ought not be a particular form and ought to be in some other form,
the science that researches it is called the science of mathematics. As
regarding the other category which is not supposed to be in a particular
form at all, the science that researches it is called theology.

As regarding the third kind, the one which may be in a particular form
or may not, the science researching it is called the inclusive science,
and it is like the knowledge of the unit, the multiplicity, the
causation, the deduction, the completion or the deficiency. All of this
falls under the category of theoretical knowledge.

Practical knowledge may either be the researching of the conditions of
man regarding his own body, which is called the science of physiology,
or his conditions with members of his household, which is called the
science of domestic management, or his conditions (ties to,
relationship...) with the rest of the world, which is called political
science.

The person who personified wisdom in his everyday conduct among people
is the Messenger of Allah by the token of this verse of Surat
Ali-\`Imran:

***"Certainly Allah conferred a benefit upon the believers when He
raised among them a Messenger from among themselves reciting to them His
signs and purifying them and teaching them the Book and the wisdom
although before then they were surely in manifest error" (Qur’an,
3:164).***

The wisdom in as far as the servants of Allah are concerned is to say
and to do what is right as much as it is humanly possible. Allah says in
Surat al-Baqarah,

"***He grants wisdom to whomsoever He pleases, and whoever is granted
wisdom is indeed granted a great deal of good and none but men of
understanding mind" (Qur’an, 2:269).***

A wise person among people is one who precisely calculates intricate
things; he masters them and skillfully executes them. Wisdom is the
greatest knowledge, and its greatness depends on the greatness of what
is known, and surely there is nothing greater than Allah. Anyone who
gets to know Allah is wise even if his share of all other secular
branches of knowledge is most modest.

The ratio of the wisdom of any of Allah's servants to that of Allah is
like the ratio of such servant's knowledge to that of Allah, and what a
vast difference it is! And what a vast distance it is between both norms
of knowledge! Yet despite the huge gap between both matters, wisdom is
regarded as the most precious of all types of knowledge and the most
fruitful, and anyone who is endowed with wisdom is surely granted a
great deal of good.

To derive a good conduct from the attribute al-Hakeem requires a servant
of Allah to be wise, that is, to do his best in whatever good deeds he
does, and that his condition is pleasing to others, that is, based on
following the commandments of Allah and distancing himself from whatever
He has enjoined us to be distant from. He takes extreme care in
performing his religious obligations, distancing himself from following
his own whims and desires, staying away from any doubtful matter.

The Messenger of Allah has said, "The apex of wisdom is fearing Allah."
A wise person is one who indicts his own self and who learns about what
will come after death. A feeble person is one who follows his own
desires and still wants even more from Allah. The Messenger of Allah has
made many wise statements in this regard. A bedouin once came to the
Messenger of Allah and asked him to teach him something good to say.

He told him to say, "There is no god except Allah, the One and only God
Who has no partner; Allah is Great, Greater than everything; Praise, a
great deal indeed of Praise, is due to Allah; Glory to Allah, Lord of
the Worlds; there is no power nor might except in Allah, the Honoured
One, the Wise." The bedouin said, "All this is for my Lord; what about
something for my own self?!" The Messenger of Allah taught him to say,
"Lord! I invoke You to forgive me, to have mercy on me, to grant me
guidance, to grant me good health, and to grant me an increase in
sustenance."[^8]

As regarding what some people consider as having "wisdom," anyone who
knows "everything" without knowing Allah is not worthy of being called
wise because he has missed the knowledge of the best and the most
significant of everything. One who knows Allah is a wise person even if
his share of all other branches of knowledge is very shallow, even if he
stutters or is unable to absorb them. One who knows Allah is one whose
speech will sound different from that of anyone else, one who seldom
indulges in frivolous matters. On the contrary, his speech will be
inclusive, and he does not seek any vanishing interest.

### 48. "Al-Wadood"

The Most Glorified and Exalted One has said,

***"And He is the Forgiving, the Loving" (Qur’an, 85:14).***

"Al-Wadood" is an Attribute derived from the Arabic word "wudd" which
conveys the meaning of love and friendship, and it applies to all
avenues of goodness. Allah is "al-Wadood" because He loves His servants
and they love Him; He says the following in Surat al-Ma'ida:

***"O you who believe! Whoever among you turns back from his religion,
Allah will bring people whom He loves and who love Him, who are humble
before the believers and mighty against the unbelievers...." (Qur’an,
5:54).***

The condition of true love is that it does not increase on account of
loyalty, nor does it decrease on account of aversion. Al-Wadood ever
tries to show His love for His friends by manifesting His knowledge to
them. The "wadood" person is one who prefers you over all others, who
removes from your heart any desire to notice or to love anyone else but
him.

Al-Wadood very much loves His servants, Who tries to be loved even by
the sinners through His forgiveness, and by all His creation by
sustaining them and granting them sufficiently. Allah's righteous
servants love Him due to their knowledge of His perfection and the
perfection of His qualities, and due to His readiness to forgive.

For all these reasons, al-Wadood is the Loving and the Beloved One. If a
servant of Allah dives deeply into the depths of the knowledge of
Allah's perfection, the perfection which causes a servant of Allah to
love his Lord more and more, his knowledge will be crystallized, and he
will find a great deal of contentment while worshipping Him accordingly.
His knowledge of Him will then bear good fruits, and he, the servant of
Allah, will turn to be the one who loves Him. He may also be understood
to be the One Who loves His servants and the love for Whom bears good
fruits according to the degree of love in the heart of each one of those
who love Him.

If someone sees through his heart his Lord to be self-Sufficient,
Gracious, Honoured, Omnipotent, everyone is in need of Him while He does
not need anyone or anything, yet He loves His servants and wishes the
best for them and even tries to get closer to them by granting them His
favours..., such a person will surely have been blessed with true vision
and a clear sight.

One who tries to fashion his conduct according to the inspiration of
this Attribute ought to know that he should love all those whom Allah
loves such as the prophets, successors of the prophets, and the
scholars. He should love everything Allah loves and with which He is
pleased such as acts of righteousness, piety, good deeds and exemplary
conduct with others.

Such a person should be compassionate towards all people: He loves to
see the disobedient returning to their Lord obediently, the righteous
remaining firm in their righteousness.

He becomes compassionate towards all servants of Allah, forgiving those
who abuse them, being kind to all people especially his family and kin.
It is recorded that the holy Prophet has said to Imam \`Ali, "If you
wish to surpass those who are close to Allah, then join your ties with
those who have cut them off from you, grant those who deprived you, and
forgive those who wrong you."

The attribute "al-Wadood" deserves from the servants of Allah that they
wish one another what they wish for their own selves, and even more so!
They should prefer others over their own selves. A righteous man once
said, "I wish to be a bridge over the fire whereupon people pass [to
heaven] unharmed."

The perfection of such following is that anger, grudge, or harm received
do not stop anyone who exemplifies this Attribute in his conduct from
favouring others over himself and from being good to them; thus are we
taught by our master the Messenger of Allah. Four of his teeth were once
broken, and his face was bleeding, yet all of that uncalled for abuse to
which he was exposed at the hands of the infidels did not stop him from
praying for them or from wishing them good.

Ibn \`Abbas is quoted saying that he had heard the Messenger of Allah,
who had just finished his prayers, supplicating thus: "Lord! I plead to
You for mercy from You whereby You guide my heart, manage my affairs,
unite my kinsfolk, and bring reform to those who are absent from among
my kin. I plead to You for security on the Promised Day, for Paradise on
the Day of Eternity, in the company of the witnesses who are near to
You, those who bow down and prostrate, who fulfill their promise..., for
surely You are the Most Merciful One, the Compassionate."

Regarding the explanation of the verse saying, "... for them will Allah
bring about love" (Qur’an, 19:96), the "love" referred to here means
that Allah will make His creation love them, that is, He will make His
servants experience love and affection on their own account. Supporting
this explanation is a tradition wherein the Messenger of Allah says, "If
Allah loves one of His servants, He calls upon Gabriel to tell him so,
whereupon Gabriel loves that person, so he calls upon the residents of
the heavens saying, \`Allah loves so-and-so; therefore, you, too, should
love him,' whereupon the residents of the heavens respond to him in the
affirmative. Love for him will thus be disseminated among the residents
of the earth."

### 49. "Al-Majeed"

Allah has said,

***"The mercy of Allah and His blessings be upon you, O Ahl al-Bayt
(People of the Prophet's House); surely He is Praised, Glorified"
(Qur’an, 11:73).***

In language, majd is glory; when combined with good deeds, a person's
own prestige will be enhanced, so he will be called glorious. It also
conveys the meanings of manliness, generosity, open-handedness, and
gracious conduct.

"Al-Majeed" connotes general honour or abundance of wealth. A man who is
majeed is extremely generous. Al-Majeed is Glorified to the utmost
extent of Glorification due to His own merits, qualities, and actions.
He is also Great in His attributes, beautiful in His power and
authority. Al-Majeed has the utmost limit of glory; His benevolence is
great. Al-Majeed is the great One, the One Whose status is Sublime, Who
is most Benevolent.

His status is tremendous, Whose Benevolence is great. He is Honoured,
Whose actions are beautiful, Who is generous in giving. Al-Majeed grants
His favours to all others, Who is Glorified because of His actions, Who
is Praised by His creation due to His greatness. He alone has the
perfect Honour, the vast kingdom since time immemorial, the One Who does
not disappoint anyone, Whose will is always carried out. Whose Honour is
not earned, Whose actions are never abhorred, Whose benevolence is
beautiful, Who gives most generously...

All meanings of perfect and inclusive glory are always rendered to
Allah, and all of them combined are but a drop in the ocean of His
Glory. Glory is also attached to His prophets, to the successors of the
latter, and to the mujahidin.

Allah has described the Holy Qur’an as majeed, saying, ***"Qaf. I swear
by al-Qur’an al-majeed..." (Qur’an, 50:1).*** The Holy Qur’an is majeed
because of the abundance of wealth of knowledge, ethics, and sublime
objectives it contains and due to the benefits it contains; so, it is
beneficial for man both in the life of this world and in the life to
come.

One who personifies in his conduct the essence of this attribute ought
to be gracious in all circumstances and most cultured.

### 50. "Al-Ba\`ith"

Allah has said,

***"And the hour is coming; there is no doubt about it, and Allah shall
resurrect those who are in the graves" (Qur’an, 22:7).***

"Al-Ba\`ith" is an attributes linguistically derived from bai\`th which
means: exciting or stimulating action, something stirring someone to
action, sending someone somewhere, going out seeking revenge, or simply
waking up someone. It also means sending a soldier to war: bai\`th means
army. It also means to bring life back to the dead.

The word "al-Ba\`ith" conveys more than one meaning:

1) the Almighty will bring His creation back to life on the Day of
Judgment as stated in Surat al-Hajj quoted above.

2) He sends messengers to His servants: In Surat al-Nahl, He says,
***"And certainly We raised in every nation an prophet" (Qur’an,
16:36).***

 3) He commissions His servants to perform specific tasks by creating
the impulses and motivations in them.

4) He sends aid to His servants who need it and helps the sinners by
accepting their repentance.

Al-Ba\`ith resurrects those in the graves, stirs things into motion,
causes determination, manifests the knowledge of the unknown, brings His
servants back to life, resurrects His creation on the Day of Judgment,
Who records what the breasts conceal. Ba\`th is the life hereafter.

One who knows the real meaning of resurrection knows the real meaning of
this Attribute. Most people have numerous general misconceptions and
ambiguous presumptions about it. They imagine that death is the end of
everything, and that resurrection starts a new creation from nothing,
just as the first creation was started. Their belief that death is the
end of everything is surely erroneous, for we have come to learn from
studying the Sunnah that the grave is either a pit of fire or a piece of
Paradise.

The dead are either happy or miserable. The happy ones, such as the
martyrs, are not dead; rather, Allah says the following about them in
Surat Ali-\`Imran (the Family of Amram):

***"And do not reckon those who are killed in the way of Allah as dead;
nay! They are alive receiving sustenance from their Lord, rejoicing in
what Allah has given them out of His grace, and they rejoice for the
sake of those who, (being left) behind them, have not yet joined them,
that they shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve" (Qur’an,
3:169-170).***

The miserable, too, are living, leading a miserable life. For this
reason, the Messenger of Allah once addressed the latter in the
aftermath of the Battle of Badr saying, "I have found what my Lord has
promised me to be the truth; so, have you found what your Lord promised
you to be true?" He was asked, "How can you address people who have
turned into a stink?" He answered by saying, "You do not hear me better
than they, except that they cannot answer me back."

Al-Ba\`ith is also the One Who inspires determination in the heart of
people to undertake lofty objectives on the battlefields of jihad, and
to purify themselves. Al-Ba\`ith plants the will to rise up to lofty
endeavors, Who removes from your heart the evil whisperings, Who purges
the innermost conscience from scruples and purifies the deeds from
filthiness. He sends His messengers to convey His commandments:

***"Allah raised prophets as bearers of glad tidings and as warners"
(Qur’an, 2:213).***

He brings the dead back to life:

***"Then We resurrected you after your death..." (Qur’an, 2:56).***

He wakes up those who sleep by reawakening their bodies:

***"He it is Who takes your souls at night (while asleep), and He knows
what you acquire during the day, then He raises you up therein so that
an appointed term may be fulfilled, then to Him is your return, then
will He inform you of what you were doing" (Qur’an, 6:60).***

 Glory, then, to Him for resurrecting the dead and recording what the
breasts conceal.

The subject of bai\`th is referred to in numerous places of the Holy
Qur’an; these are some of them:

***Certainly We raised in every nation an prophet saying: Worship Allah
and shun Satan. So there were some of them whom Allah guided, and there
were others against whom error was due; therefore, travel in the land
and witness what the end of those who rejected [Our signs] was. (16:36)
And during part of the night pray Tahajjud beyond what is incumbent upon
you so that your Lord may raise you to a position of great glory.
(17:79)***

***Then We raised them up so that We might ascertain which of the two
parties was best able to compute the time during which they remained
(asleep). (18:12)***

***Those who disbelieve think they shall never be resurrected. Say: Aye!
By my Lord! You shall most certainly be resurrected, then you shall most
certainly be informed of what you did, and that is easy for Allah.
(64:7)***

The portion of inspiration a servant of Allah may be able to derive from
the attribute al-Ba\`ith is his knowledge that a soul first has no
knowledge of anything, just like the body. Allah says the following in
Surat al-Ana\`m:

***"Is he who was dead then We brought him back to life and made for him
a light whereby he walks among people like one who is in utter darkness
from which he can never come forth? Thus what they did was made
fair-seeming to the unbelievers" (Qur’an, 6:122),***

And in Surat al-Nahl He says,

***"He sends the angels with the inspiration by His command to
whomsoever He pleases of His servants saying: Give the warning that
there is no god but I; therefore, be careful (of your duty) to Me"
(Qur’an, 16:2).***

If a servant of Allah strives hard to learn, he will be as though he has
instilled a new life in his soul after its death, and if he strives to
teach the ignorant ones, he will be as though he brought their souls
back to life after their death.

### 51. "Al-Shaheed"

Allah has said,

***"Is it not sufficient as regarding your Lord that He is Witness over
all things?" (Qur’an, 41:53).***

According to Mu\`jam maqayees al lugha by Ibn Faris, the topic of the
verb shahida, saw, witnessed, or testified, indicates, linguistically,
presence, knowledge, and the dissemination of such knowledge. The
attribute "al-Shaheed" is derived from shuhood, [eye] witnesses, and it
requires knowledge by observation: Allah is al-Shaheed because He is
present and observes all beings whom He has created and whom He will
create at any time and in any place, and He is fully aware of such
beings; "... and He is with you wherever you may be."

Al-Shaheed is a superlative of al-Shahid, the Witness. In his work Taj
al-Aroos, al-Zubaidi has indicated that al-Shaheed is one of Allah's
Attributes meaning: "the One Who is faithful in His witness and from
Whose knowledge nothing at all escapes." His knowledge is the very
ultimate regarding all apparent matters, all things to observe and to
witness. The Holy Qur’an states the following in Surat Ali-\`Imran:

***"Allah bears witness that there is no god but He" (Qur’an, 3:18).***

Al-Shahid knows and manifests the knowledge of what He knows to a select
group from among His most sincere and loyal servants. Allah has proven
His being One through all what He has created. Al-Shaheed is
ever-present; from His kingdom nothing at all can be absent; everything
is included within the realm of His kingdom.  
 Addressing the Messenger, Allah says the following in Surat
al-Nisa'***:***

***"... and We have sent you (O Muhammad!) to mankind as an Prophet, and
Allah suffices as Witness (to that)" (Qur’an, 4:79).***

That is, Allah suffices as Witness to all people regarding the truth of
your message: He testifies that you are His Messenger who does not have
full control over His servants. In Surat al-Ana\`m, He says, ***"Say:
What is the weightiest in testimony? Say: Allah is Witness between you
and me" (Qur’an, 6:19),*** that is, were we to paraphrase it, "Ask them:
What is the greatest witness? Say: Allah testifies with regard to you
and to me." Allah ordered His Messenger to ask the disbelievers, "Whose
testimony is the greatest and the most accurate?"

Then He ordered him to tell them that the greatest is the testimony of
the One Whose statement does not permit any room for lying or erring.
The testimony, that is, shahada, of the Almighty is of three types:

1) His own telling people in His Book that He has sent the Prophet as
His Messenger;

2) His own support for His Messenger in numerous ways the greatest of
which is the Holy Qur’an, which is the everlasting scholarly and
rational miracle. It has been practically proven that all people put
together are incapable of producing a chapter or a verse like it;

3) the testimony of previously revealed divine books and the fact that
messengers before him had already brought the glad tidings of his
Prophethood.

In Surat Younus, the Great Qur’an says,

***"Allah, therefore, suffices as Witness between us and you that we
were quite unaware of your worship (of us)" (Qur’an, 10:29).***

It may be paraphrased thus: Allah suffices as Witness, O polytheists,
and as Judge between us and you, for He is fully knowledgeable of our
condition and yours, and we were not happy with your own associating
partners with Him. In Surat al-Tawbah, the Almighty says,

***"... Allah and His Prophet will witness your deeds, then you shall be
brought back to the One Who knows the unseen and the seen, then He will
inform you of what you did" (Qur’an, 9:94)***, that is, He knows what
you hide or manifest, what you conceal or reveal.

The Almighty has repeated the phrase "\`Alim al ghayb wal shahada," the
One Who knows the unseen and the seen, about ten times; among such
references are the following:

***... His is the kingdom on the Day when the trumpet is blown, [and He
is] the One Who knows the unseen and the seen, and He is the Wise, the
Aware. (6:73)***

***The One Who knows the unseen and the seen, the Great, the Most High
(is He). (13:9)***

***The One Who knows the unseen and the seen, so may He be exalted above
what they associate (with Him). (23:92)***

***Such knows the unseen and the seen, the Mighty, the Merciful.
(32:6)***

***Say: O Allah! Originator of the heavens and the earth Who knows the
unseen and the seen! You judge between Your servants as to that wherein
they differ. (39:46)***

***He is Allah besides Whom there is no other god, the One Who knows the
unseen and the seen; He is the Beneficent, the Merciful. (59:22)***

***Say: (As for) the death from which you flee, it will surely overtake
you, then you shall be sent back to the One Who knows the unseen and the
seen, and He will (then) inform you of whatever you did. (62:8)***

The believing nation, the nation that believes in Muhammad as the
Messenger of Allah, always remembers that its Lord, Allah, is the
Witness over it, and it is also the nation of testimony in every field.
Its Lord has said the following about it:

***"Thus have We made you a medium (just) nation so that you may be the
bearers of witness to people, and so that the Messenger may be a bearer
of witness to you" (Qur’an, 2:143).***

### 52. "Al-Haqq"

Allah has said:

***Allah is the Truth, and He gives life to the dead, and He has power
over all things. (22:6)***

One of the attributes Allah is "al-Haqq", the Truth. His existence is
proven to be true and so is His Divinity. He makes the truth manifest by
the power of His words, Who supports those whom He loves by His signs.
Allah is the Truth, al-Haqq, who is worthy of being adored, Who is
always there and Who never disappears, Whose presence is proven to have
always been, since time immemorial, and forever - even before time and
above time.

His presence is a reality standing on its own merits, and there is no
existence except through Him, and by Him, and He never moves and is
above motion or anything physical or material. He permits the truth to
manifest itself. He creates everything as His wisdom dictates. He is
present in a way which permits no room for Him to be absent, nor
different, nor extinct. Everything that exists is from Him, and to Him
is its ultimate end.

"Al-Haqq" is the antithesis of falsehood. According to one tradition,
the Messenger of Allah has said, "Labbayka Haqqan Haqqa!" that is, "Here
I am, O Truth, O Truthful One, here I am, in obedience to You! Here I
am, O antithesis of falsehood!" Surely He is the truth beyond any doubt.
Allah has said, ***"Then are they sent back to Allah, their Master, the
true One" (Qur’an, 6:62).***

He has also said,

***This is so because Allah is the Truth, and that which they call upon
besides Him is falsehood. (31:30) And Allah will show the truth to be
true by His words. (10:82)***

***His promise is the very truth; He has said in this regard: Surely the
promise of Allah is true. (31:33)***

Whenever the Prophet made tahajjud during the night, he would say,
"Lord! All Praise is due to You! You are the Lord of the heavens and the
earth and everything in them! All Praise is due to You! You are the One
Who sustains the heavens and the earth and everything in them! You are
the Truth; Your speech is the truth; Your promise is the truth; meeting
with You is the truth; Paradise is the truth; Hell is the truth; the
Hour [of Judgment] is the truth! Lord!

To You have I submitted myself; in You have I believed; upon You have I
relied; to You have I returned; for Your sake have I disputed with
others, based upon Your truth have I arbitrated; so, I implore You to
forgive my past faults and my future ones, what I have concealed and
what I have manifested! You are my Lord! There is no god but You!"

### 53. "Al-Wakeel"

Allah has said, ***"... and trust in Allah, and Allah suffices as
Protector" (Qur’an, 4:81, 33:3).***

"Al-Wakeel" is one of the Attributes of Allah, these Attributes which
link whoever repeats them quite often, being aware of their meanings, to
the gardens of Allah, the Truth, Who has all the beauty, perfection, and
glory. Al-Wakeel is the Sustainer, the One Who has taken upon Himself to
provide sustenance for His servants.

He, and only He, takes charge of all the affairs of those who are in His
custody, under His care. According to linguists, "al-Wakeel" is the One
to Whom all affairs are entrusted to manage, Who provides His servants
with everything they need. In other words, He takes charge of
everything. Al-Wakeel benevolently looks after His pious servants. He is
the One to Whom all affairs are referred, Who makes the truth manifest;
so, whoever relies on Him will be self-sufficient, and whoever seeks
sufficiency from Him will be independent and pleased.

The servants of Allah have entrusted their affairs to Him and relied on
His benevolence due to their inability to attain what they wish to
attain versus His own ability to do so: He takes charge of the
conditions of His servants, Who manages them as He pleases. Those who
recognize Him will entrust Him to fare with their own affairs.

He surely is the only One Who truly fares with His servants as He
pleases. If one of His servants entrusts Him to fare with his own
affairs, He will beautifully save him the hardship of any task and will
grant him more than He grants others; He gives sufficiently to those who
rely on Him. He takes care of the affairs of His servants. He initiated
the giving to man without the latter having asked Him, and He gave man
everything he needed. Whenever man pleads to Him, He directs His
attention to him and beautifully looks after him. If he remains on the
straight path, He will seal his deeds with the beauty of His
guardianship.

Linguistically, a wakeel is one upon whom one relies; so, this is why it
is said that one who relies on Allah will come to know that Allah
suffices him in as far as his sustenance and affairs are concerned, so
he relies on Him and only Him and depends on none but Him. The wakeel of
someone else is the person who efficiently represents him or does on his
behalf what he is incapable of doing.

In Surat Hud, Allah addresses His Messenger Muhammad saying***, "You are
only a warner, and Allah is Custodian over all things" (Qur’an,
11:12)***, that is, "Your responsibility is simply to convey the
Message, to warn against the dire consequences of rejecting it, to
invite people to accept it, while Allah manages the affairs of His
servants and watches over them, something which you do not have to do,
since it is the responsibility of the Creator towards His creatures, and
it is not a subject to be taught or conveyed."

Narrating the tale of Ya\`qoob (Jacob) and his sons, the Almighty says
in Surat Yousuf (Joseph), ***"And when they gave him their pledge, he
said: Allah is the One in Whom trust is placed as regarding what we say"
(Qur’an, 12:66).***

In Surat al-Ahzab, the Almighty addresses His Messenger Muhammad saying,
***"The Lord of the east and the west; there is no god but He;
therefore, take Him for Protector" (Qur’an, 73:9).***

The address here is repeated twice to the Messenger of Allah; therefore,
the Messenger of Allah used to quite often remember his Lord, al-Wakeel
al-Hafiz, reminding his companions and followers never to neglect
mentioning this Gracious Attribute during the time of trouble, hardship
and affliction.

The Messenger of Allah once said, "How can I feel happy knowing that the
one charged with blowing the horn (i.e. archangel Israfil) has picked
the horn and bent his forehead listening to the order to blow it?" His
companions asked him, "Then what are we supposed to say, O Messenger of
Allah?" He said, "Say: \`Hasbuna Allah wa ni\`mal-Wakeel (Allah suffices
us, and Great is the Guardian)!'"

The Messenger of Allah used to plead to his Lord, al-Wakeel, on every
occasion, saying, "Lord! I implore You not to permit me to rely on my
own self even for the twinkling of an eye else I should surely perish."
According to one qudsi tradition, the Almighty, addressing His
Messenger, says, "You are My servant and Messenger, and I have named you
al-Mutawakkil [one who trusts in and relies on his Lord];" therefore,
the Messenger of Allah was ordered by his Lord to do so; i.e. to always
rely on Him.

In Surat Ali-\`Imran, He says, ***"... so once you have made up your
mind, place your trust in Allah; surely Allah loves those who trust (in
Him)" (Qur’an, 3:159),*** that is, "Having consulted your companions
regarding a matter, you must rely on Allah in effecting it, and have
confidence in His assistance and help, for He is al-Wakeel, and He is
your Guardian." Allah loves His servants who turn to Him and rely on Him
provided they exert some effort and exhaust the means available to them.

Allah has made His Messenger a role model to emulate in the reliance
upon his Lord, for Allah has ordered His believing servants to be among
those who rely on Him. In Surat Yousuf, He says, ***"Judgment is only
Allah's; on Him do I rely, and on Him let those who are reliant rely"
(Qur’an, 12:67).***

In another verse of the same chapter, He says, ***"And what reason do we
have not to rely on Allah, and He has, indeed, guided us in our ways?
And certainly we would bear with patience your persecution of us, and on
Allah should the reliant rely" (Qur’an, 14:12).***

In 39:38 we read, ***"Say: Allah suffices me; on Him do the reliant
rely" (Qur’an, 39:38).***

One who chooses Allah as his Guardian is one who has also to guard
Allah's interest in his own self by observing His rights and obligations
and whatever He has required him to do, so he should be the opponent of
his own evil-insinuating self day and night, without laxing for a
moment, nor falling short even for the twinkling of an eye.

### 54. "Al-Qawiyy" and 55. "Al-Mateen"

The Almighty has said,

***"Surely Allah bestows sustenance, the Lord of Power, the Strong One"
(Qur’an, 51:58).***

"Al-Qawiyy" and "al-Mateen" are two of Allah's Attributes and are
mentioned in such an order. They share the same basic meaning.

Linguistically, "al-Qawiyy" is derived from quwwa, strength, power,
might, ability, etc. It is in lexicons indicative of strength versus
weakness. Strength in this sense describes a complete and perfect might.
Since He is very Strong, Allah has the most perfect and absolute might
and perfection; He has said,

***"... surely your Lord is the Strong, the Mighty" (Qur’an, 11:66).***

"Al-Qawiyy" means: the One Whose strength is unlimited and before Whom
the strength of His foe dwarves, and so does the greatness of anyone
held as great. Allah has granted the angels a mighty power whereby one
angel, for example, can uproot a mountain or turn cities upside down.
Yet such an angel, or his like, fears Allah and His Might, shakes in awe
for fear of His Greatness.

Al-Qawiyy is the One Whose Might and Greatness are perfect: He subdues
and is not subdued; He helps and is not helped; His Might is superior to
the might of anyone else. It is also said that He never suffers any
weakness in Himself, in His qualities, or in His actions, and His
strength is indicative of His complete Might.

There are many Qur’anic verses that describe Allah as the Strong One;
among them are the following,

***O had only those who are unjust seen when they witness the
chastisement that power is wholly Allah's, and that Allah is severe in
requiting (evil)! (2:165)***

***And wherefore did you not say, when you entered your garden: "It is
as Allah has pleased; there is no power save in Allah"? (18:39)***

As regarding \`Ad[^9] , they were unjustly proud in the land, and they
said: "***Who is mightier than we are?" Did they not see that Allah Who
created them is mightier than them, and that they denied Our signs?
(41:15)***

When we discern the previously quoted glorious verses, we will find the
Attribute "al-Qawiyy" existing in 8:52 and 40:22 as the One Who is
severe in requiting evil. Seven times has the Attribute "al-Qawiyy" been
combined with the Attribute "al-\`Azeez"; strength is not suited except
for those who are honourable. Might is accompanied by severity.

The root word, matana, connotes solidness with expansion and extension.
It may be applied to a solid rock, or to a distance traversed. Al-Mateen
is al-Qawiyy, the Strong One, Who can do whatever He pleases, Who does
not need an army to enforce His authority. He needs no help, nor
supporters, nor assistants. Rest your hope on none besides Him.
Al-Mateen is the One Whose Might is perfect; nothing in the heavens nor
on earth can stand in His way. He is Allah Who affects His will, Whose
Might is eternal; He affects everything yet nothing can affect Him.

### 56. "Al-Waliyy"

Allah has said, ***"Allah is the Guardian (al-Waliyy) of those who
believe" (Qur’an, 2:257***). Al-Waliyy connotes closeness, nearness, one
who may be an ally, a neighbor, a guardian, a relative, etc. It also
means the supporter, the beloved one.

Allah has said, ***"Allah is the Guardian of those who believe" (Qur’an,
2:257).*** Quoting Yousuf, He has said, ***"You are my Guardian in this
life and in the life hereafter" (Qur’an, 12:101).*** Quoting the
believers, He has said, ***"You are our Patron; so, help us against the
unbelieving people" (Qur’an, 2:286),*** and, ***"Then are they sent back
to Allah, their Master, the True One" (Qur’an, 6:62).*** He has also
said, ***"That is so because Allah is the Protector of those who
believe, and because the unbelievers shall have no protector" (Qur’an,
47:11).***

Allah is the Guardian of His servants. A good servant of Allah is also a
friend of His. The Exalted One has said, ***"Surely the friends of Allah
shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve" (Qur’an, 10:62).*** The word
"waliyy" simultaneously conveys the meanings of a master and a slave, a
supporter, a neighbor, a cousin, an ally, a guardian... The common
denominator in the meaning of all these connotations is nearness. A
"waliyy" is one who is near to someone else physically and figuratively.

The Almighty has said, ***"Awla laka fa awla" (Qur’an, 75:34***): Nearer
to you (is the destruction) and nearer, a clear warning meaning: "It
(destruction) has come close to you, and that against which I have
warned you has almost reached you; therefore, beware!"

This proves that the root word of this Attribute is derived from
nearness, and this meaning is met in the case of a slave, a supporter, a
cousin, an ally, or a guardian. In all these cases, there are situations
which necessitate nearness required for proximity and communication. If
this is proven, His being al-Waliyy of His servants is indicative of His
being near to them.

The Almighty has said, ***"... and He is with you wherever you are"
(Qur’an, 57:4).***

He has also said,  
***... and We are nearer to him than his life-vein. (50:16) Nowhere is
there a secret counsel between three persons except that He is their
fourth. (58:7)***

Whoever repeats this Attribute, realizing its great meanings, must be a
friend of Allah. Any friend of Allah is also a friend of people, Allah's
servants. He looks after them, managing their affairs, and so on. Allah
says, ***"Believing men and women are guardians of one another" (Qur’an,
9:71).***

Whoever aspires to be close to the Almighty will find Him willing to be
his friend too, and whoever turns away from Allah, Allah will turn away
from him, and Satan will welcome him with open arms.

### 57. "Al-Hameed"

The Almighty has said, ***"O people! You are the ones who stand in need
of Allah, while Allah is the self-Sufficient, the Praised One" (Qur’an,
35:15).***

The root word of "al-Hameed" is hamd which means: praise, something more
general than thanking. Al-Hameed is also al-Mamood, the Praised One.
Allah is al-Hameed due to praising His own Self since time immemorial,
and also due to His servants praising Him.

His qualities, such as His being Glorified and Exalted, are due to the
fact that those who mention His Attribute glorify and exalt it. Hamd in
this context means enumerating or the attempt to enumerate the qualities
of perfection conceived by those who praise Him. Al-Hameed grants you
success and compliments you for it; He wipes out your sins and does not
embarrass you by exposing them. He is Praised due to His merits.

One whose beliefs, conduct, speech and action are praiseworthy is called
hameed. Such a description fits only the Messenger of Allah and those
whose ranks are close to his from among Allah's prophets as well as
others such as the friends of Allah, and the scholars. Each one of these
is hameed with regard to his beliefs, conduct, deeds and statements.

### 58. "Al-Muhsi"

Allah has said, ***"So that He may ascertain that they have truly
delivered the messages of their Lord, and He encompasses what is with
them, and He records the number of all things" (Qur’an, 72:28).***

The root word of "Al-Muhsi" is ihsa' which means: counting or computing.
Linguistically, it also means to tolerate or to be able to handle. It is
also used to describe a tract of land where there is a large quantity of
pebbles or stones.

Allah is al-Muhsi Who counts what we do and readies it for the Day when
we meet Him, that is, the Day of Judgment, the day of hisab, accounting
or reckoning, the day of reward or punishment. Al-Muhsi knows all
precise and minute matters, the secrets of what is decreed; He sees what
is apparent and is fully knowledgeable of what is hidden.

He counts the acts of obedience to Him, knows everything, counts our
breath, and is acquainted with our insinuations. His knowledgeable of
all beings in existence, when they move around or when they are still,
and with all their affairs and deeds.

This Attribute's meaning and derivations exist in several places; here
are some examples:

***Certainly He has a comprehensive knowledge of them, and He has
numbered them a (comprehensive) numbering. (19:94)***

***Surely We shall give life (back) to the dead, and We record what they
have sent forth before and what they leave behind, and of all things
have We taken account in a clear Book. (36:12)***

***And We have recorded everything in a book. (78:29)***

### 59. "Al-Mubdi"

Allah, Glory and Exaltation are His, has said,

***"... as We originated the first creation, so shall We reproduce it, a
promise (binding on Us); We shall surely bring it about" (Qur’an,
21:104).***

 Both "al-Mubdi" and "al-Mu\`eed" are among Allah's Attributes, and most
of those who have discussed them have dealt with them jointly.

In Surat al-A\`raf, we read the following:

***"Say: My Lord has enjoined justice, and set your faces upright at
every time of the prayers and call upon Him, being sincere to Him in
obedience; just as He brought you forth in the beginning, so shall you
also return (to Us)" (Qur’an, 7:29).***

And in Surat al-Naml, we read:

***"Or Who originates the creation then reproduces it, and Who gives you
sustenance from the heavens and from the earth? Is there a god with
Allah? Say: Bring your proof if you are truthful" (Qur’an, 27:64).***

In Surat al-\`Ankabut, we read this verse:

***"Say: Traverse the earth and see how He makes the first creation,
then Allah creates the latter creation; surely Allah has power over all
things" (Qur’an, 29:20).***

Surat al-Room mentions these Attributes in two places:

***Allah originates creation, then He reproduces it, then to Him you
shall be brought back. (30:11) He it is Who originates the creation then
reproduces it, and it is easy for Him, and His are the most exalted
Attributes in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
(30:27)***

In Surat al-Buruj, we read: ***"Surely He it is Who originates and
reproduces" (Qur’an, 85:13).***

Linguistically, the root word of this Attribute means to start, begin,
initiate, and the like. Allah starts, begins, initiates, the creation of
all beings and Who brings them into existence. In Surat Saba', we read
the following: ***"... falsehood shall vanish and shall not come back"
(Qur’an, 34:49).*** This verse may be paraphrased thus: "What can
falsehood initiate, and what can it bring back?"

Al-Mubdi has brought the cosmos into being without a prior model, Who
created all the worlds in a perfect manner, Who initiates the giving to
and the assistance of His servants, proving Himself as the best to rely
on.

One who remembers the Attribute "al-Mubdi" ought to seek His forgiveness
whenever he remembers it and to always stay attentive while supplicating
to Him.

### 60. "Al-Mu\`eed"

Allah has said, ***"Surely He it is Who originates and reproduces, and
He is the Forgiving, the Loving" (Qur’an, 85:13-14).***

Linguistically, the root word of this Attribute means: to return, to go
back. We supplicate thus: "Lord! We plead to You to grant us a return to
Your House," that is, to go back to the Ka\`ba after having visited it
or after having been there. A man who is mu\`eed is one who is
knowledgeable of certain issues/topics, etc. Al-ma\`d means: the Day of
Judgment. According to one particular tradition, the Messenger of Allah
has supplicated saying, "... and make my abode in the hereafter good,
for to it shall I return."

It is narrated that Gabriel asked the Messenger of Allah once, *"O
Muhammad! Do you have a nostalgic feeling for your place of birth, to
your homeland?!" He* answered him in the affirmative, whereupon Gabriel
quoted the Qur’anic verse saying, ***"Most surely He Who has made the
Qur’an binding on you will bring you back to the destination" (Qur’an,
28:85).***

Al-Mu\`eed brings life back to the dead. He gathers all beings for the
Judgment Day together, lifting the veils from them and rewarding or
punishing them, each according to what he/she had said and done. He
tries them about how they fared with the blessings He bestowed upon
them. Allah will cause all things (beings as well as inanimate objects)
to come to naught, then He will bring them back again into existence:

***"Say: The One Who brought them into existence at first will give life
[back] to them, and He is Cognizant of all creation" (Qur’an, 36:79).***

We ought to return to Allah regarding everything, and we have to bear in
mind that Allah created us when we were nothing at all; He determines
our destiny.

### 61. "Al-Muhyi"

Allah has said, ***"Allah gives life and causes death, and Allah
witnesses whatever you do" (Qur’an, 3:156).***

Allah surely brings life to the bodies when He rejoins their souls to
them. Al-Muhyi creates life and grants it to whomsoever He pleases. He
creates people out of nothing, then He brings them back to life when the
Day of Judgment approaches after their death.

He brings life into the heart of those who know through the light of His
knowledge:

***"Is he who was dead then We raised him to life and made for him a
light whereby he walks among people like him whose likeness is that of
one who is in utter darkness from which he cannot come out?" (Qur’an,
6:122).***

Allah gives life to the sperm and to the leech-like clot. He causes rain
to pour out of the clouds in order to bring life thereby to a dead land.

References to Allah bringing life back to the dead are numerous
throughout the Holy Qur’an; here are some of them:

***So We said: Strike him (the dead corpse) with part of it (the
sacrificed cow); thus does Allah bring the dead to life, and He shows
you His signs so that you may understand. (2:73)***

***Allah gives life and causes death, and Allah sees whatever you do.
(3:156)***

***Say: O people! Surely I am the Messenger of Allah to you all, [the
Messenger] of Him to Whom the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
belongs; there is no god but He; He brings (beings/things) to life and
causes death; therefore, believe in Allah and in His Messenger, the ummi
Prophet who believes in Allah and in His words, and follow him, so that
you may walk in the right way" (Qur’an, 7:158).***

***Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; besides Allah
you have no guardian nor helper. (2:107)***

***He gives life and causes death, and to Him you shall be brought back.
(10:56)***

***He it is Who gives life and causes death, and in His (control) is the
alternation of the night and the day; do you not then understand?
(3:80)***

***He brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living
and gives life to the earth after its death; thus shall you be brought
forth. (30:19)***

***One of His signs is that He shows you the lightning for fear and for
hope and sends down water from the clouds, then He gives life therewith
to a land after its death (barrenness); most surely there are signs in
this for people who understand" (Qur’an, 30:24).***

***He it is Who gives life and causes death; so, when He decrees an
affair, He only says to it: Be, and it is. (40:68)***

***Or have they taken guardians besides Him? But Allah is the Guardian,
and He gives life to the dead, and He has power over all things.
(42:9)***

***There is no god but He; it is He Who gives life and causes death, the
Lord and Cherisher of yourselves and of your earlier ancestors.
(44:8)***

A believer ought to adorn his conduct by remembering this Attribute
quite often so that Allah may bring light into his heart through
knowledge. His soul will then glow with the mysteries of manifestation.
He should particularly remember Him as such in the depth of the night.

### 62. "Al-Mumeet"

Allah has said,

***"He it is Who makes (men) laugh and makes (them) weep, and He it is
Who causes death and gives life" (Qur’an, 53:43-44).***

Death is the antithesis of life. A wind dies when it stands still. A
human dies when he sleeps; sleep is called death by way of analogy: it
causes the faculties of reason and almost all other bodily movements to
stop. The mawt is the land which was never tilled. One whose heart dies
is dumb, stupid, idiotic, the warmth of his reason cooled down and died
out.

Al-Mumeet, the Almighty, decrees death for whomsoever He pleases; none
causes death except He. He has subdued His servants by death, causing
them to go back to the earth from which He had created them and to be
covered with dust...

Al-Mumeet has caused the heart of sinners to die because of going
against His will. He is the Creator of death. He has caused the tyrants
to die out of His mercy for the living. He causes the oppressors to die
on account of their disrespect for Him. He causes the land to die,
rendering it barren, free from vegetation, then He brings it back to
life when it produces. He brings to life His Sunnah by causing His
prophets to inherit it from their predecessors, and He causes the death
of innovations through the life of knowledge.

Once the Messenger of Allah performed the hajj then stood over the safa,
overlooking the House, the Ka\`ba. Then he made three takbeers saying,
"There is no god except Allah, the One and only God; there is no partner
with Him; His is the kingdom; to Him is all Praise due; He brings to
life and causes death; in His hand is all goodness, and He can do
anything at all."

Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, may Allah be pleased with him, is quoted as saying
that whenever the Messenger of Allah was ready to go to bed at night, he
would say, "In Your Name do we die and live," and whenever he woke up,
he would say, "All Praise is due to Allah Who has brought us back to
life after having caused us to die, and to Him is our final return."

### 63. "Al-Hayy"

The Almighty has said,

***"... as for the next abode, that most surely is the (real) life, had
they only known!" (Qur’an, 29:64).***

He has also said,

***"And rely on the ever-Living Who never dies" (Qur’an, 25:58).***

Life is the antithesis of death. Allah brings life back to a "dead"
land: He causes vegetation to grow in it; He brings it life through
rain. When we discuss it as an Attribute of the Almighty, it means that
He is the ever-Living Who is self-Sustaining since time immemorial and
will continue to be so forever. Every living being besides Him is not
alive on its own; it does not by itself sustain its life; rather, its
life is sustained by al-Hayy. Al-Hayy never dies. The Holy Qur’an states
the following in Surat al-Zumar:

***"Surely you shall die, and so shall they" (Qur’an, 39:30).***

Al-Hayy is the Doer, the Aware; any deed without an origin or an
awareness is dead. The least degrees of awareness is awareness of one's
own self. Anything which is not aware by itself is a dead inanimate
object. Allah is the Absolute Living One, and everyone and everything
that live besides Him is alive according to the extent of its awareness.

Anas ibn Malik has said, "I was once sitting with the Messenger of Allah
in our circle when a man was still performing his prayers. After having
bowed down, prostrated and made the tashahhud, he supplicated to his
Lord saying, \`Lord! I plead to You by the very fact that to You is all
Praise due; there is no god but You; You are the One Who gives without
reminding the takers, Who created the heavens and the earth; O You Who
has all the Honour and all the Glory! O ever-Living One, O Sustainer! I
plead to You...' whereupon the Prophet said, \`He surely has invoked
Allah by His Greatest Attribute: He answers favourably when He is asked
thereby, and He gives when invoked.'"

Al-Mumeet causes your heart to die when you fail to remember Him, and
your soul to die when you continuously permit yourself to slip away from
His right path, and your mind to die when you permit your desires to
take control of you. Al-Muhyi brings life to the hearts of those who
know and who willingly submit to Him, while al-Mumeet causes the
[spiritual] death of those who go against His will.

### 64. "Al-Qayyum"

Allah has said,

***"Alif, Lam, Mim. Allah, (there is) no god but He, the ever-Living,
the self-Subsisting, the One through Whom all things subsist" (Qur’an,
3:1-2).***

One who is qayyim is a master and organizer of affairs. The "qayyim
creed" is the Hanafi faith. The day of qiyama is the Day when everyone
will stand before Allah, Lord of the Worlds, for judgment. Al-Qayyum is
never created, Who manages all affairs.

Al-Qayyum exists absolutely on His own, not through others, while every
being exists through Him and because of Him. Nothing, no life whatever,
can ever be sustained without Him. Al-Qayyum is the ever-Lasting, the
Eternal Who never suffers extinction. He effects justice and equity, Who
is self-Sustaining, Who never sleeps.

According to Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, whenever the Messenger of Allah used
to stand up to perform his night prayers, he would say, "Lord! All
Praise is due to You! You are the Lord of the heavens and the earth! All
Praise is due to You! You are the Qayyum of the heavens and the earth
and everything in them; all Praise is due to You! You are the Light of
the heavens and the earth; all Praise is due to You! You are the King in
the heavens and the earth; all Praise is due to You! You are the Truth;
Your promise is true, the meeting with You is true, Your speech is the
truth; Paradise is true; the fire is true; the prophets are truthful;
Muhammad is truthful, and the Hour is true!

Lord! To You have I submitted; in You have I believed; upon You have I
relied; to You is my return; for Your sake do I dispute; Your judgment
do I seek; so, I implore You to forgive my sins, the ones I have
committed and the ones I may commit in the future, what I have concealed
and what I have declared, for You are the One Who advances and Who
postpones; there is no god but You, and there is no strength nor might
except in Allah."

According to another tradition, he has invoked His Maker saying, "O
Hayy! O Qayyum! We solicit Your help by Your mercy! Lord! I invoke You
to mend my affairs, all of them, and not to permit me to rely on my own
self even for a twinkling of the eye, nor for a shorter time, nor on
anyone from among Your creation."

Imam \`Ali has said, "During the Battle of Badr, I participated in the
battle for some time, then I came to the Messenger of Allah to see what
he was doing, and I found him making sajdah while repeating, \`O Hayy! O
Qayyum!' So I went back to the battle-field, then I came back to him and
I saw that he was still repeating the same words. I kept going there and
coming back to him, and he was still doing exactly the same thing till
Allah granted us victory."

Abdullah ibn \`Abbas is quoted as saying that the Greatest of all
Attributes of Allah is al-Hayy al-Qayyum. Anyone who truly realizes that
He, Glory to Him, is the Qa'im, Qayyim, Qiyam and Qayyum will never
detach his heart from loving the Creator.

Al-Qayyum connotes His independence and the dependence of all others on
Him, that He does not need anyone while everyone is in need of Him.

Allah, Glory to Him, is the Only al-Hayy al-Qayyum: He exists on His
own, whereas everything that exists depends on Him to continue existing.
So rely on al-Qayyum besides Whom you need no other supporter, nor is
there anyone else besides Him who can sustain you, nor can anyone else
teach you whatever you need to know.

### 65. "Al-Wajid"

Allah has said,

***"And whoever does evil or acts unjustly against his own soul then
asks forgiveness of Allah, he shall find Allah Forgiving, Merciful"
(Qur’an, 4:110).***

 The root word of "al-Wajid" is "jidda," abundance and independence.
Al-Wajid is the most Knowing:

***"And [did He not] find you lost and guide you?" (Qur’an, 93:7***);

***"... and there he finds Allah, so He pays him back his reckoning in
full" (Qur’an, 24:39).***

The phrase "he finds Allah" means "he finds out that Allah..." Al-Wajid
has everything; He lacks nothing; He is never incapable of doing
whatever He pleases. Al-Wajid is the One from Whose knowledge nothing at
all escapes; He does not overlook anything at all. He is the opposite of
one who has lost everything. Al-Wajid lacks neither necessary things nor
any of the requirements related to Divinity and its perfection; He is
none but Allah, the Most Exalted One.

In such sense, He, and He alone, is the Absolute al-Wajid. Anyone
besides Him who may have some of the attributes of perfection while
still lacking a few things is not called wajid at all.

Al-Wajid has with Him everything He wants and desires; He can affect His
decree; He knows everything and He determines everything; He is capable
of doing everything; nothing is beyond His reach or might; His status is
Sublime. He is the Most Honoured; His Might is the most perfect; He
gives abundantly and generously.

The root word of this Attribute has many other meanings such as: finding
out something through the power of the senses, the reaching of a point
or a goal, the existence of something, the mental realization.

### 66. "Al-Majid"

The Almighty has said,

***"... the handiwork of Allah Who has made everything thoroughly"
(Qur’an, 27:88).***

The root word of this Attribute is "majd," a noun meaning glory and
honours. A man may be said to be majid if he has descended from parents
known to have established a deeply rooted reputation of glory and
honours. A majid person is very highly distinguished; he quite often
showers others with his favours.

The Attribute "al-Majid" means absolute perfection and dazzling glory;
He is Beautiful in His qualities and actions, Who treats His servants
most graciously, most generously, manifesting His Greatness to them
through the light of His compassion for them. Among our supplications is
this one:

Lord! You are al-Majid al-Majid, the Doer of whatever pleases You! We
plead to You to grant us security on the Promised Day; Glory to the One
Who has been Gracious unto His servants through His Glory and Honours
and is distinguished thereby! Glory to the One Who is Great, Whose
Honour is Great, Whose Generosity is vast!

The Attribute "al-Majid" underscores the meaning of the Attribute
"al-Wajid", thus stressing their common meaning of independence. Abu
Tharr al-Ghifari, may Allah be pleased with him, has quoted the
Messenger of Allah quoting, in turn, his Lord saying, "O servants of
Mine! You are all sinners except those whom I have healed from sinning;
therefore, seek My forgiveness so that I may forgive you by My might.

Whoever among you comes to know that I am capable of forgiving, and he
seeks My forgiveness, I shall forgive his sins and overlook them. You
are all to perish except those whom I guide; therefore, seek My guidance
so that I may guide you. You are all poor except those whom I enrich;
therefore, ask Me so that I may grant you sustenance. O servants of
Mine! If the first of you and the last, whatever is moist with you and
whatever is dry, the living among you and the dead, should ever
unanimously become as pious as the most pious person among My servants,
it will not increase My domain as much as the wing of a mosquito.

And if they all become as wretched as the worst wretch among My
servants, it will not decrease My domain as much as the wing of a
mosquito. If the first of you and the last, the moist with you and the
dry, the living and the dead, were to ask Me, it will not decrease what
is with Me in anything at all just as any of you may pass by a sea shore
and immerse a needle therein then takes it out. This is so because I am
al-Majid; I do whatever I please; My giving is only a word: Whenever I
desire something, I say to it \`Be!' and it is."

This Attribute instills in the hearts of the faithful the sincere desire
to treat others with forgiveness, clemency, and patience. One should
speak kindly to them, smile to them, and remove the dissension from
among them. He should spend his wealth for the good of the poor, and he
should be humble and kind to the weak among them. He should treat all
people as though they were his own family members and brethren.

### 67. "Al-Wahid"

Allah has said,

***"And your Lord is One (and Only) Lord! There is no god but He"
(Qur’an, 2:163).***

He has also said,

***"Say: He, Allah, is One" (Qur’an, 112:1).***

Linguistically, "al-Wahid" means: the One Who does not socialize with
people nor keeps them company. To believe in Tahweed is to believe that
there is no partner at all with Allah in His authority, and that being
One is a quality of His which nobody else shares with Him.

Tahweed means recognition of the Unity of the One Who alone manages the
affairs of His servants.

None creates, nor sustains, nor grants, nor withholds, nor brings back
to life, nor causes death, nor manages the affairs of the domain
outwardly or inwardly, except Allah. Whatever He wills comes to be, and
whatever He does not never will. Not even an atom moves without His
knowledge; nothing takes place without His will. No leaf falls down
without His knowledge. Nothing escapes His knowledge, not even as much
as the weight of an atom in the heavens or the earth, nor smaller than
that nor bigger: His knowledge encompasses everything. His might
overwhelms everything. His will is effected regarding everything. His
wisdom dominates everything.

Tawhid, then, means that whatever comes to your mind of how He may be or
anything which you think is appropriate for Him..., He is contrary to
and above it, Glory to Him.

The subject of Tawhid is beyond anyone's description, for if you discuss
the Almighty, there are too many views about Him to discuss, and there
are too many ways to discuss Him through Him [i.e. through His
statements]. Reason recognizes Him, yet the tongue can never describe
Him.  
 Tawhid's meaning shatters any image and confuses all branches of
knowledge, while Allah remains just as He has always been and will
always be. Glory to the One Who has made no means for His creatures to
really know Him except by proving to them that they can never know Him.

One who falls into the seas of Tawhid will day after day feel more and
more thirsty. Tawd is a prerogative, a privilege, of the Truth (the
Almighty), yet His creatures are simply curious. Among people are those
whose actions portray their belief in Tawhid; they look at everything
that happens through Him. And there are those who, when the truth is
unveiled before their eyes, feel less and less concerned about anyone
besides Him; they see everyone to be as one secret within another...

Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, has said, "Allah is One, and He loves
oneness." This tradition indicates that He loves the heart that is
solely dedicated to Him, Glory and Exaltation are His.

Al-Wahid, the One and Only God, protects you, the individual that you
are, against the group, a number of individuals, whereas the latter
cannot protect you against Him. Al-Wahid cannot be counted. He Alone is
the source of all knowledge, the Only One Who reveals what is hidden.
His existence has neither a duration nor a limit, nor can anyone carry
out a decision against Him, nor can His Essence ever suffer any decrease
or increase whatever.

### 68. "Al-Samad"

Allah, Glory and Exaltation are His, has said,

***"Say: He, Allah, is One. Allah is He on Whom all depend" (Qur’an,
112:1-2).***

Al-Samad is an Attribute of Allah whose linguistic meanings include the
following: the ultimate goal, the obeyed Master without Whose command
nothing can happen, the Support of those who need to be supported, the
One to Whom all matters are referred, the One to Whom all issues are
rendered and regarding which nobody else decides, the One to Whom pleas
are directed. A-Samad is approached to grant the pleas and is pleaded to
make wishes come true. He is the Master sought during the time of need.
Arabs describe a household as Samad if people go there in the hope of
fulfilling their worldly needs.

God is the final destination, the ultimate goal. The one whom Allah
enables to be sought to satisfy people's needs, particularly those
relevant to their creed, as well as those of every day life, the one who
serves their interests by word and by means is truly one upon whom Allah
has bestowed a great deal of goodness. It is goodness inspired by this
Attribute.

Whoever recognizes Allah as the ever-Lasting Who never dies will turn
away from the adornments of this fleeting life and will have no desire
for its material things... One of the good manners of a believer
inspired by this Attribute is that he does not seek help from anyone
besides Allah to help him meet his worldly needs, nor does he rely on
anyone else besides Him. He fashions his conduct after Him and becomes
the one sought by people for the fulfillment of their needs. According
to one hadith, the Messenger of Allah has said, "One who is most loved
among people is the one who benefits them most."

### 69. "Al-Qadir"

In the Holy Qur’an, we read,

***"Say: He has the power to send on you a chastisement from above you,
or from beneath your feet, or throw you into confusion, (making you)
different parties, and making some of you taste the fighting of others.
See how We repeat the signs so that they may understand" (Qur’an,
6:65).***

Both al-Qadeer and al-Qadir are among Allah's characteristics. They may
be derived from taqdeer, estimation or assessment, or from qudra, might,
power, or ability. Al-Qadeer does whatever He does according to the
requirement of wisdom, no more, nor less. Al-Qadeer is not among Allah's
ninety-nine Attributes although it is repeated more than thirty times
throughout the text of the Holy Qur’an.

The root word of "al-Qadir" is the noun "qudra", might, power, prowess,
ability, etc. Laylat al-Qadr, the Night of Power or of Destiny, is
surely the Night of the great honour. In the Holy Qur’an, we read the
following verse in Surat al-Ana\`m: ***"And they do not honour Allah the
Great Honour due to Him" (Qur’an, 6:91),*** that is, they do not honour
Him as He ought to be honoured.

The word "qadr" means that Allah is capable of doing anything without
tackling it or using any means, etc.; therefore, it does not exert or
exhaust Him to do whatever He wants. It means authority and power, that
is, the complete dealing with the entire universe, the cosmos, without
being opposed by an opponent. Who can oppose Him or escape His grip? His
command is that whenever He decrees anything, he says to it: "Be!" and
it is. It means the One Who has the Complete power, Who is not
frustrated by anything at all, He needs no means to do anything.

He measures His decree, Who manages the universe with might and wisdom:
***"So We proportion it: how well We are at proportioning (things)!"
(Qur’an, 77:23)*** and also, ***"Surely We have created everything
according to a measure" (Qur’an, 54:49).*** The qadar is what Allah, the
Most Honoured and Glorified, decrees and decides.

A servant of Allah has a measure of power to do a number of things, but
it is deficient, for his ability is limited. Allah, on the other hand,
makes His servants capable of doing what they do through His might. A
servant of Allah has power to do a number of things, but he cannot do
everything. He cannot create things out of nothing. Only Allah can.

### 70. "Al-Muqtadir"

As regarding the Attribute "al-Muqtadir", the Almighty has said,
***"They rejected all Our signs, so We overtook them after the manner of
a Mighty, Powerful One" (Qur’an, 54:42).***

"Al-Muqtadir" is a superlative of "al-Qadir" which enhances the prestige
and awe inspired by the latter. Al-Muqtadir controls everything through
His might which encompasses all His creation. His might is endless, Who
manages all affairs, Who manifests His might to the souls through the
light of His Attribute al-Muqtadir and thus grants them serenity and
security.

They recognize and venerate His might in the late hours of the night and
at both ends of the day. The meaning it suggests is:

***"the One Whose Might is Great, Who, through His overwhelming Power,
controls all His creatures; He subdues everyone and everything in His
domain. He decreed, so existence came to be as a manifestation of His
might: \`... and Allah holds power over all things'" (Qur’an, 18:45).***

One of the signs of the good manners of a believer in as far as
al-Muqtadir is concerned is that this Attribute will always fill his
heart, and he always remembers it, so much so that a glimpse of its
light will shine upon him and will always surround him. The following is
a tradition related by Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Salami:

The Messenger of Allah used to teach his companions to follow istikhara
in all matters just as he used to teach them the text of the Holy
Qur’an. He used to always repeat saying, "If one of you decides to do
something, let him prostrate twice besides what is incumbent upon him
then say: \`Lord! I seek Your istikhara and Your help to enable me to
achieve what I aspire to achieve! I plead to You to grant me of Your
favours, for You can and I cannot, and You know and I do not, and You
know the unknown.

Lord! If You know that this matter (and here you indicate what it is) is
good for me sooner or later, or good for my creed or sustenance, or for
the ultimately good end of my affairs, then decree it for me and ease it
for me, then bless it for me. Lord! If You know that it is evil for me
regarding my creed or the ultimate end of my affairs, or regarding my
matter sooner or later, then take me away from it and enable me to
acquire goodness wherever it may be, then make me pleased therewith.'"

The Attribute "al-Muqtadir", Praised and Glorified is He, is mentioned
verbatim in two verses of the Holy Qur’an: in verses 42 and 55 of Surat
al-Qamar, and once in verse 45 of Surat al-Kahaf.

### 71. "Al-Muqaddim"

Allah has said,

***"... so that Allah may forgive your past faults and your faults to
come, to complete His favour unto you, and to guide you on the right
path" (Qur’an, 48:2).***

Linguistically, taqdeem, the root word of this Attribute, means
advancing, promoting, or preferring; "al-Muqaddim" means: the One Who
presents things and places them in their right place. Whoever deserves
to be advanced, preferred or favoured over others, the Almighty,
al-Muqaddim, advances his rank or status.

And He advances the living, each according to his sincerity of
worshipping Him, protecting them against falling into disobedience of
Him. Al-Muqaddim since the beginning of time advanced those whom He
loves and made them happy through accurate comprehension and sound
judgment. He prefers those who know over those who do not. He opens the
gates of true conviction (iman) for everyone. He prefers humans over all
others, making them Imams. And He advances, prefers, favours scholars
over ignorant folks, making the first party like stars guiding others to
righteousness.

He has advanced the Messenger of Allah from the very beginning and will
advance him at the very end, in the Hereafter. He took a covenant from
all those whom He sent into this world that***: "... when a Messenger
comes to you verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him,
and you must support him" (Qur’an, 3:81).***

He also advanced him on Laylatul-Isra', the Night Journey. Muhammad led
all other Prophets in congregational prayers.

The Holy Qur’an states the following***: "Do not dispute in My presence,
and indeed I warned you beforehand" (Qur’an, 50:28)***. Muhammad, the
most honoured of all prophets, as Muslims regard him, enjoys a status
that tops all those of other "Ulul-\`Azm" prophets[^10], peace be upon
all of them. Next in status are awliya', the friends of Allah, whose
status is less only than that of the prophets.

Al-Muqaddim, therefore, advances whoever He pleases on account of one's
piety and frequency of returning to Him, to His path, making them
truthful; He responds favourably to their pleas. And al-Muqaddim
advances the living who worship Him in ranks (in this life as well as in
the one to come), protecting them against disobeying or displeasing Him.

### 72. "Al-Mu'akhkhir"

The Almighty has said,

***"Man shall on that Day be informed of what he had sent forth before
and of what he had put off" (Qur’an, 75:13).***

Al-Mu'akhkhir causes the polytheists to lag behind while raising the
ranks of the believers. He delays the disobedient ones and grants His
guidance to those who obey Him. He postpones the penalty of the
oppressor because He is Compassionate and Merciful. Whenever your heart
is exposed to a glimpse of the light of His Attribute "al-Mu'akhkhir,"
you will be managing your affairs very well, postponing what the
Legislator has decided must be postponed, and looking down at what the
Wise Lord has Himself looked down upon.

In Surat Ibrahim (Abraham), we read the following verse:

***"And do not think that Allah is heedless of what the unjust ones do;
He only grants them a respite till a Day on which the eyes shall be
fixedly staring (being horrified)" (Qur’an, 14:42).***

He has forewarned people regarding the Day when His chastisement will
approach them, so those who have wronged their own souls will plead to
thus: ***"Lord! Grant us a respite till a near term so that we may
answer Your call and follow the messengers" (Qur’an, 14:44***) but they
will be told: ***"Did you not swear before now that there would be no
passing away for you?!" (Qur’an, 14:44).***

The Messenger of Allah used to supplicate by saying, "Lord! I plead to
You to forgive my sins, my ignorance, my extravagance, and to grant me
that which You know to be better for me. Lord! I plead to You to forgive
my (unintentional) sins, my deliberate sins, my ignorance, when I am
serious and when I am not, and I am guilty of all of that. Lord! I plead
to You to forgive what I have advanced and what I have postponed, what I
have revealed and what I have declared, for You are al-Muqaddim, and You
are al-Mu'akhkhir, and surely You can do whatever You please." Both
Attributes "al-Muqaddim" and "al-Mu'akhkhir" are not mentioned in the
text of the Holy.

The discussion of advancing something and postponing something else has
been dealt with in the Holy Qur’an with reference to mankind in verses
such as these:

***Man shall on that Day be informed of what he sent forth before and
what he put off. (75:13)***

***Surely We know those of you who have gone before and We certainly
know those who shall come later. (15:24)***

***And We do not delay it except till an appointed term (11:104).***

One of the signs of a believer's good conduct with regard to both of
these Attributes is that he should take a middle course between fear and
excessive hope, and to always be on his alert.

### 73. "Al-Awwal"

Allah has said, ***"He is the First (al-Awwal) and the Last (al-Akhir)
and the Ascendant (over all) and the One Who knows hidden things, and He
is Cognizant of all things" (Qur’an, 57:3).***

The Attribute "al-Awwal" means: the One upon Whom all others rely, the
One Who advances all others. Applied to the Almighty, it means: He was
never preceded in existence by anyone at all; He does not need anyone
else at all; He is Independent of everything and everyone.

A bedouin once asked the Messenger of Allah, "Where was Allah before
creation?" He answered him by saying, "Allah was and there was nothing
with Him." The bedouin asked him again, "How about now?" He answered him
by saying, ***"He is now just as He has always been."*** The Attribute
"al-Awwal" exists in Surat al-Hadeed: ***"He is the First and the Last,
the Ascendant (over all), the One Who knows hidden things, and He is
Cognizant of all things" (Qur’an, 57:3).***

And He is referred to by implication in this verse:

***"We have ordained death among you and We are not preceded in doing so
by anyone else" (Qur’an, 56:60).***

"Al-Awwal" is the first of anything different from Him. He has the upper
hand over His foes, an advancement due neither to time nor to place nor
to anything else that can be conceived by mind nor acquired by
knowledge. "Al-Awwal" means the timeless, the perpetual, the One Who has
neither a beginning nor an end. He is the First without a beginning; He
exists on His own even before His creatures were ever there.

He is the Eternal One Who has always been and Who is never preceded by
anyone at all. Allah has said, ***"We have ordained death among you, and
We are not preceded in doing so by anyone else" (Qur’an, 56:60).*** This
verse indicates that He, and Only He, has such power to effect death
upon His servants, and He is the First to do so without anyone preceding
Him.

### 74. "Al-Akhir"

Allah Almighty has said,

***"He is the First and the Last, the Ascendant (over all), the One Who
knows all hidden things, and He is Cognizant of all things" (Qur’an,
57:3).***

Al-Akhir is the Last without having to have a first, the Last in His
Attribute of eternity and perpetuity; He postpones anything that is to
come later. He is the Last by virtue of being above any adjectives
whereby He may be described, the Last above extinction. He is the Last
without anyone having delayed Him and made Him so, and He is the Last
due to His sustaining us. He is the Last according to the rule of
necessity: He is the First to grant guidance; He is the Last to look
after those whom He guides.

Allah permits the rewards to reach those who earn them and the penalty
to afflict those who deserve it; so, just as He was the first since time
immemorial, when there was nothing with Him at all, so will He remain
the Last One and nothing will be with Him at all.

Among the good manners of a believer with respect to this Attribute is
that he keeps remembering it quite often so that its light may manifest
itself unto his heart, and so that he should escape this vanishing abode
and look forward for the lasting one; he flees from his own self seeking
Allah, the Lord of the heavens and the earth.

### 75. "Al-Zahir"

Allah has said,

***"... the One Who knows the unseen! So He does not reveal His secrets
to any..." (Qur’an, 72:26).***

Linguistically speaking, "al-Zahir" is derived from "zuhoor,"
manifestation, appearance, sighting, etc. It means something hidden
coming to appearance. It also conveys the meaning of "victor." This
meaning occurs in this verse: ***"... and they became the uppermost"
(Qur’an, 61:14),*** that is, in a higher status and rank. "zahr" also
means back, the opposite of "ban," stomach or belly; so, what is zahir
is the opposite of what is batin.

It also means: animals used to transport people and luggage on their
backs, their hrs, that is, beasts of burden, whether it is used as a
figure of speech or literally. Something zaheer is very strong.
According to hadith, "There is no verse in the Holy Qur’an except that
it has an apparent meaning and a hidden one." What is apparent may be
the wording, and what is hidden may is the meaning, or it may mean
recitation or reading versus comprehension and learning.

The meaning of the Attribute of the Almighty "al-Zahir" permits more
than one interpretation:

1) He subdues His creation. 2) He knows everything apparent, just as the
Attribute "al-Batin" means He knows everything hidden. 3) He is al-Zahir
due to the abundance of dazzling proofs and the enlightening evidence
testifying to His Glory.

Suppose someone says that if He is al-Zahir, the Apparent or the Evident
One, the One about Whom there can be no doubt entertained, well, most
people seem to doubt His existence nevertheless; so, how can He still be
Apparent or Evident?

Allah is al-Batin, the Obscure, if sought through the senses and the
imagination. He is al-Zahir, the Apparent One, if sought by the treasure
of reason by way of deduction. His being obscure to many minds, despite
His being so Apparent, is due to the intensity of such evidence. His
being Evident is the reason why He is Obscure, and His light is the same
that obscures His glow: whatever exceeds its limit turns into its own
antithesis. He is Obscure if one seeks to know Him by applying his own
physical senses.

The senses are related to what is apparent, such as one's complexion,
physique, etc.. In fact, a person is a human being not only on account
of his complexion, for even if such complexion or the rest of his parts
are altered, he still remains one and the same. Actually, a person's
parts at the time when he ages are not the same when he was young. They
would have suffered a great deal of change due to the passage of time
and were replaced by ones similar to them through food intake. His
identity, nevertheless, has not changed. Such an identity is obscure
from the senses, quite clear to the mind by way of deduction.

### 76. "Al-Batin"

Allah has said,

***"He is the First and the Last and the Ascendant (over all) and the
One Who knows all hidden things, and He is Cognizant of all things"
(Qur’an, 57:3).***

"Al-Batin" means: the One Who is obscured from the eyes of His creatures
due to the intensity of His appearance, the Hidden One due to His
Essence that defies the minds and intellects.  
 The Messenger of Allah has supplicated thus:

Lord! O God of the heavens and of the great Throne! Our Lord and the
Lord of everything! The One Who splits the seed and the date-stone! The
one Who has revealed the Torah, the Gospel, and the Holy Qur’an! I seek
refuge with You against the evil of every being whose forelock is in
Your Hands! Lord! You are the First; there is nothing before You! And
You are the Last; there is nothing after You. You are the Apparent;
there is nothing beyond You, and You are the Hidden One; there is
nothing that can reach You! I plead to You to pay our debts on our
behalf, and to save us from [the humiliation of] want.

He is al-Zahir through sufficiency, al-Batin by objectivity, al-Zahir
due to His bounties, al-Batin through His mercy. He is the Apparent One
Who subdues everything, the Hidden One Who knows the truth about
everything, the One Who is Apparent for everything by way of convincing
proofs, the One Who is Hidden from any physical appearance. Glory, then,
to the One Who has obscured Himself from all creation by His light, Who
is Hidden from them because of the intensity of His appearance.

The Almighty has said, ***"... and made His favours to you complete
outwardly and inwardly" (Qur’an, 31:20).***

Apparent are the ones we can observe, see, witness, notice, while hidden
are the things with which we are not familiar. He has also pointed out
to the fact that

***"And if you were to count Allah's favours, you will not be able to
count them" (Qur’an, 16:18 and 14:34).***

They are apparent to the senses, defying our intellect.

Man is a manifestation of the Attribute "al-Zahir" and, at the same
time, is also a manifestation of the other Attribute "al-Batin." Man,
physically, is a manifestation of the Apparent Light, and spiritually a
manifestation of the Hidden One, al-Batin. Whenever a servant of Allah
repeats the Attribute "al-Batin", his soul will feel submissive to its
Creator, and he will realize that he on his own is really incapable of
doing anything at all; so, it is then that the Truth will be Merciful
unto him and will grant him purity of both body and soul.

### 77. "Al-Wali"

Allah has said,

***"For his sake there are angels following one another, before him and
behind him, who guard him by Allah's commandment; surely Allah does not
change the condition of people until they change their own conditions,
and if Allah intends evil to anyone, there is none to avert it, and
besides Him they have no protector" (Qur’an, 13:11).***

Al-Wali is the Owner of everything; He deals with everything as He
pleases. The mawla is also a supporter or a helper.

Al-Wali manages the affairs of all creation. He initiates whatever
improves the condition of His creatures. In other words, He is the
Absolute and undisputed Ruler. Al-Wali is the One and only One Who
manages all affairs, Who does everything, and there is no continuity nor
existence without His permission; everything happens according to His
judgment and by His command. Al-Wali gives graciously by halting the
advent of mishaps and calamities.

Among the characteristics of al-Wali is that He manages, is capable and
is the doer of whatever He pleases. Unless all these attributes are
found in someone, he will not be called wali, and there is no wali for
our affairs except Allah. He, and only He, single-handedly manages them
first and foremost and safeguards their continuity and existence. It is
also possible to attach to the wali the meaning of: One Who gives
abundantly, Who wards off evil.

### 78. "Al-Muta\`ali"

Allah has said,

***"[He is] the One Who knows the unseen and the seen, the Great, the
Most High" (Qur’an, 13:9).***

The root word of "al-Muta\`ali" is \`uluww, height, sublimity,
loftiness. Its verb also means one who feels proud, or even arrogant,
with regard to someone else, and this usage is for humans. We have
already discussed the Attribute "al-\`Aliyy", which is also derived from
the same root word. Al-Muta\`ali is Exalted in His Greatness and
Honours, an Exaltation which nobody reaches besides Him.

His Honour is above what any of His creation can conceive or comprehend,
above what His creation describe, measure, compute, or define.
Al-Muta\`ali is Sublime and is above everything due to His might or
perfection. He, Glory to Him, is Most High due to His Greatness. It also
means He is high above deficiencies or shortcomings, or above being
conceived by anyone's imagination. He is very, very High above all His
creatures. He does not need any of what He creates or what He did not
create; He created them out of His Munificence.

His Compassionate Attribute is surely gloriously manifesting itself to
all what He has created. He does not need the worship of those who
worship Him; He makes His grace available to all those who strive to
attain it.

Al-Muta\`ali is above the falsehood of the conceited, by necessity is
Lofty and Sublime. His rank is the Most High; He has the authority all
of it. He is Proud and Great. His Glory is too High to be comprehended
or conceived by His creation.

One who keeps remembering the Attribute "al-Muta\`ali" ought to fashion
his conduct according to it by his determination to worship none but
Allah. One who adorns his manners as such will then remember the
persecuted and the downtrodden and does his best to help them, so their
condition will hopefully improve. According to one tradition, "A wretch
indeed is a servant of Allah who fancied himself and became conceited,
forgetting the Great One, al-Muta\`ali."

Our second Imam, al-Hasan ibn \`Ali, says that his grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah, had taught him a few supplications to recite during
his witr prayers such as this one:

Lord! I plead to You to guide me among those whom You have guided, to
grant me good health among those whom You have granted, to befriend me
among those whom You have befriended! I further implore You to bless
what You have granted me, to shun from me the evil of what You have
decreed in my regard, for You decree while none can force his decree on
You! Surely none can humiliate those whom You have befriended; Blessed,
Lord, are You and Exalted exceedingly.

### 79. "Al-Barr"

Allah has said,

***"Surely He is the Benign One, the Merciful" (Qur’an, 52:28).***

Al-Barr is one of Allah's Attributes derived from barr, the doer of
goodness; birr means the doing of benevolent deeds. "Al-Barr," then, is
an inclusive word containing all attributes of goodness, benevolence and
charity. One who is barr to his parents is very gracious and benevolent
to them. Those who are barr are those from whom deeds of goodness are
expected. Birr also means ties, links, or connections. A person who is
barr regarding his kin means he maintains good ties with them.

The Holy Qur’an states this verse in Surat al-Mumtaana:

***"Allah does not forbid you regarding those who have not made war
against you on account of (your) religion and have not driven you out of
your homes that you show them kindness and deal with them justly; surely
Allah loves the doers of justice" (Qur’an, 60:8).***

And in Surat Ali-\`Imran, we read,

***"By no means shall you attain righteousness until you spend
(benevolently) out of what you love" (Qur’an, 3:92***).

A pilgrimage that is blessed and free of any prohibited acts is called
"hajj mabroor" the reward for which is no less than Paradise according
to hadith. Birr also means piety, which in turn means the doing of
whatever brings one closer to Allah, a word that combines qualities very
highly commendable and praiseworthy.

The birr is the best of what is in the life of this world and that of
the hereafter. The best of this life is whatever Allah makes available
to any of His servants such as guidance, bounties, and enjoyable things.
The best of the life to come is the eternal bliss which is residence in
Paradise; may Allah enable us to enjoy both blessings by His mercy and
grace, Allahomma ameen. The Messenger of Allah has said, "Uphold telling
the truth, for it shall lead you to birr."

Birr means goodness, a word which combines all good attributes. It
implies whatever good deeds bring one closer to Allah, the Honoured One,
the Most Exalted. The well of Zamzam is called barra due to the
abundance of its benefits and of its water.

Al-Barr does not do anything ugly or abominable. He has been Gracious
unto those who seek His pleasure by showing them the way how to, and
unto the worshippers by His Favours and the granting of success to them.
Al-Barr is kind unto those who seek His benevolence and His giving, unto
the worshippers by beautifully rewarding them. He never ceases giving
benevolently because of one's disobedience to Him.

A servant of Allah may be described as barr. A servant of Allah can be
barr according to the extent of his deeds of righteousness, to his being
the first and the foremost to observe the right of his parents,
teachers, and mentors.

One of the ways wherein a servant of Allah can fashion his conduct after
following the light of this Attribute is to befriend the believers who
are sincere in their belief, who are acquainted with the secrets of
belief. When someone mentions this Attribute quite often, his conduct
will then personify it, and love for all servants of Allah will then be
planted in his heart, and all people will love him with sincerity.

Allah has combined all the aspects of birr in one of the verses of Surat
al-Baqarah when He said:

***It is not righteousness that you turn your faces towards the east and
the west, but righteousness is this: that one should believe in Allah
and the last day and the angels and the book and the*** ***prophets and
give away wealth out of love for His sake to those near in kin, to the
orphans, the needy, the wayfarer, the beggars, and for (the emancipation
of) the slaves, and keep up prayers and pay the zakat, and those who
fulfill their promise when they promise, and those who persevere when in
distress and affliction and during the time of conflict: these are they
who are true (to themselves), and these are they who guard (themselves
against evil) (2:177).***

One to whom Allah is barr will be protected from committing what
displeases Allah, and He, in turn, will please him with many beautiful
things; He will make his path in life full of success; He will make his
objectives always good. He will make him independent through Favours
from Him, and He will protect him against committing anything which He
deems unlawful.

### 80. "Al-Tawwab"

The Glorified and Exalted One has said,

... ***except those who repent and amend and make (the truth) manifest:
to these do I turn (mercifully), and I am the oft-Returning (to mercy),
the Most Merciful. (2:160)***

"Al-Tawwab" is an Attribute whose root word is tawbah, repentance, which
means: returning to Allah. It means that He accepts His servants'
repentance, that is, He resumes bestowing His grace upon them, enabling
them to repent, making it easy for them to do so. Al-Tawwab, then,
accepts repentance. He says in the Holy Qur’an,

***"... then He turned to them (mercifully) so that they might turn (to
Him); surely Allah is oft-Returning (to mercy), the Most Merciful"
(Qur’an, 9:118).***

It is known, hence, that if Allah does not accept the repentance of one
of His servants, the latter is not considered repentant, for the
initiation of repentance in all reality is from Allah Who concludes it
with His acceptance thereof.

Al-Tawwab facilitates repentance for His servants, time and over again,
by the Signs which He manifests for them, and the warning whereby He
warns them; so, when they become familiar with the penalty of their
sins, they become frightened, and they return to repentance, and Allah's
favour returns to them when He accepts their repentance.

Al-Tawwab accepts the repentance of His servants and forgives their
sins. He accepts the repentance of one who disobeys Him then returns to
obeying Him. And if he commits a sin then returns to Him, He welcomes
him back. He forgives the one who slips from the right path then
apologizes to Him and overlooks his sin. As long as the servant of Allah
seeks tawbah, the Lord remains Forgiving.

The light inspired by this Attribute is that one who accepts the
apologies of criminals as well as friends and relatives time and over
again derives his conduct from this Attribute. So that we may model our
conduct after it, we ought to repent and seek His acceptance of our
repentance; we should go to Him in every circumstance. Also, repetition
of repentance prepares a servant of Allah for Allah's love for him,
which is the greatest honour and status, for repentance is admission of
one's deficiency and shortcoming, and the standing at the threshold of
the Most Knowing most humbly.

For this reason, the Messenger of Allah used to repent quite often in
order to show us the path to happiness. It is also one of the good
manners of a believer who repeats this Attribute quite often to forgive
those who wrong him, to be benevolent to those who mistreat him, and to
accept the apologies of others.

The Messenger of Allah has desired very much that those who believe in
him should always seek Allah's forgiveness. He once said, "By Allah! I
seek forgiveness of Allah, and I repent to Him, every day more than
seventy times." Allah has forgiven all the faults of our master
Muhammad, yet he seeks His forgiveness and repents to Him more than
seventy times a day, nay, even a hundred times a day! So, what can we
say about how often should Muslims repent to Him and seek His
forgiveness?

Anas ibn Malik has said that he had heard the Messenger of Allah quoting
his Lord saying, "O son of Adam! So long as you invoke Me and place all
your hope on Me, I shall forgive you, and I do not mind. O son of Adam!
Even if your sins were to pile up and reach the skies, then you seek My
forgiveness, I shall forgive you. O son of Adam! If you come to Me after
having committed as many sins as would fill the earth, believing in Me,
associating no partners with Me, I shall grant you their equal in
forgiveness."

### 81. "Al-Muntaqim"

Allah, subhanahu wa ta\`ala, has said,

***"Therefore do not think Allah (to be One) failing in His promise to
His prophets; surely Allah is Mighty, Lord of retribution" (Qur’an,
14:47).***

Al-Muntaqim, the Avenger, splits the spines of those who deviate from
His path, Who increases the penalty of those who oppress in the land,
after alerting them and repeatedly warning them, and after enabling them
to amend, giving them a respite. It implies a much more severe penalty
than merely an immediate one.

The word "al-Muntaqim" is derived from the noun intiqam, avenging or
seeking revenge against someone. A penalty is not called as such unless
the following conditions are met:

1. Clemency reaches the limit of extreme outrage. Allah has said, ***"On
the Day when We seize them with the most violent of seizing; surely We
will (then) inflict retribution" (Qur’an, 44:16).***

2. A punishment is affected after a period of respite. The Glorified and
Exalted One has said, ***"... and whoever returns to (committing) it,
Allah will inflict retribution on him, and Allah is the Mighty, the Lord
of Retribution" (Qur’an, 5:95).***

3. Such a punishment must require a sort of feeling of spiteful
gratification upon seeing one being hurt, something which never happens
in the case of the Creator, but it does happen in the case of vicious
and spiteful humans. The intiqam, revenge, of a servant of Allah is held
commendable only if it is inflicted on His foes (those who deny or
disbelieve in Him). The worst of all foes of mankind are their own
insinuating selves, the nafs, which is within each and every one of us.
There is no doubt that he has to seek revenge against such nafs.

The Attribute "al-Muntaqim" manifests itself in the body: in the means
for its natural defense system when a germ violates the sanctity of the
body. These means will then kill the germ as a penalty for such a
violation, and they will then purge the body from it. Al-Muntaqim, then,
facilitates getting rid of what is bad, harmful, or dangerous.

The discussion of "revenge" occurs in the Holy Qur’an: In Surat
al-Ma'ida we read:

***"O you who believe! Do not kill (any) game while you are on
pilgrimage, and whoever among you kills it unintentionally, the
compensation (for it) is the like of what he killed from the cattle, as
two just persons among you shall judge, as an offering to be brought to
the Ka\`ba, or the expiation (of it) is the feeding of the poor or the
equivalent in fasting, so that he may taste the unwholesome result of
his deed; Allah has pardoned what is gone by, and whoever returns (to
it), Allah will inflict retribution on him, and Allah is the Mighty, the
Lord of Retribution" (Qur’an, 5:95).***

The "We" in the phrase "We inflicted retribution" is meant, of course,
as a reference to Allah Almighty. It also occurs in several other places
throughout the text of the Holy Qur’an such as the following:

***We, therefore, inflicted retribution on them and drowned them in the
sea... (7:136)***

***So We inflicted retribution on them, and they are both, indeed, on an
open road (still) pursued. (15:79)***

***... then We punished those who were guilty, and helping the believers
is ever incumbent upon Us. (30:47)***

***So We inflicted retribution on them, then see how the end of those
who rejected was. (43:25)***

***Then when they displeased Us, We inflicted retribution on them.
(43:55)***

***He has revealed to you the Book with the truth, verifying what is
before it, and He revealed the Torah and the Gospel aforetime, a
guidance for people, and He sent the Furqan (Qur’an). Surely those who
disbelieve in the signs of Allah shall have a severe chastisement, and
Allah is the Mighty, the Lord of retribution. (3:3-4) ...***

***and Allah is the Mighty, the Lord of retribution. (5:95)***

***Do not, therefore, think Allah (to be) failing in His promise to His
Messengers; surely Allah is the Mighty, the Lord of Retribution.
(14:47)***

***And whoever Allah guides, there is none that can lead him astray; is
not Allah the Mighty, the Lord of Retribution? (39:37)***

***And who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his
Lord then he turns away from them? Surely We will punish the guilty.
(32:22)***

***But if We should take you away, still We shall inflict retribution on
them. (43:41)***

***On the Day when We seize them with the most violent of seizing,
surely We will (then) inflict retribution. (44:16)***

Al-Muntaqim intensifies His penalty against the oppressors, causing the
criminals to be subjected to His retribution. He sends His messengers
supported by His signs and miracles to warn people; so, if warning does
not benefit someone, He will surely then inflict His penalty and revenge
against him.

Once a person comes to realize that there is nothing small nor big
except that there is a penalty for it equal in size and kind, he will
certainly fear his Lord and remain alert regarding his wishes and
desires for fear of falling into transgression.

### 82. "Al-\`Afuww"

Allah has said,

***It may be that Allah will pardon them, and Allah is Pardoning,
Forgiving. (4:99)***

"Al-\`Afuww" is derived from the root word "\`afuw" and permits several
meanings: When used as a verb, it means to go somewhere to receive
something, to give without being asked, to increase, to wipe out
something. As a noun, it means the wiping out of sins in their entirety.
One may supplicate and say, "Lord! I implore You to grant me \`afuw and
\`fiya," that is, not to punish me for my sins, and to make me safe and
secure with regard to Your torment. As an adjective, it means what is
halal, lawful.

Al-\`Afuww has removed, by His Mercy, from the souls the darkness of
slipping away from the right path, and of the loneliness of
forgetfulness from the hearts through His Greatness. It is also said
that He removes the sins from the records and replaces loneliness with
beautiful things from Him.

Al-\`Afuww wipes out the traces of sins, removing them by the winds of
His forgiveness. He wipes out the sins from the records kept by His
guardian angels. He even wipes them out from their (angels') memory and
the memory of those who committed them. He abandons punishing the
sinners, Who does not remind you of your shortcomings; He is Gracious
when He forgives. He protects the heart of the doer of evil against
loneliness, sparing him the feeling of shame, and He does not remind him
of the evil of what he had done.

We notice that in the text of the Holy Qur’an, the Attribute [indeed a
Most Beautiful one] al-\`Afuww occurs side by side with another
Attribute which is al-Ghafoor as many as four times, and once side by
side with the Attribute "al-Qadeer" as the following verses demonstrate:

***... surely Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving. (4:43)***

***It may be that Allah will pardon them, and Allah is Pardoning,
Forgiving. (4:99)***

***... most surely Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving. (22:60, 58:2)***

***If you do good openly or secretly or pardon an evil act, then surely
Allah is Pardoning, Powerful. (4:149)***

The Messenger of Allah has always enjoined us to wipe out our evil deeds
with good ones, saying, "Fear Allah wherever you may be, and follow your
evil deed with a good one in order to wipe out the first, and treat
people in the best conduct." He addressed one of his uncles once saying,
"O \`Abbas, uncle of the Messenger of Allah! Plead to Allah for \`afuw
and \`fiya in the life of this world and in the life to come."

The Commander of the Faithful Imam \`Ali ibn Abu Talib called upon one
of his slaves once but he did not respond. He repeated his call, and the
slave again neglected to respond. Then he repeated it a third time, and
no response was there either, so he stood up and looked for him and
found him lying down. He asked him, "Did you hear me calling you?" He
answered, "Yes, I did." The Imam asked him, "Then what stopped you from
responding?"

He answered, "My confidence in your clemency and my reliance on your
forgiveness," whereupon the Imam said, "Then I set you free seeking the
Pleasure of Allah." The Imam did so on account of the firm conviction on
the part of that slave.

One who wishes to receive a glimpse of the light inspired by this
Attribute should first forgive those who have committed a wrong deed
against him or dealt with him unjustly. One who remembers this Attribute
ought to wipe out from his heart any ill feeling towards anyone who has
wronged him, and to treat beautifully those who mistreated him.

### 83. "Al-Ra'oof"

Allah, the Glorified and the Exalted One, has said,

... ***so that He may bring you out of utter darkness and into the
light. (57:9)***

Linguistically, this Attribute is derived from ra'fa, intense mercy or
compassion which is the ultimate limit of rahma. When applied to the
Almighty, it means His warding off all types of evil.

The Attribute "al-Ra'oof" refers to the One Who does not cease being
kind and compassionate to the sinners by accepting their repentance, and
to His friends by protecting them from committing sins. It conveys the
same meaning conveyed by the Attribute "al-Rahim" with an
intensification of the meaning embedded in the latter.

Among the manifestations of His mercy towards His servants is that He
protects them against committing what incurs His penalty. Such a
protection from slipping from the right path carries a stronger sense of
mercy than His forgiveness for sins already committed. He may be
Merciful unto one of His servants by outwardly exposing him to hardship,
but inwardly there may be a great deal of bliss and blessing hidden for
him in such hardship, while he does not know it. How often has a servant
of Allah been pitied by people for the harm from which he suffers, the
harm of poverty, want, and misery, while in reality he is enjoying a
blessing for which the angels envy him?

The Most Exalted One has advanced the Attribute "al-Ra'oof" over that of
"al-Rahim," preferring "ra'fah" over "rahmah" and giving precedence to
the first over the latter in the following glorious verses:

***Most surely Allah is Affectionate, Merciful, to people. (2:143)***

***... and We put in the hearts of those who followed him kindness and
mercy. (57:27)***

***... to the believers he is compassionate, merciful. (9:128)***

This Attribute is derived from "mercy" and "compassion." This requires
us to distinguish between both of these words. Also, whenever the
Almighty uses both of these words, He mentions the Attribute "al-Ra'oof"
before "al-Rahim;" therefore, we have to explain the difference between
both of them and the reason for such a preference.

The Messenger of Allah was travelling once as he happened to pass by a
woman baking bread. Her young son was with her. She was told that the
Messenger of Allah was passing by, so she came to him and said, "O
Messenger of Allah! It has come to my knowledge that you have said,
\`Allah is more Compassionate towards His servants than a mother towards
her son.' Is this the correct statement which you have spoken?"

He answered her in the affirmative, whereupon she said, "A mother does
not hurl her son in an oven like this one." Having heard her say so, the
Messenger of Allah wept, then he said, "Allah does not torment anyone by
the fire [of hell] except one who is too arrogant to bear witness that
there is no god but He."

If a servant of Allah wishes to model his conduct after the inspiration
of this Attribute, he has first to remember and mention it quite often,
hence the light of al-Ra'oof will manifest itself to his heart, so much
so that he will become compassionate towards all people, the commoners
as well as the elite, always remembering the saying of the Messenger of
Allah, "Be merciful unto the people of the earth so that the people of
the heavens may be merciful to you."

### 84. "Malikul-Mulk"

Allah has said: Say:

***O Allah, Master of the Kingdom! You give the kingdom to whomsoever
You please and take the kingdom away from whomsoever You please, and You
exalt whomsoever You please and abase whomsoever You please; in Your
hand is goodness; surely You have power over all things. (3:26)***

Malikul-Mulk affects His will in His kingdom however He pleases, letting
some live and others perish. The mulk in this context means the kingdom,
and the Malik is the Omnipotent, the Most Powerful. All things in
existence are included in His kingdom, so His is one kingdom because all
things in it are somehow connected to one another. Although they may be
regarded as many, they constitute one entity, one kingdom.

Malikul-Mulk fares with His kingdom as He pleases, and none can revoke
His judgment, nor can anyone appeal or repeal it. All things in
existence, in all their degrees and levels, constitute one kingdom owned
by One: Allah, the Most Exalted.

Malikul-Mulk is the true King Who deals with His kingdom as He pleases,
bringing things into existence in it or ending the existence of some of
its beings, chastising some and accepting the repentance of others,
without anyone sharing the authority with Him or prohibiting Him from
doing whatever He pleases. "Malikul-Mulk" occurs in the original Arabic
text of this verse:

***"Say: O Allah, Master of the Kingdom!" (Qur’an, 3:26).***

Another derivative is "al-malakoot" which exists in

***"Glory to the One in Whose hand is the kingdom of all things, and to
Him you shall be brought back" (Qur’an, 36:83).***

***... and a hard Day shall it be for the unbelievers. (25:26)***

***To Whom does the kingdom belong this Day? To Allah, the One, the One
Who subdues (all). (40:16)***

***And Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and to Allah
is the eventual return. (24:42)***

The Messenger of Allah is quoted saying that Allah's Greatest Name, the
one because of which He will respond if thereby invoked, exists in the
verse saying, ***"Say: O Allah, Master of the Kingdom!" (Qur’an,
3:26).***

The Commander of the Faithful Imam \`Ali ibn Abu lib was asked once by
Ababah ibn Rab\`i al-Asdi about "ability." The Commander of the Faithful
asked Abadah, "Do you have it without Allah or with Him?" Ababah could
not answer, so he told him to say something. "What shall I say, O
Commander of the Faithful?!" asked Ababah.

He answered, "You should say that you have it by permission of Allah Who
has full control over it without your help. If He opts to grant it to
you, then it is a boon which He gives you. And if He takes it away, it
is a trial from Him. He is the real Owner of what you own, and the One
Who owns what He enables you to possess.

Have you not heard about seeking His help and might by saying, \`Surely
there is no help nor might except through Allah'?" The man asked him,
"And what does it mean, O Commander of the faithful?" He said, "It
means: We do not stay away from committing acts of disobedience to Allah
except if He protects us against disobeying Him, and we have no strength
to obey Him except if He grants us His help," whereupon the man leaped
and kissed his hands and feet.

The kingdom of each and every servant of Allah is his own body. If it
affects his will regarding his heart and senses, he will then be the
owner of his kingdom according to the extent of his control over it.

### 85. "Thul-Jalali wal Ikram"

Allah has said:

***Blessed is the name of your Lord, the Lord of Glory and Honour!
(55:78)***

Thul-Jalali wal Ikram is a glorious Attribute that combines glory and
beauty, for there is an awesome Glory and Beauty of the Almighty; no
servant of Allah can achieve knowledge except if he becomes familiar
with Thul-Jalali wal Ikram. This Attribute surely combines in it
anticipation, awe, hope and fear.

The Almighty monopolizes the qualities of jall, greatness, and ikrm,
honour. All greatness is His, and honour is from Him; Glory to Him;
there is no glory except that He is its fountainhead, while honour is
always His. Glory has originated from Him and overwhelmed His creation,
and the norms of His honouring His creation are countless, immeasurable;
therefore, He, and only He, is worthy of being Glorified by His
creatures. They should express their respect for His Greatness, show
appreciation for His favours and grace, and recognize His signs and
bounties.

"Thul-Jalali wal Ikram" means: the One Who has all Greatness. There is
no distinction, nor glory, nor prominence, except if Allah permits it;
in all reality, it is His, from Him, and by Him. Glory and Exaltation
are His, the One Who is the source and fountainhead of all glory,
perfection, honour, dignity and greatness. There is neither greatness
nor favour nor bliss nor goodness except that it springs from His ocean.

Ma\`ath ibn Jabal is quoted saying that the Messenger of Allah once
passed by a man who was repeating "O One with the Glory and Honours!" so
he said to him, "Your plea will be honoured; so, proceed and state it."

The Messenger of Allah has said, "Uphold Thul-Jalali wal Ikram," that
is: "follow His path and remain steadfast in doing so and repeat this
Attribute of His in your supplications." If a servant of Allah keeps
repeating this Attribute, and its light will eventually shine in his
innermost, he will become highly regarded among the nations. Whoever
realizes the Greatness of Allah will become very humble before Him.

One of the signs of the good conduct of a servant of Allah is that he
seeks nearness to Him by attaching himself to Him, by becoming very
humble, by expressing his humility before Allah. He must realize that
all Greatness and perfection belong to Him, and that He honours His
servants by granting them His favours.

### 86. "Al-Muqsit"

Allah, Glory and Exaltation are due to Him, has said,

***Allah testifies that there is no god but He, and (so do) the angels
and those who have knowledge, maintaining His creation with justice.
(3:18)***

Meanings of variations of this Attribute's root word is qist, equity or
fairness, are as follows: qasata means implemented justice; qasata means
became inequitable or unfair; qasit is an unfair or inequitable person,
an oppressor; muqsit is one who is fair in his judgment or decision, and
qist means share, lot, or portion of something. Qasitoon is plural: they
are those who deviate from justice and about whom the Almighty says,

***"As to the deviators, they are the fuel of hell" (Qur’an, 72:15).***

Qist means the implementing of justice by taking what one unlawfully has
acquired and giving it back to its lawful owner. Iqsat means that one is
given his own lawful share which someone else has unlawfully taken
[forcefully or otherwise]; it is also called insaf, carrying out equity.
Qasata means someone became inequitable, and aqsata means that he became
fair and just. Al-Muqsit is the Almighty Who is fair and equitable in
all His decisions and decrees, Who deals with everyone according to a
system.

Al-Muqsit comes to the rescue of the oppressed and brings about justice.
The perfection in His doing so is the fact that He adds to pleasing the
oppressed His own pleasing of the oppressors as well, which is the
ultimate end of equity, something which nobody can do other than Allah,
Glory to Him, Who has said,

***"... and if you judge, then judge between them with equity; surely
Allah loves those who judge equitably" (Qur’an, 5:42).***

According to a Qudsi tradition, while the Prophet was sitting once, he
smiled to the extent that his molar teeth showed. One of his companions
said to him, "May both my parents be sacrificed for your sake, O
Messenger of Allah! What has made you smile like that?!" He answered,
"Two men of my nation were brought before the judgment of the Lord of
Dignity. One of them said, \`Lord! I plead to You to effect justice on
my behalf from this man.' Allah, the Honoured and the Great, said, \`Be
fair to your brother and give him what is his.' The man said, \`Lord!
None of my good deeds is left to effect it thereby.'

The Glorified and the Honoured One said to the first man, \`What are you
going to do to your brother since he has none of his good deeds left
with him?' The man answered, \`Then, Lord, let him bear some of my own
burdens.'" It was then that the eyes of the Messenger of Allah
over-flooded with tears. "That, indeed," he continued, "is a momentous
Day when men will need others to bear their own burdens." After a pause,
the Messenger of Allah continued to say,

"Allah, the Honoured and the Glorified One, said to the wronged one,
\`Raise your eyes and cast a look at the Gardens of Bliss.' The man
said, \`Lord! I see whole cities made of silver and huge houses of gold
bedecked with pearls; for which siddeeq or martyr are they?' The
Almighty said, \`They are for the one who pays the price.' The man said,
\`Lord! Who can have their price?' He said, \`You can.' \`For what,
Lord?' he asked the Almighty. \`For forgiving your brother,' the Lord
said. The man said, \`Lord! I do forgive him.' The Almighty then said,
\`Take your brother by the hand and lead him the way to Paradise.'" Then
the Messenger of Allah said, "Fear Allah; fear Allah, and mend your
relations, for Allah will implement justice on the Day of Judgment among
the believers."

### 87. "Al-Jami\`"

Allah has said,

***Lord! Surely You are the One Who gathers men on a Day about which
there is no doubt; surely Allah will not fail His promise. (3:9)***

Al-Jami\` is an Attribute of Allah derived from jami\`, its root word,
which means: to gather, assemble, horde, or combine. The Day of
Gathering is the Day of Judgment. It is called so because Allah will
gather on it the early generations of His creation and the last ones,
the jinns and mankind, all the residents of the heavens and the earth,
each and every servant of Allah and his deeds, every oppressor and those
whom he oppressed, and every prophet and those to whom he was sent. He
will also combine between the rewards of those who obeyed Him and the
penalty of those who disobeyed Him.

The subject of jami\`, gathering or combining, is referred to in several
verses of the Holy Qur’an such as the following:

***Allah: there is no god but He; He will most certainly gather you
together on the Resurrection Day; there is no doubt about it. (4:87)***

***He has ordained mercy on Himself; most surely He will gather you on
the Day of Resurrection, there is no doubt about it. (6:12)***

***And on that Day, We will leave some of them in conflict with others,
and the trumpet will be blown, so We will gather them all together.
(18:99)***

***Say: Our Lord will gather us together, then will He judge between us
with the truth, and He is the greatest Judge, the all-Knowing.
(34:26)***

***Say: Allah gives you life, then He causes you to die, then He will
gather you to the Day of Resurrection wherein there is no doubt...
(45:26)***

***And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and
what He has spread forth in both of them of living beings, and when He
pleases, He is all-Powerful to gather them together. (42:29)***

***On the Day when He gathers you for the Day of Gathering, that is the
Day of loss and gain: whoever believes in Allah and does good, He will
remove from him his evil and cause him to enter gardens beneath which
rivers flow to abide therein forever; that is the great achievement.
(64:9)***

One whose knowledge is perfected and whose conduct is good deserves to
be called jami\`. For this reason, a perfect person is one who does not
put out the light of his piety by the light of his knowledge; so is one
who combines perfect vision with foresight.

### 88. "Al-Ghaniyy"

Allah has said,

***O men! You are the ones who stand in need of Allah while Allah is
self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy. (35:15)***

Both "al-Ghaniyy" and "al-Mughni" are among the Attributes of Allah.

Linguistically, ghina, the root word of "al-Ghaniyy", means:
independence by virtue of having self-sufficiency. It is the opposite of
faqr, poverty, want, indigence, need, and the like. Independence or
self-sufficiency is of various types: one is the absence of need, and
none is independent of needing anyone or anything other than Allah. This
meaning is implied in the verse saying,

***"His is whatever in the heavens and in the earth, and most surely
Allah is the self-Sufficient, the Praised" (Qur’an, 22:64).***

The other is the small or limited number of one's needs, which is
pointed out in this verse:

***"And found you in want and made you free from want" (Qur’an,
93:8).***

A third is what is mentioned by a few ignorant folks among the
unbelievers who claimed that Allah was poor while they were rich,
whereupon the One Who has all the Glory and Honours responded by telling
them that

***"Allah has certainly heard the statement of those who said: Allah is
poor and we are rich" (Qur’an, 3:181).***

They had said so upon hearing the verse saying, "Who will loan Allah a
beautiful loan...?" The Almighty answered them by saying, ***"O men! You
are the ones who stand in need of Allah while Allah is self-Sufficient,
Praiseworthy" (Qur’an, 35:15).*** The Almighty emphasized the same fact
in another verse:

***"... and whoever disbelieves, then surely Allah is self-Sufficient,
above any need of the worlds" (Qur’an, 3:97).***

Al-Ghaniyy has no need, within Himself or in His Attributes or deeds,
for anything or anyone at all. He needs none while everything and
everyone need Him. Al-Ghaniyy is the Perfect One due to what He has and
what is with Him. Our Lord, the Most Praiseworthy, is referred to as
such because need is a deficiency, and the needy person is incapable of
attaining what he desires or aspires for.

The one who is needed has an advantage, because of what he has, over the
one who is in need of him. Deficiency is out of the question in the case
of the Absolute al-Ghaniyy, and incapacitation cannot be attributed to
Him, Praise to Him, nor can anyone do Him a favour, for everything is
His own creation and invention; He formed and created it, and it is
totally dependent on Him in everything. Everything is exactly what the
Creator wants it to be.

Everyone else besides Allah is needy while He, al-Ghaniyy, does not need
anyone. The Holy Prophet is quoted saying, "Wealth is not abundance of
availability; rather, it is the richness of one's own soul." The highest
degree of wealth is satisfaction, contentment, with what is available
with you; therefore, there is, indeed, no wealth like the feeling of
contentment. A man may be very poor, yet he tries his best to look good
in the eyes of the people. Notice what the Almighty says about such
persons:

***"... the ignorant man perceives them rich on account of their
abstaining (from begging)" (Qur’an, 2:273).***

The Almighty exists by virtue of the necessity for His existence, on His
own merits; therefore, He needs none besides Himself. Everything and
everyone besides Him may exist, yet its existence comes about when He
creates it; so, He, and He alone, Praise to Him, is al-Ghaniyy.

### 89. "Al-Mughni"

Allah, al-Mughni, has said,

... ***and if you fear poverty, Allah will enrich you out of His grace
if He pleases; surely Allah is Knowing, Wise. (9:28)***

Al-Mughni has granted His favours to His servants abundantly and
facilitated for them the achievement of their goals and objectives, and
the meeting of their everyday needs. There is no independence nor
self-sufficiency except that He caused it to exist. He enriches His
friends from the treasures of His lights, facilitates for those who live
in the universe to access the means of their livelihood and sustenance
by His decree. He enriches every truth which He provides in a measure,
for He, and only He, knows its secrets, what is hidden of it and what is
apparent.

Allah is the Enricher, yet a servant of His whom He has enriched cannot
be thought at all as being absolutely independent. The least of his
affairs proves that he needs al-Mughni; therefore, he is never
independent; rather, he may be independent of anyone except Allah Who
provides him with what he needs while not jeopardizing the causes for
his needs. The true independent person is one who does not need anyone
at all.

One who needs and finds what he needs is independent only by way of
analogy, which is the most that can be said about anyone besides Allah.
As regarding the lack of need, this is out of the question for anyone
besides Him. But if one needs none save Allah, then he will be called
ghaniyy. Had he had no need at all, the verse saying ***"... and Allah
is self-Sufficient while you have need (of Him)" (Qur’an, 47:38)***
would not have been accurate. Had there been any possibility at all that
Allah could in any way be regarded as in need of anything, there would
have been no need for the Almighty to be al-Mughni, the Enricher.

Al-Mughni makes whomsoever from among His servants self-sufficient. He
grants independence and self-sufficiency to His servants, and He can be
regarded as granting them self-sufficiency. And Allah also makes some of
His servants independent of others, for all needs are in reality met by
Him: His creatures cannot do anything for themselves without His help;
so, how can they be thought to help others when they themselves need to
be helped? He grants independence and self-sufficiency to whomsoever He
pleases from among His servants according to His wisdom and will; He
says the following : ***"... Our Lord gave everything its creation then
guided" (Qur’an, 20:50).***

About Himself, al-Mughni has said,

***... if they are needy, Allah will make them free from want by His
grace. (24:32)***

***And that He enriches and Who withholds. (53:48)***

***And He found you in want and made you free from want. (93:8)***

One of the ways to derive a code of ethics from al-Ghaniyy and al-Mughni
is that one realizes that he needs Him constantly, and that he trusts in
what Allah has more than he does in what he himself has, and to be good
in conducting generosity and benevolence towards other servants of
Allah. One of the norms of conduct of a believer with regard to the
Attribute "al-Mughni" is that once he realizes Him to be the One and
only One Who is Independent of any need, the One Who satisfies all the
needs of His servants, he will rely on Him in everything and refer to
Him in every matter.

### 90. "Al-Mani\`"

Allah, Glory and Praise are due to Him, and only to Him, has said,

***Or do they have gods who can defend them against Us? (21:43)***

Al-Mani\` is one of Allah's Attributes and is derived from man\`, the
opposite of giving or granting. It also means: to protect, to stop one
thing from harming another or one group of people from annihilating
another. It is used to describe the defense of a house, a fortified
fortress, etc, against an enemy. It means: to protect and support.

It means He has the power to stop the causes of annihilation or
deficiency in both creeds and bodies. He wards off evil to protect and
safeguard; He stops giving to whomsoever He pleases in order to try or
to protect them. He gives life to whomsoever He loves or does not love,
but He does not grant the bliss of the hereafter except to those whom He
loves.

Al-Mani\` protects and supports those who obey Him, and He stops some of
His servants from doing what He does not want them to do while giving
them what they want. He wards off the causes of perdition and diminution
in matters related to creeds and nations due to what He creates of
causes prepared for their preservation.

Obstruction from the causes of annihilation, and the preservation of
what is guarded against extinction, are the objectives of man\` and are
the ultimate goal. If man\`, prohibition, is needed for the purpose of
preservation, and the latter is not needed for the sake of the first,
then every protector defends and protects. Not everyone who prohibits
protects except that he prohibits the causes of annihilation and
diminution.

Al-Mani\` prohibits affliction from reaching His friends, or the
complete abstention from giving to whomsoever He pleases. If He
prohibits affliction from reaching His friends, this is due to His
beautiful Grace, and if He stops giving to them, it will still be a
great favour from Him.

Allah grants the pleasures of the life in this world to those whom He
loves and to those whom He does not, but He does not protect the heart
of a servant of His except when the latter is one of His close friends.

Al-Mani\` wards off the causes of annihilation and diminution of creed
and body by creating the means which protect it against annihilation and
diminution. So, He creates some causes and prohibits others; He gives
everything what serves its interests and prohibits what causes its
damage. He makes some wealthy by giving them, and He stops giving to
whomsoever He pleases to try them by affliction. He enriches and
impoverishes; He makes some happy and some miserable; He grants some and
withholds from others; He grants some and deprives others; so, He is
both al-Mu\`ti, the Giver, and al-Mani\`, the One Who withholds.

And He withholds giving from whomsoever He pleases, and His withholding
may contain giving in disguise. He may withhold giving one of His
servants abundant wealth and instead give him accomplishments and
beauty. He may deprive one of His servants from enjoying good health and
make him pleased with His decree. Al-Mani\` is also al-Mut'i: for within
the withholding there may be giving, and within the giving there may be
withholding.

The Messenger of Allah used to say the following after finishing each of
the prescribed daily prayers: "There is no god but Allah, the One and
only God; His is the Kingdom; His is the Praise, and He can do
everything. Lord! None can prohibit what You grant, nor can anyone grant
what You withhold, and none is capable of stopping the implementation of
Your will."

### 91. "Al-Darr"

Allah has said,

***Say: I do not control for myself any harm, nor can I benefit myself
in aught except what Allah pleases. (10:49)***

Both al-Darr and al-Nafi\` are among the Attributes of Allah.

Most references wherein these Attributes are discussed have combined
both Attributes together. Combining both of these Attributes is better:
it conveys a stronger meaning of the Almighty's Power to do whatever He
wills, however He wills; none benefits nor harms others besides Him.

Language says that darr, harm, is the opposite of nafi\`, benefit or
advantage. Allah is al-Darr, that is, the One Who can harm anyone He
wants in any way He wishes; He impoverishes some of His servants or
causes them to fall prey to sickness according to His wisdom; so, He
determines everything, and He alone facilitates the means of harm as a
trial from Him whereby He purges the sins or subjects one of His
servants to a test in order to raise his status.

He decrees harm to some of His servants and effects His decree through
certain means. He is the Wise One in whatever He does, the most Merciful
in His judgment. If He decrees some harm, it is only for the sake of the
general good, and if He decrees an ailment, it is but the useful
medicine in the life of this world and the life hereafter. Allah has
said,

***"If Allah touches you with affliction, there is none to remove it but
He..." (Qur’an, 6:17).***

Prophet Moses once complained to his Lord about a tooth-ache, so the
Almighty instructed him to apply a certain type of herb on the area of
his pain, which he did, and the aching stopped. A few days later, the
same pain came back to him, so he went and took the same herb and
applied it, but this time his pain intensified many times more. He
complained to Allah saying, "Lord! Did You not order me to apply this
type of herb and tell me where I could find it?" The Almighty inspired
him, "O Moses! I am the One Who heals and Who grants good health; I am
the One Who causes harm and Who benefits. You came to Me the first time,
so I removed the cause of your ailment, whereas this time you went to
the plant (on their own) instead and did not come to Me."

The Messenger of Allah has said, "Anyone who claims that Allah commends
the doing of wrong deeds and of sins tells lies about Allah. And anyone
who claims that goodness and evil are possible without the will of Allah
strips Allah of His Authority. And anyone who claims that sins are
committed without Allah's Might tells a lie about Allah, and whoever
tells lies about Allah, He will lodge him into the fire." In this
tradition, by goodness and evil he means health and sickness
respectively due to this verse:

***"... and We try you by evil and by good by way of probation" (Qur’an,
21:35).***

Imam al-Baqir is quoted saying, "Allah, the Exalted and the Great, is
more compassionate towards His creation than forcing them to commit sins
then penalizing them for doing so, and Allah is more Mighty than willing
to do something and it does not take place." He was asked once whether
there was a distance between compulsion and destiny, and his answer was,
"Yes! One more spacious than that between the heavens and the earth!"

He has also said, "There should neither be compulsion nor an
unrestricted freedom; the best course is a middle one." When he was
asked about the middle course, he said, "Let me give you an example: You
may see a man committing a sin, and you may try to stop him from doing
so but he refuses to desist, whereupon you leave him to commit that sin.
When he does not listen to you but insists on sinning, it does not mean
that you yourself have encouraged him to commit that sin."

### 92. "Al-Nafi\`"

As regarding the Attribute "al-Nafi'", Allah subhanahu wa ta\`la has
said,

***"Whatever benefit comes to you (O man!), it is from Allah, and
whatever misfortune befalls you, it is from your own self" (Qur’an,
4:79).***

Al-Nafi\` is the source of any benefit and goodness for the life in this
world and for the creed. He alone grants good health, wealth, happiness,
authority, guidance and piety. He enables all His creatures to receive
the benefits He creates for them.

He has facilitated the path leading to Him for those who aspire to tread
it, Who benefitted the souls through His prophets, Who nourished the
bodies through food, Who warded off disease through medicine, Who kept
affliction away through favours and goodness, and Who has benefitted
everyone, be he an angel, a human, or a jinn.

Ibn \`Abbas says, "I was sitting once behind the Messenger of Allah so
he said to me, \`Young man! I would like to teach you a few words [of
wisdom]: If you safeguard your rights towards Allah, He will protect
you. If you remain mindful of Allah's rights on you, you will find Him
looking after you. If you have a plea, then plead to Him; if you seek
help, seek it from Him, and bear in mind that if all people gather to
benefit you in anything, they will not be able to do so except in what
He has already allotted for you, and if they all gather together to harm
you in any way, they will never be able to do so except if He has
already decreed it on you; the ink has dried, and the tablets have been
removed.'"

Al-Darr al-Nafi\` is the One from Whom everything good or bad ensues;
all is attributed to Allah and is affected either through the angels,
mankind, inanimate objects, or by other means; so, do not think that
poison, for example, kills by itself, or that food by itself satisfies
hunger. Angels, mankind, demons, or anything else in existence, such as
planets, stars, or other things, are all under His control; they do not
do anything except what He has made them do. Their totality, in addition
to the eternal Power, is like a pen in the hand of the writer as
conceived by an illiterate.

If a ruler signs the order to penalize or reward someone, the pen
whereby he signs such an order cannot tell the difference between one
order and another, or between what harm it is causing or what benefit,
or even the difference between one of its users and the other. This is
the case with all means and causes.

Both al-Darr and al-Nafi\` are referred to in various places in the Holy
Qur’an; among them are:

***Say: I do not control any benefit nor any harm for my own soul except
as Allah pleases; had I known the unknown, I would have had much of good
and no harm would have touched me; I am only a warner and giver of glad
tidings to people who believe. (7:188)***

***Say: I do not control for myself any harm, nor any benefit, except
whatever Allah pleases; every nation has a term; when their term comes,
they shall not remain behind for an hour, nor can they go before (their
time). (10:49)***

***Yet when He removes the evil from you, lo! A party from among you
associates others with their Lord. (16:54)***

***And when We make people taste of mercy, they rejoice in it, and if
evil befalls them for what their hands have done, lo! They despair.
(30:36)***

The portion a servant of Allah may obtain of the inspiration of these
Attributes is that he becomes "harmful" towards the enemies of Allah
while benefitting the friends of Allah. In Surat al-Ma'ida, the Almighty
describes the faithful as

***"... lowly before the believers, mighty against the unbelievers"
(Qur’an, 5:54).***

Such a believer does not plead to anyone, nor does he fear anyone except
his Lord; he relies wholly on Allah.

One who fully realizes that his Lord, the Most Exalted One, is the One
and only Who creates and makes things available, Who alone brings new
things into existence, he will then submit to Him and rely on Him
regarding all his affairs; he will then live enjoying a peaceful mind;
he will be secure from people, and he will provide counsel for everyone.
His heart will have no room for deception nor treachery.

It is good to combine both of these Attributes, al-Darr and al-Nafi\`,
together, for at them it is said that all Attributes end; He, Glory to
Him, controls the means for people's harm and benefit, and none can harm
anyone nor benefit anyone besides Him;

***"... and suffices your Lord for a Guide and a Helper" (Qur’an,
25:31).***

One who remembers both of these Attributes will submit totally to Allah
and will always feel that everything is from Him and returns to Him.

### 93. "Al-Noor"

The Almighty has said,

***Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth; a likeness of His
light is a niche wherein there is a lamp; the lamp is in a glass, and
the glass is as if it were a brightly shining star lit from a blessed
olive-tree, neither eastern nor western, the oil whereof almost emanates
light though fire does not touch it: light upon light; Allah guides
whomsoever He pleases to His light, and Allah sets forth parables for
men, and Allah is Cognizant of all things. (24:35)***

In language, noor is light, whatever its glow, rays, or reflection may
be. It aids vision. There are two kinds of light: a light related to the
life of this world, and a light related to the life hereafter. The
first, let us say the secular, is also of two types: one is what the
mind, the intellect, can see; it is a Divine light, the light of reason,
of the Holy Qur’an.

The other is related to the physical one, that of things which emit or
reflect light such as the sun and the moon. An example for the Divine
light is implied in a verse such as this:

***"... there has come to you light and a clear Book from Allah"
(Qur’an, 5:15).***

Reference to the physical light exists in the verse saying,

***"He it is Who made the sun a shining brightness and the moon a light
(a reflection)" (Qur’an, 10:5).***

Here, the sun is mentioned before the moon because its light is more
commonly associated with what we can see than the moon.

Al-Noor is the Apparent One Who has manifested Himself fully. The One
Who is apparent on His own and Who makes everything else apparent and
visible is called al-Noor Who takes things out of non-existence and
brings them into the world of existence. Al-Noor, Glory to Him, has
filled our world with light and brought it into existence, Who
determined it since time immemorial, Who has illuminated the apparent
existence through the sun and the stars, Who illuminated the world of
spirits through the Messenger of Allah, the master of the first
generations and of the last, and He illuminated the hearts through the
light of His Divinely revealed Books. He illuminated those endowed with
knowledge with the light of Divine manifestations.

Al-Noor has illuminated the hearts of the truthful through His Unity,
and the conscience of those who love Him by His support for them. He
beautified the complexions and brought life to the souls of the pious
through their adoration. He guides the hearts to prefer and opt for what
is right, Who guides the innermost conscience to silently address Him.

Noor, light, then, has many meanings. One of them is the light of
knowledge and scholarship, which is the dawn of the truth as seen by the
heart of a knowledgeable believer. The Attribute "al-Noor" has been
mentioned in the text of the Holy Qur’an and is attributed to Allah in
many places the best known of which is 24:35 cited above.

Ibn \`Abbas says that the meaning of this verse is that Allah is the
Guide of the residents of the heavens and of the earth; the similitude
of His guidance in the heart of a believer is like pure oil which shines
even before fire touches it; therefore, when fire does touch it, it
intensifies its light, so it intensifies and adds light to its light.
The Attribute "al-Noor" is indicative of the fact that Allah is the
Light of the heavens and the earth.

There are many other verses wherein reference to Allah's light is made;
among them are the following:

***They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and
Allah insists on perfecting His light though the unbelievers are averse
thereto. (9:32)***

***What?! Is he whose heart Allah has opened for Islam, so he is in a
light from his Lord (like the hard-hearted one)? Nay! Woe unto those
whose hearts are hard against the remembrance of Allah; surely they are
in clear error. (39:22)***

***And the earth shall beam with the light of its Lord, and the Book
shall be laid down, and the prophets and the witnesses shall be brought
forth, and judgment shall be issued between them with equity, and they
shall not be dealt with unjustly. (39:69)***

There are more than forty references to light in the text of the Holy
Qur’an. Some scholars are of the view that the Attribute "al-Noor" is
Allah's Greatest Name. They say that they cannot see anything in
existence without seeing the meaning of this Attribute manifested in it.

The Messenger of Allah used to supplicate to his Lord in the morning
saying, "Lord! I invoke You to create light in my heart, light in all
parts of my body, light in my hearing, light in my sight, light in my
hair, light in my complexion, light in my flesh, light in my blood,
light in my bones, light before me, light behind me, light on my right,
light on my left, light above me, light underneath me! Lord! I implore
You to increase my light, to grant me light, and to create light for
me."

### 94. "Al-Hadi"

The Most Glorified and Exalted One has said,

... ***and sufficient is your Lord as a Guide and a Helper. (25:31)***

"Al-Hadi" is an Attribute derived, linguistically, from hidya, guidance,
which means: to attract someone to something, such as attracting the
heart of a believer to al-Hadi, to the One Who provides such guidance.
Guidance means bringing the hearts closer to the Almighty.

Guidance is the following of one's sound reason and common sense and the
graceful way of bringing someone to the anticipated goal.

He guides the elite from among His servants whom He has chosen to know
His Essence, so much so that they see things through Him, and He guides
the commoners among them to witness His creatures, so much so that they
have seen them as signs of His being their Creator and Sustainer.

He has guided everything He created to whatever means whereby it can
satisfy its needs. He has guided the baby to suck the breast of its
mother, the young birds to pick the seeds, and the bees to build their
honey-combs in hexagonal shapes which are the best to suit the forms of
their bodies, and such examples are quite lengthy indeed.

Al-Hadi guides the guilty to repentance, and those blessed with
knowledge to the facts regarding nearness to Him. Al-Hadi occupies the
hearts by truthfulness and equity, the bodies by life and death. Al-Hadi
has given everything He has created its shape and characteristics, and
He guides whom He creates to the goals behind His creating them, to
issues related to their life in this world and to those related to their
creed, in addition to everything else related to them.

He guides the hearts to know Him and the souls to obey Him; He guides
the guilty to the path of repentance, the sincere ones to nearness to
Him after being far from it. He keeps the hearts filled with love for
equity and truth; He enables them to treat people justly. Al-Hadi is in
all reality Allah. Al-Hadi has guided the elite from among His servants
to wisdom and knowledge.

Whenever the Messenger of Allah woke up during the night for prayers, he
would supplicate to his Lord saying, "Lord! God of Gabriel, Michael and
Israfil, Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the unknown
and the Witness! You judge between Your servants regarding that wherein
they dispute! I plead to You to guide me to that wherein they have
differed, by Your will, for You guide whomsoever You please to a
straight path."

### 95. "Al-Badee\`"

Allah, Glory and Exaltation are His, has said,

***Wonderful Originator of the heavens and the earth! When He decrees an
affair, He only says to it "Be!" and it is. (2:117)***

In language, to originate is to bring about something without following
a model or an example. Al-Badee\` is the Unique One; there is nothing
similar to Him in His essence, qualities, or whatever He does; He has
manifested the wonders that He has created as the most beautiful
indications of His wisdom. He has created all cosmic worlds without a
prior model. He, Exalted is His Name, has said,

***"Wonderful Originator of the heavens and the earth! How could He have
a son when He has no consort, and He (Himself) created everything, and
He knows all things?" (Qur’an, 6:101).***

"Badee\`" means: originator; one who does something new, originating its
existence. "Bid'a" means something new, an innovation, simply because
nobody before had said or advocated it. Allah is the Originator of all
things without following a prior model. He did not learn their creation
from anyone else; rather, He initiated the creation of all beings, so He
is their Maker, the One Who started their existence. The Almighty,
al-Badee\`, has brought everything into existence without the use of a
tool or any material, without being limited to time or space in order to
be able to do that.

Al-Badee\` has manifested the wonderful things of what He has done and
the extra-ordinary proofs of His wisdom. He is the Absolute One Who has
no peer similar to Him in His qualities, wisdom, or anything related to
Him; He, and only He, is the Absolute al-Badee\` Who has created
everything without following a prior model.

Since there is none like Him in His essence, characteristics, actions,
or anything related to Him, that makes Him the Absolute Originator. If
such a thing is known commonly, it cannot be called badee' at all; so,
this Attribute does not fit anyone besides Allah. None was ever like Him
nor ever will; therefore, His example never existed at all and never
will, and whatever exists besides Him exists because of Him; He, and He
alone, is the Originator since time immemorial and forever.

Anas ibn Malik is quoted saying that the Messenger of Allah once heard a
man supplicating thus, "Lord! I plead to You by the fact that to You is
all Praise due; there is no god but You; You are the One Who never stops
giving, Who originated the heavens and the earth, the One to Whom all
Glory and Honour belong! I plead to You to grant me a place in Your
Paradise, and I seek refuge with You against the fire," whereupon the
Prophet said, "He surely has pleaded to Allah by His Attribute which, if
one pleads to Him by it, He grants the plea and gives what He is asked."

A believer's share of this Glorious Attribute is that if he repeats it
quite often, Allah will cause the springs of wisdom to flow from his
tongue; he will be wise in his intentions, for intention is the bedrock
of action. A servant of Allah who remembers and repeats this Attribute
quite often, being fully aware of its meanings, will be exposed to the
beauty of its light. Allah, the Truth, Exalted and Blessed is He, will
permit him to enter into the circle of invention; He will make him a
master obeyed by others. One of the norms of conduct of whoever mentions
this Attribute quite often is the avoiding of innovations in the creed
and full adherence to the Sunnah.

### 96. "Al-Baqi"

Allah, Glory and Exaltation are His, has said,

***"... and Allah is better and more abiding" (Qur’an, 20:73).***

"Al-Baqi" is one of Allah's Attributes the root word of which is baqa':
the opposite of extinction. It also means: obedience to Allah and
awaiting His rewards, or the lingering status of goodness.

The reality of al-Baqi, Glory to Him, is in His ever-enduring existence;
endurance is one of His characteristics. Al-Baqi, Glory to Him, always
exists and Whose existence is necessitated by virtue of His own merits.
He is ever-Present, Who remains existing forever, from the beginning of
any beginning and for eternity.

The Absolute al-Baqi is the One the duration of Whom never ends, and
such a duration is described as abadi, perpetual, eternal, endless. The
Absolute al-Qadeem is the One the time of Whose beginning, if there is
such a thing, goes back to the very beginning of time, and such a
duration is called azali, eternal. When you say that His existence
depends on His own merits, this Attribute will then include both
meanings.

What affects the determining of the "past" and the "present" are certain
variables; both words describe time, and nothing measures time other
than change. One Who is above change by virtue of motion is above being
affected by time; therefore, neither "past" nor "future" can apply to
Him. The Truth, Exalted is He, is before time, since He Himself created
time, and nothing in Him changed, and He was before time, and He remains
after His creation of time just as He has always been and will always
be.

Those who have claimed that duration is a characteristic added to the
essence of al-Baqi are far from the truth, and still further from the
truth than them are those who claim that time is an additional quality
in as far as the Eternal One is concerned. There is no need to bother
the reader with details about such confusion regarding existence,
duration, and which qualities endure.

Allah's existence stands on its own merits and is self-necessitating,
that is, it does not accept extinction in any way. The duration of
anything which is self-sustaining during the past and will remain so in
the future as well as it did in the past is called old, and its duration
in the future is called existence.

The subject of enduring and duration attributed to Allah has been
referred to in the text of the Holy Qur’an in more than one place.
Examples are the following:

***... and the sustenance of your Lord is better and more abiding.
(20:131)***

***And there will endure forever the person of your Lord, the Lord of
glory and honour. (55:27)***

***... what is with Allah is better and more lasting for those who
believe and rely on their Lord. (42:36)***

***... ever-abiding good deeds are with your Lord best in recompense and
best in yielding fruit. (19:76)***

The good fortune a servant of Allah may receive if he remembers this
Attribute quite often is that the Almighty will reveal to him enduring
facts and will make him observe the perishing trails, so he will flee
eagerly to al-Baqi and decorate his conduct with the meanings its
qualities and moral code suggest.

### 97. "Al-Warith"

Allah has said,

... ***Allah's is the heritage of the heavens and the earth, and Allah
is aware of everything you do. (3:180)***

Al-Warith, Glory to Him, remains after the extinction of all beings. He
inherits everything after the extinction of everyone and everything. He
is the Heir: on the Day of Judgment, it will be loudly called out,

***"To whom does the kingdom belong this Day? To Allah, the One, The
Subduer (of all)" (Qur’an, 40:16).***

The root word of the Attribute "al-Warith" is "waratha," inherited: He
will inherit all beings after their extinction. He is the only One Who
remains after those who used to think that they possessed wares and
items, the things which He had given them, will be gone; their
existence, as well as that of what He has given them, is dependent on
Him, and on none else. He has said,

***"And most surely We bring to life, and We cause death, and We are the
heirs" (Qur’an, 15:23).***

What Allah's servants used to own will go back to Him; there is no
partner with Him. Al-Warith is the One to Whom all possessions will go
back after the death of their "owners." He will be the One Who will call
on that Day, the Day of Judgment, as in 40:16,

***"To whom does the kingdom belong this Day?" and He will be the One
Who will answer by saying, "To Allah, the One, The Subduer (of all)"
(Qur’an, 40:16)."***

Most people mistakenly think that they have possessions which are their
own, but the reality of the matter will be unfolded before their eyes on
that Day. This call represents a fact which will then be revealed to
everyone.

Reference to the subject of heritage as applied to the Almighty occurs
in some Qur’anic verses such as the following:

***And most surely We bring to life and cause death, and We are the
heirs. (15:23)***

***Surely We inherit the earth and all those on it and to Us shall they
all be returned. (19:40)***

***And We desired to bestow a favour upon those who were deemed weak in
the land and make them the Imams and make them the heirs. (28:5)***

***Lord! Do not leave me alone, and You are the best of inheritors.
(21:89)***

The Messenger of Allah used to supplicate saying, "Lord! I plead to You
to grant me the enjoyment of my hearing and vision, and to make them my
heirs."

### 98. "Al-Rasheed"

Allah subhanahu wa ta\`ala has said,

***And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very
near: I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me;
therefore, they should answer My call and believe in Me so that they
will be rightly guided. (2:186)***

The Attribute "al-Rasheed" is derived from Rushd, its root word, which
means: guidance, righteousness, and uprightness, the antithesis of
straying and crookedness. Its derivation accepts two possibilities: one
is al-Rasheed, which means the same as al-Rashid, the Wise One, so Wise
is He that there is nothing among His deeds that can be regarded as
wasteful or wrong. The other is that it may mean the same as al-Badee\`,
and Allah's irshad, that is, His leading His servants to the right path,
is due to His hidaya, guidance. Al-Rasheed is the One Whose management
of all affairs achieves its objectives without anyone else besides Him
directing or assisting it, Who is none but Allah, Glory to Him.
Al-Rasheed pleases whoever He wills by providing him with His guidance,
making whoever He wills miserable by distancing him from His guidance.
He is the One in Whose management there is no lapse, and in Whose
assessment there is no fault.

Al-Rasheed is characterized by complete perfection, great wisdom,
ultimate guidance. He is the One Whose management of all affairs reaches
its ultimate goal and success. He guides His creatures and leads them to
what is best for them. He guides them through His wisdom towards the
attainment of their well-being in the life of this world and in the life
to come. Al-Rasheed has made those with whom He is pleased happy, Who
guided His friends to Him; there is no negligence in His management of
the affairs nor in His assessment, and He is known for His justice and
favours.

Al-Rasheed is al-Murshid, the One Who inspires right guidance for those
who obey Him, and He has led all beings to His guidance, the One Whose
rope is strong, Whose command is wise. In Surat al-Kahaf, we read the
following verses,

***"Lord! Grant us mercy from You, and provide for us a right course in
our affairs" (Qur’an, 18:10),***

***"... whomsoever He causes to err, you shall not find for him any
friend to lead (him) rightly" (Qur’an, 18:17).***

If a servant of Allah wishes to be on the right track, his guidance will
be proportionate with his terse management in the attainment of his
secular and religious objectives. One must deal with his Lord,
al-Rasheed, in a way whereby he properly relies on his Lord to guide
him. His Lord will then lead him to reform his own self first, to refer
all his affairs to Him, and to seek refuge with Him whenever evil
touches him and pray for His help whenever he is afflicted, just as
Allah has told Moses to do:

***"And when he (Moses) turned his face towards Midyan, he said: Maybe
my Lord will guide me to a course nearer to the right path than this"
(Qur’an, 18:24).***

Thus ought a servant of Allah behave: when he wakes up, he should rely
on his Lord, and whatever matter faces him, he should seek Allah's help
in its regard then await what signal his heart will respond thereto. He
will then help him do whatever he needs to do and will suffice him
regarding all his affairs. If he does contrary to what Allah guides him,
He will then reprimand him so that he would know that his Lord found him
to be insolent, hence he abandons his self-reliance and forsakes
following his own mind and trickery.

A servant of Allah ought to quite often remember the Attribute
"al-Rasheed" and cling to its meaning so that he may be led to the
commendable conduct, and Allah will then grant him wisdom and bestow His
blessings upon him.

### 99. "Al-Saboor"

The Praised and Glorified One has said,

... ***nor did they weaken, nor did they abase themselves, and Allah
loves those who are patient. (3:146)***

"Al-Saboor" is an Attribute of Allah linguistically derived from the
noun sabr which means: withholding one's self from expressing its
overwhelming grief. Al-Saboor is most patient, Whose patience is greater
than anyone else's. The month of Raman is called the month of patience
and perseverance: during its days, the believer withholds
himself/herself from yielding to the desires.

Al-Saboor, Glory to Him, is the Clement One Who does not surprise those
who disobey Him by suddenly inflicting His penalty on them; rather, He
forgives and postpones His carrying out of such a penalty. Al-Saboor
does not rush to do anything too early; rather, He manages the affairs
according to a measure; He conducts them according to a well-defined
plan of His; He does not delay them from reaching their destined courses
out of laziness or laxation, nor does He advance their execution.

Rather, He does everything exactly at its right time, in the best way,
as it ought to be. All of this He does without facing hardship which may
frustrate His will. Al-Saboor gives you and is true to you even when you
are rude to Him. He comes to you forgiving even when you shun Him and
revolt against Him.

Al-Saboor does not rush to penalize those who disobey Him or to chastise
those who sin. He does not do anything except when it is most opportune
due to His wisdom, honour, and sublimity. He is not harmed by those who
commit sins. He takes the guilty by the forelocks. Al-Saboor commands
and respites those to whom He issues His command; He observes and does
not rush, nor does He do anything prematurely.

He commands and His command is according to a certain measure. He
cancels the penalty even after it becomes due. Al-Saboor inspires
patience and perseverance for all His creatures. The meaning of the
Attribute "al-Saboor" is very close to that of the other Attribute
"al-aleem". The difference between the first and the latter is that with
al-Saboor, nobody can feel safe against His penalty, as is the case with
al-aleem.

In Surat Ali-\`Imran, the Almighty says, ***"O you who believe! Be
patient, excel in patience, and remain steadfast" (Qur’an, 3:200)***,
that is, be patient while obeying Allah, make your hearts accustomed
tolerating affliction in the cause of Allah, and train your innermost
conscience to be eager for Allah. It also means: Be patient for the sake
of Allah; persevere while seeking Allah's Pleasure; remain in Allah's
camp. Patience regarding what Allah decrees is a trial, and patience for
the sake of Allah is a hardship, while patience with Allah is loyalty
[to Him].

The Messenger of Allah has said, "None is more patient regarding the
pain of what he hears than Allah: they ascribe sons to Him even as He
grants them good health and sustenance."[^11]

One of the manifestations of a believer's good conduct in deriving a
moral code from the inspiration of the Attribute "al-Saboor" is that he
keeps in mind its beautiful meanings, so he is patient under all
circumstances. One who examines how Allah treats His servants, how He is
patient in the face of their rudeness and disobedience, while He keeps
giving them one respite after another, will learn how to treat people
applying Allah's manners to the best of his ability.

Whenever patience is repeated by a servant of Allah, it becomes a habit,
and he will then be following its guiding light. Such is the status of
those who persevere in the sight of Allah, Glory and Praise to Him, as
explained in the text of the Holy Qur’an.

We are told that the group of those who were patient will be advanced
before others by the token of the verse saying,

***"Those who are patient, and the truthful, and the obedient, and those
who spend (benevolently) and those who ask forgiveness in the
morning..." (Qur’an, 3:17)***.

Thus, such a group will have a higher status than that of other groups
of His servants. The Praised One has said,

***"If there are twenty patient ones among you, they shall overcome two
hundred, and if there are a hundred, they shall overcome a thousand of
those who disbelieve" (Qur’an, 8:65)***.

This is victory with regard to prowess and number granted by Allah
whereby He blesses those from among His servants who persevere.

***"Lord! Pour down upon us patience, and make our steps firm, and
assist us against the unbelieving people" (Qur’an, 2:250),***

***"Lord! Pour upon us patience and cause us to die as Muslims" (Qur’an,
7:126).***

[^1]: This tradition is recorded on p. 12, "Kitab al-Adab," Vol. 8 of
al-Bukhari's Sahih.

[^2]: The word "lucky" is used here only because the Holy Qura'n states
in 41:35 that the residents of Paradise will surely be the very lucky
ones. The Almighty's use of this word is quite different from that of
humans. It is humans' use of this word that we reject.

[^3]: Muslim, Sahih. It also is stated on page 260 of his "Book of
Athkar."

[^4]: Abu Dawud, Al-Athkar, p. 81.

[^5]: Notice that the word "heavens" is used throughout this book as
singular due to its reference to one: the sky. If it is at all used in
the plural, it will then be referring to the seven layers or spheres of
the sky. As for the word "heaven," it is often used by non-Muslims to
refer to Paradise. Non-Muslims' concept of Paradise is certainly
different from that of Muslims.

[^6]: Abu Dawud, Jami\` al-Fawa'id, Vol. 2, p. 410.

[^7]: al-Tirmithi, Sunan, Vol. 4, p. 379.

[^8]: Muslim, sahih, Vol. 4, traditions 33 and 35

[^9]: The people of \`Ad were Arabs who lived in upper Hijaz near the
area where the people of Thamud, also Arabs, used to live. Prophet Hud
was sent to them; they did not heed his warning, so they were
annihilated. As for the people of Thamud, these used to live in Wadi
al-Qura in the 8th century B.C.

[^10]: These are: Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad.

[^11]: al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 9, p. 206


