Introduction : Contention in Society Is the Basis For Mankind’s Perfection
==========================================================================

Contention in society and contrasting ideologies are the basis for
mankind's development. Contrasting ideologies are not only the sources
of mankind's development, rather opposing forces, the foundations of the
universe's order, are considered sources for the advancement of the
world. If these opposing forces in nature were absent, the order of the
universe would fall apart.

Opposites in the solar system and the stars that rotate around each
other are the guardians of the system's order. The gravitational force
of the sun and the centrifugal force are the reasons for the harmony
that exists in the world. Were these opposites to become defunct no
trace of life would be left nor would progress be possible.

Such is also the case with microbes, which are spread out in the
environment. They provide the most valuable service for man at the same
time as being at war with man. This is because they strengthen our white
blood cells' defense vis-à-vis internal and external dangers. If such an
enemy was not in our environment, if man lived for some time free from
all microbial infections, he would be incredibly fragile when faced with
physical hardships. He would lose his ability to resist different
ailments. These enemies are similar to vaccines in that they strengthen
our cells to fight against disease.

The basis for human development is polarity and competition. A rival
lays all of his enemy's faults on the table before him, and, since the
smallest mistake will be used to the enemy's advantage, man is forced to
improve himself.

Sociologists believe that opposing parties and criticisms are what
cause progress in human civilization. A critique warns man and displays
his faults. It gives him the ambition to change his life, to make his
life better.

Societies without oppositional parties or rivalries are similar to
glasses of water equally filled. Instead of allowing the water to flow,
such a society forces it to remain stagnate, water becomes unsanitary by
doing this.

Factories and cultural organizations that do not have a competitor stay
in their place, they are unable to improve and attain levels of
excellence. On the contrary, organizations that have competitors
concentrate on expanding their goals, ideas and personnel to be able to
surpass their antagonist and take a step, or even steps, forward.
Abilities will not blossom in a society where appropriate competition
and fundamental differences are removed.

They will not thrive in societies where all of the wealth is in the
hands of the government, where individuals work only to the ability of
their bodies and intellects and where their salaries are just enough to
cover their basic needs. An innovative or mentally active spirit will
not blossom in these conditions.

Carnal desires (nafs amma-rah) are the basis for the intellect's and
the spirit's improvement. They are the basis for man's sense of
self-preservation and for his spiritual progress. If there were no
carnal desires in man, he would not be able to reach high spiritual
ranks, obtain Allah's satisfaction or achieve eternal bliss.

The devil (shayt?a-n), using his evil powers, is waiting to ambush
mankind. This is how he misguides humanity. Man knows about this adept
enemy and prepares his spirit to fight against him. Man tries to
strengthen his spirit with piety, the power of resistance and restraint,
because of his comprehensive knowledge of this foe. Sometimes he is able
to reach so lofty a spiritual peak that he becomes immune from
committing sins.

As was mentioned, known enemies and targeted opponents are the basis
for man's advancement along the path of spiritual and physical
perfection. Man should not be afraid of the presence of such an enemy
nor should he consider this enemy dangerous. The human intellect and
man's love of self prepare him to combat this rival. In this battle, one
must not satisfy oneself with physical and spiritual weapons, equal to
those of his enemy's; instead he must try to equip himself with weapons
more powerful than those of his opponent.

In addition to these enemies there are unfamiliar enemies as well. They
are imposters, those who pretend to by one's friend, but beneath this
façade they are more dangerous than wolves or any other predator. They
take advantage of the intimacy and comfort one assumes with a friend.
Apparently, they are caring friends, but in actuality, they are enemies.
They insist on their being trustworthy and their ability to keep
secrets, but in reality, they are spies and traitors. They are conscious
of human strengths and weaknesses. Staying away from these unknown
enemies is extremely difficult, if not impossible.

These enemies are the hypocrites, whom the Qura-n discusses in various
chapters. An independent chapter was even sent down regarding
hypocrites. The Commander of the Faithful (a) related the following from
the Prophet (s) about those adversaries: “I have never been frightened
of any country taking of Islam. I only worry about one group of people,
the unbelievers who pretend to be Muslim, the two-faced hypocrites. They
have eloquent speech, but in actuality, they are the Muslims' enemies.
They are with you in their words, but, in reality, they would never take
a step with you.”[^1]

**TWO SU-RAHS THAT STAND OUT FROM THE REST**

The author has decided to choose two su-rahs from the Qura-n to
sincerely, in straightforward language, comment upon. They were chosen
because of special importance that the hypocrites played in Islamic
history. These two su-rahs explain the relevance and reality behind
hypocrites more than any other chapters do. The goal of this effort is
for the children of Islam t become more aware of their heavenly
scripture.

These two su-rahs are:

1. Su-rah Repentence (tawbah). A commentary on this su-rah has been
published as a series of articles in the magazine “Lessons from the
School of Islam” (Darsha-ye az Maktab Islam). Now, with the will of
Allah, it is being published as a book.

2. Su-rah Hypocrites (Muna-fiqu-n). This su-rah has revealed the
intentions of this group. It has also gone on to mention every other
kind of enemy that Islam has.

The different topics that are covered in this commentary of the Qura-n
have also been published in the aforementioned magazine. Now, this
commentary is being presented to the reader, with additions, in the form
of a book.

**Notes:**

[^1] Nahj al-Bala-ghah, ?Abduh, volume 3, page 33


