Hypocrites And Repentance
=========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْا يَسْتَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ
لَوَّوْا رُؤُوسَهُمْ وَرَأَيْتَهُمْ يَصُدُّونَ وَهُم مُّسْتَكْبِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***When it is said to them, 'Come, the Messenger of Allah will pray for
your forgiveness,' they turn aside their heads, and you see them turning
away their faces in arrogance***.”[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَوَاء عَلَيْهِمْ أَسْتَغْفَرْتَ لَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ تَسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ
لَن يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ
الْفَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***It is the same for them whether you pray for their forgiveness or
not. Allah will not forgive them. Surely, Allah guides not rebellious
transgressors***.”[^2]

A sinner, who realizes that he is a sinner and that he has transgressed
the limits set for him by Allah, will, try to find a way to repent. But
a sinner who does not recognize that he sins, who thinks that the sins
he commits are actually good deeds, will not try to find a way to
repent. If one suggests to him to follow the correct path, the path
which will bring him success, he will arrogantly reject it because of
his ignorance.

Hypocrites belong to this second group of sinners. They pretend to be
Muslims and to have faith. All that they do is fake; they do not have
sincere faith in Allah or His Messenger. In reality, they epitomize
compound ignorance (*jahl murakkab*) unaware of both of their mistakes
and of their ignorance.

It is because of this kind of ignorance that whenever anyone of the
hypocrites during the time of the Prophet was encouraged to go before
the Prophet (S) and ask him to ask for forgiveness, he would arrogantly
refuse and shake his head, showing that he does not need the Prophet to
do that for him. The reason for this is that such hypocrites did not
believe in the Prophet or his religion.

This kind of behavior is not exclusive to hypocrites, rather it is found
in any society that is ignorant, but unaware or its ignorance. Such a
society will never do anything to fix itself. It is for this reason that
scholars have said that guiding people who possess simple ignorance
(*jahl basit*), or ignorant people who admit that they are ignorant, is
easy, while guiding people who possess compound ignorance, ignorant
people who do not know that they are ignorant, is difficult or even
impossible.

The Prophet’s Repentance Results In The Pardon Of Sins
------------------------------------------------------

It can be gathered by the verses regarding the prophets who repented for
a sinner that people would come to the prophets because of the close
relationship that they had to Allah, asking them to ask for forgiveness.
They would, in other words, ask the prophets to ask Allah to forgive
them.

Jacob's (*Ya‛qub*) sons regretted their evil deed when they saw Joseph
(*Yusuf*), whom they had thrown into a well, become the vizier of a part
of Egypt's land. They went to their father and said:

“***Oh father! Ask forgiveness for our sins for us, for we were truly at
fault***.”[^3]

Jacob told them that he would soon do this for them, that is, he would
plead for their forgiveness once he saw the signs of regret on their
faces. He said:

“***Soon I will ask my Lord for forgiveness for you, for he is indeed
the oft-forgiving, the most merciful***.”[^4]

Sometimes the prophets would promise to ask Allah to forgive sinners. An
example of this is when Abraham (*Ibrahim*) made such a promise to Azar:

“***I shall pray for forgiveness for you, though I have no power (to
get) anything on thy behalf from Allah***.”[^5]

The meaning of this sentence, which sheds light into the reality of the
prophets performing repentance for others, is that the prophets are not
in charge of forgiving or punishing sinners. Allah did not give the task
of judgment to them. The prophets are nothing more than a means; if
Allah's permission was not prevalent, such asking for the forgiveness of
others would be ineffective.

The Qur’an's Order To The Muslims
---------------------------------

The Qur’an clearly orders sinners to go to the Prophet and ask him to
seek their forgiveness from Allah. The Qur’an states, with no
uncertainty, that if the Messenger of Allah prays for a sinner and asks
Allah to forgive his sins, his sins will be forgiven. The verse reads as
follows:

“***We did not send a messenger, except to be obeyed, in accordance with
the will of Allah. If they had only, when they were unjust to
themselves, come to you and asked Allah's forgiveness, and the Messenger
had asked forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah indeed the
oft-returning, the most merciful***.”[^6]

For this reason the Muslims of the past would ask their infallible
leaders to repent in their stead. Thus, the infallibles interceded for
them in this world.

This ability and this kind of intercession are not exclusive to
prophets. A believer can ask Allah to forgive other believers, resulting
in the forgiveness of their sins. But the believers cannot ask Allah to
forgive the polytheists, as it says in the Qur’an:

“***It is not fitting for the Prophet and those who believe that they
should pray for forgiveness for the polytheists***.”[^7]

Sometimes the 'throne-bearers' (these are Allah's infallible angels)
pray for the pardoning of believers' sins, as mentioned in the Qur’an:

“***Those who sustain the throne (of Allah) and those around it sing
glory and praise to their Lord, believe in Him, and implore forgiveness
for those who believe.***”[^8]

This verse, as well as the verses mentioned from the *Surahs* *Nisa'*
and *Yusuf*, are proofs of the Qur’anic validity of intercession. Allah,
because of the station that the prophets occupy in proximity to Him,
accepts their intercession and forgives the sins of those who take the
prophets as intercessors.

A Misunderstanding
------------------

Some of those who do not believe in the Shia creed claim that the
intended consequence of coming to the Prophet and his asking for
forgiveness is that the Prophet forgives those who have transgressed his
own rights.

The reason for this is that the hypocrites were people who oppressed the
Prophet, and because of this, the Prophet had a right over them.
According to this, the station that the Prophet had, namely being able
to ask Allah to forgive the sins of others, was not a special station.

Every human is equal to the prophet in this sense. Anyone who oppresses
another must ask that person to forgive him. The people holding this
opinion did not pay attention to one point: if the meaning were this,
that is that the Prophet would forgive them for the oppression that they
had committed against him, the verse would read as follows: “Go to the
prophet and he will forgive you.” But in the verse the term “pray for
your forgiveness” is used. The difference between the two is clear for
those who can see.

A Condition For Making The Repentance Of Others Effective
---------------------------------------------------------

The Qur’an states plainly that Allah will not forgive the sin of
polytheism, as the following verse says:

“***Allah does not forgive setting up partners with Him, but He forgives
anything else***.”[^9]

Hence, polytheism is an unforgivable sin and a barrier for the
forgiveness of other sins.

The Prophet's asking for the forgiveness of hypocrites is ineffective
because of their being polytheists. Polytheism is a crime that cannot be
excused. The heart of a polytheist is dark and thus unsuitable for being
forgiven. This reality is lucidly explained in the Qur’an:

“***Whether you ask for their forgiveness or not (their sin is
unforgivable); even if you ask seventy times for their forgiveness,
Allah will not forgive them, because they have rejected Allah and his
Messenger***.”[^10]

Since the topic of intercession has come up, we will discuss it in order
to remove some doubts. But this subject should be discussed elsewhere in
more detail.

Sometimes people think of intercession as favoritism or as an excuse to
supersede the divine law. This would result in a person gaining a
recompense of which he was unworthy.

It must be realized that intercession is a definite part of the Islamic
belief system. Anyone who has even a little information about the
Qur’an, the prophetic traditions or the belief system of the Muslims in
all ages and places would know that intercession is given only to those
who deserve it. This point should not be subject to doubt.

We must define the reality of intercession and its conditions before we
relate the verses regarding it. The purpose of doing this is to
distinguish between real intercession and the fake intercession which
some people claim that they will receive in the future.

The Literal And Figurative Meaning Of Intercession
--------------------------------------------------

Intercession comes from the Arabic word ”*shifa'ah*,” the literal
meaning of which is to put two things together, to pair them. In
religious terminology, it means the friends of Allah (the prophets,
Imams and righteous people) help those who have committed mistakes in
their lives. There are two cases of helping a sinner. This first kind is
similar to favoritism, where oppression and unjust discrimination take
place. The second kind is similar to reform, giving hope and a way to
reach perfection.

If one would help undeserving people and place them before others this
would be unjust discrimination and an encouragement for committing sin.
This is the incorrect form of intercession. Sinners having such a hope
of intercession do not cease to commit sins. Obviously this is not the
goal of the verses regarding intercession. Intellect would reject such a
belief.

It is not unjust discrimination when a sinner who has a spiritual
relationship with Allah and faith in Allah's friends receives the help
of the intercessors on the Day of Judgment. This is not only an
encouragement, but it is justice, a way of obtaining spiritual growth
and a reason for a sinner to turn back after he has walked half way down
the road of destruction.

The explanation for this is the same as that found in the glorious
Qur’an - the intercession of the friends of Allah depends on Allah's
permission. No one can intercede until Allah permits it. It goes unsaid
that Allah does not give permission superficially, or without wisdom
behind it. Allah's permission only includes those who deserve
forgiveness, who have made mistakes in their lives but have not reached
the level of disparagement and insolence.

If one's relationship with Allah has become weak on certain levels, it
is still not completely broken. Such people deserve intercession.

Intercession has a condition that makes it serve as a warning sign. When
a person realizes that he occasionally commits a sin, he must stop doing
that sin immediately. He must cease sinning because he does not want the
doors of intercession to close on him. There will be no road of
salvation for one stuck behind closed doors.

Attention to this matter has an affect on sinners. It makes them return
to the correct path and change their incorrect lifestyle. In reality, it
encourages them to clean up their lives.

Experience shows us that a criminal will turn back from the road of
destruction if given hope. He will turn back if he feels that there is
salvation in changing his wrongful ways.

In international law, there is a law that forgives and releases
prisoners who have been sentenced to life in prison. The reason this law
exists is to give the prisoners hope, resulting in a change in
lifestyle. If this hope were not present, there would be no reason for
them to sit peacefully in the prison. There would be no reason for them
to stop committing crimes, because there is no punishment worse than
life imprisonment.

Intercession is the hope given to deserving people. It makes them change
their religious and ethical lives. It is exclusive to those who have
protected their relationship with Allah and His friends. But, the person
who has not performed good deeds, has not been benefited with faith in
Allah and has spent his life in sin and corruption will never receive
intercession. The difference between these two groups of people can be
brought to life by an example:

Imagine that some soldiers are ordered to build an army base on the top
of a mountain. Building this army base is incredibly important to
protect their country from foreign attack. An adept general gives them
the necessary tools to build this army base. He then gives the order.
Some undisciplined and scared soldiers do not obey the general's command
and remain at the bottom of the mountain. These soldiers will never
receive the general's help. But, another group of soldiers sacrifice
themselves and quickly climb up the mountain. The general will take care
of weak soldiers in this second group when they tremble out of fear. He
will also help them climb the mountain at its difficult parts.

This kind of help is a form of intercession given to those walking along
the path. There is no problem with the general the general announcement
of this before climbing the mountain by saying: “I shall help you if you
cannot climb up the difficult parts. I shall use all of my strength to
help you achieve this goal.”

This sentence from the general will encourage the soldiers. It will give
them hope. It will increase their strength and power of resistance. In
reality, this is a way to train the soldiers and a tool for them to
reach perfection.

The Qur’an And Intercession
---------------------------

The verses regarding intercession can be divided into three categories:

**First:** verses that negate intercession. For example:

“***Then guard yourselves against a day when one soul shall not avail
another, nor shall intercession be accepted for it, nor shall
compensation be taken from it, nor shall anyone be helped (from
outside).***”[^11]

**Second:** verses that specify intercession for only Allah. For
example:

“***You have none, besides Him, to protect or intercede for
you***.”[^12]

**Third:** verses that state clearly the existence of those who
intercede by the permission of Allah. Allah also limits the acceptance
of this intercession as He pleases. For example:

“***Who is there that can intercede in His presence except as He
permits***.”[^13]

And:

“***On that day no intercession will avail except for those for whom
permission has been granted by (Allah), the Most Gracious, and whose
word is acceptable to Him***.”[^14]

These verse and the verses that are mentioned in the footnotes clearly
state the fact that there will be intercessors on the Day of Judgment.
They will intercede, with the permission of Allah, for sinners and Allah
will accept their intercession.

One who doubts the validity of intercession or completely rejects it can
understand the matter clearly by studying the relevant verses.

What Are The Meanings Of The Verses That Negate Intercession?
-------------------------------------------------------------

The goal of the first group of verses which downright negate
intercession becomes clear when one looks at the superstitious beliefs
that the polytheistic Arabs had about intercession. They said: “These
idols are our intercessors before God.” Allah related this belief in
different chapters of the Qur’an. For example:

“***They say: 'These are our intercessors with Allah***.'”[^15]

Many of the verses that negate intercession are negating the kind of
intercession that the ignorant Arabs believed in. Because of this, when
the Qur’an mentions the subject of interceding idols it quickly negates
it, then says intercession belongs to Allah. The Qur’an states:

“***What! Do they take for intercessors others besides Allah? Say: 'Even
if they have no power whatever and no intelligence?' Say: 'To Allah
belongs exclusively (the right to grant) intercession***.”[^16]

What is understood is that the purpose of the verses which negate
intercession is not to negate the correct form of intercession, which,
as the third group of verses state, is done with Allah's permission.
Instead, they negate the intercession of idols, to which Allah has not
granted the authority of intercession.

The goal of some other verses that apparently negate intercession is,
instead, to condemn some of the false notions held by the Jews in the
Prophet's time. They thought that they would receive the intercession of
the prophets from whom they descended, regardless of the sins they
committed. They thought that they could expunge their sins, just as they
expunge their crimes in this world, with bribery, favoritism, gifts and
so forth. They thought that they could sway the Judge's mind.

The Qur’an states, in order to negate this kind of thinking and in order
to announce that no person has an absolute right to intercession, that
bribery and gifts will not be accepted, and that nothing other than
one's actions will be a source of salvation. The Qur’an states:

“***Then guard yourselves against a day when one soul shall not avail
another, nor shall intercession be accepted for it, nor shall
compensation be taken from it, nor shall anyone be helped (from
outside)***.”[^17]

As a result, when one considers the popular beliefs or the polytheistic
Arabs and Jewish beliefs about intercession and looks, as well, at the
previous and subsequent verses, one realizes that the verses which
negate intercession are negating the false forms of intercession that
these two groups believed in.

This false intercession differs from the intercession that the second
and third groups of verses mention.

The verses that state that intercession is only for Allah and the verses
that state that intercessors exist with the permission of Allah do not
contradict each other in the least. The reason for this is that
intercession belongs to Allah and others only have this ability through
Allah's permission.

[^1]: 63:5

[^2]: 63:6

[^3]: 12:97

[^4]: 12:98

[^5]: 60:4

[^6]: 4:64

[^7]: 9:113

[^8]: 40:7

[^9]: 4:48

[^10]: 9:80

[^11]: 2:48 ,also refer to 2:123, 2:254 and 74:48

[^12]: 32:4, also refer to 6:51, 6:70, 39:44 and 40:18

[^13]: 2:255

[^14]: 20:109, also refer to 10:3, 21:28, 19:87, 34:23, 43:86 and 53:26

[^15]: 10:18

[^16]: 39:43-44

[^17]: 2:48 This verse is about the history of the Israelites. This is
negating the intercession that the Jews believe in.


