Chapter 6 : Hypocrities's Dangerous Plans
=========================================

<p dir="rtl">
هُمُ الَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ لَا تُنفِقُوا عَلَى مَنْ عِندَ رَسُولِ
اللَّهِ حَتَّى يَنفَضُّوا وَلِلَّهِ خَزَائِنُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ
وَلَكِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ لَا يَفْقَهُونَ
</p>

“They are the ones who say, 'Spend nothing on those who are with
Allah's Messenger, to the end that they may disperse (and leave
Medina).' But to Allah belong the treasures of the Heavens and the
Earth; but the hypocrites understand not.”[^45]

<p dir="rtl">
يَقُولُونَ لَئِن رَّجَعْنَا إِلَى الْمَدِينَةِ لَيُخْرِجَنَّ الْأَعَزُّ
مِنْهَا الْأَذَلَّ وَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ وَلِرَسُولِهِ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
وَلَكِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

“They say, 'If we return to Medina, surely the more honorable (element)
will expel from there the meaner.' But honor belongs to Allah and His
Messenger, and to the Believers but the hypocrites know not.”[^46]

Economic embargos and acts of injustice can be used to subdue movement
or an active minority group. Influential individuals of society sanction
groups that they deem harmful. They make the minority group kneel to the
ground, and they stop these groups from following the path that they
were taking.

Revolutions and social advancements almost always start from the few,
the weak and the poverty-stricken. In order to silence and disperse such
a group, the influential members of society need only stop all sources
of funding from reaching them. By doing this, hunger and poverty will
prevail, and the minority group will be forced either to relinquish
their or to forget completely their goals and ides.

The polytheists of Mecca used this political tactic in a most severe
and dreadful way at the beginning of Islam. They forced the Muslims to
live in Sh?ib Abu- T?a-lib for three years. During this time the Muslims
lived in extreme poverty and were faced with unbearable hunger. The
leaders of the Quraysh, at the beginning of the prophetic mission posted
an announcement on the Ka?ba.

This announcement forbade all kinds of business transactions and legal
rights for Bani- Ha-shim. Everyone, either out of fear or personal
choice, cut off all economic and business ties, even small transactions,
with the family of the Prophet. The family of the Prophet was put under
a tremendous economic embargo. The cries of their children from hunger
were heard at night until the sanctions were nullified.[^47]

The leaders of many countries do not have a positive outlook on
religion; they see religion as an imposing barrier, keeping them away
from their goals. Because of this they deprive believers in various
religions of certain social, political and cultural rights, so that the
next generation will not show this same inclination to religion and so
that the people of faith will leave their ways.

The leader of the hypocrites, ?Abd Allah bin Ubay, made the following
two plans to destroy Islam. He wanted his companions to act upon these
plans:

1. Forbid all kinds of transactions with the Muha-jiri-n and all those
who are with the Prophet (s), so that they will leave him because of
severe hardships.

2. The citizens of Medina who own land in Medina should expel the
Muha-jii-n from their land, so that the Prophet (s) will also leave. The
leader of the hypocrites mentioned this plan when an argument erupted
between two members of the Ans?a-r and Muha-jiri-n. The following
explains certain events found in history books and certain verses found
in the Qura-n:

THE WAR OF BANI- MUSTALAQ

Bani- Mus?t?alaq[^48] surrendered to the Islamic army after losing ten
soldiers. The war ended in favor of the Muslims. After the war, two
Muslims, one from the Muha-jiri-n and the other from the Ans?a-r began
arguing over water. Both parties sought help from their respective
tribes. Both sides were on the verge of a battle which would culminate
in losing the peace that was achieved after years of work. The Prophet
(s) became aware of the situation and thought the cries of both sides
were unfounded. He (s) said: “The age of ignorance has not yet left your
hearts.” He then separated the two sides.

?Abd Allah bin Ubay (the leader of the hypocrites who pretended to
accept Islam out of fear of public opinion tried to use this opportunity
to his advantage. He told those around him: “We are to blame for the
calamity that has befallen us. We, the people of Medina, gave the
Muha-jiri-n shelter in our land. We protected them against their
enemies. Our situation is now like the famous saying: 'Train your dog
and he will kill you.' I swear by Allah, if we return to Medina, we must
cut all economic ties with those who follow the Prophet so that they
will leave our land. The strong and the honorable must expel from their
land those who are weak and ignoble.”

The man instilled hatred for the Muha-jiri-n in the hearts of some
Muslims by provoking arguments between the Muha-jiri-n and the Ans?a-r.
Luckily, there was an intelligent young man sitting amongst that crowd.
He answered ?Abd Allah bin Ubay's statement in the following way: “I
swear by Allah that you are despised and wretched. You are the one who
has no place in your own family. Muh?ammad is beloved by the Muslims.
Their hearts are filled with compassion and love for him.”

He went to the Prophet (s) and informed him of ?Abd Allah's poisonous
statements. This young man proposed to execute ?Abd Allah. But the
Prophet (s) said: “This action would never be correct because the people
would say that Muh?ammad killed his friends after he came to power.”

Asi-d came to the Prophet (s), consoled him, and said: “Bear with ?Abd
Allah. He is a low man. Islam has taken away his social status in
Medina. Islam toppled his government, his dictatorship which was about
to come into existence.”

The Prophet (s) gave the order for the Muslims to march in harsh
circumstances so that the two sides would forget what had happened and
abandon their satanic thoughts. He did not allow any rest in an entire
twenty-four hour period, except for during prayer-time. On the second
day, the weather was so hot that no one could walk. The order was given
to the Muslims to dismount their horses. Then they fell into such a deep
sleep that all of the bitter events that had happened in the territory
of Bani- Mus?t?alaq were forgotten. Later, all traces of this event were
forgotten.[^49]

**The Quranic Condemnation Of Hypocritical Beliefs**

Hypocrites claim that the sustenance of humans is in their own hands.
But they are neglectful of the important principle that the sustenance
of humans is under the control of Allah. Allah, who gives sustenance to
his enemies, would never let His own friends remain in a state of hunger
and difficulty. All of the treasures of the earth and the skies are
under the control of Allah. This great system of life, where sustenance
is granted to everything on every corner of the world is wisely
controlled by Allah. People of faith will be relieved from economic
hardships through resistance and strong belief. Only impatient groups
will fall and eventually yield to the deviant ideas of influential
people. Righteous people, with the strength that comes from faith and
patience, make their enemy understand that eventually economic embargos
will be lifted and that they will have to change their minds. This
reality was made apparent in the very beginning of Islam, through the
events of Sh?ib Abu- T?a-lib.

The hypocrites claimed that honor and strength came from possessing
land and water. They thought that the Muha-jiri-n were despised and
wretched because they possessed less land than the Ans?a-r. They were
unaware of the fact that sometimes these possessions result in
despicableness, helplessness and being despised by others. In reality,
both honor and dishonor come from the inside. What is meant here by
“inside” is the faith that carries man from the depths of wretchedness
to the peak of honor. For this reason, the Qura-n says that honor is for
the believers; it belongs to those who have faith.

A person of faith, one who believes in human principles, ethical values
and the Day of Judgment, is not fooled by many of the world's tricks.
The possibility of worldly gain cannot lure him into falling for such
tricks. He would rather die protecting his honor and his pure soul than
live a life of dishonor. He believes dying honorably is nobler than
liven dishonorably. He deems an honorable death to be a victory, while
he deems a dishonorable life to be a form of imprisonment.

The Commander of the Faithful (a) has alluded to this point by saying:
“To die is to be truly alive. Real life, a life of honor, is
martyrdom.”

Everyone witnessed how the Prophet (s) and the believers behaved during
the events surrounding Bani- Mus?t?alaq. Fourteen centuries have passed,
and still Muslims mention the prophet's and the believers' names with
the utmost respect. But ?Abd Allah bin Ubay and his followers lived the
rest of their lives in dishonor. This dishonor became so intense that
his own son was ready to execute him, but the Prophet did not allow him
to do that.[^50]

**Notes:**

[^45] 62:7

[^46] 62:8


[^47] Ibn Hisha-m, Si-rah, volume 1, page 350

[^48] A tribe who fought against Islam

[^49] Ibn Hisha-m, Si-rah, volume 2, page 292; ?Ali- bin Ibra-hi-m
al-Qumi-, Tafsi-r al-Qumi-, page 681

[^50] Ibn Hisha-m, Si-rah, volume 2, page 292


