Chapter 7 : the Islamic Viewpoint of the World
==============================================

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُلْهِكُمْ أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَلَا
أَوْلَادُكُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْخَاسِرُونَ
</p>

“Oh believers! Do not Let your riches or your children divert you from
the remembrance of Allah. If any one acts this way, the loss is his
own.”[^51]

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَنفِقُوا مِن مَّا رَزَقْنَاكُم مِّن قَبْلِ أَن يَأْتِيَ أَحَدَكُمُ
الْمَوْتُ فَيَقُولَ رَبِّ لَوْلَا أَخَّرْتَنِي إِلَى أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ
فَأَصَّدَّقَ وَأَكُن مِّنَ الصَّالِحِينَ
</p>

“Spend something (in charity) out of the substance which We have
bestowed upon you, before death should come to any of you and he should
say, 'Oh my Lord! Why didn't you give me respite for a little while?
Then I would have given (largely) in charity, and I would have been one
of the righteous.'”[^52]

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَن يُؤَخِّرَ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِذَا جَاء أَجَلُهَا وَاللَّهُ خَبِيرٌ
بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
</p>

“But Allah will not grant respite to any soul when its appointed time
when has come, and Allah is well acquainted with (all) that you
do.”[^53]

There is no doubt that worldly wealth and physical abilities can lead
to man's success. With these, it is possible for man to gain Allah's
pleasure and save himself from undesirable characteristics and evil
actions.

A financially stable person is free from the bonds of poverty. He is
able to live a healthy life. He is able to protect his freedom and honor
because of his independence.

Poverty and neediness are the most common causes of crime and social
deviance. For example, the main reason women fall into prostitution is
poverty. Of course, some unethical forms of action have causes other
than poverty and neediness.

There is, of course, forms of logic behind the Quranic statement that
wealth is one of the greatest blessings from Allah. It is mentioned in
the Qura-n that sharing wealth is the best form of charity.

The Honorable Prophet (s) said the following to a group of people who
thought that being poor is better than having wealth: “Worldly
possessions are the best means for obtaining piety (taqwa).”[^54]

WHAT IS CONSIDERED LAWFUL PROPERTY AND WHAT IS CONSIDERED THE BASE
WORLD?

Rightful possessions are those that lead to success and improve one's
environment, those that save people from hopelessness and destitution.
It was this sort of property that the Commander of the Faithful
described when he saw ?Ala- bin Zi-ya-d's glorious castle: “This castle
can be a tool for success, if guests and family members are treated with
hospitality inside it.”[^55]

Man's essential purpose will remain misunderstood if one lives in a
world of passions and carnal desires, a world where only pleasure is
important. Were one to live in such a world one would think that life's
only goal is love of oneself and worldly possessions. There is, of
course, no problem if one approaches this world in a way where
possessions and children do not take one away from the remembrance of
Allah. Anything else will lead to destruction and loss.

One clear point of the ninth verse of Su-rah Muna-fiqu-n is that the
Qura-n does not give the order to stay away from the world. It does not
say: “Do not seek profit and livelihood.” Instead it uses the Arabic
word 'tulhikum.' What is meant by this is an approach to the world that
does not keep one away from the remembrance of Allah and does not keep
one unnecessarily busy.[^56]

The reason this world leads to loss is because one spends all of one's
physical and spiritual strength on something that will not remain after
death. A person who seeks only this world will not benefit in the least
from the blessings that are reserved for the believers.

The Commander of the Faithful has a succinct and beautiful saying about
this world: “One who looks at the world as a means of obtaining success
in both worlds can see, and one who thinks of the world as the final
goal is blind.”[^57]

One who thinks that gold, silver and mansions are the goals of life
will not respect any moral principles. Such a person will abandon truth,
justice, equity and other ethical virtues.


**Death Cannot Be Delayed**

People whose highest goal in this world will wish to prolong their
lives when they are confronted with death and will have the feeling that
the wealth they have amassed will not benefit them anymore. During these
last moments of life they will desire to spend their money in the way of
Allah so that they can secure provisions for the next life.

They are neglectful of one of the divine secrets (sunnat illa-hi-).
This secret is that death cannot be delayed. Death arrives once one has
exercised all of ones abilities and has lived a full life. In the same
way that a ripe fruit must be picked, a soul that has reached its
personal perfection must leave the body and enter the next life.

Not only does the person who was in love with this world wish that his
death could be delayed, but when he enters the next world and the
curtains of ignorance and neglect are lifted from him, he will wish to
be sent back to the world. The Qura-n describes this intense regret in
powerful terms: “Oh Our Lord, we have seen and we have heard. Send us
back (to the world). We will do righteousness because we surely believe
now.”[^58]

**Notes:**

[^51] 62:9

[^52] 62:10

[^53] 62:11

[^54] Shaykh S?adu-q, Man la- yadharah al-Faqi-h, page 353

[^55] Ima-m ?Ali- bin Abi- T?a-lib, Nahj al-Bala-ghah, sermon 207

[^56] Refer to 24:37

[^57] Ima-m ?Ali- bin Abi- T?a-lib, Nahj al-Bala-ghah, sermon 80

[^58] 32:12


