The Manifestation of Social Differences and the Necessity of Law
================================================================

Man in his dealings with his fellow men is obliged to accept a social
life based on cooperation; in doing so he effectively forgoes some of
the freedom enjoyed within his own sphere of work. Merely taking part in
a society based on injustice and gaining social differences is not
enough to satisfy the basic needs of the average man. In such a society,
taking advantage of the efforts of others leads to corruption and a loss
of the original purpose of removing glaring differences between men and
bettering their lives.

It is clear that a framework of laws, understood and respected by all,
must govern the different members of society. If there are no clear laws
governing even the most basic of transactions (like buying and selling),
transactions will cease to function correctly. Laws are necessary to
preserve the rights of individuals. The power and wisdom of the Creator,
who has guided man towards his well-being and happiness, has also
guaranteed the success and happiness of society.

Guidance in the form of social law is mentioned by God in LXXX:19-20,
"From a drop of seed He creates him and proportions him. Then makes the
way easy for him. " This making of life easy for him is an indication of
the social guidance which he has given to man in the form of laws and
instructions.

**The Intellect is not Sufficient in Guiding Man towards Respect of the
Law**

The guidance we are considering here is that which emanates from the
wisdom of the Creator; this wisdom has created man and alloted him his
goal of well-being just as it has assigned a path and goal to all
creation. This goal of happiness and well-being is the path of
self-fulfilment based on correct behaviour in a social setting. It is
clear that, of necessity, there can be no inconsistencies or
shortcomings in the work of the Creator.

If, at times, one cannot discern His aim or it seems hidden from normal
perception, it is not through lack of reason or cause on the part of
God, but rather that the cause is linked to other causes which obscure
the one in question. If there were no hindrances to a clear perception
of the causal chain of events, two given actions would never appear
inconsistent or contradictory to the harmony of creation. Nor would the
work of the Creator appear (as it sometimes does to those whose
perception is hindered by the intricacy of the causal chain of events),
inconsistent and imperfect.

Guidance towards the law, whose function is to remove differences and
conflict between individuals in society, is not a matter for the
intellect since it is this very intellect which causes man to dispute
with others. It is the same intellect which incites man to profit at the
expense of others and to preserve, first and foremost, his own interest,
accepting justice only when there is no alternative.

The two opposing forces, one causing difficulties and one doing away
with them, are qualities of man's character; they do not obviously exist
in the Creator: the countless daily transgressions and violations of the
law, in effect, all result from those who use their intellect
incorrectly; they themselves are the very source of their own
difficulties.

If the intellect was truly a means of removing wrong action from
society and was itself a trustworthy guide to man's well-being, it would
recognize the validity of the law and prevent man from violating it. The
intellect's refusal to willingly accept what is obviously given for the
well-being of man is confirmed when we realize that its acceptance of a
society based on just laws is only out of necessity. Without this
compulsion, it would never accept to know the law.

Those who transgress the law do so for many reasons: some oppose it
without fear, because their power exceeds that of the law; others,
because they live outside the reach of the law, through deceit or
negligence on the part of the authorities; others are able to invent
reasons which make their wrong actions appear lawful and acceptable;
some make use of the helplessness of the person they have wronged. All,
however, find no legal obstacle in their wrong aims; even if an obstacle
appears, their intellect, rather than guiding them to an acceptance of
the law, renders the obstacle right and ineffective.

From these examples we are left in no doubt that the intellect, far
from controlling, restricting or guiding man, merely uses its influence
to its own purpose. We must include, therefore, that it is incapable of
guiding man towards a social law which guarantees the rights, freedom
and well-being of all the members of society.

God says in chapter XCVI:6-7 "Indeed man truly rebels when he thinks
him self independent. " The independence referred to here includes the
independence of those who imagine that they can claim their rights
through other than the path of legality.

**The Only Way to Guidance is that of Revelation**

Man, like the rest of creation, naturally seeks his own well-being and
happiness as he lives out his life. Since, by his very make-up, he has a
variety of natural needs, he has no alternative but to live in society
in order to fulfill these needs; his own well-being and search for the
fulfillment of his natural character takes place in the wider framework
of society's well-being.

Thus the only acceptable pattern of existence, regulated by a
comprehensive law common to all people, is the one which guarantees both
the well-being of society and of the individual in a balanced and just
fashion. It is also clear that man, like the rest of creation, must
endeavour to achieve his well-being and undertake whatever preparation
is necessary for achieving this by allowing himself to be guided by his
Creator.

It is but a logical next step in our analysis to say that any guidance
from the Creator must be towards this comprehensive law, common to all
and, at the same time, in accord with the individual's well-being.
Intellect is not enough to guide man to the law since it does not always
decide in favour of cooperation with others nor in favour of the common
good.

The path, the way, which fits perfectly the requirements of man is the
way taught by the Prophets and messengers of God. It is the way brought
to them by God through revelation and established as undeniably true and
valid, by the example of their own lives and their intimate knowledge
and contact with God.

**The Revelation of the Qur'an**

In chapter II:213, God says, "Mankind was one community and God sent
(to them) prophets as bearers of good news and as warners and revealed
to them the book with the truth that it may judge between mankind
concerning that in which they differed." Here we under- stand "one
community" to mean a society at peace, its members living without
dispute or difference. After a period of time, men differed with one
another and as a result God sent the prophets.

Again He says in IV:163-165, "Indeed We have inspired you as we have
inspired Noah ... Messengers of good news and a warning in order that
mankind might have no argument against God after the Messenger. "
Intellect alone does not make man accountable to God and this is why he
must be awakened to the reality of his inner condition by other means.

The first of the above-mentioned verses recognizes the way of
revelation and prophecy as the only way of removing differences between
men. The second shows revelation and prophecy to be the complete and
absolute proof to mankind of the truth of God's message.

**Some Questions Answered**

Question: By using the premise that the intellect cannot prevent
violation of the law and the wrong action of man in general, you are
declaring the necessity of imposing a law or, as you say, "guidance"
towards his own well-being; that is, you are demanding that we place our
trust in revelation and in prophethood rather than in the intellect.

The truth is, however, that the laws and instructions of revelation are
also ineffective in that they cannot prevent violation of the law, of
the Shari'ic law or divine code; in fact, man's acceptance of this code
is even less than his acceptance of the civil code. What can you reply
to this? Answer: To point out the way is one thing and to follow it is
another. The Creator has taken upon himself to guide mankind to a law
under which he can achieve his well-being; He has not taken upon himself
to stop mankind from infringing upon the law nor of compelling men to
follow the law. We have investigated above the problem of man's
infringement of the law, not to prove that the intellect is deficient or
incapable of preventing wrong action but, rather, to show that it
usually does not decide in favour of the law or of cooperation with
society.

As we have pointed out, the intellect only follows the law out of
necessity; if it perceives that obeying the law and restricting one's
personal freedom brings less benefit than disobedience, then it will not
follow the law nor stop others from transgressing.

The acceptance of the way of the revelation, however, always brings
with it an obedience to the law. By accepting the code of behaviour
revealed by the prophets, one entrusts one's judgement to God who, with
his boundless power and knowledge, constantly watches over man; only He
can reward good deeds or punish bad ones in an absolutely just and
unbiased way. God says in chapter XII:40, "The decision rests with God
only," and in chapter XCIX:74, "And whoever does an atom 's weight of
good will see it then and whoever does an atom 's weight of bad will see
it then. "

Likewise, He says in XXII:17, "Indeed God will decide between them on
the day of Rising, Indeed! God is witness over all things, " and in
II:77, "Are they unaware that God knows that which they keep hidden and
that which they proclaim." In XXXIII:52 we read: "And God is watcher
over all things. "

From these verses it is clear that the divine din of Islam, which has
been given to man through revelation, is not capable of preventing
transgression of the law any more than the civil law drawn up by men.
The machinery of the civil law appoints officials and employees to
control and inspect the action of man and also imposes a system of
punishment for his offences; this method only works when the law is
strong and the crime is discovered.

The divine din is superior to man-made laws or social orders in that
control over man is carried out in a very special way, namely, through
the vigil of the angels. Moreover, the divine din obliges in every man
and woman to enjoin the right and forbid the wrong. All men, without
exception, are instructed to watch over the action of their fellow men
and to be guardians of the law.

It is only belief in a divine order which contains and defines action
outside the limits of good and bad and within the reality of the Day of
Reckoning to come. Most importantly, the Lord of the world and of all
the unseen world is aware of man's every action and is present with him
everywhere at every moment.

Like the civil codes drawn up by man, there is also in the divine code
a corresponding system of punishment for every sin, both in this world
and on the day of reckoning after death. Unlike the civil code, however,
the divine law guarantees that no man will escape from judgement and
punishment, if punishment is warranted. As proof, the reader is urged to
follow what is written in chapter IV: 59, "Obey God and obey the
messenger and those of you in authority" and, in XI: 71, "And the
believers, men and women are protecting friends one to another; they
enjoin the right and forbid the wrong."

Likewise, we may study LXXXII:1-12 when God says, "Indeed there are
guardians above you, generous and recording, who know (all) that you do"
and, also in XXXIV:21, "And your Lord (O Muhammad) takes note of all
things. "

A Second Question: It has been argued that the intellect does not
always decide in favour of respect for the law. Is this not inconsistent
with what is contained in the saying of the Imams which states that God
has given two proofs to his servants, the outward and obvious one being
that of His Prophet, and the inner and hidden one being that of the
intellect of man? How are we to understand this statement in the light
of how the intellect has been described?

Answer: Without exception, man's intellect is concentrated on securing
benefit and avoiding harm. Whenever it accepts to cooperate and share in
society's activity, it is, as we have seen above, seeking its own
benefit. This need is often felt by those who wish to profit from others
or seek to control others by using their wealth. For such men there is
nothing prohibiting them from pursuing their illegal action; their
intellect will pot decide in favour of the law nor forbid transgression
of the same law.

If, however, the source of compulsion (as is understood in the light of
divine revelation) is from God, then the effect on man is totally
different. God's watching over man's action, His punishment or reward of
bad or good action, admits of no negligence, ignorance or incapacity.
The intellect, which recognizes the existence of God, cannot refuse the
law. It will always decide in favour of that which revelation demands of
man.

Thus the intellect of a believing man will recognize the importance of
the revelation over any personal matter. God say in XIII:33 "Is He who
is aware of the deserts of every soul as he who is aware of nothing;"
and, in LXXXVI:4, "No human soul but has a guardian over it" and,
LXXIV:38, "Every soul is a pledge for its own deeds."


