The Path of Revelation Is Protected Against Mistakes
====================================================

The path of revelation is part of the Creator's programme. He never
makes mistakes, neither in His Creation nor in the system of belief and
the laws of the shari'ah, which are delineated for man through
revelation.

God says in LXXII:26-28, (He is) the knower of the unseen and he
reveals His secret to no one exccpt to every messenger He has chosen and
He makes a guard go before him and a guard behind him, that He may know
that they have indeed conveyed the message of the Lord. He surrounds all
their doings and He keeps count of all things.

From this we understand that the prophets and messengers of God must be
infallible both in receiving the revelation and in preserving it against
alteration and attack. They are as instruments at the disposal of the
Creator's wisdom. Were they to make an error in receiving or teaching
the message of the revelation or be led astray by the whispering of evil
persons, were they themselves to commit wrong or deliberately change the
message they had to deliver, then the wisdom of God would be unable to
perfect its programme of guidance.

God confirms in chapter XVI:9 that He is in total control of man's
guidance by means of his messenger, "And God's is the direction of the
way, and some (words) do not go straight."

**The Hidden Reality of Revelation**

The reality of revelation is hidden from us. What is clear is that the
aim of the programme of life, outlined for man by the Creator, cannot
possibly have been put together by the intellect; there must be another
way of understanding, of perceiving, (other than through reflection and
thought), by which man learns-of the duties incumbent on him and his
fellow-men. This understanding may only be encompassed by the path of
revelation.

There are, however, only a limited number of men who possess this kind
of understanding since receiving revelation requires an understanding
based on purity, sincerity and freedom from all corruption and bad
thoughts. It requires men whose spiritual qualities do not change; men
who are psychologically balanced in their judgements and who possess
real depth of understanding. It must be admitted that these qualities
are rarely to be found amongst men.

The Prophets and messengers mentioned in the Qur'an are men of
precisely these qualities. The Qur'an does not mention their number; it
only names a few (namely Adam, Nuh (Noah), Hud, Salih. (Methusaleh),
Ibrahim (Abraham), Lut (Lot), Isma'il (Ismael, Ishmael), Alyasa'
(Elisha), Dhu al-Kifl (Ezekiel), Ilyas (Elias), Yunus Jonah), Idris
(Enoch), Ishaq (Isaac), Ya'qub (Jacob), Yusuf Joseph), Shu'ayb, Musa
(Moses), Harun (Aaron), Da'ud (David), Sulayman (Solo- mon), Ayyub
(Job), Zakariya' (Zacharias), Yahya (John), Isma'il Sadiq al-Wa'd, 'Isa
(Jesus) and Muhammad; others are indicated but not named).

We, as ordinary men, do not share at all their qualities and so we
cannot taste the reality of their perception. Prophecy, as an
experience, remains unknown for us. Moreover, few of the past
revelations have reached us and we have only a limited view of the
reality which is revelation and prophecy. It may be that what has
reached us in the form of revealed books is exactly as the revelation we
are familiar with, that is the Qur'an. Nevertheless, it is possible that
other revelations (complete- ly unknown to us) may have contained
information and instructions of which we have no knowledge.

**How the Qur'an was Revealed**

Qur'anic revelation, according to the Qur'an itself, is an utterance on
behalf of God to His Prophet; the Prophet received the speech of God
with all his being, not just by way of learning. In XLII:5 1-52 God
says, And it was not to be for any man that God should speak to him
unless (it be) by revelation or from behind a veil or (that) we send a
messenger to reveal what He will by His leave. Truly He is exalted,
wise. And thus We hare inspired in you (Muhammad) a spirit of Our
Command. You did not know what the Book, nor what the Faith was. But We
have made it a light whereby We guide whom We will of our slaves. And
truly you surely guide to a right path.

On comparison of these two verses we discover three different ways of
divine utterance. Firstly, God speaks without there being any veil
between Him and man. Secondly, God speaks from behind a veil: like the
tree on the Tur mountain from behind which Moses heard God speaking.
Thirdly, God's speech is brought to man by an angel who had previously
heard the revelation from Him.

The second of the two verses above show that the Qur'an has reached us
by means of the third of three possible ways. Again God says in XXVI:
192-5, "(A revelation) which the Faithful Spirit (Gabriel) has brought
down upon your heart, that you may be (one) of the warners, in plain
Arabic Speech," and in chapter II:97 "Who is an enemy to Gabriel! For it
is he who has revealed (this book) to your heart."

From these verses we understand that the Qur'an was transmitted by way
of an angel named Gabriel, or the "Faithful Spirit"; and that the
Prophet received the revelation from him with all his being, all his
perception and not merely by listening. The verse says "on your heart,"
which in Qur'anic terms means perception or awareness. In LIII: 10-11 we
read, "And He revealed to His slave that which He revealed. The heart
did not lie (in seeing) what it saw;" and in XCVIII:2 reception of the
revelation is indicated as a reading of "pure pages" by God's
messenger.


