Part Iv the Relationship of the Qur'an To the Sciences
======================================================

Praise of Knowledge and the Stimulation of the Desire to Study No other
revealed book praises and encourages science and knowledge as does the
Qur'an and it is for this reason that the Qur'an names the age of the
desert Arabs, together with their pagan cultures, before Islam as the
"age of ignorance." In over a hundred verses reference is made to
science and knowledge in a variety of ways; and many of these verses
praise the value of scientific knowledge. In XCVI:5 God indicates the
favour he has done man by bringing him out of his state of ignorance.

"He teaches man what he did not know." Likewise, we read in LVIII:11,
"God will exalt those who believe among you and those who have knowledge
to high ranks," and in XXXIX:9 God says, "Are those who know equal to
those who do not" Besides the many verses in the Qur'an concerning
knowledge, there are also countless traditions of the Prophet and the
Imams on this subject which rank second only in importance to the
Qur'an.

**The Sciences which the Qur'an Invites Men to Study**

In verses too numerous to mention, the Qur'an invites one to reflect
upon the signs Of creation: the heavens, the shining stars and their
astonishing celestial movements, and the cosmic order which rules over
them all. Similarly, the Qur'an urges one to reflect upon the creation
of the earth, the seas, the mountains, the desert, and the wonders
contained below the surface of the earth, the difference between night
and day and the changing cycle of seasons. It urges mankind to meditate
on the extraordinary creation of the plants and the order and symmetry
governing their growth, as well as the multiplicity of the animal
kingdom.

The Qur'an invites one to witness the interdependence of beings and how
all live in harmony with nature. It calls upon man also, to ponder on
his own make-up, on the secrets of creation which are hidden within him,
on his soul, on the depth of his perception, and on his relationship
with the world of the spirit.

The Qur'an commands man to travel in the world in order to witness
other cultures and to investigate the social orders, history and
philosophies of past people. Thus it calls man to a study of the natural
sciences, mathematics, philosophy, the arts and all sciences available
to man, and to study them for the benefit of man and the well-being of
society.

The Qur'an recommends the study of these sciences on the condition that
it leads to truth and reality, that it produces a correct view of the
world based on an understanding of God.

Knowledge, which merely keeps a man occupied and prevents him from
knowing the reality of his own existence, is equated with ignorance. God
says in XXX:7, "They know only some appearance of the life of one world
and are heedless of the Hereafter" and in chapter XLV:23, "Have you seen
him who makes his Desire his goal, and God sends him astray purposely
and seals up his Heart and sets a covering on his Heart. Then who will
lead him after God (has condemned him)."

The Qur'an not only stimulates the desire for study but is itself a
complete system of education of divine knowledge; it provides, too, a
model for human behaviour and thought. This complete way of life is
called Islam, the way of submission.

**The Sciences Particular to the Study of the Qur'an**

There are many sciences devoted to the study of the Qur'an itself. The
development of such sciences dates from the first day of Qur'anic
revelation; over a period of time they were unified and perfected. Today
countless books are available on these sciences, fruit of the labour of
different researchers over the centuries.

Some of these sciences investigate the language and vocabulary of the
Qur'an, and some the meanings. Those concerned with language are the
sciences of correct Qur'anic pronunciation and reading (tajwad and
qira'ah). They explain the simple changes which certain letters undergo
when occurring in conjunction with others, the substitution of letters
and the places prescribed for breath-pausing, and other similar matters.
They also study the different ways the Qur'an has been written down and
the several generally accepted ways of recitation, together with the
three lesser known ways and the rarer modes of recitation.

Other works enumerate the number of chapters and their verses, while
others relate these numbers to the whole Qur'an.

They discuss the tradition of Qur'anic calligraphy and how it differs
from the normal Arabic script. They research, too, into the meanings of
the Qur'an and the general division of subject matter, such as the place
and circumstance of revelation, the interpretation of certain verses,
the outward and inner meanings, the muhkam (clear) or the mutashabih
(ambiguous), and the abrogating and the abrogated verses.

Others study the verses containing the laws (which, in fact, are part
of what is known as Islamic fiqh or jurisprudence). Others specialize in
the commentary of the meanings (already seen in a previous section of
the book). Specialists in each of the different sciences have published
numerous works on each subject.

**The Sciences which Developed because of the Qur'an**

The sciences of the din of Islam came into being at the beginning of
the Prophet's mission and the revelation of the Qur'an, including laws
governing the behaviour and transactions of Muslims. Study of these
sciences developed in the first century after the Hijrah although
initially, not in any formal way. Since the Caliphs had prohibited the
writing down of the tradition, they were handed down by word of mouth by
the companions and their followers.

A small number of Scholars wrote on jurisprudence and on the science of
the traditions at the beginning of the second century when the
prohibition was lifted, allowing Scholars to record the traditions.

It was at this point that a number of disciplines came into being
including the Science of Traditions and the Science of establishing the
authority and sincerity of those men who transmitted it; the Science of
analysis of the text of the traditions; the Science of the foundations
of jurisprudence and jurisprudence itself; the Science of belief in the
judgement after death and the after-life. Even philosophy, which entered
the Islamic arena via the Greek, and remained there for some time in its
original Greek, took on the colour and beliefs of the people after a
time. Changes in the subject matter and the structure of disciplines
took place such that today, amongst Muslims, all subject matter
concerning divine gnosis is supported by proofs and reasons taken from
the Qur'an and the traditions.

All these subjects were also studied as an integral part of the Arabic
language: mastery of the science of verb declensions grammar, meanings
of words, commentary and explanation, the art of metaphors and good
style, and the philosophy and science of derived meanings allowed
greater precision and clarity in the study of the Islamic Sciences as a
whole.

Indeed what stimulated scholars to record and arrange coherently the
laws of the Arabic language was the sense that they were serving God;
love of Him drew them to a clarity and sweetness of style which in turn
generated the Science of correct speech and composition. It is thus
related that Ibn 'Abbas, who was one of the commentators amongst the
companions, explained the mean- ings of verses by taking examples of the
vocabulary in question from Arabic poetry. He advised people to collect
and learn Arabic poetry saying, Poetry is the court of the Arabs
(meaning the place where the finest language may be heard).

The famous Shi'ite scholar Khahl ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi wrote the book
al-'Ayn on the subject of language and also described the science of
poetic rhyme.

Many others also wrote on the same subjects. The subject of history was
initially derived in Islam from stories of the lives of prophets, in
particular that of the Prophet Muhammad, and the description of the
course of past nations. To this basic material was added an account of
the events during the period immediately following the appearance of
Islam. All this was developed into a history of the world in the
writings of such men as al-Tabari, al-Mas'udi, al-Ya'qubi and
al-Waqidi.

The original reason the Muslims translated and transmitted the natural
Sciences and mathematics from other cultures and languages into Arabic
was the cultural stimulation given to them by the Qur'an. Many different
Sciences were translated from Greek, Syriac and Sanskrit into Arabic.
Access to these sciences was at first available only to the Caliph (who
was at that time leader of only Arab Muslims). Gradually they were made
available to all Muslims and improved upon as research methods,
structuring, classification and ordering of the subjects developed.

One of the main reasons the civilization of Islam, which formed after
the death of the Prophet, came to include a large part of the inhabited
world (and which today numbers over six hundred million inhabitants),
was the Qur'an. We as Shi'ahs, however, deny that the caliphs and the
kings who followed them had legitimate claim to the guardianship and
execution of the law even though they expanded Islamic civilization, and
do not fully agree with the way they explained the realities of Islam.

Indeed the light of wisdom which illuminated the world was from the
light of the miracle of the Qur'an. The apppearance and diffusion of the
revelation caused a change in the direction of history and generated a
chain of important events resulting in the progress and development of
the culture of man.


