The Inner and Outer Dimensions of the Qur'an
============================================

In chapter IV:36 God says, "And serve God and ascribe nothing as a
partner to Him. " The verse prohibits pre-Islamic Arabs from their
worship of idols, just as chapter XXII:30 urges them to "shun the filth
of idols, and shun lying speech." On reflection it becomes clear that an
idol may exist in any form; therefore, idol-worship is forbidden because
it involves submission to an entity other than God.

In chapter XXXVI:60 God treats the devil as an idol when He says, "Did
I did not charge you, O you sons of Adam, that you do not worship the
devil. " It also becomes clear that another form of idol-worship is
submission to one's desires or to the will of others, over and above the
will of God; this is indicated in XLV:23 which refers to "him who makes
his desire his God. "

Thus it becomes apparent that one should turn to none other for help
than God Himself and not forget Him in any circumstances, since to do
otherwise would be to direct one's attention away from God. To submit to
others is to belittle Him and this is the very essence of idol-worship.
Thus, in chapter VII:179 God says of those who refused to worship Him,
"Already We have urged into hell many of the jinn and humankind, ...
These are the neglectful. " The verse, "ascribe nothing to Him, "
clearly forbids worships of idols; that is to say, man may not, without
God's permission, submit himself to others including his own desires,
since any such submission would render him neglectful of God.

In this way, the simple, apparent text of the verse unfolds multiple
meanings and exemplifies a feature to be found throughout the Qur'an.
Thus the saying of the Prophet, (related in the books of hadith and
commentary), become clear: In truth the Qur'an possesses an inner and
outer, and the inner contains Seven dimensions.

The Wisdom Contained in the Two Facets of the Qur'an: The Inner and the
Outer Man's primary life, namely, the temporal life of this world, is as
a bubble on the immense sea of the material; and since all his
transactions concern the material, he is throughout his life, at the
mercy of the moving waves. All his senses are occupied with the material
and his thoughts influenced by sensory information. Eating, drinking,
standing, speaking, listening, like all other human actions, take place
in the sphere of the material and not in the sphere of thought.

Moreover, in reflecting upon such concepts as love, enmity, ambition
and nobility, one comes to better understand them by translating them
into language derived from the senses or from actual material objects;
for example, the magnetic attraction of lovers, a burning ambition, or a
man's being a mine of wisdom.

Capacity to comprehend the world of meaning, which is vaster than that
of the material, varies from man to man. For one person it may be almost
impossible to imagine the world of meanings; another may perceive it
only in the most superficial terms and, yet another, may comprehend with
ease the most profound of spiritual concepts.

One may say that the greater a man's capacity to under- stand meanings,
the lesser he is attached to the world of the material and its alluring,
deceiving appearance. By his very nature, each person possesses a
potential for understanding meanings and, provided that he does not deny
this capacity, it may be cultivated and increased further.

It is not a simple matter to reduce meaning from one level of
understanding to another without losing its sense. This is particularly
true for meanings possessing great subtlety which cannot be transmitted,
especially to ordinary people, without adequate explanation. As one
example, we may mention the Hindu religion: anyone reflecting deeply
upon the vedic scriptures of India and studying the different aspects of
its message will ultimately see that its basic aim is the worship of one
God.

Unfortunately this aim is explained in such a complicated manner that
the concept of oneness reaches the minds of ordinary people in the form
of idol-worship and the recognition of many gods. To avoid such
problems, it becomes necessary to communicate meanings hidden beyond the
material world in a language which is rooted in the material and readily
comprehensible world.

Indeed some religions deprive their adherents of rights accorded to
them by the religion itself: women, for example, in Hinduism; Jews and
Christians who, in general, are denied access to knowledge of their holy
books. Islam does not deprive anyone of their rights in the din, and
both man and woman, scholar and layman, black and white are equal in
being accorded access to their religion. God affirms this in chapter
III:195, "Indeed I do not allow the work of any worker, male or female,
to be lost," and, again, in chapter XLIX: 13, "O mankind! Truly we have
created you male and female and have made you nations and tribes that
you may know one another. Indeed the noblest of you in the sight of God
is the best in conduct."

In this manner the Qur'an addresses its teachings to mankind at large
and affirms that every man may increase himself in knowledge and,
thereby, perfect his own behaviour.

In fact, the Qur'an addresses its teachings specifically to the world
of man. Since, as mentioned earlier, each man has a different capacity
of understanding and since the expounding of subtle knowledge is not
without danger of misinterpretation, the Qur'an directs its teachings
primarily at the level of the common man.

In this manner, the subtlest of meanings can be explained and multiple
meanings and ideas expressed, to the ordinary person, by co-relating
them to concrete sensory meanings; meaning, therefore, is always
inherent in the letter of the words. The Qur'an reveals itself in a way
suitable {or different levels of comprehension so that each benefits
according to his own capacity. In chapter XLIII:34 God emphazises this
idea: Truly We have appointed it a lecture in Arabic so that you may
perhaps understand and indeed in the source of the Book, which We
possess, it is sublime, decisive.

God describes the different capacities of man's comprehension in the
following metaphor in chapter XIII:17 He sends down water from the sky,
so that valleys flow according to their measure; and the Prophet, in a
famous tradition says: "We prophets talk to the people according to the
capacity of their intellects." Another result of the multiple meanings
within the Qur'an is that the verses take on a significance beyond their
immediate text. Certain verses contain metaphors which indicate divine
gnosis far beyond the common man's understanding but which,
nevertheless, become comprehensible through their metaphorical form.

God says in chapter XVII:89, "And indeed We have displayed for mankind
in this Qur'an all kind of similitudes, but most of mankind refuse
everything except disbelief. " And again in chapter XXIX:43 God talks of
metaphors as a means of expression, "As for these similitudes, We coin
them for mankind, but none will grasp their meanings except the wise."

Consequently, we must conclude that all Qur'anic teachings which deal
with subtle profound knowledge, are in the form of similitudes.


**The Two Kinds of Qur'anic Verses: The Explicit and the Implicit**

In chapter XI:I God says of the Qur'an, "This is a book whose meanings
are secure. " From this we may draw the meaning to read "whose meanings
are perfected, expanded, firm and strong." In chapter XXXIX:23, it
reads, God has revealed the fairest of statements (consistent with and
in relation to each other) and arranged in pairs (according to meaning)
which cause the flesh of those who fear their Lord to creep.

In chapter III:7 He says, "He it is who has revealed to you the Book in
which are clear revelations, (that is, verses whose meaning is
immediately clear and which Muslims use for guidance). They are the
substance of the Book and others which are allegorical. But those in
whose heart is doubt indeed follow the allegorical seeking dissension by
seeking to explain it. None knowest its explanation except God and those
who are of sound instruction say: We believe in it, it is all from our
Lord.

The first of the verses describes those sections of the Qur'an whose
meaning is explicit, clear and unambiguous, and safe from
misinterpretation. The second verse refers to all those verses whose
meanings are implicit, and which are considered allegorical. It then
proceeds to indicate that both types of verses, (the explicit, or clear
and the implicit, or allegorical), share certain common qualities:
beauty and sweetness of language, and a miraculous power of expression
which are present in the entire Qur'an.

The third verse under consideration divides the Qur'an into two parts:
the explicit and the implicit, the clear and the allegorical, or, in
Qur'anic terms, the muhkam and the mustashabih.

The muhkam and those verses which are explicit, clear and immediate in
their message and, therefore, incapable of being misinterpreted; the
mutashabih verses are not of this nature. It is the duty of every firm
believer to believe in and act according to the verses which are mahkam.
It is also his duty to believe in the verses which are mutashabih, but
he must abstain from acting upon them; this injunction is based on the
premise that only those whose heart is corrupt and whose belief is false
follow the implicit, mutashibih, verses, fabricating interpretations
and, thereby, deceiving common people.

The meanings of the Explicit and the Implicit Verses, According to the
Commentators and Scholars
There is much difference of opinion amongst the Islamic scholars
concerning the meaning of explicit and implicit verses, with almost
twenty different views on the matter. We can, however, conclude from the
views of commentators, ranging from the time of the Prophet to the
present day, that the explicit verses are clear and unambiguous, and
that one is obliged to believe in and act according to them.

The implicit verses, on the other hand, are those which outwardly seem
to express a meaning, but which contain a further truer meaning whose
interpretation is known only to God; man has no access to it. However,
he is enjoined to believe in them but to avoid acting upon them. This
view is held amongst the Sunni scholars. It is also maintained by the
Shi'ite scholars except they believe that the Prophet and the Imams of
his family also understood the hidden meanings. They also maintain that
the ordinary man must seek knowledge of the implicit verses from God,
the Prophet and the Imams.

This view, although held by most commentators, is in several aspects
not in accord with the text of the verse beginning, He it is who has
revealed to you the Book in which are explicit verses (whose meanings
are immediately clear) ... The Method of Guidance and Explanation used
in the Rest of the Qur'an This we may attribute, firstly, to the fact
that there is no verse whose meaning is totally obscure since the Qur'an
describes itself as a light, as a guidance and as an explanation. Thus
it is not befitting that there be verses which fail to reveal their
meaning, or to illuminate the Qur'an as a whole.

We should examine again the verse, Will they not ponder on the Qur'an.
If it had been from other than God they would have found much
inconsistency in it [IV:82].

Thus reflection on the Qur'an would remove all kinds of seeming
inconsistencies making it unacceptable to say, as do most of the
scholars, that the implicit verses cannot be totally understood and that
apparent inconsistencies cannot be resolved. Other scholars say that
what is meant by the implicit verses are the letters found at the
beginning of certain chapters. (These are known as the
muqatta'ah-letters, like Alif, Lam, Mim, Alif, Lam Ra', Ha, Mim, whose
real meaning is unknown).

We must, how ever remember that the implicit verses are so-called when
read in relation to the explicit verses. This denotes that, accompanying
the hidden meaning of the implicit, there is a surface (or literal)
meaning whereby the real and the apparent meanings come together in
intricate relationship with one another.

It should be understood that the letters at the opening of certain
chapters do not have any literal meaning. It seems that a group of
misguided men use the implicit verses to mislead people, but never in
Islam has one heard of anyone trying to use the muqatta'ah-letters to do
so. Some commentators say that the meaning of the word mutashabih, (in
the verse), refers to the famous story of the Jews who wanted to find an
indication of the duration of Islam within the order of the letters, but
the Prophet used to read the letters one after the other and so confuse
their calculations.

This view is also without substance since, even if the story is true,
it is not of sufficient impact nor conviction to be considered as an
interpretation of the implicit verses. Whatever the Jews talked, it
contained no malice because, even if the religion, din, of Islam was for
a limited period of time (and, thus, subject to abrogation), their
remarks would in no way be a criticism of the purity and reality of
Islam considering that all religions revealed by God prior to Islam were
for a specific period and open to abrogation.

Secondly, this view implies that the word ta'wil (which may be
translated as "interpretation") in the verse refers to a meaning other
than the apparent literal meaning and that it is used only as a
reference to the implicit verses. This is incorrect, as we shall see in
a later chapter dealing with exegesis ta'wil and revelation, tanzil (the
actual text or letter of the verse) how exegesis in Qur'anic terminology
does not refer to one meaning but to several, encompassing such terms as
realization, fulfilment, interpretation and explanation.

We shall also discuss how all Qur'anic verses have a specific
interpretation, ta'wil and not just their explicit and implicit
definitions. On examination, the words of the explicit verses (ayat
muhkamah), are seen to describe the phrase "They are the source of the
Book," meaning that the explicit verses include the most important
subjects of the Book, and the theme of the rest of the verses is
secondary and dependent upon them. This implies that the real point
intended to be conveyed by the implicit verses refers back to the
explicit verses. Thus, the meanings of the implicit are illuminated by
referring back to the source (or explicit) verses.

Thus we are left with no verses which have no obvious indication as to
their true meaning; they are either immediately clear by virtue of their
being in the class of explicit verses or, in the case of the implicit,
made clear by the other explicit verses. As for the muqatta'ah-letters
at the beginning of the chapters, they do not have any apparent meaning
since they are not words in the normal sense and possess no meaning
comprehensible to man; thus, they are outside of the classification of
explicit and the implicit.

Again, we would refer the reader to an examination of the following
verse in order to emphasize the truth of our view: And so why do they
not reflect upon the Qur'an or are there locks upon their hearts. " And,
likewise, the verse, "and why do they not reflect upon the Qur'an, if it
were from other than God they would have found much inconsistency in
it."

The Commentary of the Imams of the Prophet's Family concerning the
Explicit and the Implicit Verses It is made clear from the different
commentaries of the Imams that there is always a way to discover the
real meaning and aim of the implicit verses. Each verse, even if its
meaning is not apparent, can be explained by reference to other
verses.

Thus the real meaning of the implicit verses can be found in relation
to the explicit verses. For instance, the verse "The Beneficent, One who
is established on the throne," [XX:5] and again the verse, "And your
Lord came," [LXXXIX:22] appear to ascribe bodily characteristics to God,
but when compared with the verse, "Nothing is as His likeness,"
[XLII:11] it becomes clear that the "sitting" on the throne or the
"coming" of God has a meaning other than a physical one. The Prophet,
describing the Qur'an, says: In truth the Qur'an was not revealed so
that one part may contradict the other but rather was revealed so that
one part may verify the other. So that what you understand of it then
act accordingly and that which is unclear for you then simply believe in
it.

The Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali, said that one part of the Qur'an
bears witness to another and one part clarifies the other. The sixth
Imam said the explicit verse is that which one acts in accordance with,
and the implicit is that which is unclear only for the man who is
ignorant of its real meaning.

From these narrations, we may conclude that the question of explicit
and implicit is relative; it is possible that a verse may seem explicit
to one person and implicit to another. It is said of the eighth Imam
that he considered, "the person who refers to the implicit mutashabih,
verses in the Qur'an to the corresponding clarifiying explicit verses",
as having "found guidance to the right path."

He is also reported to have said that, In truth in our traditions are
recorded implicit verses like the explicit of the Qur'an, so refer the
implicit to its corresponding explicit verse. or tradition, and do not
follow the implicit and go astray. Thus it is clear from the traditions
and, in particular, the last tradition, that the implicit verse is one
which does not contain a clear meaning without reference to the explicit
verse, and not that there exists no means to understand it.


