Part 3: The Revelation of the Qur'an
====================================

General Beliefs of Muslims concerning the Revelation of the Qur'an
------------------------------------------------------------------

More than any other revealed book, especially the Torah and the New
Testament, the Qur'an describes the details of the revelation, the
transmittance and even accounts of the experience of the revelation. The
general belief of Muslims concerning the revelation, based on the
Qur'an, is that the text of the Qur'an is the actual speech of God
transmitted to the Prophet by one of His chosen angels.

The name of this angel, or heavenly being, is Gabriel or the Faithful
Spirit. He transmitted the word of God over a period of twenty-three
years to the Prophet. He would bring the divine instructions to the
Prophet, who would relate them faithfully to the people using the same
words in the form of a verse.

The Prophet thus used the meaning of the verses to call the people to an
understanding of faith, of belief, of social laws and of individual
duties. These instructions from God to His messenger are known as the
Prophecy, or the message; the Prophet transmitted this message without
making any addition to or detraction from it in any way.

The View of Contemporary Non-Muslim Writers concerning the Revelation and Prophecy
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Most contemporary writers who take an interest in different religions
and ideologies adopt the following view of the Qur'an: they say the
Prophet was a social genius who appeared to save society from the throes
of decline into savagery and to raise it up in the cradle of
civilization and freedom.

They claim also that he called men to his own ideas of pure and sincere
behavior by giving them a comprehensive religious form and order. They
affirm that he had a pure soul and tremendous ambition; that he lived in
a particularly dark and ignorant age, where only the law of force and
foolish singing of verse, social chaos and selfishness, stealing,
marauding and savagery were to be seen.

They describe how he was troubled by witnessing such things and,
sometimes when overcome by the pain of such sights, he would withdraw
from men and pass days alone in the cave in the Tihamah mountains; he
would marvel at the sky and its shining stars, the earth, the mountains,
the sea, the desert and all the precious means placed at the disposal of
man by the Creator; he would be grieved at the bad behavior and
ignorance of those around him, who had thrown away a life of well-being
and happiness for a tormented succession of bestial habits.

This feeling was always present with the Prophet; he bore this pain and
vexation up to his fourtieth year when, according to these contemporary
non-Muslim writers, he formed a plan to save his fellow-men from their
miserable state of nomadic wandering, rebellious independence, selfish-
ness and lawlessness.

This plan, called the religion of Islam, was the most suitable one for
the times. The Prophet being of pure and sincere character, realized
that his chaste thoughts were the Word of God and Divine Revelation
which were infused in him through his virtuous nature. His good will and
benevolent spirit, from which his thoughts exuded and established peace
in his heart, was called the Spirit of Trustworthiness and Gabriel, the
angel of revelation.

Furthermore, according to this contemporary view of Muhammad, he
perceived the forces of good and happiness in nature as Angels and all
the forces of bad as Satan and the Jinn (invisible entities). He called
his own task, which he had undertaken according to his own conscience,
Prophethood and himself, the deliverer of the divine message.

This explanation, however, comes from those writers who affirm the
existence of God or at least some kind of nature- force, and attach a
certain importance to the religion of Islam, albeit in the name of just
and unbiased assessment.

Those, however, who deny outright the existence of a Creator see
Prophecy, revelation, divine duties, reward and punishment, the fire and
the garden as mere religious politics, a lie in the name of religion to
further one's own ends.

They say that the prophets were reformers who brought about social
change in the name of religion. They argued that since men of past ages
were drowned in ignorance and superstitious worship the prophets
contained the religious order within a framework of superstitious
beliefs about the origin of Creation and the day of reckoning in order
to further their prospects of reform.

What the Qur'an Itself Says concerning this Matter
--------------------------------------------------

Scholars who explain the power of revelation and prophecy using the
above explanation, attach great importance to the Science of nature and
the visible world, and claim that everything in the world works
according to the laws of nature. They view historical events, right up
to the present-day, as the developing and constantly changing face of
nature.

Likewise, they view all revealed religions as social manifestations.
Thus they would agree that if one of the geniuses of history, like
Cyrus, Darius or Alexander, had announced himself as having been chosen
by God as an executor of divine commands, their explanation would have
been no different than that given above.

We do not intend here to establish the existence of the unseen, of the
world beyond the visible world of nature; we are not saying to other
scholars or scientists that any one science may only be discussed by
remaining within the strict limits of that particular science.

We are not suggesting that the modern sciences which investigate the
properties and effects of the material world, (whether or not they be
positively or negatively disposed to the creation), do not have the
right to enter into an investigation of the metaphysical.

What we are saying is that any explanation they propose must be in
accordance with the explanation of society, existence, nature and the
cosmos given by the Qur'an. The Qur'an is an authentic document of
prophecy and is the basis of all social, metaphysical and scientific
discussion; the explanation Of the Qur'an contain proofs against their
arguments which we can enumerate and reflect upon. These proofs are
connected to different Qur'anic verses discussed below.

According to the explanation of modern non-Muslims and atheists, the
Prophet's nature was pure through which came to him the word of God,
meaning that the divine system of thought was alive in his own thoughts;
the idea of divinity manifested itself in his thoughts because he was
pure and holy; it was natural (in the minds Of these Scholars) for
prophets to attribute these thoughts to God for, in this way, they
ennobled and exalted their own task.

The Qur'an, however, strongly and convincingly denies that it is the
speech or the ideas of the prophet or, indeed, of any other man. In
chapters 10:38 and 11:13 the Qur'an declares that if it is the word of
man then detractors of Islam should produce similar words about every
subject treated in the Qur'an, namely, belief in the after-life, morals,
laws, stories of past generations and other prophets, wisdom and advice.

The Qur'an urges them to seek help anywhere if they do not realize that
it is the word of God and not of man, but adds that even if jinn and man
joined forces together they would not be able to produce a Qur'an like
it.

In chapter 2:23 the Qur'an challenges those who consider it merely the
speech of Muhammad to produce a book similar to it or even just one
chapter like it. The force of this challenge becomes clear when we
realize that it is issued for someone whose life should resemble that of
Muhammad, namely, the life of an orphan, uneducated in any formal sense,
not being able to read or write and grew up in the unenlightened age of
the jahiliyah period (the age of ignorance) before Islam.

In 4:82 the Qur'an asks why no inconsistencies or changes appeared in
the verses considering that neither the wording nor the meaning of the
verses has altered despite being revealed over a period of twenty-three
years. If it was the word of man and not the word of Gods then it would
have certainly been affected by change like all other things in the
temporal world of nature and matter.

It is clear that this challenge and these explanations are not mere
empty words of exultation; rather they present the Qur'an for what it
is, namely the word of God.

The Qur'an establishes its own miraculous nature in hundreds of verses.
This miracle is still unexplained by normal literacy standards used to
"grasp" a text. Indeed successive prophets established their Prophethood
through similar verses revealed by God.

If prophecy was merely the call of an individual conscience or the
inspiration of a pure and sincere soul, then there would be no sense in
claiming it as divine proof or seeking help in its miraculous nature as
the Prophet, in fact, did.

Some writers interpret the many miracles of the Qur'an in terms of
undisguised mockery. When we investigate the subject of their mockery we
inevitably discover that the Qur'an means something other than that
which they have understood.

It is not our intention to try and prove the miraculous nature of the
Qur'an nor to demonstrate the soundness and authenticity of its
narration; rather, we would point out that the Qur'an clearly describes
the miracles of the past prophets, like Salih, Abraham, Moses and Jesus.
The stories related in the Qur'an can only be understood and interpreted
in the light of miraculous guidance.

Why, we may ask, if the prophets were mere men, inspired by the purity
of their character, was it necessary to establish the existence of this
miraculous guidance?

The Angel Gabriel
-----------------

According to the explanation of the above-mentioned writers, the prophet
referred to his own pure soul as the "Faithful Spirit" or the giver of
revelation. The Qur'an, however, does not support this view and names
Gabriel as the deliverer of the verses.

God says in chapter 2:97, "***Say (O Muhammad, to mankind): Who is an
enemy to Gabriel! for it is he who has revealed (this book) to your
heart by God's permission.***" This verse refers to Jews who wanted to
know who had revealed the Qur'an to the Prophet.

He replied that it was Gabriel. They said, "We are enemies of Gabriel as
he it was who gave us (the tribe of Israel) the laws and legal
punishments and as we are enemies to him, we do not believe in the book
which he has brought.”

Thus God replies to them in the verse that Gabriel revealed the Qur'an
to the Prophet by God's permission. God further says that the Qur'an is
to be believed in, and that it is not the speech of Gabriel. It is
important to note that the Qur'an, in the words of the above verse was
revealed "to the heart" of the Prophet Muhammad by Gabriel.

In another verse (26:193-4) we read that it was transmitted by the
Faithful Spirit, "***which the Faithful Spirit has brought down upon
your heart." By comparison of these two verses it*** ***becomes evident
that it is the angel Gabriel who is meant here by the words, "Faithful
Spirit.***"

In chapter 81:1923 God describes the transmittance of revelation:
***That this is in truth the word of an honored messenger (Gabriel),
Mighty established in the presence of the Lord of the Throne, one to be
obeyed and trustworthy and your comrade (the Prophet) is not mad. Surely
he saw him on the clear horizon.***

These verses show that Gabriel was one of the intimates of God,
possessing great power and trust. Again in chapter 40:7 we read,
"***Those who bear the power, and all who are around Him, praise their
Lord and believe in Him and ask forgiveness for those who believe.***"
Such characteristics as belief in God and seeking forgiveness from him
are only to be expected from independent, sentient creatures.

In chapter 4:172-173 we read, ***The Messiah will never disdain to be a
servant of God, nor will the favored angels. Whoever disdains His
service and is proud, He will gather them all to Himself, then as for
those who believe and do good, He will pay them fully their rewards and
give them more out of His grace, and as for those who disdain and are
proud, He will punish them with a painful doom. And they will not find
for themselves besides Allah a guardian or a helper.***

It is clear that although the Messiah, Jesus, and the favored angels do
not disobey the commands of God they are, nevertheless, warned of a
painful punishment on the day of reckoning if they were to commit a
wrong.

The possibility of neglect of their duties or committing wrong action is
necessarily dependent on their being sentient beings, possessed of free
will and entrusted with the task of transmitting the revelation of God.

Thus we learn from the Qur'an that Gabriel is the Faithful Soul: he is
trustworthy and to be obeyed because he is obeyed by angels in his task.
An indication of these obedient angels comes in the verse, ***But truly
it is a warning-so let whoever will pay heed to it, on honored leaves
exalted, purified (set down by scribes) noble and righteous***
(80:11-16) .

The Angels and the Devils
-------------------------

According to the explanation of contemporary non-Muslim writers, angel
is the name given to forces in nature which represent goodness, and
happiness and devils are forces in nature representing evil and
unhappiness.

What we under- stand from the Qur'an, however, is that they are beings
existing beyond our sense-range, who possess feelings and an independent
free-will. To the verses above, (indicating that angels possess
independence and free will), may be added many other verses which
confirm these same qualities.

The refusal of Satan to prostrate himself before Adam and the dialogue
between Satan and God occurs several times in the Qur'an. Satan, after
having been expelled from intimacy with God, says in chapter 38:82-83,
"***I surely will lead every one of them astray except your sincere
slaves among them.***" And God replies "***I shall fill hell with you
and with those who follow you, together***" (38:85).

It is clear that punishment can only take place if the punished
understand the reason for the punishment. God in chapter 34:20, says in
confirmation of Satan's warning to man, "***And Satan indeed found his
calculation true concerning them, for they follow them, all except a
group of true believers.*** "

Likewise, we read in chapter 14:22, "***And Satan said when the matter
had been decided: Indeed! Allah promised you a promise of truth; and I
promised you and failed you. And I had no power over you except that I
called to you and you obeyed me. So do not blame me but blame
yourselves.***"

Blame is a matter which can only be associated with those who possess
the power of reason and free-will. We quote these verses to show that
Satan, like the rest of the angels, is a thinking independent being
rather than a force in nature. Just as verses occur in the Qur'an
concerning the angels and the devils, there also are verses which
clearly and vividly describe the jinn (elemental spirits or invisible
beings, either harmful or helpful).

In chapter 46:18 reference is made to those who, invited to believe in
Islam, spurn it as just another ancient fable or superstition: ***Such
are those in whom the word concerning nations of the jinn and mankind
which have passed away before them has effect. Indeed they are the
losers.***

We may understand from this verse that the jinn, the invisible entities,
like mankind, live in different nations, pass a period of time in their
different societies and finally die.

In the same chapter, verses 29-32 we read, ***And when we inclined
toward you (Muhammad) certain of the jinn who wished to hear the Qur'an
and when they were in its presence said, Listen! and, when it was
finished turned back to their people warning. They said: O our people!
Truly we have heard a book which has been revealed after Moses,
confirming that which was before it, guiding to the truth and a right
road. O my people! respond to God's Summoner and believe in Him. He will
forgive you some of your wrong actions and guard you from a painful
doom. And whoever does not respond to God's Summoner he can in no way
escape in the earth, and you (can find) no protecting friends instead of
Him. Such are in clear error***.

These verses clearly confirm that the jinn, like men, live in groups,
are thinking individuals possessing free will and charged with duties,
Moreover, there are other verses dealing with the day of rising which
affirms these same qualities in the jinn.

The Call of Conscience
----------------------

According to the explanation of certain modern writers, Prophethood is
the rising up of a man from amongst his people in order to undertake
social reform in accordance with the call of his conscience. The Qur'an,
however, gives a different meaning to the Prophethood. In 91:7-8 we
read, "***And a soul and Him who perfected it, and inspired it (with
conscience off what is wrong for it and (what is) right for it.*** "

In this verse God demonstrates that each individual perceives from his
own conscience and God-given nature the difference between good and bad
action; and, that the potential for reform and the bettering of one's
self is contained within each person; some listen to their conscience
and act correctly while others pay no heed and so act wrongly.

Thus in the following verses of the same chapter God says: "***He is
indeed successful who causes it to grow and he is indeed a failure who
stunts it.”*** If Prophethood manifests itself as a result of the
conscience, which everyone possesses, then everyone in theory may become
a prophet. God, however, has reserved this duty for certain men only.

Thus He says in chapter 6:124, "***And when a sign comes to them, they
say: we do not believe until we are given that which God's messengers
are given. God knows best with whom to place His message.***"

The Reality of the Prophet's Mission
------------------------------------

We should repeat at this point that we do not intend to prove or
disprove here the truth of Islam or the validity of the Prophet's
invitation of the people to Islam. Rather, we simply want to state that
the second of the modern non-Islamic explanations is also not in
accordance with the explanation given in the Qur'an.

According to it, the prophet succeeded in convincing people to believe
in a set of superstitions framed in a politico-religious framework; he
was aided in this, so they say, by the fact that his own people were
tribesmen, having no advanced culture of their own.

In the name of public good and the well-being of society harsh
punishments were promised to those who did not obey the religious laws;
the Prophet instilled a fear of the Day of Reckoning and promised
rewards for those who obeyed.

Thus fervor for the promised paradise and fear of the Day of Reckoning
created a society based on a religious foundation.

The history of the lives of other prophets has, for the most part, been
lost in time, but the life of the Prophet Muhammad is well documented.
Anyone who researches into it will not be left in the least doubt that
he had total faith and inner certainty in his mission.

If religious beliefs were mere superstitions or a means to unify and
subdue a society, then all the proofs expounded in the Qur'an concerning
the hereafter, the existence of a Creator of the World, Divine Unity,
His attributes, belief in a prophecy and the reckoning of a man's
actions after death would have absolutely no meaning.

What the Qur'an says about the Meaning of Revelation and Prophecy
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'an clearly states that it is a book revealed to the Prophet and
that revelation is a kind of divine utterance beyond the understanding
or communication of the material world; revelation is unperceived by
sense or intellect but apprehended by other faculties which, by God's
will, are present in certain individuals. Through revelation
instructions from the unseen are received and their acceptance and
implementation is called Prophethood. To clarify this matter we may make
the following points.

Man's Innate Nature
-------------------

In the beginning of this book we explained that each created entity,
whether mineral, plant or animal, is endowed with an inherent force
which enables it to develop in accordance with its own innate design and
nature.

Thus we read in chapter 20:50, "***Our Lord is He who gave everything
its nature, then guided it correctly,***” and again in chapter 87:2-3
"***Who creates, then disposes, who measures then guides.***" We also
know that man is not excluded from this general law, that is, he has a
direction and an aim towards which he develops, having been endowed with
faculties which allow him to fulfill this aim.

All his happiness lies in achieving this aim; his sorrow, grief and
misfortune are the result of his failure to achieve this aim. He is
guided to this special purpose by his Creator.

As God says in chapter 76:3, "***Indeed, we have shown him the way
whether he be grateful or disbelieving.*** " Likewise we read in chapter
80:1920, "***From a drop of seed, He creates him and proportions him.
Then makes the way easy for him”***

Man's Path in Traversing the Road of Life
-----------------------------------------

The difference between the animal and plant kingdoms and man is that the
former react according to their inherent knowledge or instinct, while
man, also possessing an inherent knowledge, is equipped with an
intellect and the capacity to use or recognize wisdom.

Even if man is capable of undertaking a certain action, he weighs the
good or the bad, the benefit or harm, contained in that action and
implements it only if he estimates that the benefit outweighs the harm.

Thus he follows the instruction of his intellect in every action; the
intellect dictates the necessity of an action. The intellect causes one
to abandon an act if it is likely to bring with it an unacceptable
degree of trouble and hardship; it not only instructs one on the
feasibility of an action, but it also takes into account the dictates of
sentiment and feeling.

Indeed the perception of sentiment with regard to the relative good or
bad in matter is so closely connected with the decision of the intellect
as to be considered one and the same thing.

Man as a Social Being
---------------------

No one would deny that men are social beings who co-operate with each
other to better meet their daily needs. We may wonder, however, whether
men desire this co-operation from their natural feelings; are they
naturally inclined to undertake an action with others and share an
interest in something as a social project?

On one level, man's needs, feelings and desires cause him to act for his
own benefit and without regard for the needs and wishes of others. Man
uses every means to fulfill his own needs: he uses every kind of
transport to reach his destination; he uses the leaves, stems and fruit
of plants and trees; he lives upon the meat of animals and their
products, and takes advantage of a multitude of other things to
complement his own deficiencies in certain respects.

Can man, whose state is such that he uses everything he finds to his own
ends, be expected to respect another human being? Can he extend his hand
to another in co-operation and turn a blind eye to his own desire for
the sake of mutual benefit?

The answer in the first instance must be no. It is as a result of man's
countless needs, which can never be fulfilled by himself alone, that he
recognizes the possibility of fulfilling them through the help and
co-operation of others. Similarly, he understands that his own
strengths, desires and wishes are also shared by others, and just as he
defends his own interests so others defend theirs.

Thus, out of necessity, he co-operates with the social nexus and gives a
certain measure of his own efforts to fulfill the needs of others; in
return he benefits from the efforts of others in order to full fill his
own needs.

In truth he has entered into a market-place of social wealth, always
open to traders and offering all the benefits obtained by the collective
work of the society. All these factors are placed together in this
market- place of pooled human resources and each person, according to
the importance society attaches to his work, has a share in these
benefits.

Thus man's first nature incites him to pursue the fulfillment of his own
needs using others in the process and taking advantage of their work for
his own ends. It is only in cases of necessity and helplessness that he
lends a hand to co-operate with society.

This matter is clear when we observe the nature of children: anything a
child wants he demands in an extreme way; he emphasizes his demand by
crying. As he grows older, however, and becomes a part of the social
fabric, he gradually puts an end to his excessive demands.

More evidence for the truth of this may be seen when a person
accumulates power which exceeds that of others and he rejects the spirit
of cooperation and its restrictions of society; such an individual uses
people and the fruits of their labors for himself without giving
anything back in return.

God refers to the necessary spirit of natural cooperation in society in
chapter 43:32, "***We have apportioned among them their livelihood in
the life of the world, and raised some of them above others in rank that
some of them take labor from others ...*** "

This verse refers to the reality of the social situation in which each
individual has a different capacity and different talents: those who are
superior in one domain engage the cooperation or employ of others for
their eventual mutual benefit.

Thus all members of society are linked together in the ways and wants of
the fabric of one single social unit. Those who do not see the obvious
necessity of mutual cooperation are condemned by God in chapter 14:34,
"***Truly man is surely a wrong-doer, (a tyrant)”*** and, in chapter
33:72, "***Indeed he has proved a tyrant and a fool.***"

These verses refer to man's natural instinct which, unless checked,
drives him to take advantage of his fellow-men and in doing so to
overstep the rights of others.

The Manifestation of Social Differences and the Necessity of Law
----------------------------------------------------------------

Man in his dealings with his fellow men is obliged to accept a social
life based on cooperation; in doing so he effectively forgoes some of
the freedom enjoyed within his own sphere of work. Merely taking part in
a society based on injustice and gaining social differences is not
enough to satisfy the basic needs of the average man.

In such a society, taking advantage of the efforts of others leads to
corruption and a loss of the original purpose of removing glaring
differences between men and bettering their lives.

It is clear that a framework of laws, understood and respected by all,
must govern the different members of society. If there are no clear laws
governing even the most basic of transactions (like buying and selling),
transactions will cease to function correctly.

Laws are necessary to preserve the rights of individuals. The power and
wisdom of the Creator, who has guided man towards his well-being and
happiness, has also guaranteed the success and happiness of society.

Guidance in the form of social law is mentioned by God in 80:19-20,
"***From a drop of seed He creates him and proportions him. Then makes
the way easy for him.*** ”This making of life easy for him is an
indication of the social guidance which he has given to man in the form
of laws and instructions.

The Intellect is not Sufficient in Guiding Man towards Respect of the Law
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The guidance we are considering here is that which emanates from the
wisdom of the Creator; this wisdom has created man and allotted him his
goal of well-being just as it has assigned a path and goal to all
creation.

This goal of happiness and well-being is the path of self-fulfillment
based on correct behavior in a social setting. It is clear that, of
necessity, there can be no inconsistencies or shortcomings in the work
of the Creator.

If, at times, one cannot discern His aim or it seems hidden from normal
perception, it is not through lack of reason or cause on the part of
God, but rather that the cause is linked to other causes which obscure
the one in question.

If there were no hindrances to a clear perception of the causal chain of
events, two given actions would never appear inconsistent or
contradictory to the harmony of creation. Nor would the work of the
Creator appear (as it sometimes does to those whose perception is
hindered by the intricacy of the causal chain of events), inconsistent
and imperfect.

Guidance towards the law, whose function is to remove differences and
conflict between individuals in society, is not a matter for the
intellect since it is this very intellect which causes man to dispute
with others. It is the same intellect which incites man to profit at the
expense of others and to preserve, first and foremost, his own interest,
accepting justice only when there is no alternative.

The two opposing forces, one causing difficulties and one doing away
with them, are qualities of man's character; they do not obviously exist
in the Creator: the countless daily transgressions and violations of the
law, in effect, all result from those who use their intellect
incorrectly; they themselves are the very source of their own
difficulties.

If the intellect was truly a means of removing wrong action from society
and was itself a trustworthy guide to man's well-being, it would
recognize the validity of the law and prevent man from violating it.

The intellect's refusal to willingly accept what is obviously given for
the well-being of man is confirmed when we realize that its acceptance
of a society based on just laws is only out of necessity. Without this
compulsion, it would never accept to know the law.

Those who transgress the law do so for many reasons: some oppose it
without fear, because their power exceeds that of the law; others,
because they live outside the reach of the law, through deceit or
negligence on the part of the authorities; others are able to invent
reasons which make their wrong actions appear lawful and acceptable;
some make use of the helplessness of the person they have wronged.

All, however, find no legal obstacle in their wrong aims; even if an
obstacle appears, their intellect, rather than guiding them to an
acceptance of the law, renders the obstacle right and ineffective.

From these examples we are left in no doubt that the intellect, far from
controlling, restricting or guiding man merely uses its influence to its
own purpose. We must include, therefore, that it is incapable of guiding
man towards a social law which guarantees the rights, freedom and
well-being of all the members of society.

God says in chapter 96:6-7 "***Indeed man truly rebels when he thinks
himself independent.*** " The independence referred to here includes the
independence of those who imagine that they can claim their rights
through other than the path of legality.

The Only Way to Guidance is that of Revelation
----------------------------------------------

Man, like the rest of creation, naturally seeks his own well-being and
happiness as he lives out his life. Since, by his very make-up, he has a
variety of natural needs, he has no alternative but to live in society
in order to fulfill these needs; his own well-being and search for the
fulfillment of his natural character takes place in the wider framework
of society's well-being.

Thus the only acceptable pattern of existence, regulated by a
comprehensive law common to all people, is the one which guarantees both
the well-being of society and of the individual in a balanced and just
fashion.

It is also clear that man, like the rest of creation, must endeavor to
achieve his well-being and undertake whatever preparation is necessary
for achieving this by allowing himself to be guided by his Creator.

It is but a logical next step in our analysis to say that any guidance
from the Creator must be towards this comprehensive law, common to all
and, at the same time, in accord with the individual's well-being.
Intellect is not enough to guide man to the law since it does not always
decide in favor of cooperation with others nor in favor of the common
good.

The path, the way, which fits perfectly the requirements of man is the
way taught by the Prophets and messengers of God. It is the way brought
to them by God through revelation and established as undeniably true and
valid, by the example of their own lives and their intimate knowledge
and contact with God.

The Revelation of the Qur'an
----------------------------

In chapter 2:213, God says, "***Mankind was one community and God sent
(to them) prophets as bearers of good news and as warners and revealed
to them the book with the truth that it may judge between mankind
concerning that in which they differed.***"

Here we under- stand "one community" to mean a society at peace, its
members living without dispute or difference. After a period of time,
men differed with one another and as a result God sent the prophets.

Again He says in 4:163-165, "***Indeed We have inspired you as we have
inspired Noah ... Messengers of good news and a warning in order that
mankind might have no argument against God after the Messenger.”***
Intellect alone does not make man accountable to God and this is why he
must be awakened to the reality of his inner condition by other means.

The first of the above-mentioned verses recognizes the way of revelation
and prophecy as the only way of removing differences between men. The
second shows revelation and prophecy to be the complete and absolute
proof to mankind of the truth of God's message.

Some Questions Answered
-----------------------

Question: By using the premise that the intellect cannot prevent
violation of the law and the wrong action of man in general, you are
declaring the necessity of imposing a law or, as you say, "guidance"
towards his own well-being; that is, you are demanding that we place our
trust in revelation and in Prophethood rather than in the intellect.

The truth is, however, that the laws and instructions of revelation are
also ineffective in that they cannot prevent violation of the law, of
the Shari'ic law or divine code; in fact, man's acceptance of this code
is even less than his acceptance of the civil code. What can you reply
to this?

Answer: To point out the way is one thing and to follow it is another.
The Creator has taken upon himself to guide mankind to a law under which
he can achieve his well-being; He has not taken upon himself to stop
mankind from infringing upon the law nor of compelling men to follow the
law.

We have investigated above the problem of man's infringement of the law,
not to prove that the intellect is deficient or incapable of preventing
wrong action but, rather, to show that it usually does not decide in
favor of the law or of cooperation with society.

As we have pointed out, the intellect only follows the law out of
necessity; if it perceives that obeying the law and restricting one's
personal freedom brings less benefit than disobedience, then it will not
follow the law nor stop others from transgressing.

The acceptance of the way of the revelation, however, always brings with
it obedience to the law. By accepting the code of behavior revealed by
the prophets, one entrusts one's judgment to God who, with his boundless
power and knowledge, constantly watches over man; only He can reward
good deeds or punish bad ones in an absolutely just and unbiased way.
God says in chapter 11:40, "***The decision rests with God only,***" and
in chapter 99:74, "***And whoever does an atom 's weight of good will
see it then and whoever does an atom 's weight of bad will see it
then.*** "

Likewise, He says in 22:17, "***Indeed God will decide between them on
the day of Rising, Indeed! God is witness over all things,”*** and in
2:77, "***Are they unaware that God knows that which they keep hidden
and that which they proclaim.***" In 33:52 we read: "***And God is
watcher over all things.”***

From these verses it is clear that the divine din of Islam, which has
been given to man through revelation, is not capable of preventing
transgression of the law any more than the civil law drawn up by men.

The machinery of the civil law appoints officials and employees to
control and inspect the action of man and also imposes a system of
punishment for his offences; this method only works when the law is
strong and the crime is discovered.

The divine din is superior to man-made laws or social orders in that
control over man is carried out in a very special way, namely, through
the vigil of the angels. Moreover, the divine din obliges in every man
and woman to enjoin the right and forbid the wrong. All men, without
exception, are instructed to watch over the action of their fellow men
and to be guardians of the law.

It is only belief in a divine order which contains and defines action
outside the limits of good and bad and within the reality of the Day of
Reckoning to come. Most importantly, the Lord of the world and of all
the unseen world is aware of man's every action and is present with him
everywhere at every moment.

Like the civil codes drawn up by man, there is also in the divine code a
corresponding system of punishment for every sin, both in this world and
on the day of reckoning after death. Unlike the civil code, however, the
divine law guarantees that no man will escape from judgment and
punishment, if punishment is warranted.

As proof, the reader is urged to follow what is written in chapter 4:
59, "***Obey God and obey the messenger and those of you in
authority***" and, in 11: 71, "***And the believers, men and women are
protecting friends one to another; they enjoin the right and forbid the
wrong.***"

Likewise, we may study 82:1-12 when God says, "***Indeed there are
guardians above you, generous and recording, who know (all) that you
do***" and, also in 34:21, "***And your Lord (O Muhammad) takes note of
all things.*** "

A Second Question: It has been argued that the intellect does not always
decide in favor of respect for the law. Is this not inconsistent with
what is contained in the saying of the Imams which states that God has
given two proofs to his servants, the outward and obvious one being that
of His Prophet, and the inner and hidden one being that of the intellect
of man? How are we to understand this statement in the light of how the
intellect has been described?

Answer: Without exception, man's intellect is concentrated on securing
benefit and avoiding harm. Whenever it accepts to cooperate and share in
society's activity, it is, as we have seen above, seeking its own
benefit.

This need is often felt by those who wish to profit from others or seek
to control others by using their wealth. For such men there is nothing
prohibiting them from pursuing their illegal action; their intellect
will not decide in favor of the law nor forbid transgression of the same
law.

If, however, the source of compulsion (as is understood in the light of
divine revelation) is from God, then the effect on man is totally
different. God's watching over man's action, His punishment or reward of
bad or good action, admits of no negligence, ignorance or incapacity.
The intellect, which recognizes the existence of God, cannot refuse the
law. It will always decide in favor of that which revelation demands of
man.

Thus the intellect of a believing man will recognize the importance of
the revelation over any personal matter. God say in 13:33 "***Is He who
is aware of the deserts of every soul as he who is aware of nothing;***"
and, in 86:4, "***No human soul but has a guardian over it***" and,
74:38, "***Every soul is a pledge for its own deeds.***"

The Path of Revelation is Protected against Mistakes
----------------------------------------------------

The path of revelation is part of the Creator's program. He never makes
mistakes, neither in His Creation nor in the system of belief and the
laws of the shari'ah, which are delineated for man through revelation.

God says in 72:26-28, ***(He is) the knower of the unseen and he reveals
His secret to no one exccpt to every messenger He has chosen and He
makes a guard go before him and a guard behind him, that He may know
that they have indeed conveyed the message of the Lord. He surrounds all
their doings and He keeps count of all things.***

From this we understand that the prophets and messengers of God must be
infallible both in receiving the revelation and in preserving it against
alteration and attack. They are as instruments at the disposal of the
Creator's wisdom.

Were they to make an error in receiving or teaching the message of the
revelation or be led astray by the whispering of evil persons, were they
themselves to commit wrong or deliberately change the message they had
to deliver, then the wisdom of God would be unable to perfect its
program of guidance.

God confirms in chapter 16:9 that He is in total control of man's
guidance by means of his messenger, "***And God's is the direction of
the way, and some (words) do not go straight.***"

The Hidden Reality of Revelation
--------------------------------

The reality of revelation is hidden from us. What is clear is that the
aim of the program of life, outlined for man by the Creator, cannot
possibly have been put together by the intellect; there must be another
way of understanding, of perceiving, (other than through reflection and
thought), by which man learns-of the duties incumbent on him and his
fellow-men. This understanding may only be encompassed by the path of
revelation.

There are, however, only a limited number of men who possess this kind
of understanding since receiving revelation requires an understanding
based on purity, sincerity and freedom from all corruption and bad
thoughts.

It requires men whose spiritual qualities do not change; men who are
psychologically balanced in their judgments and who possess real depth
of understanding. It must be admitted that these qualities are rarely to
be found amongst men.

The Prophets and messengers mentioned in the Qur'an are men of precisely
these qualities. The Qur'an does not mention their number; it only names
a few (namely Adam, Nuh (Noah), Hud, Salih. (Methusaleh), Ibrahim
(Abraham), Lut (Lot), Isma'il (Ismael, Ishmael), Alyasa' (Elisha), Dhu
al-Kifl (Ezekiel), Ilyas (Elias), Yunus Jonah), Idris (Enoch), Ishaq
(Isaac), Ya'qub (Jacob), Yusuf Joseph), Shu'ayb, Musa (Moses), Harun
(Aaron), Da'ud (David), Sulayman (Solo- mon), Ayyub (Job), Zakariya'
(Zacharias), Yahya (John), Isma'il Sadiq al-Wa'd, 'Isa (Jesus) and
Muhammad; others are indicated but not named).

We, as ordinary men, do not share at all their qualities and so we
cannot taste the reality of their perception. Prophecy, as an
experience, remains unknown for us. Moreover, few of the past
revelations have reached us and we have only a limited view of the
reality which is revelation and prophecy.

It may be that what has reached us in the form of revealed books is
exactly as the revelation we are familiar with, that is the Qur'an.
Nevertheless, it is possible that other revelations (completely unknown
to us) may have contained information and instructions of which we have
no knowledge.

How the Qur'an was Revealed
---------------------------

Qur'anic revelation, according to the Qur'an itself, is an utterance on
behalf of God to His Prophet; the Prophet received the speech of God
with all his being, not just by way of learning. In 42:5 1-52 God says,
***And it was not to be for any man that God should speak to him unless
(it be) by revelation or from behind a veil or (that) we send a
messenger to reveal what He will by His leave. Truly He is exalted,
wise. And thus We have inspired in you (Muhammad) a spirit of Our
Command. You did not know what the Book, nor what the Faith was. But We
have made it a light whereby We guide whom We will of our slaves. And
truly you surely guide to a right path.***

On comparison of these two verses we discover three different ways of
divine utterance. Firstly, God speaks without there being any veil
between Him and man. Secondly, God speaks from behind a veil: like the
tree on the Tur Mountain from behind which Moses heard God speaking.
Thirdly, God's speech is brought to man by an angel who had previously
heard the revelation from Him.

The second of the two verses above show that the Qur'an has reached us
by means of the third of three possible ways. Again God says in
26:192-5, "***(A revelation) which the Faithful Spirit (Gabriel) has
brought down upon your heart, that you may be (one) of the warners, in
plain Arabic Speech,***" and in chapter 2:97 "***Who is an enemy to
Gabriel! For it is he who has revealed (this book) to your heart.***"

From these verses we understand that the Qur'an was transmitted by way
of an angel named Gabriel, or the "***Faithful Spirit***"; and that the
Prophet received the revelation from him with all his being, all his
perception and not merely by listening.

The verse says "***on your heart,***" which in Qur'anic terms means
perception or awareness. In 53: 10-11 we read, "***And He revealed to
His slave that which He revealed. The heart did not lie (in seeing) what
it saw;***" and in 98:2 reception of the revelation is indicated as a
reading of "***pure pages***" by God's messenger.


