The Existence of Abrogating and Abrogated Verses in the Qur'an
==============================================================

Among the verses in the Qur'an containing orders or laws, there are
verses that abrogate verses previously revealed and acted upon. These
abrogating verses are called nasikh and those whose validity they
terminate are called mansukh.

For example, at the beginning of the Prophet's mission, Muslims were
ordered to cultivate peace and friendship with the people of the Book,
"Forgive and be indulgent (towards them) until God gives command,"
[II:109]. Some time later, fighting was allowed and the order to
establish peace was abrogated: Fight against such as those who have been
given the Book but who believe not in God nor the last day, and do not
forbid that which God has forbidden by His messenger, and follow not the
religion of truth ... [XI:29]

The common notion of abrogation, that is, a cancelling of one law or
code by another, is based on the idea that a new law is needed because
of a mistake or shortcoming in the previous one. It is clearly
inappropriate to ascribe a mistake in law-making to God, Who is perfect,
and whose creation admits of no flaws.

However, in the Qur'an, the abrogating verses mark the end of the
validity of the abrogated verses because their heed and effect was of a
temporary or limited nature. In time the new law appears and announces
the end of the validity of the earlier law. Considering that the Qur'an
was revealed over a period of twenty-three years in ever-changing
circumstances, it is not difficult to imagine the necessity of such
laws. It is in this light that we should regard the wisdom of abrogation
within the Qur'an: And when We put a revelation in place of (another)
revelation and God knows best what He reveals - they say: you are just
inventing it. Most of them do not know. Say: The Holy Spirit (Gabriel)
has revealed it from your hand with truth and as a guidance and good
news for those who have surrendered (to God) [XVI:101-102]..

**Applicability and Validity of the Qur'an**

Bearing in mind that the Qur'an is valid for all times, the verses
revealed in special circumstances informing Muslims of their specific
duties are also valid for those who, in future, experience the same
circumstances. Similarly, those verses which praise or reproach certain
qualities, and promise reward or threaten punishment accordingly, are
applicable to all ages and places. Thus the meaning of a verse is not
limited to the circumstances or the times of its revelation.

Similar circumstances occurring subsequent to the revelation of a verse
are to be followed; this is known in Qur'anic Science as jary, or
applicability. The fifth Imam said, "were a verse after its revelation
to pass away with the passing away of that people, then nothing would
have remained of the Qur'an. " As long as the heavens and the earth
exist, there are verses for every people, wherever they be, which they
may read and act upon for the benefit or reject at their loss.

**Qur'anic Commentary: Its Advent and Development**

Commentary on the words and expressions used in the Qur'an began at the
time of the first revelation. The Prophet himself undertook the teaching
of the Qur'an and the explanation of its meanings and intent. Thus, in
chapter XVI:44 God says, "And we have revealed to you the Remembrance
that you may explain to mankind that which has been revealed for them."
And He says in LXII :2, "He it is Who has sent among the unlettered ones
a messenger of their own to recite to them His revelations and to make
them grow and to teach them the Scriptures and wisdom."

At the time of the Prophet a group of men, on his orders, were
instructed to read, record and learn the Qur'an by heart. When the
Prophet's companions passed away, other Muslims took over the
responsibility of learning and teaching the Qur'an; and so it has
continued until the present day.

**The Science of Qur'anic Commentary and the Different Groups of
Commentators**

After the death of the Prophet a group of his companions, including
Ubayy ibn Ka'b, 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah al-Ansari,
Abu Sa'id al-Khudri, 'Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar,
Anas, Abu Hurayrah, Abu Musa, and, above all, the famous 'Abd Allah ibn
'Abbas, were occupied with the Science of Commentary. Just as they had
heard the Prophet explaining the meanings of the verses, they would
transmit it orally to other trustworthy persons.

The traditions specifically concerned with the subject of Qur'anic
verses number over two hundred and forty; many were transmitted through
weak chains of transmission and the texts of some have been rejected as
incorrect or forged. Sometimes the transmission would include
commentaries based on personal judgements rather than on a narration of
the actual sayings, hadiths, from the Prophet. The later Sunni
commentators considered this kind of commentary as part of the body of
Sayings of The Prophet, since the companions were learned in the science
of Qur'anic commentary. They argued that these companions had acquired
their knowledge of this science from the Prophet himself and that it was
unlikely they would say anything which they themselves had invented.

There is, however, no absolute proof for their reasoning. A large
proportion of these sayings, or traditions, about the reasons and
historical circumstances of the revelation of verses do not possess an
acceptable chain of narration. It should be noted that many of the
narrators like Ka'b al-Akhbar, were learned companions who had belonged
to the Jewish faith before accepting Islam. Moreover, it should not be
overlooked that Ibn Abbas usually expressed the meanings of verses in
poetry. In one of his narrations over two hundred questions of Nafi' ibn
al-Azraq are replied to in the form of poetry; al-Suyuti in his book,
al-Itqan, related one hundred and ninety of these questions.

It is evident, therefore, that many of the narrations made by the
commentators amongst the companions cannot be counted as actual
narrations from the Prophet himself; therefore, such additional material
related by the companions must be rejected. The second group of
commentators were the companions of the followers (tabi'un), who were
the students of the compan- ions. Amongst them we find Mujahid, Sa'id
ibn Jubayr, 'Ikrimah and Dahhak. Also from this group were Hasan
al-Basri, 'Ata' ibn Abi Rabah,, 'Ata' ibn Abi Muslim, Abu al-'Aliyah,
Muhammad ibn Ka'b al-Qurazi, Qatadah, 'Atiyah, Zayd ibn Aslam, Ta'us
al-Yamani.

The third group were comprised of the students of the second group,
namely, Rabi ibn Anas, 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Zayd ibn Aslam, Abu Salih
al-Kalbi and others. The tabi'un sometimes narrated the commentary on a
verse as a tradition of the Prophet or of the companions and, sometimes,
they explained its meaning without attributing a narrator to the source,
this they did especially when there was any doubt as to the identity of
the narrator. The later commentators treat these narrations as
traditions of the Prophet, but count them as mawquf in their science of
the levels of hadiths (that is as a tradition whose chain of narration
does not reach back to the Prophet) .

The fourth group comprised the first compilers of commentaries, like
Sufyan ibn 'Uyaynah, Waki' ibn al-Jarrah, Shu'bah al-Hajjaj and 'Abd ibn
Humayd; others from this group include Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, the author
of the famous Qur'anic Commentary.' This group recorded the sayings of
the companions and the followers of the companions with a chain of
narrators in their works of commentary; they avoided expressing personal
opinions except, perhaps, Ibn Jarir al-Tabari who sometimes expressed
his views by indicating his preference when discus- sing two similar
traditions. The basis of the work of later groups may be traced to this
group.

The fifth group omitted the chain of narrators in their writings and
contented themselves with a simple relation of the text of the
traditions. Some scholars regard these commentators as the source of
varying views in the commentaries by connecting many traditions to a
companion or a follower without verifying their validity or mentioning
their chain of narration. Consequently, confusion has arisen allowing
many false traditions to enter the body of traditions, thus undermining
the reputation of this section of hadith literature.

Careful examination of the chains of transmission of the traditions
leaves one in doubt as to the extent of the deceitful additions and
false testimonies. Many conflicting traditions can be traced to one
companion or follower and many traditions, which are complete
fabrications, may be found amongst this body of narrations.

Thus reasons for the revelation of a particular verse, including the
abrogating and abrogated verses, do not seem to ac- cord with the actual
order of the verses. No more than one or two of the traditions are found
to be acceptable when submitted to such an examination. It is for this
reason that Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who himself was born before this
generation of narrators, said, "Three things have no sound basis:
military virtues, bloody battles and the traditions pertaining to
Qur'anic commentary." Imam al-Shafi'i relates that only about one
hundred traditions from Ibn 'Abbas have been confirmed as valid.

The sixth group consists of those commentators who appeared after the
growth and development of the various Islamic Sciences and each
undertook the study of Qur'anic commentary according to his
specialization: al-Zajjaj studied the subject from the grammatical point
of view; al-Wahidi and Abu Hayyan' investigated the verses by studying
the inflection of the verbs, the vowels and the diacritical points.
There is also commentary on the rhetoric and eloquence of the verses by
al-Zamakhshari in his work entitled al- Kashshaf. There is a theological
discussion in the "Grand Commentary" of Fakhr al-Din al-Razi. The gnosis
of Ibn al-'Arabi and 'Abd al-Razzaq al-Kashani treated in their
commentaries. Other narrators, like al-Tha'labi, record the history of
transmission of the traditions. Some commentators, among them
al-Qurtubi, concentrate on aspects of fiqh (jurisprudence) .

There also exists a number-of commentaries composed of many of these
sciences, such as Ruh al-bayan by Shaykh Isma'il Haqqi, Ruh al ma'ani by
Shihab al Dm Mahmud al- Alusi al-Baghdadi Ghara'ib al-Qur'an by Nizam
al-Din al Nisaburi. This group rendered a great service to the Science
of Qur'anic commentary in that it brought the Science out of a state of
stagnation (characteristic of the fifth group before it), and developed
it into a Science of precise investigation and theory.

However, if one were to examine closely the precision of this group's
research, one would see that rnuch of its Qur'anic commentary imposes
its theories onto the Qur'an rather than allowing the content of the
verses to speak for themselves.

**The Methods Used by the Shi'ite Commentators and their Different
Groupings**

All the groups mentioned above are Sunni commentators. Their method,
used in the earliest commentaries of this period, was based on ijtihad,
that is, the reports of the companions and the followers of the
companions were examined according to certain rules in order to reach an
acceptable understanding of the text. This resulted in varying opinions
amongst those making ijtihad and caused disorder, contradiction and,
even, fabrication to enter into the body of the traditions.

The method employed by the Shi'ite commentators, how- ever, was
different, with the result that the patterning of the groups was also
different. The Shi'ite commentators in their study of a verse of the
Qur'an, viewed the explanation given by the Prophet as proof of the
meaning of the verse, they did not accept the saying of the companions,
or the followers, as indisputable proof that the tradition was from the
Prophet. The Shi'ite commentators only recognized as valid an unbroken
chain of narration from the Prophet and through members of his family.
Accordingly, in using and transmitting the verses concerning Qur'anic
commentary, they restricted themselves to the use of traditions
transmitted by the Prophet and by the Imams of the Prophet's family.
This has given rise to the following groups:

The first group comprises those who have learned these traditions from
the Prophet and from the Imams of the Prophet's family, studying and
recording them according to their own method but not in any particular
order. Among them we may mention such scholars as Zararah, Muhammad ibn
Muslim, Ma'ruf and Jarir who were companions of the fifth and sixth
Imams.

The second group comprises the first compilers of the commentaries,
like Furat ibn Ibrahlm al-Kufi, Abu Hamzah al-Thumali, Muhammad
al-'Ayyashi, 'Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi and al-Nu'mam who lived between
the second and fourth centuries after Hijrah. The method of this group
was similar to that of the fourth Sunni group of Commentators.

Thus, they avoided any kind of ijtihad or passing of judgement. We
should remember that the Imams of the Prophet's family were living
amongst Muslims and available for questioning (on matters of commentary,
for example) for a period of almost three hundred years. Thus the first
groups were not divided chronologically but rather according to their
relationship with the Imams.

There are very few who recorded the tradition without a chain of
transmission. As an example, we should mention one of the students of
al-'Ayyashi who omitted to record the chains of transmission. It was his
work, instead of the original of al-'Ayyashi which came into common use.
The third group comprises masters of various sciences, like al-Sharif
al-Radi who provided a commentary concerned with Qur'anic language and
Shaykh al-Tusi who wrote a commentary and analysis on metaphvsical
matters. Included, too, is Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi's philosophic work,
al-Maybudi al-Kunabadi's gnostic commentary and 'Abd 'Ali al-Huwayzi's
commentary Nur al-thaqalayn. Hashim al- Bahram composed the commentary
al-Burhan and al-Fayd al-Kashani compiled the work known as al-Safi.

There were others who brought together many different themes to their
commentaries, like Shaykh al-Tabarsi who in his Majma' al-bayan
researches different fields of language, grammar, Qur'an recitation,
gnosis of death, after-life and paradise, and knowledge of the
traditions.


