How Does the Qur'an Lend Itself To Interpretation?
==================================================

The answer to this question is contained in the previous section where
we discussed the eternal validity of the Qur'an: it speaks to, instructs
and guides man now as it did in the past.

As we have seen, the whole text of the Qur'an is a challenge to mankind
and particularly to the enemies of Islam in that the Qur'an itself is
proof of its own argument; it announces itself as a light, an
illumination and an explanation of all things.

Thus a document which states and demonstrates that it is
self-illuminating, hardly needs others to illuminate it. As proof that
it is not the speech of man, the Qur'an says that it is a harmonious
speech, without the slightest inconsistency and any seeming
inconsistency may be removed through reflection on the Qur'an itself. If
it were not the word of God, the Qur'an would not be as clear as it is.
Moreover, if such speed needed something or someone else to explain its
meaning and purpose, it would neither be the proof nor the absolute
authority that it is so obviously is. This clarity is absolute, even if
a seemingly contradictory passage becomes the object of dispute; it
could be understood by cross-reference to the text of the Qur'an.

For instance, at the time of the Prophet, such matters could be
referred to him since his knowledge of the Qur'an was perfect and he did
not need to refer to other verses for clarification. Those who insisted
on disagreeing, or disbelieving in the Prophet's fallibility, were not
satisfied. Therefore, commentaries which solve problems of
interpretation by quoting the commentaries of the Prophet, without
giving proofs from other Qur'anic verses, are useful only for those who
believe in Prophethood and the Prophet's infallibility. These people do
not go unmentioned in the Qur'an; we are familiar with the following
verse, if it had been from other than God then they would have found
many inconsistencies in it.

This is a clear argument against those who would seek for
inconsistencies in the Qur'an and find fault with the Prophet. The
Qur'an itself declares that the commentary and explanation of the
Prophet is valid while the Prophet himself has confirmed the validity of
the Qur'anic commentary of the Imams. We may summarize this by saying
that in the Qur'an some verses may be explained by comparison with other
verses and some by using the instructions and teachings of the Prophet
and the Imams. The latter commentaries are not, of course, different
from the explanation which is produced by comparing and analysing
different verses.

**Conclusion**

There are three roads open to us when making commentary upon the
Qur'an. Firstly, by using knowledge that one already possesses.
Secondly, with the help of the sayings of the Prophet or Imams.

Thirdly, by using a combination of methods: by reflection and analysis,
or by allowing the verse to become clarified by comparing it to other
verses, or by use of the sayings of the Prophet and the Imams, whenever
possible. The third way is the one which we have outlined in the last
section and it is this way which the Prophet himself and the Imams of
his family indicate in their teachings. As we have seen, the Prophet
said that, "The verses were revealed to confirm each other," and Imam
'Ali said that "One part of the Qur'an explains another and one part
witnesses to the other."

It is, moreover, clear that this method of commentary is other than
that warned against by the Prophet when he said, "Whoever makes a
commentary upon the Qur'an according to his own opinion prepares for
himself a place in the Fire." This method uses the Qur'an to explain
itself and is not based merely on explanation arising from whim or
fancy.

The first method is unacceptable and exemplifies commentary based on
opinion, except in cases where it agrees with the third method. The
second method is the one used by the early scholars and for many
centuries afterwards, and is still in use amongst both Sunni and Shi'ite
scholars of the traditions of the Prophet. This method is limited,
considering the vast nature of the subject and the countless number of
questions, (both general and particular), arising from over six thousand
verses. Where, one asks, is the answer to such questions? Where is the
solution to so many intricate and perplexing questions? Or, should we
refer to the body of tradition concerning the verses?

Let us not forget that the total number of traditions of the Prophet
accepted and transmitted by the Sunni scholars number no more than two
hundred and fifty; we should also remember that many of them are weak
and some even totally unacceptable. It is true that the traditions of
the Prophet and the Imams transmitted by the Shi'ite scholars number a
thousand and that amongst them are to be found a consider- able number
which are fully trustworthy.

Consideration of these traditions is not enough, however, given the
countless questions which arise and the many Qur'anic verses that are
not even mentioned in this body of traditions. Should one refer in such
matters to the appropriate verses? As we have explained, this is not
acceptable according to the method under consideration here. Should one
simply abstain from investigation and imagine that the need for
knowledge is non-existent? In this case, what is one to understand by
the verse, And we reveal the Book to you as an exposition of all things,
[XVI:89] which is clear proof that the Qur'an itself is not a mystery
but rather explains, among other things, itself, by its own light.

Chapter IV:82 contains the injunction, "Will they not ponder on the
Qur'an." Similarly, in chapters XLVII:24 and XXXVIII:29 "(This book) is
a Book that we have revealed to you, full of blessing, that you may
ponder its revelation and the men of understanding may reflect. "
Likewise in Chapter XXIII:68, "Have they not pondered the word, or has
something come to them which did not come to their forefathers. "

What are we intended to understand by these verses? How are we to act
in the light of the totally trustworthy traditions of the Prophet and
the Imams in which they advise us to refer to the Qur'an itself in case
of problems of interpretation and discordance of opinion? According to
many well known traditions of the Prophet, transmitted in unbroken
chains of transmission, one is obliged to refer the tradition to the
Book of God; if the tradition is in accordance with the Book, then it is
accepted and used in commentary and, if in disagreement, it is
rejected.

It is clear that the meaning of these traditions is applicable when one
discovers through the Science of Commentary that the inner meaning of
one verse is contrary to what is contained in another verse. In this
case, one must reject what one has discovered through the study of
commentaries. These traditions are the best proof that the Qur'an, like
speech or writing in general, has meaning and will always have meaning,
even when studied independently of the traditions. Thus it is the duty
of the commentators to take into account and reflect upon the traditions
of the Prophet and Imams concerning Qur'anic verses but only use those
traditions which are in accordance with the verse under scrutiny.

**An Example of Commentary on the Qur'an with the Aid of the Qur'an**

On four occasions in the Qur'an God says "Allah is the creator all
beings," [XXXIX:62]. The meaning is clear on each occasion; God is
stating that everything man may possibly imagine in the world has been
created by him and is sustained by Him. However, one should not ignore
the fact that in hundreds of verses the Qur'an affirms the existence of
cause and effect and attributes the action of every doer to the
immediate cause.

Thus the effect of the burning of fire is a direct result of the fire
itself, the growing of plants, the action of the plants, the falling
rain caused by the state of the sky; the actions which man chooses to
undertake are, according to the Qur'an, the result (and consequent
responsibility) of man. We may also say that the doer of any action is
the one responsible for that action, but God is the giver of existence,
the Creator of deeds and the owner of deeds.

Keeping in mind this general relationship between the Creator and His
creation, we may read in chapter XXXII:7 "Who made all things beautiful
and good which We created. " When we join this verse to the previous one
we see that beauty and goodness necessarily accompany His creation and
so anything which has existence in the cosmos is also good and
beautiful. We should not forget, however, that in many verses, the
Qur'an affirms the existence of good and its opposite, evil, useful
things and harmful things, beauty and ugliness; and it enumerates many
bad actions, wrong doers and bad events.

These are all, however, negative aspects of the human character and are
mentioned as a measure of man; they are relative and not intended as
proof that the creation of man is basically bad. For example, the snake
or the serpent is harmful but only to man and animals who suffer the
effects of its sting; to stones and earth it is harmless. Bitter taste
and foul smell are unpleasant, but only to the human sense of taste and
smell, not to all animals. Certain behaviour may at times appear wrong
but this is often the result of observing human behaviour in relation to
one particular society of men; in another society or circumstance it may
not be considered wrong.

Indeed, if we dispense for a moment with those negative aspects of
man's character which are secondary or relative to the miracle and
perfection of His creation, we witness only the beautiful symmetry and
proportion of the cosmos in its entirety and the amazing beneficence of
the Creator. Words are not able to describe this beauty since they
themselves are part of this world of beauty.

In reality the above-mentioned verses awake man to an awareness of the
relative nature of beauty and ugliness; they invite him to a
comprehension of absolute beauty and prepare him for an understanding of
creation as a whole. In fact, there are Qur'anic verses which explain or
comment upon the different aspects of creation in the universe, either
as isolated individual examples or as groupings and classes. Each
creation, whether a single manifestation or joined to a larger structure
and patterning, is a sign and indication of God.

Whichever way we regard creation, it all points to the existence of
God.

This way of understanding or seeing the universe and its signs, leads
to an appreciation of the stupendous beauty which encircles the whole
world and allows us to realize that it is His beauty, emanating from the
domain of His power, and made visible in the signs of the skies and the
earth. Each aspect of the cosmos lends beauty and dimension to
everything surrounding it, yet at the same time it is insignificant in
relation to the whole.

The Qur'an affirms in other verses that perfection and beauty manifest
themselves from the domain of his power; thus He says in chapter XL:65
"He is the Living One, there is no god save Him," and in II:165 "...
power belongs completely to God, " and in IV: 139, "Truly all power
belongs to God, " and "He is the knower, the All-Powerful." On another
occasion we read "And He is the Hearer, the Seer, " and in XX:8, "Allah!
There is no god save Him. His are the most beautiful names."

We realize from these verses that the beauty which manifests itself in
the visible world has its reality in the domain of His power and
grandeur. All other beauty, all other power, is illusory or metaphorical
of His power.

In affirmation of this explanation, the Qur'an states that the beauty
and perfection created by man is limited and temporal but that of God
boundless and eternal. God emphasizes that all creation is from Him and
under His power. In chapter LIV:49, "Truly we have created everything by
measure" and in the chapter XV:21, "And there is not a thing with us but
there are stores of it. And we do not send it down except in appointed
measure."

Careful observation reveals that the Book itself declares its own
perfection and beauty, that it encompasses all aspects of creation and
the Creator, and that there is no fault or shortcoming in it. Such is
the perfection of the Qur'an, which itself is one of the signs of God,
that it makes the reader forget himself in rapturous appreciation of its
beauty.

This we read in II: 165 "Those who believe are stauncher in their love
of God. " Love, of its very nature, demands the self and the giving over
of the self to God. It demands the handing over of one's affairs
completely to Him and allowing Him to be one's Lord: "And Allah is the
protecting Friend of the believers" [III:68] .

This idea is also contained in II:257 which declares, "God is the
Protecting Friend of those who believe. He brings them out of darkness
into light," and also in VI:122, "Is he who was dead and We have raised
him to life and set for him a light in which he walks among men ..."
Likewise, we read in LVIII:22, "As for such, He has written faith upon
their hearts and has strengthened them with a spirit from Him."

This spirit, this new life and light, is given by God to the man who
perceives reality and truth and who understands the path of happiness
and well-being in society. In another verse in LVII:28, He explains the
effect of such light: "O you who believe! Be mindful of your duty to God
and put faith in His messenger. He will give you two fold of His mercy
and will appoint for you a light in which you shall walk."

Again, in another verse, He makes a commentary on "faith in the
Prophet" by explaining it as submission and obedience to Him; chapter
III:31, "Say (O Muhammad, to mankind): If you love God follow me; God
will love you."

The nature of this path is explained in chapter VII:157, Those who
follow the messenger the Prophet, who can neither read nor write, whom
they will find described in the Torah and the Gospels (which are) with
them. He will rejoin in than that which is right and forbid them that
which is wrong. He will make lawful for them all good things and
prohibit for them only the foul; and He will relieve them of their
burden and the fetters they used to wear.

Still more vividly, the path is explained in another verse which is
also a commentary on the previous verse [XXX:30], So let your purpose (O
Muhammad) for the din (of Islam) as a man by nature upright-the nature
of (God on which he has created man. There is no altering God 's
creation. That is the right way of life, but most men to not know ...
"

The right way of life, or din refers to the correct path for society to
follow for its well-being and happiness. According to this verse, the
way of Islam is also the way desired by the Creator for man.

In other words, the legislative framework given to man by God is the
very framework which is appropriate for the creature man. This divine
law is in complete harmony with the nature of man, living a life of
piety and obedience.

God says in another verse IXCI:7-81, "And a soul and Him who perfected
it. And inspired it (with conscience of) what is wrong for it and (what
is) right. " The Qur'an is the only revealed book which equates the
happiness and well-being of man with a pure and sincere way of life.
Moreover, unlike other religions, Islam does not separate worship of God
from the actual programme of living; it establishes the word din to mean
not only religion but also life in general as well, the actual day to
day routine of man, both on a personal and social level.

The Qur'an establishes a programme of living which is in accord with
the functioning and the reality of the cosmos, and the Qur'an mentions
many of the benefits and virtues to be expected by the man of God and
the lovers of Truth, including a certainty of faith and tranquillity of
the heart.


