The Validity of the Commentary of the Prophet and the Imams
===========================================================

From an indication in the Qur'an itself, the commentary of the Prophet
and the Imams, (as discussed in the previous sections), is established
as being absolutely true. Authentication of the sayings of the Prophet
and the Imams is clearly established by the existence of fully
trustworthy chains of transmissions. A tradition may not, however, be
recognized as totally acceptable if it has been transmitted by one chain
of narration only.

The validity of the tradition may be disputed amongst the Muslim
Scholars of Commentary: amongst the Sunni's a tradition of a single
chain of transmission, classified in their terms as sahih (sound), must
be accepted and acted upon; among the Shi'ite scholars a tradition with
a single undisputed chain of transmission is also accepted as a proof.
However, in the laws of the shari'ah it is not valid and must be
investigated and checked before use as a proof. Author's Note: The
previous section has been specifically about the use of commentary or
explanation in order to arrive at the true meaning of a verse. This
includes study of the literal meanings and those hidden in metaphor. It
does not include an explanation or a discussion of the linguistic and
literal aspects or the science of Qur'an recitation since these do not
affect the meaning.


**Part III The Revelation of the Qur'an**

General Beliefs of Muslims concerning the Revelation of the Qur'an More
than any other revealed book, especially the Torah and the New
Testament, the Qur'an describes the details of the revelation, the
transmittance and even accounts of the experience of the revelation. The
general belief of Muslims concerning the revelation, based on the
Qur'an, is that the text of the Qur'an is the actual speech of God
transmitted to the Prophet by one of His chosen angels. The name of this
angel, or heavenly being, is Gabriel or the Faithful Spirit. He
transmitted the word of God over a period of twenty-three years to the
Prophet. He would bring the divine instructions to the Prophet, who
would relate them faithfully to the people using the same words in the
form of a verse.

The Prophet thus used the meaning of the verses to call the people to
an understanding of faith, of belief, of social laws and of individual
duties. These instructions from God to His messenger are known as the
Prophecy, or the message; the Prophet transmitted this message without
making any addition to or detraction from it in any way.

**The View of Contemporary Non-Muslim Writers concerning the Revelation
and Prophecy**

Most contemporary writers who take an interest in different religions
and ideologies adopt the following view of the Qur'an: they say the
Prophet was a social genius who appeared to save society from the throes
of decline into savagery and to raise it up in the cradle of
civilization and freedom. They claim also that he called men to his own
ideas of pure and sincere behavior by giving them a comprehensive
religious form and order. They affirm that he had a pure soul and
tremendous ambition; that he lived in a particularly dark and ignorant
age, where only the law of force and foolish singing of verse, social
chaos and selfishness, stealing, marauding and savagery were to be
seen.

They describe how he was troubled by witnessing such things and,
sometimes when overcome by the pain of such sights, he would withdraw
from men and pass days alone in the cave in the Tihamah mountains; he
would marvel at the sky and its shining stars, the earth, the mountains,
the sea, the desert and all the precious means placed at the disposal of
man by the Creator; he would be grieved at the bad behaviour and
ignorance of those around him, who had thrown away a life of well-being
and happiness for a tormented succession of bestial habits. This feeling
was always present with the Prophet; he bore this pain and vexation up
to his fourtieth year when, according to these contemporary non-Muslim
writers, he formed a plan to save his fellow-men from their miserable
state of nomadic wandering, rebellious independence, selfish- ness and
lawlessness.

This plan, called the religion of Islam, was the most suitable one for
the times. The Prophet being of pure and sincere character, realized
that his chaste thoughts were the Word of God and Divine Revelation
which were infused in him through his virtuous nature. His good will and
benevolent spirit, from which his thoughts exuded and established peace
in his heart, was called the Spirit of Trustworthiness and Gabriel, the
angel of revelation.

Furthermore, according to this contemporary view of Muhammad, he
perceived the forces of good and happiness in nature as Angels and all
the forces of bad as Satan and the Jinn (invisible entities). He called
his own task, which he had undertaken according to his own conscience,
Prophethood and himself, the deliverer of the divine message.

This explanation, however, comes from those writers who affirm the
existence of God or at least some kind of nature- force, and attach a
certain importance to the religion of Islam, albeit in the name of just
and unbiased assessment. Those, however, who deny outright the existence
of a Creator see Prophecy, revelation, divine duties, reward and
punishment, the fire and the garden as mere religious politics, a lie in
the name of religion to further one's own ends.

They say that the prophets were reformers who brought about social
change in the name of religion. They argued that since men of past ages
were drowned in ignorance and superstitious worship the prophets
contained the religious order within a framework of superstitious
beliefs about the origin of Creation and the day of reckoning in order
to further their prospects of reform.

**What the Qur'an Itself Says concerning this Matter**

Scholars who explain the power of revelation and prophecy using the
above explanation, attach great importance to the Science of nature and
the visible world, and claim that everything in the world works
according to the laws of nature. They view historical events, right up
to the present-day, as the developing and constantly changing face of
nature. Likewise, they view all revealed religions as social
manifestations. Thus they would agree that if one of the geniuses of
history, like Cyrus, Darius or Alexander, had announced himself as
having been chosen by God as an executor of divine commands, their
explanation would have been no different than that given above.

We do not intend here to establish the existence of the unseen, of the
world beyond the visible world of nature; we are not saying to other
scholars or scientists that any one science may only be discussed by
remaining within the strict limits of that particular science. We are
not suggesting that the modern sciences which investigate the properties
and effects of the material world, (whether or not they be positively or
negatively disposed to the creation), do not have the right to enter
into an investigation of the metaphysical.

What we are saying is that any explanation they propose must be in
accordance with the explanation of society, existence, nature and the
cosmos given by the Qur'an. The Qur'an is an authentic document of
prophecy and is the basis Of all social, metaphysical and scientific
discussion; the explanation Of the Qur'an contain proofs against their
arguments which we can enumerate and reflect upon. These proofs are
connected to different Qur'anic verses discussed below.

According to the explanation of modern non-Muslims and atheists, the
Prophet's nature was pure through which came to him the word of God,
meaning that the divine system of thought was alive in his own thoughts;
the idea of divinity manifested itself in his thoughts because he was
pure and holy; it was natural (in the minds Of these Scholars) for
prophets to attribute these thoughts to God for, in this way, they
ennobled and exalted their own task.

The Qur'an, however, strongly and convincingly denies that it is the
speech or the ideas of the prophet or, indeed, of any other man. In
chapters X:38 and XI:13 the Qur'an declares that if it is the word of
man then detractors of Islam should produce similar words about every
subject treated in the Qur'an, namely, belief in the after-life, morals,
laws, stories of past generations and other prophets, wisdom and advice.
The Qur'an urges them to seek help anywhere if they do not realize that
it is the word of God and not of man, but adds that even if jinn and man
joined forces together they would not be able to produce a Qur'an like
it.

In chapter II:23 the Qur'an challenges those who consider it merely the
speech of Muhammad to produce a book similar to it or even just one
chapter like it. The force of this challenge becomes clear when we
realize that it is issued for someone whose life should resemble that of
Muhammad, namely, the life of an orphan, uneducated in any formal sense,
not being able to read or write and grew up in the unenlightened age of
the jahiliyah period (the age of ignorance) before Islam.

In IV:82 the Qur'an asks why no inconsistencies or changes appeared in
the verses considering that neither the wording nor the meaning of the
verses has altered despite being revealed over a period of twenty-three
years. If it was the word of man and not the word of Gods then it would
have certainly been affected by change like all other things in the
temporal world of nature and matter.
It is clear that this challenge and these explanations are not mere
empty words of exultation; rather they present the Qur'an for what it
is, namely the word of God.

The Qur'an establishes its own miraculous nature in hundreds of verses.
This miracle is still unexplained by normal literacy standards used to
"grasp" a text. Indeed successive prophets established their prophethood
through similar verses revealed by God. If prophecy was merely the call
of an individual conscience or the inspiration of a pure and sincere
soul, then there would be no sense in claiming it as divine proof or
seeking help in its miraculous nature as the Prophet, in fact, did.

Some writers interpret the many miracles of the Qur'an in terms of
undisguised mockery. When we investigate the subject of their mockery we
inevitably discover that the Qur'an means something other than that
which they have understood. It is not our intention to try and prove the
miraculous nature of the Qur'an nor to demonstrate the soundness and
authenticity of its narration; rather, we would point out that the
Qur'an clearly describes the miracles of the past prophets, like Salih,
Abraham, Moses and Jesus. The stories related in the Qur'an can only be
understood and interpreted in the light of miraculous guidance.

Why, we may ask, if the prophets were mere men, inspired by the purity
of their character, was it necessary to establish the existence of this
miraculous guidance?

**The Angel Gabriel**

According to the explanation of the above-mentioned writers, the
prophet referred to his own pure soul as the "Faithful Spirit" or the
giver of revelation. The Qur'an, however, does not support this view and
names Gabriel as the deliverer of the verses.

God says in chapter II:97, "Say (O Muhammad, to mankind): Who is an
enemy to Gabriel! for it is he who has revealed (this book) to your
heart by God's permission." This verse refers to Jews who wanted to know
who had revealed the Qur'an to the Prophet. He replied that it was
Gabriel. They said, "We are enemies of Gabriel as he it was who gave us
(the tribe of Israel) the laws and legal punishments and as we are
enemies to him, we do not believe in the book which he has brought. "
Thus God replies to them in the verse that Gabriel revealed the Qur'an
to the Prophet by God's permission. God further says that the Qur'an is
to be believed in, and that it is not the speech of Gabriel. It is
important to note that the Qur'an, in the words of the above verse was
revealed "to the heart" of the Prophet Muhammad by Gabriel.

In another verse [XXVI:193-4] we read that it was transmitted by the
Faithful Spirit, "which the Faithful Spirit has brought down upon your
heart." By comparison of these two verses it becomes evident that it is
the angel Gabriel who is meant here by the words, "Faithful Spirit." In
chapter LXXXI:1923 God describes the transmittance of revelation: That
this is in truth the word of an honoured messenger (Gabriel), Mighty
established in the presence of the Lord of the Throne, one to be obeyed
and trustworthy and your comrade (the Prophet) is not mad. Surely he saw
him on the clear horizon.

These verses show that Gabriel was one of the intimates of God,
possessing great power and trust. Again in chapter XL:7 we read, "Those
who bear the power, and all who are around Him, praise their Lord and
believe in Him and ask forgiveness for those who believe." Such
characteristics as belief in God and seeking forgiveness from him are
only to be expected from independent, sentient creatures.

In chapter IV:172-173 we read, The Messiah will never disdain to be a
servant of God, nor will the favoured angels. Whoever disdains His
service and is proud, He will gather them all to Himself, then as for
those who believe and do good, He will pay them fully their rewards and
give them more out of His grace, and as for those who disdain and are
proud, He will punish them with a painful doom. And they will not find
for themselves besides Allah a guardian or a helper.

It is clear that although the Messiah, Jesus, and the favoured angels
do not disobey the commands of God they are, nevertheless, warned of a
painful punishment on the day of reckoning if they were to commit a
wrong. The possibility of neglect of their duties or committing wrong
action is neces- sarily dependent on their being sentient beings,
possessed of free will and entrusted with the task of transmitting the
revelation of God. Thus we learn from the Qur'an that Gabriel is the
Faithful Soul: he is trustworthy and to be obeyed because he is obeyed
by angels in his task. An indication of these obedient angels comes in
the verse, But truly it is a warning-so let whoever will pay heed to it,
on honoured leaves exalted, purified (set down by scribes) noble and
righteous [LXXX:11-16] .


