The Angels and the Devils
=========================

According to the explanation of contemporary non-Muslim writers, angel
is the name given to forces in nature which represent goodness, and
happiness and devils are forces in nature representing evil and
unhappiness. What we under- stand from the Qur'an, however, is that they
are beings existing beyond our sense-range, who possess feelings and an
independent free-will. To the verses above, (indicating that angels
possess independence and free will), may be added many other verses
which confirm these same qualities. The refusal of Satan to prostrate
himself before Adam and the dialogue between Satan and God occurs
several times in the Qur'an. Satan, after having been expelled from
intimacy with God, says in chapter XXXVIII:82-83, "I surely will lead
every one of them astray except your sincere slaves among them." And God
replies "I shall fill hell with you and with those who follow you,
together" [XXXVIII:85].

It is clear that punishment can only take place if the punished
understand the reason for the punishment. God in chapter XXXIV:20, says
in confirmation of Satan's warning to man, "And Satan indeed found his
calculation true concerning them, for they follow them, all except a
group of true believers. " Likewise, we read in chapter XIV;22, "And
Satan said when the matter had been decided: Indeed! Allah promised you
a promise of truth; and I promised you and failed you. And I had no
power over you except that I called to you and you obeyed me. So do not
blame me but blame yourselves."

Blame is a matter which can only be associated with those who possess
the power of reason and free-will. We quote these verses to show that
Satan, like the rest of the angels, is a thinking independent being
rather than a force in nature. Just as verses occur in the Qur'an
concerning the angels and the devils, there also are verses which
clearly and vividly describe the jinn (elemental spirits or invisible
beings, either harmful or helpful)

. In chapter XLVI: 18 reference is made to those who, invited to
believe in Islam, spurn it as just another ancient fable or
superstition: Such are those in whom the word concerning nations of the
jinn and mankind which have passed away before them has effect. Indeed
they are the losers. We may understand from this verse that the jinn,
the invisible entities, like mankind, live in different nations, pass a
period of time in their different societies and finally die.

In the same chapter, verses 29-32 we read, And when we inclined toward
you (Muhammad) certain of the jinn who wished to hear the Qur'an and
when they were in its presence said, Listen! and, when it was finished
turned back to their people warning. They said: O our people! Truly we
have heard a book which has been revealed after Moses, confirming that
which was before it, guiding to the truth and a right road. O my people!
respond to God's Summoner and believe in Him.

He will forgive you some of your wrong actions and guard you from a
painful doom. And whoever does not respond to God's Summoner he can in
no way escape in the earth, and you (can find) no protecting friends
instead of Him. Such are in clear error. These verses clearly confirm
that the jinn, like men, live in groups, are thinking individuals
possessing free will and charged with duties, Moreover, there are other
verses dealing with the day of rising which affirms these same qualities
in the jinn.

**The Call of Conscience**

According to the explanation of certain modern writers, prophethood is
the rising up of a man from amongst his people in order to undertake
social reform in accordance with the call of his conscience. The Qur'an,
however, gives a different meaning to the prophethood. In XCI:7-8 we
read, "And a soul and Him who perfected it, and inspired it (with
conscience off what is wrong for it and (what is) right for it. " In
this verse God demonstrates that each individual perceives from his own
conscience and God-given nature the difference between good and bad
action; and, that the potential for reform and the bettering of one's
self is contained within each person; some listen to their conscience
and act correctly while others pay no heed and so act wrongly.

Thus in the following verses of the same chapter God says: "He is
indeed successful who causes it to grow and he is indeed a failure who
stunts it. " If prophethood manifests itself as a result of the
conscience, which everyone possesses, then everyone in theory may become
a prophet. God, however, has reserved this duty for certain men only.
Thus He says in chapter VI:124, "And when a sign comes to them, they
say: we do not believe until we are given that which God's messengers
are given. God knows best with whom to place His message."

**The Reality of the Prophet's Mission**

We should repeat at this point that we do not intend to prove or
disprove here the truth of Islam or the validity of the Prophet's
invitation of the people to Islam. Rather, we simply want to state that
the second of the modern non-Islamic explanations is also not in
accordance with the explanation given in the Qur'an.

According to it, the prophet succeeded in convincing people to believe
in a set of superstitions framed in a politico-religious framework; he
was aided in this, so they say, by the fact that his own people were
tribesmen, having no advanced culture of their own. In the name of
public good and the well-being of society harsh punishments were
promised to those who did not obey the religious laws; the Prophet
instilled a fear of the Day of Reckoning and promised rewards for those
who obeyed.

Thus fervour for the promised paradise and fear of the Day of Reckoning
created a society based on a religious foundation.

The history of the lives of other prophets has, for the most part, been
lost in time, but the life of the Prophet Muhammad is well documented.
Anyone who researches into it will not be left in the least doubt that
he had total faith and inner certainty in his mission. If religious
beliefs were mere superstitions or a means to unify and subdue a
society, then all the proofs expounded in the Qur'an concerning the
hereafter, the existence of a Creator of the World, Divine Unity, His
attributes, belief in a prophecy and the reckoning of a man's actions
after death would have absolutely no meaning.

**What the Qur'an says about the Meaning of Revelation and Prophecy**

The Qur'an clearly states that it is a book revealed to the Prophet and
that revelation is a kind of divine utterance beyond the understanding
or communication of the material world; revelation is unperceived by
sense or intellect but apprehended by other faculties which, by God's
will, are present in certain individuals. Through revelation
instructions from the unseen are received and their acceptance and
implementation is called prophethood. To clarify this matter we may make
the following points.

**Man 's Innate Nature**

In the beginning of this book we explained that each created entity,
whether mineral, plant or animal, is endowed with an inherent force
which enables it to develop in accordance with its own innate design and
nature.

Thus we read in chapter XX:50, "Our Lord is He who gave everything its
nature, then guided it correctly, " and again in chapter LXXXVII:2-3
"Who creates, then disposes, who measures then guides." We also know
that man is not excluded from this general law, that is, he has a
direction and an aim towards which he develops, having been endowed with
faculties which allow him to fulfill this aim. All his happiness lies in
achieving this aim; his sorrow, grief and misfortune are the result of
his failure to achieve this aim. He is guided to this special purpose by
his Creator.

As God says in chapter LXXVI:3, "Indeed, we have shown him the way
whether he be grateful or disbelieving. " Likewise we read in chapter
LXXX:1920, "From a drop of seed, He creates him and proportions him.
Then makes the way easy for him. "

**Man 's Path in Traversing the Road of Life**

The difference between the animal and plant kingdoms and man is that
the former react according to their inherent knowledge or instinct,
while man, also possessing an inherent knowledge, is equipped with an
intellect and the capacity to use or recognize wisdom. Even if man is
capable of undertaking a certain action, he weighs the good or the bad,
the benefit or harm, contained in that action and implements it only if
he estimates that the benefit outweighs the harm.

Thus he follows the instruction of his intellect in every action; the
intellect dictates the necessity of an action. The intellect causes one
to abandon an act if it is likely to bring with it an unacceptable
degree of trouble and hardship; it not only instructs one on the
feasibility of an action, but it also takes into account the dictates of
sentiment and feeling. Indeed the perception of sentiment with regard to
the relative good or bad in matter is so closely connected with the
decision of the intellect as to be considered one and the same thing.

**Man as a Social Being**

No one would deny that men are social beings who co-operate with each
other to better meet their daily needs. We may wonder, however, whether
men desire this co-operation from their natural feelings; are they
naturally inclined to undertake an action with others and share an
interest in something as a social project?

On one level, man's needs, feelings and desires cause him to act for
his own benefit and without regard for the needs and wishes of others.
Man uses every means to fulfil his own needs: he uses every kind of
transport to reach his destination; he uses the leaves, stems and fruit
of plants and trees; he lives upon the meat of animals and their
products, and takes advantage of a multitude of other things to
complement his own deficiencies in certain respects. Can man, whose
state is such that he uses everything he finds to his own ends, be
expected to respect another human being? Can he extend his hand to
another in co-operation and turn a blind eye to his own desire for the
sake of mutual benefit?

The answer in the first instance must be no. It is as a result of man's
countless needs, which can never be fulfilled by himself alone, that he
recognizes the possibility of fulfilling them through the help and
co-operation of others. Similarly, he understands that his own
strengths, desires and wishes are also shared by others, and just as he
defends his own interests so others defend theirs.

Thus, out of necessity, he co-operates with the social nexus and gives
a certain measure of his own efforts to fulfill the needs of others; in
return he benefits from the efforts of others in order to full fill his
own needs. In truth he has entered into a market-place of social wealth,
always open to traders and offering all the benefits obtained by the
collective work of the society. All these factors are placed together in
this market- place of pooled human resources and each person, according
to the importance society attaches to his work, has a share in these
benefits. Thus man's first nature incites him to pursue the fulfillment
of his own needs using others in the process and taking advantage of
their work for his own ends. It is only in cases of necessity and
helplessness that he lends a hand to co-operate with society.

This matter is clear when we observe the nature of children: anything a
child wants he demands in an extreme way; he emphasizes his demand by
crying. As he grows older, however, and becomes a part of the social
fabric, he gradually puts an end to his excessive demands. More evidence
for the truth of this may be seen when a person accumulates power which
exceeds that of others and he rejects the spirit of cooperation and its
restrictions of society; such an individual uses people and the fruits
of their labours for himself without giving anything back in return.

God refers to the necessary spirit of natural cooperation in society in
chapter XLIII:32, "We have apportioned among them their livelihood in
the life of the world, and raised some of them above others in rank that
some of them take labour from others ... " This verse refers to the
reality of the social situation in which each individual has a different
capacity and different talents: those who are superior in one domain
engage the cooperation or employ of others for their eventual mutual
benefit.

Thus all members of society are linked together in the ways and wants
of the fabric of one single social unit. Those who do not see the
obvious necessity of mutual cooperation are condemned by God in chapter
XIV:34, "Truly man is surely a wrong-doer, (a tyrant) " and, in chapter
XXXII1:72, "Indeed he has proved a tyrant and a fool."

These verses refer to man's natural instinct which, unless checked,
drives him to take advantage of his fellow-men and in doing so to
overstep the rights of others.


