Introduction
============

Disscusing about youths and community problems is like discussing a
wide disparity from the human disparities and comprises approximately
six billion people all over the world. Such a discussion deals with the
present and future and the tremendous changes and transformations in the
human race.

Surely religious scholars and those specialized in the affairs of
education, sociology, psychology, and health have dealt with this
subject, i.e., the factor of youths, as the politicians did through
studying, analyzing, planning and solving, so as to build a generation
which could perform its responsibilities seriously and efficiently, and
also could withstand the latest devolopments in its era.

Islam has its own ideology and philosophy in life and its cultural
value gives great concern to the development of the human being, from
birth and childhood, through youth to maturity and, then, to the end of
his life, and has its own scientific approaches which are based on the
foundations of morals and pure ideology in order to deal with the
generation of youth; morally and spiritually.

Indeed, Muslim youths are afflicted with dreadful plans which are
supported from every angle, psychologically, politically and financially
in order to isolate them from Islam. Such destructive plans are based on
the following two, main, dangerous puposes:

1. Spreading immorality and vice among the youths by means of
exploiting the sexual urge, using allurements, infiltrating drugs and
broadcasting the call for moral disentanglement through mass media,
amusement parks, illicit clubs, etc. And, also, by calling for sexual
freedom, and dissoluteness under the slogan of freedom and sexual
rights... etc.

2. Waging a campaign of creating doubts about Islam as an ideology,
shari'ah and moral and cultural value under the guise of modernization.
And, also, accusing this innocent religion, i.e., Islam, as being the
cause of Muslims' backwardness. They work, continuously, day and night
to substitute the identity of the Muslim youths with the West's
materialistic way of life and also by portraying Islam as a religion
unable to answer the problems of the age or to lead man towards the age
of complexity and scientific development.

In view of this, the responsibility of Muslim writers and intellectuals
concerning the youths increases day by day, and for this purpose,
Al-Balagh Foundation presents this booklet to its dear readers, hoping
that they will benefit from it, and seeking Allah's aid to give us the
power to present more in the way of guiding the youths as being the
leaders of tomorrow, and also building an enlightened Islamic
civilization.

Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds.

Al-Balagh Foundation

1. Stages of Human Growth

"It is He Who has created you from dust, then from a sperm drop, then
from a leech like clot: Then does He get you out (into the Light) as a
child; then lets you (grow and) reach your age of full strength; then
lets you become old, though of you there are some who die before; and
lets you reach a term appointed; in order that you may learn wisdom".
Holy Qur'an (The Believer 40:67) "What is the matter with you; that you
place not your hope for kindness and long suffering in Allah. Seeing
that it is He that has created you in diverse stages?"

Holy Qur'an (Noah 71:13-14) That is how the Creator of this complicated
world started the Creation of human beings, and by the power of its
Creator, the first step of life started from earth where it goes through
some stages, from formation to the growing of the body, soul and mind.
Surely Allah's greatness is manifested in the above mentioned verse,
through the creation of human beings from the soil of the earth. The
emergence of the body through its complicated and active parts, is
manifested by its psychological formation, and its creative and
emotional fields in the form of love and hatred, content and discontent,
desire and anger, fear, sorrow and happiness.

Likewise, it is manifested through its mental or intellectual
formation, by means of sensation and abstract perceptions with
imagination and the power of comtemplation and the reflecting on the
unseen and unknown things, and also its power of discovery, preparation
and plans. Surely, it is Allah's greatness that is manifested in the
creation of man, as mentioned in the above Qur'anic verse, so as to show
the three stages of his life which are:

1. Childhood Stage
2. Puberty Stage
3. Maturity Stage

The medical scientists and psychologists have conducted scientific
researches on the human formation related to the stage of childhood and
its peculiarities, as they studied the second stage in its three stages:
youth, adulthood, elderliness. In Islamic messages to human beings one
can see some distinction in its mode of education, guidance and dealings
between the human beings in those stages. This way exposes the
scientific view and substantial personification of the human's soul,
intellect and body formation and establishing good treatment on this
foundation.

In this discussion we address the youth stage for its importance in
human life, because of it being the stage of power, activity and ability
to perform things, and also because of being the stage surrounded with
dangers and psychological, emotional and instinctual dilemmas. Thus, the
bodily, intellectual and psychological abilities of youths looks like
any free ability in this universe, such as nuclear energy and water
energy, which can be directed towards serving man and the welfare of
mankind, likewise, it can also be changed to the power of destruction,
problems, the sufferings against individuals and society.

2. Infulencing Factors in an Individual's Conduct

The human conduct, itself, forms a relatively objective unit, which is
the outcome of different factors and activities, hence, the human
behaviour, like mercy, honesty, justice, uttering good words, or telling
lies, hypocracy, crime, murder, using drugs and practicing monopoly, are
clear signs of how different factors are united in itself, thus, by it a
symphathetic human being or a criminal one is made or a complicated one
who suffers from a nervous and pychological disease. Indeed, the
psychological studies and the researches of criminologists and
pychologists have been able to present to us analyses and
interpretations to the human behaviour and refers them to their original
factors. These studies and researches discovered that the human conduct,
being good or bad - is biult from diverse factors and causes social,
hereditary and natural instincts...etc

It is beneficial to summarize these factors, so as to shed light on
some circumstances epecially the pychological crises and complicated
ones, and also the conditions of deviation and unnatural behaviours and
manners which are clearly visible among the youths. The state of
rebellion against the law, sexual deviation, crime, theft and
aggressions, degradation of personality and wandering, taking alcohol
and drugs, suicide and social vices; which usually turns to bodily
diseases, can be attributed to the essential causes and stages that form
the human personality.

But whatever the circumstances may be, we ought to understand that man
is an existence which has desire and power of change and transformation,
and the freedom to choose what is right, instead of deviation; that is
why seeking forgiveness is decreed, as well as, enjoining good and
prohibiting evil.

However, the main factors which contribute in the formation of
individual conducts are:

a. The Family and the Circumstances of the First Upbringing
b. Genetic Composition
c. School Education
d. The Media and Its Affect on the Conduct of the Youths
e. Political Power and Authority
f. The Culture and Beliefs of the Youths

Later on, we will see the role of each of these factors, and their
effect on the conduct of the youth in particular. This kind of
enlightenment will give the youth vis-a-vis the condition of
comtemplation and controversy, a forum of dispute and the stimulus of
emotion and instinct, as well as, the impulses of conduct, before he
attends to them, and takes any stance. How marvellous and superb is this
guidance of the Holy Prophet, which says: "Should you set your mind on
doing something think of its outcome. If it is good, go ahead, but if it
is bad, refrain from doing it"(1)

We must understand that among the most important factors behind the
corruption in the conduct of the young generation is their unconscious
drift toward the stimulus and personal interests, and their submission
to the pressures of the sexual instinct and other behaviours which
affect the personality of the youth; aware or unaware.

However, we can understand this brief explanation, scientifically, by
considering the relationship between the intellect, consciousness and
behaviours, as we can see it clearly in some reports and researches in
this field, as well as, the record and statistics which show the
spreading of crime, deviation and other irregular practices in a
community covered by ignorance, intellectual and cultural retardation,
disbelief in Allah, which is another result of human ignorance, and the
misinterpretation of this world, thus, analyzing it negatively.


