A. Family and the Circumstances of the First Upbringing
=======================================================

The Islamic view point vis-a-vis the scientific perspective for the
growing and formation of man through the stages of his existence
manifest in the relationships between those stages, from the time of the
uniting of the sperm and the egg up to the stages of elderliness. Islam
shows that even the relationship between the different kinds of food
eaten by the parents and the zygote, which forms the baby, as well as,
the behaviors of the parents toward the child in his early stage and the
community and the environment which surrounds him, all have a great role
in the upbringing of a newly born child.

Accordingly, we see the holy prophet (s.a.w.) explains that a man's
embracing a certain ideology and behaviour in his maturity and
responsibility is related to the way he was raised and educated by his
parents.

Thus, a person becoming a Muslim, having good behaviour, or a person
becoming a deviant, shows that his parents and the way he was raised has
had a hand in it. But, a person is, initially, born with a pure and
clean intellect.

Although his intellect is subject to adjustment and the accomodating of
different ideas and behaviours, it is in the first stage that a person
and his nature is formed ... from this the saying of the holy prophet
(s.a.w.) will become clear, i.e., "Every man is born on moral
constitution unless his parents' will causes him to become a jew or
christian or idol worshipper."(2) And the Holy Qur'an talks about this
reality, i.e., the relationship between the early education given by the
parents and the human behaviour after the grade of maturity and
intellectually and bodily perfection.

Allah the most high is saying: "And Allah has brought you forth from
the wombs of your mothers - when you knew nothing - and He gave you
hearing and sight and the hearts that you may give thanks (to Him)".
Holy Qur'an (The Bee 16:78)

"O You who believe: Save yourselves and your families from a fire whose
fuel is men and stones..." Holy Qur'an (Prohibitions 66:6)

In this view, the Holy Qur'an connects what man learns and obtains in
his early stage, what he hears, sees and comprehends and with what comes
to him after that, hence, it enjoins the parents to educate and
discipline their children aright and warns them against negligence and
carelessness (toward their children).

Imam Ali (a.s.) in his sermon to his son Imam Hassan (a.s) also
connects between what man obtains and learns during the infancy stage
and what his person will become in terms of thought and conduct at his
puberty stage. He says: "Certainly, the heart of a young man is like
uncultivated land. It accepts whatever is strewn upon it. So, I hastened
to mold you properly before your heart hardened up and your mind became
occupied, that you might be ready to accept, through your intelligence,
the results of the experience of others and be saved from going through
these experiences yourself..."(3)

Verily, by this, the Imam (a.s.) proves to us the basis of education,
i.e., undertaking the education of a child (before his heart becomes
hardened and his mind becomes occupied).

Certainly, this principle of education stands on a scientific or
educational basis calling us to undertake the discipline of children and
educating them before they grow up and their mind becomes busy with
experiences and other corrupt teachings and ideologies, otherwise, we
will have to start from the beginning and repeat the education once
more. But, most likely, we cannot cure some deviations, and, if so, man
becomes a victim and will be left in total distress the whole of his
life. Thus, the foundation of most of the problems, social vices and
corruption in conducts is the childhood stage which is not founded on
the basis of goodness and piety.

The studies conducted on the rate of crimes in the U.S.A., in 1910,
shows that 50 % of the 7,598 crimes came from family problems and
separation, and that 50 % of the children in reformatory centres in
England and Scotland came from broken homes. Also, the studies conducted
by a German researcher on 144 criminals shows that all of them came from
broken homes. And the research conducted by another German on some 2000
criminals shows that 26 % of them came from families in which the
parents were separated for some reason or other. In 1942, a French
researcher conducted research in the city of Paris on crime, and it
shows that 88 % of the criminals came from separated families.(4)

In general, the reason for good conduct is correct family education,
and, likewise, most social vices, which a person practices in his
puberty stage; like jealousy and having an inferiority complex,
laziness, dependance, selfishness, aggression, drinking alcohol and
using drugs, telling lies, stealing, hypocracy and showing bad behavior
toward his fellow being, all these are attributed to the family
education and discipline which he recieved in his puberty stage. Man's
behaviour, morals and attributes grow, even though escaping from them
and controlling them is possible. Thus, man is an existence having will,
freedom of choice and power of change, although his education, if not
undertaken properly, creates difficulties for him, and others may become
victims of such erroneous education.

Hence, among the ways a man can understand his personality and the
problems he faces or the positive side of his personality is that he
should remember the nature of his first growth, and study the
environment and atmosphere in which he grew up, in order to understand
the source of his problems or the positive side of his personality.

b. Genetic Composition

Studies and field researches performed on the conduct of individuals,
particularly the abnormal and unnatural ones, like of those who were
inflicted with sexual deviations, tribalism, aggression...etc. show that
there are some biological, physiological, and hereditary factors which
have an affect on the conduct of a person, as well as, other educative,
environmental and communal factors. Indeed, it is comfirmed,
scientifically, that the endocrine gland and hormones have a great
effect on a person, and their effect increases - both in males and
females, in the puberty and youth stages.

However, man, with his power, is able to change his stand and displace
or divert his desires, selfishness and personal interests. These
scientific studies confirm that the nature of the body structure of a
person, and his composition, has an effect on his conduct and human
behaviour. Therefore, the bodily structure of both a young boy and girl,
like beauty and power, or weakness, simplicity and ugliness, has an
effect on their various behaviours.

Like the affiliation to a certain class or social rank of a person,
physical strenghth or weakness, and even the colour and body size of a
person, like the breasts and hair in young girls and the strength and
height in body in young boys, and even eloquency in speech, has a great
effect on their conduct and human behaviour.

By considering all these, the bodily structure of a person has an
effect on his conduct and behaviour, or even in the formation of bad
habits, like pride and arrogance, inferiority complex, zeal and
jealousy, and the sense of wanting to oppress others. But, Islam has
cured all these problems by warning man against pride and arrogance, as
it warns him against zeal and jealousy and the feeling of inferiority,
and emphasizing that man's value lies in his intellect, conduct and
behaviour. In view of this, humanity has value and worthiness which
depends on the intellect, morals and will, not just on man's bodily
structure or other material things which decieve him. Allah, the Most
High, says: "Surely the most honourable of you in the sight of Allah is
the one among you most careful (of his duty). Holy Qur'an (Inner
Apartments 49:13)

Warning against the deception of the bodily structure in the case of
the Munafiqeen (hypocrites), Allah, the Almighty, describes them: "When
you see them, their exteriors please you; and if they speak; you listen
to their words. They are as (worthless as hollow) pieces of wood clad
with garments, (unable to stand on their own). They think that every cry
is against them. They are the enemies; so beware of them. The curse of
Allah be on them; how are they deluded (away from the truth)." Holy
Qur'an (Hypocrites 63:4)

In an advice, Luqman warns his son against pride and arrogancy: "And do
not go about in the land exultingly, for you cannot cut through the
earth nor reach the mountains in height." Holy Qur'an (Luqman 31:37)

In this respect, the Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) says: "Surely the
Almighty, Allah, does not look at your structure and wealth, but He
looks at your hearts and deeds."(5) Also came a warning against pride
and arrogance or pride of the body structure, like having eloquency in
speech, strength, health...etc., and likewise, another warning came
against those who feel a sense of deficiency, because they have lost
some part of their body. And the spirit of zeal and jealousy sometimes
makes them feel embarassment and shame or creates a spirit of
retaliation in some of them. Allah the Most High says: "Say: I seek
refuge in the Lord of the Dawn, from the evil of what He has created;
and from the evil of the utterly dark night when it comes; and from the
evil of those who blow on knots, and from the evil of the envious when
he envies." Holy Qur'an (The Dawn 113:1-5)

And Allah, the Almighty, also says:

"And do not covet that by which Allah has made some of you excel
others. Men shall have the benefit of what they earned and women shall
have the benefit of what they earn, and ask Allah of His grace, surely
Allah knows all things." Holy Qur'an (Women 4:32)

Surely, the calling to self perfection, and perception of the self and
essence without the feeling of inferiority or as a result of what a man
has in his structure, is manifested in this supplication of Imam Zain-ul
Abideen Ali bin Hussain (a.s.): "O Allah put my wealth in myself."(6)
Thus, the supplication summarizes the highest peak of relationship with
the self and prevents it from feeling inferior, zealous or jealous.
Therefore, in every man, there are certain specifications and qualities
with which he enjoys and which are enough to make him satisfied with his
personality if he makes good use them.

This is the justice of Allah, the Most high, and it is His wisdom to
His creatures, and the feeling of superiority over others opens one's
will to work hard and feel that he needs the hand of others. The Holy
Qur'an sheds more light on this, when it says: "...And We have exalted
some of them above others in degree, that some of them may take others
in subjection..."
Holy Qur'an (Adornments 43:32)

Hence, we can see this enlightenment to a cure for this self problem,
which came from the bodily structure of a person. In this regard, the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), describing the attributes of a true believer,
says: "Faith and jealousy cannot be gathered together in the heart of a
person."(7)

c. School Education:

The issue of education and its influence on the future behaviour of a
person is not regarded as a scientific or practical issue, because it is
among the clearest issues in the field of science. Therefore, the
educational elements in school life have the most effect in the forming
of one's personality and creating one's identity. Thus, a child, in our
present world, spends the most important part of his life in the school
atmosphere. He starts his life in its environment and from the nursery
schools and kindergartens, it participates in the stages of his life
through the primary and secondary schools, colleges and universites.
Thus, he spends his childhood, puberty and youth in a system of life
designed and arranged according to particular programs and purposes.

Therefore, he grows and forms his personality according to the
philosophy of education and a life system governed by school, whether
the schools are run by the state or by private funds and associations.

So, the school that adopts materialistic ideas or notions in its
programs and does not give much concern to morals and belief in Allah,
will produce licentious personalities who are craving after worldly
gains without principles, and whose bases are built on social and
political platforms. Surely, such schools will produce materialistic and
capitalistic minds. General reforms and changes basically start from the
school in its educational philosophy, programs and the ways of life in
it and, also, the personality of the teachers who practice teaching.
Thus, the school's elements - programs, methods, the behaviours inside
school and the teachers, will play a great role in the formation of
one's personality.

Hence, the school teaches a student how to live with tens or hundreds
of students and how to deal with different customs and cultures and how
to gain from them.

The school builds its educational life on some certain principles and
helps in forming the social conditions, choosing what suits its
principles and refusing whatever is against its aims and purposes,
therefore, it, in essence, is a small model of a community and a state.
Certainly, it is more, in that, the school plays a vital role in the
life of a student from the time he understands his self and starts to
think about his future ambitions and expections. So, the school becomes
an essential source for him to achieve his future aspirations and
ambitions. In view of this, the general opinion polls, among the
students, will give us the knowledge of hope, opinions and the
approaches of the student, as well as, where they are heading in the
future. Likewise, failure in their studies will cause great problems for
most of them, and can also affect their conduct and the future of their
lives; even among their families and communities. Therefore, it is
advantageous to study the problems of children and teenagers before they
become more complicated and difficult to find solutions for and which
may cause them to give up their studies in the primary or secondary
stages, without gaining scientific training, culture and knowledge which
may help them to achieve their future ambitions.

So often the teacher, or the method of education and the way of dealing
with students, plays a vital role in creating problems for children and
teenagers. Therefore, it demands that the school employ a social-
psychology researcher to study the students' problems according to their
ages and conditions, as well as, their problems from their childhood,
young age and youth stages with the aim of solving them, before they
become complicated and distructive to the student and his studies,
though most of the recent schools have already adopted this method.
Also, bad economic conditions play a vital role in causing a student, at
this age, to give his studies and his concentration to be fully focused
on earning his living, or he gives up studying forever because of being
unable to pay his school fees.

Bad companions and friends, also, participate greatly in the failure of
the continuation of studies. Because, in this stage, it is easy to
attract a child toward vices and bad habits, directing him towards
loitering, vagrancy and playing in vain instead of thinking, seriously,
to his respected future.

In addition, the culture of the parents and their appreciation of the
future of their children, and their good relationship with them or bad
habits and negligence toward them, has a great role in the failure or
prosperity of their studies and life. All these show the importance of
having good relationships with the youth and younger generations,
because it helps them a lot in the success of their school life.

It is worth mentioning that Islam considers the seeking of knowledge
compulsory for all Muslims on two levels; i.e., Ainii and Kifa'i.??????
It considers knowledge with its diverse branches, as a way to human
perfection, faith in the Divine messages, knowing Allah, practicing good
conduct, community's growth and life organization. This is clearly seen
in the sayings of Allah, the Most High: "...Those truly fear Allah,
among His servants, who have knowledge..." Holy Qur'an (The Originator
35:28)

And also says, "...Allah will raise up to (suitable) ranks (and
degrees) those of you who believe and who have been granted (mystic)
knowledge.." Holy Qur'an (The Woman Who Pleads 58:11) And also says:
"Read and your Lord is Most Honourable. Who taught (to write) with the
pen, taught man what he knew not." Holy Qur'an (The Clot 96:3-5)

Making a connection between ignorance and moral deterioration, the
Almighty, Allah, says: "What! Do you indeed approach men lustfully
rather than women? Nay, you are a people who act ignorantly." Holy
Qur'an (The Ants 27:55)

And the Most High said: "...And if you turn not away their snare from
me, I will yearn towards them and become (one) of the ignorant." Holy
Qur'an (Joseph 12:33)

"...and man has turned unfaithful to it; surely he is unjust,
ignorant." Holy Qur'an (The Allies 33:72)

"...surely I admonish you lest you may be of the ignorant." Holy Qur'an
(Hud 11:46)

"...but I see you are a people who are ignorant." Holy Qur'an (The
Winding Sandtracts 46:23)

The Holy Qur'an founded the Islamic Message on the principles and basis
of knowledge and education, and called for the establishment of faith on
the basis of knowledge, evidence and proof. In view of this, the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) continued the call for seeking knowledge and
motivated people towards it, and, in addition, he (s.a.w.), himself,
propagated knowledge and education. Thus, after the battle of Badr, the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) demanded that each of the Quraish's prisoners of
war should teach ten of the Muslims to read as a ransom from captivity,
so as to show that being free from captivity is equal to being free from
ignorance. At various times, we read in the Prophetic traditions,
commandments and guidances, motivations and stimulations toward seeking
knowledge, like in his (s.a.w.) saying: "Seeking knowledge is compulsory
upon every Muslim."(8)

And: "The angels spread their wings to a seeker of knowledge."(9)

And: "Whoever prepares a way for seeking knowledge, Allah will prepare
a way to Paradise for him." All these hadiths, and the like, show us the
importance, in Islam, of knowledge and seeking it. And also it makes
clear, to us, the interest and concern Islam has toward biological
knowledges, like pharmacology, engineering, physics, agriculture and
chemistry, as well as, differnt professions and works, if we understand
that Islamic Shari'a regards those knowledges and professions as
compulsory duties, i.e., it is compulsory to obtain it as much as
permissible. Thus, we understand the importance of knowledge and Islam's
aim in seeking knowledge.

Both the government and the individual should take the responsibility
to execute this duty by preparing some people with knowledge, and
teaching them different professions, so that the community will be
acquainted with those knowledges and professions.

Islam puts great emphasis on the parents with regard to teaching their
children, being merciful to them and, also, solving their problems. It
is obvious that the family has a great role in providing a suitable
atmosphere for their children's education, and encouraging them to seek
knowledge, and preventing them from having relations with bad friends
who disturb their studies. Likewise, the parents, by cooperating with
the schools, can solve their children's problems.

In view of this, what we ought to give special attention to is
directing the students toward the rules and principles of studing,
showing them the importance of knowledge, encouraging them to continue
their studies to the higher levels, and giving them advice and guidance
which will prevent them from abandoning their studies and their
professions. Likewise, the government should participate, greatly, and
give a helping hand in education and solving the economic problems of
the students which force them to leave their studies.

However, a young man should think, seriously, about his future and that
the continuation of his studies and learning other works and having a
profession are basic issues in his life, therefore, it is compulsory
upon him to put forth more effort on his part and take a lesson from the
life of those people who have lost their future, so that he will not
become a victim like they.

d. The Media and Its Affect on the Conduct of the Youths:

In our present world, the means of communication and conveying thoughts
and information, has developed rapidly, seeming to travel at the speed
of light and sound, and reaches every angle of the world within a few
seconds. There are a great number of institutions, equipment and special
devices for mass enlightenment, establishing general opinions and
individual resolutions.

In addition, the means of communication and information, like
television, radio, internal waves, computers, newspapers, books,
magazines...have become the dominant power upon the thoughts and a means
of establishing a pattern for conduct. Therefore, the media contributes
in the establishment of political thoughts, as well as, individual
positions and thoughts, and it contributes immensely, especially the
pictorial type, like, television, cinema, Video, and pornographic
magazines, in affecting the general thought and conduct of the people.

The youths - especially at the puberty stage - are active and ready,
more than other people, to copy other personalities, and are influenced
by the people who appear on the screen of television or cinema.

They are influenced by other people who play a vital role in the
political, social and revolutionary arena, as well as, great historical
heroes. This is because a youth - whether male or female - is in the
stage of building his or her personality. Therefore, he or she needs
someone to copy. Since instinct and desires, especially the sexual
instinct, are at their highest peak and putting pressure on the youths,
so they are looking for a solution to it, therefore, the media have
contributed, immensely, in stirring and arousing the sexual instinct by
means of pornographic and seductive films, pictures, stories, as well
as, cultures, like the use of guerilla warfare tactics and aggression in
films which contribute, a lot, in deviating the youths and teaching them
criminal acts. In view of this, some governments are prohibiting the
showing of pornographic and guerilla warfare films, often prohibiting
the youth from attending the theaters where these films are shown.

The result of the statistics on viewing videos conducted by Dr.
Alexander Aldila in Lebanon shows that: "The viewing of social and
emotional films wins the first position while detective films win the
second position..."(10)

Another report states that: The studies conducted in the U.S on 110
people in a corrections institute show that 49% of them got the desire
of carrying weapons from watching the cinema and 12-21 % of them found
the audacity to steal and kill police from the same source. While the
studies conducted on 252 deviated young girls, between the ages of
14-18, shows that 25% of them had sexual relationships as a result of
watching pornoqraphic films in the cinema and 41 % of them were led to
glamorous ceremonies, night theaters and 54% of them cut school in order
to watch films, while 17% of them left their homes as a result of the
conflict between them and their family on going to the cinema.

A W.H.O report and, also, a French Judge, about the factors of
deviation, say: "I don't have any doubt that some films, especially
detective films, play a great, harmful role in most of the cases."

A questionnaire and cross examination on 1344 personalities conducted
in Britain on the relationship between the cinema and corruption of
children under 16, found that 600 of them answered that there is a
relationship between the cinema and children's deviation. Other studies
also show that most of the stealing and robbing, which happens in the
West, has an effect from the cinema.(11) At last, it can be concluded
that watching emotional films, pornographic and detective films is
corrupting people, and furthermore, as scientific studies comfirm, the
youth at this stage, can be influenced by all this, because he is on the
verge of his growth. From all these statistics, we can deduce that the
work of the mass media in the formation of emotions and conduct
involving instinct, as well as, copying the role of the heroes, is
important.


