E. Political Power and Authority:
=================================

With the advancement of social living and civilization and its
complications, the role of government and its importance in the life of
an individual and community becomes high, and the interference of
government in vital and necessary issues, becomes apparent, as well as,
in social, intellectual, educational, economical, cultural and
informative matters.

In addition, it is upon the government to undertake the responsibility
of education and its organization, supervise the ministry of information
and direct other ministries according to its general politics and aims,
and enact rules and regulations governing its citizens, therefore, the
goverment plays a vital role in the formation of individual conduct and
culture, positively or negatively.

Thus, the Islamic message considers the formation of an Islamic
government as an obligatory matter, and defines Islamic government as:
"A government established on the basis of Islam and its principles", and
tries to make the government an instrument of execution, indvidual and
community building and governing the community on the basis of Islamic
Shari'a. In view of this, the Islamic scholars term the existence of an
Imam (a leader) as a mercy, i.e., he can encourage people toward
obedience and submission (to Allah's Commands) and discourages them from
sin and disobediences, because he is the one who coordinates life's
construction and leads it on the basis of Islamic values and principles
through his government.

The government contributes in the formation of an individual's conduct,
and the political powers and parties also contribute in the formation of
an individual's conduct, especially the youths, because they are more
emotional and easy to be affiliated with a particular political group or
movement and accept its thoughts and manifestations, whether it carries
luminous ideas based on Islamic principles and its original values or
being deviated parties, ideas and thoughts. Thus, it is the parents'
duty to direct their children toward the right direction, and guard them
against affiliating with deviated parties or groups.

f. The Culture and Beliefs of the Youths:

"It is He Who brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers when you
knew nothing and He gave you hearing and sight and the hearts; that you
may give thanks (to Allah)." Holy Qur'an (The Bee 16:78) "Read! and your
Lord is Most Honourable, Who taught (to write) with the pen, Taught man
that which he knew not. Nay! man is most surely inordinate, because he
sees himself free from want." Holy Qur'an (The Clot 96:4-7)

"...those truly fear Allah, among His servants, who have knowledge..."
Holy Qur'an (The Originator 35:28)

These holy verses, among others, show the importance of knowledge and
education, and the relationship between knowledge and conduct. For
instance, thanksgiving and fear, i.e., submission and obedience to the
laws and morals, before it transforms into reality, passes certain
stages starting from imagination, which is the first step of an action,
then, it inclines to this imagination, then, after being satisfied with
it, chooses it and transforms it into action.

This is how imagination transforms into action through intellectual and
psychological processes. It is clear that the belief and culture of a
person contributes in creating the ideas and imaginations governing his
stance and actions, as well as, depending on it.

The studies and researches conducted, in this field, show that the
culture, ideas and beliefs of a person contribute immensely to his
conduct, the statistics confirm that the aggression and deviation in the
ignorant people, or who lack civilization and knowledge or who do not
believe in Allah or the Judgement Day and the Hereafter, is related to
their ignorance and unconsciousness.

Therefore, knowledge and cultural adaptation which a person bears,
participate in guarding him against failure and practicing crimes and
aggression, as it, also, participates, immensely, in the belief in Allah
and the Hereafter, good conduct and morals. Thus, a person who is wise
and conscious, socially and knowledgeably, about the actions that tempt
him, and understands their bad consequences, both in this world and the
Hereafter, will refrain from performing these acts due to the knowledge
he has.

And a knowledgeable and civilized person who is conscious of his
knowledge, respects his personality, because he knows the essence of his
being in the society and evaluates his responsibilities before the Lord
of the worlds Who bestowed on him knowledge and consciousness.
Therefore, he refrains from committing crimes, sins and other immoral
actions.

However, the more knowledge, piety, chasteness and self-respect in a
person increases due to his civilization, social consciousness and his
belief in Allah, the more his social dignity, respect for the laws that
protect his interest, as well as, the interests of the community will
increase. This will also help him in shunning the acts which downgrade
his personality, put him under the divine and world by punishments,
social contempt and general hatred. Whereas, an ignorant and uncultured
person who does not know the essence of his carelessness to commit any
kind of atrocity and crime will downgrade his own personality.

It is reported, in one of the traditions of the Holy Imams of
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) about the importance of respecting man's personality,
and knowing the essence of his existence and consciousness about the
consequences of his actions, thus: "Do not feel secure from the evil of
a person who outrages his self."(12) Another hadith says: "An ignorant
companion is an inconvenience."(13)

And it has come in another hadith; an explanation of the difficulty of
guiding an ignorant man after he has become deviated and changing his
accustomed conduct, which shows the danger of ignorance and its effect
on deviation and committing crimes. In a hadith, Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq
(a.s.) says: "Teaching an ignorant (person) and changing his accustomed
conduct appears to be a miracle."(14) Certainly the researches, field
statistics and scientific analyses reveal that self sincerity and
conduct require three basic elements, they are: 1. Knowledge and
awareness on the conduct and actions which a person will present, thus,
a person who knows the harm of beer, drugs, smoking, gambling and
recklessness, and the danger of fornication and adultery, will not go
close to them talking of committing them. But, as for a person who is
controlled by instinct and ignorance, will become the victim of those
destuctive actions, destroying his wealth, health and dignity in them.
Therefore, it is obligatory to enlighten the youths, and educate them on
the incidents, statistics and experiences which victimized others (men
and women), so that they can be of those who are alert and refrain from
committing those acts.

And for strengthening the conduct of a person, there is a need to
spread knowledge, awareness, and civilization and control ignorance and
illiteracy. The school and cultural curriculum, or system for the
people, should be a system which concerns itself with man's guidance
against deviated, criminal acts.

Because knowledge gives man awareness on what is going on and
understanding it in a true, scientific way, thus, he can have correct
relations with it, far from deviation and ignorance. Likewise, it gives
his self awareness and understanding of the essence of his existence and
personality, therefore, he can have good relations with his person and
guard his dignity and security. It gives him understanding of the
actions and processes which stir in his self and direct him toward his
actions, so as to study it and act consciously toward it in order to
turn down those which direct him to evil and viciousness and to follow
those that guide him to virtue.

Also, knowledge gives man the ability to understand the usefulness and
harmfulness of an action which returns to him or his community. He
responds to the useful and good ones and rejects the evil and vicious
ones. It gives him an ablity to understand his past, present and future
and protects him against falling into danger, mistakes and wasting good
opportunities, as it gives him the understanding of reality and his
surroundings and he knows how to deal with it and guard himself against
problems...this is how knowledge becomes man's protector and director in
life.

2. Beliefs: Beliefs, ideas and civilization of a person forms a basic
stimulant upon performing a particular action or refraining from it.
Thus, malicious ideas and thoughts, like marxism and capitalism, which
call for unbridled freedom and the malicious ideas of psychologists and
other ideas which were formed on a material basis deprived of morals and
belief in Allah inflict a lot of damages on the community. Surely, the
only pure and real ideology for the human generation is Islam, which has
arranged human conduct on the basis of belief, because it prohibits
everything which afflicts harmful results on the wellbeing of man, as
well as, community interests.

In addition, Islam prohibits fornication, homosexuality, beer,
gambling, drugs, slaughter, rape and violation of women, a stage that
has reached untold proportions of selling millions of young girls for
sexual purposes in Western countries. Therefore, the youth who believe
in Allah and the Day of Ressurection, protect themselves against those
actions which result in loss of health, wealth and dignity and often end
with imprisonment and death, and the downgrading of the personality.

Furthermore, the researches and statistics conducted by some
institutions confirmed that the percentage of crime, deviation and
social problems and vices in Europe, America, Russia, Japan and other
countries of the world, is increasing upon all the educational,
scientific and economical develpments enjoyed there. This is because the
knowledge, awareness and social welfare (in those countries) does not
safeguard man from crime, deviation and negativism.

Man can understand the evil and danger of lying, forgery, fornication,
drugs, smoking, extravagance, oppression, manslaugther, stealing,
raping, pride...etc., but he is practicing it, because the knowledge
which is deprived him of the belief in Allah and the Hereafter will not
protect against those crimes...in view of this, the holy Qur'an joins
knowledge with belief, and says: "...Allah will raise up to (suitable)
ranks (and degrees) those of you who believe and who have been granted
(mystic) knowledge.." Holy Qur'an (The Woman Who Pleads 58:11) Therefore
man's progress and priority will not be achieved unless through
interaction between knowledge and belief.

3. Willingness: Will is the ability to perform an act or refrain from
it. In short, it is that stance which shows a human's essence, and
willingness is the basis of sharia's responsibility of doing an act.
Thus, a man who has the power of will is able to access the self stances
and desires, and face the problems and events... for this, his conduct
will be well founded. The secret of personal power, basically, is will
power, as will power is one of the effective ways of man's success,
achieving his goals and the security of his future...thus, with the
power of will, man can fight against fornication, forbidden wealth and
those who want to direct him to evil work. And, likewise, with the power
of will, man drinks alcohol, smokes, takes drugs, etc., hence, educating
the power of will is Islam's interest and aims at it morally and through
education.

Therefore, the youths need to respect their self will, so as to enter
the world of life with full dignity founded on good conduct and
behavior. Before taking any resolution, he has to weigh the
consequences, and think, seriously, about what he wants to do,
especially because he is on a dangerous stage. And the most important
factors for strengthening the will are: belief in Allah Ta'ala,
patience, worshipping like Fasting, prayers and jihad, teaching the self
to stand against prohibited things, practicing and preserving the
obligatory acts, self satisfaction, struggling to achieve good acts and
aims and expelling indecision and anxious ideas.

3. Problems of the Youths

Every stage of life has its own features from mind and bodily
formations, as well as, bodily diseases, psychological problems, and
behavioral practices. So, every stage of childhood and the stage before
puberty, as well as, the puberty stage, itself, and, likewise,
elderliness has its own features, and in every stage a person carries
the features of the past stage which often paves the way for the
subsequent stage. Any problem found in the stage of puberty and youth
will be the most dangerous one and the most important. It is of great
benefit to mention this problem which happens to the youths and causes
inconvenience to them, as well as, to their families and community, they
are:

1. The Youth and Abandoning School
2. Rebellion
3. Supremacy of Imagination and Reverie
4. Pride and Carelessness About the Future
5. Anxiety
6. Youths and the Sexual Urge
7. Taking Drugs and Smoking
8. Idleness

1. The Youth and Abandoning School:

Education, knowledge and preparing for life, is a fundamental issue in
human life, hence, whoever lacks a good education, which prepares him to
be beneficial to the community and be a good mannered person, morally
and spiritually, becomes very dangerous, both to himself and his
community. And a person who lacks sufficient knowledge and awareness in
his life, is an ignorant fellow who harms himself and his community,
neither playing a role in the growth of himself or his community.
Consequenthy, ignorant parents will not know how to educate their
children; an ignorant wife will not know how to deal with her husband,
and an ignorant farmer will not know how to use modern ways on his farm
and, likewise, an ignorant rich man will not be able to use his wealth
and property correctly.

This is how ignorance affects every angle of life. More than that,
ignorance is the source of all evils and backwardness and even being the
fundamental cause of all crimes in the society. Thus, an ignorant
society will not be able to undertake any plans of development or
preventing crime, or solving its political, security, economic an social
problems.

Likewise, an illiterate youth or he who does not have enough knowledge
and awareness will not be able to play any role in the development of
the society, nor help himself or his family, as expected. The researches
and statistics show that illiteracy and ignorance, as well as, lack of
consciousness and civilization are among the fundamental causes of
youths' problems. Therefore, the problems of illiteracy and unemployment
are among the most important problems which face the states and the
families. Furthermore, there are the problems of school abandoning in
the primary, secondary or university level. Surely, they are among the
greatest problems which direct the life and future of the youths towards
danger, and encourage them towards idleness, wandering, committing
crimes and other vices. Indeed, abandoning school has its own spiritual,
intellectual, social, economic, psychological and, sometimes, health
problems. Also, vagrancy and loss of shelter resulting from political
persecutions, and having no peaceful stability, play their greatest
roles in the abandoning of school and the spread of illiteracy.
Likewise, the mistreatment by school authorities or teachers' bad
conduct toward the students, contribute, immensely, to the abandoning of
school by some students.

Certainly, a student's facing psychological problems may be caused by
the family, parents' bad conduct or problems among themselves. Even the
problem of divorce often causes a split between children or the
slackness of the parents toward their children's education and welfare,
as well as, preparing ways for the continuation of their education may
all play a part in the disruption of a child's education and cause some
students to abandon school.

Also, lack of desire towards education by a student, and his relation
with bad friends and those who are unsuccessful in their lives, helps a
lot in the abandoning of school by a student. However, poverty is among
the most important factors in causing the giving up of studies, because
poor families cannot provide the necessary needs for their children to
study, which contributes in the abandoning of school by a student in the
early stage, and will leave him with insufficient means to find a good
job that will support his social needs. Thus, these problems, and the
like, need to be thoroughly studied in order to find suitable solutions
to them.

2. Rebellion

The word rebellion absolutely gives a negative image or meaning, for it
always means disobedience and disapproval if supported. But, in Islamic
terminology it means going against the power, laws, ideologies and
conducts that are pure and right or going against things which deserve
honour and respect. Rebellion is not mere rejection and disapproving of
what people like, because there are some laws, ideologies and opinions
which are not right and are liable to rebellion and disapproval.

In view of this, the rebellion that occurs in the life of the youths,
which are caused by the feeling of power and challenging the need for
change, has two opposite outlooks; a negative and harmful outlook and a
positive outlook which helps in the community's progress and
safeguarding its interests. Certainly, the negative rebellion which
occurs in the youths and young children is the most serious and
complicated one which faces families and societies.

Likewise, negative rebellion or the rebellion against what deserves
respect and honour, like pure ideology and laws, subjective, as well as,
objective, have causes which deserve to be studied with consciousness
and wisdom. Because rebellion by the youths is a dangerous matter to the
family and the community at large, and it starts from the cradles of the
family, and by refusing the commands of the parents or the pure cultures
and ideologies of the family and going against them, children put
themselves in great danger.

Then, there is rebellion against the school laws, which are comprised
of coming to school on time and every day, writing class work,
respecting the teachers, as well as, fellow students, and at the same
time, rebellion against the community's rules and regulations.
Statistics conducted in 1970 show that: "20 % of the youths of France
who were under 30 years of age and 30 % from the men who were below 40
years of age participated in a demonstration in May of 1968 in France.
It was confirmed, by this analysis, that the younger generations of the
community, in a short time, could react or participate in any rebellion
against the ruling power, however, it was confirmed by another research
that it is not possible to generalize this result."(15) Rebellion has
its own causes which encourage it, and those which may be the most
apparent, are the following:

a. Dictatorial relationship of some parents towards their children,
supprssing their wills and insisting on restricting them of things which
are not restricted by the Shari'a. The parents do not change their
relationship with the youths, continuing to treat them like a child, who
is not conscious, by their commands, interfere in their affairs like
studies, marriage, work, daily activites and economic matters and even
their mode of dress.......which forces some children to rebellion and
disapproval and ends up in the showing of no respect for the ideas and
commandments of the parents. Thus, problems occur and misunderstandings
begin to appear between them, and sometimes end in bad results,
disrespect or even leaving the parents' house.

Indeed, Islam has studied carefully these problems so as to bring
obedience and respect between both sides. However, Islam differentiates
between loyalty to one's parents and submission to them, as it
differentiates between guidance, directing and educating, and forcing
and dictating their will and desires on the children.

The Islamic jurisprudence necessitates the loyalty and goodness to
parents, but, it does not necessitate submission except to Allah, the
Almighty, and anything which is not against His laws, for instance, the
Islamic Shari'a does not necessitate submission upon a girl or a boy to
their parents when the parents want to conduct their marriage against
their own choice and wish.

The parents' duty is to guide their children to the right path and
protect them against what is harmful to them, starting from the legal
responsibility, necessity of enjoining good and forbiding evil, holding
any pure means for their living less they fall into crisis and failure
in their life, as well as, making them understand that the disapproval
of the parents to the choice of their children is just for their own
good and they should do so with a cool temper and wisdom. This is the
best way to change them and keep them from falling into crisis and
calamities. It is a mistake for the parents to force their ideas,
thoughts and their own way of life, which is not founded legally, upon
their children, but, for mere affinity or intimacy or social custom,
which makes them strike against their children's ideas and their modern
way of life.

Imam Ali (a.s.) has warned parents against this, in his famous
saying:

"Do not force your ethics or customs on your children, because they are
created in an era different from yours."(16) Surely, this Islamic
analysis on the means of life's progress and what occurs between
generations, will shed light on most of the complicated matters between
parents and children, which often result in rebellion and disobedence.
When Islam studies and analyzes this matter, it calls for thorough
investigation, on the matter, as an issue of civilization in the life of
a human being based on the fundamentals of good morals. Surely, Islam
has warned parents and stops them from bad relationships with their
children which may result in rebellion and disobedence.

It is reported in a Prophetic tradition that the prophet said: "Oh Ali!
Allah and religion has cursed those who hold their children responsible
for their disobedience (because they, themselves, did not train
them)."(17) All this is to preserve and safeguard the new generations
from negative rebellion which the family, nations and communities face
that incline toward the materialistic idea and which contradicts the
Islamic perspectives on this matter. Even though the parents take on
this responsibility, it is important that they guide and encourage their
children to love their parents, respect them, listen to their advice, as
well as, refrain from rebelling against them.

Therefore, educating a child, showing him the rights of the parents and
how to associate and live with them are among the effective factors in
controlling rebellion. Surely, family life, especially a good
relationship between the parents and the respect between them, or a bad
relationship between them, has a great effect in solving or complicating
such problems.

b. School: As the parents' conduct and relationship, toward their
children, contributes in creating the spirit of negative rebellion, so,
also, the school plays a vital role in this field. The system, and
complicated ways of dealing with a student, sometimes makes him feel
that it is trespassing against his personality and his studies, or it
does not correspond with the realty of his life, thus, it forces him to
challenge the school's system, create problems and, later on, his
leaving the school. Therefore, it is necessary for the school to adjust
its communal conditions and systems to the spirit of the times, and deal
with a student by considering the nature of a teenager and his problems
in this stage, through good conduct and mercy, and not with pressure and
punishment, except if it becomes necessary.

c: The nature of a teenager and his morals and spiritual formations:
The spiritual nature, as well as, the state of mind, and the level of
education, has its own great contribution in rebellion, disapproval and
challenges of a teenager. Because the teenage stage is a stage of pride
and emotion and power, it is a stage of self feelings, separation from
the parent and freedom, likewise, it is a stage of challenging anything
that stands in his way, whether it be the family, government or the
community: Thus, negative rebellion occurs and, likewise, the positive
one.

Therefore, the solution to negative rebellion is to give much concern
to the issue of education and make them understand the problem of that
stage, as well as, the shunning of the stimulated atmosphere which
surrounds teenagers. Hence, young boys and girls who are conscious and
civilized will understand this analysis and the problems, as well as,
accept the solutions without rebellion or disapproval, not the same as
the uncultured and illiterate youth will deal with it; ignorantly.

d. Conditions and circumstances: Surely, economic, intellectual, social
and political conditions and circumstances, as well as, the laws and
declarations, have a great effect - both positively and negatively
vis-a-vis the government and the laws - on the conduct of the youths and
their stance.

Thus, in a condition where the generation of youths are facing poverty
and needs, the security of their future activities, through intellectual
and political terrorism and racial discrimination, will force them to
challenge and rebel against it with all their might, as is happening in
some countries of the world. Therefore, intellectual freedom, reforming
the economic conditions (and peoples' welfare), and respecting peoples'
rights, is the only solution to the problem of negative rebellion and
disobedience, not through the use of power and intellectual pressures
and terrorism.


