4. Youths and Wars
==================

Among the major problems facing mankind throughout the centuries has
been war and bloody conflicts between nations and races. No matter how
war occurs, there must be an oppressor or the blame will be on both
sides of the war, and how often mankind has suffered from such
oppressive wars. Hence, war can be regarded as a destroyer of human
capabilities. It is obvious that wars require bodily capability,
fighters, sacrificing huge amount of money, mobilization of troops...
etc., and the major part of world armies are comprised of youths.
Therefore, wherever it occurs, war's major components and victims are
the youths, in addition to their being victims of economic destruction
and other evil practices, because, they are the target of economic,
political, as well as, social standstill of a war.

Consequently, the young man who is recruited for war usually stays long
in the army barracks and at the war fronts, is deprived of family life,
like marrying, fathering legitimate children, forming a family,
providing the economic prerequisites of life, continuing studies or
having a profitable job.

Wars also become the source of anxiety, spiritual, as well as, bodily
disorder in the youths' generation, who were recruited and driven to the
battle fronts by the order of those who want to make money and have
hegemony over the deprived nations or safeguarding the rulers without
the prior consent of those youths.

Indeed, the Vietnam and Korean wars, the allied forces versus Saddam
Hussain in the Gulf war, the Iraq - Iran war, as well as, the two world
wars, i.e., the first and second world wars, all these disclose the
destructive effects on millions of youths being the victims of
depression, racism, suicide and taking of narcotic drugs, as well as,
leaving behind millions of orphans, widows and parents who lost their
children. Therefore, it is necessary for the youths to be completely
alert and conscious of the wars which they were called upon to
participate in. But, the just wars, like wars in defence of the right
principles, or for safeguarding the interests of the nation, community
and human values are holy wars. Thus, this type of war is another
example of safeguarding security and peace (of the community) and
achieving the human's aim and his interests.

So, Islam, according to its logic and method of understanding life,
death and the hereafter, regards \`jihad' and matyrdom among the sacred
and holliest principles. Allah, the Most High, says:

"And the earth will shine with the light of its Lord, the record (of
deeds) will be placed (open); the prophets and the witnesses will be
brought forward, and judgement shall be given between them with justice,
and they will not be wronged (in the least)." Holy Qur'an (The Crowds
39:69) Allah, the Almighty says while exlpaining some aims of holy
fighting in Islam says: "And why should you not fight in the cause of
Allah and of the weak among the men and women and the children, (of)
those who say: Our Lord! Rescue us from this town whose people are
oppressors..." Holy Qur'an (Women 4:75)

In another place, the Holy Qur'an explains that war should be against
unjust rulers who aggress on the security of mankind and its rights and
who practice oppression, corruption and enmity. Allah, the Almighty
says: "Those who believe fight in the way of Allah, and those who
disbelieve fight in the way of evil..." Holy Qur'an (Women 4:76)

Thus, in the logic of material wars, the youths are the forerunners
used in war and are the troops who safeguard the interests of unjust
rulers and the victims of the wars. While in Islamic logic, those who
can go to jihad are responsible for safeguarding the rights of the
oppressed, as well as, fighting oppression, vices, corruption and
aggression on the earth. The Qur'anic call for mankind is a message of
love and peace, and not a message of wars and enmity. Allah, the Most
High says: "But if the enemies incline towards peace, then (also)
incline towards it, and keep your trust in Allah..." Holy Qur'an (The
Spoils of War 8:61)

Therefore, war in this logic, is to defend the truth, prevent
aggression and remove the obstacles of unjust rulers on the way of
guidance and peace. How great is this Islamic principle, which the Holy
Prophet confirms in his saying: "Religion is nothing but love."(32),
while at the same time the principles and outlooks of ignorant
materialism are founded on the basis of wars, enmity and aggression.

The capitalist ideology, for instance, which governs the West, is
founded on the basis of monopoly and seeking commercial markets and
natural resources like crude oil, gold and uranium (in order to have
control over them). It builds its system on exploiting the weak,
oppressed nations and spoiling its resources. Thus, to achieve this aim,
they plan and invent diverse weapons of mass destruction, like nuclear
and biological weapons, as well as, drafting its machineries with the
aim of capturing the whole world and having supremacy over the
oppressed. They ignite the fire of war and conflicts, everywhere, in
order to have control over the major resources and businesses (of those
countries), as well as, controlling the strategic places and laying
groundwork for selling their destructive weapons, as they are presently
doing in different locations of the world at this very moment.

Therefore, youths can be divided into two generations; one generation
lives under the theory of love and peace, and regard wars as a means of
defending the truth, and the other generaton lives under the system
which regards wars as a means of oppression, exploitation and an
aggression on the oppressed and deprived people (of the world).

5. The Culture, and Intellectual Inclination of the Youths:

Man differs (with other creatures) in the sense that he is a living
thing, sane and intellectual who develops his intellect and knowledge
through thought, experience and learning from others, but among the
fundamental instincts, which associate man and animals, is the instinct
of gathering or the instinct of grouping.

Hence, animals, birds and fishes gather as groups in brooding and
resting areas, movement, migration and searching for food and water. An
Arabic proverb expresses this view by saying: "Birds are known by their
shapes". Thus, we can see the relationship between the grouping of
deers, birds, and fishes and the gathering of people, when they meet at
their different meeting places and assemblies. Indeed, it is obvious
that a child grows in a particular atmosphere with a certain culture,
civilization, intellectual and civilizational inclination, therefore,
these spiritual and civilizational atmospheres contribute in the
formation of his personality and his life style. The Holy Qur'an
disapproves of and refuses the method of blind following and accuses it
seriously, but, encourages the use of consciousness, thinking and
intellect in deciding matters and taking stances, and choosing the right
path, as well as, the intellectual and political inclination, with
consciousness and wisdom. The Almighty Allah says:

"Say: This is my way. I call to Allah, I and those who follow me being
certain, and glory be to Allah, and I am not one of the polytheists."
Holy Qur'an (Joseph 12:108)

Surely the Holy Qur'an, in various verses, disapproves of vicious
enviromental inclination or imitation of forefathers, without reasoning,
and differentiating between right and wrong. For instance, the Almighty
Allah says: "And when it is said to them: Come to what Allah has
revealed, and to the Apostle, they say: That on which we found our
fathers is sufficient for us. What! Even though their fathers knew
nothing and did not follow the right way." Holy Qur'an (The Table Spread
5:104)

The Holy Qur'an also informs us on how the prophets and messengers
(a.s.) suffered from their people's act of vain environmental and
intellectual inclination, as well as, the results of their imitating the
inheritance of their forefathers' civilization. Thus, we see it
elaborating on this dangerous phenomenon and warning (people) against
it, as in this verse: "Just in the same way, whenever we sent a warner
before you to any people, the wealthy ones among them said: "We found
our fathers following a certain religion, and we too are followers of
their footsteps." Holy Qur'an (Adornments 43:23)

Likewise, the holy prophet (s.a.w.) warns against such blind imitation
and the one who cannot decide his own stance and inclination from
knowledge, consciousness and pure scientific reasoning; he lives as an
imitator and follower of others, or to the environmental condition which
he was born in, nor he asks himself or examines what he finds himself
in: from ideas, ideologies, conducts and behaviours, so as to be able to
hold the right side of it and do away with the mistakes of the previous
people, and purifying the ways for the other generations, as well as,
escaping from wrong and dangerous mistakes.

Indeed, we can see, clearly, the warning of the holy prophet (s.a.w.)
in this saying: "Do not be a mere imitator with no firm determination.
You say, \`I am with the people who do good. And if they do evil, so do
I.' But train yourself that if people do good, so should you. But if
they do evil shun their evil deeds."(33)

Surely, among the deep-rooted and inherent matters, in man, is his
social conduct - as we have explained before -, as well as, his
conscious and unconscious inclination toward the community; for
instance, his inclination toward the family or tribe, or toward a
certain town, province and nation or toward a particular people or
group, on the basis of religion or sect, or toward a particular party,
organization and professional institution and even to a particular
sporting club and other groups. And the state of group inclination and
joining a particular group or party, originated from the instinct of
social affection or what the psychologists call "Grouping Instinct", and
a person's feeling that he is part of that community or group and,
consequently, he is in need of it in his life endeavours, as well as, to
avoid the feeling of loneliness and isolation, thus, he needs to
associate himself with others, so as to achieve his aims.

It is obvious that the new generation is witnessing social changes and
a new intellectual and political atmosphere, hence, life is composed of
movements and changes every moment and these changes and inventions
differ according to the community's condition. Thus, for instance, the
youth's generation, that lived with Islamic teachings in the time of
prophethood, had faced a tremendous and perfect intellectual, as well
as, civilizational changes in its deepest meaning and perfection.

Surely, at the time of revelation, it was the generation of youths that
helped and supported Islam, where as the old generation could not cope
and comprehend the new socio-intellectual changes which the Islamic
messsage carried. Likewise, in our present era, the generation of youths
(men and women) are the protectors and supporters of Islam, especially
in the universities, colleges and other institutions.

For instance, youths, in the Islamic nations, are coping and
comprehending the new developments and changes, giving much concern on
the future conditions and atmosphere, as well as, acquiring the zeal for
change and depending on reality, because in this stage, they feel more
challenged with a power which is pushing them against a social and
political dictatorship and oppression. Consequently, associations,
institutions and clubs play a geat role in educating the youth and
guiding their intellect in this stage, especially those that have
special programs and ideas for educating, as well as, civilizing their
members.

The generation of Muslim youths, are to embrace and accept the Islamic
ideas and thought, as well as, incline, with all its might, toward it.
It is, also, a target to the deviated ideas and politics, for instance,
Marxism and western Capitalism which absorbed a great number of youths.
The present state has witnessed a geat change in the Islamic world,
intellectual, political and social, at the same time when the world is
witnessing a great techincal and scientific change.

The Marxist civilization crumbled and its ideas became extinguished,
after it was able to attract a large number of youths into deviation
and, thus, was in its hey day after the second world war, until the time
when Marxism was thrown into the dustbin of history. The Western
civilization raided the Islamic world after the first world war, and it
met an empty, intellectual tendency in the young generation, therefore,
it overpowered that generation because of its emptiness and what they
had from technical and scientific development, with their great number
of soldiers, as well as, propagating the cultural, economic and
scientific anxiety which surrounds the Muslim from every angle. But the
great problem in this blind and unconscious inclination is the belief
that Islam is the main causer of Muslim's backwardness and that
technical and scientific development requires the forsaking of Islam, as
a system of life, and exchanging it for Western civilization.

Thus, this is how the Western intellectual war machinery faces the
Muslim youths' generation and draws a great number of Muslim children to
this deviated path, thinking that it is the solution to the problem of
scientific, economic and social backwardness, and achieving freedom and
terminating the terroristic systems which govern the Islamic world,
through European civilization whose followers, among the Muslims, think
that it is the solution to this problem.

The universties, institutions of learning, political parties and the
mass media machineries like cinema, television, newspapers, history,
drama, poetry and literature books, and the like, are the means and ways
of dragging and attracting the youths' generation toward the western
material civilization which uses the call for freedom, womens' rights
and sometimes cultural and scientific development as a cover for
introducing the bad condition and problems, which the Muslim, especially
the youths, are facing in this, our present time. The generation of
youths do not understand what this secret plan and conspiracy contains
and the hostile and antagonistic aims of eliminating Islam and
disuniting the Muslim ummah, as well as, fighting them culturally and
intellectually, but nevertheless, the conscious elements, the activities
of those who are working for Islam and the disclosure of the fakeness of
western civilization to the generation of youths, has created a great
sense of self-consciousness and thought about the inclination toward the
Western ideology. Surely, it becomes clear to the generation of youths
that the cause of all human calamities is the material civilization and
the capito-Imperialist system and that man is a victim of this
civilization. Because it is a system which practices and encourages
terrorism, killing people, plundering their wealth and preparing ground
for dictatorship.

All these create a great current in the generation of youths, as well
as, the true inclination toward Islam and creating the sense of
challenge and revolution against the Western ideology, as well as, their
consciously understanding the cause of their backwardness and the total
intellectual and political inclination toward Islam.

The formation of civilization is a basic pillar among the pillars of
man's personality, and a milestone, as well as, his distinctive element.
Thus, the type of a civilization and its size shapes a person with a
particular nature. However, culture or civilization is not a material
and experienced knowledge and profession which everyone will learn, even
if his culture develops, but in a nutshell, we can say the human
knowledges, thoughts, ideas and opinions that are related to his
personality's growth, with regard to man's thought toward existence and
life, as well as, the danger of his thought and conduct, is what is
termed as civilization, e.g., political, literary, historical, beliefs,
philosophy and social cultures and others. And, likewise, the community,
nation and cultural developments are affected by the type of the culture
and civilization that is governing the community.

Thus, an individual's opinions and his understanding of the freedom and
human rights, terms and belief in Allah and his responsibility toward
his person and his community, as well as, his understanding of life,
politics ...etc., is one of the intellectual and cultural terminologies
which is supposed to be surrounded by cultural and civilizational
thought and opinions.

And the basic source of man's culture is the divine message,
philosophists, books, intellectuals, experts, cultural foundations and
mass medias. However, in a single community we can see different
thoughts, opinions and cultures competing and challenging each other and
even sometimes it will reach a stage of abrogation, and often the
cultural and intellectual changes in the community frequently occur and
under all circumstances the generation of youths always is in the centre
of these conflicts, facing intellectual impasses and witnessing cultural
and civilizational changes. Therefore, it is necessary for a youth to
have a cultural personality and civilized identity, and the cultural
identity or personality of a Muslim youth is his Islamic identity, but
this does not mean that all his cultural undertakings are bound to the
religious information which is related to beliefs, history or
jurisprudence laws, although given attention and interest in the Muslim
youth's culture. Indeed, what we mean by Islamic culture is life
consciousness, conducts and behaviours according to the Islamic way.

Hence, a cultured and civilized Muslim deals with the meaning of
freedom and political community, sexual instinct, as well as,
relationship with the Lord, the message, wealth, essence,
thought...etc., according to the Islamic understanding and way, so this
will necessitate the formation of intellectual law, on which the Islamic
views will be founded.

Therefore, a Muslim youth needs to understand the Islamic beliefs, the
basis of Shari'a laws, prophetic history, be scientifically acquainted
with religion, have a knowledge of the Qur'an and the pure sunnah. He
should start the formation of his culture through Islamic writers and
intellectuals who were blessed with the basis and deepness in thought
and the modern systems in research and conducts in order to possess the
basis and principles of Islam in understanding matters, so as to be able
to differentiate between what is Islamic, and what is not Islamic. And
how many youths have become a victim of intellectual impasses and
conflicts which the human community is afflicted with, especially in our
present era, the era of transporting information through the Internet,
International television, radio, newspapers, cinema and books, and there
are no barricades to become a stumbling block between cultures.

Therefore, the interaction between cultures is an imposed issue
naturally and by reality, and we ought to differientiate between the use
of other nations' culture in accordance with Islamic methods, and
between their dissolution and deprivation of cultural identity, thus, a
Muslim person turns toward blind imitation and becomes overwhelmed or
overpowered by what is brought to him of foreign cultures, espcially the
western culture. Thus, these are vital issues to look into, and it is
the role of the Islamic writers and intellectuals to present the Islamic
culture in a developed way, as well as, live presentation, in accordance
with the intellectual obligations.

Surely, petrification and imposing retarded formulas to Islam, will
drive away the youths from the Islamic thought and teachings. And,
surely, what ought to be done, is understanding the present human
intellectual problems, such as, the problem of freedom, governing of
human rights, the sexual urge, morals, faith and the relationship of
knowledge with life, and other phenomenon, as well as, studying it
scientifcially, and according to the Qur'anic methods, present spirit
and its language. Also, it is good to present critical views and
opinions which are opposite to Islam, as well as, solving the problems
presented by the opponents of Islamic thought with good faith, so the
Muslim youths will be well versed in the basics and foundations of
Islamic culture and civilization, and understand the weak points of the
other thoughts and views, as well as, to be capable of answering the
challenges forwarded to the Islamic thought and views.

Whatever the case may be, the formation of a subjective culture is
among the responsibilities of a Muslim youth, therefore, it is necessary
for him to arrange a time for gaining and learning the Islamic culture
and thought, and follow the Islamic cultural programmes which are
publicized in papers, magazines, books and radio stations. Also, it is
the duty of Islamic foundations to provide awareness to the youths which
comprise the holdings of Islamic lectures and conferences and the
publishing of volumes and servies of books which deals with Islamic
thought and intellectual development and culture.

6. Guiding the Youth

The youths are the most precious property of a community, and,
consequently, in the puberty stage and the beginning of the youth stage,
will undertake the responsibility of life, whatever the nature of the
society may be, because very soon they will take the reigns of the
society, therefore, precautionary powers must make future plans and
projects for the guidance of the youth and the protection of the society
on which its dignity depends.

And, indeed, thinking on the capabilities of the youths, through the
youths' institutions, guiding their capabilities and rearing their power
is the responsibility of the government, society and family. Because if
the youths' bodily, intellectual and spiritual power is not well guided
and protected, it will turn into a destructive element in the society,
and rather, it will negatively harm the person himself.

Thus, the great importance of the youth's power and the danger or lack
of guiding and protecting it, is what forces some countries to establish
special ministries to look into the affairs of the youth and guide them
to the right way. Because youths have a wide range of power which needs
orientation and rehabilitation, their rehabilitation, like teaching them
how to use modern, scientific equipment, through rehabilitation centres,
is a fundamental issue. Hence, teaching them how to use the computer and
its different programs, items of production and other electrical
appliances will give them orientation in different fields, and will
rescue them from the danger of idleness and roaming about, which are the
major causes of poverty and social, spiritual and security problems.

A large number of youths have the technical and professional
capabilities and talents, like the talents of writing and drawing and
other hand works, but need a good atmosphere, exhibitions, conferences
and seminars to give them self-esteem. Opening special clubs, too, will
help by encouraging the youths to develop their talents. Developing the
technical and professional fields and engaging the youths and rescuing
them from idleness is quite important, as well, because the danger of
idleness, in man, is so great and has a negative effect on his person
and his conduct. Unfortunately, a great number of youths have the
ability to write stories and poetry, but, their efforts end without
benefit because of lack of good support. But, their cultural, as well
as, literary rehabilitation through the formation of cultural and
literary clubs and groups, and likewise, the printing and publication of
cultural and literary works, for the youths, and encouraging them to
develop their talents, will give the society a great number of writers,
poets, inventors and professional experts.

Also, the youths have the capability of inventing in different fields,
thus, it is necessary to protect them and give to these inventors, the
necessary material support, as well as, scientific encouragement.
Consequently, it is necessary for the states and special government
institutions to create certain programs, on radio and televison, for the
youths and their problems, as well as, for guiding them.

The presence of newspapers, magazines and arranging conferences and
seminars, for experts, on the affairs of the youths and their problems,
as well as, publishing their findings, is a great and important matter
of encouragement on the way to solving the problem, guiding the youths
and developing their awareness and providng them with experiences and
advice.

The youths, in this stage, are distinguished with vitality and bodily
power. Therefore, developing the spirit of the youths and sports are the
fundamental issues in rescuing them from liquidity and disengagement,
and that by opening sports clubs, stadiums, swimming pools and race
courses, as well as, arranging sports competitions and presenting
prizes, is another way of saving the youths. Hence, Islam gives great
importance to sports and exercises, so as to raise a powerful
generation. Thus, sports are a bodily, as well as, moral and conduct
preparation. It is educating the morals power and honouring the youths
by competition and superiority over others, and morals discipline in
relation to the power and beauty of the body, far from pride and
domination. Indeed, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) has practiced racing,
himself, as well as, watching the race and presenting prizes to the
victors. Surely, he (s.a.w.) used to encourage his followers to practice
sports.

Thus, sports are the most suitable way of gaining bodily power and
capability which the Holy Qur'an calls for. Therefore, it is necessary
for the generation of youths to exercise and enjoy power free from
liquidity and idleness.


