Part 1: Value of life
=====================

Life is a divine quality: Among God’s attributes and names in the
Islamic scriptures, “the Living” (Al-Hayy) is one of the most obvious
and outstanding one.

Sanctity of life
----------------

All forms of life are precious and are considered as signs of God.
However, among all forms of life in the material world, human life is
the most outstanding and the most precious.

Human life is so important that God mentions in the Qur'an its
development step by step and finally after referring to the creation of
spirit, which is considered as “Khalqan Aakhar” says:

***“Blessed be the Best of creators!”*** [^1]

If the creator of man is the best of creators, man himself must be the
best of creatures – at least potentially.

Life must be appreciated and respected. Killing an innocent person not
only is considered as a criminal act (i.e. murder), but also represents
an underestimation or an insult to human life as a whole. The fact is
interestingly expressed in the following verse:

For this reason We prescribed to the Children of Israel that whoever
slays a soul, unless it be for manslaughter or for mischief in the land,
it is as though he slew all men; and whoever keeps it alive, it is as
though he kept alive all men; and certainly Our messengers came to them
with clear proofs, but even after that many of them certainly act
extravagantly in the land. [^2]

One may conclude from the above verse that:

• Causing death to one person unjustifiably is like causing death to all
people. In the other words, lack of respect for an individual life
demonstrates lack of respect for life as such and, therefore, for all
individual lives (1, 2). This is in agreement with the fact that whoever
commits a murder is likely to murder more people and endanger all people
(2).

• Giving life to one person or more precisely, saving one person out of
one’s respect for life is like saving all people (from killing dangers).

• Causing death to a murderer or someone who does mischief on the earth
is permitted since it demonstrates respect for the lost life and
prevents further dangers and damage to life as a whole. This is why the
Qur’an considers legislation of the retaliation as a source of life,
though prefers pardon when there is no fear of threat to the public
security[^3].

***Animal life:*** We also found in the Islamic hadiths that even
killing or destroying animals unjustifiably is very severely condemned.
For example, Imam Sadiq, the sixth Imam of the Shi‘a Muslims, has
informed about the divine punishment of a woman who had fastened a cat
with a rope so the cat could not move and died out of thirst (3). A
typical view among the Shi'a jurists can be found in the following
passage by ‘Allamah Mohammad Taqi Ja'fari:

Consideration of the whole sources of the Islamic jurisprudence (Fiqh)
leads to the conclusion that animals must not be killed unless there is
a legal permission (by God) like benefiting from them or being safe from
their harm. There are adequate reasons for prohibiting hunting animals
for fun and one can argue from these reasons for prohibition of killing
animals without having a permitting cause (4).

Elsewhere he writes: “Hunting animals for leisure and without need is
prohibited. Therefore, "if someone makes a trip for such hunting his
trip will be a sinful trip" (5).

The above idea is part of a broader Islamic perspective on animal life.
According to the Islamic law, there are many rights for animals that
must be observed. Consideration of those rights show that not only their
lives must be protected, but also the quality of their lives must be
observed. For example, animals must not be bothered by forcing them to
carry heavy goods or to move faster than they tolerate. Neither animals
can be cursed or sworn at. It is reported that Imam Ali said: “Whoever
curses an animal he himself will be cursed by God” (5).

***Who is the giver of life and death?*** This is one of the basic
questions in bioethics which can entirely influence one’s approach
towards life and its treatment. If one believes that life is created by
chance or by man himself, then it will lose its sanctity. Therefore, it
can also be destroyed by chance or by man. But if life is a gift of God
for which we are held accountable, then it is not up to us to take it
away.

God is the only source of life. This is an idea on which special
emphasis has been put in the Qur’an. For example, we read:

***Verily, it is God Who causes the seed-grain and the fruit stone (like
date-stone) to split and sprout. He brings forth the living from the
dead, and it is He Who brings forth the dead from the living. Such is
God, then how are you deluded away from the truth?*** [^4]

Thus, life is a gift of God, for which we are held responsible. Not only
just God gives life, but also just God brings life to an end. For
example, we read in the Qur’an:

***...You bring the living out of the dead, and you bring the dead out
of the living. And You give sustenance to whom You will, without
limit*** [^5]

According to the Qur’an, refuting Nimrod’s claim of deity, the Prophet
Abraham said (to him):

***“My lord is He Who gives life and causes death.”*** [^6](6).

Of course, it is possible to suppose that man and natural environment
can have role in the process of giving life and causing death. The
reason is this: in this world God usually acts through natural rules and
cause-effect system.[^7]

It is also possible to suppose that natural factors and circumstances
may sometimes have role in something being created or brought into
existence. However, it is only God Who truly and genuinely brings into
existence or gives life[^8]. We humans have no control or even complete
knowledge of our existence or life. So how it is possible to suppose
that we can grant existence or life to something else?

Dignity of man
--------------

Human beings have great status in Islam. They are honored by God[^9] and
can act as God's vicegerents on earth[^10]. They are endowed with reason
and freewill and therefore are responsible for what they do. Therefore,
humans bear the divine trust and can fulfill the goal of creation:

***We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains,
but they refused to carry it and were afraid of it; and man carried it.
Surely he is very unjust, very ignorant.*** [^11]

This verse suggests that the main problems which man is faced when
exercising his freewill are injustice and ignorance[^12]. Of course, God
has provided human beings with the basic knowledge required to
distinguish between what is (morally) good or bad[^13].

***Man & the world:*** Human beings can benefit from the world and
indeed every blessing of God including their own bodies and souls in a
responsible way[^14]. Therefore, everything in the world which is at our
disposal is both a gift and a trust. If it were just a trust we would
not have permission to use them. Since they are gifts of God, we can use
them. However, we cannot waste them or use them extravagantly as it is
the case with any trust.

God;

***"does not love the extravagant"***[^15]

In addition to this, the Qur’an[^16] tells us that we are supposed to
make efforts to improve the conditions of the globe as much as possible.

***Dignity of body and soul:*** In Islam there is a close link between
body and mind, or, more generally, between the material and the
spiritual. In the same way that we need to look after our physical
health we need to look after our spiritual health. Dignity of man
extends to his body and therefore there is no way to harm or treat with
disrespect human body, including one’s own.

This dignity also extends to the period after death (7). There are many
rulings pertaining human corpse which all indicate the continuity of the
respect to human body even after separation of spirit. For example,
human corpse must be properly washed, dressed, prayed on and buried.

The dead body must be buried in a respected place and the direction of
Mecca must be observed. It is not allowed to dig the graves or unveil
the buried body (8). Autopsy is allowed, if necessary (say, when there
is the suspicion of murder) (9).

According to many hadiths, performance of any act that causes death to a
living person like cutting off one’s head is forbidden, even in a dead
person. For example, Husayn Bin Khalid says that Abu ‘Abdillah (the
sixth Imam, Imam Sadiq) was asked about a man who has cut off head of a
corpse. The Imam replied: “Verily, God has prohibited in respect of
someone who has died the same thing that was prohibited when he was
alive. So whoever does to a dead person what causes death to a living
person must pay the Diyah (blood money).

I asked Abu Al-Hassan (the seventh Imam, Imam Kazim) about this. The
Imam replied: “Abu ‘Abdillah told the truth. The Prophet spoke thus.” I
said: “So whoever cuts off the head of a corpse, or cuts his stomach, or
does anything else that causes death to the living must pay the Diyah of
a complete person?” The Imam replied: “He must pay the Diyah of an
embryo in the womb of his mother before the spirit was created into it
and that is 100 Dinar (golden coin).

The Diyah of embryo belongs to his heirs, but the Diyah of this dead
person belongs to him and not to the heirs.” I asked: “What is the
difference between them?” Imam replied: “Verily the embryo is something
in prospect, whose benefit is hoped for (sought after), while the dead
is something which has expired whose benefit has gone.

Therefore, when his organs are severed (Muthlah) after his death the
Diyah belongs to him himself and not others. With this money, Hajj
(pilgrimage to Mecca) will be performed on his behalf and other good
deeds, such as giving alms, will be done.” (10)

Thus, causing harm to a corpse is forbidden. Indeed, according to some
hadiths, it is considered to be worse since the dead have no power to
defend (7).

[^1]: Qu’ran: 23:14

[^2]: Qu’ran: 5:32

[^3]: Qur’an: 2:178, 179

[^4]: Qu’ran: 6:95

[^5]: Qu’ran: 3:27, 3:156, 9:117, 10:31, 22:6, 30:4, 50:43, 53:44, 57:2,
67:29

[^6]: Qu’ran: 2:258

[^7]: Of course, there have been miracles and extraordinary acts
performed by the Prophets or holy people. These may seem to contradict
the general rule mentioned above: “In this world God usually acts
through natural rules and cause and effect system”. However, it must be
noted that firstly miraculous and extraordinary acts do not represent
the usual procedure, and secondly even in the case of such acts there is
no exception to the cause-effect system. The only difference is that
instead of natural causes supernatural causes are used. Just as there
are natural causes, say, for treatment of an ill person, there may be
supernatural causes, such as prayer and giving charity.

[^8]: Qu’ran: 2:260, 3:49

[^9]: Qur'an 17:70

[^10]: Qur'an: 2:30

[^11]: Qu’ran: 33:72

[^12]: Qu’ran: 95:61

[^13]: Qur'an: 91:8, 76:3

[^14]: Qur'an: 45:13, 102:8

[^15]: Qur'an: 6:141

[^16]: Qur’an 11:61


