Conclusion
==========

In this paper, we saw how great emphasis has been attached by Islam to
life in all forms. Indeed, life is considered as one of the most
important qualities of God as well. Among divine creatures, human life
is certainly one of the most sacred ones. We studied human dignity from
an Islamic perspective and saw how this has been extended to human body
both before and after the ensoulment.

Since human life is both a gift and a trust of God, it must be regulated
according to divine instructions, that is, to its best and towards a
fully human one. Therefore, it must be appreciated, respected and
protected. The Islamic law and bioethics are responsible for introducing
the Islamic teachings in this regard. Maintenance of physical health and
treatment of patients are two important aspects of the Islamic
teachings.

In respect to the beginning of human life, we realized that reproduction
must occur in the context of a legitimate and stable family. We also saw
that as soon as pregnancy starts, abortion is prohibited in the Islamic
law and bioethics, though there are differences in the level of respect
given to fetus before and after ensoulment.

With respect to the end of life, we saw that death consists in the
departure of the soul from body and as long as we are not sure about
that, we must practically assume that the person is still alive. The
standard view among the Shi'a jurists is that nothing can be done to
hasten the death of one's self or the patient. Therefore, suicide and
euthanasia are condemned since they demonstrate lack of respect for
human life.


