14. Penology (hudud)
====================

Under an Islamic government, certain punishments are prescribed for
certain crimes, so that the society may be kept healthy and the roots of
corruption destroyed. Some of these penalties (hudud) are as follows
according to Shi'ah fiqh.

1)The penalties for adultery (zina): If an adult, sane man knowingly
and deliberately has sexual intercourse with a woman who is forbidden to
him, it is then an obligation on the authorized judge to flog him with a
hundred lashes; his head will be shaved and he will be forced to leave
the city for a period of one year. If he is "muhsin", i.e. he is in a
position to satisfy his sexual urges in conformity with the shari'ah, he
will be stoned to death as well as being given a hundred lashes.

If the woman consented, she shall, if also "muhsinah", be stoned, and
if otherwise, she shall be given a hundred lashes. If a man has sexual
intercourse with a forbidden woman of his relatives (mahrum), or with a
woman who has suckled at the same breast as he was (his rida'ih), or
with his step mother, or if a dhimmah (a non-Muslim under the protection
of a Muslim state) has sexual intercourse with a Muslim woman, he shall
be beheaded; and the penalty is the same for rape.

The adultery can only be proven by:

1) a confession repeated four times;
2) the witnessing of four just men that they saw him actually in the
act of penetration;
3) the witnessing of three just men and two just women.

If the adultery is witnessed by two just men and four just women, it
shall be deemed proven but the penalty may only be flogging, their being
no capital penalty. If the evidence is less than this, it is not
considered complete, and, what is more, if less than four men give
evidence, they shall be punished for slander (qadhaf). For the evidence
to be accepted there must be unanimity between the witnesses, and they
must all have seen the actual penetration with their own eyes.

If a man is to be stoned after a confession, but then disavows his
confession, he shall not be stoned; and if, after confession, he repents
of his deed, the qadi may exercise his discretion. If he repents when
four witnesses have seen his act, there will be no alteration in the
penalty.

If a person is being punished for the third time for the same offence
(adultery), he shall be beheaded. A pregnant Woman or a sick person must
not receive his or her punishment until the baby is born or the sickness
goes away, respectively .

2) The penalties for homosexual acts : The punishment for sodomy
between two males (liwat) is more severe than that for any other crime.
It is the only case in which the offender may be burnt to death. The
qadi may sentence the active partner in the act to one of four
penalties: beheading, stoning to death, being thrown from a height so
that his bones are all broken up, burning to death. The passive partner,
if he is adult and responsible for his actions, is to be beheaded. If he
is not yet of the age of puberty, he will be given a reduced punishment
(ta'zir). The same conditions of proof hold here as in adultery.

In the female homosexual act (sihaq), both offenders will be given a
hundred lashes. If they are married, it is not impossible for them to be
stoned to death.

3) The penalty for the procurer: the procurer (qawwad) who arranges for
an unlawful sexual act to take place, will be given seventy lashes, his
head will be shaved, and he will be expelled from the city. The proof
for this is met by the evidence of two just melt or by a confession made
twice.

4) The penalty for false witnessing and slander. if someone falsely
accuses a sane, adult and free Muslim of a crime for which some sentence
can be inflicted, for instance, adultery, sodomy or drinking wine, then
the false accuser shall be punished with eighty lashes. In case of the
proof being admissible on confirmation by the accused person, the
sentence against the accuser shall become void. The crime shall be
considered proved as long as there is "bayyinah)) (see above).

It is also a punishable offence for a person to call someone else with
some undesirable epithet which he does not deserve, e.g. "sinner",
"corrupter", "leper", etc. If someone claims to be a prophet, or curses
or declares enmity with one of the fourteen pure ones (the Prophet
(s.a.w.), the twelve Imams (a.s.) and Hadrat Fatima), he shall be
beheaded.

5) The penalty for the drunkard: the penalty for any one who avails
himself of any intoxicating beverage of any kind is eighty lashes, to be
given on his or her bare neck and arms.

If someone has been punished for three times and he commits the crime a
fourth time, he or she shall be beheaded. One who considers wine lawful
is liable to the same punishment.

If the dealer in wine repents and leaves his profession, it is well and
good, otherwise he too shall be liable to beheading.

6) The penalties for theft: if an adult and sane person steals
something from a "safe" place (i.e. somewhere which is locked or firmly
closed, or someplace similar) which is valued at more than a quarter of
a mithqal (about 1 gm - a mithqal is a little over 4.5 grams 0) of pure
gold, he will have the four fingers of his right hand cut after duly
being sentenced by a qadi on the evidence of double confession or
"bayyinah" (see above).

If he commits the crime a second time, his leg will be cut off under
the knee. For the third offence, he shall be sentenced to life
imprisonment. And, if he commits theft in prison, he shall be beheaded.
If he has committed theft a number of times before he is subjected to
the prescribed punishment, only one penalty shall be inflicted upon
him.

For children and insance people, there is no hadd only ta'zir (a
lenient punishment). The thief must invariably have to pay compensation,
and for this, one acknowledgement, or the evidence and oath of one just
witness is sufficient.

The "hands" of the father shall not be cut off for stealing the
property of the son. But, if, conversely, the son steals, his "hands"
shall be cut off

7) The penalty for causing fear and terror (muharib): if someone causes
fear among the people in a town or in the open country or at sea and/or
intimidates them for the purposes of seizing what belongs to them, the
qadi is empowered to have him or her executed, crucified, to have his
right hand and left foot cut off, or to have him banished from the
country.

God, the Most High, has said, "The recompense of those who war against
God and His Messenger, and strive in the land spreading corruption, is
only that they be slain or crucified or their hands and their feet
should be cut off, from the opposite sides, or be banished from the
land." (5:33)

In case of banishment, the people of the place to which the culprit has
been deported must be informed in writing, so that they may refuse him
entry to their meetings, to their meals, etc., till he repents.

The thief who attacks a house is also a "muharib". If he is killed, his
blood will be considered shed with impurity.

If someone attacks the modesty of a woman or her child, these latter
have the right of self-defence. If the assailant is killed in the
struggle,(his blood too will have been shed with impunity. Thugs,
ruffians and false witnesses (excluding those in 4 above) are liable to
reduced punishment. The judge can give them any appropriate
punishment.

8) Sundry penalties: anyone who perpetrates an indecent act with a
quadruped shall be given a less severe punishment. If he persists in his
activities, he may be executed. The meat of the animal (if it is a
lawful animal) will become forbid den, and it must be slaughtered and
its body burnt. In case it belongs to someone other than the perpetrator
of the act, he must be awarded the cost of the cost of the animal. If
the animal is of doubtful ownership, it should be decided by lots.

If the animal is in any case unlawful, it must be sold in another city,
and the price obtained given in charity. If the animal belongs to
another, he must be suitably recompensed for his loss. The evidence of
two just persons or a double confession is sufficient to prove guilt.

A person who has sexual intercourse with a dead body shall be dealt
with as if it were alive; rather, the punishment will be even more
severe. In the case of it being the body of his wife or slave girl, the
punishment will be milder. The proof for this is the same as is required
for adultery.

A person who indulges in masturbation also deserves a mild
punishment.

As far as is possible, every person has the right to defend his own
person as well as his property and the persons of his family. But he
should start by adopting less severe measures, and he should only
increase his precautions if necessary.

If someone looks without permission into someone else's house and the
dwellers pelt him with stones causing his death, do penalty may be
extracted from them, and his blood is considered shed with impunity.

Murder is the greatest sin and the greatest social crime. "And whose
slays a believer willfully, his recompense is Hell, therein dwelling
forever, and God will be wroth with him and will curse him, and prepare
for him a mighty chastisement." (4:93) Crimes against the person,
whether it causes death, loss of a part of the body, or not, can be
divided into three kinds:

1) premeditated or willful,
2) similar to (1),
3) by accident.

First, (1), premeditated or willful, needs no explanation. (2) means
that the attacker took the initiative, but did not intend to kill. For
example, someone beats someone else as a warning, but this results in
death, or a person is given some medicine to cure him, but it ends his
life. (3) accidental means that there is neither any intention nor any
initiative, yet someone is killed; for instance, somebody is aiming at a
bird and, by mistake, a human being becomes the victim, or a man is
lifting his gun and it accidentally goes off and kills somebody.

More clear examples are the actions of a man who is sleep walking, of
an unconscious person, of a mad man or of an innocent child.

It must be clearly observed that as far as the crime and its punishment
is concerned, there is no difference between the actual committer of the
crime and the person who devised and ordered it to be done; nor does it
make any difference if the crime is committed by one or many.

Retaliation (qisas) applies only in the case of willful or premeditated
murder or injury. In (2) and (3) there are only compensation (diyah).
There can be no retaliation from the child or the lunatic, nor can there
be any retaliation if the murdered person is a child or a lunatic. An
adult who kills a child is subject only to the deliverance of
compensation. However, some jurists are of the opinion that there is
retaliation here, and also for the killing of a lunatic.

Another condition for retaliation is that the culprit was not compelled
or under constraint, although this does not apply in the case of death,
for in a matter of murder, there is no "taqiyah" (dissimulation). It is
also necessary that the person murdered by "without sin", i.e. not
someone whose death is permitted by the shari'ah.

There is no retaliating against the father, the grandfather or the
great-grandfather, if they murder their son, grandson or great-grandson,
only compensation. A Muslim is subject to retaliation only in the case
of the murder of another Muslim. Likewise, retaliation shall be taken
against the freedman only for the murder of a freedman.

The blood money or compensation for a free Muslim is: a hundred camels,
or two hundred cows, or a thousand sheep, or two hundred items of
clothing, each consisting of two parts, or a thousand dinars. If the
heirs of the murdered person agree to take the compensation, retaliation
is voided, and the murderer must pay the compensation within one year.
In (2), the period for payment is two years. In (3), the period is three
years, with a third being payable each year.

In cases of parts of the body, retaliation can be extracted if the
action was deliberate. The retaliation is like for-like, i.e. an eye for
an eye, an ear for an ear, and a tooth for a tooth.

If the crime is of kinds (2) or (3), there are special compensations:
some equivalent to the whole compensation for a man (i.e. 1000 dinars),
some a half, and some less than a half. In general, organs and parts of
the body which occur singly, such as the nose or the penis, demand the
whole compensation, those which occur in twos demand half the
compensation (i.e. two hands demand the whole compensation). In (1) and
(2) the compensation must be paid by the culprit himself, but in (3) it
may be paid by his 'aqilah (certain near relatives on the father's
side).

If the reader is interested, he or she may consult the extensive books
which deal with this topic for further details. However, since it was
our intention to deal with, matters only briefly, we have left out a
great many things.

Our purpose was to give a few examples, so that our aim might be made
clear with only a few references.


