1. Salat (prayer)
=================

Like all other Muslims, the Shi'as too regard "salat" as one of the
pillars of religion. This prayer is a means of bringing God's servant
near to Him. If one does not perform the prayer, the relation between
God and His servant is broken. That is why the traditions of Ahlu
'l-bayt (a.s.) say that not offering the prayer even once or twice is
the distinguishing mark between infidelity and Islam.

According to the religious code "salat" has great importance. No other
act of worship can bear comparison with it. The Imamiyah sect
unanimously believe that anyone who does not perform "salat" is a great
sinner: moreover he has no place in Islamic society. He is neither
credible nor trustworthy- One is even permitted to criticize him behind
his back. There are very strict orders about "salat"; five kinds of
"salat" are compulsory;

1. The five daily prayers.
2. The "salatu 'l-jum'ah" (the Friday prayers)
3. "Salatu 'l-ayat" (on the occasion of a solar or lunar eclipse, an
earthquake, or any frightening natural event).
4. "Salatu 'l-'idayn" (the salat of 'idu 'l-fitr and 'idu'l-azhar).
5. "Salatu Ka'bah).

In addition, an adult person may make "salat" compulsory for himself by
making a promise or taking an oath to perform a certain number of
prayers or by accepting a reward for performing prayers under certain
conditions.

Besides these, all other kinds of salat are "nawafil" (supererogatory
prayers). The most important "nawafil" am those attached to the five
daily prayers, which are twice the number of units of the compulsory
prayers (that is thirty four units). The total number of units of both
"nawafil" and compulsory prayers is thus fifty one.

Here we remember an interesting incident which Raghib al-Isfahani wrote
about in his distinguished book "al-Muhadirat". We learn that during the
days of Ahmad ibn 'Abdu 'l-'Aziz there was a man named Kanani in
Isfahan. Ahmad was learning the correct way to do the prayers and the
basic Shi'a beliefs from Kawani.

one day Ahmad's mother happened to see them during a lesson and she
said to Kanani: "Oh master, you have made my son a Rafidi! (one of the
Rafidah - i.e. a particularly zealous Shi'a). Kanani immediately
retorted: "Foolish woman! The Rafidah perform fifty one units of prayer
daily, and your son does not perform even one unit out of the fifty one.
How can he be one of the Rafidah?"

The "nawafil" of the month of Ramadan are of great blessing and
significance. Their number is one thousand. Our Sunni brothers also
perform these prayers, but in congregation (jama'ah), and they are known
among them as "tarawih" from the Shi'a point of view these prayers are
not permissible in congregation (jama'ah), because only the Friday
prayer is a compulsory congregational prayer. For details one can refer
to the tens of thousands books which contain elaborate and explicit
descriptions of the correct way to perform the various compulsory or
recommended prayers, and the numerous recitations and invocations which
are especially associated with each prayer.

According to the religious code correct "salat" depends upon three
things. Firstly, there are certain conditions which have be to be
fulfilled before the actual performance of the prayers, although they
are not included in the salat itself; these conditions are so important
that salat becomes absolutely void if they are not attended to.

They are six in number. (1) 'Taharah' (one must be in state of ritual
purity); (2) Time (each compulsory prayer, and most ofthe recommended
prayers, are to be performed. "at a particular time); (3) Qiblah (that
is one should face the'Ka'bah); (4) Covering (dress); (5) Intention (one
must make the intention to perform the prayer according to that
particular prayer); (6) Place (it must be lawfully occupied; and the
place for prostration must be pure and clean).

Secondly, the constituent parts of salat are of two kinds: they are
either considered to be a fundamental part of the prayer and thus
absolutely compulsory, or not. There are four compulsory actions. (1)
Takbiratu 'lihram (that is the initial "allahu akbar"); (2) qiyam
(standing to perform the prayer); (3) ruku' (bending for ward) and
finally sujud (prostration on the ground).

Likewise there are four conditions which are compulsory but do not make
the salat void if, for example, one unintentionally does not fulfill
them: (1) qira'ah (the reading of Surah al-Hamd and one other complete
surah); (2) dhikr, tashahud and the final salam. One must be Still and
in a state of remembrance throughout the prayer. Adhan and iqamah before
the start of the prayer are both strongly desirable (indeed almost
compulsory).

The following invalidate the prayer: anything which breaks one's state
of wudu', turning one's back on the qiblah, and excessive movement. Any
other action (which is not a fundamental part of the prayer) such as
talking, laughing, weeping, looking to the right or left, eating or
drinking invalidate the prayer if done intentionally.

To purify oneself, ready for any act of 'ibadat (such as prayer), one
must make either wudu' (the minor purification) or ghusl (the major
purification). In case of absence of water, or for some other reason
like illness, unbearable cold, shortness of time, when it is not
possible to do either of these two acts of purification, their
substitute is "tayammum" (cf. the Qur'an which indicates this method of
purification: fa tayammamu sa'idan tayyiban - so perform tayammum on
pure earth - Surah al-Ma'idah).

The scholars of jurisprudence and the lexicographers give various
meanings for the word "sa'id". Some of them say it only means dust, and
some say. that it means all kinds of pound (including sand, fragments of
rocks, stones, and mineral substances). We have limited our ascription
of salat to fundamentals: more detailed studies may be found in numerous
other works.


