2. Sawm (fasting)
=================

According to the Shi'a faith, sawm (plural siyam), fasting, is a pillar
of the Islamic code. There are four kinds of siyam: wajib (compulsory),
mustahabb (recommended), haram (forbidden) or makruh (undesirable). The
fasts made incumbent by the shari'ah (code of religion) are those of the
Holy month of Ramadan.

Other fasts become incumbent for some specific reason, for instance
"sawm kaffarah" (the penalty fast), "badal"(in lieu of sacrificing an
animal), in lieu of someone else, "nadr" (as a vow, or oath).

The fasts of the months of Rajab and Sha'ban are desirable as well as
other fasts too numerous to mention in this brief work. Fasting on the
two 'id days and "ayyam at-tashiq" (the three days after hajj) is
forbidden; to fast on the days of 'Ashurah and 'Arafat are undesirable
(according to many the 'Ashurah day fast is strictly forbidden).

Details concerning the conditions and actual performance of a certain
fast, as well as the courtesies (adab) and recitations associated with
each, may be found in the large number of books on this topic. The
Shi'as are extremely particular about the Ramadan fasts: many of them
would rather die of thirst or hunger than not undertake it.


**3. Zakat (Taxation)**

We may consider salat and sawm as two acts of worship ('ibadat) whose
immediate basis is physical rather than spiritual. Zakat is of an
entirely different nature. According to the Shi'as, after salat in rank
comes "zakat" (taxation); indeed from some of the traditions of the Holy
Imams (a.s.) it is understood that if somebody does not give "zakat" his
salat also is invalid Like all other Muslims the Imamiyah consider
"zakat" compulsory on nine things: Animals - camels, cows, goats;
Grains - wheat, barley, dates, raisins; Money - gold, silver coins.

Besides these, zakat on other things, such as all kinds of merchandise,
horses and crops is desirable. The precise conditions and regulations
can be found in the appropriate books of jurisprudence.

It is interesting to note that all the rules are in basic conformity
with those of the "fiqh" of the four Sunni schools of thought, Hanafi,
Shafi'i, Maliki and Hanbali. Among those entitled to receive zakat are
the poor and the needy, according to God the Almighty's command in Surah
at-Tawbah: innama 's-sadiqatu li 'lfuqara' wa 'l-masakin.

Zakatu 'l-fitrah (poor-tax on the day or 'idu 'l-fitr) is compulsory
for every adult and sane person who can financially support himself and
his wife and children and other members of the household dependent on
bun. Its quantity is one "sa'" (approximately 3 kilos) of wheat, barley,
or dates on behalf of every individual.

The nature of zakat is basically the same; whether from the point of
Shi'a or Sunni fiqh.


