6. Jihad
========

Jihad is the foundation stone of the magnificent building of Islam. In
its absence the religion of God would neither have been the cause of
mercy for the world, nor would it have proved a source of blessing to
mankind.

For jihad means fighting against oppression and oppressors, and
sacrificing one's life and wealth in the way of God. for the
preservation of peace and tranquility.

In the Shi'a religion it is of two kinds: "Jihad al-akbar" (the greater
jihad) and "Jihad al-asghar" (the lesser jihad).

To face that internal enemy called the "nafs" (self), and to fight
against its harmful qualities, such as ignorance, cowardice, oppression,
tyranny, envy and pride, is the "jihad al-akbar". It was the Prophet of
God himself who declared: "your greatest enemy is the self and it is to
be found right in your own body." Jihad al-asghar means subduing anyone
who is opposed to justice and equity, peace and humanity, and religion
and reality.


**7. Amr Bi 'l-ma 'Ruf and Nahy 'ani'l-munkar**

(The enjoining of good and the prevention of evil)

This is one of the most important of the compulsory acts prescribed by
religion and the basis of the Muslim's moral duties; moreover, it is the
most effective means of demonstrating the truth and reality of Islam and
is a successful weapon against infidelity and paganism.

Any nation which ignores this holy law is doomed to ruin; indeed it
will become the haven of oppressors and cheats.

It is for this reason that the Prophet (s.a.w.), who taught the divine
code of religion, and our infallible Imams (a.s.), who have preserved
and protected it, have laid great stress on this matter; they have, on
numerous occasions explained in detail the benefits accruing from its
execution and have warned against the horrible consequences of
neglecting it.

Today we are seeing with our own eyes the truth of these statements: we
have totally abandoned the "enjoining of good and the prevention of
evil". We can only pray that the situation does not become so degenerate
that what is ma'ruf comes to be regarded as munkar, and what is munkar
as ma'aruf.

"Verily we are God's and verily to Him shall we return!" We pray to God
to protect us from these who call to the enjoining of good deeds but
themselves do not heed the call. God the Almighty curses the wicked
scholar, and wicked preachers and guides!

Such prayers are called the "mother of prayers" (meaning the best
prayers); we have been able to make only cursory references, but one can
research further on this topic in numerous books written by 'ulama'
belonging to the period ranging from the first century A.H. till the
present time. Countless fine works of research are still available
despite the attempt in past centuries to destroy any trace of them.


