11. Passing Judgement (qadawah)
===============================

The rank of qadi (judge), and that of the administrator of justice have
great importance, and in fact these are ranks worthy of great respect.
In the Imamiyah sect, the responsibility of the judiciary is considered
an adjunct of the prophethood, the imamate and the state in general.

God, the Almighty has said, "O David. We have appointed you vicegerent
in the earth; so judge between the people with justice." (38:26) And
again He says, "By the Lord (O Prophet), they believe not until they
have set you up as their judge in all that they dispute about among
themselves, and thereafter find not in their selves any vexation against
what you decide, and submit with total submission." (4:65)

The qadi and judge are the nawamisu' th-thalathah (custodiansof three
things - life, property and honour).

That is why there are serious dangers in this rank at every step, and
if the texts of the traditions are carefully studied, we shall find that
it is so exalted a rank that even the mountains seem to be insignificant
before it.

Hadrat Amir al-Mu'mimin (a.s.) says, "The qadi should be considered to
be on the brink of Hell. The qadi's tongue is between two balls of fire.
O Shurayh, you are sitting at a place where sits either a prophet or his
"wasiy" (successor) or else some wicked person." It is stated in a
tradition of the Prophet (s.a.w.), "If somebody is made a qadi it means
that he has been slaughtered without a knife." There are many traditions
of this nature.

If a ruling which a "faqih" (expert in jurisprudence) deduces from
proofs concerns some general principle, it is called a "fatwa"; for
instance, it is unlawful to use someone else's property without his or
her permission, the wife of a man is lawful to him but she is unlawful
to a stranger. But if the order pertains to some particular case it is
called a judgement (qada). for instance, "This woman is the wife. "This
woman is a stranger." "This is Zayd's property. "That is the property of
such and such a person."

Whether it is a "fatwa" or a "qada", both of them are duties of a just
mujtahid who is the general proxy of the Imam.

Judgement is in fact the identification of the legal nature of points
under dispute, whether they pertain to defense and accusation in a
court, or to matters such as the sighting of the moon and the
determination of the beginning of the month, or the administration of
endowments and the determination of lineage, and it demands great wisdom
and intellectual ability. In fact it is more difficult a task than
issuing a "fatwa".

Now, if somebody who is devoid of these qualities undertakes to perform
this duty, it will certainly do more harm than good. Accordingly, it is
unlawful in Imamiyah "fiqh" for anyone except a just mujtahid to
undertake to perform this work. Indeed, it is regarded as one of the
major sins if anyone else does do it, and the extent of its enormity
borders on infidelity. Our respected teachers used to be very cautious
about passing judgements. We also follow the same line.

Judgment can only be passed on the basis of three things: (1)confession
(iqrar), (2)an oath (qasm), or (3) two just witnesses (bayyinah). The
question of how to establish preference or priority in cases where there
may be difference or contradiction between the witnesses is a matter for
the section of fiqh which deals with the giving of evidence,

and there is little point in going into the details here suffice it to
say that the matter has been examined in great detail by our jurists and
they have left many writings on it. We, also, have written a book on the
subject called "Tahriru 'l-majallah".

One who does not act in accordance with the order of the authorized
"qadi" (i.e. one who fulfills all the conditions of a "qadi"), will be
considered to have violated the divine commands. Also no one has the
right to revise the decision of a "qadi". Of course, the qadihimself may
re-examine his judgment.


**12. Slaughtering and Hunting**

The basic principle in Shi'ah jurisprudence concerning animals whose
blood spurts 4 is that they become "najis" (impure) when they die, and
that it is unlawful (haram) to eat their flesh.

There is also a division of animals into two categories: those which
are impure (najis) in essence and cannot become pure, such as the dog
and the pig, and cannot therefore on no account be eaten; and those
which become essentially impure if they die in any way other than as a
result of hunting or slaughtering in accordance with the shari'ah, but
which become pure if they are correctly hunted or slaughtered in
accordance with the rules laid out below.

However, the mean of correctly killed animals of the second category
can only be eaten provided they are not carnivorous.

There are two ways of killing animals in accordance with the shari'ah.
The first is hunting.

Hunting may be in two ways. Firstly by a trained hound who obeys the
orders given it and does not normally eat the animal it has killed. For
his prey to be lawful, the person who released and sends the hound must
be a Muslim and must pronounce "bismillah" when releasing it, and the
hound should at no time leave his sight.

Secondly, hunting may be by means of a weapon, i.e. a sharp sword,
spear or arrow, or the bullet of a gun. In all cases, the death must be
directly due to the penetration of the weapon into the animal, and not
to some side effect such as fright. The person who uses the weapon must
be a Muslim and he must pronounce "bismillah" at the time of taking
aim.

If the animal is killed by either of the above methods, its flesh is
lawful. But if the hunter gets his animal when it is still alive, he
must slaughter it (see below). All other means of hunting (i.e. trap,
net, etc.) are forbidden, unless, of course, the animal is taken alive
and correctly slaughtered.

The second way to lawfully kill an animal is by slaughtering it
(dhabih). The slaughterer must be a Muslim or someone under the rules of
Islam such as the minor son of a Muslim. The second condition is that
the instrument of slaughtering should be made of sharp metal. However,
in case of necessity, any sharp implement (glass, sharp stone, etc.)
which cuts the arteries clearly may be used.

In the Name of God (bismillah) must be pronounced when the intention to
slaughter is amde, and the animal must be lying with its face towards
the "qiblah". All four main blood vessels of the neck must be completely
severed above the vocal chords. (There is a special method of killing a
camel called "nahr", which may also be used for other animals when
"dhabih" is not possible.

It should be noted finally that all namilas whose blood does not spurt
are unlawful (haram) except fish which have scales. A hadith of Muhammad
ibn Nu'man Ahwal, Mu'min at-Taq, says, "One day I went in to see Abu
Hanifah. I saw there was a pile of books in front of him. Abu Hanifah
said, 'Do you see all these books?' I said, Yes.' He said, 'They are all
to do with divorce.

' I said, God has made us free from all your books by one single verse
of the Quran, "Oh Prophet, (say to the believers), 'When you divorce
(your) women, divorce at their prescribed period, and reckon the 'iddah
(exactly).' "He said, 'Well then, have you ever asked your friend Ja'far
ibn Muhammad (al-Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.)) about the seacow?' I said, 'Yes,
he said that every sea-animal with scales, even if it be a 'sea-) camel
or a (sea-) cow, can be eaten, and that if it has no scales it is
unlawful to eat.'" 5


