History Testifies
=================

Let us ask ourselves this question:

**Did any one of the wives commit any sin or disobedience to** **Allah
and His Messenger** ***after*** **the revelation of the purification
verse that would contradict the notion of them/her being purified? Does
history give us any example of such** **event?**

Let us search in the history of Islam, and if we search, we will
certainly find the truth.

After the revelation of the purification verse, A’isha and Hafsa, two of
the wives of Rasulullah (SA) got together against Rasulullah (SA) and
planned a trick to separate between him and one of his other wives. The
verses in the beginning of Surat Al-Tahreem (Prohibition) descended in
regards to their inappropriate actions (verses 1-5). Do those verses fit
with the notion of them being purified, as the ones referred to in the
purification verse?

After the revelation of the purification verse, Rasulullah (SA) confided
a secret to A’isha/Hafsa and ordered her not to reveal it to anyone.
But, she disobeyed the orders of Rasulullah (SA) and she announced the
secret to others.

Could the act of disobeying Rasulullah (who does not speak out of his
own desire, and whom Allah (SWT) forbid his disobedience), come from a
purified person who have been purified by the will of Allah (SWT)? Could
this disobedience be the stage that is set for that person to attain the
status of purification? How could she be from among the ones referred to
by the purification verse, which removes any sin from those “purified”
individuals?

What A’isha/Hafsa committed is considered to be a sin and disobedience
to Allah (SWT) and His Messenger (SA). Except if we said that Allah
(SWT) desired something but was unable to do it! God forbid that we say
such a statement or even think it!

After the revelation of the purification verse and the demise of
Rasulullah (SA), A’isha did not abide by the orders of Allah (SWT) to
stay in her house. She disobeyed that order and went out of her house on
the back of a camel to lead an army of rebels. She instigated
mischief/troubles, planted the seeds of war, and resulted in the death
of thousands of Muslims.

She did something that never happened before in the history of Islam,
but because of her it became easier on the Muslims afterwards to fight
and kill among themselves and commit the forbidden. It became easier on
them to disobey, turn back on their oaths of allegiance, and shed each
other’s blood.

A’isha went out to fight Ameer Al-Momineen (AS) and she forgot the
orders of Rasulullah (SA) to her and the Ummah, to obey Ali, support him
and be faithful to his leadership. She did not remember the verses of
Allah (SWT) and the wisdom which was recited in her house and others
which she heard and memorized.

Rather she forgot it, lost it, and disobeyed the orders of Allah (SWT)
to keep in mind what is recited in her house from the communications of
Allah (SWT) and the wisdom in order to be good examples to be followed.
She was the first one to leave on him. She went out to fight Ali (AS)
while he was her guardian along with the other wives of the Prophet
(SA).

Therefore, are these repulsive and hideous actions of hers an indication
of her purification from Allah (SWT)? Is it expected or accepted from
the purified individuals who have been purified by Allah (SWT) to commit
such offensive acts?! Could the disobedience of Allah (SWT) and His
Messenger (SA) in this repugnant form, and the killing of Muslims,
originate from individuals whom Allah (SWT) have cleansed and purified?!
That is absolutely impossible!

This is a testimony from history itself which indicates that if we
believe in the absolute, free, and independent will of Allah (SWT), then
it could not be possible that the wives be the ones referred to in the
purification verse. That is because one sin will affect all of them
since the verses address the wives as a group, and the “purified
individuals” are also referred to as a whole.

Hence, either all the wives are purified *or* none of them are purified.
Based on the events that took place after the revelation of the
purification verse, we can conclude that it is impossible and
implausible that the wives of the Prophet (SA) be the ones referred to
in the purification verse. Is there anything more clear from this
irrefutable proof which the brain cannot help but accept?!


