Parenthetical Clause
====================

If we accepted the verity of the statement that the purification verse
refers to the wives of the Prophet (SA) based on its context, we will
find that the purification verse here will turn into a parenthetical
clause (Jumla E’teradiya). In other words, if you delete that verse from
the group of verses surrounding it, you will find that it does not at
all affect the verses and it flows of ideas and meaning is not
interrupted because it is simply a parenthetical clause.

Indeed, if you try to recite all the verses without the purification
verse, you will not find any difference at all in the context of the
meaning, monologue, and speech. Rather, you will find that the flow of
ideas presented is logical and this deletion does not affect the drift
of verses which are as follows:

**“*****And stay in your houses and do not display your finery like the
displaying of the ignorance of yore; and keep up prayer, and pay the
poor-rate, and obey Allah and His Messenger. And keep to mind what is
recited in your houses of the communications of Allah and the wisdom;
surely Allah is Knower of subtleties, Aware*****.”**

So, do you find any difference or anything missing from theses verses or
not? Actually, there is no difference at all! Thus, if the purification
verse were indeed addressing the wives of the Prophet (SA), then based
on the observation that we just made, the purification verse would be a
parenthetical clause (from a grammatical point of view). It would be an
insignificant statement that would not affect the verses by its addition
or deletion.

Can one ever imagine that such a great and important verse (which
specifies to us the purified individuals whom we will use as our source
of guidance and who will be our Imams, guides, and religious
authorities) be a trivial statement that does not affect by its presence
or absence?! Can such a verse that will determine the path and direction
of Islam and the Muslims be insignificant within the context and
structure of the other verses?!

This cannot be and it is illogical to be accepted by any mature and wise
mind. The verse of purification cannot simply be a petty and pointless
statement. And if it can’t be so, then it is also impossible for it to
be directing and referring to the wives of the Prophet (SA).

That is because we have already reached the conclusion that if the
purification verse was referring to the wives of the Prophet (SA), then
it has to be considered as a parenthetical clause since the context of
the verses will force it to be so. But since it is not possible nor
appropriate for this important verse to be trivial, this indicates to us
a clear proof that this verse does **not** address the wives of the
Prophet (SA). Rather, it addresses other individuals and completely
eliminates the possibility that the wives are the ones referred to by
this great, critical, and crucial verse to Islam and the Muslims.


