Regrouping & Reflecting
=======================

After extensively studying and analyzing the first possibility, do we
find that our minds accept it? What conclusion do we reach which forces
itself upon us after seeking it, finding it, and being sure of it? The
mind, logic, faith, wisdom, proofs, and evidence all assure (without any
doubt) the fact that this 1st possibility, which is often supported by
many, is totally invalid and incorrect!

Not only that, but we also reach the important conclusion that the wives
are excluded and eliminated from the possibility of being those referred
to by the purification verse. It is not at all possible for them to even
share in the reference or be from those purified individuals. It is as
if the presence of the purification verse among the verses that
addresses the wives of the Prophet (SA) made it even more clear and
presented a stronger proof which proves the exact opposite of what some
say!

Maybe if the purification verse was located elsewhere in the Qur’an in a
different Surah, it might not have been possible to prove the
elimination and exclusion of the wives of the Prophet (SA), as it was
when this verse was positioned among the verses that was revealed in
Surat Al-Ahzab. It is as if Allah (SWT) purposefully meant by its
location to prove that the wives are **not** the ones intended or
referred to by the purification verse. It is as if Allah (SWT) desired
for us not to fall into that grave mistake which we would undoubtly fall
in, if this verse were revealed elsewhere in the Qur’an.

All praise and thanks be to Allah (SWT), the Lord of the Worlds who
revealed the truth in His Book which does not get tainted by falsehood
and is the source of guidance, clarification, and explanation for
everything. The Holy Book which is a revelation from the Mighty and the
Merciful, and which leaves no excuse after that for the nonbelievers,
the rejecters, the stubborn, the foolish, the deniers, or the
hypocrites.

Since we’ve reached this logical conclusion about the wives of the
Prophet (SA) and therefore excluded the first possibility, we can also
eliminate the third possibility since it is without basis. The reason
why is because this third possibility states that the purified
individuals are the wives of the Prophet (SA) in addition to Ali,
Fatima, Hasan, and Husain (AS).


