Conclusion
==========

By His Mercy and Generosity, Allah (SWT) have created for this Ummah a
purified source, and created for it a clean fountainhead for it to use
and cleanse itself with. But unfortunately, the Ummah refused and
insisted on searching for every other malignant, stagnant, and polluted
water to drink from, and therefore, increase in uncleanness, filthiness
and misguidance! What a big shame?!

Not only that, but the Ummah weren’t satisfied with their decision. They
tried to wipe out and eradicate the purified source and sought to
disparage, tarnish, and dehydrate this purified stream of water which
Allah (SWT) blessed us with! However, they were not able to do that
because Allah (SWT) will perfect His Light, though the nonbelievers may
be averse. Allah (SWT) is the one who cleansed and purified this source
by His desire and will which shall continue to stay in its purified and
chaste form through the times and age.

It will be available for those who want to use, take advantage of, and
cleanse themselves with it, thus meeting Allah (SWT) with a good heart.
This will be so until Allah (SWT) inherits the Earth, and truthful is
Allah, the Great when He said,

***“Surely, We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
guardian.”*** **[15:9]**

With His Wisdom and Desire, Allah (SWT) has willed that the purification
verse become a test and temptation to the people. So, He placed it in
that specific location in Surat Al-Ahzab. It is a fitna (test) that is
passed only by those who truly believe in Allah (SWT) and His Messenger
without being obstinate, making lies, being hypocritical, or following
their carnal desires.

It is passed by those who are not fanatic and do not fall as a victim of
their own foolishness and narrow-mindedness. As for those who fail this
great test, they are the stubborn, the hypocrites, the liars, the
fanatics, the disbelievers, and the foolish from this Ummah.

There is absolutely no excuse whatsoever for those who fail this test,
especially since the truth was made clear, vivid, and was revealed for
all ages to come. It is not at all hard for us to understand the truth,
especially since Rasulullah (SA) explained it and made clear to us the
truth from falsehood, the right from wrong, and the light from darkness.
After that, whoever wishes to take advantage and use this purified
source which Allah (SWT) Himself have purified by His own free will, let
him/her do so.

Whomsoever Allah (SWT) guides, he is the rightly guided one, and
whomsoever He causes to err, you shall not find for him any friend to
lead him to the right way. It is not Allah (SWT) who is unjust to them;
rather they were unjust to their own selves. Whoever goes astray or
disbelieves, or is uncompromising, or lies, will not at all hurt Allah
(SWT) in any way or form, for surely He is Self-Sufficient and above any
need of the worlds, and He will reward the thankful.

Those who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning they
shall turn back, and the end is for those who guard against evil. Peace
and prayers be upon the most dignified of messengers, Muhammad, and his
purified progeny, Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and Husain (AS), who have all been
purified by the word and will of Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, despite
the jealous, the rejecters, the deniers, the envious, the foolish, the
obstinate, the liars, and the nonbelievers. May Allah’s curse be upon
all those who are unjust, and praise is to Allah, the Lord of the
Worlds!


