Our Focus
=========

Let us begin from where the people left off and let us focus our
research and analysis in putting an end to this controversy. The matter
is clear and the avenues for our research are limited. We do not have to
search for those purified individuals (who have been referred to by the
purification verse) among all the Muslims, or even a group of them.

The religious scholars of the Muslim Ummah have made it easier for us by
narrowing down the possibilities of individuals who might be the ones
referred to by the purification verse. Also, the purification verse
itself has limited the possibilities by using the term “Ahlul-Bayt”.
Therefore, we can focus our research on the following possibilities
without a fourth, as the prospects for being the ones referred to in the
purification verse:

1) The purified individuals referred to are the wives of Rasulullah (SA)
alone.

2) The purified individuals indicated by the purification verse are Ali,
Fatima, Hasan, and Husain (Peace be upon them) alone.

3) The purified individuals are the wives of Rasulullah (SA) *in
addition* to Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and Husain (Peace be upon them).

Only one of these three possibilities can be correct in identifying
those purified souls who have been purified by Allah (SWT), while the
other two possibilities are wrong and invalid. This makes sense and is
logical, since it is not possible for all three possibilities to be
correct; neither can two of them be acceptable.

So the matter is easier for us now. All that is required for us to do is
to search and reach a conclusion as to which of these possibilities is
correct. We will then be guided by Allah’s grace to our desired mission
to identify thse purified individuals whom we seek their guardianship
and guidance to the right path. So, let us open our ears and minds to
research and analyze until we reach a logical, convincing, and
satisfying answer in this controversy.

Let us reach a solution that is conclusive and decisive such that the
sincere hearts and minds rest afterwards and would be convinced of the
truth after recognizing it clearly and vividly, without having any
confusion or doubts. Let us start our journey in finding out which of
the three above-mentioned possibilities is correct, while depending
first and foremost on Allah (SWT), secondly on the Qur’an, and thirdly
on our minds, our logical reasoning, and our intelligence.


