Bibliography
============

1) ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Abi Shaybah Ibrahim b. ‘Uthman b. Abi Bakr
b. Abi Shaybah al-Kufi al-‘Ubsi, *Musannaf Ibn Abi Shaybah fi al-Ahadith
wa al-Athar* (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1409 H) [annotator: Prof. Sa’id
al-Laham]

2) ‘Ali Al Muhsin, *‘Abd Allah b. Saba: Dirasat wa Tahlil* (1st edition,
1422 H)

3) Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, *Musnad* (Cairo: Dar
al-Hadith; 1st edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Ahmad Muhammad Shakir]

4) Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
*al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata]

5) Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Mizan
al-I’tidal fi Naqd al-Rijal* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1382
H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi]

6) Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah al-Bukhari
al-Ju’fi, *al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar* (Beirut: Dar Ibn Kathir; 3rd
edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha]

7) Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa* *Fawaidihah* (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr
wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H)

8) Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu*
(Al-Maktab al-Islami)

9) Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, *al-Jami’ al-Sahih
Sunan al-Tirmidhi* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

10) Abu ‘Ubayd al-Qasim b. Salam al-Harwi, *Gharib al-Hadith*
(Haydarabad: Majlis Dairah al-Ma’arif al-‘Uthmaniyyah; 1st edition, 1385
H)

11) Abu ‘Umar Yusuf b. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Barr b. ‘Asim
al-Nimri al-Qurtubi, *al-Isti’ab fi Ma’rifat al-Ashab* (Beirut: Dar
al-Jil; 1st edition, 1412 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi]

12) Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
*Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah* (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406
H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim]

13) Abu al-Barakat ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b. Mahmud al-Nasafi, *Tafsir
al-Nasafi* (Beirut: Dar al-Nafais; 2005 CE) [annotator: Shaykh Marwan
Muhammad al-Shi’ar]

14) Abu al-Fida Ibn Kathir al-Dimashqi, *al-Nihayah fi al-Fitan wa
al-Malahim* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: Prof. ‘Abduh al-Shafi’i]

15) Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi,
*Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim* (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah]

16) Abu al-Hajjaj Jamal al-Din Yusuf al-Mizzi, *Tahdhib al-Kamal fi Asma
al-Rijal* (Beirut by Muasassat al-Risalah; 4th edition, 1413 H)
[annotator: Dr. Bashar ‘Awad Ma’ruf]

17) Abu al-Hasan Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Salih al-‘Ijli al-Kufi,
*Ma’rifat al-Thiqat* (Madinah: Maktabah al-Dar; 1st edition, 1405 H)

18) Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, *Sahih
Muslim* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi]

19) Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, *Tarikh Madinah Dimashq* (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1415
H) [annotator: ‘Ali Shiri]

20) Abu Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Ali al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, *Tarikh Baghdad*
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah)

21) Abu Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. Abi ‘Asim al-Dhahhak al-Shaybani, *al-Ahad
wa al-Mathani* (Riyadh: Dar al-Rayat; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator:
Dr. Basim Faysal Ahmad al-Jawabirah]

22) Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Abi Khaythamah Zuhayr b. Harb, *Tarikh Ibn Abi
Khaythamah* (al-Faruq al-Hadithiyyah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 1st
edition, 1424 H)

23) Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, *Kitab al-Sunnah* (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400
H) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

24) Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, *Kitab al-Sunnah* (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah]

25) Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, *Kitab
al-Thiqat* (Hyderabad: Majlis Dairat al-Ma’arif al-‘Uthmaniyyah; 1st
edition, 1398 H)

26) Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, *Mashahir
‘Ulama al-Amsar* (Dar al-Wafa li al-Taba’at wa al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’;
1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Marzuq ‘Ali Ibrahim]

27) Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir al-Tabari, *Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk*
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1407 H)

28) Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Tabari, *Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an* (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Sidqi Jamil al-‘Attar]

29) Abu Muhammad ‘Abd al-‘Azim b. ‘Abd al-Qawi al-Mundhiri, *al-Targhib
wa al-Tarhib* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1417 H)
[annotator: Ibrahim Shams al-Din]

30) Abu Muhammad ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Hatim Muhamamd b. Idris b.
al-Munzir al-Tamimi al-Hanzali al-Razi, *al-Jarh wa al-Ta’dil* (Beirut:
Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1371 H)

31) Abu Na’im Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Isfahani, *Hilyah al-Awliya wa
Tabaqat al-Asfiya* (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 4th edition, 1405 H)

32) Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, *Musnad*
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad]

33) Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *al-Isabah fi Tamyiz
al-Sahabah* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H)
[annotators: Shaykh ‘Adil Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Shaykh ‘Ali
Muhammad Ma’udh]

34) Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Taqrib al-Tahdhib* (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata]

35) Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani
al-Shafi’i, *Hadi al-Sari Muqaddimah Fath al-Bari* (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)

36) Ahmad b. Abi Bakr b. Isma’il al-Busiri, *Itihaf al-Khiyarah
al-Maharah bi Zawaid al-Masanid al-‘Ashara* (Riyadh: Dar al-Watan; 1st
edition, 1420 H)

37) Ibn al-Athir, Abu al-Hasan ‘Izz al-Din ‘Ali b. Abi al-Karam Muhammad
b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Karim b. ‘Abd al-Wahid, *al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh*
(Beirut: Dar Sadir; 1385 H)

38) Ibn al-Athir, Abu Sa’adat al-Mubarak b. Muhammad al-Jazari,
*al-Nihayah fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar* (Beirut: al-Maktabah
al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1399 H) [annotators: Tahir Ahmad al-Zawi and Mahmud
Muhammad al-Tanahi]

39) Muhammad b. Sa’d, *al-Tabaqat al-Kubra* (Beirut: Dar al-Sadir)

40) Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, *Sahih al-Targhib wa al-Tarhib*
(Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif; 5th edition)

41) Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, *Silsilah al-Ahadith
al-Dha’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi al-Ummah*
(Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H)

42) Muslim b. al-Hajjaj, *al-Kuna wa al-Asma* (Madinah al-Munawwarah:
al-Jami’ah al-Islamiyyah; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator: ‘Abd al-Rahim
Muhammad Ahmad al-Qushqari]

43) Prof. Dr. Hikmat b. Bashir b. Yasin, *Mawsu’at al-Sahih al-Masbur
min al-Tafsir bi al-Mathur* (Madinah: Dar al-Mathar li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’ wa al-Taba’at; 1st edition, 1420 H)

44) Shams al-Din Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Dhahabi
al-Dimashqi, *al-Kashif fi Ma’rifat Man Lahu Riwayat fi al-Kutub
al-Sittah* (Jeddah: Dar al-Qiblah li al-Thaqafat al-Islamiyyah; 1st
edition, 1413 H)

45) Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Tarikh
al-Islam wa Wafiyat al-Mashahir wa al-A’lam* (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab
al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1407 H) [Dr. ‘Umar ‘Abd al-Salam Tadmiri]

46) Shihab al-Din Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani,
*Lisan al-Mizan* (Beirut: Manshurat Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Matbu’at;
2nd edition, 1390 H)

47) Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib* (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H)

48) Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition)

49) Taqiy al-Din Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. ‘Abd al-Salam
b. ‘Abd Allah b. Abi al-Qasim b. Muhammad b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani
al-Hanbali al-Dimashqi, *al-Sarim al-Maslul ‘ala Shatim al-Rasul* (Saudi
Arabia: al-Haras al-Watani al-Sa’udi) [annotator: Muhammad Muhy al-Din
‘Abd al-Hamid]


