Preface
=======

Every Shi’i who seeks to debate a Sunni must insist on certain ten
principles:

1. Both parties must swear before Allah to pursue, defend and follow the
truth alone.

2. Both parties must agree on a specific topic, and also set the
boundaries of the discussion.

3. Each party must declare beforehand what exactly must be proved by the
other party in order to win the debate.

4. Each side must swear before Allah to strictly stay on the topic of
the debate, and not deviate, digress or venture into any other
throughout the discussion.

5. Each party must swear before Allah to present only authentically
transmitted reports from both the Sunni books and the Shi’i books.

6. The Sunni party *must* always present reports with reliable chains
from the Shi’i books only in order to convince the Shi’i on any point.
In the same manner, the Shi’i must always present reports with reliable
chains from the Sunni books in order to convince the Sunni on any point.

7. Authenticity of the reports is determined primarily through the
chains of narration. Each party must either present the opinions of the
relevant leading *rijal* experts on each *riwayah* or do a thorough
*rijal* breakdown of its narrators using the strictest appropriate
*rijal* standards. If either party has an objection to the
authentication by the *‘ulama* of any particular report, he must present
convincing evidence to prove their error.

8. The opinions of scholars on issues are not valid as proof unless
reliably transmitted evidence can be provided to back them up.

9. It is he who claims that something exists, or that it is true, that
*must* provide the cogent evidence for it. The party denying it has no
obligation to provide proof of his denial. However, where the claimer
has provided his proof, the onus shifts to the denier. The denier must
either accept the evidence supplied, or provide solid academically sound
and orthodox reasons to reject it.

10. There shall never be any vulgar abuse of the other party or anyone
respected by his sect or *madhhab*. The debate shall be entirely
decorous, and the choice of words shall be respectful.

Unfortunately, not many Sunnis or Shi’is have the necessary skills or
temperaments to accept all the conditions stated above. Therefore, we
almost always see very poor pseudo-debates, especially on online forums.
We often see each side quoting *dha’if* reports from even his own
sources, as well as from those of the opposing party, to drive home his
weak points! In most cases, no original research is ever done on the
topic by either side. Rather, each of them merely copy-pastes heavily
from websites and parrots statements by others.

In the end, nothing useful is achieved from the debate. On a lot of
occasions, the discussion turns into a cursing contest; and the party
with the vilest tongue declares victory. It is our absolute conviction
that whatever is worth doing at all, is worth doing best. It is more
advisable for pseudo-debaters to take time to train themselves in the
necessary skills – academic and emotional – needed for a real debate
before (re-)taking the podiums. The damage and evil caused by the
pseudo-debates outweigh any benefits that might come from them.

Let us take the question of “Ibn Saba” as a case study for the ten rules
above. Our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah always make the following
claims about him:

1. He was a descendant of Saba, and belonged to one of the Sabai tribes.

2. He was a black Arab with a black slave mother.

3. He was a Jew from Sana in Yemen.

4. He accepted Islam during the *khilafah* of ‘Uthman b. ‘Affan.

5. He stirred up the public, especially the Egyptians, against ‘Uthman
and caused the latter’s bloody overthrow.

6. He was the first to claim that ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, was the
designated successor of the Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa
alihi*.

7. He was the first to proclaim belief in *al-raj’ah* – that is, that
the return to this world after death by certain dead people.

8. He was the first to publicly criticize or revile Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.

9. He was popularly called *Ibn al-Sawda* – son of the black mother.

10. Imam ‘Ali was frustrated with him, and abused him by calling him
“the black container” and also banished him to al-Madain.

11. Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi Talib saw it as legitimate to execute
him for reviling Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, and would have done so had people
not talked him out of the decision.

12. ‘Ali burnt him (i.e. Ibn Saba) and his followers alive for calling
him (i.e. ‘Ali) Allah.

Since it is the Sunni in any debate who makes these claims, the onus is
on him to provide reliably transmitted evidence for each and every
point. The Shi’i – who denies them – has no initial obligation or
responsibility to bring any evidence to refute them[^1].

Normally, the question is: who exactly is the Sunni trying to convince
on these matters? If he only seeks to convince his Sunni brothers, then
he must present reliable *riwayat* from the *Sunni* books to back up all
the points[^2]. However, if his aim is only to convince the Shi’ah, in
that case he has no other choice but to quote nothing but authentic
*Shi’i* reports in support of himself.

Incidentally, there are only three reliable *athar* concerning Ibn Saba
throughout all Shi’i books. Shaykh ‘Ali Al Muhsin has compiled the Shi’i
*riwayat* about ‘Abd Allah b. Saba, and examined their various
chains[^3], and has thus concluded:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والصحيح من تلك الروايات منحصر بثلاث روايات مروية في رجال الكشي,وهي
تثبت وجود عبد الله بن سبأ, وأنه ادّعى الألوهية في أمير المؤمنين,
فأحرقه بالنار, ولا تثبت أكثر من ذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The authentic from these reports are only three reports recorded in**
***Rijal al-Kashi***, and they establish the existence of ‘Abd Allah b.
Saba, and that he claimed divinity for Amir al-Muminin, and that he
(‘Ali) therefore burnt him (i.e. Ibn Saba) with fire. **Nothing more
than that is proved**.[^4]

This is the first of the three reports, as quoted by Al Muhsin:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رواه الكشي أيضاً بسنده عن هشام بن سالم, قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله يقول
وهو يحدِّث أصحابه بحديث عبد الله بن سبأ وما ادّعى من الربوبية في أمير
المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب, فقال: إنه لما ادّعى ذلك فيه استتابه أمير
المؤمنين, فأبى أن يتوب فأحرقه بالنار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kashi narrated it too with his chain from Hisham b. Salim, who said:
I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah saying, while addressing his companions on the
issue of ‘Abd Allah b. Saba and his claim of divinity for Amir
al-Muminin, ‘Ali b. Abi Talib: “When he made that claim concerning him,
Amir al-Muminin asked him to repent. But, he refused to repent. So, he
burnt him with fire.”[^5]

Al Muhsin also copies the second *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رواه الكشي أيضاً في كتابه المذكور بسنده عن أبان بن عثمان, قال: سمعت
أبا عبد الله يقول: لعن الله عبد الله بن سبأ, إنه ادّعى الربوبية في
أمير المؤمنين, وكان والله أمير المؤمنين عبداً لله طائعاً, الويل لمن
كذب علينا, وإن قوماً يقولون فينا ما لا نقوله في أنفسنا, نبرأ إلى الله
منهم, نبرأ إلى الله منهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Kashi records again in his mentioned book with his chain from Aban b.
‘Uthman, who said: I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah saying: “**May Allah curse
‘Abd Allah b. Saba**. Verily, he claimed divinity for Amir al-Muminin. I
swear by Allah, Amir al-Muminin was only an obedient slave of Allah. Woe
unto whosoever lies upon us. A group say concerning us what we never say
about ourselves, we dissociate ourselves from them unto Allah. We
dissociate ourselves from them unto Allah.”[^6]

And this is the third report, cited by Shaykh Al Muhsin:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رواه أيضاً بسنده عن أبي حمزة الثمالي, قال: قال علي بن الحسين :لعن الله
من كذب علينا, إني ذكرت عبد الله بن سبأ فقامت كل شعرة في جسدي, لقد
ادّعى أمراً عظيماً, ما له لعنه الله !كان علي والله عبداً لله صالحاً,
أخو رسول الله, ما نال الكرامة من الله إلا بطاعته لله ولرسوله, وما نال
رسول الله الكرامة من الله إلا بطاعته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He narrated again with his chain from Abu Hamzah al-Thumali, who said:

‘Ali b. al-Husayn said: “May Allah curse whosoever lies upon us. I
remember ‘Abd Allah b. Saba, and every hair on my body rises. He made a
terrible claim. What was wrong with him? **May Allah curse him**. I
swear by Allah, ‘Ali was only a righteous slave of Allah and the brother
of the Messenger of Allah. He did not achieve honour from Allah except
through his obedience to Allah and to His Messenger. The Messenger of
Allah too did not achieve honour from Allah except with his obedience of
Him.[^7]

Then, Al Muhsin comments about the three *ahadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذه الروايات الثلاث صحيحة السند
  </p>
</blockquote>

These three reports have *sahih* chains.[^8]

Any Sunni who wants to debate any Shi’i on the topic of ‘Abd Allah b.
Saba, *la’natullah ‘alaihi*, can therefore only quote the three
*riwayat* above if he is sincere. However, he would NEVER be able to
establish the Sunni claims below, through those authentic Shi’i
*ahadith*:

1. ‘Abd Allah b. Saba was a black Arab with a black mother.

2. He was a Jew from Sana in Yemen.

3. He accepted Islam during the *khilafah* of ‘Uthman b. ‘Affan.

4. He stirred up the public, especially the Egyptians, against ‘Uthman
and caused the latter’s bloody overthrow.

5. He was the first to claim that ‘Ali was the designated successor of
the Messenger of Allah.

6. He was the first to proclaim belief in *al-raj’ah* – that is, that
the Prophet will one day return to this world after death.

7. He was the first to publicly criticize or revile Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.

8. He was popularly called *Ibn al-Sawda* – son of *the* black mother.

9. Imam ‘Ali was frustrated with him, and abused him racially by calling
him “the black container” and also banished him to al-Madain.

10. Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi Talib saw it as legitimate to execute
him for reviling Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, and would have done so had people
not talked him out of the decision.

Therefore, our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah will *always* lose any
debate on Ibn Saba with any Shi’i as long as both sides are honest.

Meanwhile, what about the Sunni sources? What if a Sunni only intended
to convince another Sunni concerning ‘Abd Allah b. Saba? Shaykh Ibn
Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) outlines the necessary rules here:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و الجواب من وجوه أحدها انه لا بد من إقأمة الدليل على صحة المنقول إلا
فالاستدلال بما لا تثبت
  </p>
</blockquote>

The reply is from several angles. One of them is: **evidence**
***must*** **be presented for the authenticity of whatever is quoted**.
Unless this is done, using it as proof is invalid.[^9]

Elsewhere, in rejecting a report, he adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيقال أولا هذه الحكاية لم يذكر لها إسنادا فلا تعرف صحتها فإن المنقولات
إنما تعرف صحتها بالأسانيد الثابتة
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is said (in reply) that first and foremost, he has not mentioned any
chain for this narration. Therefore, its authenticity is unknown. **This
is because the authenticity of quoted reports is known only through
their authentic chains**.[^10]

He further reiterates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومعلوم أن من احتج في أي مسألة كانت بشيء من النقل فلا بد أن يذكر إسنادا
تقوم به الحجة
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is well-known that whosoever relies upon as proof any narration in
any issue, **he** ***must*** **mention (at least) a chain which
establishes it as a** ***hujjah*** **(proof)**.[^11]

So, every Sunni must do the following with every report he mentions on
‘Abd Allah b. Saba:

1. Quote the report *with the full chain*.

2. Provide clear evidence for the reliability of the chain.

Interestingly, our dear Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah himself has failed
completely to comply with either of the two obligatory rules in his
discourses about Ibn Saba. For instance, this is his submission about
how that controversial, “elusive” character mounted onto the Islamic
scene:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأما بيعة عثمان فلم يتخلف عنها أحد مع كثرة المسلمين وانتشرهم من
إفريقية إلى خراسان ومن سواحل الشام إلى أقصى اليمن ومع كونهم كانوا
ظاهرين على عدوهم من المشركين وأهل الكتاب يقاتلونهم وهي في زيادة فتح
وانتصار ودوام دولة ودوام المسلمين على مبايعته والرضا عنه ست سنين نصف
خلافته معظمين له مادحين له لا يظهر من أحد منهم التكلم فيه بسوء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم بعد هذا صار يتكلم فيه بعضهم وجمهورهم لا يتكلم فيه إلا بخير وكانت قد
طالت عليهم إمارته فانه بقي اثنتي عشرة سنة لم تدم خلافة أحد من الأربعة
ما دامت خلافته فإن خلافة الصديق كانت سنتين وبعض الثالثة وخلافة عمر عشر
سنين وبعض الأخرى وخلافة على أربع سنين وبعض الخامسة ونشأ في خلافته من
دخل في الإسلام كرها فكان منافقا مثل ابن سبأ وأمثاله وهم الذين سعوا في
الفتنة بقتله
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for the *bay’ah* of ‘Uthman, there was no one who did not pledge it
despite the great number of the Muslims and their spread from Africa to
Khurasan (in Iran, Turkmenistan and Afghanistan), and from the plains of
Syria to the remotest places of Yemen. This was also despite their
victories over their enemies, such as the idolaters and the *Ahl
al-Kitab* who fought them. This was accompanied by conquests and the
survival of the state and the survival of the Muslims; and they (i.e.
the Muslims) followed him and were pleased with him for six years –
which was half of the period of his *khilafah*. They showed great
respect to him, and praised him. There was not a single one of them who
criticized him.

Then, after this, appeared those who criticized him. Yet, the majority
of them did not talk about him except in good terms. However, his rule
had gotten too long for them, for it lasted twelve years. The *khilafah*
of none of the four (rightly guided *khalifahs*) lasted as long as his
*khilafah*. The *khilafah* of al-Siddiq was for just a little over two
years; the *khilafah* of ‘Umar lasted a little over ten years; and the
*khilafah* of ‘Ali was for a little over four years. **During his
(‘Uthman’s)** ***khilafah*****, there were those who entered Islam
unwillingly, and they were hypocrites,** **such as Ibn Saba and his
likes, and they were those who started the** ***fitnah*** **(crisis) by
killing him**.[^12]

Really? ‘Abd Allah b. Saba “unwillingly” accepted Islam and, within a
short period, successfully masterminded the assassination and overthrow
of the mighty *khalifah*?! Is there *any* reliable evidence for this?
Well, our Shaykh makes no attempt to pretend that there is any! He has
neither quoted any *riwayah* with any *sanad*, nor has he provided any
evidence whatsoever for the authenticity of any report on his claims.

All right then, is there anything else we should know about ‘Abd Allah
b. Saba? Our Shaykh says “yes”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا ريب أن كثيرا ممن يحب الرسول من بني هاشم وغيرهم وقد تشيع قد تلقى من
الرافضة ما هو من أعظم الأمور قدحا في الرسول فإن أصل الرفض إنما أحدثه
زنديق غرضه إبطال دين الإسلام والقدح في رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم
كما قد ذكر ذلك العلماء وكان عبد الله بن سبأ شيخ الرافضة لما أظهر
الإسلام أراد أن يفسد الإسلام بمكره وخبثه كما فعل بولص بدين النصارى
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no doubt that a lot of those who loved the Messenger among the
Banu Hashim and others - and who also became Shi’ah - imbibed from the
Rafidhah some of the most blasphemous matters concerning the Messenger.
**This is because** ***al-rafdh*** **was founded by an infidel, whose
aim was to destroy the religion of Islam, and to blaspheme the Messenger
of Allah**, peace be upon him, as mentioned by the scholars. **‘Abd
Allah b. Saba – the** ***shaykh*** **of the Rafidhah -** when he
professed Islam, he intended to corrupt Islam with his plots and malice,
as Paul did with Christianity.[^13]

Interestingly, once again, our Shaykh fails to provide *any* proof
whatsoever for his claims!

So, what exactly did ‘Abd Allah b. Saba do to found Shi’ism? Shaykh Ibn
Taymiyyah thinks he has a clue on that as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد علم أهل العلم أن أول ما ظهرت الشيعة الإمامية المدعية للنص في أواخر
أيام الخلفاء الراشدين وافترى ذلك عبدالله بن سبأ وطائفة الكذابون فلم
يكونوا موجودين قبل ذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

The scholars have known that the Shi’ah Imamiyyah, who claimed the
*nass* (for ‘Ali), first appeared during the last periods of the rule of
the *khulafa al-rashidin* (i.e. the rightly guided *khalifahs*). **That
was invented by ‘Abd Allah b. Saba and a group of liars**. So, they
never existed before then.[^14]

He adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذا معروف عن ابن سبا واتباعه وهو الذي ابتدع النص في علي وابتدع أنه
معصوم
  </p>
</blockquote>

And this is well-known about Ibn Saba and his followers. **He was the
one who innovated the** ***nass*** **(i.e. a claim of prophetic
appointment as** ***khalifah*****) for ‘Ali, and innovated the claim
that he (‘Ali) was** ***mas’um*** **(infallible)**.[^15]

The only problem here is that there is ZERO evidence provided to support
these claims. Merely claiming that the rumours were “well-known” is not
sufficient. An authentically transmitted eye-witness account is required
in cases like this. None is quoted anyway, anywhere!

Were there any the other “innovations” created by ‘Abd Allah b. Saba?
Our Shaykh proceeds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلنا نعم وأشهر الناس بالردة خصوم أبي بكر الصديق رضي الله عنه وأتباعه
كمسيلمة الكذاب وأتباعه وغيرهم وهؤلاء تتولاهم الرافضة كما ذكر ذلك غير
واحد من شيوخهم مثل هذا الإمامي وغيره ويقولون إنهم كانوا على الحق وأن
الصديق قاتلهم بغير حق ثم من أظهر الناس ردة الغالية الذين حرقهم علي رضي
الله عنه بالنار لما ادعوا فيه الإلهية وهم السبائية أتباع عبدالله بن
سبأ الذين أظهروا سب أبي بكر وعمر
  </p>
</blockquote>

We say: yes, the most notorious of mankind for apostasy were the enemies
of Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, may Allah be pleased with him, and his followers,
such as Musaylamah the Liar and his followers and others. These people
(i.e. the apostates) are loved by the Rafidhah, as mentioned by many of
their *shuyukh*, like this Imami and others. They say that they (those
apostates) were upon the truth, and that al-Siddiq fought them unjustly.

Those who were most notorious among mankind for extreme apostasy were
**those burnt with fire by ‘Ali**, may Allah be pleased with him, **when
they called him Allah. They were the Sabaiyyah, followers of ‘Abd Allah
b. Saba, those who were the first to curse Abu Bakr and ‘Umar**.[^16]

He reiterates the same elsewhere:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأين شبهة مثل أبي موسى الأشعري الذي وافق عمرا على عزل علي ومعاوية وأن
يجعل الأمر شورى في المسلمين من شبهة عبدالله بن سبأ وأمثاله الذين يدعون
أنه إمام معصوم أو أنه إله أو نبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Where is the confusion of the likes of Abu Musa al-Ash’ari who concurred
with ‘Amr to dethrone (both) ‘Ali and Mu’awiyah and to subject the
matter to consultation among the Muslims from the confusion of **‘Abd
Allah b. Saba and** **his likes who called him (i.e. ‘Ali) an infallible
Imam, or that he was Allah, or that he was a prophet**?[^17]

Once more, our Shaykh makes no attempt to quote any report or chain for
his submissions. Meanwhile, we have decided to help him out and his
followers by actually checking the authenticity of all the primary Sunni
*riwayat* about ‘Abd Allah b. Saba – especially all those ones that
Sunnis table as evidence concerning him - in order to distinguish the
truths from the fables. We sincerely hope that this work of ours will be
highly beneficial to every soul seeking to learn the *real* truth about
the character called Ibn Saba and the activities and doctrines that have
been attributed to him. In this book, we have adopted the same strict
investigative and transparent research methodology as we did in our
first and second books. We implore Allah to forgive us all our mistakes,
and to accept this as a worthy act of *‘ibadah*. And may Allah send His
*salawat* and *barakat* upon our master, Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah, and
upon his purified offspring.

[^1]: We must emphasize at this point that we, the Shi’ah Imamiyyah, do
NOT deny the existence of ‘Abd Allah b. Saba. Those of us who do that
are in error, and their opinion does not bind our madhhab. It is only
the Qur’an and our authentic ahadith that do that. There indeed was once
a man with that name, as our sahih reports establish. However, the only
statement that is true about him – from all that the Ahl al-Sunnah claim
– is that he considered Amir al-Muminin to be a god. Everything else is
false, as nothing else is established in any reliable Sunni or Shi’i
riwayah. Absolutely nothing else at all! As such, all the political
roles that the Ahl al-Sunnah have given to Ibn Saba, and all the other
doctrines and beliefs that they have attributed to him, are only
distortions of the true history. Meanwhile, our belief in the existence
of the man, and his consideration of Imam ‘Ali as a god, are based
strictly and solely upon our own authentic Shi’i ahadith. As for Sunnis,
they do not have a single reliable report in all their books to
establish even the existence of Ibn Saba, much less all the fairytales
that they have attached to him!

[^2]: We have seen efforts by some Sunni brothers to prove all the Sunni
claims about ‘Abd Allah b. Saba by mentioning the existence and
doctrines of a group called al-Sabaiyyah. In their opinion, if they can
prove that a sect which attributed itself to Ibn Saba existed, then they
have already proved the existence of the man himself. Moreover, if they
are able to establish the doctrines of this sect, then they have
established the original doctrines of the man. This is however a very
poor methodology, which is based upon clear logical fallacies. The fact
that a group of people attribute themselves to an individual or an
entity does NOT necessarily prove that he/she/it existed. Qur’an 7:71
and 53:19-23 give vivid examples. Al-Lat, al-‘Uzza and Manat were three
Arab idols which existed only in “names”. They had no real existence. A
lot of the other idols are like that. However, it is possible to find
people who attribute themselves to such imaginary idols, and who even
spread weird legends about the idols’ “achievements” and “teachings”!
Besides that, it is quite possible to find people who have attributed
themselves to a real being, but who do NOT truly or accurately represent
him at all. Examples of these kinds of adherents abound in our midst.
For instance, there are Christians who attribute themselves to the
Christ, Prophet ‘Isa b. Maryam, ‘alaihima al-salam. Would it be accurate
to determine the existence and true doctrines of the Christ through the
existence and doctrines of Christians? On a more specific note, is it
correct to claim that the Christ believed in his own divinity, or that
he was the Son of God, simply because Christians make these claims? Of
course, that would be very wrong! In the same manner, it is wrong to try
to prove the existence and doctrines of ‘Abd Allah b. Saba through the
claims and doctrines of al-Sabaiyyah, who attributed themselves to him.
Rather, separate authentic reports must be provided to independently and
directly establish the existence of the man himself and his personal
doctrines, beliefs and teachings.

[^3]: ‘Ali Al Muhsin, ‘Abd Allah b. Saba: Dirasat wa Tahlil (1st
edition, 1422 H), pp. 45-50

[^4]: Ibid, p. 49

[^5]: Ibid, p. 47

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Ibid

[^9]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 136

[^10]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 138

[^11]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 481

[^12]: Ibid, vol. 8, pp. 315-316

[^13]: Ibid, vol. 8, pp. 478-479

[^14]: Ibid, vol. 8, p. 251

[^15]: Ibid, vol. 7, p. 220

[^16]: Ibid, vol. 3, pp. 458-459

[^17]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 61


