3. Tracing The Fairytale: Explicit Athar Naming Ibn Al-Sawda
============================================================

According to Sunni *‘ulama*, ‘Abd Allah b. Saba was “well-known” as *Ibn
al-Sawda* – the son of the black woman. Imam Ibn al-Athir (d. 630 H),
for instance, submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكان عبد الله بن سبأ المعروف بابن السوداء
  </p>
</blockquote>

He was ‘Abd Allah b. Saba, *well-known* as *Ibn al-Sawda*.[^1]

The only existing testimony concerning the colour of his mother,
however, is the *mawdu’* (fabricated) report of Yazid al-Faq’asi.
Therefore, there really is absolutely **NO** evidence that ‘Abd Allah b.
Saba had a black mother. As a result, there is no basis for naming him
*Ibn al-Sawda* or for suggesting that he could be called that.

Secondly, there is equally no reliable proof that the contemporaries of
‘Abd Allah b. Saba ever called him *Ibn al-Sawda*. Rather, his own
existence at all is not even established through *any* authentic chain
in the Sunni books! Logic demands that whichever Sunni wants to claim
that ‘Abd Allah b. Saba was *Ibn al-Sawda*, or that he was well-known as
that, must do the following:

1. Provide at least a single authentic, explicit Sunni report proving
the existence of a man called ‘Abd Allah b. Saba.

2. Provide at least a single authentic, explicit Sunni *riwayah* showing
that the man named ‘Abd Allah b. Saba was addressed as *Ibn al-Sawda* by
his contemporaries.

The truth is – no Sunni has *ever* been able to do either of the above,
and no Sunni will be able to do so till the Day of *al-Qiyamah*.
Therefore, as things stand, there is no valid Sunni evidence that a man
named ‘Abd Allah b. Saba *ever* existed, or that such a man was *ever*
called *Ibn al-Sawda* by those who knew him. With this background fact,
we are good to proceed to some Sunni reports on the unknown son of the
black woman!

Narration One
-------------

Imam Ibn Asakir (d. 571 H) helps us with the first of them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ونا سيف عن أبي حارثة وأبي عثمان قالا لما قدم ابن السوداء مصر عجمهم
واستخلاهم واستخلوه وعرض لهم بالكفر فأبعدوه وعرض لهم بالشقاق فأطمعوه
فبدأ فطعن على عمرو بن العاص وقال ما باله أكثركم عطاء ورزقا ألا ننصب
رجلا من قريش يسوي بيننا فاستحلوا ذلك منه وقالوا كيف نطيق ذلك مع عمرو
وهو رجل العرب قال تستعفون منه ثم يعمل عملنا ويظهر الائتمار بالمعروف
والطعن فلا يرده علينا أحد
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Sayf** – Abu Harithah and Abu ‘Uthman:

When ***Ibn al-Sawda*** arrived in Egypt, he tested them. He was
delighted with them and they were delighted with him. He presented
*kufr* (disbelief) to them, and they distanced themselves from it. He
then suggested sedition to them and they gave him hope. Then he began
and slandered ‘Amr b. al-As, saying, “Why is his pension and salary the
largest among you?” Will a man from Quraysh not be put forward to settle
the matter between us?” They were pleased with that from him, and said,
“How can we achieve this with ‘Amr when he is the man of the Arabs?” He
said, “Seek his dismissal! Then we will play our role and begin to
publicly command the good and to defame. At that time, no one will hold
us back.”[^2]

In this chain again is Sayf b. ‘Umar. We will only remind ourselves of
the words of ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) concerning him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وفي هذا نظر، فإن أكثر الطرق المشار إليها مدارها على سيف بن عمر
والواقدي وهما كذابان
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: There is an error in this, for most of the indicated chains,
their pivot is **Sayf b. ‘Umar and al-Waqidi, and they both were
LIARS**.[^3]

As such, the *sanad* is *mawdu’* and the *riwayah* is thereby a
fabrication.

Ibn Asakir apparently assumes that the “Ibn al-Sawda” in the report was
‘Abd Allah b. Saba – which is why he has placed the *riwayah* under his
biography of the latter. However, there is no valid proof that ‘Abd
Allah b. Saba had a black mother, to begin with! Even Ibn Asakir makes
no attempt to provide any, either! Meanwhile, decency and common sense
dictate that whosoever seeks to rely upon the above report to prove the
existence of ‘Abd Allah b. Saba – as Ibn Asakir did - must first do the
following:

1. Bring convincing, solid proof that there was a man - at that period
in time - named ‘Abd Allah b. Saba who had a black mother.

2. Supply reliable evidence that the black mother of this man was
well-known among the people, and was widely recognized as “*the* black
woman”.

3. Provide an authentically transmitted eye-witness testimony which
establishes that the man - ‘Abd Allah b. Saba - was also known as *Ibn
al-Sawda*.

We are absolutely certain that no creature can fulfil any of the above
conditions till the Hour! As such, we believe that anyone who claims
that *Ibn al-Sawda* in the fabricated *riwayah* was ‘Abd Allah b. Saba
(whoever that was) – apparently with no valid evidence at all – is a
bigot who only plays dirty games with the truth. Undoubtedly, there is
zero evidence to establish that ‘Abd Allah b. Saba was *ever* referred
to or known as *Ibn al-Sawda* by any of his contemporaries. Therefore,
it is clearly impossible to connect the above tale of Sayf to him. So,
the report is completely useless and irrelevant, since it is strictly
about a hopelessly unidentifiable character.

Narration Two
-------------

With the collapse of the first *riwayah*, Imam Ibn Asakir takes us to
another:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قرأنا على أبي عبد الله يحيى بن الحسن عن أبي الحسين بن الآبنوسي أنا
أحمد بن عبيد بن الفضل وعن أبي نعيم محمد بن عبد الواحد بن عبد العزيز
أنا علي بن محمد بن خزفة قالا نا محمد بن الحسن نا ابن أبي خيثمة نا محمد
بن عباد نا سفيان عن عمار الدهني قال سمعت أبا الطفيل يقول رأيت المسيب
بن نجبة أتى به ملببة يعني ابن السوداء وعلي على المنبر فقال علي ما شأنه
فقال يكذب على الله وعلى رسوله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah Yahya b. al-Hasan – Abu al-Husayn b. al-Abnusi – Ahmad b.
‘Ubayd b. al-Fadhl and Abu Na’im Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Wahid b. ‘Abd
al-‘Aziz – ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Khazafah and Muhammad b. al-Hasan – Ibn
Abi Khaythamah – Muhammad b. ‘Abbad – Sufyan – Ammar al-Duhni – Abu
al-Tufayl:

I saw al-Musayyab b. Najabah, bringing him – **that was** ***Ibn
al-Sawda*** - while ‘Ali was on the pulpit. So, ‘Ali said, “What is his
problem?” He replied, “He lies upon Allah and upon His Messenger.”[^4]

This report suffers from the same fatal defect as the first. We do not
know who this *Ibn al-Sawda* was, and there is no reliable Sunni
*riwayah* to connect him to ‘Abd Allah b. Saba. Meanwhile, even if we
assumed, for the sake of argument, that he was Ibn Saba, the *athar*
still does not prove any of the primary Sunni claims about him. For
instance, it does not prove that he was negative towards Abu Bakr and
‘Umar, or that he believed in the succession or *‘isma* (sinlessness) of
Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*. It also says nothing about
‘Abd Allah b. Saba’s alleged belief in *al-raj’ah* or his claimed
participation in the bloody overthrow of ‘Uthman b. ‘Affan. It is
therefore basically an utterly valueless report, as long as Ibn Saba is
concerned.

Narration Three
---------------

Imam Ibn Abi Khaythamah (d. 279 H) reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن عباد المكي قال نا سفيان قال نا عبد الجبار بن عباس
الهمداني عن سلمة عن حجية بن عدي الكندي :رأيت عليا على المنبر وهو يقول
من يعذرني من هذا الحميت الأسود الذي يكذب على الله يعني ابن السوداء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. ‘Abbad – Sufyan – ‘Abd al-Jabbar b. ‘Abbas al-Hamdani –
Salamah – **Hujayyah b. ‘Adi al-Kindi**:

I saw ‘Ali upon the pulpit and he was saying, “Who will excuse me of
this evil black container, who tells lies upon Allah?” **He meant**
***Ibn al-Sawda***.[^5]

Imam Ibn Asakir has also transmitted the same *riwayah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنبأنا أبو عبد الله محمد بن أحمد بن إبراهيم بن الخطاب أنا أبو القاسم
علي بن محمد بن علي الفارسي ح وأخبرنا أبو محمد عبد الرحمن بن أبي الحسن
بن إبراهيم الداراني أنا سهل بن بشر أنا أبو الحسن علي بن منير بن أحمد
بن منير الخلال قالا أنا القاضي أبو الطاهر محمد بن أحمد بن عبد الله
الذهلي نا أبو أحمد بن عبدوس نا محمد بن عباد نا سفيان نا عبد الجبار بن
العباس الهمداني عن سلمة بن كهيل عن حجية بن عدي الكندي قال رأيت عليا
كرم الله وجهه وهو على المنبر وهو يقول من يعذرني من هذا الحميت الأسود
الذي يكذب على الله ورسوله يعني ابن السوداء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Ibrahim b. al-Khattab – Abu al-Qasim
‘Ali b. Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Farisi; AND Abu Muhammad ‘Abd al-Rahman b.
Abi al-Hasan b. Ibrahim al-Darani – Sahl b. Bishr – Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali b.
Munir b. Ahmad b. Munir al-Khalal – al-Qadhi Abu al-Tahir Muhammad b.
Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Dhuhli – Abu Ahmad b. ‘Abdus – Muhammad b. ‘Abbad
– Sufyan – ‘Abd al-Jabbar b. al-‘Abbas al-Hamdani – Salamah b. Kuhayl –
**Hujayyah b. ‘Adi al-Kindi**:

I saw ‘Ali, *karamallah wajhah*, while he was upon the pulpit and he was
saying, “Who will excuse me of this evil black container, who tells lies
upon Allah and His Messenger?” **He meant** ***Ibn al-Sawda***.[^6]

This *riwayah* is inconsequential as well. First, the phrase “He meant
*Ibn al-Sawda*” is an interpolation (*idraj*) of one of the narrators.
But, who was it? It could have been anyone from Muhammad b. ‘Abbad to
Hujayyah. There is no explicit proof to establish that the interpolation
came from Hujayyah, the eye-witness, and not from any of the
sub-narrators. As such, there is no sufficient basis to rely upon it in
identifying whoever ‘Ali allegedly called an “evil black container”.
Moreover, even if we assumed, for the sake of argument, that it was
Hujayyah who made the identification, then the report would still be of
zero value. The only thing it would have done in such a case is to show
that Amir al-Muminin once called one *Ibn al-Sawda* a “black container”
– nothing more, nothing less. Meanwhile, the exact identity of this *Ibn
al-Sawda* remains unknown through any reliable Sunni report. Therefore,
the report would still be redundant and unusable.

Narration Four
--------------

This is the fourth “evidence” of Imam Ibn Asakir, allegedly about ‘Abd
Allah b. Saba:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو بكر أحمد بن المظفر بن الحسين بن سوسن التمار في كتابه
وأخبرني أبو طاهر محمد بن محمد بن عبد الله السنجي بمرو عنه أنا أبو علي
بن شاذان نا أبو بكر محمد بن جعفر بن محمد الآدمي نا أحمد بن موسى الشطوي
نا أحمد بن عبد الله بن يونس نا أبو الأحوص عن مغيرة عن سباط قال بلغ
عليا أن ابن السوداء ينتقص أبا بكر وعمر فدعا به ودعا بالسيف أو قال فهم
بقتله فكلم فيه فقال لا يساكني ببلد أنا فيه قال فسيره إلى المدائن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr Ahmad b. al-Muzaffar b. al-Husayn b. Susan al-Tamar – Abu Tahir
Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Sinji – Abu ‘Ali b. Shadhan –
**Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ja’far b. Muhammad al-Adami** – Ahmad b. Musa
al-Shatawi – Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Yunus – Abu al-Ahwas – Mughirah –
**Sabat**:

It reached ‘Ali that *Ibn al-Sawda* was reviling Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. So,
he sent for him and called for the sword, or he decided to kill him.
But, he was persuaded against it. Then he said, “He cannot live with me
in the same town”. So, he banished him to al-Madain.[^7]

This report is very *dha’if*.

Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi (d. 463 H) has done a *tarjamah* for Abu Bakr
Muhammad b. Ja’far b. Muhammad al-Adami but has mentioned no *tawthiq*
for him whatsoever concerning his narrations. None exists in any other
Sunni book either. By contrast, al-Baghdadi has actually recorded this
under the said *tarjamah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال محمد بن أبي الفوارس سنة ثمان وأربعين وثلاثمائة فيها مات محمد بن
جعفر الادمي وكان قد خلط فيما حدث
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Abi al-Fawaris said: “In the year 348 H, Muhammad b. Ja’far
died, **and he used to mix things up in what he narrated**.”[^8]

This makes him *dha’if* as a narrator.

Besides, the main narrator of the report too, Sabat, is completely
unknown in the Sunni books of *rijal*. No mention of him whatsoever is
made. So, he is perfectly *majhul*.

But, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) thinks it is not over yet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فروى أبو الأحوص عن مغيرة عن شباك عن إبراهيم قال: بلغ علي بن أبي طالب
أن عبد الله بن السوداء ينتقص أبا بكر وعمر فهم بقتله فقيل له: تقتل رجلا
يدعو إلى حبكم أهل البيت؟ فقال: "لا يساكنني في دار أبدا".
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي رواية عن شباك قال: بلغ عليا أن ابن السوداء يبغض أبا بكر وعمر قال:
فدعاه ودعا بالسيف أو قال: فهم بقتله فكلم فيه فقال: "لا يساكنني ببلد
أنا فيه" فنفاه إلى المدائن وهذا محفوظ عن أبي الأحوص وقد رواه النجاد
وابن بطة واللالكائي وغيرهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومراسيل إبراهيم جياد لا يظهر علي رضي الله عنه أنه يريد قتل رجل إلا
وقتله حلال عنده ويشبه والله أعلم أن يكون إنما تركه خوف الفتنه بقتله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-Ahwas narrated from Mughirah **from Shibak from Ibrahim** that he
said, “It reached ‘Ali b. Abi Talib that ‘Abd Allah b. al-Sawda was
reviling Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Then he decided to kill him. But it was
said to him, ‘Will you kill a man who calls towards love of you, Ahl
al-Bayt?’ Then he said, ‘He can never again stay with me in the same
house.’”

In another report from Shibak, he said: “It reached ‘Ali that *Ibn
al-Sawda* hated Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Then he sent for him and called for
the sword, or he decided to kill him. But he was dissuaded from it. As a
result, he said, ‘He can not stay in the same town with me.’ So, he
banished him to al-Madain.” **This is accurately preserved
(*****mahfuz*****) from Abu al-Ahwas**, and al-Najad, Ibn Battah,
al-Lalikai and others have recorded it.

And the *marasil* (i.e. disconnected narrations) of Ibrahim are good
(*jiyyad*).[^9]

The pretensions of Ibn Taymiyyah nonetheless, both reports are
unreliable! Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H) tells us why:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إبراهيم النخعي وهو إبراهيم بن يزيد بن عمرو بن الأسود أبو عمران كان
مولده سنة خمسين ومات سنة خمس أو ست وتسعين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibrahim al-Nakha’i: he was Ibrahim b. Yazid b. ‘Amr b. al-Aswad, Abu
‘Imran. **He was born in 50 H** and died in 95 or 96 H.[^10]

It is unanimously agreed upon within the *Ummah* that Amir al-Muminin
‘Ali b. Abi Talib was martyred in 40 H, some 10 years before this
Ibrahim was born! That means he was narrating as an eye-witness what
occurred long before his birth! Yet, Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah – who
apparently admits that the report of Ibrahim is *mursal* (disconnected)
– wants us to believe it was a “good” testimony. What happened to his
common sense?

It gets worse with the *riwayah* of Shibak – which our Shaykh has graded
as “correctly preserved”. He too was not an eye-witness, and had only
gotten his story – as he personally indicated – from Ibrahim! In fact,
even though Imam ‘Ali belonged to the first *tabaqah* (i.e. generation
of narrators), Shibak only fell in the sixth – a fact which throws him
far, far away from the time of the alleged incident! Yet, al-Hafiz (d.
852 H) has some further damaging information about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شباك ... الضبي الكوفي الأعمى ثقة له ذكر في صحيح مسلم وكان يدلس من
السادسة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shibak ... al-Dhabi al-Kufi, the Blind: *Thiqah* (trustworthy). He is
mentioned in *Sahih Muslim*. **He used to do** ***tadlis*****. He was
from the sixth (*****tabaqat*****)**.[^11]

The bottom-line of all this is obvious. Both Shibak and Ibrahim were
completely cut off from the time of Amir al-Muminin. So, neither of them
could have validly narrated about events which occurred during his
*khilafah*. Secondly, in the chain of Ibrahim is Shibak, a *mudalis*,
who has narrated from the former in an *‘an-‘an* manner. This is
another, independent evidence of the unreliability of the chain of
Ibrahim! So, both reports quoted by Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah are not just
*dha’if* – they are *very* weak (*dha’if jiddan*) But, what have we got
our Shaykh stating about them instead?! This is how some people behave
when they become desperate about their fallacies.

Even then, these reports only show that one *Ibn al-Sawda* hated and
reviled Abu Bakr and ‘Umar during the *khilafah* of Imam ‘Ali. It
nowhere identifies him as Ibn Saba. Also, it does not confirm the Sunni
claims that ‘Abd Allah b. Saba believed in *al-raj’ah*, or in the
*wisayah* or *‘isma* of ‘Ali, nor does it establish his guilty in the
murder of ‘Uthman.

[^1]: Ibn al-Athir, Abu al-Hasan ‘Izz al-Din ‘Ali b. Abi al-Karam
Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Karim b. ‘Abd al-Wahid, al-Kamil fi
al-Tarikh (Beirut: Dar Sadir; 1385 H), vol. 3, pp. 144-145

[^2]: Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 29, p. 6

[^3]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 3, pp. 101-102, \# 1110

[^4]: Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 29, p. 7

[^5]: Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Abi Khaythamah Zuhayr b. Harb, Tarikh Ibn Abi
Khaythamah (al-Faruq al-Hadithiyyah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 1st
edition, 1424 H), vol. 3, p. 177, \# 4359

[^6]: Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 29, p. 8

[^7]: Ibid, vol. 29, p. 9

[^8]: Abu Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Ali al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah), vol. 2, p. 149, \# 565

[^9]: Taqiy al-Din Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. ‘Abd al-Salam
b. ‘Abd Allah b. Abi al-Qasim b. Muhammad b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani
al-Hanbali al-Dimashqi, al-Sarim al-Maslul ‘ala Shatim al-Rasul (Saudi
Arabia: al-Haras al-Watani al-Sa’udi) [annotator: Muhammad Muhy al-Din
‘Abd al-Hamid], p. 584

[^10]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti,
Mashahir ‘Ulama al-Amsar (Dar al-Wafa li al-Taba’at wa al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Marzuq ‘Ali Ibrahim], p.
163, \# 748

[^11]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, pp. 410-411, \# 2742


