5. Hitting The Final Nail: The Wisayah And The Raj’ah
=====================================================

The aim of those who ceaselessly peddle the Ibn Saba fables is primarily
to prove:

1. that he was the origin of the claim that Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali,
*‘alaihi al-salam*, was declared *khalifah* by his Prophet, *sallallahu
‘alaihi wa alihi*; and

2. that he founded the claim that *khilafah* belongs exclusively to ‘Ali
and the offspring of Muhammad; and

3. that he was the first to express belief in *al-raj’ah*.

However, even in the authentic Sunni *ahadith*, evidence can be produced
to establish that belief in the *khilafah* of the Ahl al-Bayt, *‘alaihim
al-salam*, as well as in *al-raj’ah*, was part of the *original*
teachings of Islam. For instance, Imam Ibn Abi ‘Asim (d. 287 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا محمد بن المثنى، حدثنا يحي بن حماد، عن أبي عوانة، عن يحيى بن سليم
أبي بلج عن عمرو بن ميمون، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم لعلي: أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنك لست نبيا وأنت خليفتي
في كل مؤمن من بعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. al-Muthanna – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah – Yahya b.
Sulaym Abu Balj – ‘Amr b. Maymun – Ibn ‘Abbas: **The Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him, said to ‘Ali**: “You are to me of the status of Harun
to Musa, with the exception that you are not a prophet. **And you are
my** ***khalifah*** **over every believer after me**.”[^1]

Dr. al-Jawabirah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسناده حسن. رجاله رجال الشيخين غير ابي‌ بلج واسمه يحيي بن سليم بن بلج،
قال الحافظ: صدوق ربما اخطأ. وله شواهد
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***hasan***. Its narrators are narrators of the two
Shaykhs, except Abu Balj, and his name is Yahya b. Sulaym b. Balj.
Al-Hafiz said: “*Saduq* (very truthful), *maybe* he made mistakes.”
**There are witnesses for it (i.e. the** ***hadith*****)**.”[^2]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) also comments on the *sanad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن .ورجاله ثقات رجال الشيخين غير أبي بلج واسمه يحيى بن سليم بن
بلج قال الحافظ" :صدوق ربما أخطأ ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***hasan***. Its narrators are trustworthy, and are
narrators of the two Shaykhs (i.e. al-Bukhari and Muslim) except Abu
Balj. His name is Yahya b. Sulaym b. Balj. Al-Hafiz said: “*Saduq* (very
truthful), *maybe* he made mistakes.”[^3]

Assessing the same chain, Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has **a** ***sahih*** **chain**.[^4]

And Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) seconds him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^5]

‘Allamah Ahmad Shakir (d. 1377 H) too has the same verdict on same
*isnad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^6]

And Imam al-Busiri (d. 840 H) holds the same view, concerning the chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سند صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

A *sahih* chain.[^7]

This *hadith* is explicit, straightforward, and authentic[^8]. It leaves
no room for doubt or manipulation. It absolutely establishes that Imam
‘Ali was indeed the designated *khalifah* of Muhammad, the Messenger of
the Lord of the worlds.

‘Allamah al-Albani has a second *hadith* for our research:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إني تارك فيكم خليفتين: كتاب الله حبل ممدود ما بين السماء والأرض وعترتي
أهل بيتي وإنهما لن يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض
  </p>
</blockquote>

**I am leaving behind over you two** ***khalifahs*****: the Book of
Allah** - a rope stretching between the heaven and the earth – **and my
offspring, my Ahl al-Bayt**. Verily, both shall never separate from each
other until they meet me at the Lake-Font.[^9]

Then, the ‘Allamah comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^10]

On the same page, al-Albani copies another similar *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إني تارك فيكم ما إن تمسكتم به لن تضلوا بعدي أحدهما أعظم من الآخر كتاب
الله حبل ممدود من السماء إلى الأرض وعترتي أهل بيتي ولن يتفرقا حتى يردا
علي الحوض فانظروا كيف تخلفوني فيهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

**I am leaving behind over you that which if you adhere to it you will
never go astray after me**, one of them both is greater than the other:
**the Book of Allah** – a rope stretching from the heaven to the earth –
**and my offspring, my Ahl al-Bayt**. Both shall never separate from
each other until they meet me at the Lake-Font. Therefore, watch
carefully how you treat them in my absence.[^11]

Again, ‘Allamah al-Albani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^12]

This *hadith* too grants and limits the *khilafah* to ‘Ali and his
offspring through Sayyidah Fatimah[^13].

We therefore ask our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah, especially the
Salafiyyah: are you going to play your “Ibn Saba” card against the
Messenger of Allah too?!

With regards to the second issue, there is need for some little
explanations in order to make the matter clearer. The word *al-raj’ah*
literally means “the return”. Any “return” to anything is a *raj’ah*.
For instance, an ex-Muslim who “returns” to Islam has done a *raj’ah*
back to the true faith. In the same manner, a traveller who “returns”
home has done a *raj’ah*. Technically, however, *al-raj’ah* is the
“return” of *any* dead person into this world *through resurrection*. It
is therefore completely different from other concepts such as rebirth or
reincarnation. It is the same body, with the same soul, that returns to
this world from *Barzakh* by Allah’s Command. At a more specific level,
*al-raj’ah* – in Shi’i theology – is the “return” after death of certain
people to this earth – through resurrection - during the “End Times”
period. Another word for this, in Shi’i terminology, is
*al-karrah*[^14].

There is, without doubt, a general rule set in the Book of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حتى إذا جاء أحدهم الموت قال رب ارجعون لعلي أعمل صالحا فيما تركت كلا
إنها كلمة هو قائلها ومن ورائهم برزخ إلى يوم يبعثون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Until when death comes to one of them, he says, “My Lord! Send me back,
so that I may do good in that which I have left behind!” No! It is but a
word that he speaks, **and behind them is** ***Barzakh*** **until the
Day when they will be resurrected**.[^15]

So, anyone who dies is prevented from ever returning to this world. He
is rather locked behind the *Barzakh* till *al-Qiyamah*. Al-Hafiz Ibn
Kathir (d. 774 H) states under the above verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال مجاهد : البرزخ : الحاجز ما بين الدنيا والآخرة. وقال محمد بن كعب :
البرزخ : ما بين الدنيا والآخرة. ليسوا مع أهل الدنيا يأكلون ويشربون ،
ولا مع أهل الآخرة يجازون بأعمالهم. وقال أبو صخر : البرزخ : المقابر ،
لا هم في الدنيا ، ولا هم في الآخرة ، فهم مقيمون إلى يوم يبعثون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mujahid said: “The *Barzakh* is a barrier between this world and the
Hereafter.” Muhammad b. Ka’b said, “The *Barzakh* is what is between
this world and the Hereafter. They are not from the people of this world
who eat and drink, and are not with the people of the Hereafter who are
rewarded according to their deeds.” Abu Dhakhr said, “**The**
***Barzakh*** **refers to the graves. They are not in this world and
they ARE NOT in the Hereafter. They will remain there till the Day of
Resurrection**.”[^16]

However, Allah has provided some exceptions to this general rule – and
those are the instances of *al-raj’ah*. Examples of them are given in
His Book. For instance, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذ قلتم يا موسى لن نؤمن لك حتى نرى الله جهرة فأخذتكم الصاعقة وأنتم
تنظرون ثم بعثناكم من بعد موتكم لعلكم تشكرون
  </p>
</blockquote>

And when you said, “O Musa! We shall never believe in you until we see
Allah plainly.” But you were seized with a thunderbolt while you were
looking. **Then, We resurrected you** ***after*** **your death**, so
that you may be grateful.[^17]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألم تر إلى الذين خرجوا من ديارهم وهم ألوف حذر الموت فقال لهم الله
موتوا ثم أحياهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Did you not see those who went forth from their homes in thousands,
fearing death? Allah said to them, “Die”. **Then, He resurrected
them**.[^18]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أو كالذي مر على قرية وهي خاوية على عروشها قال أنى يحيي هذه الله بعد
موتها فأماته الله مائة عام ثم بعثه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Or like he who passed by a town and it had tumbled over its roofs. He
said: “Oh! How will Allah ever bring it to life after its death?” **So,
Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, and then resurrected
him**.[^19]

The Qur’an also quotes Allah as having said to ‘Isa, one of the
Israilite prophets:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذ تخرج الموتى بإذني
  </p>
</blockquote>

And when **you resurrect the dead** with My Permission[^20]

Prophet ‘Isa himself said this to his people, as reported by the Book of
Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأحيي الموتى بإذن الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

And **I resurrect the dead** by Allah’s Permission.[^21]

These are all instances of people “returning” from *Barzakh* into this
world through resurrection. They are all instances of *al-raj’ah*.

We see from these verses that *al-karrah* occurred in the previous
*Ummahs* before ours, especially among the Israilites. There is
significance in this fact for our research. This is on account of this
*hadith*, documented by Imam al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمود بن غيلان حدثنا أبو داود الحفري عن سفيان الثوري عن عبد
الرحمن بن زياد الأفريقي عن عبد الله بن يزيد عن عبد الله بن عمرو قال
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم ليأتين على أمتي ما أتى على بني
إسرائيل حذو النعل بالنعل حتى إن كان منهم من أتى أمه علانية لكان في
أمتي من يصنع ذلك وإن بني إسرائيل تفرقت على ثنتين وسبعين ملة وتفترق
أمتي على ثلاث وسبعين ملة كلهم في النار إلا ملة واحدة قالوا ومن هي يا
رسول الله قال ما أنا عليه وأصحابي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mahmud b. Ghilan – Abu Dawud al-Hafari – Sufyan al-Thawri – ‘Abd
al-Rahman b. Ziyad al-Afriqi – ‘Abd Allah b. Yazid – ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**Verily, everything
that** **occurred to the offspring of Israil will occur to my**
***Ummah*** **in identical manners, such that if any of them had sexual
intercourse with his mother publicly, there will certainly be in my**
***Ummah*** **someone who will do that**. Verily, the offspring of
Israil divided into seventy-two religions; and my *Ummah* will divide
into seventy-three religions, all of them will be in the Fire except one
religion.” They said, “Who are those, O Messenger?” He replied, “That
which I and my Sahabah follow.”[^22]

‘Allamah al-Albani comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*[^23]

Of course, *al-raj’ah* occurred to the offspring of Israil too.
Therefore, it *certainly* is part of our *Ummah* as well.

The Qur’an too proclaims:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سنة الله في الذين خلوا من قبل ولن تجد لسنة الله تبديلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

That was the *Sunnah* of Allah in the case of those passed away of old,
**and you will not find any change in the** ***Sunnah*** **of
Allah**.[^24]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سنة الله التي قد خلت من قبل ولن تجد لسنة الله تبديلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

That has been the *Sunnah* of Allah already with those who passed away
before. **And you will not find any change in the** ***Sunnah*** **of
Allah**.[^25]

*Al-Raj’ah* was without doubt part of the *Sunnah* of our Lord with the
previous *Ummahs*. Obviously, it is compulsorily part of His *Sunnah*
with our *Ummah* too. There is never any change in the *Sunnah* of Allah
with the various *Ummahs*.

[^1]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah], vol. 1, pp. 799-800, \#
1222

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 565, \# 1188

[^4]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
143, \# 4652

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo: Dar
al-Hadith; 1st edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Ahmad Muhammad Shakir], vol.
1, p. 331, \# 3062

[^7]: Ahmad b. Abi Bakr b. Isma’il al-Busiri, Itihaf al-Khiyarah
al-Maharah bi Zawaid al-Masanid al-‘Ashara (Riyadh: Dar al-Watan; 1st
edition, 1420 H), vol. 7, p. 184, \# 6630

[^8]: This author has published an entire book entitled On the Khilafah
of ‘Ali over Abu Bakr: A Dictionary of Sahih Sunni Ahadith in which he
has explored the above hadith and several similar others in great
detail.

[^9]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami), vol. 1, p. 482, \# 2457

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 482, \# 2458

[^12]: Ibid

[^13]: This author has a book on the two hadiths, entitled Hadith
al-Thaqalayn: The Deposed Will of the Last Prophet to Humanity. In it,
he has done an extensive research on the authenticity, meaning and
history of the hadiths.

[^14]: The word al-karrah has been used in the Book of Allah to mean the
return of a dead person to life on the earth through resurrection after
death. See Qur’an 2:167, 26:102 and 39:58

[^15]: Qur’an 23:99-100

[^16]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah], vol. 5, p.
494-495

[^17]: Qur’an 2:55-56

[^18]: Qur’an 2:243

[^19]: Qur’an 2:259

[^20]: Qur’an 5:110

[^21]: Qur’an 3:49

[^22]: Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’
al-Sahih Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 5, p. 26, \# 2641.
This authentic hadith establishes some fundamental principles. First, it
shows that the similar occurrences between our Ummah and that of the
Israilites may not be 100% identical. What matters most is the basic
fact common to both examples as well as the substantial similarity
between them. For instance, the offspring of Israil divided into 72
religions. However, our own Ummah will divide into 73 religions. 73, of
course, is not the same as 72, even though they are close together. Yet,
the basic fact remains: the Israilites divided, and we too are divided.
Another crucial principle from this hadith is that anything that a
Sahabi said or did – which was never said or done by the Prophet – is
misguidance, from one of the 72 heretical religions. The Messenger was
careful to emphasise that the truth is not what his Sahabah alone were
upon, but what he and his Sahabah followed together.

[^23]: Ibid

[^24]: Qur’an 33:62

[^25]: Qur’an 48:23


