Chapter 1: Revelation and Prophethood
=====================================

**Universal Guidance**

A belief in revelation and Prophethood emanates from a particular
conception of the world and man, which involves a belief in the
universality of Divine guidance. The principle of universal guidance is
a part of the monotheistic conception of the world as presented by
Islam. As Allah, the Almighty is a compulsorily self-existing in every
respect and absolutely Beneficent; He extends His favour to every
species of the existing things in accordance with its capability and
guides it on its evolutionary journey.

This guidance covers everything from the tiniest particle to the
largest star and from the lowest lifeless existence to the highest
living being known to us, that is man. That is why the Holy Qur'an has
used the word revelation in connection with the guidance of inorganic
material, plants and animals as it has used it in connection with the
guidance of man.

No existing thing in this world is at rest. Everything is moving
towards its goal. At the same time all indications show that everything
is pushed to its goal by a mysterious force existing within it. It is
this force that is called Divine guidance. The Holy Qur'an reports that
Prophet Musa said to the Fir'awn of his time:


"Our Lord is He who gave everything its distinctive nature and then
guided it." (Surah Ta Ha, 20:50)

Our world is a world of goals. Everything is being attracted to its
evolutionary goal by an inner force, or Divine guidance.

The word wahi meaning revelation has been repeatedly used in the Holy
Qur'an. The way how it has been used and the occasions on which it has
been used, show that the Holy Qur'an does not consider the revelation to
be confined to man. The Holy Qur'an believes it to be effective in the
case of everything, at least in the case of all living beings. That is
why it talks of revelation even to the bee. All that may be said is that
revelation and guidance have degrees which vary in accordance with the
degree of the evolution of the different things.

The highest degree of revelation is that which is made to the Prophets.
This kind of revelation is based on man's need of Divine guidance so
that he may proceed towards a goal beyond the perceptible and material
world, to which he must go in any case. In addition, revelation meets
man's requirements in his social life which needs a divinely sanctioned
law. We have already explained man's need to an evolutionary ideology
and his inability to frame such an ideology himself.

The Prophets are a sort of a receiving set in human form. They are
chosen individuals capable of receiving guidance and knowledge from the
invisible world. It is Allah alone who can judge who is fit to be a
Prophet. The Holy Qur'an says.

"Allah knows best whom to entrust with His message." (Surah al-An'am,
6:124)

Though revelation is a phenomenon, which is beyond the purview of
direct human perception and experiment, its impact can be felt, like the
impact of many other forces, in the effects which it produces. Divine
revelation produces a deep and tremendous impact on the personality of
its recipient that is the Prophet. It 'raises' the Prophet to truth. In
other words, it stimulates his talents and faculties and brings about a
deep and big revolution in his person for the good of humanity. It
endows him with an absolute conviction. History has not witnessed such a
conviction as that of the Prophets and the persons produced by them.


**Characteristics of Prophets**

The Prophets who through revelation come in contact with the source of
existence, have certain distinguishing characteristics to which we refer
below:

**(i) Miracles:**

Every Prophet raised by Allah was endowed with a kind of supernatural
power by means of which he worked one or more miracles to prove the
truth and Divinity of his message and mission.

The Holy Qur'an calls the miracles wrought by the Prophets by the will
of Allah, 'Ayat' that is the sign of Prophethood. The Holy Qur'an says
that in every age the people have asked the Prophets of their time to
work some miracles for them. The demand being reasonable and logical,
the Prophets acceded to it, because otherwise it was not possible for
those who sought truth, to acknowledge their Prophethood. Anyway the
Prophets declined to accede to a request for a miracle if it was made
with an intention other than seeking truth.

For example, if an offer was made in the form of a bargain and the
people said to a Prophet that they would embrace his faith only; if he
worked a particular miracle, their request was ignored. However, the
Holy Qur'an has recounted many miracles of the Prophets, such as
bringing the dead to life, curing the incurable, speaking in the cradle,
turning a staff into a serpent, describing the unknown and foretelling
future events.

**(ii) Infallibility:**

Another distinguishing feature of the Prophets is their infallibility
that is their immunity from committing a sin or making a mistake. The
Prophets are not carried away by their personal desires. They do not
err. Their infallibility is indisputable. But what does their
infallibility actually mean? Does it mean that whenever they are about
to commit a sin or to make a mistake, an angel comes and stops them in
the same way as a father prevents his child from going astray?

Or does it mean that the Prophets have been created in such a way that
they are incapable of doing anything wrong just like an angel who, for
example, cannot commit adultery for he has no sexual desire, or like a
machine, which makes no mistake because it has no brain?

Or is it that the reason why the Prophets do not sin nor do they err is
that they have been endowed with a particular degree of intuition, faith
and conviction?

Yes, that is the only right explanation. Now let us take up each of
these two kinds of immunity separately.

**Immunity from Sins**

Man is a free being. He himself determines what is beneficial to him
and what is harmful, and on that basis he decides what he should do. His
judgement plays an important role in his choice. It is impossible that
he should choose to do a thing which according to his judgement is
rather harmful to him than beneficial. For example a sensible man
interested in his life would never throw himself down from a hilltop nor
would take a lethal poison.

Individuals vary from the viewpoint of the strength of their faith and
the extent of their consciousness of the consequences of a sin. The
stronger their faith and the keener their consciousness, the less sins
they will commit. Should the faith of a man be so strong that while
committing a sin he feels as if he was throwing himself down from the
top of a hill, the chance of his sinning will be nil.

We call this state infallibility. Here infallibility originates from
the perfection of faith and piety. To be infallible and immune, man does
not require an external force to restrain him from committing sins, nor
is there any need of his being powerless by nature. Not to commit a sin
is not commendable if a man is unable to commit it, or is prevented from
committing it by an external force. The position of a man who is unable
to commit a sin is similar to that of a prisoner who is unable to commit
a fraud. Naturally a prisoner cannot be described as an honest and
upright man.

Immunity of the Prophets from sins and errors is an outcome of their
intuition. A mistake occurs when a man comes into contact with a reality
through his internal and external senses and forms some mental pictures
of it which he analyses with the help of his mental faculties. In that
case he may make a mistake in arranging his mental pictures or applying
them to the external reality.

But when he comprehends an external reality direct through a special
sense, having no need of forming any mental picture of it, and his very
apprehension of a reality means his direct contact with it, the question
of making any mistake does not arise. The Prophets have a contact with
the realities of the world from within themselves. Naturally no mistake
can be imagined to exist in a reality itself.

For example, if we put 100 rosary beads in a receptacle, then put
another 100 beads in it and repeat this act 100 times, we may not be
able to keep the count correctly and may not be sure whether we have
repeated the action 100 times, 99 times or 101 times. But the actual
reality cannot be different from what it is.

Though the action has been repeated 100 times, the actual number of the
beads can neither be less nor more than what it is. The men who are in
the midst of reality and close to the root of existence are immune from
making any kind of mistake. They are infallible.


