Chapter 7: the Holy Qur'an
==========================

The Holy Qur'an is our celestial Book and the eternal miracle of our
Holy Prophet. This Divine Book was revealed to the Holy Prophet over a
period of 23 years. The Holy Qur'an besides being a revealed Book and a
manifestation of the miracle-producing power of the Holy Prophet has had
a deeper and greater role than that of the staff of Prophet Musa and the
breath of Prophet 'Isa. The Holy Prophet used to recite the verses of
the Holy Qur'an to the people. Their magnetic power on many occasions
drew many a man to Islam. Such incidents are innumerable in Islamic
history.

The Holy Qur'an is a collection of 114 chapters which consist of 6205
verses comprising about 78,000 words.

The fact that Muslims from the early days of Islam till the present day
have been taking an unprecedented interest in the Holy Qur'an shows
their devotion to it. In the lifetime of the Holy Prophet the Holy
Qur'an was preserved in writing by a number of persons especially
appointed by him and known as the 'scribes of revelation'.

Besides, most of the Muslims irrespective of their sex and age were
keen to memorize the whole or a part of the Holy Qur'an. They recited it
in their prayers and considered it a meritorious act to recite it even
when they were not offering prayers. They really enjoyed its
recitation.

**Great Interest of Muslims in the Holy Qur'an**

Under the impact of their ardent love for their revealed Book the
Muslims in every age have rendered some service to the Holy Qur'an
corresponding with their intellectual and practial potentialities. They
memorized it. They acquired special training in reading it properly and
uttering every letter of it through proper organs.

They wrote commentaries on it and compiled special books explaining the
meaning of every word of it. They counted its verses, its words and even
its letters. They explored its meanings and applied results to the
legal, moral, social, philosophical, Gnostic and scientific questions.
They adorned their speeches and writings by quoting the verses of the
Holy Qur'an.

The inscriptions of high merit, Mosaics and Qashani tiles inscribed
with beautifully drawn and illuminated lines and letters contained the
Qur'anic verses.

The Muslims taught the Holy Qur'an to their children before giving them
any other education. They compiled Arabic grammar and Arabic
dictionaries to facilitate the understanding of the Holy Qur'an. They
were inspired by it to develop the art of rhetoric.

The devotion of Muslims to the Holy Qur'an was the source of the origin
of a number of sciences and literary arts which would not have come into
being if it did not exist.


**Inimitability of the Holy Qur'an**

The Holy Qur'an is an everlasting miracle of the last Prophet. From the
very beginning of its revelation in Makkah which began with small
surahs, the Holy Prophet formally threw a challenge to the idolaters. He
claimed that the Holy Quran was not his work. It was the work of Allah
and neither he nor any other human being could produce a like of it. He
said that if they did not believe him, they could make an attempt to
produce the like of it, and for that purpose could seek the help of
anybody they liked.

But they should know beforehand that they would never succeed in such
an attempt even if all the human beings and the jinn joined hands
together with them.

The opponents of the Holy Prophet neither during his lifetime nor
during any subsequent period of the past 1400 years have been able to
respond to this challenge. The only thing that the opponents of Islam of
the Holy Prophet's time could do was that they asserted that the Holy
Quran was a piece of magic.

This accusation was in itself an admission of the super-naturalness of
the Holy Qur'an and of their inability to emulate it. The die-hard
opponents of the Holy Prophet had no scruples. They were so desperate
that they left no stone unturned in order to harm and weaken his
position. But the only thing they were unable to do was that which was
proposed by the Holy Prophet himself and expressly asked by the Holy
Qur'an.

The Holy Qur'an had asked them to produce the like of at least one
surah of it even if that be a one-line surah like Surah at-Tawhid or
Surah al-Kawthar.

**Various Aspects of the Inimitability of the Holy Qur'an**

Here we propose to refer to some aspects of the miraculousness or
super-naturalness of the Holy Qur'an. On the whole the inimitability of
the Holy Qur'an has two aspects: one of them pertains to its words and
the other to its contents.

The inimitability of its words is due to its beautiful and artistic
diction, and the inimitability of its contents is due to their high
intellectual and scientific value. Each of these two aspects, especially
the second one again in its turn has several aspects. Lately certain
Egyptian and Iranian scholars have claimed that one of the aspects of
the inimitability of the Holy Qur'an is that its letters and words have
been so arranged that its verses form a special type of ascending
curve.

**Wording of the Holy Qur'an**

The Holy Qur'an has its own style, which is different from that of both
poetry and prose. It is not poetry because it is neither rhymed, nor has
it a metrical rhythm. Moreover, poetry entails a sort of imagery called
poetic fancy. It is interwoven with exaggeration which amounts to
telling a lie. The Holy Qur'an has no poetic imagery nor fanciful
similes and metaphors. At the same time it is no ordinary prose, for it
is characterized by a kind of harmonious flow and cadence not found in
any other prose work. The Muslims have always recited the Holy Qur'an
with a particular harmonic tune.

There are religious instructions to the effect that the Holy Qur'an
should be recited in a melodious voice. The Holy Imams sometimes recited
the Holy Qur'an in their houses so melodiously that the passers-by
stopped in the street to listen to their recitation. No other piece of
prose can be melodized in the same way as the Holy Qur'an.

Its sound-effect is compatible with its spiritual value and is
different from that of music. Since the invention of radio no other
spiritual speech has been found comparable with the Holy Qur'an in its
sweet melodious effect. In addition to the Muslim countries the
non-Muslim countries also have included the recitation of the Holy
Qur'an in their radio programmes on account of its sweet sound and
beauty.

It is astonishing that the beauty of the Holy Qur'an has surpassed the
limits of time and place. Many of the beautiful speeches are appreciated
only during a particular period of time and with a change in taste they
lose their value and effect. Some of them are appreciated only by
certain nations having a particular taste and a particular cultural
background. But the beauty of the Holy Qur'an is unique. It is not
peculiar to any particular time, race or culture.

All those who are conversant with the diction of the Holy Qur'an, find
it conforming to their individual taste. The more the time passes and
the more the various nations get acquainted with the Holy Qur'an, the
more they are fascinated by its charming beauty.

The biased Jews, Christians and the followers of certain other
religions over the past fourteen centuries have in various ways offered
resistance to the Holy Quran with a view to weaken its position. They
alleged that alteration had taken place in it. They tried to create
doubts about various matters concerning it and they resorted to so many
other machinations and tricks, but they never thought of seeking the
help of their writers and men of letters to respond to the challenge of
the Holy Qur'an and produce at least a small surah like it.

In the history of Islam there appeared a large number of people known
as Zindiqs or heretics. Some of them were extraordinarily intelligent.
They in various ways criticized the religion generally and the Holy
Qur'an particularly. Some of them enjoyed a great command of the Arabic
language. They tried to contest the superiority of the Holy Qur'an; but
all that they could do was that they proved their own lowliness and the
grandeur of the Holy Qur'an. In this connection history has related the
stories of Ibn Rawandi, Abul 'Ala' al-Mu'ari and Abut Tayyib
al-Mutanabbi.

It was they who wanted to show that they were able to emulate the Holy
Qur'an and could prove that it was a human work. There arose also many
pretenders who claimed to be the Prophets. They produced utterances
about which they claimed that they were revealed to them by Allah just
like the Holy Qur'an. Tulayhah, Musylimah and Sajah belong to this
category. They again could prove only the grandeur of the Holy Qur'an
and their own lowliness.

It is astonishing that the sayings of the Holy Prophet himself on whose
tongue the Holy Qur'an flowed are dissimilar to the Holy Qur'an. A very
large number of the sayings of the Holy Prophet, including his sermons,
invocations, maxims and orders have come down to us. Their language is
apt and flawless, but it is in no way similar to that of the Holy
Qur'an. This clearly proves that the sayings of the Holy Prophet and the
Holy Qur'an have originated from two different sources.

Imam Ali's contact with the Holy Qur'an began when he was only 10 years
old. In other words, he was 10 years of age when the first verses of the
Holy Qur'an were revealed to the Holy Prophet. He received them as
zealously as a thirsty person would receive pure water. Till the last
moments of the Holy Prophet's life he headed the scribes of revelation.
He knew the Holy Qur'an by heart and recited it regularly. At night his
most favorite act of worship was the recitation of the Holy Qur'an.

In these circumstances if it had been possible to emulate the style of
the Holy Qur'an, Imam Ali with his unrivalled eloquence would certainly
have done so. Influenced by the style of the Holy Qur'an as he was, his
sermons would have taken the form of the Qur'anic verses. But as we
know, his style is quite different from that of the Holy Qur'an.

When Imam Ali in his eloquent sermons quotes a verse of the Holy
Qur'an, it always has a distinctive look and shines like an
extraordinarily bright star among other stars.

The Holy Qur'an has not used the themes which are usually selected by
the human beings in order to display their rhetorical skill, such as
self-glorification, panegyric, satire, elegy, love-songs and description
of natural scenery. The Holy Qur'an has not dealt with any of these
themes. Its subjects are all spiritual, such as Monotheism,
Resurrection, Prophethood, ethical duties, rules of law, religious
exhortations and moral stories. However, its diction is remarkably
superb and extremely beautiful, in every case.

The arrangement of the words in the Holy Qur'an is matchless. Nobody
can change the position of a single word without damaging its beauty nor
can anybody produce a like of it. In this respect the Holy Qur'an is
comparable to a beautiful building in which no alteration can be made,
nor can anybody construct a building better than it or like it. The
style of the Holy Qur'an is unprecedented and will ever remain
unrivalled. In spite of the challenge of the Holy Qur'an, no one has
ever been able to rival or emulate it.

The challenge of the Holy Qur'an is still valid and will ever remain
so. Even now the faithful Muslims invite the people the world over to
take part in the competition suggested by the Holy Qur'an. They say that
if the like of the Holy Qur'an was produced, they would give up their
faith. They are sure that such a thing cannot happen and would never
happen.


