Chapter 8: Distinguishing Features of Islam
===========================================

Islam is the name of the religion of Allah. That is the religion
preached by all Prophets. The most perfect form of it was conveyed to
people through the last Prophet, Muhammad bin Abdullah. (May peace and
blessings of Allah be on him and his progeny) With him the Prophethood
came to an end. The message given by him is now known by the name of
Islam throughout the world.

The Islamic teachings conveyed through the last Prophet, being the
everlasting guide and the most perfect form of the religion of Allah,
have certain special features consistent with the period of finality.
These features in their totality could not exist during previous ages,
the period of the minority of people.

Each of these features is a means of knowing Islam, and represents one
of its basic doctrines. These features help forming a picture of Islam,
though it may be a bit vague. They are also a criterion by which it can
be judged whether a particular teaching is or is not a part of Islam.

We do not say that it is possible for us to mention all these features,
but we will try to present an overall picture of them.

We know that every ideology, or for that matter, every school of
thought, which offers a programme for the salvation, perfection and
prosperity of man, also puts forward certain values and prescribes
certain do's and don'ts, should and shouldn'ts on the level of the
individual or society. Every ideology says what should happen and what
should be done, and determines the general policy and the aims to be
pursued, for example it may lay down that everybody should be free and
should live a free life.

Everybody should be bold and brave and should make continuous progress
in order to attain perfection. A society should be built on the basis of
justice and fair play, making an advance towards proximity to Allah.

These 'do's' and 'don'ts' should naturally be based on some philosophy
capable of explaining them. In other words it is but natural that the
injunctions of an ideology should be based on a particular conception of
the world, man and society according to which it may be said that such
and such should be like this or like that, because the world or man or
society is like this.

A conception of the world means the sum-total of the views and
interpretations regarding the world, man and society. In regard to the
world it covers such views as: the world is like this or like that; it
has such and such a law; it goes forward in such and such a way; its
pursuer does not pursue such and such objective; it has or has not an
origin;

it has or has not a purpose. In regard to man the views which
constitute the conception of the world are such as whether man has any
innate nature; whether he is free or predestined; whether he is, in the
words of the Holy Qur'an, a chosen being. As regards man the questions
are: Whether society has a law independent of the laws governing the
individuals; what laws govern society and history; and similar other
questions.

As ideology is always based on a particular conception of the world
which explains why the world, society or man is like this or like that,
and determines what actions man should take and what sort of life he
should lead. The answer of every 'why' of an ideology underlies the
world conception on which it is based. Technically every ideology is a
sort of 'practical wisdom', whereas every conception of the world is a
sort of 'theoretical wisdom'.

Naturally every practical wisdom is based on a particular theory. For
example, the practical wisdom of Socrates is based on his particular
outlook on the world, which forms his theoretical wisdom. Similar is the
relation between the practical wisdom of Epicurus and others and their
theoretical wisdom.

As various people have different conceptions of the world naturally
their ideologies vary.

Now a question arises why there are so many conceptions of the world or
so many cosmologies? Why should one school of thought look at the world
in one way and another school in another way?

The answer to this question is not so simple. Some people have gone to
the extent of asserting that it is the class position of an individual
that determines his attitude and outlook and puts special glasses on his
eyes through which he sees the world. According to this theory the
methods of production and distribution create reactions that shape the
mentality and the views of an individual in a certain fashion depending
on how favorably or adversely he is affected by these methods. The views
thus formed affect his judgement and his evaluation of the things.
Mowlawi says:

"If you feel giddy, you will find the whole house whirling round; if
you travel in a boat, you will find the shore moving along with you; if
you are distressed on account of some bad event you will find the whole
world boring; if you are happy, you will find everything pleasant. You
being a part of the world, you see as if the whole world is like you".

According to this theory nobody can claim that his view alone is
correct and the view of others is wrong, for the views are a relative
matter only. They are the outcome of an individual's contact with his
natural and social environment. Hence everybody's views may be presumed
to be correct as far as he himself is concerned.

Anyhow, the matter is not so simple. There is no denying the fact that
a man's thinking is greatly influenced by his environment. But it also
cannot be denied that man is endowed with a faculty of independent
thinking free from any influence. It is this faculty which has been
termed by Islam as the innate nature of man. We may deal with this
question in detail on some other occasion.

Even if we hold that man has no independent, in fact, realistic
thinking, it is still too early at this stage of cosmology to blame
him.

What the modern philosopher who have made a close study of this
question admit that the root-cause of the variety of conceptions of the
world should be looked for in what is called the theory of knowledge.

The philosophers have paid enough attention to this theory. Some of
them have asserted that philosophy is not cosmology. It is only the
methodology of the pursuit of knowledge. The reason why there are so
many cosmological theories is that there are several methods of knowing
the world.

Some say that the world should be known through reason. Some others are
of the opinion that the knowledge of the world can be acquired only
through illumination and inspiration. So there is a difference of
opinion about the method, the source and the criterion of attaining the
knowledge of the world. According to some reason has a very limited role
in this respect, but according to others its role is unlimited.

In short, the ideology of every school is based on its conception of
the world, which in its turn is based on its theory of knowledge. How
far an ideology is progressive depends on how far its conception of the
world is progressive, which in its turn depends on how far its method of
attaining knowledge is progressive.

In fact the practical wisdom of every school depends on its theoretical
wisdom that is its way of thinking. Therefore it is necessary that every
school must in the first instance make its way of thinking clear.

Islam is not a school of philosophy and has not talked in philosophical
terms. It has its own terminology, which is intelligible to all classes
in accordance with their particular level of understanding. It is
astonishing that though it has referred to these questions only in
between other subjects, its ideology in the form of practical thinking
and its world conception in the form of a logical doctrine can easily be
deduced from its teachings.

Evidently here we have to be contented with making a reference only to
Islamic world conception, and cannot dwell at length on the valuable
views expressed by Muslim scholars such as jurists, philosophers,
mystics and other thinkers on the questions of Islamic Ideology, Islamic
World Conception and the Methods of Acquiring Knowledge. Should we make
such an attempt, the task is likely to be voluminous.

At the most we can produce a list, though incomplete, of the main
features of Islamic views on these questions. We may be able to complete
the list on some other occasion.

A list of the main features of the views of Islam under their
appropriate headings, viz. The -Methods of Knowing, Conception of the
World and the Ideological Features of Islam is as under.


