Chapter 4: Religion Or Religions
================================

The scholars of divinity and the writers on the history of religion
usually discuss their subject under the heading of religions. For
example, they talk of Prophet Ibrahim's religion, the Jewish religion,
the Christian religion and the religion of Islam. They regard every
Prophet to whom a code of law was revealed as the founder of a separate
religion.

But the Holy Qur'an has its own terminology and its own style. From its
point of view there has been only one Divine religion from the beginning
to the end. All Prophets irrespective of the fact whether they had or
had not an independent code of law, had the same mission and preached
the same message.

Their basic principles called religion were the same. Their teachings
differed only in rules and subsidiary matters of secondary importance
which varied according to the requirements of the time, the
peculiarities of the environment and the characteristics of the people
whom these Prophets addressed.

But in spite of the difference in the form of their teachings, all
Prophets visualized one single goal. Apart from the difference of form
there was a difference of level also. The Prophets who came later, their
teachings were of a higher level in keeping with the stage of the human
development.

For example, there is a vast difference in the level of the teachings
of Islam and those of the earlier Prophets in respect of the genesis of
man, the Hereafter and the conception of the world. In other words man
vis-a-vis the teachings of the Prophets is like a student who is brought
up step by step from class I to the highest class. This process
signifies the development of religion, not the difference of religions.
The Holy Qur'an has nowhere here used the word religion in a plural
form.

From the point of view of the Holy Qur'an what has existed is the
religion, not the religions. There exists one big difference between the
Prophets and the great philosophers and other outstanding social
leaders. Each eminent philosopher has had his own school. That is why so
many schools of philosophy have always existed in the world. In
contrast, the Prophets have always corroborated and never contradicted
each other. Had any one of the Prophets lived in the time and
environment of another Prophet, he would have preached the rules of law
and conduct similar to those preached by the latter.

The Holy Qur'an declares expressly that all Prophets form one single
series. The earlier Prophets foretold about the later ones, and the
latter Prophets acknowledged the earlier ones. The Holy Qur'a'n also
says that Allah made a covenant with the Prophets to the effect that
they would believe in each other and help each other. It says:

"When Allah made the covenant with the Prophets, He said. 'Here are the
Scripture and the wisdom which I have given you. Later a Prophet will
come to you confirming what you possess. You shall believe in Him and
you shall help him. He then said: 'Do you agree to this and take the
responsibility I placed on you?' They answered: 'We agree. He said:
'Then bear witness and I will bear witness with you." (Surah Ale Imran,
3:81)

The Holy Quran calls the Divine religion Islam and described it as a
continuous process from Adam to the last Prophet. This does not mean
that the Divine religion has always been known by this name. What is
meant is that Islam is the best word to describe the nature of this
religion. That is why the Holy Qur'an says:

"There is no doubt that the only true faith in Allah's sight is Islam."
(Surah Ale Imran, 3:19)

At another place the Holy Qur'an says:

"Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian. He was upright in faith and
a Muslim"(Surah Ale Imran, 3:67)


