Miracles of the Final Prophet
=============================

Furthermore, the view expressed by Dr Iqbal that revelation is a sort
of instinct, is also wrong. This view has led him to make several other
mistakes. As Dr Iqbal himself is fully conscious, of the fact, an
instinct is a purely innate, unacquired and unconscious propensity. It
is a faculty lower than senses and intellect with which the primitive
animals such as insects and other animals of a class lower than that of
insects have been provided according to the law of creation.

With the development of other means of guidance such as senses and
intellect, instinct is weakened and becomes dormant. That is why man,
who among the animals enjoys the highest degree of thinking power, has
the weakest instinctive power.

In contrast, revelation is a means of guidance which ranks higher than
senses and intellect and to a great extent is something which is
acquired. Above all, it is the highest degree of consciousness, and the
field in which it makes discoveries is far vaster than the field in
which experimental intellect can work.

In a previous section of this book, while discussing the question of
ideology, we have proved that in view of the variety of the individual
and social capabilities of man, complexity of his social relations and
the dubiousness of the end of his evolutionary journey, the ideologies
propounded by the philosophers and sociologists are misleading and
bewildering. There is only one way open to man to have a sound ideology
and that is the way of revelation. If we do not accept the way of
revelation, we shall have to admit that man is unable to have an
ideology at all.

The modern thinkers believe that the future line of the development of
mankind can be determined through human ideologies only stage by stage.
In other words, at every stage only the next stage can be determined,
and that too according to the belief of these gentlemen. As for the
subsequent stages and whether there exists any final stage at all,
nothing is known. The fate of such ideologies is evident.

We wish that Dr Iqbal, who more or less studied the works of the Muslim
Gnostics and was especially devoted to the Mathnavi of Rumi, could have
gone deeper into these works and found a better explanation of the
finality of Prophethood. The Gnostics say that Prophethood terminated
because all the individuals and social stages of human development along
with the way that man should follow to attain them were revealed all
together. As thereafter none could discover anything additional, it was
the duty of everyone to follow this last message.

The sufis say: that the final is he, who has finalized all stages, and
leaves no stage uncovered. This is the basis of finality, not the
development of the experimental intelligence of society as conceived by
Dr Iqbal. If he had made a deeper study of the works of only those sufis
to whom he himself was devoted; (like Rumi), he could know that
revelation is not an instinct. It is a spirit and soul superior to the
rational spirit. Rumi, the mystic poet says:

"Know that the soul of man is different from that of a cow and a
donkey, and again the soul of a Prophet and a saint (holy man) is
different from that of an ordinary man."

"The body is visible, but the soul is hidden. Again intellect is more
hidden than soul. The spirit of revelation is still more hidden. The
intellect of the Holy Prophet could be perceived by anybody. But the
spirit of his revelation was not so perceptible".

"He was guided by the Protected Tablet and that is why was protected
from any mistake and error. Divine revelation is neither astrology nor
geomancy nor a dream. It is a fact and reality".

It appears that Dr Iqbal has unconsciously made the same mistake as was
made by the Western world, which holds that knowledge has replaced
faith. Of course Dr Iqbal was severely opposed to this theory of
replacement. But his philosophy of the finality of Prophethood somehow
leads to the same conclusion. Dr Iqbal describes revelation as a sort of
an instinct.

He also asserts that instincts cease to function when intellectual and
thinking faculties begin to work. This remark of his is correct but is
applicable to those cases in which thinking power performs the same
function that was previously performed by an instinct. But in those
cases in which their functions are different, there is no reason why an
instinct should cease to work when thinking power becomes active.

Therefore even if we suppose that Divine revelation is a sort of
instinct whose function is to put forward a sort of world conception and
an ideology not produced by intellect and thinking power, there, is no
reason why with the development of inductive intellect, in the words of
Dr Iqbal, the function of this instinct should come to an end.

The fact is that Dr Iqbal in spite of all his outstanding talent,
extraordinary intelligence and love of Islam is basically a product of
Western culture, for his entire education was Western, though he made
some studies in Islamic culture, especially in Islamic law, mysticism
and philosophy. That is the reason why he sometimes makes grave
mistakes.

In the preface of our book, Principles of Philosophy and Method of
Realism, vol. V, we have referred to the faultiness of Dr Iqbal's ideas
about deep philosophical questions. That is why it is not proper to draw
a comparison between him and Sayyid Jamiluddin Asadabadi.14 Though from
the viewpoint of mental endowments Jamaluddin is not comparable to Dr
Iqbal, his original education was Islamic and Western education was only
his secondary acquisition.

In addition, the late Jamaluddin, owing to his vast travels in the
Muslim countries and a close study of their affairs was more conversant
than Dr Iqbal with the situation in the Muslim world. Therefore unlike
Dr lqbal he did not make any grave mistakes in evaluating certain events
which took place in some Muslim countries like Turkey and Iran, for he
could judge them better.

**Notes**

14. Popularly known as Jamaluddin Afghani.


