Chapter 6: Miracle of Finality
==============================

The Holy Qur'an is the everlasting miracle of the last Prophet. The
miracles of the former Prophets like Prophet Ibrahim, Prophet Musa and
Prophet 'Isa, each of whom had a revealed Book and also wrought
miracles, were distinct from their revealed Books. They wrought such
miracles as the transformation of a blazing fire into 'coolness and
peace', the conversion of a dry piece of wood into a serpent and
bringing the dead to life.

Obviously each of these miracles was temporary and passing. But in the
case of the last Prophet his Book itself was his miracle. It is the
proof of his Prophethood. As such, the miracle of finality, unlike any
other miracle, is everlasting, not passing nor meant only for the time
being.

The fact that a Divine Book is the miracle of the last Prophet is
absolutely in comformity with his time, the age of the advancement of
science, knowledge, culture and education. The eternity of this Holy
Book is also in consonance with the eternity of its message which is
never to be abrogated.

The Holy Qur'an in several verses of it has expressly proclaimed this
extraordinary and superhuman aspect of itself. One of these verses
says:

"If you are in doubt about what We have revealed to Our bondman, then
bring a chapter like it." (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:23)

It has also expressly mentioned several other miracles wrought by the
last Prophet.

The Holy Qur'an has dwelt on a number of questions related to the
miracles. It declares that a Divine message must be accompanied by some
miracles, that a miracle is a decisive evidence and definite proof, that
the Prophets work the miracles by the will of Allah and that they work
them to prove the veracity of their claim, and that they are not bound
to accede to every request of everybody in this respect. In other words,
the Prophets are not expected to hold an exhibition of miracles or to
set up a factory of them.

As the Holy Qur'an has dealt with these questions, it has also
expressly recounted the stories of the miracles of many of the former
Prophets like Nuh, Ibrahim, Lut, Salih, Hud, Musa and 'Isa, and has
categorically confirmed them.

Some orientalists and Christian clergymen on the basis of those verses
in which the Holy Qur'an responded negatively to the demand of the
idolaters to work the miracles proposed by them, have claimed that the
Prophet of Islam told the people that he had no miracle other than the
Holy Qur'an, and if they did not accept it, he could do nothing further.
Some 'liberal-minded' Muslim writers also have accepted this view, and
explaining it, they say that the miracle is an argument which can
convince only immature humanity looking for something extraordinary and
fantastic.

A mature man is not impressed by such things and is concerned only with
the things rational. As the age of the Prophet of Islam was that of
rationality, not of myths and fancy, he declined by the will of Allah to
accept any request for a miracle besides the Holy Qur'an. One writer
says:

"To seek the help of the miracles was unavoidable for the former
Prophets, for in those days it was almost impossible for them to
convince people with any rational arguments. At the time the Prophet of
Islam appeared, humanity had passed the period of its minority. It had
reached the stage of its intellectual majority.

The child of yesterday no longer depended on his mother and was able to
stand on his own feet and use his brain. In such circumstances it was
not unreasonable that the Prophet of Islam resisted the pressure of the
disbelievers and his opponents demanding from him to work miracles. To
prove the truth of his mission he solely relied on rational arguments
and historical evidence.

In spite of the insistence of the disbelievers the Prophet of Islam by
the order of Allah refused to work miracles similar to those of the
former Prophets. He relied on the Holy Qur'an alone as an incomparable
miracle. Its incomparability is in itself a proof of the finality of
Prophethood. It is a Book that contains truths, teachings and guidance
in complete conformity with all aspects of life. It is a miracle worthy
of mature humanity, not an immature humanity believing in myths and
fables."

The so called our liberal-minded Muslim writer adds:

"The atmosphere in which the ancient man lived was always full of
myths, idle stories and supernatural ideas. Hence he was not impressed
by anything unless it was contrary to what was reasonable and
perceptible. That is why we find mankind throughout history to be fond
of what is unknown and in search of what is supernatural.

This sentimental attitude towards what is imperceptible and
unreasonable is more acute among the more uncivilized. The more men are
close to nature, the more they are fond of what is extra-natural. Myths
are an evil outcome of this situation. The man of the desert is always
looking for a miracle.

His world is full of spirits and wonderful mysteries. The spirit of a
primitive man is moved only by what is marvellous and mysterious. That
is why we see that not only the Prophets, but also the kings, the heroes
and the sages of every nation have resorted to something supernatural to
justify what they claimed. In these circumstances the Prophet whose
mission was based on the invisible had to have recourse to a miracle
more than others, for at this period of history supernatural events were
more effective than logic, science and indisputable facts".

However, the life of Prophet Muhammad (Peace be on him and his progeny)
is an exception to this rule. He announced that his miracle is a Book.
He made this announcement in a society, in the largest commercial city
of which the number of those who knew the art of writing was not more
than seven. This society never thought of anything other than boasting,
the sword, the camel and the male child.

It is in itself a miracle that in this society he announced that his
miracle was a Heavenly Book. He announced this in a country where no
Heavenly Book ever existed. His Lord, Allah, the Creator swears by the
ink, the pen and the writing before a people who regarded the pen as the
tool of a few helpless and weak persons.

This is a miracle in itself. Only that Book is a miracle which can
always be seen. Unlike any other miracle it is the only miracle the
marvellous and extraordinary nature of which can be more accurately
understood and appreciated by those who are more wise and more learned
in comparatively advanced and cultured societies. It is the only miracle
the belief in which is not confined to those who have faith in
supernatural things.

Its super-naturalness can be acknowledged by any knowledgeable person.
It is the only miracle which is not for the common people. It is for the
intelligentsia, unlike other miracles it is not intended to stimulate
the admiration of the onlookers and to persuade them to accept a message
on that basis. It is meant to educate those who accept it. It is a
message in itself.

The miracle of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (Peace be on him and his
progeny), though not a human product, is not something not concerned
with the human beings. Unlike the miracles of the past, it is not a
device used only to make people believe, and having no other use. But
his miracle represents a sort of the display of the highest human
talent. It is also the best model for exercise and training, and for
that a model which is always available.

The Holy Prophet tried to divert human inquisitiveness from what was
extraordinary and supernatural to the rational, logical and intellectual
problems and social and moral questions. His task was not so easy,
especially in view of the fact that the people with whom he had to deal
were not willing to submit to anything except what was unnatural.

It is really astonishing how he called himself a Prophet, invited
people to accept his Divine message and at the same time admitted
formally that he was not aware of the "unknown". Apart from the human
value of this admission, what is striking is the extraordinary truth
which is felt in his actions and which compels every heart to bow to him
in admiration and respect. Some people asked him to foretell what price
their goods were to fetch so that they might plan accordingly to be able
to earn profit and make money. The Holy Qur'an ordered him to say:

"I have no power to acquire for myself a benefit or to avert any
trouble except by the will of Allah. If I had the knowledge of the
unknown, I would have certainly acquired for myself much that is good
and no harm would have touched me. I am no more than the one who gives
warning and brings good news to a believing people." (Surah al-A'raf,
7:188)

A Prophet who could make no prophecy, who did not converse with the
spirits, the fairies and the jinn and who did not work a miracle every
day, was no good in the sight of the people of the desert. The Holy
Prophet called upon them to look into the universe, to observe piety,
uprightness and faith, to acquire knowledge and to understand the
meaning of life and destiny, but they ceaselessly continued to ask him
to work a miracle and make a prophecy. On the other hand Allah prompted
him to say:

"Glory be to my Lord! I am no more than a human messenger." (Surah Bani
Isra'il, 17:93)

Those who deny the occurrence of miracles rely mostly on the following
Qur'anic verses saying:

"They say: We will not believe you unless you make a spring gush forth
from the earth for us; or you have a garden of date-palms and cause
rivers to flow abundantly in their midst; or you cause the sky to fall
on us in pieces as you have asserted, or you bring Allah and the angels
before us; or you have a house of gold; or you ascend to heaven. But
even then we will not believe in you until you bring down for us a book
which we can read. Say: Glory be to my Lord. I am nothing but a human
messenger." (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:90 - 93)

They say that these verses show that the idolaters asked the Holy
Prophet to work a miracle other than the Holy Qur'an, but he declined to
accede to their demand.

Unfortunately we cannot agree to this theory, especially in view of the
points mentioned above and in view of what we have said in regard to the
superiority of the Holy Qur'an to all other miracles. From our point of
view the disputable points are as under:

\* The Prophet of Islam had no miracle other than the Holy Qur'an. He
refused to fulfill the demand of the idolaters who wanted him to produce
some other miracle. The verses of the Surah Bani Isra'il prove this
point.

\* As for the value and effectiveness of miracles, it may be said that
they were compatible with the period of the minority of mankind when
reason and logic were not effective. Even the sages and the kings had
recourse to supernatural things to justify themselves. The Prophets also
had to resort to them to convince their people. The Prophet of Islam
whose miracle is a Book is an exception to this rule. He justifies
himself by means of a Book or actually by reason and logic.

\* The Prophet of Islam tried to divert the attention of the people
from the unusual and supernatural things to the rational and logical
questions and to turn their sensitivity from wonders to the actualities
and facts.

Now let us discuss one by one the points made by the opponents of the
miracles: Is it true that the Prophet of Islam had no miracle except the
Holy Qur'an? Apart from the fact that this view is unacceptable from the
viewpoint of history and traditions reported by numerous authorities, it
is contrary even to what the Holy Qur'an itself says. The miracle of the
split of the moon is mentioned in the Holy Qur'an itself. Suppose
someone explains away the verse mentioning this miracle, though it is
not amenable to any explanation, how will the story of the ascension of
the Holy Prophet mentioned in the Surah Bani Isra'il be explained? The
Holy Qur'an expressly says:

"Glory be to Him who carried His slave by night from the Masjidul Haram
(in Makkah) to the Masjidul Aqsa' (in Jerusalem), the precincts of which
We have blessed. (We took him on this journey) to show him some of Our
signs." (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:1)


**Is this occurrence not a supernatural event and a miracle?**

In Surah at-Tahri'm there is an event saying that the Holy Prophet told
a secret in confidence to one of his wives who divulged it to another
wife of his. The Holy Prophet asked the first wife why she disclosed the
secret to the second one and recounted a part of the conversation which
had transpired between the two.

That wife was surprised and asked the Holy Prophet how he came to know
all that. The Holy Prophet replied that Allah had apprised him of the
event. When the Holy Prophet confided a fact to one of his wives and
when she afterwards divulged it and Allah apprised him thereof, he made
known to her of part thereof and passed over the rest. And when he told
it to her, she said: "Who has told you?" He said: "The Knower, the Aware
has told me". Does this not mean telling the unknown?

Is this not a miracle? What has been mentioned in Surah Bani Isra'il,
17:90 - 93 and some other verses does not at all indicate what has been
inferred from it. The idolaters were not asking for a proof of
Prophethood and sign with a view to gain satisfaction. They were
actually asking for something else. These verses as well as Surah
al-'Ankabut, 29:50 throw ample light on the unique mentality of the
idolaters who were apparently demanding a miracle. These verses also
make clear the philosophy of the Holy Qur'an about the miracles of the
Prophets.

In Surah Bani Isra'il the idolaters begin their talk saying virtually:
"We will not join you unless you on your part make a spring gush forth
for us in this arid land of Makkah." This is just a bargain.

They further say: "Or you have a garden of date palms with rivers
flowing in their midst or you have a house full of gold, so that we may
share these things with you."This is again a bargain, as they wanted
these things for their own benefit.

They say: "Or you cause the sky to fall on us in pieces as you think
that it will fall on the Day of Resurrection."

This is asking for a punishment and the end of everything, though
apparently they asked for a miracle.

"Or you ascend to heaven or you bring Allah and the angels be fore us."
(Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:90 - 93)

This is again a bargain, though this time they were not asking for
riches, but were asking for something they could be proud of. Anyhow,
they ignored the fact that it was impracticable to fulfill their
demand.

The words actually used by the idolaters are notable. They did not
says: 'Lan numina bika', that is we will not believe you. Instead they
said: 'Lan numina laka', meaning we will not join you to your advantage.
This difference in meaning has been pointed out by the scholars of the
principles of jurisprudence while explaining similar expressions in
Surah at-Tawbah, 9:61. Further, the intention of the idolaters is clear
from the way they put their demand.

They asked the Holy Prophet to make a spring gush forth for them in
exchange for their support and expedient faith. Evidently this is a
demand for remuneration and not for a proof and a miracle. The Holy
Prophet came to make the people believers, not to purchase their opinion
and faith.

The writer whom we quoted above, says:

"The idolaters asked the Holy Prophet to foretell the price their goods
would fetch so that they could earn profit". Evidently this demand for a
miracle was not made in order to know the truth. They wanted to use the
Prophet as a means of making money. Naturally his reply was: "If I had
the knowledge of the unknown, I would have certainly used it to acquire
for myself much that is good in this world. Obviously miracles are not
meant for such purposes. I am a Prophet. I only give warning and bring
good news to a believing people".

The idolaters thought that the Prophet could work a miracle to order,
any time and for any purpose. That is why they wanted him to make a
spring gush forth, to have a house of gold and make a prophecy about the
market rates. But the fact is that a miracle is just like a
revelation.

Its occurrence is determined from "that side", not "from this". Just as
a revelation is not subject to the wish of the Prophet and is a process
which influences his will, similarly a miracle is also a process that
proceeds from the other side and influences the will of the Prophet,
though it is worked by him. That is what the words; 'by the will of
Allah' signify both in the case of a revelation and a miracle. And that
is what is meant by the following verse of Surah al-'Ankabut, which has
been misinterpreted by the Christian missionaries:

"The signs are with Allah alone. I am nothing but a plain warner".
(Surah al-'Ankabut, 29:50)

The same is the case with the revealing of the unknown miraculously. As
far as the personality of the Holy Prophet is concerned, he is not aware
of the unknown. The Holy Qur'an says:

"Say: I do not say to you that I am an angel, nor am I aware of the
unknown."

But when he comes under a supernatural influence he tells of what is
hidden, and when he is asked how he knew that, he replies that Allah,
the All-knowing apprised him of the unknown matter.

When the Holy Prophet says that he does not know the unknown and if he
had known it he would have earned a lot of money through that knowledge,
he wants to refute the false presumption of the idolaters; and makes it
clear that the knowledge of the unknown falls within the range of a
miracle for he receives it through Divine revelation only. Had his
knowledge of the unknown been automatic and had he been able to use it
for any purpose he liked, he would have used it to fill his own coffers
instead of telling the future market rates to others in order to enable
them to fill their pockets.

In another verse the Holy Qur'an says:

"He is the knower of what is hidden and He reveals His secret to none,
except to a Messenger He has chosen." (Surah al-Jinn, 72:26 - 27)

The Holy Prophet was certainly His chosen Messenger.

Furthermore, the Holy Qur'an has recounted many miracles of the former
Prophets like Prophet Ibrahim, Prophet Musa and Prophet 'Isa. Then how
was it possible that the Holy Prophet when asked to work a miracle like
that of the former Prophets; should say that he was no more than a human
messenger? Had not the idolaters a right to retort and say: "You
yourself describe the miracles of the former Prophets so eloquently.
Were they not human beings or were they not Prophets?" Is it possible
that such a glaring contradiction should exist in the Holy Qur'an? Is it
imaginable that the idolaters did not take notice of such a glaring
contradiction?

Should the thinking of these liberal-minded be correct, the Holy
Prophet instead of saying: "Glory be to Allah! I am no more than a human
messenger", should have said: "Glory be to Allah! I being the last
Prophet am excluded from the rule applicable to other Prophets.
Therefore do not ask me to do, what the other Prophets were asked to
do". Anyhow, he did not say so. On the other hand he said: "I am a
messenger like all other messengers".

This shows that what the idolater, demanded from the Holy Prophet was
not a miracle or a sign with a view to find out the truth. They were
asking for something else and their demand was such that the Prophets
usually do not accede to it. That is why the Holy Prophet declined to
give a positive reply to their selfish and arrogant demand. They were
actually asking for something impossible.

We admit that the common people are inclined to invent the stories of
the miracles and ascribe them not only to the Prophets and the Imams but
even to any grave, stone or tree. But that is no reason why we should
deny that the Holy Prophet had miracles other than the Holy Quran.

Further, there is a difference between a Prophetic miracle and a
saintly miracle. A Prophetic miracle is a Divine sign and a proof to
prove that there is a Divine assignment. It is always linked together
with a challenge.

It has certain special conditions and takes place for a special
purpose. As for a saintly miracle, that is a supernatural event which is
purely an outcome of the spiritual power and personal sanctity of a
perfect or a semi-perfect man and does not take place to prove the truth
of any Divine mission. It is almost an affair with no special conditions
attached to it. A Prophetic miracle is the voice of Allah in support of
a particular person. But that is not the case with a saintly miracle.


