Value and Effect of a Miracle
=============================

What is the value of a miracle? The logicians and the philosophers
divide the material that is used to argue a case into several kinds.
Some arguments have a proving value. They are something beyond any
reasonable doubt, as is the case with the data used by a mathematician.
Some other arguments have only a persuasive value, as is the case with
the arguments advanced by the rhetoricians. If the arguments of the
latter are analysed, they often do not prove to be convincing. But so
long as they are not dissected, they prove quite moving. Some other
arguments are merely emotional or have some other value.

**Value of a Miracle from the Viewpoint of the Qur'an**

The Holy Qur'an describes the miracles of the Prophets as the signs and
clear proofs, and regards them as a convincing and logical evidence of
the existence of Allah in the same way as it regards the creation as the
incontrovertible proof of His existence.

The Holy Qur'an has elaborately dwelt on the question of the miracles.
It considers the demand of the people for a miracle and their refusal to
submit to the Prophets unless a sign was shown to them, to be reasonable
and justified, provided the demand was not made for ulterior motives or
just as a pastime. It has eloquently narrated many stories of the
practical response of the Prophets to such demands. The Holy Qur'an has
nowhere indicated that a miracle is only a persuasive argument suitable
to the simple-minded people and appropriate to the period of the
minority of mankind. On the other hand it has called it a clear proof.


**Nature of the Holy Prophet's Guidance**

The miracle of the 'Finality' being a Book, a piece of literature and a
treasure of culture and knowledge, is an everlasting miracle. Many of
its miraculous aspects are still gradually coming to light. Some
wonderful features of the Holy Qur'an which have become known to the
people of our times were not known and could not be known in the past.
The value of a Book-miracle is better grasped by the thinkers than by
the common people. It is true that this miracle because of its special
merits,

is appropriate to the period of the finality, but, is it also true that
this miracle has the nature of a Book because it is intended, among
other things, to divert the attention of man from the unknown to the
known, from the unreasonable to the reasonable and logical, and from the
supernatural to the natural, Does the Holy Prophet try to draw of the
inquisitiveness of people from the unusual and supernatural things to
the rational, logical, intellectual, scientific, social and moral
questions and to turn their sensitivity from wonders to the realities?

That does not appear to be true. Should it be true, that would mean
that all other Prophets were inviting people to the unknown and only the
Holy Prophet invited them to the known. If this is the case, then why
have hundreds of the verses of the Holy Qur'an been devoted to the
description of miracles?

Undoubtedly it is one of the basic distinctions of the Holy Qur'an that
it calls for the study of nature and describes the natural phenomena as
Divine signs. But a call for the study of nature does not mean diverting
the attention of people from everything that does not pertain to nature.
On the other hand a call for the study of natural phenomena as signs
means passing from nature to what is beyond nature and from what is
perceptible to what is intelligible.

The importance of the work of the Holy Prophet lies in the fact that
just as he calls the people for the study of nature, history and
society, he also persuades those who submit to nothing but supernatural
to submit to reason, logic and science also. He similarly tries to make
those who are fond of reason and logic and submit to nothing but what is
natural and perceptible, to get acquainted with a higher logic as
well.

The basic difference between the world presented by the religion on the
whole, and especially by Islam, and the world depicted by purely human
sciences and philosophies, is that as William James has put it, in the
construction of the world of religion certain other elements have gone
in addition to the material elements and the laws generally recognized
by mankind.

The Holy Qur'an does not want to divert the attention from natural and
perceptible things to supernatural and imperceptible things. The
importance of the Holy Qur'an lies in the fact that besides paying
attention to what is natural or in the words of the Holy Quran, is the
seen, it puts the belief in the unseen in the forefront of its
teachings:


"This is the Book about which there is no doubt. It is a guidance to
the pious, who believe in the unseen." (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:2 - 3)

How can the Holy Qur'an divert the attention of people from what is
supernatural when it is itself a miracle and so many other miracles have
been described in more than hundred verses of it.

We are unable to understand what is meant by saying that the Book is
the only miracle, the belief in which is not confined to those who
believe in the supernatural things.

What belief? Does the writer mean the belief that the Holy Qur'an is a
Book the contents of which are very valuable and sublime, or the belief
that it is a miracle? The belief that a thing is miraculous in the sense
that it is a Divine sign, amounts to the belief in its
super-naturalness. How can a man have a belief in a miracle and at the
same time not have a belief in anything supernatural?

It has been said that the miracle of the Prophet of Islam does not
belong to the category of non-human matters though it is a non-human
act. To us the meaning of this statement also is not clear for it can be
interpreted in two ways. Firstly it may mean that the Holy Qur'an being
a revealed Book, not having been composed by the Holy Prophet is a
non-human act, but though it is the word of Allah, not of any human
being, it belongs to the category of human matters and is an ordinary
act, like other human acts.

It appears to be improbable that this is what the writer means, for in
the case of the acceptance of this view, the Holy Qur'an would have no
distinction over other revealed Books. All the other revealed Books have
also issued from the same source of revelation, but as they have no
supernatural aspect, they not belong to the category of superhuman
acts.

There is a category of the sayings of the Holy Prophet known as Hadith
al-Qudsi. These sayings are the revealed words of Allah but still they
are neither miraculous nor superhuman.

The Holy Qur'an is distinguished from other revealed Books and from
Hadith al-Qudsi in that it is superhuman. It is revealed as well as
superhuman and supernatural. That is why the Holy Qur'an says:

"Say: If all human beings and jinn were to combine to produce the like
of the Quran, they would surely fail to compose the like of it, even if
they helped one another." (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:88)

The other interpretation of the above-mentioned statement may be that
unlike the miracles of other Prophets such as converting a staff into a
serpent and bringing the dead to life which definitely do not belong to
the category of human acts, the miracle of Muhammad (Peace be on him and
his progeny) being a sort of learned speech and dissertation, belongs to
that category, but it is still superhuman, having sprung from a
supernatural source.

Should this interpretation be what is intended, and it should be, then
this statement in itself is an admission that there exists what is
supernatural and extraordinary and that there are things which are
unseen and unknown. Then why should we think of a miracle as if it is
something mythical and irrational.

Why should we not from the very beginning distinguish between the
miracles on the one hand and the myths and superstitions on the other,
so that the less-informed people may not form that impression of the
miracles which we do not want them to form. Why instead of saying
clearly and in a straightforward manner that the Book of the Prophet of
Islam is a miracle, should in a roundabout way say that his miracle is a
Book?

In one of the last works of the same writer an article has been
published under the heading: 'The Quran and the Computer'. This article
may be considered to be a correction of his earlier view about the
miraculousness of the Holy Qur'an and a sign of the gradual development
of his thinking.

In this article he has proposed the replacement of the letters of the
Holy Qur'an by the computerized signs and the use of this great
manifestation of human culture for the discovery of the Qur'anic
knowledge. This is a timely and sound suggestion. The writer has hinted
at the endeavours made and being made by some Egyptian and Iranian
scholars in this field.

He has also made an interesting discourse under the caption: 'How to
Prove the Inimitability of the Qur'an'. In this article he has referred
to a valuable book entitled, 'The Process of the Development of the
Qur'an', which has lately been published and in which its learned author
has proved that the size and the length of the verses and the words
revealed to the Holy Prophet in over 23 years form and exact and regular
curve. Commenting on the discovery made in this book the writer says:

"Is there any speaker in the world the year of whose sentences may be
ascertained from their length, especially when these sentences do not
form the text of any literary or scientific book produced by an author
in a regular manner? In contrast, they are the sentences which came from
time to time on the lips of a man over a long period of twenty-three
years of his busy life. They do not form a book written on a particular
subject, nor do they pertain to even any pre-conceived field.

They cover multifarious questions which arose in society from time to
time. Some of them answer the specific queries made, and some others
deal with the problems that came up in the course of a long-drawn
struggle. They were revealed to a great leader and were collected and
arranged later".


