Publisher’s Preface
===================

***In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful***

This is the U.S. edition of the third of eight books written so far by
Yasin T. al-Jibouri, and hopefully the reader will eventually read the
others as well. The first was *Fast of the Month of Ramadan: Philosphy
and Ahkam*, and the second was his best book yet titled *Allah: the
Concept of God in Islam*, and we pray there will be many more! Since the
reader is most likely interested in knowing who the author is, we would
like to state the following:

Al-Jibouri was born on August 14, 1946 in Baghdad, Iraq, and he lived
most of his life in the holy city of al-Kadhimiyya (Kadhimain) where he
presently is living. In 1969, he graduated from the College of Arts,
Baghdad University, where he majored in English which he taught at a
high school in Babylon (Hilla) then at a vocational institute in
al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia, from which he flew in 1972 to the United States
in order to pursue his Graduate degree which he earned in 1978.

In the Winter of 1973, he founded the Islamic Society of Georgia, Inc.
and started in January of 1974 editing and publishing its newsletter
*Islamic Affairs* which evolved from a four-page newsletter to a
twelve-page bulletin, becoming the most widely circulated Shi'a
publication in the United States with readers in all the 50 U.S. States
and in 67 countries world-wide.

In 1975, al-Jibouri received instructions to facilitate the entry to the
United States of the very first representative of the then Supreme
Ayatullah Abul-Qasim al-Khoei, may Allah reward him, in North America,
namely Shaikh Muhammad Sarwar of Quetta, Pakistan. Due to the
sponsorship of the author, Sarwar did, indeed, arrive at the U.S. on
January 25, 1976; a few days later, the Shaikh became al-Jibouri’s
roommate. A few months later, the Shaikh moved from Atlanta to New York
where there has been a much larger Shi'a population.

Al-Jibouri not only writes his books, but he also typesets them and
often designs their covers as well. He developed a passion for
computers, hardware and software, and in March of 1988, he obtained a
Certificate with honours from N.R.I. of Washington, D.C., in
microcomputers and microprocessors and later added to it three more
Certificates in electronics and programming, including advanced
programming. Putting that knowledge together, he wrote more than a
hundred dBASE programs in order to accommodate his extensive and
sophisticated mailing list and those of others, proving that we all
ought to put modern technology at the service of Islam and Muslims.

Presently, he is working as a full-time reporter while studying to be an
Oracle Developer and Database Administrator, and he hopes to spend the
last years of his life designing web-sites for various Shi'a
organizations throughout the world that utilize the Internet to get
their message across. Indeed, the Internet is the wave of the future. It
provides us with the fastest and cheapest way of communication and
advertising as well as publicizing for our faith.

The author has edited and revised three English translations of the Holy
Qur’an by: 1) S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali, 2) A. Yusuf Ali, and 3) M.H. Shakir.
He also edited and typeset several newsletters and magazines, including
*Middle East Business Magazine* of which he became Senior Editor. Among
the other books which he edited are: *Socio-Economic Justice with
Particular Reference to Nahjul-Balagha* by Dr. S.M. Waseem, and *A
Biography of Leaders of Islam* by Sayyid Ali Naqi Naqwi, English
translation by Dr. Sayyid Nazir Hassan Zaidi.

He also edited 14 pamphlets for the youths titled *The Fourteen
Infallibles* which were published in Beirut, Lebanon, in 1419 A.H./1998
A.D. and which were originally written by M.N. Sultan. They are very
professionally produced pamphlets that employ pictorial narratives and
an easy and flowing style, and they ought to be in the possession of
each and every Muslim family raising children and caring for the youths.

The Author has also translated five other books where his name as the
Translator was omitted for selfish reasons; these are: 1) *Best Month,
Best Night*; 2) *The Book of Istikhara*; 3)*Weapon of the Prophets*; 4)
*Miracles of the Holy Qur’an* and 5) *The Great Names of Allah*.

So far, the list of the books which he has written includes the
following titles arranged chronologically according to their completion
but not necessarily the date of publication: 1) *Memoirs of a Shi'a
Missionary in America: Two Decades of Dawah* (his auto-biography which
details his experience in Islamic work in the U.S.), 2) *Fast of the
Month of Ramadan: Philosophy and Ahkam*, 3) *Mary and Jesus in Islam*,
4) *Allah: the Concept of God in Islam*, 5) *Muhammad: Prophet and
Messenger of Allah*, 6) *The Ninety-Nine Attributes of Allah*, 7)
*Karbala’’ and Beyond* (this book), and 8) *Ghadir Khumm: Where Islam
was Perfected*.

In 1980, when Imam Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr was martyred, al-Jibouri
shifted his attention to politics, putting out several pamphlets,
circulars, letters to the news media and two newsletters, *Islamic
Revival* and *Rafidain News*. *Islamic Revival* was dedicated to the
Islamic liberation movements throughout the Muslim world in general and
in Iraq in particular, and it strongly supported the Islamic Revolution
in Iran which was being viciously attacked and distorted by some
anti-Islamic racist and hateful news media in the U.S. and throughout
the West.

Al-Jibouri is a well known translator, and he is the very first person
ever to translate the works of the Martyr Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad
Baqir as-Sadr, the greatest economist, philosopher, author and political
figure in the modern history of Iraq, such as: *A General Outlook at
Rituals* (which was printed in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, in
1979), *Contemporary Man and the Social Problem* (which was also
published in Tehran in 1980), *The General Bases of Banking in the
Muslim Society* (which was published in Maryland, U.S.A., in 1981), and
*What Do You Know About Islamic Economics?* which was published by the
Imamia Center of Lanham, Maryland, U.S.A., in the month of Ramadan 1410
A.H./April 1990 A.D. Al-Jibouri twice published his translation titled
*A General Outlook at Rituals* here in the U.S., getting their latest
registered with the Library of Congress of Washington, D.C.

He also translated and/or published many other titles; among them are:
*A Biography of Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr, The Form of Islamic Government
and Wilayat al-Faqeeh, About the World Political Situation from a
Muslim’s Viewpoint*, and *Our Faith*. The latter work is written by
Sayyid Muhammad Husayn al-Jalali, a famous scholar, researcher, critic
and theologian presently living in Chicago, Illinois. Other works he
translated are: *A Biography of Imam ar-Rida* (by the late Shaikh
Muhammad Jawad Fadlallah, older brother of famous theologian and
political leader Shaikh Muhammad-Husayn Fadlallah); this book was
published in the United Kingdom, *Al-Murajaat: A Shii-Sunni Dialogue*
(by Sharifud-Deen Sadr ad-Deen al-Masawi; this book was published in
Beirut, Lebanon, in 1415 A.H./1995 A.D. and had previously been
translated and published under the title *The Right Path*); it later was
published by Ansariyan in Qum, Iran, first in 2001 then reprinted in
2005 and its fourth edition was reprinted in 2008 and is presently
receiving world-wide circulation through the marketing of international
booksellers in the United States and Europe, *Shi'as are the Ahl
as-Sunnah* (by Dr. Muhammad at-Tijani as-Samawi; this book was published
in New York in 1996 in New York by Vantage Press and is available for
sale on the Internet from both Amazon Books and Barnes and Noble Books,
and its ISBN number is: 0-533-12055-1 and the reader is strongly urged
to get his/her own copy of it; its first copies were sold “like hot
cakes;” therefore, Vantage Press had to reprint it a number of times
till the present), and *Maqtal al-Husayn* by the late Abd ar-Razzaq
al-Muqarram, which is the major reference utilized for the writing of
this book.

Al-Jibouri has also written numerous essays and articles dealing with
various themes. Most of them were published in more than one
publication, whereas he circulated the others on his own throughout the
U.S. and abroad. Several of his articles were published in *Islamic
Monitor*, a fairly short-lived top quality magazine (lived for less than
3 years) which used to be published in Washington, D.C. Among such
articles carried the following headings: “An Interview with Professor
Fazlallah Reza” (once chancellor of the University of Tehran, Ambassador
at Paris to the United Nation’s UNESCO and Ambassador of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to Canada), “Violation of Women’s Rights in Saudi
Arabia,” “Bahrain: A Shameful Human Rights Record,” “The Drug Epidemic,”
and many others. Some of his political writings appeared in *Echo of
Islam*. His other writings also appeared in *Mahjubah* magazine of
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, and in *Jafari Observer* magazine of
Bombay, India, and elsewhere.

Yasin T. al-Jibouri is discussed in detail by Prof. Larry Poston in his
book *Islamic Dawah in the West: Muslim Missionary Activity and the
Dynamics of Conversion to Islam* (New York, United States, and Oxford,
United Kingdom: Oxford University Press, 1992; ISBN No. 0-19-507227-8).
One of the essays which he wrote and circulated is an extensive,
thorough and extremely well researched rebuttal to Samuel P.
Huntington’s famous article “The Clash of Civilizations?” which appeared
in *Foreign Affairs* magazine in the Summer of 1993. His rebuttal is
actually a laborious research which exhausted two weeks of his time and
many sleepless nights and is dated October 26, 1993.

Thanks are due to Sr. Zeinab Donati for her effort to prepare this
book’s manuscript for publication. Her suggestions and input have been
invaluable, and may she be richly rewarded on behalf of all those who
will benefit from this book. May the Almighty assist all of us and keep
our feet firm on His Right Path, *Assirat al-Mustaqeem*, *Allahomma
Aameen*.


