ك،خ K, Kh,
==========

**Ka'bah or** **Kaaba** **كعبه:** the first house of worship built for
mankind, the cubic-shaped structure which is the most sacred to the
Muslims of the world. It was originally built by Adam and was rebuilt by
Abraham and his son Ishmael because it was damaged by torrential rain.
It has the Black Stone which is believed as having been brought by an
angel for Adam from another planet. The stone has been subjected to
tests and analyses which all proved that it was unlike any other on our
planet, thus proving the Muslims' claim that it is not earthly but
cosmic.

It is located in Mecca, the city located in Hijaz to which all Muslims
of the world turn as they perform their five daily prayers and all other
prayers, obligatory or optional. Mecca now is a very modern city with
luxury hotels, malls, commercial centers and all modern facilities, and
its people are most courteous, kind, generous and hospitable. Many
pilgrims did not like to leave it once they had completed their
pilgrimage rituals, so they married there and lived happily ever after.

**Kaffara كفاره:** atonement from sin, a penalty for wrongdoing. It is
great if sinners pay for their sins in this short life for the price
they will have to pay in the Hereafter will be quite dear. Kaffara
sometimes is done by paying a certain amount of money determined by a
jurist which will be distributed to the poor and needy. Other ways of
paying it may be with performance of rituals such as prayers, fast,
pilgrimage, etc.; so, dear reader, if you have committed a sin—who has
not?! —, try to atone for it before it is too late.

**Kafir كافر:** infidel, apostate, atheist, one who does not believe in
the existence of the Creator. The noun *kufr* denotes a person who
refuses to submit to the will of Allah (God), who disbelieves in God. It
also means one who deliberately covers up the truth while fully knowing
it.

**Kalam or** **Kalaam** **كلام:** Talk or speech as in "kalamu-Allah".
It also means logic or philosophy.

**Kalima** **or Kalimah** **كلمه:** Synonymous to "*shahada*," it is a
Muslim's declaration of faith (that is, to testify that there is no god
except Allah, and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah), and it is
always pronounced in Arabic.

**Kantar قنطار:** in Arabic, it is *qintar*, a varying weight of 100
*rals* (rotls); a *ral* in Syria is roughly 3.202 kg., whereas in
England it is 449.28 grams, and in Lebanon it is 2.566 kg.

**Khabir or Khabeer** **خبير:** expert, learned, informed, connoisseur
(of), specialist

**Khafaqan خفقان:** palpitation (of heart, etc.)

**Khala\`a or Khalaa\`ah** **خلاعه:** indecency, immorality, debauchery

**Khaleefa or Khalifah خليفه:** caliph; the word "khalifah" refers to
the successor of Prophet Muhammad (ص) or simply to any ruler who claims
that he rules the Muslims according to the will of the Almighty, whether
he is justified in his claim or not. History has proven that most of
these claims are false! This person sees himself as the head not only of
his country but of the entire Muslim nation, so let us leave him
enjoying this thought! Another title for the khalifah is "Amir
Al-Mu'mineen", Commander of the Faithful, which is explained above.

**Khalis خالص:** whole, clear, pure, candid, genuine, exclusive

**Khandaq خندق:** ditch, moat. This word reminds the Muslims of the
"Battle of the Khandaq" which took place during Islam's early years,
that is, in 627 A.D. First of all, there are two theories about how
contemporary Jews went to and settled in Mecca and Medina. One theory
says that they fled the persecution of the Romans who had by then
subjected Jerusalem, which Jews call Ur-shalom, the city of peace, and
went to Arabia where they felt confident that the Romans would not chase
them there. Arabia at that time did not have much to attract foreign
invaders. Another theory says that these Jews, who spoke Arabic besides
Hebrew and Yiddish, had actually fled away from the persecution of cruel
and fanatical Christian rulers of Nejran, southern Yemen, who were at
the time appointed by the emperors of Abyssinia (Ethiopia).

In Medina, most Jews settled within small fortified towns. Upon settling
down at Khaibar, one of their tribes, Banu Nadir, decided to seek
revenge against the Muslims because of an incident which had taken place
at Medina's main bazaar: A Jewish shop owner went from behind a Muslim
woman and pulled her gown up, exposing her private parts. A Muslim man
noticed the incident, attacked the Jew and killed him. The Jews went
into a riot and contacted the Meccans. Twenty Jewish leaders and 50
others from pagan Quraish made a covenant in the Ka\`ba that as long as
they lived, they would fight Muhammad and the Muslims.

Then the Jews and Quraish contacted their allies and sent emissaries to
a number of tribes. Banu Ghatfan, Banu Asad, Banu Aslam, Banu Ashja\`,
Banu Kinanah and Banu Fizarah readily responded. The Meccans, four
thousand strong, including three hundred cavaliers and fifteen hundred
camels, were joined by six thousand allies from among the Jews and the
bedouin tribes. The three armies set out, ten thousand strong, under the
command of Abu Sufyan in the beginning of the month of Shawwal, 5 A.H.
(the end of February 627 A.D.) to attack Medina.

When news of these preparations reached Medina, the Prophet consulted
his companions, as he always did during such situations. There was
hardly sufficient time to make preparations for the war. He decided this
time to remain within the city and fight back. The stone houses of the
city were built adjacent to one another so as to make a high and
continuous strong wall for a long distance except in the north-west
where a wide open space could afford the enemy an easy entry.

At this place, with the suggestion of Salman al-Farisi, who was familiar
with the mode of defending cities in other countries such as his home
country (Persia), a trench, fifteen feet in width and fifteen feet in
depth, was dug up. Muslims were divided into parties of 10 each, and
each party was allotted 10 yards to dig. The Prophet himself
participated in this task, carrying the excavated earth away.

The *khandaq* (moat) was completed in the nick of time: just 3 days
before the host of the enemies reached Medina. The houses outside the
city were evacuated, and the women and children were accommodated for
safety on the tops of the double-storied houses at the entrenchment.
Muslims could muster only three thousand men to face this huge army, and
they immediately took cover behind the ditch. The Propeht camped in the
center of the entrenchment in a tent of red leather on a space shaped
like a crescent. The camp had the rising ground of Sila\` on its rear
and the trench in the front.

Huyaiy ibn Akhtab, head of Banu Nadir Jews of Medina, met secretly with
Ka\`b ibn Asad, head of Banu Quraizah, another Jewish tribe which was
still in Medina. Huyaiy was the most antagonistic Jew towards the
Prophet (ص). Banu Quraizah, on his instigation, tore down the treaty
which they had concluded with the Muslims. The Jews decided that they
would assist the pagan Quraishites after ten days' preparations and
would attack the rear of Muhammad's army from the north-western side of
the city which was located on the south-east side of their fortress and
which was easily accessible to them.

Rumours reached the Prophet about the Jews' schemes, so he sent two
chiefs, one from the Aws and one from the Khazraj, namely Sa\`d ibn
Mu\`ath and Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah (by the way, the reader may remember this
same Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah whom I mentioned in my book titled *Allah: The
Concept of God in Islam* while discussing the jinns) respectively, to
ascertain the truth.

Both men proceeded to meet the Jews. Having made searching inquiries and
some scouting of their own, they returned to report to the Prophet that
the temper of the Jews was even worse than it had been feared. This news
alarmed the Prophet. It was then necessary to take precautions against
any surprise attack or treachery from the side of those Jews. The
north-western part of the city, which was located on the side of the
Jewish stronghold, was the weakest of all defences.

In order to prtoect the families of his followers throughout the city,
the Prophet, as a meager measure of precaution, had no choice except to
send a considerable number of his men from his already small army of
three thousand to afford them such protection. His men's supplies were
hardly adequate due to the length of the siege of the entrenchment which
formed his defense line. Still, he had no choice except to detach two
parties, one of three hundred men under the command of Zayd ibn
Harithah, his freed slave whom he raised since childhood, and another of
two hundred men under the command of a chieftain from Medina. Their job
was to patrol the streets and the alleys of the city night and day.

This treachery and danger from inside Medina, when Muslims were
surrounded by the combined armies of pagans and Jews of all of Arabia on
the outside, had a telling effect on the Muslims. The enemy was
astonished to see the moat because it was a novel military tactic for
the Arabs. They camped on the outside for 27 (or 24) days. Their number
increased day by day, and many Muslims were extremely terrified, as the
Qur'an portrays for us. Surat al-Ahzab (Chapter 33 of the Holy Qur’an)
describes various aspects of this siege. For example, read the following
verses:

***When they came upon you from above you and from below, and when the
eyes turned dull, and the hearts rose up to the throats, you began to
think diverse thoughts about Allah. There, the believers were tried, and
they wee shaken a tremendous shaking.*** **(Qur'an, 33:10-11)**

At that time, many hypocrites, and even some Muslims whose faith was
weak and who are unfortunately described by some scholars as being
*sahaba*, companions of the Prophet, asked permission to leave the ranks
of the Muslims and to go home:

***A party of them said: O people of Yathrib! There is no place for you
to stand. And a party of them asked permission of the Prophet saying:
Verily our houses are exposed, and they were not exposed; they only
(thus) described (them in order) to flee away.*** **(Qur'an, 33:13)**

The bulk of the army, however, steadfastly withstood the hardship of
inclement weather and rapidly depleting provisions. The coalition's army
hurled arrows and stones at the Muslims.

Finally, a few of Quraish's more valiant warriors, \`Amr ibn Abdwadd,
Nawfal ibn Abdullah ibn Mughirah, Dhirar ibn Khattab, Hubairah ibn Abu
Wahab, \`Ikrimah ibn Abu Jahl (an unbelieving cousin of the Prophet) and
Mirdas al-Fahri, succeeded in crossing the moat.

\`Amr called for battle; nobody responded; he was considered equal to
one thousand warriors. History accounts state that all the Muslims were
as though birds were sitting on their heads: they were too afraid to
raise their heads.

Three times did the Prophet exhort the Muslims to battle \`Amr. Three
times it was only Ali who stood up. In the third time, the Prophet
allowed Ali to go. When Ali was going to the battlefield, the Prophet
said: “The whole faith is going to fight the whole infidelity; the
embodiment of the former bounds is to crush the entirety of the latter.”
The Prophet put his own turban on Ali's head, his own coat of mail over
Ali's body, and he armed Ali with his own sword, Thul-Fiqar, then he
sent him to meet his opponent. Then the Prophet raised his hands to
supplicate thus: “O Allah! \`Obaydah, my cousin, was taken away from me
in the Battle of Badr, Hamzah, my uncle, in Uhud. Be Merciful, O Lord,
not to leave me alone and undefended. Spare Ali to defend me. You are
the best of defenders.”

Ali invited \`Amr to accept Islam or to return to Mecca, or to come down
from his horse since Ali had no horse and was on foot.

“Nephew,” said \`Amr to Ali, being a friend of Ali's father Abu Talib,
“By God I do not like to kill you.” Ali replied, “By God, I am here to
kill you!” \`Amr, now enraged at this reply, alighted from his horse.
Having hamstrung his horse, a token of his resolve never to run away
from the battlefield but either to conquer or to perish, he advanced
towards Ali. They were immediately engaged in a duel, turning the ground
underneath them into a cloud of dust, so much so that for a good while,
only the strokes of their swords could be heard while they themseles
could not be seen. \`Amr succeeded once in inflicting a serious cut on
Ali's head. At last, Ali's voice was heard shouting, “*Allahu Akbar!*
*Allahu Akbar!*” That was his cry of victory. It always is Muslims' cry
of victory.

Seeing how the most brave among them has been killed by Ali, the other
pagans who crossed the moat now took to their heels with the exception
of Nawfal whose horse failed to leap; it fell into the moat. As the
Muslims showered him with a hail of stones, he cried out thus: “I rather
die by the sword than by the stones!” Hearing this, Ali leaped into the
moat and fulfilled his last wish, dispatching him to hell!

Ali, contrary to the Arab custom then, did not, however, strip either
men from their armour or clothes. When \`Amr's sister came to her
brother's corpse, she was struck with admiration at the noble behaviour
of her slain brother's adversary and, finding out who he was, she felt
proud of her brother having met his fate at the hands of the person who
was known as the unique champion of spotless character. She said, as
recorded in *Tarikh al-Khamis*, “Had his conqueror been someone else
other than the one who killed him, I would have mourned \`Amr for the
rest of my life. But his opponent was the unique spotless champion.”
Ali, the “Lion of God,” thus distinguished himself as on previous
occasions: in the battles of Badr and of Uhud. About this battle, the
Prophet said: “Verily, one attack of Ali in the Battle of Khandaq is
better than the worship of all human beings and jinns up to the Day of
Resurrection.”

No further activity was atempted by the enemy that day, but great
preparations were undertaken during the night. Khalid ibn al-Walid, with
a party of cavaliers, attempted during the night to clear the ditch for
crossing the next day. The next morning, the Muslims found the entire
enemy force arrayed in fighting formations along their line of
entrenchment. The enemies tried to overrun the Muslim side of the trench
but were repelled at every point. The ditch served its purpose; it could
not be crossed. During the entire military campaign, by the way, only
five Muslims were martyred. The Muslims' vigilance paralyzed the enemies
despite their numeric superiority. Numeric superiority is not always a
prerequisite for victory. The Almighty grants victory to whosoever He
pleases.

But the Muslims were running out of provisions. The Prophet had to tie a
stone on his stomach in order to minimize the pangs of hunger. Abu
Sa\`eed al-Khudri said: “Our hearts had reached our throats in fear and
in desperation.” On the other hand, the besieging army was getting
restive, too; it could not put up any further with the rain and cold;
its horses were perishing daily and provisions nearing depletion.

The Prophet went to the place where the Mosque of Victory
(Masjidul-Fath) now stands and prayed to Allah. The Prophet said, “O
Lord! Revealer of the Sacred Book, the One Who is swift in taking
account, turn the confederate host away! Turn them to flight, O Lord,
and make the earth underndeath them quake!”

A fierce storm raged, uprooting the tents of the enemies; their pots and
belongings went flying in all directions; it blew dust in their faces,
extinguished their fires, and their horses were running around as though
they were possessed. An unbearable terror was cast in their hearts. In
the fourth night, after having finished his prayers, Muhammad asked Abu
Bakr if he would go to the enemy's camp to discern and report their
activities. He replied saying, “I ask pardon of Allah and of His
Messenger.”

The Prophet promised Paradise to be the reward of anyone who would
venture out for that purpose, then asked \`Omer ibn al-Khattab if he
would do it. \`Omer's answer was similar to that of Abu Bakr. The
Prophet's request is actually an order, a divine one, since it is coming
from one who does not say anything or do anything without the Will of
the Almighty. These facts are recorded in *Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthur,
As-Sira al-Muhammadiyya, As-Sira al-Halabiyya, Tarikh al-Khamis,* and
*Rawdat al-Ahbab* for all to review.

The third person the Prophet asked was Huthayfah al-Yemani who readily
responded to the request and proceeded to the enemy camp in the darkness
of the night where he saw the devestation wrought by the storm. He saw
Abu Sufyan looking very depressed. When he came back to his camp and
reported in detail to the Prophet what he had seen, the Prophet was
delighted to find out that his plea to Allah was answered.

Either feeling the pain of the severity of the weather or struck with
terror at that storm which was interpreted as a manifestation of the
Divine Wrath, Abu Sufyan decided to lift the siege and to march back at
once. Summoning the chiefs of his allies, he announced his decision to
them, issuing orders to dismantle the camp. He and all the Meccans with
him, as well as the pagan tribes that allied themselves under his
command, fled away. The first to flee was Abu Sufyan himself who was so
upset that he tried to ride his camel without first untying its rope.

Khalid ibn al-Walid guarded the rear of the armies with two hundred
cavaliers against a pursuit. The Ghatfan tribesmen and the bedouin
allies returned to their deserts; not a single person remained on the
battlefield in the morning. It was with great joy that in the morning
the Muslims discovered the sudden disappearance of the enemy, finding
themselves unexpectedly relieved. The siege lasted for twenty-four long
days and ended in March of 627 A.D.

This episode is referred to in the Qur'an in this *ayat*:

***O ye who believe! Remember the bounty of Allah unto you when came
upon you the hosts, so We sent against them a strong wind and hosts that
ye saw not, and Allah sees all what you do.*** **(Qur'an, 33:9)**

And also in *ayat* 25 which says:

***And God turned back the unbelievers in their rage; they did not
achieve any advantage, and Allah sufficed for the believers in fighting,
and Allah is Strong, Mighty.*** **(Qur'an, 33:25)**

Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud was interpreting this thus: “And God sufficed the
believers (through Ali ibn Abu Talib) in their fight,” as we read in
*Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthur*.

As a direct result of this defeat of the infidels' combined forces in
the Battle of Khandaq (moat, or the Battle of Ahzab, coalitions),
Quraish's influence waned, and those tribes who were till then
hesitating to accept Islam out of fear of Quraish began to send
deputations to the Prophet. The first deputation came from the tribe of
Mazinah, and it consisted of four hundred persons. They not only
accepted Islam but were ready to settle down in Medina. The Prophet,
however, advised them to return to their homes.

Likewise, a deputation of a hundred persons came from the Ashja\` and
embraced Islam. The tribe of Juhainah lived near them, so they were
influenced by their conversion. One thousand of the latter's men came to
Medina to join the fraternity.

**Kharab خراب:** destruction, ruin, desolation, doom, waste

**Khardal خردل:** mustard

**Khariq خارق:** extraordinary, exceptional, remarkable, piercing,
penetrating

**Khasir خاسر:** loser, loss-making, unprofitable

**Khaskhasa خصخصه:** privatization

**Khasm خصم:** opponent, disputant, foe

**Khat خط:** line, path, method, style, writing, route

**Khatib or Khateeb** **:** **خطيب** orator, speaker, one who delivers
the "khutba", sermon, whether during the Friday prayer service or any
other service

**Khawarij خوارج:** defectors, apostates, renegades, an extinct group of
individuals who split from the Islamic nation and declared a rebellion
on elected Caliph Ali ibn Abu Talib (ع). Literally, the word means
"Those who Went Out"): a controversial term which is described by some
Muslim scholars differently, each according to his level of education
and extent of bias and prejudice. If you are sincere about researching
who these rogues were, you can start with p. 278, Vol. 3, of Tabari's
famous book *Tarikh al-Umam wal Mulook* (famous as simply Tarikh). There
are many editions of this book available for reviewers, but the one I
have is the newest; it is published by the Dar Al-Amira for Publication
and Distribution, Beirut, Lebanon, and is dated 1426 A.H./2005 A.D.

Their history started in the year 37 A.H. (which then corresponded to
the year 658 A.D.) when they first reverted against the then elected
caliph, Ali, but returned to obedience after he had reasoned with them
just to revolt against him again and one of them, namely Ibn Muljim,
killed caliph Ali on a Friday, 11th, 13th or 17th of the month of
Ramadan of 40 A.H., according to various narratives.

Their ideology could not withstand the intellectual challenges of the
time, so it gradually weakened and died away. I think they do not
deserve more space than this much here! To hell with them and with all
those who apply this term to any Muslims, whoever they may be and from
any sect at all, presently or in the future. The **خوارج** Khawarij and
their ideology are both dead and decayed; so, there is no need to beat
on a dead horse.

**Khayr خير:** good, goodness, well-being, welfare, prosperity, benefit;
in some verses of the Holy Qur'an, it means "money" which, of course,
can be a good tool for the doing of righteousness and for helping
people.

**Khazaf خزف:** ceramic

**Khida\` خداع:** deceit, deception, trickery, cheating, fooling,
double-dealing

**Khilaf خلاف:** dispute, disagreement, feud, variance (of opinion,
etc.), discrepancy

**Khilafa or Khilaafah خلافه:** succession, [Islamic] caliphate

**Khiraj** **خراج:** religious tax collected at the end of the Islamic
lunar year for *baytul-mal*

**Khitam ختام:** conclusion, end, termination

**Khitan ختان:** circumcision

**Khiyara خيره:** choice, option, prime, best

**Khulud or Kholood** **خلود:** immortality, eternity, forever

**Khums خمس:** one-fifth of one's savings and is now paid only by Shi\`a
Muslims; see Chapter 8, verse 41 of the Holy Qur'an. It is set aside
from one’s annual income or increase in wealth. It is divided into 2
equal parts: One, called "sahm as-Sadat", is payable to needy *Sadat*
(or Sayyids), descendants of the Prophet who are not allowed to receive
charity (*sadaqa*) and are too dignified to ask for it. The other half,
called "sahm al-Imam عج))", is to be spent on promoting the Islamic
creed, such as paying expenses for writing, translating, editing,
publishing and printing of books or the building of schools, religious
seminaries, libraries, etc. *Khums*, moreover, is collected from one's
profits or gains which he earn, as well as from the following: minerals,
treasure troves, amalgamation of *halal* (permissible) wealth with what
is *haram* (prohibitive), gems obtained from sea diving, spoils of war,
land which a *thimmi* (a non-Muslim living under the protection of
Islamic Government) purchases from a Muslim. There are many rules and
regulations about the collection of, exemption from and distribution of
this *khums* which, according to 8:41 of the Holy Qur'an is not
optional, as some ill-informed individuals claim, but compulsory. Here
is this verse for you:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُم مِّن شَيْءٍ فَأَنَّ لِلَّهِ خُمُسَهُ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَابْنِ
السَّبِيلِ إِن كُنتُمْ آمَنتُمْ بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أَنزَلْنَا عَلَى
عَبْدِنَا يَوْمَ الْفُرْقَانِ يَوْمَ الْتَقَى الْجَمْعَانِ وَاللَّهُ
عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And know that out of all the booty that you may acquire (in war), a
fifth share is assigned to God! and to the Messenger, and to near
relatives, to the orphans, the needy, and the wayfarer! if you believe
in Allah and in the Revelation We sent down to Our servant on the day of
testing! the day of the meeting of the two forces, for Allah has power
over all things.*** ***(Qur’an, 8:41).***

What is stated in the Holy Qur'an as permissible or not permissible
remains so till the Day of Judgment, and if you disagree, it is your own
burden which you will carry and not mine. If you have the *risala*
(compilation of edicts) of Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Ali al-Husayni
as-Sistani, refer to his "Kitab al-Khums" (Chapter on the *khums*) which
starts on p. 387, Vol. 1, of the Arabic text of his 4-volume *Minhaj
as-Saliheen* (published in the Hijri year 1427 which coincides with the
year 2006 A.D. by the Grand Ayatollah's office in Holy Mashhad, Iran).
If you do not have a copy of the said *risala*, the Internet can provide
you with a wealth of information on this subject.

**Khushu\` خشوع:** state of submission and full attention, humility, of
being in reverence

**Khusuf or Khosoof** **خسوف (القمر):** eclipse of the moon

**Khutba خطبه:** a speech or sermon. It is sometimes used to refer to
the sermon given during the Friday congregational prayer.

**Kuffar كفار:** plural form of *kafir*, apostate

**Kufr كفر:** showing ungratefulness to Allah and not to believe in Him
and in His religion, to deliberately hide the truth while fully knowing
it with the ability to show the truth

**Kunya كنيه:** the use of "Abu " (father of) or "Umm " (mother of)
someone, often used as a prefix for one’s name

**Kursi كرسي:** Literally, it means "chair", theologically, however, it
refers to the symbol of the Almighty's Seat of Judgment and Authority;
see Holy Qur'an, 2:255 (*ayat al-Kursi*, verse of the Throne).

**Kusuf كسوف (الشمس):** eclipse of the sun

**Khutba خطبه:** lecture, sermon; a speech delivered on a specific
occasion

**Kufr كفر:** apostasy, infidelity, disbelief, the deliberate
covering/hiding of the truth


