م, M
====

**Ma\`ad معاد:** the return: a reference to the re­turning of the souls
to new bodies/forms after the period of *barzakh* برزخ (see above),
their ultimate return to their Maker for judgment; generally, it is used
to refer to death and the life hereafter.

**Mahlaj محلج:** cotton gin, gin

**Maqam** **مقام:** standing or staying place, a place where one usually
stands to preach or address the public; “Maqam Ibrahim” is a small area
in the precincts of the Ka’ba Mosque which shows footprints of Abraham
(prophet Ibrahim [ع] where he used to stand to rebuild the Ka’ba.

**Medina or Madeenah مدينه:** city, the first city-state that came under
the banner of Islam. It is a city in Hijaz, northern part of presently
Saudi Arabia, where the Prophet's *masjid* and grave are located.

**Maghazi مغازي:** Prophet's military campaigns

**Maghrib مغرب:** sunset**,** time for the obligatory sunset prayer
ritual, *salat*

**Mahdi** **مهدي**: Rightly guided in order to guide others; preceded by
the definite article "**ال**", it means **المهدي (عج)** the Awaited
Imam, al-Qa'im, al-Hujja, Savior of Mankind, the 12th in the series of
the Infallible Imams followed by Twelver Shiites, may the Almighty
hasten his re-appearance. We owe it to the reader to introduce him to
this great personality, perhaps he will wake up from his slumber and
realize that he has a lot of work to do in preparation for the
re-appearance of the Savior of Mankind. Needless to say, Sunni and
Shiite sects believe in al-Mahdi but differ among themselves about his
family lineage, birth and other issues which are not regarded as being
major.

More details about Imam al-Mahdi (عج) are already stated above.

**Mahr مهر:** dowry paid by the groom to the bride (or *vice versa* in
some cultures). It is part of the Muslim marriage contract. It can never
be demanded back except when the bride refuses to cohabit with her groom
in the absence of any legitimate excuse. In this case, she may be
entitled to receive half the dower or none of it once the divorce takes
place. By the way, do you know what dowry our father Adam paid our
mother, Eve?! If you do not, read my book titled *Allah: The Concept of
God in Islam*.

**Mahram or** ***Mahrim*** **محرم:** "mahram" refers to people who are
unlawful for a woman to marry due to blood relationships. These people
include:

Her **permanant** *mahrams* on account of blood relationship: her
father, son, brother, paternal uncle, maternal uncle, step-son and
nephew.  
 Her ***radha'*** رضاع *mahrams* on account of sharing the nursing milk
when she was an infant; their status is similar to the permanent
*mahrams* referred to above.  
 Her (in law) *mahrams* because of marriage; these are: her husband's
father (father in law), husband's son (step-son), her mother's husband
(step-father) and her daughter's husband. These categories of people,
along with the woman's husband, are permitted to escorts Muslim women
when they travel as required by some countries such as Saudi Arabia.

**Majalis مجالس:** meetings or gatherings held to com­memorate certain
religious occasions, mostly applied to those held during the month of
Muarram or to recite the *Faiha* for a deceased person; singular:
*majlis*, a place where people sit

**Manzil منزل**: (sing.) home, residence, abode; **منزلة**
***manzila***: status, position, esteem; (pl.) **منازل**
***manazil*****:** homes, positions, stages, phases. **منازل الآخرة**
Stages or phases of the life in the hereafter: Brace yourself, Dear
Reader, for the following text may not make you happy; shed a tear now
before your tears later on will not avail you a bit. You will notice
that there are so many supplications in the following text. This is due
to the significance Islam, or any other religion, awards supplication.

One authentic *hadith* **حديث** (tradition) says: **الدعاء مخ العبادة**
Supplication is the pith (or essence) of adoration." As for the Holy
Qur'an, it tells you in the following verse that had it not been for
people supplicating to their Creator, He would have had nothing to do
with them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَا يَعْبَأُ بِكُمْ رَبِّي لَوْلا دُعَاؤُكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***" Say: 'Had it not been for your prayers (supplications), my Lord
would not have cared about you'" (Qur'an, 25:77):***

**Stages or Phases of The Hereafter:** **منازل الآخرة** These are the
phases through which one has to pass on his/her way to either eternal
happiness in Paradise or endless doom in Hell, may the Almighty keep it
away from us and from your own self **اللهم آمين** *Allahumma Ameen*.
Following is a list of these stages or phases from some of which very
few are exempted such as those who are very close to the Almighty on
account of their being very deeply knowledgeable and ascetic such as the
*anbiya,'* prophets **الأنبياء**, *awliya'*, walis **الأولياء**,
*\`ulema'*, scholars **العلماء**, *salihun*, righteous **الصالحون** and
the *shuhada'*, martyrs **الشهداء**.

If you are none of these, and most of us are not, brace yourself for the
following phases. Of course, due to self-deception, every Muslim who
performs his daily prayers thinks that he is included among the
righteous, not knowing whether his/her prayers are accepted or not,
forgetting that performing the daily prayers is only the very first step
along a very lengthy and thorny path to salvation. Those included in the
categories listed above will not taste any painful death, nor will they
have to go anywhere in the company of hordes of angels except to
Paradise and to nearness to the Almighty. Others have to go through the
following:

1) ***An-Naza\` al-akheer*** **النزع الأخير Drawing the Last Breath:**
Another name is **سكرات الموت**, Stupors of Death. Reference to these
stupors of death exists in this Qur'anic verse:

**وَجَاءَتْ سَكْرَةُ الْمَوْتِ بِالْحَقِّ ذَلِكَ مَا كُنتَ مِنْهُ
تَحِيدُ**

***"And the stupor of death will bring truth (before his eyes): “This
was the thing which you were trying to escape!”*** (Qur'an, 50:19).

These are the moments when the dying person bids this vanishing world
goodbye, casts a last look at it, mostly at his own self: Life will pass
before his eyes like a flash, and he will realize how short it really
was, how he wasted it, how he did not perform the purpose behind his
very creation: to worship the Almighty his Lord and the Lord of all
creation. How will one naturally die? The answer is in verses 88-96 of
Surat al-Waqi\`a (Chapter 56):

**فَأَمَّا إِن كَانَ مِنَ الْمُقَرَّبِينَ، فَرَوْحٌ وَرَيْحَانٌ
وَجَنَّةُ نَعِيمٍ: وَأَمَّا إِن كَانَ مِنَ أَصْحَابِ الْيَمِينِ فَسَلامٌ
لَّكَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ الْيَمِينِ، وَأَمَّا إِن كَانَ مِنَ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ
الضَّالِّينَ فَنُزُلٌ مِّنْ حَمِيمٍ وَتَصْلِيَةُ جَحِيمٍ: إِنَّ هَذَا
لَهُوَ حَقُّ الْيَقِينِ، فَسَبِّحْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الْعَظِيمِ:**

***Thus, then, if he is of those nearest to Allah, (there is) rest and
satisfaction (for him) and a Garden of delights. And if he is of the
companions of the right Hand, (for him there is salutation:) “Peace be
unto you!” from the companions of the right Hand. And if he is one of
those who treat (truth) as falsehood, who commit wrong, for him there
is*** **entertainment** ***of boiling water and burning in Hell-Fire.
Truly this is the very truth, so celebrate with praise the Name of your
Lord, the Supreme*** **(Qur'an, 56:88-96).**

See how the Almighty in these verses classifies three methods of death
perhaps the first of which is particularly interesting: One who is near
to his Maker will smell fragrance which will turn death into a very
pleasant and pleasurable experience. Of course an opposite type of death
awaits those who are not close to Him and who apparently will experience
death by way of suffocation. According to some traditions, two angels
pull life out of each and every cell of the dying person's body, and it
will not be fun at all.

During these moments, the dying person will have a moment of
contemplation on what he has just left behind: worries about the little
ones, separation from wealth, estates, precious items, homes on which he
spent fortunes, wealth which he amassed without making sure where it
exactly came from, etc. And there will be worries about how much he fell
short of carrying out with regard to his duties to others and to his
Maker. In *Nahjul-Balagha*, the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (ﻉ)
has summarized it thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يتذكر أمولاً جمعها أغمض في مطالبها وأخذها من مُصرَّحاتها ، ومشتبهاتها
قد لزمته تبعات جمعها وأشرف على فراقها، تبقى لمن وراءه ينعمون بها فيكون
المهنأ لغيره والعبءُ على ظهره».
  </p>
</blockquote>

"He shall remember wealth which he had overlooked where it had come
from, accepting its sources as they were claimed to be, or as they were
thought to be, the consequences of having collected it now are round his
neck, haunting him, as he is about to leave it behind him for those who
will now enjoy it, thus the pleasure will be for others while he bears
the burden." Verse 22 of Surat Qaf states the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كُنتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِّنْ هَذَا فَكَشَفْنَا عَنكَ غِطَاءَكَ
فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"**We have removed your veil, and your sight is sharp (on) this
Day!”*** (Qur'an, 50:22).

Indeed, the sight of the dying person during the stupors of death will
be quite sharp: He will for the first time be able to see angels, who
are created of light that can easily blind any human eye, and the
*jinns* who are created of smokeless fire. He will be able to see and
hear his family, relatives, friends and strangers who are around him at
the time of death and who will soon bear his casket to the cemetery. But
he will not be able to show any reaction because he has lost control
over his temporal body and his soul **روح** now takes over. On the other
hand, there will be a tremendous transformation in the process of
changing from one form into quite another which now enables him to see
what he could never see before: According to p. 170, Vol. 6 of *Bihar
al-Anwar*,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيرى رسول الله وأهل بيته الأطهار صلوات الله عليهم وملائكة الرحمة
وملائكة العذاب حاضرين عنده ليحكموا فيه وانّه يترقب ايّ حكم يحكمون به ،
وأي شيء سوف يوصون به ؟ ومن جهة اُخرى قد اجتمع ابليس واعوانه ليوقعوه في
الشك ، وهم يحاولون جاهدين أن يسلبوا إيمانه ليخرج من الدنيا بلا إيمان.
ومن جهة اُخرى يعاني من هول حضور ملك الموت ، وبأي صورة وهيئة سوف يجيئه
به ، وبأي نحو سوف يقبض روحه . الى غير ذلك.. قال أمير المؤمين عليه
السلام: «فاجتمعت عليه سكرات الموت ، فغير موصوف ما نزل به».
  </p>
</blockquote>

"He will see the Messenger of Allah and his Pure Family, peace and
blessings of Allah be with them all, the angels of mercy and those of
torment, all present near him as he awaits their verdict and what they
will decide. On the other hand, the army of Satan and his helpers (will
also be present in order to prevent him by all means from saying *La
ilaha illa-Allah* **لا إله إلا الله**, There is no god save Allah, which
is the key to salvation), to cast doubt in his heart and try hard to rob
him of his belief (*iman* **يمانإ**) so he will come out of this life
without *iman*. At the same time, he is overwhelmed by expecting the
presence of the angel of death: In what form it will approach him and
how he will take his life away, etc.

The Commander of the Faithful (ﻉ) has said: 'The stupors of death
surround him, so no description can be made for what has afflicted
him.'" What about the *munjiyat* **المنجيات** during this very critical
and dangerous phase, the acts of adoration which one can form during his
lifetime so they may help ease or even cancel his pain of death?

We are told on p. 9 of Abbas al-Qummi's precious work **منازل الآخرة**
*Manazil al-Akhira*, which is the main source for this text material,
that it is reported that the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) was present during
the death of a young man. The Prophet (ﺹ) told the dying youth to
testify that **لا إله إلا الله** *La ilaha illa-Allah* (There is no god
save Allah), but his tongue was tied and he could not. Whenever the
Prophet (ﺹ) repeated his **تلقين** *talqeen* (instruction to the dying
person to make a pronouncement)**,** the dying young man could not
respond. The Prophet (ﺹ) asked a woman who was sitting at the head of
the dying young man if she was his mother, and she answered in the
affirmative. He again asked her if she was angry with her young son, and
she again answered in the affirmative, adding that she had not spoken to
him for the past six years. The Prophet (ﺹ) asked her to be pleased with
her son now, so she said, "May Allah be pleased with him on account of
you being pleased with him, O Messenger of Allah." When the mother thus
expressed her pleasure with her dying son, the latter was able to
pronounce *La ilaha illa-Allah* **لا إله إلا الله**. The Prophet (ﺹ)
then asked the youth to tell him about what he saw. The youth said, "I
see a very dark man, very ugly, extremely smelly, wearing very filthy
outfits, emitting a stench, coming in my direction, pressing on my mouth
and respiratory passages."

The Prophet (ﺹ) ordered him to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا من يقبل اليسير ويعفو عن الكثير، إقبل مِنّي اليسير وآعف عنِّي
الكثير، إنَّك أنت الغفور الرحيم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O One Who accepts little (of good deeds) while forgiving a lot (of
sinning), do accept what is little [of the good deeds which I have done]
and forgive a lot (of my sins); surely You are the Forgiving, the most
Merciful." The young man did as instructed by the Prophet (ﺹ), so the
Prophet (ﺹ) asked him again about what he now saw. The dying young man
said, "I now see a man with a glowing face, pleasant, smelling very
nicely and wearing clean outfits coming in my direction, whereupon the
dark one is going away and getting ready to depart."

The Prophet (ﺹ) ordered the young man to repeat the statement which he
had taught him then asked him once more about what he then saw. "The
dark one has already gone, leaving no traces," the young man said,
adding, "while the one having a glowing face remains beside me." It was
at that moment that the young man passed away. This is recorded on p.
92, Vol. 1 of *Mustadrak Wasa'il ash-Shi\`ah*.

We also read on p. 380, Vol. 74 of *Bihar al-Anwar* that Imam Ja\`far
as-Sadiq (ﻉ) has said, "One who gives an outfit to his [believing]
brother, whether for the summer or for the winter, it will be incumbent
upon the Almighty to outfit the first with one of the outfits of
Paradise, ease the stupors of death for him and expand his resting
place."

The greatest Prophet (ﺹ) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أطعم أخاه حلاوه، أزال الله عنه مرارة الموت
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who feeds his Muslim brother something sweet, Allah will remove
from him the bitterness of death." What also helps the dying person and
eases his pain is hearing the recitation of Surat Ya-Sin (Chapter 36 of
the Holy Qur'an) and Surat as-Saffat (Chapter 37) as well as "du'a
al-faraj" which is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا إله إلا الله الحليم الكريم، لا إله إلا الله العليم العظيم، سبحان
الله رب السماوات السبع و رب الأرضين السبع و ما فيهن و ما بينهن و رب
العرش العظيم و سلام على المرسلين، و الحمد لله رب العالمين:
  </p>
</blockquote>

"There is no god save Allah, the Clement, the Great; there is no god
save Allah, the all-Knowing, the Great; praise to Allah, Lord of the
seven heavens, Lord of the seven earths and everything in them and
everything between them, and the Lord of the Great \`Arsh; peace be with
the Messengers, and praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds."

We read on p. 33, Vol. 97, of *Bihar al-Anwar* that according to Imam
as-Sadiq (ﻉ), as we are told by the mentor as-Saduq, "One who fasts the
last day of the month of Rajab will be placed by Allah in security
against the intense pain of the stupors of death and the horror after
death as well as the torment in the grave." As quoted by al-Kaf'ami on
p. 397, Vol. 2, p. 397 of his *Musbah*, the Prophet (ﺹ) is quoted as
having said that if one recites the following supplication ten times
every day, ten thousand of his major transgressions will be forgiven by
Allah Who will also save him from the stupors of death and from the
constriction of the grave as well as grant him security from one hundred
thousands of the horrors of the Judgment Day; He will also protect him
from the evil of Satan and his hosts, will pay his debts on his behalf
and remove his worries and concerns; this very precious supplication,
which you should share with all the ones you love, is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«أعدَدتُ لِكُلّ هولٍ لا إله إلاّ الله ، وَلِكُلّ هَمٍّ وَغَمٍّ ما شاء
اللهُ ، وَلِكُلّ نِعمَةٍ الحَمدُ للهِ ، وَلِكُلّ رَخاءٍ الشُّكرُ للهِ
، وَلِكُلِّ اُعجُوبَةٍ سُبحان اللهِ ، وَلِكُلّ ذَنبٍ أستَغفِرُ الله ،
وَلِكلّ مُصيبَةٍ إنا لله وإنا اليه راجعون ، وَلِكُلّ ضيقٍ حَسبيَ اللهُ
و نعم الوكيل ، وَلِكلّ قَضاءٍ وَقَدَرٍ تَوَكَّلتُ على اللهِ ، وَلِكُلّ
عَدُوٍّ اعتَصَمتُ باللهِ ، وَلِكُلّ طاعةٍ وَمَعصِيَةٍ لا حَولَ ولا
قوهَ إلاّ بالله العَليِّ العظيم»
  </p>
</blockquote>

"I have prepared for every horrific thing "There is no god save Allah",
for every worry and distress "The will of Allah be done", for every
blessing "Praise to Allah", for every prosperity "Thanks to Allah", for
every amazing thing "Blessed be Allah", for every sin "I seek
forgiveness of Allah", for every transgression "We belong to Allah, and
to Him shall we return", for every hardship "Allah suffices me, and how
good a Helper He is!", for every decree and destiny "I have relied on
Allah", for every enemy "I have sought refuge with Allah" and for every
obedience and disobedience "There is neither power nor might save in
Allah, the most Sublime, the most Great".

Another supplication has as many as seventy merits one of which is that
one who recites it will be given glad tidings at the time of his/her
death; it is this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يا أسمع السامعين ويا أبصر الناظرين ويا أسرع الحاسبين ويا أحكم
الحاكمين»
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O You, the most Hearing of those who hear, the most Seeing of those who
see, the most Wise of those who decree!"

Al-Kulayni has quoted Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) as saying, "Do not ever be bored
with reciting Surat az-Zalzala (Chapter 99 of the Holy Qur'an), for if
one recites it in the voluntary prayers, Allah will keep earthquakes
away from him; he will not die because of an earthquake or be struck by
lightning or any of this life's catastrophes; a glorious angel will
descend upon him, sit at his head and address the angel of death thus:
'Be kind to him, for he is a servant of Allah who used to recite me
quite often,'" as we read on p. 331, Vol. 92, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

Remember that in the life hereafter, there will be personification of
everything: Each and every action or intention, good or bad deed, will
have a form, a shape, an entity. Every verse of the Holy Qur'an, every
chapter and the Qur'an as a whole will also have forms eaChapter So will
desires, wishes, hopes, aspirations, remorse, regret, prayer, fast and
all other forms of adoration: All will have forms.

How one will distinguish one from the other is a faculty which will be
created with him as he is re-created, re-formulated, re-born in a new
form, for the hereafter is the true life awaiting all of us, so get
ready for it; there is no escape from it. But if you do not believe in
the Hereafter, this book is not written for you, and it is a pity it
fell in your hands; someone else can make better use of it. Also, some
non-Muslims may feel "sorry" for what the Muslims will have to go
through in the Afterlife, feeling happy with the thought placed in their
heads by their clergymen that they had nothing to worry about, that
nothing but many good things await them after they die. Muslims,
however, think that all followers of religions, or those who do not
follow any religion at all, are entitled to ther own wishful thinking.

2) **The** ***Adeela*** **at the Time of Death العديله عند الموت** It
means one turning from right to wrong as he dies due to the presence of
Satan at the time of his death who will cast doubts in his heart through
his evil insinuations in order to get him out of the right creed. There
are many supplications to seek protection for such **عديله**:

For example, the pride of all critics, may Allah have mercy on his soul,
has said that if one seeks security against Satan, he must bring into
his presence the proofs of conviction and the five basic principles of
Islam through irrevocable evidences, with ease of conscience, then he
hands them all over to Allah Almighty so He may return them to him at
the time of his death. Having stated all the right doctrines, he should
say the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"«اللّهمَّ يا أرحم الراحمين انّي قد اودعتك يقيني هذا وثبات ديني وأنت
خير مستودع وقد أمرتنا بحفظ الودائع فردّه عليّ وقت حضور موتي». :
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O Lord, the most Merciful of those who show mercy: I have entrusted You
with this conviction of mine, with the firmness of my creed. Since You
are the best of trusted ones, and You commanded us to safe keep the
trusts, do return it to me at the time when I am to die." What also
helps is performing the prayer rites on time; doing so helps during such
a critical stage.

According to one tradition, the angel of death looks at all people five
times a day, that is, during the five daily prayers, so he may teach
those who perform them on time the *shahada* and spare him the evil of
the cursed Satan. It is also highly recommended to recite the following
supplication/ Qur'anic verse on every Sunday during the month of
Thil-Qi'da:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا لاَ تُزِغْ قُلُوبَنَا بَعْدَ إِذْ هَدَيْتَنَا وَهَبْ لَنَا
مِن لَّدُنكَ رَحْمَةً إِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْوَهَّابُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Our Lord!” (they say,) “do not let our hearts deviate now that You have
guided us, but grant us mercy from Your Own Presence, for You are the
Giver of unlimited bounties" (Qur'an, 3:8). Other Qur'anic Chapters that
have the same effect include Suras 23 and 109.

3) ***Wahshat al-Qabr*** **وحشة القبر Grave's Loneliness:** According to
the book titled

**من لا يحضره الفقيه** *Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih*, there are
tremendous horrors in the grave; therefore, when the deceased person is
taken to his burial spot, he must not be entered into it suddenly. He
must be placed near the pit for a while so the dead person may get ready
to enter it. Then one must bring him closer to it and wait a short while
again after which the deceased person is to be placed in the grave.

Al-Majlisi, the father, has explained the wisdom in these steps. He says
that, true, the soul has already left the body, the **الروح الحيوانية**
"animal spirit" (*spiritus animalis* in Latin) or the moving soul; as
for the **الروح الناطقة** "articulate soul", it is yet to sever its ties
with the body: There is fear about the grave's constriction, the
questioning by Munkir and Nakeer, Ruman who tries to cause the dead to
slip away into the torment, and the **البرزخ** *barzakh*; so, the
deceased person has a lot to worry about.

Ar-Rawandi has narrated saying that Jesus Christ (ﻉ) once addressed his
mother, Maryam (Mary) (ﻉ), after her death saying, "Speak to me, Mother!
Do you wish to return to the abode of the living?" She said, "Yes, so I
may perform the prayers during an extremely cold night, and so I may
fast during a very hot day. O Son! This path [of the dead] is frightful,
horrific." It has also been narrated that Fatima az-Zahra (peace be with
her) said once to her revered husband, Commander of the Faithful Ali
(ﻉ), by way of her will:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وروي : انَّ فاطمة عليها السلام لمّا احتضرت أوصت علياً عليه السلام
فقالت : «اذا أنا مت، فتول أنت غسلي وجهزّني ، وصلّ عليَّ وانزلني قبري
والحدني ، وسوّ التراب عليّ، واجلس عند رأسي قبالة وجهي ، فأكثر من تلاوة
القرآن والدعاء فانّها ساعة يحتاج الميت فيها الى أُنس الأحياء»
  </p>
</blockquote>

"When I die, wash my body and outfit me [with the shrouds], perform
prayers for me, get me inside the grave, place the grave stone, bury me
in the earth, sit at my head facing me, recite the Book of Allah and
recite many supplications, for it is time when the deceased person needs
the company of those alive." We are told on p. 148, Vol. 1, of
*Mustadrak al-Wasa'il* **مستدرك الوسائل** that Ibn Tawoos, may Allah
have mercy on his soul, has quoted the Prophet (ﺹ) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا يأتي على الميت ساعة أشدّ من أول ليلة فارحموا موتاكم بالصدقة ، فان
لم تجدوا فليصل أحدكم ركعتين يقرا فيهما فاتحة الكتاب مرّة وآية الكرسي
مرّة ، وقل هو الله احد مرّتين ، وفي الثانية فاتحة الكتاب مرّة والهاكم
التكاثر عشر مرّات ويسلم ويقول : اللّهمّ صلّ على محمّد وآل محمّد وابعث
ثوابها الى قبر ذلك الميت فلان بن فلان ، فيبعث الله مِن ساعته الف ملك
الى قبره مع كل ملك ثوب وحلة ويوسع في قبره من الضيق الى يوم ينفخ في
الصور ويعطى المصلي بعدد ما طلعت عليه الشمس حسنات ويرفع له أربعون درجة»
  </p>
</blockquote>

"There is nothing harder for the deceased person than the first night in
the grave; so, send mercy to your dead by offering charity on his
behalf, and if one does not have charity to offer, let him perform two
*rek'ats* (prostrations) in the first of which he should recite Surat
al-Fatiha, the Verse of the Throne and twice Surat at-Tawhid
(al-Ikhlas). In the second, he should recite Surat al-Fatiha followed by
reciting ten times Surat at-Takathur (Chapter 102 of the Holy Qur'an).
Then he should offer the *tasleem* [greeting the Prophet of Allah (ﺹ)]
and say, "Lord! Bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad, and send the
rewards [of this prayer] to the grave of the deceased person so-and-so."

Allah Almighty will then instantly send a thousand angels to the grave
of that dead person. Each angel will be carrying an outfit. His grave
will be widened till the trumpet is blown. The person who performs this
prayer will be granted good deeds as many as the expanse of what is
under the sun, and he will be raised forty stations." What also helps
lessen the pain of loneliness in the grave is one during his lifelong
perfecting *rukoo'* **ركوع** (bowing down) very well during the prayers.
Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) is quoted as having said: **من أكمل الركوع لا يدخل الى
قبره وحشة** "One who perfects his bowing down [during the performance of
the daily prayers] will not feel lonely in his grave," according to p.
244, Vol. 6 of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

Actually, the doers of good do not have to worry about such loneliness,
for angels will keep them company and they will be permitted to visit
their relatives, the living or the dead, escorted by these angels, and
this will be a diversion for them. Another act of *munjiyat* **منجيات**
is repeating a hundred times this beautiful statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا اله الا الله الملك الحق المبين
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no god save Allah, the true and obvious King. Such act will
save one from poverty in his lifetime and from loneliness in the grave
in the Hereafter. He will be wealthy in this life and the gates of
Paradise will be opened for him in the next. According to p. 217, Vol. 8
of *Bihar al-Anwar*, one who fasts 12 days during the month of Sha\`ban
will be visited in his grave every day by seventy thousand angels till
the trumpet is blown.

Here we must point out that "every day" means days of our own counting,
days of this short life, for the *barzakh* period precedes the Judgment
Day. Starting with that Day, time will bear a different dimension. And
one who goes to visit a sick person will be rewarded by Allah Who will
assign an angel to visit him in his grave till the Day of Gathering, the
Assembling Day. Also, it is recorded in Rawandi's *Da\`awat* **دعوات**
that the Prophet (ﺹ) has said that if one recites the following
supplication three times when a deceased person is buried, the torment
from the latter will be lifted till the Trumpet is blown:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(اللّهمَّ إنِّي أسألكَ بحق محمدٍ وآل محمدٍ أن لا تُعَذِبَ هذا
المَيِتَ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lord! I plead to You through the status reserved with you for Muhammad
(ﺹ) and the Progeny of Muhammad (ﺹ) not to torment this deceased person
till the Day when the trumpet is blown."

4) **Grave's Constriction ضغطة القبر:** This is a very terrifying phase
to the extent that it is difficult for the living to imagine. Commander
of the Faithful Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) has said the following about
it

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يا عِباد الله ما بَعدَ المَوتِ لمَن لا يُغفَر له أشدُّ مِنَ المَوتِ:
القبر، فاحذروا ضيقَةُ وضَنكَهُ وظُلمَتَهُ وَغُربتَهُ ، إنَّ القَبرَ
يقولُ كُلَّ يَومٍ: أنا بَيتُ الغربة! انا بيتُ الوَحشَة!ِ أنا بَيتُ
الدّود!ِ ، وَالقَبرُ روضَةٌ من رياض الجنّة أو حُفرهٌ من حُفرِ
النّار... الى أن قالَ : وَإنَّ مَعيشَةَ الضَّنكِ الَّتي حَذَّرَ اللهُ
مِنها عَدُوَّهُ (هي) عذابُ القبر ، إنَّه يُسلّطُ على الكافرِ في قَبِره
تِسعةً وتسعين تنيناً فَينهشنَ لحَمهُ ويَكسِرنَ عظمهُ، يَتردَّدنَ عليه
كذلك الى يوم يبعث ؛ لَو انَّ تنيناً مِنها نَفَخَ في الأرض لَم تُنبِت
زَرعاً. يا عباد الله: إنَّ انفسَكُمُ الضَّعيفة وأجسادكُمُ الناعمة
الرّقيقة التي يكفيها اليسيرُ تَضعُفُ عن هذا».
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O servants of Allah! There is nothing harder, on those who are not
forgiven, than death save the grave: So, beware of its constriction,
darkness and loneliness. Each day, the grave says: 'I am the abode of
loneliness! I am the abode of worms!' And the grave is either like one
of the gardens of Paradise or one of the pits of Hell… Indeed, the "life
of hardship" about which Allah has warned those who are hostile to Him
is the torment in the grave: The unbeliever is assailed as he is in his
grave by ninety-nine dragons that tear up his flesh, crush his bones and
keep visiting him thus till the Day of Resurrection. Had one of these
dragons blown on earth, no vegetation would have ever grown in it. O
servants of Allah! Your weak selves, tender and soft bodies which are
satisfied with little, are too weak to withstand all of this."

As indicated above, the sins, transgressions and wrongdoings will each
take a form in the hereafter, and the worse one is the worse its form
will be. What will help during this difficult situation? Page 327, Vol.
4 of *Usul al-Kafi* **صول الكافيأ**, tradition No. 13, says that
whenever Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) woke up at the end of the night, he would
raise his voice so his family members could hear him saying the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اللّهمّ أَعِنِّي على هول المطلعِ ، و وسع علي ضيق المضجع، اللّهُمَّ
بارِك لِي في الموتِ ، و ارزقني خير ما قبل الموت، و ارزقني خير ما بعد
الموت؛ اللّهُمّ أعِنِّي على سَكراتِ المَوتِ، اللّهُمَّ أَعِنِّي على
غمِّ القَبر ، اللّهُمَّ أَعِنِّي على ضيقِ القَبر،ِ اللَّهُمَّ أعِنِّي
على وَحشَةِ القَبرِ،ِ اللّهُمَّ زَوِّجني مِن الحور العينِ»
  </p>
</blockquote>

 "Lord! Help me with regard to the horror of what is awaiting me [after
death] and expand for me the narrowness of the grave. Lord! Grant me a
blessing at the time of death, and grant me goodness before death, and
grant me goodness after death. Lord! Help me during the time of the
stupors of death. Lord! Help me against the agonies of the grave. Lord!
Help me against the constriction of the grave. Lord! Help me against the
loneliness of the grave. And Lord! Do marry me to the *huris* with
large, lovely eyes." Be informed, dear reader, that most torment in the
grave is due to one not paying enough attention and care while using the
toilet, taking lightly the sources of **نجاسة** uncleanness, and also
due to committing calumny and backbiting as well keeping a distance from
his family, according to p. 222, Vol. 6 of *Bihar al-Anwar*. From a
narration by Sa'eed ibn Jubair, another cause is one having bad manners
with his wife, speaking to her roughly rather than with kindness and
consideration. Whatever the reason may be, we are assured by Imam
Ja\`far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا ينجو أحد من المؤمنين من ضغطة القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"No believer is spared the grave's constriction," according to p. 221,
Vol. 6 of the same reference.

On p. 221, Vol. 6 of *Bihar al-Anwar* and on p. 74, Vol. 2 of *Safeenat
al-Bihar*, Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) is quoted as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان ضغطة القبر كفارة عن نعمه ضيعها المؤمن
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The grave's constriction is atonement for a bliss wasted by a
believer."

Now let us review what helps in this terrible phase of the afterlife:
Luckily, there are many acts of adoration which one can perform during
his lifetime which will help him in the life to come, and the book
titled **منازل الآخرة** *Manazil al-Akhira* by Abbas al-Qummi counts 15
of them. But we, in order to be brief, would like to cite the following
for you: 1) Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (ﻉ) has said

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من قرأ سورة النساء من القرآن في كل يوم جمعة أمن من ضغطة القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who recites Surat an-Nisaa (Chapter 4 of the Holy Qur'an) every
Friday will have security against the grave's constriction," according
to p. 330, Vol. 74 of the same reference. 2) It is recorded on p. 397,
Vol. 2 of *Safeenat al-Bihar* that **من داوم على قراءة سورة الزخرف، آمنه
الله تعالى في قبره من حشرات الأرض و الحيوانات و ضغطة القبر** "One who
recites Surat an-Nisaa (Chapter of the Women [Chapter 4] of the Holy
Qur'an) every Friday will be granted security in his grave from the
earth's insects, animals and the grave's constriction."

3) According to the same reference and page, some traditions of the
Prophet (ﺹ) indicate that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من قرأ سورة "ن و القلم" في فريضة الصلاة أو النافلة، آمنه الله من ضغطة
القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one recites Surat Noon (Chapter 68 of the Holy Qur'an which is also
called Surat al-Qalam), during obligatory or optional prayers, Allah
will grant him security from the grave's constriction."

4) On pp. 221 and 243, Vol. 6 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, we are told that Imam
ar-Rida (ﻉ) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات بين زوالي الخميس و الجمعه، آمنه الله من ضغطة القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who dies between the periods of *zawal* **زوال** (midday) of
Thursday and Friday, he will be secured by Allah from the grave's
constriction."

5) Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) is also quoted as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عليكم بصلاة الليل، فما من عبد مؤمن قام آخر الليل فصلى ثماني ركعات صلاة
الليل، و ركعتين صلاة الشفع، و ركعة صلاة الوتر، و استغفر في قنوت الوتر
سبعين مرة، الا و آمنه الله من عذاب القبر، و من عذاب النار، و طال عمره،
و توسعت معيشته
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Uphold the Night Prayer; no believing servant of Allah stands at the
end of the night to offer 8 *rek'ats* (prostrations), two *Shaf\`
rek'ats* **ركعتا الشفع**, one *Witr Rek\`a* **ركعة الوتر**, then he
seeks forgiveness of Allah in the *Qunoot* (invocation) of the Witr
seventy times except that Allah will grant him security against the
torment of the grave and against the torture of the Fire, grants him a
longer lifespan and expands his means of livelihood for him", as we are
told on p. 397, Vol. 2 of *Safeenat al-Bihar* where the subject of the
grave is discussed.

5) **Questioning by Munkir and Nakeer** **سؤال منكر و نكير**:

On p. 223, Vol. 6 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, Imam Ja\`far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) is
quoted as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
« ليس من شيعتنا مَن أنكر ثلاثة أشياء: المعراج، المساءَلة في القبر،
والشفاعة»
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Not among our followers (Shi'as) is one who denies three things: the
ascension [to heavens], the questioning in the grave (by Munkir and
Nakeer) and the intercession."

In the same reference on p. 261, we are told the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روي أن الملكين (منكر و نكير) يأتيان في هيئة هائلة، لهما صوت كالرعد و
أعين كالبرق، يسألان: من ربك؟ و من نبيك؟ و ما دينك؟ و يسألان عن وليه و
امامه، و بما أن الاجابة، في تلك الحال، صعبة على الميت، و أنه لا جرم
يحتاج الى مساعدة، تعين التلقين في موضعين: أحدهما حين وضعه في القبر، و
يستحسن أن يؤخذ كتفه الأيمن باليد اليمنى، و كتفه الأيسر باليد اليسرى، و
يحرك و يلقن في حالة الاهتزاز و الادخال في القبر، و الثاني بعد وضعه في
القبر و دفنه، يستحب أن يجلس أقرب أنسبائه، و هو ولي الميت، على رأس
الميت، بعد أن تركه الباقون و غادروا المكان، و يلقن الميت بصوت مرتفع، و
يستحسن به أن يضع (الملقن) كفيه على القبر، و يقرب فاه من القبر، أو يفعل
ذلك من ينوب عنه، فلقد ورد أن الملكين حينما يسمعان هذا التلقين، يقول
منكر لنكير: دعنا نعود، فلقد لقنوه تلقين الحجة، و لا يحتاج الى سؤال،
فيتركان السؤال و يعودان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been reported that the two angels (Munkir and Nakeer) come in a
terrifying form: Their voice is like thunder and their eyes like
lightening. They will ask the dead person: "Who is your God? Who is your
Prophet? What is your religion?" And they will ask him about his *wali*
and Imam. Since the answers under such conditions will be very difficult
for the dead person, and he undoubtedly needs help, the *talqeen*
becomes a must in two places: One of them when he is placed inside the
grave, and it is recommended that his right shoulder be held by the
*mulaqqin* and his left shoulder by the left hand and moved then
instructed with *talqeen* when his body is being shaken and entered into
the grave. The other place is after the deceased person is put in the
grave and buried: It is recommended that the *mulaqqin*, who is a close
relative and a *wali* of the deceased person, sits at the area of the
head after everyone else had left. He should raise his voice as he
conducts the *talqeen*, and it is recommended that the *mulaqqin* places
both his hands on the grave and brings his mouth close to the grave.
Someone else who acts on behalf of the *mulaqqin* may do so. It is
reported that when both angels hear the *talqeen*, Munkir will say to
Nakeer: "Let us go back, for they have taught him the *talqeen* of
evidence, and he needs no question," whereupon they both leave. On p.
183, Vol. 1 of *Mustadrak al-Wasa'il* **مستدرك وسائل الشيعة**, we are
told that Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) has said the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اذا دخل المؤمن القبر، حضرت الصلاة الى يمينه، و الزكاة الى شماله و
أشرف عليه البر و الاحسان: أما الصبر فيستقر في جانب، فاذا حضر الملكان
ليسألاه، يخاطب الصبر الصلاة و الزكاة و البر (قائلا): أعينوا صاحبكم،
يعني الميت، فان عجزتم عن ذلك، فأنا مستعد لذلك"
  </p>
</blockquote>

If the believer enters the grave, prayer come at his right and *zakat*
at his left as kindness and benevolence look on. As for perseverance, it
will stand aside. When both angels (Munkir and Nakeer) come to question
him, perseverance will address prayer, *zakat* and kindness saying,
'Help your fellow,' meaning the deceased person, 'and if you cannot, I
am ready.'" Also,

> في بصائر الدرجات للصفار : ص 145 ـ 146 الطبعة الحجرية بالإسناد عن زر بن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جبيش قال : روي في المحاسن بسند صحيح عن احدهما عليهما السلام ـ يعني
الامام الصادق أو الامام الباقر ـ قال: «اذا مات العبد المؤمن دخل معه في
قبره ستة صور ، فيهنّ صورة أحسنهنّ وجهاً ، وأبهاهنّ هيئة ، وأطيبهنَّ
ريحاً ، وأنظفهنّ صورة . قال : فتقف صورة عن يمينه واُخرى عن يساره
واُخرى بين يديه ، واُخرى خلفه ، واُخرى عند رجله . وتقف التي هي أحسنهنّ
فوق رأسه . فإن اُوتي عن يمينه منعته التي عن يمينه، ثمّ كذلك الى أن
يؤتى من الجهات الست. قال : فتقول أحسنهنّ صورة : ومن أنتم جزاكم الله
عنّي خيراً؟ فتقول التي عن يمين العبد : أنا الصلاة. وتقول التي عن يساره
: أنا الزكاة. وتقول التي بين يديه : أنا الصيام. وتقول التي خلفه : أنا
الحجّ والعمرة . وتقول التي عند رجليه : أنا برّ مَن وصلت من اخوانك. ثمّ
يقلن : مَن أنت ؟ فأنت أحسننا وجهاً وأطيبنا ريحاً ، وأبهاناً هيئة .
فتقول : أنا الولاية لآل محمّد صلوات الله عليهم أجمعين».
  </p>
</blockquote>

On pp. 145-146 of the old edition of as-Saffar's *Basa'ir al-Darajat*,
through isnad which goes back to Zurr ibn Jubaish narrating an authentic
tradition in the *Mahasin* book from one of them, peace be with them,
namely Imams as-Sadiq and al-Baqir, saying, "When a believer dies, six
faces (forms or shapes, i.e. personifications) enter the grave with him,
each is more beautiful, more fragrant and more clean than the rest.
These faces settle in six positions: on his right side, on his left,
behind him, in front of him and at his feet. The most beautiful and the
most fragrant one rests at his head. If questioning or torture
approaches him from all sides, it will be prevented by one of the six
faces. The most beautiful face will ask the other faces saying: 'Who are
you, may Allah reward you well on my behalf?!' The face settling at the
believer's right side will say, 'I am the prayers.' The face settling on
the believer's left side will say, 'I am the *zakat*.' The face settling
opposite to the believer's face will say, 'I am the fast.' The one
settling behind the believer will say, 'I am the pilgrimage', while the
one settling at his feet will say, 'I am kindness and benevolence
towards the believing brothers.' Everyone will then ask him about
himself thus: 'And who are you with your dazzling beauty and
extra-ordinary fragrance?' He will say, 'I am the *wilaya* (mastership)
of the Progeny of Muhammad (peace and blessings of Allah be with them
all).'"

6) **The** ***Barzakh*** **البرزخ (Purgatory?)** It is one of the
terrifying phases or stages through which the vast majority of people
will pass. Exceptions are two kinds: People with whom the Almighty is
very pleased, and these go straight to Paradise, and people with whom He
is very displeased, and these go straight to hell. Neither group will go
through whatever goes on in the grave as indicated above. The *barzakh*
is mentioned in the Holy Qur'an in places such as this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِن وَرَائِهِم بَرْزَخٌ إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"(There) is a barrier before them till the Day they are raised up***
*(from their graves for judgment)" (Qur'an, 23:100).*

This barrier separates this short temporal life as we know it from the
other everlasting one awaiting us, but it is also one of its phases or
stages, a station, if you will.

On p. 71, Vol. 1 of *Safeenat al-Bihar* **سفينة** **البحار** we are told
that Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) pointed out to the *barzakh* once saying, "By
Allah, I fear for you the *barzakh*." He was asked, "What is the
*barzakh*?" He said, "It is the grave from the moment of death till the
Day of Judgment."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الامام الصادق عليه السلام في حديث: «ولكني والله اتخوف عليكم من
البرزخ. قيل له: وما البرزخ ؟ قال: القبر منذ حين موته الى يوم القيامة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been cited from ar-Rawandi's book *Lubb al-Lubab* **لب اللبا**ب
that those in the graves go to call upon their families, offspring and
relatives and tearfully plead to them saying: "O our children!! O our
families! O our relatives! Have mercy on us and bestow upon us of the
good things with you and the good deeds, and do remember us, may Allah
have mercy on you. We have sat in narrow prisons, bearing many worries
and concerns; so, do not be too miser to pray for us and to pay alms on
our behalf before your fate becomes similar to ours, perhaps Allah will
have mercy on us all. Alas! We used to be like you, enjoying blessings,
but we did not spend in the way of Allah, so our wealth turned into a
calamity on our heads while others benefited from it; so, listen to us
and do not forget to do us a favor with a dirham or a loaf of bread or
whatever you wish, for you shall join us; you shall weep and your tears
will not do you any good, just as we do although we find doing so to be
futile. Work hard and seize the opportunity before it is gone and before
your condition will be similar to ours."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ونقل عن لبّ اللباب للقطب الراوندي قال: وفي الخبر كان الموتى يأتون
فيقفون ، وينادي كلّ واحد منهم بصوت حزين باكياً : يا أهلاه ! يا ولداه !
وياقرابتاه ! اعطفوا علينا بشيء يرحمكم الله ، واذكرونا ولا تنسونا
بالدعاء وارحموا علينا وعلى غربتنا ، فانّا قد بقينا في سجن ضيق ، وغمّ
طويل وشدّة ، فارحمونا ، ولا تبخلوا بالدعاء والصدقة لنا لعل الله يرحمنا
قبل أن تكونوا مثلنا. فواحسرتاه قد كنّا قادرين مثل ما أنتم قادرون
فياعباد الله : اسمعوا كلامنا ولا تنسونا فانّكم ستعلمون غداً فانّ
الفضول التي في ايديكم كانت في أيدينا فكنّا لاننفق في طاعة الله ،
ومنعنا عن الحقّ ، فصار وبالاً علينا ومنفعةً لغيرنا . اعطفوا علينا
بدرهم أو رغيف أو بكسرة. ثم ينادون ما أسرع ما تبكون على انفسكم ولا
ينفعكم كما نحن نبكي ولا ينفعنا فاجتهدوا قبل أن تكونوا مثلنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Is the *barzakh* similar to the purgatory? Catholics believe that the
purgatory is a place where the souls of the dead are cleansed before
receiving God's grace, and such cleansing includes atonement through
pain. This seems to be close to the Islamic concept because the Almighty
punishes many of His servants in the grave in order to affect justice so
He may not punish them again in hell. This does not apply to everyone,
however, because some sinners are punished in this life, in the grave
and in hell as well.

This "purging" in which the Catholics believe may be close to the
"grave's constriction" detailed above. It is also stated in some
traditions that this constriction, or the torment in the grave, is one
of the manifestations of the Almighty Who does not wish to torment His
servants twice; so, the grave is the last phase where they have to "pay"
for some of their sins.

But it is better, of course, to avoid such torment by doing simple
things in this life that will spare you having to go through it, in
other words, the *munjiyat* **المنجيات**, acts of salvation, the easiest
of which is recitation of supplications on a regular basis and helping
others morally and financially, that is, those who deserve to be helped
as explained in the Qur'an and Sunnah. The best way to offer charity, of
course, is to give with the right hand what the left does not know, that
is, let it be a secret you keep to yourself; do not make a show of it
and thus lose its rewards. In the reference *Jami\` al-Akhbar* **جامع
الأخبار**, we read the following on p. 197:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذكر صحابي عن الرسول الأعظم (ص) أنه قال: "إبعثوا بهداياكم إلى موتاكم"
فسئل عن هدايا الموتى، فقال: "الصدقه و الدعاء".
  </p>
</blockquote>

A companion of the Greatest Prophet (ﺹ) cited the Prophet (ﺹ) as saying,
"Send your gifts to your dead." He was asked about what gifts could be
sent to the dead, so he said, "Charity and supplication." If you read
the classic reference written by al-Harrani titled *Thawab al-A\`mal*
**ثواب الأعمال**, you will see how rewards for good deeds multiply by
many times, starting from the tenfold promised in the Almighty for a
good deed and go up the ladder till they reach an astronomical figure of
one hundred thousand times. Who will be rewarded so many times and for
what? One who offers charity on behalf of both his deceased parents will
receive them. If his parents still living, he will receive in the
hereafter ten thousand times as much as he gives away as charity in the
life of this world on their behalf. But if you have no money to pay
charity, supplications will do. A combination of both is the best,
though, if you really want to shun many horrors awaiting us in the
hereafter and to live a very happy and blissful life here and hereafter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و فيه أيضا عن النبي الكريم (ص) أنه قال: إذا تصدق أحدكم لميت، فإن ملكا
يحملها في طبق من نور، تمتد إشعته حتى تبلغ السماوات، فيقف على حافة
القبر، و ينادي بأعلى صوته: السلام عليكم يا أهل القبور، هذه هدية أهلكم
إليكم! فيتسلمها الميت، و يدخلها قبره، و يتسع بها مضجعه. .... ثم قال
رسول الله (ص): إعلموا أنه من ترحم على ميت بصدقه، فله أجر عند الله مثل
جبل أحد، و هو يوم القيامه تحت ظل عرش الله، إذ لا ظل سواه يومذاك و ينجو
بالصدقه الأموات و الأحياء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the same reference, that is, *Jami\` al-Akhbar* **جامع الأخبار**, we
read the following on the same page: "The Revered Prophet (ﺹ) has been
quoted as saying, 'If one of you offers charity on behalf of a deceased
person, an angel carries it on a platter of *noor* (celestial light) the
rays of which extend and reach the heavens. He stands at the edge of the
grave and calls out as loudly as he can, saying: Peace be with you, O
people of the graves! This is a gift sent to you by your family! The
deceased person receives it and takes it with him inside his grave: It
expands his resting place…"

Then the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) added saying, "Be informed that when
someone seeks mercy for a deceased person through offering charity on
his behalf, he will get rewards as large as the Uhud Mountain, and he
will be on the Judgment Day under the shade of Allah's \`Arsh when, on
that Day, there will be no shade other than it, and charity will be the
salvation of the dead and of the living." Here we must point out that
many writers write about the thirst and hunger of the Judgment Day but
do not say much about the darkness which will engulf the bad ones.

There are many references to the *noor* **نور**, celestial light, that
will shine through and for the good ones on that Day, whereas the bad
ones will be terrified because they will have no *noor* that will enable
them to see what is around them, and they will most likely suffer from
the stench of the pus coming out of the bodies of many in their company
whose bodies will be smitten by the angels of torture. Contrary to their
condition is enjoyed by those whom the Almighty will bless on that Day:
These will have *noor*, shade on their heads rather than heat and be
brought drinks and fruits from Paradise as they watch others being
tried, that is, court marshaled!

On p. 59, Vol. 74 and on pp. 573-4 of *Zad al-Ma\`ad* **زاد المعاد**, we
read the following statement by Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الامام الصادق (ع) يرد الصوم و الصلاة و الصدقة و الحج و الأدعية و
الخيرات على الميت في قبره، و يكتب ثواب جميع الأعمال للميت و لفاعل
الخير معا
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Fast, prayers, charity, pilgrimage, supplications and good deeds reach
the deceased person inside his grave, and the rewards of all deeds done
on behalf of the deceased person will be recorded as they are for the
doer of these deeds."

7) ***Qiyama*****: Judgment Day القيامه** Belief in the Day of Judgment
is one of the basic principles of the Islamic creed and of almost all
other creeds, including primitive non-divine ones. For example, if you
ask an Eskimo in the North Pole what will happen when one of his folks
dies, he will tell you that he will be placed in his husky dog-pulled
chariot with plenty of food and clothes. The dogs will be told to pull
it wherever they want, and he will be taken to a place reserved for the
dead with which the huskies are familiar. There, he will return to life
and, if he is good, the Eskimo will go on, the place to which the dogs
will take him will be very nice and warm: The food and clothes will keep
recreating themselves indefinitely. And we know how the ancient
Egyptians used to bury their dead with food, clothes and jewelry due to
their belief in the hereafter. Such belief is innate, natural,
instinctive, deeply ingrained in the human nature. Islam portrays the
Judgment Day as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القيامة من منازل الآخره المهوله، بل هولها أشد الأهوال و أعظمها، و
فزعها أكبر فزع، و قد وصفها الله (تبارك و تعالى) في القرآن:
"يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ السَّاعَةِ أَيَّانَ مُرْسَاهَا قُلْ إِنَّمَا
عِلْمُهَا عِندَ رَبِّي لاَ يُجَلِّيهَا لِوَقْتِهَا إِلاَّ هُوَ
ثَقُلَتْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ لاَ تَأْتِيكُمْ إِلاَّ بَغْتَةً
يَسْأَلُونَكَ كَأَنَّكَ حَفِيٌّ عَنْهَا قُلْ إِنَّمَا عِلْمُهَا عِندَ
اللَّهِ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They ask you about the Hour (of Resurrection) when its appointed time
will be. Say: 'The knowledge of this is with my Lord (alone): None but
He can reveal when it will occur; its burden will be weighty throughout
the heavens and the earth. It will come but suddenly to you'. They ask
you as if you were solicitous of it; say: 'The knowledge of it is with
Allah (alone), but most men do not know'*****” (Qur'an, 7:187).**

On p. 312, Vol. 6 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, we read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى الراوندي عن الصادق من آل محمد (عليهم السلام) إن عيسى إبن مريم
(عليه السلام) سأل جبرائيل: متى تقوم القيامة؟ فارتعش جبرائيل حتى سقط
على الأرض مغشيا عليه و أغمي عليه، و لما صحا، قال: يا روح الله، ليس
المسؤول بأعلم من السائل عن أمر القيامة، ثم تلى الآيه التي مر ذكرها
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Ar-Rawandi has quoted Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) saying that Jesus son of Mary
(peace be with him) asked Gabriel once: "When shall the Judgment Day
be?" Gabriel shook till he fell on the ground conscious, and he lost his
consciousness. When he woke up from it, he said, "O Ruhullah (Spirit of
Allah)! The asked person does not know about it more than the
questioner." Then he recited the above verse.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روي أنه لما كان النبي (ﺹ) يذكر القيامة، يتغير صوته و يشتد، و يحمر وجهه
الشريف
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated that whenever the Prophet (ﺹ) mentioned the
Judgment Day, his voice would change and intensifies, and his holy face
would change color. There are many *munjiyat* **المنجيات**, acts of
salvation, that can help during this terrifying Day about which so many
Chapters and verses of the Holy Qur'an warn. Here are some of them:

1) On p. 293, Vol. 7 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, we read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روي أنه من قرأ سورة يوسف (ع) كل يوم أو كل ليلة، يبعث يوم القيامة جميلا
كجمال يوسف (ع)، و لا يستولي عليه فزع يوم القيامة الأكبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who recites Surat Yousuf (Chapter 12 of the Holy Qur'an) every day
or every night will be resurrected on the Judgment Day as beautiful as
Yousuf (Joseph) (peace be with him) used to be, and he will not be
overtaken by the greatest fright of the Judgment Day."

On p. 295 of the same reference, Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) is quoted as having
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من قرأ سورة الدخان في فرائضه و نوافله، فإن الله تعالى يبعثه مع الآمنين
المطمئنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who recites Surat al-Dukhan (Smoke, i.e. Chapter 44 of the Holy
Qur'an) in his obligatory as well as voluntary prayers will be
resurrected by Allah in the company of those who will be secure and
contented.**"**

And the Imam (ﻉ) has also said the following as we read on p. 298 of the
same reference

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
: من قرأ سورة الأحقاف كل ليلة أو كل جمعة، لا يستولي عليه الخوف في
الدنيا، و يجعله الله تعالى في أمان يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Whoever recites Surat al-Ahqaf (Chapter 46 of the Holy Qur'an) every
night or every Friday will not be overtaken by fear in the temporary
life, and Allah Almighty will grant him security on the Judgment Day."

On p. 298, Vol. 7 of the same reference, the Imam (ﻉ) is quoted as
having said:

**من قرأ سورة "و العصر" في نوافله، يبعث يوم القيامة ناصع الوجه، مشرق
المحيا، قرير العين، تبدو على شفتيه البسمة الى أن يدخل الجنة**

" One who recites Surat al-Asr (Chapter 103 of the Holy Qur'an) in his
voluntary prayers will be resurrected on the Judgment Day with a bright
face, shiny forehead, cooled eyes and a smile painted on his lips till
he enters Paradise." 2)

On p. 302, Vol. 7 of the same source, al-Kulayni cites Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ)
as having said that the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) has said:

**من إحترم الذي بيض شعره في الإسلام، جعله الله في أمان من فزع القيامة
الأكبر، و لا يخاف منه**

"One who shows respect to a person who grows grey hair while being
Muslim will be granted by Allah security against the greatest fright of
the Judgment Day and he will not fear that Day."

3) He is also quoted, as stated in the same reference and on the same
page, as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات في طريق مكه في ذهابه إليها أو إيابه عنها، كان آمنا من فزع
القيامة الأكبر، و لا يخاف منه
  </p>
</blockquote>

" One who dies on his way going to Mecca or returning from it will be
secure against the greatest fright of the Judgment Day, and he will not
fear that Day."

And on p. 57 of the same source, as-Saduq quotes him as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات في أحد الحرمين، أي حرم مكة و حرم المدينة، زادهما الله شرفا و
تعظيما، بعثه الله مع الذين لا يخافون، و هم في أمان يوم القيامه
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who is buried in the holy precincts of Mecca the Venerable or in
Medina, may the Almighty increase their honor and glory, will be secure
and resurrected by Allah in the company of those who do not fear and
will enjoy security on the Judgment Day."

 4) On p. 303, Vol. 7 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, it is indicated that as-Saduq
has narrated saying that the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من تهيأت له فاحشه أو شهوه، فتخلى عنها و تجنب التورط فيها خوفا من الله
تعالى جل و علا، حرم الله عليه نار جهنم، و جعله في أمان من هول القيامة
و خوفها
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one had the opportunity to commit a sin or satisfy a lustful desire
but he let it pass by and avoided being involved in it out of his fear
of Allah, the most Sublime, the most Great, Allah will prevent the fire
of Hell from coming near him and will grant him security against the
horror of the Judgment Day and of its fright."

5) The same source cites the Prophet (ﺹ) as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من عادى نفسه و لم يعاد الناس، جعله الله في أمان من فزع يوم القيامه
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one opposes his desires while not being hostile to people, Allah
will grant him security against the greatest fear of the Judgment Day."

6) The great mentor, Sheikh Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi, as we read in Vol.
62 of the same reference, has quoted Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ) as
having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من كظم غيظه و هو قادر على تنفيذه و تطبيقه، ملأ الله تعالى قلبه
بالإيمان و الأمان
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one suppresses his anger while being able to carry its dictates out
and implement them, Allah will fill his heart with conviction and
security."

7) Allah Almighty has said the following in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن جَاءَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ فَلَهُ خَيْرٌ مِّنْهَا وَهُم مِّن فَزَعٍ
يَوْمَئِذٍ آمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Whoever does a good deed will be rewarded with better than it, and
these will be secure against the fright of that Day**" (Qur'an, 27:89).*

A footnote on p. 117, Vol. 7 of *Bihar al-Anwar* cites the Commander of
the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) commenting about the word **الحسنة**
in this verse by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسنه في هذه الإيه المعرفة و الولاية و محبتنا نحن أهل البيت
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The doing of good in this verse is knowing about, accepting the
mastership of and loving us, we Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) (immediate family of the
Prophet (ﺹ))."

8) In the same reference, we are told that as-Saduq has quoted Imam
as-Sadiq (ﻉ) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أعان أخاه المغموم الضمآن بما في وسعه، و أراحه من همه و غمه، أو
أعانه في قضاء حاجته، فله من الله تعالى إثنتان و سبعون رحمة، يعطيه الله
في الدنيا رحمة واحدة، و بها يصلح الله أمر معاشه، و يدخر له إحدى و
سبعين رحمة الباقيه لأهواله و فزعه يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who helps his distressed and thirsty brother as much as he can, or
if he relieves him of his worry and concern, or if he helps him take
care of something, he will receive from Allah Almighty seventy-two
blessings: Allah will grant him in the life of this world one blessing
whereby He repairs his livelihood while saving his remaining seventy-one
blessings for the horrors and fright of the Judgment Day."

More *munjiyat* **منجيات**, acts of adoration that result in one's
salvation, are stated on the pages of al-Qummi's *Manazil al-Akhria*
**منازل الآخرة** to which we refer the reader.

8) ***Al-Hashr*** **الحشر The Gathering:** It is a terrifying phase
which starts when one comes out of his grave, having a new form with
which he is not familiar, and it is one of the three most critical times
through which a human being has to go. Prophet Isa (Jesus Christ), peace
be with him, refers to these three phases during which he will see
nothing but peace as we read in verse 33 of Surat Maryam, a chapter in
the Holy Qur'an named after his saintly mother, Maryam (Mary), where
Jesus is quoted by the Almighty as saying on the very first day when he
was born, a miracle which testified to his extra-ordinary birth to an
extra-ordinary Lady, the Mistress of the world of her time, the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّلامُ عَلَيَّ يَوْمَ وُلِدتُّ وَيَوْمَ أَمُوتُ وَيَوْمَ أُبْعَثُ
حَيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So peace is upon me the day I was born, the day I die, and the day I
shall be raised up to life (again)!” (Qur'an, 19:33).

In Surat al-Ma\`arij (Chapter 70 of the Holy Qur'an), the Almighty says
the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَذَرْهُمْ يَخُوضُوا وَيَلْعَبُوا حَتَّى يُلاقُوا يَوْمَهُمُ الَّذِي
يُوعَدُونَ، يَوْمَ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الأَجْدَاثِ سِرَاعًا كَأَنَّهُمْ
إِلَى نُصُبٍ يُوفِضُونَ ، خَاشِعَةً أَبْصَارُهُمْ تَرْهَقُهُمْ ذِلَّةٌ
ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمُ الَّذِي كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

"So leave them to plunge into vain talk and play until they encounter
the Day they have been promised. (It is) the Day on which they will come
out of their sepulchers in sudden haste as if they were rushing to a
goal-post (fixed for them), their eyes lowered in dejection, ignominy
covering them (all over). Such is the Day they are promised" (Qur'an,
70:42-4).

On p. 111, Vol. 7, of *Bihar al-Anwar*, we read the following text:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روي عن ابن مسعود أنه قال: كنت جالسا في محضر أمير المؤمنين (عليه
السلام)، فقال: في القيامة خمسون موقفا، و كل موقف ألف سنة. الموقف الأول
هو الخروج من القبر، يحبس الناس فيه ألف سنة حفاة عراة جياعا عطاشا، فمن
خرج من جدثه مؤمنا بالله و الجنة و النار و البعث و الحساب و القيامة، و
مقرا بالله، و مصدقا لنبيه و ما أنزل من الله تعالى، نجا من الجوع و
العطش.
  </p>
</blockquote>

"In the Hereafter, there will be fifty stations: Each station lasts a
thousand years. The first station is getting out of the grave. People
will be confined in it for a thousand years barefoot, hungry and
thirsty. Whoever comes out of his grave believing in Allah, in Paradise
and Hell, in the Accounting and the Judgment, admitting Allah as the
Lord, believing in His Prophet and in what Allah Almighty had revealed
to him, will be saved from hunger and thirst."

The Holy Qur'an refers to these fifty thousand years in the following
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعْرُجُ الْمَلائِكَةُ وَالرُّوحُ إِلَيْهِ فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ
مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The angels and the spirit ascend to Him in a Day whose measure is fifty
thousand years" (Qur'an, 70:4).

In *Nahjul-Balagha*, the Commander of the Faithful Ali (ﻉ) says the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و ذلك يوم يجمع الله فيه الأولين و الآخرين لنقاش الحساب، و جزاء
الأعمال، خضوعا قياما قد ألجمهم العرق، و رجفت بهم الأرض، و أحسنهم حالا
من وجد لقدميه موضعا، و لنفسه متسعا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"**It is the Day on which Allah gathers the early generations and the
last to discuss settling accounts and to reward good deeds. People will
be submissive as they stand stifled by sweat, the earth having shaken
underneath their feet. The best condition among them all is one who can
find a foothold and a space." Obviously, the reckoning will take place
on the same earth on which humans have been living for many years, but
the earth will not be the same: All mountains will be then be flattened,
all water in the seas and the oceans would have been turned into fire:
The oxygen will be separated from the hydrogen and set ablaze:

**وَإِذَا الْجِبَالُ سُيِّرَتْ وَإِذَا الْعِشَارُ عُطِّلَتْ وَإِذَا
الْوُحُوشُ حُشِرَتْ وَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ سُجِّرَتْ**

*"**When the mountains vanish (like a mirage); when the she-camels, ten
months with young, are left untended; when the wild beasts are gathered
together, and when the oceans boil over with a swell"*** *(Qur'**a**n,
81:3-6).*

Notice the verse saying: "And when the wild beasts are gathered
together" which indicates that the Day of Gathering will not be confined
to humans but also to animals as well: All those who, without a
justifiable cause, harmed these animals will have to account for their
sins on that horrific Day, and this proves to you how Islam cares so
much not only about humans but also about animals. One can write a book
about "animal rights in Islam" and compare these rights with the abuse
these servants of the Almighty receive at the hands of either ignorant
or selfish humans, but let us not get into that now. As for the last
verse, No. 6, the one referring to the oceans "boiling over with a
swell", I think it is a weak translation of what should be something
like this: "And when the oceans are set ablaze." The earth will be
flattened in order to make room for all billions of humans and animals
and perhaps birds as well; it will be like a thin disk.

Mentor al-Kulayni, as cited on p. 197, Vol. 7 of *Bihar al-Anwar*,
quotes Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان الله تبارك و تعالى يبعث يوم القيامة أناسا من قبورهم، غلت أيديهم و
ربطت إلى أعناقهم لدرجة أنهم لا يستطيعون أن يأخذوا بأيديهم قدر أنمله، و
معهم ملائكة يلومونهم بشدة و يقولون: هؤلاء منعوا الخير القليل عن الخير
الكثير، و هؤلاء هم الذين منحهم الله من عطاياه، فامتنعوا عن أداء حقوق
الله من أموالهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"**Allah, the most Blessed and the most Exalted One, will send on the
Judgment Day people out of their graves: Their hands are tied to their
necks to the extent they cannot take an iota of anything in their hands.
The angels will be with them chastising them harshly and saying: "These
(folks) prevented the doing of small acts of goodness while plenty was
at their disposal. These are the ones whom Allah granted out of His
boons, yet they did not pay what belonged to Allah from their wealth."
In the same reference and on the same page, mentor as-Saduq quotes the
Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) as saying the following in a lengthy tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من وشى بين شخصين، سلط الله عليه في قبره نارا تحرقه إلى يوم القيامه، و
إذا ما خرج من قبره و حفرته، سلط الله عليه حيه سوداء تقطع لحمه إلى أن
يدخل النار
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"**If one drives a wedge between two persons, Allah sends a fire in
his grave that burns him till the Judgment Day. Once he gets out of his
grave, Allah will send on him a black snake that will tear his flesh
apart till he enters hell." The Prophet (ﺹ) is also quoted in the same
reference as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من ملأ عينه من النظر إلى المرأة الغريبه، حشره الله يوم القيامه مسمرا
بمسامير ناريه حتى يحكم الله بين الناس، فيحكم عليه أن يؤخذ الى النار
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one fills his eyes with looking at a stranger woman, Allah will
gather him on the Judgment Day nailed with nails of fire till Allah
judges among the people. He will then rule to throw that man into the
fire of hell." He (ﺹ) is also quoted on the next page of the same
reference as having said the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شارب الخمر يحشر يوم القيامة مسود الوجه، مائل العينين معتمة، معوج الفم،
يسيل اللعاب منه، و قد أخرج لسانه من قفاه
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who drinks wine will be gathered on the Judgment Day with a black
face, his eyes are dark and slanted, his mouth twisted, saliva pouring
down his mouth and his tongue sticking out of his back." Sheikh
as-Saduq, as stated on p. 198 of the same reference cited above, has
quoted Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنه من أزال عن مؤمن همه و غمه، أزال الله عنه هموم الآخره و غمومها، و
يخرج من قبره مفرح القلب مثلجه
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one removes the worry and the agony of another believer, Allah will
remove from him the worries and the agonies of the Hereafter, and he
shall come out of his grave with a happy and cooled heart." Both
al-Kulayni and as-Saduq, as stated in the same reference, narrate a
lengthy tradition from Sadeer, the money exchanger, citing Imam as-Sadiq
(ﻉ) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يحشر الله المؤمن من قبره و معه تمثال و نظير، و كلما رأى المؤمن من
أهوال القيامه، قال له التمثال: لا تخف و لا تحزن فإن لك البشرى من
الرحمن. و يديم على بشارته حتى يبلغ موقف الحساب، فيحاسبه الله حسابا
يسيرا و يأمر له بالجنة و التمثال أمامه. فيقول المؤمن للتمثال: رحمك
الله، فقد كنت لي خلا حسنا، خرجت معي من القبر، و داومت على بشارتي
بالسرور و كرامة الله تعالى إلى أن تحققت لي، فمن أنت؟ فيجيبه التمثال:
أنا السرور الذي أدخلته في قلب أخيك المؤمن في الدنيا، و قد خلقني الله
لأبشرك بالسرور الدائم و الفرح المداوم
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"** Allah gathers a believer, once he is out of his grave, in the
company of an image and a like form. Whenever the believer sees horror
in the Hereafter, the image says to him, "Do not worry and do not
grieve, for you have the glad tidings from the most Merciful One." He
keeps telling him such glad tidings till he takes his place for the
judgment. Allah will then be easy on him as He judges him. He will order
him to be lodged in Paradise. The image will still be standing in front
of him, so the believer will ask it, "May Allah have mercy on you! You
have been a good companion to me: You came out with me from the grave
and continued to give me glad tidings of happiness and honor from Allah
Almighty till this became a reality for me; so, who are you?!" The image
will answer him saying, "I am the pleasure which you entered into the
heart of your believing brother in the temporary life, and Allah created
me so I may inform you of the continuous happiness and incessant
pleasure."

On p. 168, Vol. 7 and p. 380, Vol. 74 of the same reference, mentor
al-Kulayni narrates saying that Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) has also said:

**من كسا أخاه المؤمن كسوة الشتاء أو الصيف، فقد أوجب الله على نفسه أن
يكسوه ملابس الجنه و يسهل عليه مشاق الموت، و يوسع عليه قبره، و تبشره
الملائكه بالبشرى حين خروجه من قبره إشارة الى هذه الآيه الكريمه: "لا
يَحْزُنُهُمُ الْفَزَعُ الأَكْبَرُ وَتَتَلَقَّاهُمُ الْمَلائِكَةُ: هَذَا
يَوْمُكُمُ الَّذِي كُنتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ**

***"One who gives his believing brother an outfit for the winter or for
the summer obligates Allah to clothe him from the outfits of Paradise,
removes the hardships of death from him, expands his grave for him and
the angels convey the glad tiding to him when he comes out of his grave
as referred to in this sacred verse: 'The angels welcome them saying:
This is your Day which Allah promised you!' (Qur'an, 21:103)."***

9) **الميزان Al-Mizan: The Scales of Deeds** It is one of the terrifying
phases/stages of the hereafter; the Almighty says the following in Surat
al-A\`raf:

**وَالْوَزْنُ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْحَقُّ فَمَن ثَقُلَتْ مَوَازِينُهُ
فَأُولَئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ وَمَنْ خَفَّتْ مَوَازِينُهُ فَأُولَئِكَ
الَّذِينَ خَسِرُواْ أَنفُسَهُم بِمَا كَانُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا يَظْلِمُونَ**

"And truly We shall recount their whole story with knowledge, for We
were never absent (at any time or place). The balance that Day will be
(absolutely) true: Those whose scales (of good deeds) will be heavy will
prosper" (Qur'an, 7:8-9).

Following is Surat al-Qari\`a, Chapter of the noise and clamor that
announce the reckoning:

**بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم: الْقَارِعَة: مَا الْقَارِعَة؟ وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ
مَا الْقَارِعَةُ؟ يَوْمَ يَكُونُ النَّاسُ كَالْفَرَاشِ الْمَبْثُوثِ
وَتَكُونُ الْجِبَالُ كَالْعِهْنِ الْمَنفُوشِ فَأَمَّا مَن ثَقُلَتْ
مَوَازِينُهُ فَهُوَ فِي عِيشَةٍ رَّاضِيَة وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَفَّتْ
مَوَازِينُهُ فَأُمُّهُ هَاوِيَةٌ وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا هِيَ؟ نَارٌ
حَامِيَة**

***In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.*** ***The (Day)
of noise and clamor: What is the (Day) of noise and clamor? And what
will explain to you what the (Day) of noise and clamor is? (It is) a Day
on which men will be scattered about like moths, and the mountains will
be like carded wool. It is then that one whose balance (of good deeds)
will be (found) heavy, he will be in a life of good pleasure and
satisfaction. But if one's balance (of good deeds) will be (found)
light, he will have his home in a (bottomless) pit (of hell). And what
will explain to you what this (pit) is? (It is) a fiercely blazing Fire"
(Qur'an, 101:1-11).***

It is called so because it hammers on the hearts with fear and terror.

We read the following on p. 64 of al-Qummi's book **منازل الآخرة**
*Manazil al-Akhira*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إعلم أنه ربما لا يساوي عمل لترجيح كفة الميزان في ثقله مثل الصلاة على
النبي الكريم و آله البررة (صلوات الله عليهم أجمعين) و مثل الخلق الحسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Be informed that perhaps there is nothing that tilts the scales of good
deeds due to its weight like blessing the Venerable Prophet and his
righteous progeny, peace and blessings of Allah be with them all, and
like good manners. On p. 49, Vol. 2 of *Safeenat al-Bihar*, we read the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سأل من روى الحديث : كيف نصلي على محمد وآله؟ فقال الصادق (عليه السلام):
تقول: صلوات الله وصلوات ملائكته وانبيائه ورسله وجميع خلقه على محمد وآل
محمد والسلام عليه وعليهم ورحمة الله وبركاته . قال الراوي : فسألت
الامام: ما ثواب من صلى على النبي هكذا؟ فقال الصادق (عليه اللسلام):
ثوابه الخروج من معاصيه وسيئاته، اي انه يتطهر منها كمن ولد من أمه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The person who narrated this tradition asked Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ): 'How
should we bless Muhammad and his progeny?' The Imam (ﻉ) said, 'You
should say: Blessings of Allah, of His angels, prophets and messengers
and all creation be with Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad; greeting
upon him and upon them, the mercy of Allah and His blessing.' The
narrator said, 'I asked the Imam (ﻉ): What is the reward of one who thus
blesses the Prophet (ﺹ)? The Imam (ﻉ) said: Its reward is one coming out
of his transgressions and sins, that is, he will be purged of them as
though he has just been born."

On p. 443, Vol. 4 of the *Tafsir* book by Sheikh Abu al-Fitooh ar-Razi,
we read the following text:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى الشيخ أبو الفتوح الرازي عن رسول الله (صلى الله عليه و آله و سلم)
أنه قال: في ليلة المعراج، عندما وصلت الى السماء، رأيت ملكا له ألف يد،
وفي كل يد ألف إصبع، كان يعد بأصابعه. فسألت جبرائيل عن إسمه و وظيفته
وعمله، فقال: إنه ملك موكل على عد قطرات المطر النازلة الى الأرض. فسألت
الملك: هل تعلم عدد قطرات المطر الساقطة على الأرض منذ أن خلق الله تعالى
الأرض؟ فاجاب الملك قائلا: يا رسول الله (صلى الله عليه و آله و سلم)، و
الذي بعثك بالحق نبيا الى الخلائق، إني لأعلم عدد قطرات المطر النازلة من
السماء الى الأرض عامة، كما أعلم الساقطة في البحار والقفار والمعمورة
والمزروعة و الأرض السبخة والمقابر. قال النبي (صلى الله عليه و آله و
سلم): فتعجبت من ذكائه وذاكرته في الحساب. فقال الملك: يا رسول الله (صلى
الله عليه و آله و سلم)، ولكني بما لدي من الأيدي والأصابع وما عندي من
الذاكرة والذكاء، فاني أعجز من عد أمر واحد. فقلت له: وما ذاك الامر؟
قال: اذ اجتمع عدد من أفراد أمتك في محفل وذكروا اسمك فصلوا عليك،
فحينذاك أعجز عن حفظ ما لهؤلاء من الأجر والثواب إزاء صلواتهم عليك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sheikh Abu al-Fitooh ar-Razi has quoted the Messenger of Allah, peace
and salutation of Allah be with him and his progeny, saying, "In the
Ascension Night, when I reached the heavens, I saw an angel having a
thousand hands. In each hand he had a thousand fingers. He was counting
with his fingers. I asked Gabriel about his name, function and job.
Gabriel said, 'He is an angel in charge of counting the drops of water
that fall to the ground.' I asked the angel, 'Do you [really] know the
number of rain drops that fall on the earth since Allah Almighty created
the earth?' The angel answered saying, 'O Messenger of Allah (peace and
salutation of Allah be with him and his progeny), by the One Who sent
you in truth as a Prophet to the creation, I know the number of the rain
drops that fall from the sky to the earth, all of it. I also know those
that fall in the seas, on the deserts, on inhabited areas, on farms, on
salty land and on the grave sites.' The Prophet (peace and salutation of
Allah be with him and his progeny) said, 'I was amazed at his
intelligence and memory in calculation.'

The angel, therefore, said, 'O Messenger of Allah (peace and salutation
of Allah be with him and his progeny), but despite all the hands,
fingers, memory and intelligence, I am unable to count one thing.' I
said to him, 'What is it?' He said, 'If some members of your nation
gather together, mention your name and bless you, it is then that I am
unable to calculate how many rewards they will receive for having
blessed you.'" Also, al-Kulayni, the mentor, articulated the following
after having performed the prayers ritual in the afternoon of a Friday:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى الشيخ الكليني ذيل صلوات عصر الجمعة: اللهم صلي على محمد وآل محمد
الأوصياء المرضيين بأفضل صلواتك وبارك عليهم بأفضل بركاتك، والسلام عليه
وعليهم و رحمة الله وبركاته. إنه من قرأ هذه الصلوات سبع مرات، فإن الله
يرد عليه بعدد كل عبد حسنة، وعمله مقبول يوم القيامة، ويأتي يوم القيامة
و بين عينيه نور.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lord! Send Your peace upon Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad, the
*wasis*, the pleased ones, bless them with the best of Your blessings,
peace be with him and with them, the mercy of Allah and His blessings.
Anyone who recites this supplication seven times will be rewarded by
Allah with rewards the number of which equals that of all of His
servants; his good deeds will be accepted on the Judgment Day, and he
will come out on the Judgment Day with *noor* (celestial light) shining
between his eyes." On p. 49, Vol. 2 of *Safeenat al-Bihar*, we read the
following text:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روي أنه من قال بعد صلاة الصبح والظهر: اللهم صلي على محمد وآله وعجل
فرجهم واحشرنا معهم وارزقنا شفاعتهم، فانه لا يموت الا و مدرك القائم من
آل محمد (عليهم السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who recites the following after the morning and afternoon prayers
will not die before seeing al-Qa'im [al-Mahdi عج] from among the progeny
of Muhammad, peace be with them: 'Lord! Bless Muhammad and his progeny,
speed up their ease, gather us in their company and grant us their
intercession.'"

10) ***Al-Hisab*** **الحساب** **The Reckoning**: It is one of the most
terrifying of all phases/stages of the hereafter, so much so that the
hereafter is often referred to, as a whole, as "the Day of Reckoning".
Numerous verses in the Holy Qur'an refer to it, emphasizing its
significance and urging the faithful to prepare themselves for it with
good deeds and acts of adoration, the latter cannot be accepted if the
former are not. Some of the verses which refer to reckoning and to the
fact that people take it lightly are these:

**بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم. اقْتَرَبَ لِلنَّاسِ حِسَابُهُمْ وَهُمْ فِي
غَفْلَةٍ مُّعْرِضُونَ، مَا يَأْتِيهِم مِّن ذِكْرٍ مَّن رَّبِّهِم
مُّحْدَثٍ إِلاَّ اسْتَمَعُوهُ وَهُمْ يَلْعَبُونَ، لاهِيَةً قُلُوبُهُمْ
وَأَسَرُّواْ النَّجْوَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ: هَلْ هَذَا إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ
مِّثْلُكُمْ؟ أَفَتَأْتُونَ السِّحْرَ وَأَنتُمْ تُبْصِرُونَ؟ قَالَ رَبِّي
يَعْلَمُ الْقَوْلَ** **فِي السَّمَاء وَالأَرْضِ وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ
الْعَلِيمُ، بَلْ قَالُواْ أَضْغَاثُ أَحْلامٍ، بَلِ افْتَرَاهُ، بَلْ هُوَ
شَاعِرٌ، فَلْيَأْتِنَا بِآيَةٍ كَمَا أُرْسِلَ الأَوَّلُونَ: مَا آمَنَتْ
قَبْلَهُم مِّن قَرْيَةٍ أَهْلَكْنَاهَا، أَفَهُمْ يُؤْمِنُونَ؟**

***"In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***
***Mankind's reckoning comes closer and closer: Yet they do not heed,
and they turn away. (Nothing) ever comes to them of a renewed message
from their Lord except that they listen to it as in jest, their hearts
toying with trifles. The wrongdoers conceal their private counsels
(saying), 'Is this more than a man like your own selves? Will you yield
to witchcraft with your eyes open?' Say: 'My Lord knows (every) word
(spoken) in the heavens and the earth: He is the One Who hears and knows
(all things).' 'No,' they say, '(these are) medleys of dreams! No, he
forged it! No, he is (but) a poet! Then let him bring us a Sign like the
ones that were sent to (Prophets) of old!' (As for those) before them,
not one of the populations which We destroyed believed: Will***
***these*** ***believe?" (Qur'an, 21:1-6).***

**وَكَأَيِّن مِّن قَرْيَةٍ عَتَتْ عَنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّهَا وَرُسُلِهِ
فَحَاسَبْنَاهَا حِسَابًا شَدِيدًا وَعَذَّبْنَاهَا عَذَابًا نُّكْرًا،
فَذَاقَتْ وَبَالَ أَمْرِهَا وَكَانَ عَاقِبَةُ أَمْرِهَا خُسْرًا: أَعَدَّ
اللَّهُ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا شَدِيدًا فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَا أُولِي
الأَلْبَابِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قَدْ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْرًا:
رَّسُولا يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ مُبَيِّنَاتٍ لِّيُخْرِجَ
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى
النُّور،ِ وَمَن يُؤْمِن بِاللَّهِ وَيَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا يُدْخِلْهُ
جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا،
قَدْ أَحْسَنَ اللَّهُ لَهُ رِزْقًا**

***How many generations that insolently opposed their Lord's command and
(that) of His Prophets did We call to account, to a severe account? And
We imposed on them an exemplary punishment. Then they tasted the evil
result of their conduct, and the end of their conduct was perdition.
Allah has prepared a severe punishment for them (in the hereafter). So
fear Allah, O you men of understanding who have believed, for Allah has
indeed sent down a message for you, a Prophet who rehearses God's Signs
to you, containing clear explanations, so that he may lead forth those
who believe and do righteous deeds from the depths of darkness into the
light. And those who believe in Allah and do righteous deeds He will
admit into gardens beneath which rivers flow to dwell therein forever:
Allah has indeed granted a most excellent provision for them" (Qur'an,
65:8-11).***

Just as there are numerous references to reckoning in the Holy Qur'an,
there are also numerous references to it in the Sunnah of the Prophet
(ﺹ): Many traditions warn the believers about its woes and perils. On p.
258, Vol. 7 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, we read the following:

**روى الشيخ الصدوق (رحمة الله عليه) عن طريق أهل البيت (عليهم السلام) أنه
قال رسول الله (صلى الله عليه و آله و سلم): لا تتحرك قدما عبد من عباد
الله، إلا و أن يسأل عن أربعه: عن عمره فيم أفناه، و عن شبابه فيم قضاه، و
عن ماله من أين وجده، و فيم صرفه، و عن محبتنا نحن أهل البيت**

Sheikh as-Saduq (may Allah have mercy on him) has narrated through the
path of Ahl al-Bayt (peace be with them) saying that the Messenger of
Allah (peace and salutation of Allah be with him and his progeny) said:
"The feet of a servant of Allah do not move before he is asked about
four things: his lifespan and how he spent it, his youth and what he did
during it, his wealth and where he found it and how he spent it and
about love for us, we Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ)."

On p. 267 of the same reference, we read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى الشيخ الطوسي (رحمة الله عليه) عن الامام الباقر (عليه السلام أنه
قال: أول ما يحاسب عنه العبد الصلاة، إن قبلت قبل ما سواها
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sheikh at-Tusi (may Allah have mercy on him) has narrated from Imam
al-Baqir (peace be with him) saying: "The first thing about which a
servant of Allah is questioned is prayer. If it is accepted, everything
else is accepted." On p. 274 of the same reference, we read the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى الشيخ الصدوق أن الدائن يأتي يوم القيامه و يشتكي، فاذا كان للمدين
حسنات، تؤخذ منه للدائن، و ان لم تكن له حسنات، فتؤخذ من معاصي الدائن و
تضاف الى معاصي المدين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Sheikh as-Saduq has narrated saying that the creditor comes on the
Judgment Day and complains. If the borrower has good deeds, they (some
of them if not all) will be taken away and given to the creditor. But if
he has no good deeds, some of the sins of the creditor will be taken and
added to those of the borrower."

On p. 82 of *Manazil al-Akhira*, we read the following

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
: إعلم أن بعض المحققين قد قال: لا ينجو من مخاطر الحساب و دقائق الميزان
إلا من حاسب نفسه في الدنيا و آختبر شخصه بميزان الشرع الاسلامي و كذلك
أعماله و أقواله و أفعاله و سيئاته و لحظاته و حركاته و سكناته، فقد
قالوا: حاسبوا أنفسكم قبل أن تحاسبوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Be informed that some critics have said: Nobody is spared the perils of
reckoning and the precisions of the scales except one who holds himself
to account in the short life and tests his person according to the
scales of the Islamic *Shari\`a*, applying the same to his actions,
statements, deeds, sins, looks, motion and stillness, for they have
said: Hold yourselves to account before you yourselves are held to
account."

11) **تسليم صحيفة الأعمال** ***Tasleem Safeet al-A\`mal*****: Delivering
the Book of Deeds:** It is one of the terrifying phases of the Judgment
Day when the list of deeds is delivered to the one it belongs to. The
Almighty has made a number of references to this book of deeds; here are
some of them:

**وَإِذَا الصُّحُفُ نُشِرَتْ،**

" When the scrolls are laid open" (Qur'an, 81:10);

and also these verses:

**فَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ فَسَوْفَ يُحَاسَبُ
حِسَابًا يَسِيرًا وَيَنقَلِبُ إِلَى أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا، وَأَمَّا مَنْ
أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ وَرَاء ظَهْرِهِ فَسَوْفَ يَدْعُو ثُبُورًا وَيَصْلَى
سَعِيرًا**

"He who is given his book in his right hand, soon his account will be
taken by an easy reckoning, and he will turn to his people, rejoicing!
But whoever is given His record behind his back, He will soon cry for
perdition, and he will enter a blazing Fire" (Qur'an, 84:7-12).

On p. 314, Vol. 7 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, al-Ayyashi quotes Imam as-Sadiq
(ﻉ) saying:

**إذا قامت القيامة، تعطى لكل واحد قائمة أعماله و يقال له: إقرأ، و يذكره
الله جميع أعماله بالنظر إلى تلك الصحيفة، و كذلك جميع أقواله، و خطواته و
غيرها و كأنه قالها و فعلها و خطاها في الحال، فيقولون: "يا ويلتنا، ما
لهذا الكتاب لا يغادر صغيرة و لا كبيرة إلا أحصاها؟"**

When it is Judgment Day, everyone will be handed over his list of deeds,
and it will be said to him, 'Read!' Allah will remind him of all his
deeds through looking at this tablet, and the same applies to his
statements, steps and everything else, as if he said, did or treaded
them instantly. People will say,

***'Woe unto us! Why does this book not leave out the recording of
anything, be it small or big?!'" (Qur'an, 18:49).***

Ibn Qawlawayh has quoted Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من زار قبر الحسين (عليه السلام) في شهر رمضان و مات في سفر زيارته
للحسين (عليه السلام)، فلا يتعرض لأمر أو حساب و يقال له: أدخل الجنة لا
خوف عليك
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one visits the gravesite of Imam al-Husayn (ﻉ) during the month of
Ramadan and dies during his trip to visit al-Husayn (ﻉ), he will not be
exposed to anything, nor will he be held to account, and it will be said
to him, "Enter Paradise, you shall not fear." \`Allama al-Majlisi, may
Allah have mercy on him, has quoted Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) through two
reliable *isnads* as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من زارني على بعد قبري، أتيته في مواطن ثلاثه: يوم القيامه لأنقذه من
أهوالها، و عند تطائر كتب المحسنين إلى يمينهم، و صحائف المجرمين إلى
شمائلهم، و على الصراط، و على الميزان
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one comes from a distance to visit my gravesite, I shall go to him
on three occasions: on the Judgment Day to save him from its woes, when
the books of the doers of good are flown to their right hands, when the
tablets of the criminals are flown to their left, on the Sirat [path
between Paradise and Hell] and at the Mizan (scales of deeds)." In the
book titled *Al-Haqq al-Yaqeen* **الحق اليقين**, it is indicated that
al-Husayn ibn Sa'eed has quoted Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) as having said:

> إذا أراد الله أن يحاسب مؤمنا، أعطاه كتابه بيمينه، و يحاسبه فيما بينه و
> بينه دون أن يطلع على حسابه أحد، و يقول له: عبدي، لقد فعلت كذا و كذا،
> فيجيب العبد: إلهي، لقد فعلته. و يقول الله تعالى: غفرت لك و بدلته إلى
> حسنات. فيقول الناس: سبحان الله! إن هذا العبد لم يقترف ذنبا، و لم يرتكب
> قبيحا، و هذا معنى قوله تعالى: " فَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ
> بِيَمِينِهِ فَسَوْفَ يُحَاسَبُ حِسَابًا يَسِيرًا وَيَنقَلِبُ إِلَى
> أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا" (الإنشقاق، 7-9) . فسأل الراوي: أي أهل يقصد بهذا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأهل؟ هل يصحب المؤمن أهله الذين كانوا معه في الدنيا؟ قال الصادق (ع):
إذا أراد الله بعبد سوءا حاسبه جهرا أمام الخلائق و أتم عليه حجته و
أعطاه كتابه إلى شماله، كما قال الله تعالى: " وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ
كِتَابَهُ وَرَاء ظَهْرِهِ فَسَوْفَ يَدْعُو ثُبُورًا وَيَصْلَى
سَعِيرًا، إِنَّهُ كَانَ فِي أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا " – يعني في الدنيا—، "
إِنَّهُ ظَنَّ أَن لَّن يَحُورَ" يعني أنه لن يعود — و هذا يشير إلى أن
أيدي الكفار و المنافقين تغل و تقيد و تسلم صحائفهم إلى شمالهم، و إلى
هاتين الحالتين أشير في أدعية الوضوء عند غسل اليدين: "اللهم أعطني كتابي
بيميني و خلودي في الجنه بشمالي، و حاسبني حسابا يسيرا، و لا تعطني كتابي
عن شمالي و لا وراء ظهري، و لا تغل يدي إلى عنقي".
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If Allah wants to hold a believer to account, he gives him his book [of
deeds] in his right hand and judges him between Himself and the believer
without anyone seeing it. He will then say to him, 'My servant! You have
done this and that.' The servant will say, 'Lord, I have done it.' Allah
Almighty will say, 'I have forgiven you and change it into good deeds.'
People will say, 'Blessed be Allah! This servant of Allah did not commit
a sin, nor did he do anything contemptible!' This is the meaning of the
verse of the Almighty**:** Then whoever is given his record in his right
hand, soon his account will be taken by an easy reckoning, and he will
turn to his people, rejoicing**!**' (Qur'an, 84:7-9). The narrator
asked, 'What is meant by *his people* (his family)? Does the believer
accompany his folks who used to be with him in this life?'

Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) said, 'If Allah wants something bad to afflict His
servant [on account of the latter's deeds], He will try him before all
creations, complete His argument against him then gives him his book in
his left hand as Allah Almighty has said:

***Truly he thought that he would not have to return (to Us)!' (Qur'an,
84:14).***

This points towards the hands of the unbelievers and hypocrites being
tied and chained and their tablets delivered on their left side. It is
to both these conditions that the supplications related to ablution
refer: 'Lord! Give me my book in my right hand and my eternity in
Paradise on my left; do judge me easily and do not give me my book on my
left or behind my back, and do not tie my hands to my neck."

12) ***As-Sirat*** ***al-Mustaqeem*** **الصراط المستقيم The Straight
Path** is also one of the most terrifying phases/stages of the Hereafter
if not the very most. It is described in both Holy Qur'an and authentic
Sunnah in numerous verses and traditions (**أحاديث** ) due to its
significance, so much so that the faithful are reminded of it ten times
a day in their obligatory daily prayers and in all optional ones
(**نوافل**) when they recite Surat al-Fatiha, the Opening Chapter to the
Book of Allah, the Qur'an. Following is a good deal of more information
about this Sirat; so, keep reading.

On pp. 103-105, Vol. 46 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, we read detailed
descriptions of this Sirat, and additional text is indicated on pp.
69-71 of the same reference. Here is some of the text on the latter
pages:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هو جسر ممدود على جهنم، لا يدخل الجنة إلا من اجتازه. و جاء في الروايات
أنه أدق من الشعرة و أحد من السيف و أصلى من النار. يعبره خالص المؤمنين
كالبرق الخاطف، و بعضهم يعبره بصعوبة لكنه يجتازه و ينجو بنفسه. و بعض
المارة يسقطون في جهنم من بعض عقبات الصراط. و هو نموذج من صراط الدنيا
المستقبم حيث الدين الحق و طريق الولاية، و متابعة أمير المؤمنين و ذريته
الأئمة الطاهرين (صلوات الله عليهم أجمعين)، فمن مال عن هذا الصراط
الدنيوي و عدل عنه إلى الباطل قولا أو عملا، فقد ارتجف من عقبة صراط
الآخرة و سقط الى الجحيم، و الصراط المستقيم الذي تجده في سورة الحمد في
القرآن الكريم يشير إلى صراط الدنيا و صراط الآخرة كليهما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

"It is a bridge extended over Hell: Nobody enters Paradise without
successfully passing over it. Traditions indicate that it is thinner
than hair, sharper than the sword and hotter than fire. Sincere
believers cross over it like lightning that snatches the eyes. Some of
them pass over it with difficulty but they pass it and are thus saved,
whereas others fall into Hell from one of the obstacles on this Sirat.

It is a sort of this life's *As-Sirat al-Mustaqeem* where true faith,
the path of the *wilaya* **ولاية**, is to follow in the footsteps of the
Commander of the Faithful and the Purified Imams (peace of Allah be with
all of them): Anyone who swerves from this worldly path and leans
towards falsehood by speech or by action, the obstacle of the
Hereafter's Sirat will shake under his feet, causing him to fall into
hell. *A*s-*Sirat Al-Mustaqeem* which you find in Surat al-Hamd in the
Holy Qur'an points out to both Sirats: the one in this life and the one
in the hereafter."

In his book titled *Al-Haqq Al-Yaqeen* **الحق اليقين,** where he quotes
*Al-\`Aqa'id* **العقائد** by Sheikh as-Saduq, may Allah have mercy on
his soul, al-Majlisi states the following:

> إننا نعتقد أن كل عقبة من العقبات التي تعترض سبيل المحشر هو إسم لفريضة
> من الفرائض—الأوامر و النواهي—فإذا وصل الإنسان الى عقبة مسماة بإسم
> فريضة، و كان مقصرا في ذلك الواجب، اوقف في تلك العقبة و طلب منه تأدية
> حق الله تعالى بالنسبة لذلك الواجب. فإن إستطاع الخروج من تلك العقبة
> بالأعمال الصالحة التي قدمها، أو برحمة من الله تشمله، فقد خرج و اجتاز
> تلك العقبة بالذات، و مدة التوقيف في كل عقبة ألف سنة، و تتوالى العقبات،
> و تتواصل التوقيفات و تنهال الأسئلة و الإستنطاق عما يعود إلى مسمى إسم
> تلك العقبة من الواجب و الفريضة، حتى إذا أجاب عن جميع ما عليه بما يجب
> من حسن الإجابة، إنتهى من العقبة الأخيرة إلى دار البقاء و سرح سراحا
> جميلا، و يحيى حياة خالدة لا موت فيها و لا بوار، و يسعد سعادة لا شقاء
> فيها و لا دمار، و يسكن إلى جوار رحمة ربه مع النبيين و الحجج و الصديقين
> و الشفعاء و الصالحين و حسن أولئك رفيقا. أما إذا استجوب في عقبة من
> العقبات، و طلب منه حق قصر في تأديته في الدنيا، و لم يقدم عملا صالحا
> يكافىء ذلك التقصير، و لا تدركه رحمة من الله تعالى لينجو من تلك العقبة،
> فتزل قدمه في تلك العقبة و يسقط منها إلى الهاوية و الجحيم، و نعوذ بالله
> من ذلك الأمر. و جميع هذه العقبات على الصراط،، تسمى واحده منها الولاية،
> يتوقف فيها جميع الخلائق، فيسأل عن ولاية أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب
> و الأئمة الطاهرين من بعده، فإذا كان قد أتاها و إتبعها فقد نجا و اجتاز
> هذه العقبة، و إلا فقد هوى إلى الجحيم. قال تعالى: "وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُم
> مَّسْئُولُونَ" (الصافات: آيه 24)، و أهم العقبات هي المرصاد: "إِنَّ
> رَبَّكَ لَبِالْمِرْصَادِ" (الفجر: آية 14). يقول الله تعالى: بعزتي و
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جلالي لا يفوتني ظلم ظالم. و تسمى عقبة أخرى بعقبة الرحم، و أخرى
بالأمانة، و أخرى بالصلاة، و هكذا فِِإِن لكل فريضة أو أمر من أوامر
الله، أو نهي من نواهيه، يقف المرء ليجيب عما هو مسؤول عنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

"We believe that each of the obstacles along the path to the Gathering
represents the name of one of the obligations, i.e. what the Almighty
has commanded or prohibited. If someone reaches an obstacle bearing the
name of an obligation, and if he had fallen short of performing that
obligation, he will be stopped at it and will be required to pay what he
owes Allah Almighty. If he can get out of that obstacle through the good
deeds which he had done, or there may be mercy from Allah which will
include him, he will get out and pass that particular obstacle. The time
period of keeping anyone at each of these obstacles is a thousand years.

The obstacles continue, following each other; questions go on and
arguments are pursued about what each station represents: the
obligations and the commandments. If one answers duly, he will pass by
the last station to the abode of eternity and will be released most
beautifully: He will live a perpetual life where there is neither death
nor loss, and he will taste happiness where there is neither misery nor
destruction. He will live beside the mercy of his Lord with the
prophets, the Signs of Allah, the Truthful Ones, the ones who can
intercede on behalf of others, the righteous ones whose company is truly
the very best.

But if he is asked at one of the obstacles and required to make up for
falling short of performing it during his lifetime, if he did not offer
an act of righteousness to make up for that shortcoming, and if he is
not saved through mercy from Allah Almighty that rescues him from that
obstacle, his feet will slip in that area and he will fall from it into
the abyss and into Hell, we seek refuge with Allah against this. All
these obstacles are on the Sirat.

One of them is called the *wilayat* (mastership of or loyalty to the
Imams from among the Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ)): All people will be stopped at it
and asked about the *wilayat* of the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn
Abu Talib and the Pure Imams after him (ﻉ). If one was observing this
*wilayat*, adhering to it, he will pass this obstacle; otherwise, he
will fall into Hell.

Allah Almighty has said

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُم مَّسْئُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"But stop them, for they must be asked" (Qur'an, 37:24).***

And the most important of these obstacles is the Mirsad: **إِنَّ رَبَّكَ
لَبِالْمِرْصَادِ**

***"For your Lord is (as a Guardian) on a watch-tower" (Qur'an,
89:14).***

Allah Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بعزتي و جلالي لا يفوتني ظلم ظالم
  </p>
</blockquote>

"By My Honor and Greatness (do I swear) that no oppression committed by
an oppressor escapes My knowledge." Another obstacle is called the
kinship obstacle. Another is called *amana* **أمانة**, trust (something
entrusted for safe keep to someone)**,** another is called *salat*
**صلاة**, prayer, and so on:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لكل فريضه من الفرائض—الأوامر و النواهي—يوقف العبد عندها ليجيب عما هو
مسؤول عنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Each obligation—what is commanded and what is prohibitive—has an
obstacle at which the servant of Allah is stopped to answer about his
responsibility towards it."

On p. 65, Vol. 8 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, we read the following:

**فترى الناس على الصرلط يسقطون كالفراش المبثوث، و ترى آخرين قد تعلقوا
بأيديهم أو بيد واحده أو بأرجلهم و هم يمسكون خوفا من الهبوط و الملائكة
حولهم واقفون يدعون و ينادون: أيها الرب الحليم، اغفر لهؤلاء و اعف عن
هؤلاء بفضلك و جودك، و سلمهم ليجاوزوا الصراط و يقطعوا الصراط. فمن اجتاز
الصراط برحمة الله الواسعة، قال: الحمد لله، و بنعمة الله تتم صالحات
الأعمال، و تنمو الحسنات، و أحمد الله الذي نجاني منك بفضله و منه، بعد أن
كنت قد يئست، ان ربنا لأعمال العباد لغفور شكور**

"So you would see people on the Sirat falling like scattered butterflies
while others are holding to it with their hands or feet or even with one
foot fearing they would fall down as the angels around them stand, call
upon the Almighty and plead to Him saying: 'O Clement Lord! Forgive
these people, overlook them through Your favor and generosity, let them
safely pass on the Path and cross it.'

Whoever passes the Path does so through wide mercy from Allah and says,
'Praise to Allah and through a blessing from Allah that good deeds are
sealed and blessed actions grow, and I praise Allah Who saved me from
you through His favor and boon after I had lost all hope; surely our
Lord forgives the servants' [sinful] deeds, appreciative [of good
deeds]'."

On p. 410, Vol. 22 of the same reference, we are also told that the
great *sahabi* Abu Tharr al-Ghifari (رض) has cited the Messenger of
Allah (ﺹ) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرحم و الأمانه على طرفي الصراط، فمن وصل الرحم و أدى الأمانة، سار على
الصراط، فإن طرفي الصراط يحفظانه من السقوط و الهبوط في النار
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Kinship and trust are at both ends of the Path: Whoever maintains good
relations with his kinsfolk and returns the trust safely will pass over
the Path, for both ends of the Path shall protect him against falling
into the Fire." In another narrative, Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذا ورد قاطع الرحم و خائن الأمانة الصراط، فإن أعماله الحسنة لا تنفعه
ما دامت له هاتان الخصلتان و تسقطانه في النار
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one who severed his ties and betrayed the trust reaches the Path,
his good deeds will not avail him so long as both these characteristics
were in him, and they will cause him to fall into the Fire (of hell)."

May the Almighty have mercy on us in this life and the life to come and
enable us to keep our feet firm on His **الصراط المستقيم** Straight Path
and admit us into His Paradise, *Allahomma Ameen*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم آمين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أعمال لتسهيل المرور على الصراط:
  </p>
</blockquote>

Good deeds that make the passage on the Sirat easy:

1. According to p. 639 of the book **الأعمال إقبال** *Al-Iqbal* by Ibn
Tawoos, one who offers 21 *rek'as* after the sunset prayers in the eve
of the first of the month of Rajab in each *rek'a* of which he recites
both Surat al-Hamd (Chapter 1) and Surat at-Tawhid (Chapter 112), then
he recites the *tasleem* after each couple of prostrations will be
protected by the Almighty, and his family, wealth and children will be
protected, too, and he will be granted security from the torment in the
grave. Moreover, he will pass over the Sirat without any questioning
like lightning.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من صلّى أول ليلة من شهر رجب بعد صلاة المغرب عشرين ركعة بالحمد والتوحيد
، ويسلم بين كل ركعتين ليحفظ في نفسه وأهله وماله وولده، واجير من عذاب
القبر، وجاز على الصراط كالبرق الخاطف.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. On p. 136 of *Thawab al-A\`mal*, we are told that one who fasts six
days during the month of Rajab will be secure on the Day of Reckoning
and will pass over the Sirat without being asked any questions.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من صام من رجب ستة أيّام ... بعث من الآمنين يوم القيامة حتّى يمرّ على
الصراط بغير حساب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. Ibn Tawoos also narrates that one who performs ten *rek'as* during
the 29th eve of the month of Sha'ban, reciting in each rek'a Surat
al-Hamd once and at-Takathur (Chapter 102) ten times, in addition to
both Chapter 113 and Chapter 114 ten times each and Surat at-Tawhid
(Chapter 112), he will be granted by the Almighty rewards of those who
exert their utmost in learning the creed and in teaching it, making his
scale of good deeds heavier and easing for him to pass over the Sirat
like lightning.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن صلّى في الليلة التاسعة والعشرين من شعبان عشر ركعات يقرأ في كل ركعة
فاتحة الكتاب مرّة وألهاكم التكاثر عشر مرّات ، والمعوذتين عشر مرّات،
وقل هو الله أحد عشر مرّات، أعطاه الله تعالى ثواب المجتهدين، وثقل
ميزانه، ويخفف عنه الحساب، ويمرّ على الصراط كالبرق الخاطف.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. On p. 102, Vol. 34 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, we are told that one who
performs the *ziyara* of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) despite his grave being so
far, the Imam will visit him at three places on the Judgment Day in
order to save him from their horrors, and one of these horrors is the
Sirat.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من زار الامام الرضا عليهِ السَّلام على بعد قبره الشريف، فانّه يأتي
عنده يوم القيامة في ثلاثة مواطن ليخلصه من أهوالها ، وانّ أحدها عند
الصراط .
  </p>
</blockquote>

What will happen after all of these phases/stages? The answer is very
simple: One will be led either to eternal happiness in Paradise or to
damnation in hell. And surely Allah knows best.

**Marji\` taqlid مرجع تقليد:** the highest theological authority-referee
followed

**Marwa or Marwah مروه:** a mound near the Ka'ba referred to in the
Qur'an as a place one of Islam's rites, the *sa\`i* between the Safa and
the Marwa, is performed 7 times during the pilgrimage or the *\`umra*

**Masjid مسجد:** a place of worship, a mosque, where people can perform
the *salat* rite. The life of the early Muslims used to revolve around
the *masjid*. Meetings were held there and discussions took place.

**Mash \`ar مشعر:** a place where certain rites are conducted, a sacred
area or place or precinct

**Ma\`soom معصوم:** infallible, divinely protected against sinning

**Mawla مولى:** It is a word with dual meaning: Depending on its usage,
it may mean either "master" or "slave," or it may mean one who is most
fit for a specific position of honor and prestige. Derived from the
adjective *awla* (one who is best qualified), it denotes the person who
is best suited to be the religious and/or temporal leader of the
Muslims. It also means a person/slave who does not have tribal
protection.

**Mawlaya مولاي!:** a form of address to a ruler who is referred to as
the protector

**Mihrab محراب:** a recess/area in the *masjid*, mosque that indicates
the direction of the Qibla

**Mina** **or Minna** **منى:** a plain within the limits of the *haram*,
precincts, of Mecca, about five kilometers outside the city limits.
During the *hajj*, the pilgrims pass the night between the eighth and
ninth day before proceeding to Arafat on the ninth day.

**Minbar منبر:** pulpit, podium

**Mi \`raj معراج:** Prophet’s ascension from Jerusalem to the heavens

**Mithqal مثقال:** a weight equivalent to 24 karats or 4.68 grams

**Mu'adh-dhin or Muaththin مؤذن:** the person who calls the *athan*, the
call for prayers

**Mufassir مفسر:** theologian who is well-versed in the exegesis of the
Holy Qur'an and is capable of interpreting its verses

**Mufti** **مفتي:** a judge who enjoys the power to issue binding legal
opinions relevant to the Islamic faith

**Muhaddith محدث:** traditionist, one who tracks and quotes statements
of Prophet Muammed (ص)

**Muhajir مهاجر:** person who undergoes *hijra*, migration

**Mujahid مجاهد :** one who practices *jihad* (se *jihad* above),
someone who is active and who struggles for the dignity and honor of
Islam, a Muslim struggler

**Mujtahid مجتهد:** one who acquires the degree of *ijtihad* and thus
becomes capable of deriving religious decisions/verdicts on his own

**Mu'min مؤمن:** believer, one who has *iman*, conviction, true belief,
a person who has deep faith in Allah and is a righteous and obedient
servant of His

**Munafiq منافق:** hypocrite, one whose external appearance is Islamic
(with regard to performing the rituals or to promoting the creed) but
whose inner reality conceals *kufr*—often unknown to the persons
themselves. (See Al-Baqarah, verses 8-23).

A *munafiq* is more dangerous to the society and the religion and worse
than a *kafir*: plural: *munafiqun*, hypocrites; refer to Ch. 63 of the
Holy Qur’an titled al-Munafiqoon **المنافقون**, the hypocrites, which
refers to interest-seekers and loafers from among the *sahaba*,
companions, who used to hang around the Prophet not out of their love
for Islam (ص) but for other un-Islamic reasons of their own.

**Murabit مرابط:** a person who disseminates and propagates for the
Islamic creed

**Mustad'afin or** **Mustad\`afun or Mustad\`afoon:** **مستظعفين أو
مستظعفون** a downtrodden, weak and oppressed person

**Mushaf مصحف:** a book, a sacred book, usually refers to a copy of the
Qur'an but linguistically it refers to any book; a book manuscript
(*Mushaf Fatima*, the very first book written in Islam; it contained
some traditions of the Prophet (ﺹ), narratives about some important
contemporary incidents, explanations of some verses of the Holy Qur'an
and other very interesting and valuable information; it seems that this
great book was lost; it must not be confused with the Holy Qur'an simply
because it is not) on which the names of all the succeeding Imams were
written down; three of them were named Muhammad and four were named Ali,
all being her offspring, and the last was named al-Qa’im **القائم
(عج)**. Fatima’s Mushaf **مصحف فاطمة** must not be confused with the
Holy Qur’an. It is not a Qur’an; refer to what is stated about Fatima
(ع) daughter of the Prophet (ص) above for details.

**Mushawarah مشاوره:** consultation, consulting, palry

**Mushrik مشرك:** a polytheist, a person who ascribes partners to Allah
or believes in the existence of many gods

**Musnad مسند:** compilation of traditions (*ahadith*) which are
consecutively and chronologically traced back to their transmitters

**Mutawatir متواتر:** consecutively reported, traced by a perfect
chronological chain of ascertained narrators of *hadith*

**Mu'aththin مؤذن:** caller to prayers (usually at a mosque)

**Mut\`a** **متعة:** literally it means: enjoyment; temporary marriage;
refer to verse 24 of Chapter 4 (an-Nisaa) of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا اسْتَمْتَعْتُمْ بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ فَـَاتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ
فَرِيضَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

where the root word for it is**: اسْتَمْتَعْتُمْ**, that is, “you
enjoyed”.

Temporary marriage existed during the time of the Prophet (ص), of first
caliph Abu Bakr and part of second caliph, Omer ibn al-Khattab who,
because of a certaint incident, banned it although his son, the famous
and highly respected narrator of *hadith*, namely Abdullah ibn Omer,
kept practicing despite his father’s prohibition. He is reported as
having regarded *mut'a* as being Islamically permissible.

Ahmed, *Musnad*, No. 2, p. 95; Ali ibn Abu Bakr al-Haithami, *Mujma'
Az-Zawaaid*, Vol. 7, pp. 332-33; Sa'eed ibn Mansour, *Sunan*, Vol. 1, p.
252 and Abu Ya'li, *Musnad*, Vol. 10, p. 68 quote Abdullah ibn Omer
saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"و الله ما كنا على عهد رسول الله (ص) زانين و لا مسافحين
  </p>
</blockquote>

By Allah! During the time of the Messenger of Allah (ص), we were neither
adulterers nor fornicators." Only Shi’ites now perform this marriage
without encouraging it except when there are legitimate reasons for it.
Some Sunnis, notably Shafi’is, seem to have found a number of almost
similar types of marriage the most famous of which is **زواج المسيار**
misyar (or misyaar) marriage, as well as marriage with the intention to
divorce, coworker’s marriage, etc.


