Part 4: Husayn’s Successors - Nine Infallible Imams
===================================================

The hero of Karbala’’, Imam Husayn (ﻉ), was succeeded by nine sinless
and infallible Imams who led the Islamic nation and are still leading it
to the Straight Path, the path of happiness in the life of this world
and salvation in the life to come. Following is a brief account of these
Imams (ﻉ)[^1].

1) Imam Ali Ibn Al-Husayn Zain Al-Abidin (as)
---------------------------------------------

Imam Husayn (ﻉ) was succeeded as the nation’s spiritual leader by his
only surviving son Ali, nicknamed “Zain al-Abidin,” the best of those
who worship the Almighty, and also “as-Sajjad,” the one who quite often
prostrates to Allah. Ali was born on the fifteenth of Jumada II, 38 A.H.
(November 19, 658 A.D.) when his grandfather, Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib
(ﻉ), was administering the affairs of caliphate at Kufa. Karbala’’ used
to be a suburb of Kufa, but it later expanded into a large city, due to
the shrine built for Imam Husayn (ﻉ), a shrine which many tyrants,
including the fanatical Wahhabis of Saudi Arabia, attacked, looted, and
tried unsuccessfully to obliterate, and housing a prestigious
theological center.

Ali’s graceful personality was the combination of Arab and Persian
nobility. On paternal side, he inherited the spiritual grace of the
Prophet (ﺹ), while through his mother, Shahr Banu, daughter of the last
Persian emperor Yazdajerd, he inherited the dignity of the Persian royal
dynasty. How did this great-grandson of the Prophet (ﺹ) get to have a
Persian princess as his mother?! In order to get the answer to this
question, we have to review history going back to the time of the
Prophet of Islam (ﻉ).

In 595 A.D., young Muhammad (ﺹ) visited Syria for the second time for a
couple of months as a businessman trading on behalf of his wealthy
relative Khadija whom he married in the same year. His first visit to
Syria took place in 582 A.D. in the company of his uncle Abu Talib,
great-grandfather of Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ). During this second visit,
one of his observations was that a feud was brewing between the then
mightiest nations on earth: the Romans and the Persians, each vying for
hegemony over Arabia’s fertile crescent.

Indeed, such an observation was quite accurate, for after only a few
years, a war broke out between these mightiest nations that ended with
the Romans losing it, as the Holy Qur’an tells us in Chapter 30 (The
Romans), which was revealed in 7 A.H./615-16 A.D., only a few months
after the fall of Jerusalem to the Persians, just to win in a successive
one. Only four years prior to that date, the Persians had scored a
sweeping victory over the Christians, spreading their control over
Aleppo, Antioch[^2], and even Damascus. The loss of Jerusalem,
birthplace of Christ Jesus son of Mary (ﻉ), was a heavy blow to the
prestige of Christianity.

Most Persians were then following Zoroastrianism, a creed introduced in
the 6th century before Christ by Zoroaster (628-551 B.C.), also known as
Zarathustra, whose adherents are described as worshippers of the "pyre,"
the holy fire. "Persia," hence, meant "the land of the worshippers of
the pyre, the sacred fire." Modern day Iran used to be known as
"Aryana," land of the Aryan nations and tribes.

Some Persians had converted to Christianity as we know from Salman
al-Farisi who was one such adherent till he fell in captivity, sold in
Mecca and freed to be one of the most renown and cherished sahabis and
narrators of hadith in Islamic history, so much so that the Prophet of
Islam (ﻉ) said, "Salman is one of us, we Ahl al-Bayt (People of the
Household of the Prophet)."

The war referred to above was between the then Byzantine (Eastern Roman)
emperor Heraclius (575 - 641 A.D.) and the Persian king Khusrau
(Khosrow) Parwiz (Parviz) or Chosroes II (d. 628 A.D.). It was one of
many wars in which those mighty nations were embroiled and which
continued for many centuries.

Yet the hands of Divine Providence were already busy paving the path for
Islam: the collision between both empires paved the way for the ultimate
destruction of the ancient Persian empire and in Islam setting root in
that important part of the world. Moreover, Muhammad’s offspring came to
marry ladies who were born and raised at Persian as well as Roman
palaces. Imam Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ), Muhammad’s grandson and
our Third Holy Imam and father of Imam Zain al-Abidin, married the
daughter of the last Persian emperor Jazdagird (Yazdegerd) III son of
Shahryar and grandson of this same Khusrau II.

Jazdagerd ruled Persia from 632 - 651 A.D. and lost the Battle of
Qadisiyya to the Muslim forces in 636, thus ending the rule of the
Sassanians for good. Having been defeated, he fled for Media in
northwestern Iran, and from there to Merv[^3], an ancient Central Asian
city near modern day Mary in Turkmenistan (until very recently one of
the republics of the Soviet Union), where he was killed by a miller. The
slain emperor left two daughters who, during their attempt to escape,
following the murder of their father, were caught and sold as slaves.

One of them, Shah-Zenan, ended up marrying our Third Holy Imam,
al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ), whereas her sister married the
renown scholar and acclaimed muhaddith (traditionist) Muhammad son of
the first Muslim caliph Abu Bakr. Shah-Zenan was awarded a royal
treatment and was given a new name in her own Persian mother tongue:
Shahr Banu, which means "mistress of the ladies of the city." The
marriage between her and Imam Husayn (ﻉ) produced our Fourth Holy Imam
Zain al-Abidin, or as-Sajjad, namely Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu
Talib (ﻉ).

After the Battle of Qadisiyya (637 A.D.), Shahr Banu was brought in
custody to Medina. With the age-old racist attitude still alive, not too
many Arabs would have expressed due respect to her. But it was the
humane chivalry of Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) who paid full regard to
this royal prisoner whom he married to his noble son Husayn (ﻉ), as
explained above. Imam Zain al-Abidin was, thus, the grandson of Imam Ali
(ﻉ) and the Persian emperor Jazdagird (Yazdegerd) III son of Shahryar,
rendering him in high esteem by both Arab and Persian nations.

Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ) could not enjoy the love of his mother for a
long time. She died soon after giving birth to him. At the age of two,
his grandfather Imam Ali (ﻉ) was also martyred. He was, thus, brought up
and instructed by his father Imam Husayn (ﻉ) and by his uncle Imam
Hassan (ﻉ). He was twelve when Imam Hassan (ﻉ) died and the burdens of
the Imamate fell on Husayn’s shoulders. The cunning of Mu'awiyah, the
then Umayyad ruler of Syria, led to the tragedy of Karbala’ during the
reign of his son Yazid; therefore, youthful Zain al-Abidin watched the
pace of the events which culminated in that terrible massacre. Imam
Husayn (ﻉ), who was leading a peaceful life in Medina, arranged the
marriage of his son to Fatima daughter of Imam Hassan (ﻉ), thus ensuring
that the series of Imamate would continue even in the face of coming
events.

Upon his departure from Medina to Mecca, then from Mecca to Karbala’’,
Imam Husayn (ﻉ) took his son Ali Zain al-Abidin, who was then twenty-two
years old, with him. It cannot be ascertained whether Zain al-Abidin
fell ill during the journey or after reaching Karbala. On the tenth of
Muharram, 61 A.H./October 10, 680 A.D., he was too ill to move. As
access to the Euphrates was blocked for three days and water was
extremely scarce, the illness of Zain al-Abidin intensified. For the
most part of that day, he lay unconscious and could not participate in
the battle which was carried on by all the male members of his family.

So when Imam Husayn (ﻉ) bade his family farewell and went to the
battlefield, he could not talk with his son Zain al-Abidin. Providence
had perhaps destined Zain al-Abidin to be tested in another way when he
was to lead his distressed family as prisoners.

Immediately after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (ﻉ), the ruthless enemies
turned to his tents to burn and plunder, as the reader has already come
to know. The overwhelming grief, the flames of burning tents, the tumult
among the widowed ladies and orphans must have taken its toll on the
sensitive Sajjad. Neither tongue nor pen could have described the
psychological impact. But the son of Husayn (ﻉ) maintained his composure
and spiritual serenity. In spite of illness and crushing distress, he
kept the grace of a true believer. Having said the night prayers on that
fateful eve, he lay in prostration with his forehead on the ground and
his tongue repeating these phrases all night long till dawn:

*There is no deity but Allah in all certainty;*  
*There is no god but Allah in truth and faith;*  
*I bear witness to this in submission and humility.*

Next day, Omer ibn Sa'd assembled all his slain soldiers, performed the
funeral prayers for them and arranged for their burial, leaving the
corpse of Imam Husayn (ﻉ), Prophet Muhammad’s grandson, and those of his
faithful adherents uncovered, unshrouded, and unburied, simply lying on
the ground. It was a most painful sight for Zain al-Abidin to pass
through the site of the onslaught accompanied by the ladies, all being
captives. He was shocked to realize that he could not bury his kith and
kin due to his captivity.

Not less heart-rending might have been the event when this pillaged
caravan was brought to the court of Ibn Ziyad, governor of Kufa.
As-Sajjad might have remembered that it was the same town where once his
grandfather Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) ruled as caliph and the ladies of
the household were the royalty. Ibn Ziyad now rejoiced over his victory
as the Prophet’s family was brought as captives.

From Kufa these people were sent to Damascus. When their caravan entered
the capital, it noticed how the bazaars were festively decorated and
people were embracing each other, congratulating each other. The agony
of humiliation suffered by Imam Husayn’s helpless folk was immeasurable,
yet Zain al-Abidin still stood and carried out Imam Husayn’s mission of
guiding the nation.

Having been released from confinement in Damascus, Zain al-Abidin went
with his family to Medina to lead a quiet life, but that city was now in
revolt against Yazid’s cruel regime. Political parties pressured Zain
al-Abidin to join them, but he knew their unreliability; therefore, he
declined to do so. So, when Yazid’s army invaded Medina, the invaders
did not harass Zain al-Abidin’s family.

Yet he was greatly shocked to see how for three days the invading host,
led by Muslim ibn Uqbah, tied their horses at the Prophet’s mosque,
turning the sacred place into a filthy stable filled with horses’
refuse, killing hundreds of innocent people and raping chaste women and
children. It was too intolerable for the Imam who had to practice a
great deal of control of his feelings. When different revolutionary
parties rose to avenge Husayn’s innocent blood, he wisely kept aloof
from them. He deemed their uprisings as untimely, and he kept himself
occupied in worship and preaching through excellent supplications,
setting an example of forbearance and endurance.

Undoubtedly, Sulayman ibn Surad al-Khuza'i or al-Mukhtar ibn ‘Ubaidah
at-Thaqafi avenged Imam Husayn’s precious blood. Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ)
had compassion for them; he prayed for al-Mukhtar’s success and used to
often inquire about those who were captured and executed. Certainly
al-Mukhtar relieved the Imam’s wounded heart by punishing the culprits.
But the Imam was so cautious that his outward appearance gave the
impression that he was indifferent, so much so that the cruel government
could not suspect him of any subversion.

His whole lifespan was a time of trouble for the Prophet’s family and
for their supporters. A few years after Yazid’s death, the ruthless
Umayyad government put to death a large number of support­ers of the
Prophet’s family at the hands of al-Hajjaj ibn Yousuf at-Thaqafi. It
kept a constant surveillance over their activities and communications
through its undercover agents. Under such circumstances, it was
impossible for Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ) to propagate the Prophet’s
teachings or guide the public in the open, so he lived Islam and made
his life an example for others to emulate.

After the tragedy of Karbala’’, the Imam lived 34 years under very odd
circumstances. During that entire period of time, patience and fortitude
were his main characteristics. Staying away from worldly pursuits, he
kept himself busy by either worshipping his Lord or narrating the
heart-rending events of Karbala’’, thus keeping its memories alive. He
wept whenever he remembered his father and whenever he saw food or
water, reflecting upon the thirst and hunger of his father, Imam Husayn
(ﻉ).

In spite of the quiet life Imam as-Sajjad (ﻉ) was leading, the Umayyad
government considered him a potential threat to the regime. Abd al-Malik
ibn Marwan ordered the governor of Medina to arrest him and take him
into custody to Damascus. There, he remained confined for three days,
but the Almighty Allah and the spiritual influence of Imam as-Sajjad (ﻉ)
made Abd al-Malik ashamed of his cruel behaviour, so he ordered him to
be released and sent back home.

It was characteristic of the Prophet’s family, particularly the twelve
Imams (ﻉ), to personify the excellence of the human perfections. Imam
as-Sajjad (ﻉ) was a true copy of his ancestors. In both Karbala’’ and
Kufa, he demonstrated extreme patience and courage.

In Medina, he proved to be most forbearing and forgiving. Once, an
insolent person spoke to Imam as-Sajjad (ﻉ) in an abusive and taunting
tone. The serene, high-spirited Imam replied saying, "May Allah for­give
me if you have told the truth or forgive you if you are wrong." The man
was impressed by his noble conduct and lowered his head in shame as he
said, "In reality, what I said was wrong."

When another person tried to slander him, the Imam (ﻉ) ignored him. The
impudent fellow raised his voice saying, "It is you whom I meant." Imam
as-Sajjad (ﻉ), with an air of loftiness, replied, "And it is you whom I
ignored." The Imam’s reply echoed the Qur’anic verse in which the
Almighty asked the Prophet (ﺹ) to

***“Hold to forgiveness; command what is right, but turn away from the
ignorant” (Qur’an, 7:199).***

Hisham ibn Isma'eel behaved insolently towards Imam as-Sajjad (ﻉ). Omer
ibn Abd al-‘Aziz, the only righteous Umayyad caliph, came to know about
it and wrote Imam as-Sajjad (ﻉ) saying that he had all intention to
punish the rogue, but Imam as-Sajjad (ﻉ) nobly replied, "I do not like
that the man be harmed on my account."

Service of the nation and generosity to it were his outstanding traits.
In the darkness of dreary nights, he used to carry flour and loaves of
bread to the needy. Many of them did not know who the benefactor was
because he always hid his face. It was only when Imam as-Sajjad (ﻉ) died
that those needy people came to know who he was.

In addition to all these virtues, even opponents acknowledged his
knowledge and admitted that none could match him in jurisprudence and
religious sciences. Yet he told people that one should not boast about
the nobility of his ancestors. Whenever he went to another town, he
avoided revealing his name or illustrious lineage. When asked about the
reason, he humbly said, "It is not fair for me to trace my lineage to
the Holy Prophet (ﺹ) since I do not have his virtues."

His ocean of knowledge was sought by the most distinguished scholars and
theologians of the time, and many rose to a lofty status after obtaining
such knowledge from him. They came to him from all parts of Arabia, the
Middle and Far Easts, and from Africa. The list of individuals who
benefitted from his knowledge and thus became scholars in their circles
includes, according to Bihar al-Anwar of ‘allama Majlisi (a photo of
whom is below): Abu Hamzah at-Thumali, Thabit ibn Dinar, al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr (grandson of first caliph Abu Bakr), Ali ibn Rafi,
al-Dhahhak ibn Muzahim al-Khurasani, Hamid ibn Musa al-Kufi, Abul-Fadl
as-Sudair ibn Hakim as-Sairafi, Abdullah al-Barqi, the poet
al-Farazdaq[^4], Furat ibn Ahnaf, Ayyub ibn al-Hassan, Abu Muhammad
al-Qarshi as-Saddi, Tawoos ibn Kaisan al-Hamadani, Aban ibn Taghlib ibn
Rabah, Qays ibn Rummana, Abu Khalid Wardan al-Kabuli (of Kabul,
Afghanistan), Sa'd ibn al-Musayyab al-Makhzami, Omer ibn Ali ibn
al-Husayn and his brother Abdullah, Jabir ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr
(another grandson of the first caliph), and many, many others. The most
distinguished of his followers are these great persons: Jabir ibn
Abdullah al-Ansari, Amir ibn Wa’ila al-Kinani, Sa'd ibn al-Musayyab ibn
Hazan, and Sa'd ibn Jihan al-Kinani. Among the tabieen, the most
distinguished were: Sa'd ibn Jubayr, Muhammad ibn Jubayr ibn Mutim,
al-Qasim ibn 'Awf, Isma'eel ibn Abdullah ibn Ja'far, Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya and his brother al-Hassan, Habib ibn Abu
Thabit, Abu Yahya al-Asadi, Abu Hazim al-Araj, Salamah ibn Dinar
al-Madani, and many, many others. The most famous of those who narrated
hadith from him were: az-Zuhri, Sufyan ibn Uyainah, Nafi, al-Awzai,
Muqatil, Muhammd ibn Ishaq, among others. Authors who quoted the
traditions transmitted through him were: at-Tabari, Ibn al-Bay, Imam
Ahmed ibn Hanbal, Ibn Batta, Abu Dawud, the authors of *Hilyat
al-Awliya’*, *Asbab an-Nuzul*, *At-Targhib wat-Tarhib*, *Al-Fa’iq*,
*Al-Mustafa*, and others. These were certainly not his contemporaries,
yet they verified and recorded the traditions which he had narrated.

As regarding the great poet al-Farazdaq, to whom reference is made
above, we would like to quote his masterpiece poem for the enjoyment of
the Arabic-speaking readers. The poem praises Imam Zain al-Abidin in the
most beautiful way, actually too beautiful to render into English or any
other language:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رائعة الفرزدق .. في مدح الإمام زين العابدين بن الحسين بن عل]
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذه قصيده للفرزدق يمدح بها الإمام زين العابدين بن الحسين بن علي رحمه
الله وهي من أجمل ماقال الفرزدق..... وسبب القصيده هو أن هشام بن عبد
الملك حج، فحاول أن يلمس الحجر الأسود فلم يستطع من شدة الازدحام فوقف
جانباً، وإذا بالامام مقبلاً يريد لمس الحجر فانفرج له الناس ووقفوا
جانباً تعظيماً له حتى لمس الحجر وقبله ومضى فعاد الناس الى ما كانوا
عليه. فانزعج هشام وقال: من هذا؟ وصادف أن كان الفرزدق الشاعر واقفاً
فأجابه هذا علي بن الحسين بن علي ثم أنشد فيه قصيدته المشهورة التي يقول
فيها:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا سائلي أين حلّ الجود و الكرم؟ عندي بيان إذا طلا به قدموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا الذي تعرف البطحاء وطئته والبيت يعرفه والحلُّ والحرمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا ابن خير عباد الله كُلُّهمُ هذا التقي النقي الطاهرُ العلمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا الذي أحمد المختار والده صلى عليه إلهي ما جرى القلم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو يعلم الركن من قد جاء يلثمه لخرّ يلثم منه ما وطئ القدم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا علي رسول اللّه والده أمست بنور هداه تهتدي الأمم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا الذي عمه الطيار جعفر و ال مقتول حمزة ليث حبه قسم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا ابن فاطمةٍ انْ كنت جاهله بجده انبياء الله قد ختموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّه فضله قدما و شرفه جرى بذاك له في لوحه القلم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من جده دان فضل الأنبياء له و فضل أمته دانت لها الأمم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وليس قولك منْ هذا؟ بضائره العرب تعرف من انكرت والعجمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كلتا يديه غياثٌ عمَّ نفعهما يستوكفان و لا يعروهما عَدمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سهل الخليقة لاتخشى بوادره يزينه اثنان: حِسنُ الخلقِ والشيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يخلف الوعد ميمونا نقيبته رحب الفناء أريب حين يعترم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حمّال اثقال اقوام ٍ اذا امتدحوا حلو الشمائل تحلو عنده نعمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن قال قال بما يهوي جميعهم و إن تكلم يوما زانه الكلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما قال لاقط ْ الا في تشهده لولا التشهّد كانت لاءه نعمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عمَّ البرية بالاحسان فانقشعت عنها الغياهب والاملاق والعدمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا رأته قريش قال قائلها الى مكارم هذا ينتهي الكرمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُغضي حياءً ويغضي من مهابته فلا يكلُّم الا حين يبتسمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بكفّهِ خيزرانُ ريحها عبق من كف اروع في عرنينه شممُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يكاد يمسكه عرفان راحته ركن الحطيم اذا ما جاء يستلمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله شرّفه قدماً و عظّمه جرى بذاك له في لوحة القلمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ايُّ الخلائق ليست في رقابهمُ لأوّليّه هذا اوله نِعمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من يشكرِ الله يشكر اوّليّه ذا فالدين من بيت هذا ناله الاممُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ينمي الى ذروة الدين التي قصرت عنها الاكف و عن احراكها القدمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من جده دان فضل الانبياء له وفضل امته دانت له الاممُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مشتقة من رسول الله نبعته طابت مغارسه والخيم والشيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ينشق نور الدجى عن نور غرته كالشمس تنجاب عن اشراقها الظلمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من معشرٍ حبهم دينٌ وبغضهمٌ كفرٌ وقربهم منجى ومعتصمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يستدفع السوء و البلوى بحبهم و يستزاد به الإحسان و النعم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مقدّمٌ بعد ذكر الله ذكرهمُ في كِلّ بدءٍ و مختوم به الكلمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن عدَّ اهل التقى كانوا ائمتهم او قيل من خير اهل الارض؟ قيل همُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يستطيع جوادُ بعد جودهم و لا يدانيهم قوم و إن كرموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هم الغيوث اذا ما ازمة ازمت والاسد اسدُ الشرى والبأس محتدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أي القبائل ليست في رقابهم لأولية هذا أوله نعم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من يعرف اللّه يعرف أولية ذا فالدين من بيت هذا ناله الأمم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بيوتهم في قريش يستضاء بها في النائبات و عند الحكم إن حكموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فجده من قريش في أرومتها محمد و علي بعده علم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بدر له شاهد و الشعب من أحد و الخندقان و يوم الفتح قد علموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و خيبر و حنين يشهدا له و في قريضة يوم صيلم قتم‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مواطن قد علت في كل نائبة على الصحابة لم أكتم كما كتموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاينقص العسر بسطاً من اكفّهم سيّان ذلك إن اثروا وان عدموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يستدفع الشرُّ والبلوى بحبّهم ويستربُّ به والاحسان والنعمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

His chief attribute which earned him the titles of "Zain al-Abidin" and
"Sayyid as-Sajidan" was his sincere worship of the Almighty. He was an
eyewitness to the tragedy of Karbala’’, and the scenes of his near and
dear ones being slaughtered were always fresh in his memory. Such
depressing events naturally make any ordinary person indifferent to all
other normal activities of everyday life, but they could not make Imam
as-Sajjad (ﻉ) relax his fear of Allah.

His complexion faded and his whole frame shook whenever the water for
ablution was presented to him, or whenever he stood to say his prayers.
When asked about the reason, he explained, "Can you at all imagine in
Whose presence I am going to stand?! It is in the presence of the Lord
of lords."

While putting on his pilgrimage garb, intending to utter "Labbayka
Allahomma Labbayk!" (I am answering Thy Call, O Lord!), colour
disappeared from his face. His whole frame shook, so much so that those
who saw him inquired what was wrong with him.

Imam as-Sajjad (ﻉ) said, "I tried to say *Labbayk!*’ but I feared lest
the Lord of the House calls out: No admittance for you.’" Tears flooded
his eyes so excessively that he ultimately fainted. Whenever everyone
else prostrated before the pomp of haughty Umayyad monarchy, it was Imam
as-Sajjad (ﻉ) who demonstrated how the King of kings should be
worshipped.

His supplications were later compiled and named As-Sahifa as-Sajjadiyya,
the book of as-Sajjad, which is dubbed “the Psalms of Muhammad’s
family.” The reader who wishes to read some of its contents are referred
to pp. 462 - 469 of my book titled Allah: The Concept of Allah in Islam
(published by Ansariyan Publications). I feel honoured and humbled by
the Almighty enabling me to translate such precious text. It is only He
Who enables His servants to do whatever good they do, whatever useful
knowledge they acquire and disseminate; He, and only He, is the source
of all goodness.

The reign of the antagonistic Umayyad rulers never permitted Imam Zain
al-Abidin (ﻉ) to deliver discourses and addresses as his grandfather
Imam Ali (ﻉ) did, nor to illustrate the creed as he had done. Later,
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ), son and grandson of
Imam as-Sajjad respectively, had the opportunity to fathom the depths of
religious problems at study circles attended by inquisitive students.
But, alas, such a favourable atmosphere was not available to Imam
as-Sajjad (ﻉ).

He, therefore, adopted quite a different method which no worldly power
could obstruct. He suspended all worldly contacts and took to hymns and
prayers. The words of those prayers are a treasure-houses of theological
mysteries and reflective of the relationship between the Creator and His
creation. A collection of these hymns and prayers, known as As-Sahifa
al-Kamila, or As-Sahifa as-Sajjadiyya, has survived despite all the
odds. In the pages of this collection, we can find what we cannot
perhaps attain even from reading lengthy addresses and discourses
presented in a similarly appealing manner, if such can be found at all.

The calm and peaceful life of the Imam could not be tolerated by the
cruel Umayyad regime. The Syrian monarch al-Walid ibn Abdul-Malik had
him poisoned, and the Imam died inside the Medina jail on the 25th of
Muharram, 95 A.H. (October 20, 713 A.D.). Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ)
conducted the burial ceremony, laying him to rest in the graveyard of
Jannat al-Baqa beside his uncle, Imam Hassan (ﻉ). May the Almighty cut
off the hands of the tyrants and those who support them wherever and
whoever they may be...

2) Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as)
------------------------------

He was named after his great grandfather Prophet Muhammad, peace be with
him and his progeny, and he was called "al-Baqir" which means "the
splitter of knowledge". His father is Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ) and his
mother is Fatima daughter of Imam Hassan (ﻉ), the Prophet’s grandson.
His lineage, therefore, reaches the Prophet of Islam (ﻉ) on both
parents’ sides. Imam Husayn (ﻉ), the younger grandson of the Prophet, is
his grandfather. He has the unique attribute of having inherited the
qualities of Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) and Fatima daughter of the
Prophet Muhammad (ﺹ).

The Imam was born on Rajab 1, 57 A.H./May 10, 677 A.D., seven years
after the martyrdom of Imam Hassan (ﻉ), and he spent more than three
years in the company of his grandfather Imam Husayn (ﻉ). He was an
eyewitness to the tragedy of Taff, and he was contemporary to his father
Imam as-Sajjad (ﻉ) during the entire period of his Imamate. The Karbala’
tragedy was a troublesome and tumultuous period of time for the
Prophet’s offspring and their followers, supporters of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ).
Imam Ali’s friends were always hunted, arrested, then hanged.

According to Al-Irshad of al-Mufid, Al-Fusul al-Muhimma of Ibn
as-Sabbagh al-Maliki, Vol. 3 of al-Ya'qubi’s Tarikh (history), and
Tathkirat al-Khawass of Ibn al-Jawzi, the great sahabi Jabir ibn
Abdullah al-Ansari narrates saying, "The Messenger of Allah, peace be
with him and his progeny, said to me: You shall live long enough to meet
one of the descendants of Husayn who shall be named Muhammad and who
shall split the core of knowledge; so, convey my Salam to him’."

According to Ikmal ad-Din wa Itmam an-Ni'ma, and on p. 252 of Shaikh
as-Saduq’s work, Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari asked the Messenger of
Allah (ص) saying, "O Messenger of Allah, who are the Imams from the
descendats of Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ)?" He (ﻉ) answered: "Al-Hassan,
al-Husayn, masters of the youths of Paradise, then the master of the
forbearing of his time, Ali ibn al-Husayn, then al-Baqir Muhammad ibn
Ali, and, O Jabir! You shall live to see him! So when you do, convey my
Salam to him."

Vol. 42, p. 25 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, and also both *I'lam al-Wara bi
A'lam al-Huda* and *Kashf al-Ghumma fi Marrifat al-A’imma*, when Imam
Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) was on his death-bed, his will to his oldest son
al-Hassan was: "O son! The Messenger of Allah (ص) ordered me to give you
my books and weapons just as he had ordered me to take his books and
weapons and to tell you to pass them over to your brother Husayn before
you die." Then he turned to Imam Husayn (ﻉ) and said, "... and the
Messenger of Allah (ص) ordered that you (Imam Husayn) should pass them
on to your son Muhammad ibn Ali and to convey to him Salam from the
Messenger of Allah and from me."

For three years, Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) enjoyed the cherished love of his
grandfather Imam Husayn (ﻉ), and when he had to leave Medina, al-Baqir,
too, was one of the family members who made the journey across the
desert. Imam Husayn (ﻉ) left for Kufa and his journey terminated at
Karbala’. Since the 7th of Muharram, when the Prophet’s family was
denied access to the water of the Euphrates, Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) suffered
from the pangs of thirst till the tragedy was over. Providence, however,
intended to preserve the Imamate by safeguarding his life, whereas even
a baby like Imam Ali al-Asghar (ﻉ) had already been killed by an enemy
arrow.

Like his father Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ), Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) could not
physically participate in the battle. The 10th of Muharram, 61 A.H./
October 10, 680 A.D. brought its hideous events with Imam Husayn (ﻉ)
gathering the corpses of his slain warriors all day long, the women
wailing, the children crying because of being extremely thirsty,
startled and bewildered, then came the last farewell bidden by Imam
Husayn (ﻉ), the murder of his baby Ali al-Asghar, the return of Imam
Husayn’s horse to his master’s tent without his master...

Young al-Baqir (ﻉ) witnessed all these events. Al-Baqir witnessed the
tents being burnt, the children reeling in panic, the heartless enemy
plundering, and the ladies of the Prophet’s family being deprived even
of their sheets and scarves. Who can possibly imagine how young Imam
al-Baqir (ﻉ) felt, or what a permanent impression such scenes had left
on his mind?

On the next day, Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) witnessed the ladies of the Prophet’s
family being shackled with chains, hand-cuffed, then transported as
captives by the enemy the entire distance from Karbala’’ to Kufa, then
to Damascus. Having been released, he witnessed their journey back to
Medina, again passing by Karbala’’. The profoundly sad impressions could
never have been erased from the memory of young Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ).

After Karbala’’, Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ) led a very calm life, staying
aloof from the pursuits of this materialistic world. Secluded from the
society, he spent his time either weeping as he reminisced on the
agonies of his father Imam Husayn (ﻉ), or worshipping the Almighty,
while the heart of his son Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) was being squeezed
painfully as he watched helplessly. In this sad environment, Imam
al-Baqir (ﻉ) grew up studying the manners of his saintly father and
availing himself from his knowledge and noble conduct.

Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) was in the full bloom of youth, ascending the heights
of physical and spiritual perfection, when his revered father died. On
his death-bed, Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ) handed over to Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ)
a box containing books of religious sciences exclusively known to this
illustrious Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ). Calling together all his offspring, he
resigned them to the care of Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ), now named the fifth in
the successive series of the successors of the holy Prophet. He was then
38 years old.

The Umayyad monarchy was heading towards its decline and decay. The
cruelties inflicted on the Hashemites, especially the massacre at
Karbala’’, had produced shock waves throughout the Muslim world. Yazid
witnessed the aftermath of Karbala’’ and may have regretted his heinous
sins. After a brief rule, he died in 64 A.H., and his son Mu'awiyah II
succeeded him briefly then abdicated.

The later Umayyad rulers, therefore, were fully aware of the
consequences of the atrocities of their predecessors. The bloody battles
waged by the Tawwaban movement, the penitents, led by Sulayman ibn Surd
al-Khuza'i and later by al-Mukhtar, led to a powerful uprising against
the Umayyads.

Everyone now demanded to avenge the holy blood of Imam Husayn (ﻉ) and
those who defended the Prophet’s family. That movement ruffled the peace
of the ruling despots and shook the foundations of their government. The
good result was that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ) had the opportunity to
free himself from the clutches of the tyrannical government. He had at
that time better chances to peacefully guide the Muslim nation to the
Right Path.

The Imams, the Prophet’s leading offspring, had rivers of knowledge in
their bosoms which were blocked by the oppressing government and thus
their waters could not moisten the lips of the thirsty. In the days of
Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ), when the grip of the oppressive government loosened a
little bit, the confined river of knowledge gushed forth, irrigating the
fields of faith-seeking hearts. Having displayed his great skill in
solving tough religious problems, he was called al-Baqir (discloser or
splitter of hidden knowledge).

The number of those who benefitted from him and learned the teachings of
Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) reached thousands of seekers of knowledge. Many others,
belonging to different schools of thought such as Imam Zuhri, Imam
Awzai, Attar ibn Jarih, or Hafiz ibn Ghiyath, the judge, who all are
considered as outstanding traditionists of the Sunni sects, came to seek
knowledge from him and are counted among his students.

Volume 3 of Manaqib al Abi Talib states that Abdullah son of second
caliph Omer ibn al-Khattab was asked once for the solution of a complex
theological problem, and he could not provide one. "Go to that young
boy," Omer said to the person who raised the question, pointing to Imam
al-Baqir (ﻉ), "Ask him and tell me what his answer will be."

The inquirer approached Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ), obtained the answer, and went
back to the son of Omer ibn al-Khattab to tell him what treasures of
knowledge he had just acquired, and Abd-Allah commented: "They are a
family immersed in knowledge."

*Al-Irshad* by al-Mufid, in a chapter on the Imamate of al-Baqir (ﻉ),
and in *Hilyat al-Awliya’* and *Tathkirat al-Khawass* of Ibn al-Jawzi,
the grandson, Abdullah ibn Ata’ al-Makki says, "I never saw scholars
shrink as I saw them in the presence of Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali ibn
Husayn. And I saw al-Hakam ibn ‘Uyainah, despite his greatness, looking
like a young boy before his teacher."

One of the testimonies to the excellence of his political thought is his
advice to the renowned Umayyad caliph Omer ibn Abdul-Aziz in which he
said, "I advise you to regard young Muslims as your sons, the adults as
your brothers, and the elderly as your parents; therefore, be kind to
your sons, stay in touch with your brothers, and be generous to your
parents."

One of his students, Muhammad ibn Muslim, is quoted in Vol. 46, as
saying, "Every time I faced a complex (theological) problem, I had to
seek its solution from Abu [the father of] Ja'far, till I asked him
about thirty thousand questions." One of his companions, Jabir ibn Yazid
al-Jufi, may Allah be pleased with him, said once, as quoted in the same
references which also quotes Al-Ikhtisas, saying, "Abu Ja'far narrated
to me as many as seventy thousand traditions."

Advising Jabir ibn Yazid al-Jufi, he said, "I admonish you regarding
five things: If you are wronged, do not commit wrongdoing to others; if
your are betrayed, do not betray anyone; if you are called a liar, do
not be furious; if you are praised, do not be jubilant; if you are
criticized, do not fret and think of what is said in criticism: if you
find in yourself what is criticized about you, then your falling down in
the eyes of Allah, when you are furious about the truth, is a much
greater calamity than your falling down in the eyes of people. And if
you are the opposite of what is said (in criticism) about you, then it
is a merit you acquired without having to tire yourself in obtaining
it."

The dissemination of religious and scientific knowledge of Ahl al-Bayt
(ﻉ) was achieved by Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ). Out of the benefits
gained from such a high-ranking mentor, the students wrote several books
on various branches of knowledge. Here is a brief description of some of
his disciples and their works which reflects the extent of Islamic
learning imparted by the Imam:

1. Aban ibn Taghlib. He was the famous lexicographer and reciter of the
Holy Qur’an who wrote the work *Ghara’ib al-Qur’an* **غرائب القرآن**,
the first book explaining the intricate diction of the Holy Qur’an. He
died in 141 A.H./758 A.D.

2. Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn al-Hassan ibn Abi Sarh ar-Rawasi, the famous
scholar of recitation, syntax and exegesis. Kitab al-Faisal and Maani
al-Qur’an are two among five books which he authored. He died in 101
A.H./720 A.D.

3. Abdullah ibn Maimun, Abul-Aswad al-Du’Ali. A biography of the Holy
Prophet and another book expounding on Paradise and Hell are among his
works. He died in 105 A.H./723 A.D.

4. Atiyyah ibn Sa'd al-'Awfi. He wrote an exegesis of the Holy Qur’an in
five volumes; he died in 111 A.H./729 A.D.

5. Isma'eel ibn Abd ar-Rahman as-Saddi al-Kabir (as-Saddi senior), the
well-known author of Tafsir. He is frequently referred to by all Muslim
writers of tafsir books as as-Saddi. He died in 127 A.H./745 A.D.

6. Jabir ibn Yazid al-Jufi. He committed to memory 50,000 (or 70,000
according to some biographers) traditions which he had heard from Imam
al-Baqir (ﻉ). He is quoted in Muslim’s Sahih. He wrote several volumes
on tradition, tafsir and jurisprudence. He died in 128 A.H./746 A.D.

7. Ammar ibn Mu'awiyah al-Wahni. A book on jurisprudence is his
contribution. He died in 133 A.H./752 A.D.

8. Salim ibn Abi Hafsah (Abu Yousuf) al-Kufi. He is the writer of a book
on jurisprudence. He died in 137 A.H./754 A.D.

9. Abdul-Mu’min ibn Qasim (Abu Abdullah) al-Ansari. He is the writer of
a book on jurisprudence. He died in 147 A.H./764 A.D.

10. Abu Hamzah at-Thumali. He wrote a book on tafsir (exegesis) of the
Holy Qur’an. Kitab an-Nawadir and Kitab az-Zuhd are among his works. He
died in 150 A.H./767 A.D.

11. Zararah ibn Ayun, a high-ranking Shi'a scholar who wrote several
books on tradition, jurisprudence and kalam. He died in 150 A.H./767
A.D.

12. Muhammad ibn Muslim. He was a great scholar who recorded 30,000
traditions which he learned from Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ). He wrote many books,
including the "Four hundred problems of halal and haram." He died in 150
A.H./767 A.D.

13. Yahya ibn Qasim (Abu Basar) al-Asadi. He was a revered scholar who
wrote Kitab Manasik al-Hajj and Kitab Yawmun wa Lailah. He died in 150
A.H./767 A.D.

14. Ishaq al-Qummi. He has a book on jurisprudence.

15. Isma'eel ibn Jabir al-Khashami al-Kufi. He wrote many volumes on
hadith (tradition) and one on jurisprudence.

16. Isma'eel ibn Abdul-Khaliq. He was a high ranking jurist and had a
book to his credit.

17. Bard al-Asqaf al-Azdi. He wrote on jurisprudence.

18. Al-Harith ibn al-Mughirah. He authored a book on the problems of
jurisprudence.

19. Huthaifah ibn Mansur al-Khuza'i. He had a book on jurisprudence.

20. Hassan ibn Sirri al-Katib. He wrote one book.

21. Husayn ibn Saur ibn Abi Fakhita, author of *Kitab an-Nawadir*.

22. Husayn ibn Muhammad ‘Abidi al-Kufi; he is author of one book.

23. Husayn ibn Mus'ab al-Bajali. He has a book to his credit.

24. Hammad ibn Abi Talha; he wrote one book.

25. Hamzah ibn Hamran ibn Ayun. He was nephew of Zurarah and author of
one book.

These are quite a few scholars, traditionists and jurists who learned
from the Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ), mostly from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ), and
safeguarded such knowledge by recording it in their books. Later, in the
days of the Imam’s son, namely Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq, hundreds of volumes
were written\_\_the sources from which such valuable collections of
hadith as *Al-Kafi, Man la Yahdharuhu Al-Faqih, Tahdhib al-Khasa’il,
Al-Istibsar*, etc. were compiled. These books now form the fundamentals
of Shi'a learnings. In addition to these, you may read his biography and
the ahadith which he narrated in at-Tabari’s *Tarikh*, in al-Balathiri,
as-Salami, al-Khattab, Abu Dawud’s *Sunan*, al-Isfahani, az-Zamakhshari,
and in others.

His moral excellences were admired even by his foes. A Syrian lived in
Medina and used to come to Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) frequently declaring that
he was opposed to the Household. Yet, despite his prejudice, he admitted
that, "The high morality and eloquence of Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) are too
attractive to resist."

The author of *Tuhaf al-‘Uqul* quotes Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ) saying, “I
entered the house of my father once and found him doling out eight
thousand dinars as sadaqa to the poor, then he freed eleven slaves.”

In a chapter on the merits of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ) in Vol. 3 of
*Manaqib Ali Abi Talib*, and in Vol. 46 of al-Majlisi’s *Bihar
al-Anwar*, Sulayman ibn Qaram is quoted as saying, "Abu Ja'far Muhammad
[ibn al-Hanafiyya], son of Imam Ali (ﻉ), used to give us as much as five
or six hundred or even a thousand dirhams, and he never tired of
visiting his brethren."

Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) cooperated with his contemporary caliphs and
offered sound counsel concerning the affairs of the Muslims. So did all
the Imams who succeeded him, each following his example. None of them
hesitated to offer advice to their contemporary rulers, and Imam
al-Baqir (ﻉ) was no exception. The Umayyad government had till then no
currency of its own. The Byzantine currency of the eastern section of
the then Roman Holy Empire was the valid tender in Damascus as well.

But during the reign of al-Walid ibn Abdul-Malik, there rose a rift
between him and the Byzantine ruler when the latter decided to stamp a
new currency with a phrase which al-Walid considered as derogatory to
the Holy Prophet (ﺹ). This created suspense among the Muslims. Al-Walid
convened a committee in which prominent Muslim scholars participated.

Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) expressed his opinion that the Muslim government ought
to mint its own currency on one side of which it should stamp the
statement "La Ilaha Illa Allah" and on the other the statement
"Muhammadun Rasul-Allah," (There is no god but Allah; Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah). The opinion was unanimously approved and new
Islamic coins were minted.

It was only during the caliphate of Omer ibn Abdul-Aziz, the only pious
Umayyad caliph, that the Prophet’s progeny enjoyed a brief period of
peace which lasted for only two years and five months, the duration of
Omer’s government.

He lifted from them a great deal of atrocities and prohibited the
cursing of Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) on the pulpits on Friday,
substituting it with this verse of the Holy Qur’an: "Allah commands
justice, the doing of good, and liberality to kith and kin, and He
forbids all shameful deeds, and injustice and rebellion: He instructs
you, that ye may receive admonition" Qur’an, 16:90 (an-Nahl).

When the Imam met caliph Omer ibn Abdul-Aziz, he found him weeping for
the injustice inflicted by his predecessors upon their subjects. The
Imam admonished him with pieces of wisdom till the caliph sobbed, knelt
down and begged the Imam for more. Then the Imam told Omer what
wrongdoing he came to ask him to rectify, and it was none other than the
estate of Fadak which the Messenger of Allah (ص) had left as inheritance
to his daughter Fatima (ﻉ) and her descendants. According to Vol. 4 of
*Bihar al-Anwar*, Omer wrote: "*In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious,
the Most Merciful*. This is what Omer ibn Abdul-Aziz had given back to
Muhammad ibn Ali to rectify the wrongdoing: Fadak."

Hisham ibn Abdul-Malik succeeded Omer ibn Abd ul-Aziz as the ruler, and
he was a stone-hearted, immoral, miser and racist. His prejudice against
non-Arab Muslims caused him to double the taxes non-Arabs had to pay,
and his reign was a replay of the bloody days of Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah and
those of the blood-thirsty al-Hajjaj ibn Yousuf at-Thaqafi[^5].

It was then that the revolution of Zaid ibn Ali broke out as a
continuation of the revolution of Imam Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ),
but Hisham was swift in crushing it. Dr. Hassan Ibrahim Hassan, in his
book *Tarikh al-Islam* (“History of Islam”), quotes contemporary
historians testifying that Hisham ordered to crucify Zaid ibn Ali and
then burn his corpse and throw the ashes in the Euphrates.

Although Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) never expressed any interest nor participated
in political activities except when the rulers invited him to, since his
peaceful way of living was devoted to people’s spiritual guidance, he
was not tolerated by the government. Hisham ibn Abdul-Malik wrote his
governor over Medina instructing him to send Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) together
with his son [later Imam] Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) to Damascus, intending to
insult them both. When they reached Damascus, he kept them waiting for
three days.

On the fourth day, he called them to his presence. He sat on a throne
surrounded by his nobility, fully armed. In the center of the courtyard,
a target was set on which the elite were shooting arrows on bet. Islam
prohibits betting or gambling or any way of making money without working
hard to earn it. As soon as the Imam entered, Hisham bluntly asked him
to shoot arrows with others. Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) asked to be excused, but
Hisham insisted; he planned to ridicule the Imam.

Since the Imam led a secluded life, Hisham thought that he might not
have had anything to do with martial arts. Compelled by Hisham, Imam
al-Baqir (ﻉ) took the bow. Handling it skillfully, he shot a few arrows
continuously, all sitting straight in the very heart of the center. A
shout of praise burst from the throats of the astonished elites standing
right and left. Hisham, thus outwitted, began to discuss the problems of
Imamate and the virtues of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ). Now he clearly saw that the
Imam’s stay in Damascus might lead to popular respect for Ahl al-Bayt
(ﻉ), so he permitted the Imam to return home to Medina. Inwardly, his
enmity of the Prophet’s family had increased.

Hisham harassed not only the Prophet’s family but also their followers,
dignitaries and scholars. He issued an order to execute Jabir ibn Yazid
al-Jufi, the most distinguished among the Imam’s scholars, but the Imam
foiled his attempt by advising Jabir to feign madness as the only way to
escape execution.

The more the Umayyads learned about the Imam’s prestige and popularity,
the more intolerable his existence became. At last they resorted to the
same soundless weapon, poison, which used to be applied by those cunning
monarchs quite often to eliminate their opponents or suspects. A saddle
was presented to the Imam to which poison was skillfully applied. When
he mounted on it, poison affected his whole body. After spending a few
days suffering the pain of his ailment, he expired on the seventh of
Thul-Hijja, 114 A.H./January 28, 733 A.D. He was laid to rest underneath
the same dome in Jannat al-Baqi where Imam Hassan (ﻉ) and Imam Zain
al-Abidin (ﻉ) already lay.

3) Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as)
----------------------------

His name is Ja'far, and he is known as as-Sadiq and Abu Abdullah, son of
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ) son of Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ) son of Imam
Husayn (ﻉ). His mother was Umm Farwah daughter of Qasim son of Muhammad
son of [first caliph] Abu Bakr who was one of the seven most prominent
jurists of Medina. Thus, the sixth Imam has an impressive lineage.

The Imam came to this world on Rabi' al-Awwal 17, 83 A.H./April 20, 702
A.D., the same lunar date when his great grandfather, the Holy Prophet
(ﺹ), was born. At his birth, his father, Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ), was 26, and
his grandfather, Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ), was 44. The Prophet’s family
joyfully welcomed this auspicious addition.

Till the age of twelve, Ja'far was brought up under the guidance of his
grandfather Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ) whose main concern was to worship
his Maker and reflect on the tragic events of Karbala’’. Twenty-two
years had lapsed since then, yet the remembrance of that shocking
tragedy was still quite fresh in his memory.

So, as soon as Ja'far gained understanding, he was profoundly impressed
by the continuous grief of his grandfather, so much so that he felt as
if he himself was present during that tragedy. He also contemplated on
the presence of his father, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ), although only
three years old, at that gruesome scene. Ja'far as-Sadiq considered it
as his duty to convene the recitation gatherings (majalis) about that
sorrowful event.

He was twelve years old when his grandfather Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ)
expired. From then on and till the age of 31, he spent his time under
the supervision of his father Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ). It was the time when
the Umayyad politics were tottering and Muslims who were approaching
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ) by the thousands seeking his knowledge,
wisdom and guidance. Whether at Medina or in travels, Ja'far as-Sadiq
was always with his father. When Hisham ibn Abdul-Malik summoned Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ), Ja'far as-Sadiq accompanied him, as stated above.

In 114 A.H./732 A.D., Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ) died, and the
responsibilities of Imamate devolved on the shoulders of now Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq. Hisham ibn Abdul-Malik was ruling in Damascus and political
disturbances were rampant. The call for seeking revenge against Bani
Umayyah was strong among the public, and several descendants of Imam Ali
(ﻉ) were preparing themselves in the hope of overthrowing their corrupt
regime. Most prominent among them was Zaid bin Ali, the respected son of
Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ). His religious zeal and piety were known
throughout Arabia. He was a well versed hafiz of the Holy Qur’an and had
taken the field against the tyranny of the Umayyads.

This was a precarious juncture for Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq. As regarding
hatred of the Umayyads, he agreed with his uncle Zaid for whom he had a
great deal of respect. His far-sighted judgment could clearly see that
his rising against the well-organized royal forces was of no avail; he,
therefore, did not join him for all practical reasons. But he was
compassionate towards him and sympathetic to his cause, and he asked him
to be judicious. As a great host of Iraqis had sworn their allegiance to
him, Zaid was now quite optimistic. He valiantly fought the royal forces
but was in the end killed.

The vengeful enemies were not satisfied with Zaid’s death. They exhumed
his dead body from the grave, severed his head, sent it as a trophy to
Hisham and hanged the body at the gate of Kufa where it remained for
several years. One year after Zaid’s martyrdom, his son Yahya earned the
same ancestral honour. Imam Ja'far was surely moved by these tragic
events, but he was destined to carry out the duties of spreading the
religious knowledge of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ).

The last days of the Umayyads’ reign of terror were ruffled by political
disturbances. Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq witnessed the rise and fall of many
of their kings. After Hisham, al-Walid ibn Yazid ibn Abdul-Malik, then
Yazid ibn al-Walid, then Ibrahim ibn al-Walid, then Marwan al-Himar [the
donkey] ascended the throne. The capture and death of the latter
terminated the monarchy of tyrannical Umayyads.

During the last phase of tottering Umayyad rule, the Hashemites were
actively engaged in their anti-Umayyad activities. The Abbasides took
advantage of their efforts and secretly formed an association whose
members had sworn to transfer the government from the Umayyads to the
Hashemites who really deserved it. It is clear that to rule the Islamic
world was not the job of every Hashemite. It was the right of those
divinely appointed descendants of the Holy Prophet and Imam Ali (ﻉ) whom
Allah had chosen to lead humanity. But these high-thinking souls never
wished to take undue advantage of the situation with the aid of cunning
tactics.

In short, the Imams who descended from the Commander of the Faithful,
Imam Ali (ﻉ), never tried to acquire power through political trickery
and opportunism. But the Abbasides, who also were Hashemites, no doubt
took the opportunity by the forelock. Availing themselves of the silence
shown by the Imams, and of the compassion the people had for the
Hashemites, the ‘Abbasides realized their chance to rise to power.

But when they established themselves on the throne, they became enemies
of Imam Ali’s posterity in the same degree or more than that which had
been adopted by the heartless Umayyads. Details of this will be narrated
in the biographies of later Imams.

The first to start the movement from among the Abbasides was Muhammad
ibn Ali ibn ‘Abdullah ibn al-Abbas who sent his agents throughout Persia
to secretly obtain the oath of allegiance to the Hashemites’ cause from
the Persians. On Muhammad’s death, his son Ibrahim succeeded him.
Meanwhile, the martyrdom of Zaid and his son Yahya had fanned the flames
of revolution against the Umayyads.

The Abbasides took advantage of it, increasing their influence in Iraq
through Abu Salamah al-Khallal. Slowly but steadily, their power base
increased. Through the sincere support of Abu Muslim al-Khurasani, all
Western Persia and Khurasan came under their control and the Umayyad
governor had to flee. The name of the Umayyad ruler was dropped from
Friday sermons, having been replaced by that of Ibrahim ibn Muhammad.

The Umayyads till then were under the impression that the disturbances
were merely local protests, but now the government spies reported that
it was a full-fledged movement initiated by Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn
Abbas who resided at Jabulqa. Soon Ibrahim was arrested, imprisoned and
mercilessly killed. His family escaped the royal wrath with other
Abbasides and sought refuge with Abu Salamah in Iraq. When the news
reached Abu Muslim al-Khurasani, he sent an army to Iraq which defeated
the Umayyad forces and annexed Iraq.

Abu Salamah al-Khallal, dubbed “Minister of the Prophet’s Progeny,” was
especially compassionate towards Imam Ali’s offspring. He wrote letters
to the prominent heads from among them inviting them to accept and share
the royal power. One of such letters was addressed to Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq. In political struggles, such opportunities are considered
golden, but the Imam declined the offer and remained devoted to his duty
of disseminating knowledge.

Those who supported the Abbasides’ cause, in addition to the followers
of Abu Muslim al-Khurasani, swore the oath of allegiance to Abul-Abbas
as-Saffah. On Rabi' II 14, 132 A.H./November 30, 749 A.D., the latter
was acknowledged as the ruler and caliph of the Muslim world.
Establishing themselves in Iraq, the Abbasides advanced towards
Damascus. Marwan assembled his forces and confronted them, but his army
was defeated. He had to flee for his life but was later captured in
Egypt and killed.

Thereafter, a reign of terror followed: The Umayyads were massacred
publicly; the dead bodies of the monarchs of their dynasty were ex­humed
and treated in a most shocking manner; thus, the revenge upon the
oppressors, the law of nature, was implemented through the Abbasides. In
136 A.H./753 A.D., as-Saffah, the first Abbaside caliph, died and was
succeeded by his brother Abu Ja'far al-Mansur, commonly known as
al-Dawaniqi.

The Abbasides raised the banner of standing and protecting the rights of
Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ), thus succeeding to rally the public around them on this
very pretext, and it was their war-cry as well. But when they came to
power and destroyed the Umayyads, they naturally feared lest the world
should be disappointed and disillusioned with them, or lest a movement
should start demanding that the caliphate must be vested upon the
descendants of Imam Ali (ﻉ) and Fatima instead of the Abbasides.

Abu Salamah was inclined to the descendants, and he was a candidate to
support such a movement; therefore, in spite of all the favours which he
had done to the Abbasides, he was the first to fall victim to their
ingratitude. He was put to death during the reign of as-Saffah. Persia
was under the control of Abu Muslim al-Khurasani. Al-Mansur arranged to
have him murdered most treacherously.

Al-Mansur was no longer apprehensive of the interference of any
influential person in his government. He, therefore, turned all his
tyranny against the Sayyids, descendants of the Prophet (ﺹ) themselves.
On mere suspicion, al-Mansur would begin to destroy the Sayyids. The
prominent among them were subjected to atrocities. Muhammad son of
Ibrahim, who was the most handsome among them and was, therefore, called
the "silken", was walled alive[^6].

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) was sadly affected by those events. When the
descendants of Imam al-Hassan ibn Ali (ﻉ) were all fettered, shackled
and banished from Medina, he watched their plight with a saddened heart
from the flat roof-top of his house. With flooded eyes he was heard
saying, “Oh! Medina is no longer a sanctuary or a haven of peace...”

Then he expressed his sorrow for the descendants of the Ansar who stood
idly by thus: “The early Medenites (Ansar) had invited the Holy Prophet
to Medina under the oath that they would protect him and his descendants
just as they would protect their own kith and kin. But today the
descendants of those very Ansar act as silent onlookers,and none stands
up to protect the Prophet’s offspring.” Having said these words, he
returned to his house and fell ill, unable to move from bed for twenty
days.

Among the afore-mentioned prisoners was the aged Abdullah Mahd son of
Imam al-Hassan ibn Ali (ﻉ) who had to suffer the hardships of a
prolonged imprisonment. His son Muhammad (known as “Thul Nafs
az-Zakiyya”) rose against the oppressive government and fell fighting
near Medina in 145 A.H./762 A.D. The head of the young warrior was
severed then sent to his aged father in prison, a shocking sight which
the worn-out old man could not bear, falling dead shortly thereafter.
Another son of Abdullah Mahd, namely Ibrahim, also fought against
al-Mansur’s army and fell fighting near Kufa.

In the same way, Abdullah son of Thul Nafs az-Zakiyya, Musa and Yahya,
brothers of Thul Nafs az-Zakiyya, were all killed mercilessly. Many
Sayyids were used alive as part of the building mate­rials of walls as
explained in a footnote above.

In spite of all these atrocities which have been described very briefly
here, Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) went on silently propagating the
teachings of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ). As a result, even those who did not
acknowledge him as the Imam nor knew his prestige and lineage, bowed
before his knowledge and prided in being counted among his students.

Al-Mansur wanted to diminish the esteem in which Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq
(ﻉ) was held by the people. He tried to bring persons to compete with
him who all proved incapable of arguing not with him but with his own
students. These fellows admitted that their counterparts had acquired
the religious learning from the Prophet’s Progeny (ﻉ).

The haughty ruler, therefore, ignored them but continued to undermine
the popularity of the Imam. Failing in all his efforts, he decided to
harass, arrest or murder him. In every town and city, hired agents were
posted to monitor the activities of the Shi'as so that anyone suspected
of supporting the Imam would be arrested. Al-Mu'alla son of Khunais was
one of the many Shi'as who were thus arrested and murdered in cold
blood.

The Imam himself was summoned from Medina to the royal palace five
times, each time being in one way or another nothing but harassment.
Al-Mansur, however, could never find sufficient grounds to order his
imprisonment or execution.

On the other hand, the consequent stay of the Imam in Iraq only expanded
the circle of those who wanted to learn the teachings of Ahl al-Bayt
from him. Perceiving this, al-Mansur ordered him to be sent back to
Medina. Even there, he was not spared persecution. Through saboteurs,
his house was once set on fire but Providence put it out and nobody was
harmed.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) was one of those Infallibles who were created
by the Almighty to be role models of moral excellence. The particular
virtues of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (ﻉ), which were recorded by historians,
included: hospitality, charity, the helping of the needy in secrecy, the
fair treatment of the relatives, forgiveness, patience and fortitude.

Once a pilgrim visiting the Prophet’s mosque in Medina fell asleep
there. On waking up, he hurriedly searched his belongings and found out
that his purse containing one thousand dinars was missing. Looking
around, he saw Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) saying his prayers in a corner
of the mosque. Bewildered and ignorant of the greatness of the Imam, he
accused him of having picked his purse. The Imam asked about its
contents and was told that it contained one thousand dinars. The Imam
asked the stranger to follow him to his house where he paid him the
amount from his own money. When the stranger came back to the mosque
satisfied, once more he checked his property and found his purse intact,
wrapped in a bundle. Greatly ashamed of his conduct, he went back to the
Imam’s house, profusely apologized and asked him to take his money back.
The Imam appeased him with these words: "We never take back what we once
give away."

Another event of the Imam’s trust in Allah, the Sustainer, deserves
mention here. During the days of scarcity and famine, one naturally
tries to hoard up as much provisions as might suffice his needs for a
long time. Once, the Imam asked his household’s manager, Trenchab, “The
price of corn is rising day by day. How much corn is there in our
warehouses?” Trenchab said that the Imam should have no reason to worry
since there was a large quantity of it to sustain them over a long
period of time.

The noble Imam then ordered him thus: “Sell out all the corn today and
let us face the situation along with others.” Then he directed him thus:
“Pure wheat flour shall not be used in my kitchen. Let it be mixed with
an equal quantity of oat flour. We must share the misfortune with the
needy as long as it takes.”The Imam (ﻉ) used to respect the poor more
than the rich and value their hard work. Trade was his occupation, yet
he liked to personally do manual work in his orchards. One day, while
wielding the spade and sweating profusely from top toe, someone offered
to do the work for him, but the Imam (ﻉ) said, “It is no insult to bear
the heat of the summer sun for the sake of my family.”

To be kind to the slaves and bondmaids was the main characteristic of
the Prophet’s Progeny (ﻉ). Sufyan at-Thawri has narrated a surprising
event in this regard. He said, “Once I went to pay him a visit. I saw
his complexion fading.

On my asking him the reason, the Imam explained: I had forbidden my folk
from ascending the stairs to the roof-top. Just now, as I entered the
house, I saw a nursing maid with my babe in her arms ascending the
stairs. She was so frightened that she became nervous, and the baby fell
down and died. I do not grieve on the death of the baby as much as I
grieve on her fright.’” Then he prepared to arrange for the shrouding
and burial of his dead baby.

The Imam’s profound knowledge of religious and other sciences was
reputed throughout the entire Islamic world, and even Western scholars
have paid him tribute, admiring his knowledge and character.  
 One famous Western reference discussing the Imam is the renown
*Encyclopedia Britannica* where he is discussed on p. 498, Vol. 5, of
its *Micropedia*. People came to him from distant regions to quench
their thirst for his ocean of knowledge. The number of his students
reached once four thousand. Among them were scholars of jurisprudence,
tafsir (exegesis), *hadith*, etc. Theologies from other creeds also went
there to debate with his students. When they went away vanquished and
defeated, the Imam used to explain to his students their (the latter’s)
own weak points so that they might be more careful in the future.

Sometimes he himself debated with the opponents especially the atheists.
Apart from religious sciences, he used to teach some students
mathematics, chemistry, medicine, etc. Jabir ibn Hayyan[^7] of Tarsus,
the famous pioneer of physics, chemistry and mathematics, was his
disciple who wrote about four hundred treatises based on his mentor’s
instruction. The jurists who learned from him and authored several
volumes of books on jurisprudence can be counted by the hundreds and
their students by the thousands.

Such a great teacher and scholar can never be ambitious for power. But
the government of his time regarded his popularity as a constant threat.
It finally resorted to the use of their soundless weapon, poison, to put
an end to this great man, just as other governments did to his ancestors
and offspring. History always repeats itself; it is a wheel in an
endless motion.

The governor of Medina was directed to offer him poisoned grapes the
efficacy of which ended his life on Shawwal 15, 148 A.H./December 4, 765
A.D. when he was 65. His funeral was arranged by his son and successor,
Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ), who led the burial prayers. He was laid to rest
in the same compound at Jannat al-Baqi where Imam al-Hassan (ﻉ), Imam
Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ), and Imam al-Baqir (ﻉ) are buried...

4) Imam Musa Al-Kadhim (as)
---------------------------

His name is Musa; “al-Kadhim” and “Abul-Hassan” are his titles. He is
usually called Musa al-Kadhim. Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) was his father
whose lineage, by five generations, reaches the Holy Prophet (ﺹ). His
mother, Hamida Khatun, was a North African Berber. He was born on Safar
7, 128 A.H./November 8, 745 A.D.

The knowledge of his father, Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ), saturated the
Islamic world. Although two elder sons, Isma'eel and Abdullah, had
already illuminated the house, the addition of the new-born brought
unequalled happiness to the family, probably because Providence had
decided to maintain the continuity of Imamate through him. Photo (above)
shows Imam al-Kadhim’s shrine in al-Kadhimiyya, Baghdad, Iraq.

For twenty years, he remained under the care of his father Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq (ﻉ). It was due to the virtues, teachings and the dissemination
of the knowledge of the Prophet (ﺹ) through Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ)
that Shi'a Muslims are called “Ja'faris,” taught by Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq
(ﻉ).

The scholarly achievements of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) were so
conspicuous that the world acknowledged Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) had,
indeed, appointed him as his successor as commanded by the Almighty. It
is proven by this act that Imamate does not, as a rule, go to the eldest
son or be inherited.

It is the blessing bestowed by the Almighty upon the Infallible ones who
are gifted with divine knowledge. The principle is further established
by the fact that such a great responsibility had once before passed from
Imam Hassan (ﻉ) to his brother Imam Husayn (ﻉ) rather than to Hassan’s
descendants. The Imamate of Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ), therefore, illustrates
that Imamate is based on personal perfection, not necessarily on
descent.

In 148 A.H./765 A.D., upon the death of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ), the
responsibilities of Imamate devolved on Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ). This
was during the reign of al-Mansur al-Dawaniqi, the tyrant who ordered
the slaying of countless Sayyids, descendants of the Prophet of Islam
(ﻉ). The number of those imprisoned, oppressed, thrown into the dark
cells of prisons or bricked up in the walls alive, was known only to
Allah. Imam Ja'far himself had been subjected to harassment, tyranny and
intrigues, the last of which was poison which ended his life.

On his death-bed, Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) predicted that the life of
his successor would also be ended in the same way. In order to avert
this danger as much as he could, he nominated, in his will, five
trustees to look after his family. Al-Mansur, the Abbaside ruler, was
one of them. The other four were: Muhammad ibn Sulayman, the then
governor of Medina, his son Abdullah al-Aftah, (later Imam) Musa
al-Kadhim (ﻉ), and their respected mother Hamida Khatun.

Imam Ja'far’s prediction was correct. When the news of his death reached
al-Mansur, the latter made a show of grief by thrice repeating these
words: Inna lillahi wa inn ilayhi rajioon, “We are Allah’s and to Him is
our return.” He also said, “Who can be Ja'far’s equal now...?” But
secretly he wrote to the governor of Medina saying, “If Ja'far, by way
of a will, appointed any trustee, put him to death immediately.” The
governor replied: “He has appointed five trustees, the first of whom is
your majesty.” Having read this reply, al-Mansur remained silent, since
the sanctity of a will cannot be violated. Then, pondering over the
situation, he said, “In this case, these persons cannot be slain.”

Accordingly, for the next ten years, al-Mansur did not try to harass
Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) who carried out the duties of Imamate
peacefully. Al-Mansur was, moreover, preoccupied with building the new
capital, Baghdad, which he completed just one year before his death. He
had, therefore, little time to think about harassing Imam Musa al-Kadhim
(ﻉ).

Al-Mansur al-Dawaniqi died in 158 A.H./775 A.D. and was succeeded by his
son al-Mahdi. In the beginning, al-Mahdi did nothing to humiliate or
disrespect Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ), but later he fostered the old enmity
against Imam Ali’s descendants. In 164 A.H./781 A.D., having performed
the *hajj*, he took the Imam with him from Mecca to Baghdad where he
imprisoned him. For one year, the Imam suffered the hardship of
imprisonment.

Then the ruler realized that he was mistreating a descendant of the
Prophet (ﺹ), so he released the pious Imam (ﻉ). In 169 A.H./785 A.D.,
al-Mahdi died and was succeeded by his brother al-Hadi who ruled for
only 13 months. On his death, Harun ar-Rashid ascended the throne. The
latter’s attitude towards Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) was very antagonistic,
causing Imam al-Kadhim (ﻉ) to die in prison.

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) was one of the illustrious Imams whom the
Almighty Allah had set as a paragon of moral excellence. Each member of
this illustrious family personified the best of virtues and moral
excellences. Each one of them was the embodiment of goodness. The
Seventh Imam excelled in tolerance and forgiveness, so much so that he
was titled al-Kadhim (ﻉ), the suppressor of fury.

Never was he heard speaking roughly or looking sternly. Even in the most
unpleasant situations, he wore a smile. This was in accordance with the
saying of his ancestor Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) that a believer keeps
his grief confined in his chest while wearing a smile on his face.

One government official of Medina was a persistent source of harassment
to Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ), even using abusive language regardig Imam
Ali (ﻉ). But the Imam always directed his followers not to abuse him in
return. When his malicious conduct became too rude to be tolerated, they
sought permission to retaliate against him. The Imam appeased them,
promising to settle the matter himself.

Pacifying his followers thus, he went to the fellow’s farm and treated
him with such noble benevolence that the man felt ashamed of his conduct
and subsequently changed his attitude and altered his conduct.
Explaining this policy to his followers, the Imam asked them: “Was my
behaviour better than the methods you suggested?” They admitted that it
was.

He thus carried out the instruction of his great ancestor Imam Ali (ﻉ)
which is recorded in Nahjul-Balagha: Subdue the enemy with kindness,
since it is more effective than vanquishing him with force. Undoubtedly,
this requires a correct judgment of the enemy’s nature.

With some enemies, one may say, good conduct does not bear any fruit; it
is then that force must be met with equal or better force, rest assured.
Imam Ali (ﻉ) has, therefore, warned not to use this policy with the vile
and the mean lest they should be encouraged to do more mischief.
Consider this piece of advice when you deal with the enemies of Islam.

To vanquish the foe with goodness certainly requires the foresight the
Imam possessed. Strictness is permissible only when the enemy’s
continuous vile conduct justifies retaliation or the use of force. If
not, these dignified souls preferred to deal with him gently, so as to
have a valid pretext against the opponent and leave no ground for him to
justify his aggression.

Such was the noble method usually employed by the Family of the Prophet
(ﺹ). Imam Ali (ﻉ), even on his death-bed, behaved liberally with Ibn
Muljim al-Muradi, his assassin who had dealt him a mortal blow only the
day before. Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) showered his generosity on Muhammad
ibn Isma'eel who carried out the orders of the Abbaside caliph to put an
end to the Imam’s life. It was Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) who aided him
when he wanted to embark upon his journey with a grant of 400 dinars and
1,500 dirhams although he undertook this journey solely to poison the
ears of the caliph against him.

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) had to undergo a great deal of hardship. The
academy of learning, which his father Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) had
established, could no longer be maintained. Other means to disseminate
knowledge were beyond his reach. It was only through his noble personal
behaviour that he was able to introduce the teachings of Prophet
Muhammad (ﺹ) and his Progeny (ﻉ) to the public.

This, indeed, is the best way to propagate Islam. You can talk about
Islam as much as you want, but when one sees you doing something
un-Islamic, your words will be forgotten, your reputation will be
ruined, and your hypocrisy will be exposed. Talk is cheap; action is the
true yardstick to measure one’s piety; actions speak louder than words.

The Imam (ﻉ) used to observe silence at gatherings or seminars, and he
never spoke unless spoken to or someone asked him a question or
requested him to solve a scientific problem. Nor did he ever initiate a
conversation. In spite of this, he was held in very high esteem by
friends and foes alike. All acknowledged his knowledge and noble
personality.

In view of his excessive worship at night, he was called “al-Abd
as-Salih,” i.e. the pious worshipper of Allah. No less famed was his
generosity. He used to secretly help the beggars and the destitute who
never got to know who their benefactor was till he had died. After the
fajr (pre-dawn) prayers, he used to lower his forehead in prostration
and remain in that position till the sun rose high in the heart of the
sky. His recitation of the Holy Qur’an was attractive; he wept as he
recited, and his audiences were deeply moved.

In 170 A.H./787 A.D., Harun ar-Rashid succeeded Abu Ja'far al-Mansur as
the caliph. His ancestors’ traditional cruelty towards the descendants
of Imam Ali (ﻉ) and Fatima (ﻉ) was well in his view. The revolt of Yahya
ibn Abdullah ibn al-Hassan broke out. Violating all agreements and
covenants, as was always customary of the Umayyads and the Abbasides,
Harun threw Yahya into the choking dark dungeons then had someone kill
him. Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) was in no way connected with Yahya’s
uprising.

Rather, he had actually advised him against opposing the tyrannical
government. But Yahya’s action served to intensify the enmity which
Harun harboured towards Imam Ali’s descendants including, of course,
Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ). To make matters even worse, the Prime Minister,
Yahya ibn Khalid al-Barmaki, poisoned Harun’s ears by pointing out that
Ja'far ibn al-Ash'ath (tutor of Harun’s son, al-Amin, and a political
rival of Yahya) was a follower of the Imam and that he planned to bring
the Imam to power.

Although Yahya ibn Khalid intended just to entice Harun against Ja'far
ibn al-Ash'ath, his plan proved to be fatal to Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ).
In the same year, Harun came to Mecca to perform the hajj, and so did
Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ). Here Harun watched with jealous eyes the
sublime popularity which the Muslim multitudes demonstrated towards that
sage. It was sufficient to flare up his rage. Muhammad ibn Isma'eel’s
hostility worsened the situation.

To understand these complications, let us ponder on the following facts:
Isma'eel, Muhammad’s father, was the eldest son of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq
(ﻉ), and he was expected to succeed his father as the Imam. But he died
during the Imam’s lefetime. The common notion was thus shattered. Yet
some simpletons still held the view that Imam Ja'far’s successor should
be one of Isma'eel’s offspring. Muhammad ibn Isma'eel and his followers,
the Isma'eelis (or Isma'eelites, now a small off-shoot Shi'a sect),
therefore, never acknowledged the Imamate of Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ). Since
his followers were a small minority, he outwardly expressed his loyalty
to the family.

To discuss all means to annihilate Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ), Harun
consulted Yahya al-Barmaki whom he instructed to collect complete
reports about the Imam through one of the descendants of Imam Ali (ﻉ).
Yahya, an avowed foe of the Prophet’s Progeny, recommended Muhammad ibn
Isma'eel as the person who would supply all the details correctly.
Accordingly, he was summoned to Baghdad.

When Muhammad ibn Isma'eel received the caliph’s letter, he considered
it a passport to power, prestige, and prosperity. But he was penniless
and unable to prepare for the journey. He was, therefore, obliged to
approach the same generous saint who demonstrated benevolence to friends
and foes alike. The Imam knew fully well the motives behind the journey.
He nevertheless inquired about its purpose. Muhammad explained that he
was having hard times, being deeply in debt, and that he thought that
the journey might bring him prosperity.

The Imam said, “You need not go there; I promise to pay off all your
debts and provide adequately for your sustenance.” But Muhammad would
not change his mind about going to Baghdad. Upon leaving, he paid the
Imam a visit and requested a useful piece of advice. Imam Musa al-Kadhim
(ﻉ) remained silent. When he repeated his request, the Imam said,
“Please see that you do not become a party in slaying me, and please do
not be the cause of making my children orphans.” Muhammad tried to turn
from the point and asked for some appropriate advice. But the Imam
refused to say anything more. When he got up to depart, the noble Imam
gave him 450 gold dinars and 1,500 silver dirhams for the journey.

The result was exactly what the Imam had foreseen. Muhammad ibn Isma'eel
reached Baghdad and stayed at the house of Prime Minister Yahya who
introduced him to caliph Harun. The latter surrounded him with honours
and inquired about the pace of events in Medina. Muhammad stated the
circumstances most incorrectly, adding, “I never saw nor heard that a
country is ruled by two kings.” Asked to explain, he asserted: “As you
are ruling here in Baghdad, Imam Musa al-Kadhim rules there in Medina.
From every town, revenues are delivered to him, and he claims to be your
own equal in power.”

These were the words Yahya al-Barmaki had instructed Muhammad to say to
Harun who felt provoked and challenged. He sent Muhammad back after
granting him ten thousand dinars. But Allah wished that Muhammad should
not avail of this sizeable wealth. On that very night, he suffered from
throat pain, and when the day dawned, the darkness of death closed on
him. Harun heard the news and ordered to retrieve the cash! Muhammad’s
statement was not erased from Harun’s memory and he was resolved to put
an end to the Imam’s life.

In 179 A.H./795 A.D., Harun went to Mecca and Medina. He stayed in the
latter city for a day or two after which he sent his men to arrest Imam
Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ). The Imam was not at home when the caliph’s men came,
so they went to the Prophet’s tomb where he used to say his prayers.
Having total disregard for the sanctity of the Prophet’s grave, they
arrested his descendant there and brought him before Harun.

It was on the 20th of Shawwal of 179 A.H./795 A.D. that the Prophet’s
pious son was being fettered and taken prisoner while not even one
Medenite dared to raise a finger against the tyrant. This lethargy of
the unfeeling Muslims had also been witnessed on several occasions
before that incident. As a matter of fact, these Medenites have been
politically lethargic ever since, especially after the Wahhabis took
control, by force, of the politics of their country...

Being apprehensive of any attempt which might be made to rescue the
Imam, Harun ordered two camel-domes to be prepared in one of which he
seated the Imam and sent him to Basra escorted by a sizeable military
detachment. The other empty dome was sent to Baghdad with an equal
number of soldiers in order to confuse any prospective rescuers and
distract the attention of the people by keeping the place of
imprisonment unknown. Was it not a shocking event that the Imam’s family
could not even see the Imam or bid him farewell?

They only received the news that he had been imprisoned by the
government. They were distressed to hear it and the Imam, too, was
equally grieved for being separated from his loved ones without being
able to bid them farewell.

Nobody knows what a zigzag route was followed; the journey to Basra took
47 days. There, the Imam remained in confinement for one year. The
city’s governor was asa ibn Ja'far, a cousin of Harun. In the beginning,
he carried out Harun’s orders. But he often wondered about the reasons
for the imprisonment of the pious descendant of Prophet Muhammad (ﺹ).
He, therefore, became curious about the Imam’s life, character and
personality. The more he studied them and noticed his forbearance, the
more he was impressed by his noble conduct. He conveyed his views to
Harun in good faith, but the latter only became suspicious of the
intentions of his own cousin.

He, therefore, ordered the Imam to be transferred to Baghdad where he
put him under the custody of Fadl ibn ar-Rabi'. Having come to know that
Fadl was sympathetic to the followers (Shi'a) of the Prophet’s Progeny
(ﻉ), he put the Imam under the custody of Yahya al-Barmaki, the
notorious enemy of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ). It seems that the Imam’s sacred
personality impressed everybody, so the tyrant thought it necessary to
change his jailers.

The Imam was finally imprisoned in a dungeon under the charge of
as-Sindi ibn Shahik, the ruthless and stone-hearted Chief of Police of
Harun ar-Rashid . The Imam died on the 25th of Rajab 183 A.H./September
2, 799 A.D. at the age of 55. No respect was awarded to him at the time
of his burial either. Rather, the corpse was carried to the grave-yard
by men who were announcing his death in degrading tones.

By this time, the people felt depressed about the fate of the elevated
Imam and sadly accompanied the coffin with a sincere display of grief
and respect. They buried him in a northern suburb of Baghdad now bearing
his name: al-Kadhimiyya, the city of Imam al-Kadhim (ﻉ), where his
magnificent mausoleum now houses a reputed school of theology coveted by
scholars and seekers of knowledge.

5) Imam ‘Ali Ar-Rida’ (as)
--------------------------

He is Imam Abul-Hassan II, Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida, the eighth in the
series of the Imams from the Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) of the Prophet. His
birthplace is Medina, and his resting place is Tus (Iran). He was born
in Medina on Friday, or Thursday, Thul-Hijja 11, or Thul-Qi’da, or
Rabaul-Awwal, of the Hijri year 148 or the year 153. He died on Friday,
or Monday, near the end of the month of Safar, or the 17th of Safar, or
Ramadan 21, or Jumada I 18, or Thul-Qi’da 23, or the end of Thul-Qi’da,
of the year 202 or 203 or 206.

In his *‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida*, as-Saduq states: “What is accurate is
that he died on the 13th of Ramadan, on a Friday, in the year 203.”
There is a great deal of dispute regarding the name of his mother. Some
say she was called al-Khayzaran; others say she was Arwi and her
nickname was “the blonde of Nubia,” while others say she was Najma and
her nickname was “Ummul-Baneen.”

Others say she was called Sakan the Nubian; still others say she was
called Takattum. Disputes exist also regarding the number of his
offspring and their names. Some scholars say that they were five sons
and one daughter, and that they were: Muhammad al-Qani', al-Hassan,
Ja'far, Ibrahim, al-Husayn, and 'Aisha.

Sibt ibn al-Jawzi, in his book titled *Tathkiratul-Khawass*, says that
the sons were only four, dropping the name of Husayn from the list.
Al-Mufid inclines to believe that the Imam did not have any son other
than Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (ﻉ), and Ibn Shahr Ashub emphatically states
so, and so does at-Tibrisi in his *A’lam al-Wara*. Author of *Al-‘Udad
al-Qawiyya* states that the Imam (ﻉ) had two sons: Muhammad and Musa,
and that he did not have other descendants.

In his claim, he is supported by *Qurb al-Isnad* where the author says
that al-Bazanti asked ar-Rida, “For years I have been asking you who
your successor is and you keep telling me that it is your son even when
you had no son at all, but since Allah has now blessed you with two
sons, which one of them is he?” *‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida* indicates that he
had a daughter named Fatima. His life was characterized by melancholy
from its beginning till its painful end. At the onset of his life, he
witnessed the trials and tribulations which filled the life of his
father Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ).

The Abbaside caliph al-Mahdi III ordered the Imam (ﻉ) to go to Baghdad
so that the caliph would secure from him promises and pledges that he
would not oppose his authority nor mobilize a revolution against him,
and the Imam (ﻉ) did not go back home till al-Mahdi went back to his
Lord with his shoulders bent by the load of the regime’s sins and
immoral actions. He was succeeded by the Abbaside caliph al-Hadi who
tried to put an end to the life of the Imam, but he did not live long
enough, so ar-Rashid acceded to the throne, thus the parching flames of
the tragedy started incinerating the existence of the Alawis (Alawides)
headed by Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ), and the dungeons of Baghdad, Basra,
Wasit and other cities could not limit the regime’s passion for seeking
revenge against its opponents.

Instructions issued by the government required the builders to fill the
hollow building cylinders and columns with the still alive bodies of the
elite from among Alawi youths as well as non-Alawi sympathizers. This
ugly method of eliminating the government’s opponents was not something
invented by ar-Rashid ; it was a continuation of a custom started by
al-Mansur who sought revenge against some Alawi youths as history tells
us.[^8]

The Abbaside caliph al-Ma'mun decided to use the Imam (ﻉ) as a
bargaining chip between him and the Abbasides in Baghdad on one hand,
and between him and the Alawis on the other, and also between him and
the Shi'as of Khurasan as well. The ploy of relinquishing the throne was
foiled when the Imam (ﻉ) refused to accede to it.

It is worth mentioning here that when Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) refused to accept
the caliphate from the abdicating caliph, al-Ma'mun, or to take charge
of the post of heir apparent to the throne, he had no reason except his
own awareness of the real depth of the goal al-Ma'mun anticipated to
achieve by his plan, and that the desire to abdicate was not to be taken
seriously.

Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) inherited the knowledge of his grandfather the
Messenger of Allah (ﻉ). History narrates a great deal about his
scholarly stances and intellectual discourses. Imam Musa a-Kadhim (ﻉ) is
reported to have often said to his sons, “Ali ibn Musa, your brother, is
the learned scholar of the Descen­dants of Muhammad (ﺹ); therefore, you
may ask him about your religion, and memorize what he tells you for I
have heard my father Ja'far ibn Muhammad more than once saying, The
learned scholar of the family of Muhammad is in your loins. How I wish I
had met him, for he is named after the Commander of the Faithful Ali
(ﻉ).’”

Ibrahim ibn al-Abbas as-Sali is reported as having said, “I never saw
ar-Rida (ﻉ) unable to provide the answer to any question he received,
nor have I ever seen any contemporary of his more learned than he was.
Al-Ma'mun used to put him to test by asking him about almost everything,
and he always provided him with the answer, and his answer and parable
was always derived from the Holy Qur’an.”

Raja’ ibn Abul-Dhahhak, who was commissioned by al-Ma'mun to escort
ar-Rida (ﻉ) to his court, said once, “By Allah! I never saw anyone more
pious than him nor more often praising Allah at all times, nor more
fearful of Allah, the Exalted. People approached him whenever they knew
he was present in their area, asking him questions regarding their faith
and its aspects, and he would answer them and narrate a great deal of
hadith from his father who quoted each of his forefathers till Ali (ﻉ)
who quoted the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ). When I arrived at al-Ma'mun’s
court, the latter asked me about his behaviour during the trip and I
told him what I observed about him during the night and the day, while
riding or halting; so, he said, Yes, O son of al-Dahhak! This is the
best man on the face of earth, the most learned, and the most
pious.’”[^9]

Al-Hakim is quoted in Tarikh Nishapur as saying that the Imam (ﻉ) used
to issue religious verdicts when he was a little more then twenty years
old. In Ibn Majah’s Sunan, in the chapter on “Summary of Cultivating
Perfection,” he is described as “the master of Banu Hashim, and
al-Ma'mun used to hold him in high esteem and surround him with utmost
respect; he even made him his successor and secured the oath of
allegiance for him.”

Al-Ma'mun said the following statement once in response to Banu Hashim:
“As regarding your reaction to the selection by al-Ma'mun of Abul-Hassan
ar-Rida (ﻉ) as his successor, be reminded that al-Ma'mun did not make
such a selection except upon being fully aware of its implications,
knowing that there is none on the face of earth more distinguished, more
virtuous, more pious, more ascetic, more acceptable to the elite as well
as to the commoners, or more God-fearing, than he (ar-Rida) is.”[^10]

Abul-Salt al-Harawi is quoted as saying, “I never saw anyone more
knowledgeable than Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (ﻉ). Every scholar who met him
admitted the same. Al-Ma'mun gathered once a large number of
theologians, jurists and orators and he (ar-Rida [ع]) surpassed each and
every one of them in his own respective branch of knowledge, so much so
that the loser admitted his loss and the superiority of the winner over
him.”[^11]

He is also quoted as saying, “I have heard Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (ﻉ)
saying, I used to take my place at the theological center and the number
of the learned scholars in Medina was quite large, yet when a question
over-taxed the mind of one of those scholars, he and the rest would
point at me, and they would send me their queries, and I would answer
them all.”[^12]

After an intellectual discourse with al-Ma'mun, ‘Ali ibn al-Jahm said,
“Al-Ma'mun stood up to perform the prayers and took Muhammad ibn Ja'far,
who was present there, by the hand, and I followed both of them. He
asked him: What do you think of your nephew?’ He answered, A learned
scholar although we never saw him being tutored by any learned mentor.’

Al-Ma'mun said, This nephew of yours is a member of the family of the
Prophet (ﺹ) about whom the Prophet (ﺹ) said, The virtuous among my
descendants and the elite among my progeny are the most thoughtful when
young, the most learned when adult; therefore, do not teach them for
they are more learned than you are, nor will they ever take you out of
guidance, nor lead you into misguidance.’”[^13]

Good manners constitute a significant part of one’s personality. The
Imam was characterized by a most noble personality which won him the
love of the commoners as well as the elite. Ibrahim ibn al-Abbas as-Sali
is quoted as saying, “I never saw Abul-Hassan ar-Rida (ﻉ) angering
anyone by something he said, nor did I ever see him interrupting anyone,
nor refusing to do someone a favour he was able to do, nor did he ever
stretch his legs before an audience, nor leaned upon something while his
companion did not, nor did he ever call any of his servants or
attendants a bad name, nor did I ever see him spit or burst into
laughter; rather, his laughter was just a smile. When he was ready to
eat, he seated with him all his attendants, includ­ing the doorman and
the groom.” He added saying, “Do not, therefore, believe anyone who
claims that he saw someone else enjoying such accomplishments.”[^14]

A guest once kept entertaining him part of the night when the lamp
started fading and the guest stretched his hand to fix it, but
Abul-Hassan (ﻉ) swiftly checked him and fixed it himself, saying, “We
are folks who do not let their guests serve them.”[^15]

The author of *Al-Manaqib* states that ar-Rida (ﻉ) once went to the
public bath-house and someone asked him to give him a massage, so he
kept giving the man a massage till someone recognized him and told that
person who that dignitary was. The man felt extremely embarrassed; he
apolo­gized to the Imam (ﻉ) and gave him a massage.[^16] Muhammad ibn
al-Fadl narrates the following anecdote regarding the Imam’s simple
personality. He says:

Ar-Rida (ﻉ), on the occasion of Eidul-Fitr, said to one of his
attendants, “May Allah accept your good deeds and ours,” then he stood
up and left. On the occasion of Eidul-Adha, he said to the same man,
“May Allah accept our good deeds and yours.” I asked him, “O son of the
Messenger of Allah! You said something to this man on the occasion of
Eidul-Fitr and something else on the occasion of Eidul-Adha; why?” He
answered: “I pleaded to Allah to accept his good deeds and ours because
his action was similar to mine and I combined it with mine in my plea,
whereas I pleaded to Allah to accept our good deeds and his because we
are capable of offering the ceremonial sacrifice while he is not; so,
our action is different from his.”[^17]

Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) defines for us the Islamic theory as the rules which
govern the actual dealings of man with his brother man. From this can we
be inspired that Islam abolishes the then class distinctions among
individuals and groups in the areas of public rights and the
safeguarding of man’s dignity, and that the difference which we must
recognize regarding these areas is the one between a person who obeys
Allah and another who does not.

A man once said to the Imam: “By Allah! There is nobody on the face of
earth who is more honourable than your forefathers.” The Imam responded
by saying, “Their piety secured their honour, and their obedience of
Allah made them fortunate.”[^18] Another man said to him: “By Allah! You
are the best of all people!” He said to him: “Do not swear that like.
Better than me is one who is more obedient to Allah and more pious. By
Allah! The following verse was never abrogated: And We have made you
nations and tribes so that you may know each other; verily the best of
you in Allah’s sight is the most pious.’”[^19]

Abul-Salt once asked him: “O son of the Messenger of Allah! What do you
say about something because of which people have been criticizing you?”
He asked: “What is it?” He said, “They claim that you call people your
slaves.” He said, “Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth, You know
what is hidden and what is manifest! I invoke Thee to testify that I
have never said so, nor did I ever hear that any of my fore­fathers had
said so! Allah! You know the many injustices this nation has committed
against us, and this is just one of them...” Then he came to Abul-Salt
and said, “O Abdul-Salam! If all people, as some claim, are our slaves,
who did we buy them from?” Abul-Salt answered: “You are right, O son of
the Messenger of Allah...”

Then the Imam said, “O Abdul-Salam! Do you deny the right which Allah
has allotted for us to be charged with the authority as others deny?” He
said, “God forbid! I do acknowledge such right.”[^20] Abdullah ibn
as-Salt quotes a man from Balkh saying, “I accompanied ar-Rida (ﻉ)
during his trip to Khurasan. One day he ordered preparations for his
meal to which he invited all his attendants, blacks and non-blacks, so I
said to him, May my life be sacrificed for yours! Maybe these should
have a separate eating arrangement.’ He said, Allah Almighty is One; the
father (Adam) and the mother (Eve) are the same, and people are rewarded
according to their deeds.’”[^21]

Ibrahim ibn al-Abbas as-Sali is quoted as saying, “I heard ‘Ali ibn Musa
ar-Rida saying, I swear by emancipation--and whenever I swore by it, I
would emancipate one of my slaves till I emancipated each and every one
of them--that I do not see myself as better than that (and he pointed to
a black slave of his who remained in his service) on account of my
kinship to the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) except if I do a good deed which
would render me better.’”[^22]

Yasir, one of his servants, said once: “Abul-Hassan said to us once: If
I leave the table before you do, while you are still eating, do not
leave on my account till you are through.’ It may happen that he calls
upon some of us to his service and he is told that they are eating,
whereupon he says: Leave them to finish their meal first.’” Nadir,
another servant, says, “Abul-Hassan did not require us to do anything
for him except if we had finished eating our meal.”[^23]

There is no doubt that, generally speaking, the Imams (ﻉ) were more
distant than anyone else from the alluring wares of this vanishing
world, and most distant from its ornamentations and allurements. But the
concept of asceticism according to them was not limited to wearing
modest coarse clothes or eating very simple food.

Rather, its limits extended beyond that, for the ascetic person is the
one who does not allow the pleasures of this world to take control over
him without being able to take control of them, one who does not see
this world as the ultimate goal he seeks; rather, when it comes towards
him, the believer is entitled to enjoy its good things, and when it
forsakes him, he contends himself that Allah’s rewards are more lasting.

Al‎-Ābi is quoted in *Nathr al-Durar* **نثر الدرر** as saying, "A group
of Sufis visited ar-Rida (ﻉ) when he was in Khurasan, and they said to
him, 'The commander of the faithful looked into the authority Allah
Almighty entrusted to him, and he found you, members of the Prophet’s
Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ), to be the most deserving of all people to be the
leaders. Then he discerned you, members of the Prophet’s Ahl al-Bayt
(ﻉ), and he found yourself the most worthy of leading the people, so he
decided to entrust such leadership to you. The nation is in need of one
who wears coarse clothes, eats the most simple food, rides the donkey
and visits the sick.'

Ar-Rida (ﻉ) was first leaning on his side, so he sat straight then said,
'Joseph (Yousuf) was a Prophet who used to wear silk mantles brocaded
with gold. He sat on the thrones of the Pharaohs and ruled. An Imam is
required to be just and fair; when he says something, he says the truth,
and when he passes a judgement, he judges equitably, and when he
promises something, he fulfills his promise. Allah did not forbid (an
Imam) from wearing a particular type of clothes or eating a particular
type of food.'

Then he recited the Qur’anic verse:

***'Say: Who has forbidden the beautiful (gifts) of Allah which He has
produced for His servants, and the good things, clean and pure (which He
has provided) for sustenance?'”***[^24]

Imam al-Jawad (ﻉ) was asked once about his view regarding musk. He
answered: “My father ordered musk to be made for him in a ben tree in
the amount of seven hundred dirhams. Al-Fadl ibn Sahl wrote him saying
that people criticized him for that.

He worte back: O Fadl! Have you not come to know that Joseph (Yousuf),
who was a Prophet, used to wear silk clothes brocaded with gold, and
that he used to sit on gilded thrones, and that all of that did not
decrease any of his wisdom?’ Then he ordered a galia moschata (perfume
of musk and ambergris) to be made for him in the amount of four thousand
dirhams.’”[^25]

Ibn Abbad tells us the following about Imam ar-Rida’s ascetic conduct:
“Ar-Rida used to sit on a leaf mat during the summer and on a straw sack
during the winter; he used to put on coarse clothes, but when he went
out to meet the public, he put on his very best.”[^26]

So, when he is by himself, away from public life, his soul finds harmony
with denying what is fake, that is, the decorations and allurements of
this life. But when he goes out to meet people, he puts on his best for
them follow­ing their own nature of holding the appearances of this
world as significant, enjoying its good things. This realistically
ascetic conduct of the Imam provides us with a glorious example of the
truth regarding the Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) and their pure view of life which is
free from any disturbing fake or pretense.

The Imam (ﻉ) tries to cause others to adorn them­selves with the same
trait of clemency and tolerance upon being wronged as an element of good
relationship among them, justifying this by saying that it increases the
dignity of man, for clemency and tolerance, when the ability to deal
equal blows and effect equal retribution express the power of anger in
man and his control over his rash temper upon being challenged, this
causes others to respect and venerate such a person especially when that
person shoulders the responsibilities of authority. Al‎-Ābi says:

A man sentenced to be beheaded was brought to al-Ma'mun while ar-Rida
(ﻉ) was among his train. Al-Ma'mun asked him: Father of al-Hassan! What
is your view?’ He said, All I can say is that Allah only increases the
dignity of those whose good will causes them to forgive.’ He, therefore,
forgave the man.[^27]

In a dialogue with al-Bazanti, the Imam said, “Anyone who receives a
boon is in danger: He has to carry out Allah’s commandments in its
regard. By Allah! Whenever Allah blesses me with something, I continue
to be in extreme apprehension till (and here he made a motion with his
hand) I take out some of it and spend it in the way Allah has ordained
in its regard.” Al-Bazanti asked him: “May my life be sacrificed for
yours! You, in your status of high esteem, fear that much?” He answered:
“Yes, indeed! And I praise my Creator for the blessings He bestowed upon
me.”[^28]

When in Khurasan, he once distributed his entire wealth to the poor on
the day of Arafat, so al-Fadl ibn Sahl said to him: “Now you are
bankrupt!” he said, “On the contrary! I am now wealthier than ever. Do
not consider trading my wealth for Allah’s rewards and pleasure as
bankruptcy.”[^29] He did not give others in order to buy their affection
or friend­ship; rather, he considered giving with generosity as a good
trait whereby man gets nearer to his Maker by including His servants in
the wealth with which He blessed him. This is the difference between his
method of giving and that of others. Ya'qub ibn Ishaq an-Nawbakhti is
quoted as saying,

A man passed by Abul-Hassan and begged him to give him according to the
extent of his kindness. He said, “I cannot afford that.” So he said,
“Then give me according to mine,’”whereupon he ordered his servant to
give the man two hundred dinars. [^30]

The reason why the Imam abstained from giving the man according to the
extent of his own kindness, as the man asked him the first time, is
probably due to the fact that he simply did not have as much money as he
liked to give. As regarding his own affection towards the poor and the
indigent, and his way of looking after them, Mu’ammar ibn Khallad
narrates this anecdote:

Whenever Abul-Hassan ar-Rida (ﻉ) was about to eat his meal, he would
bring a large platter and select the choicest food on the table and put
on it, then he would order it to be given away to the poor. After that
he would recite the following verse: “But he hath made no haste on the
path that is steep.”[^31] After that he would say, “Allah, the Exalted
and the Sublime, knows that not everyone has the ability to free a
slave; nevertheless, He found means for them to achieve Paradise (by
feeding others).”[^32]

Thus does the Imam sense the weight of deprivation under which the poor
moan and groan; therefore, he shares his best food with them in response
to the call of humanity and kindness and in harmony with the spirit of
the message with which Allah entrusted him. Al-Bazanti tells the story
of a letter Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) once wrote to his son (later Imam) Abu
Ja'far (ﻉ) which personifies the generosity and spirit of giving deeply
rooted in the hearts of the Prophet’s Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ); he says:

“I read the letter of Abul-Hassan Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) to Abu Ja'far which
said, O Abu Ja'far! I have heard that when you ride, the servants take
you out of the city through its small gate. This is due to their being
miser so that nobody would ask you for something. I plead to you by the
right I have upon you that every time you enter into or get out of the
city, you should do so through its large gate, and when you ride, take
gold and silver with you, and every time you are asked, you should give.
If any of your uncles asks you for something, you should give him no
less than fifty dinars, and you yourself may determine the maximum
amount you would like to give; and if any of your aunts asks you for
something, do not give her less than twenty-five dinars, and it is up to
you to determine the maximum amount. I only desire that Allah raises
your status; therefore, keep giving away and do not fear that the Lord
of the Throne will ever throw you into poverty.’”[^33]

Yasir, one of the Imam’s servants, narrates saying that the Imam’s
attendants were eating some fruit one day and they were throwing away a
good portion of it uneaten. Abul-Hassan (ﻉ) said to them: “Praise be to
Allah! If you have eaten to your fill, there are many who have not; so,
you should feed them of it instead.”[^34]

Sulaiman ibn Ja'far al-Jufi is quoted as saying, “I was in the company
of ar-Rida (ﻉ) trying to take care of some personal business of my own
when I wanted to go home. He said to me, Come with me and spend the
night over my house.’ So I went with him and he entered his house
shortly before sunset. He noticed that his attendants were working with
clay, probably mending stables, and there was a black man among them. He
asked them, What is this man doing with you?’ They said, He is helping
us, and we will pay him something.’ He asked, Did you come to an
agreement with him regarding his wages?’ They said, No. He will accept
whatever we pay him.’ He, thereupon, started whipping them and showing
signs of extreme anger. I said to him, May my life be sacrificed for
yours! Why are you so angry?’ He said, I have forbidden them so many
times from doing something like that and ordered them not to employ
anyone before coming to an agreement with him regarding his wages. You
know that nobody would work for you without an agreed upon wage. If you
do not, and then you pay him three times as much as you first intended
to pay him, he would still think that you underpaid him. But if you
agree on the wage, he will praise you for fulfilling your promise and
for paying him according to your agreement, and then if you give him a
little bit more, he would recognize it and notice that you increased his
pay.”[^35]

Al-Bazanti is quoted as saying,

Ar-Rida (ﻉ) had one of his donkeys sent to convey me to his residence,
so I came to the town and stayed with a dignitary for a part of the
night, and we both had our supper together, then he ordered my bed to be
prepared. A Tiberian pillow, a Caesarian sheet, and a Merv blanket were
brought to me. Having eaten my supper, he asked me, “Would you like to
retire?”’ I said, “Yes, may my life be sacrificed for yours.” So he put
the sheet and the blanket over me and said, “May Allah make you sleep in
good health,” and we were on the rooftop. When he went down, I told
myself that I had achieved a status with that man nobody else had
attained before. It was then when I heard someone calling my name, but I
did not recognize the voice till one of his (ar-Rida’s) servants came to
me. He said, “Come meet my master;” so I went down and he came towards
me, asked me for my hand to shake and he shook it with a squeeze,
saying, “The Com­mander of the Faithful, Allah’s peace be with him, came
once to visit Sa’sa’ah ibn Sawhan, and when it was time to leave, he
advised Sa’sa’ah not to boast about his visit to him but to look after
himself instead for he seemed to be about to depart from this world and
that worldly hopes do not do a dying man any good, and he greeted him a
great deal as he bid him good-bye.”[^36]

We can clearly be acquainted with the negative stance of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ)
towards their rulers by examining what al-Hassan ibn al-Husayn al-Anbari
tells us about Imam Abul-Hassan ar-Rida (ﻉ). Says he, “I continued
writing him for fourteen years asking his permission that I accept a job
in the service of the sultan. At the conclusion of the last letter which
I wrote him, I stated the fact that I was fearing for my life because
the sultan was accusing me of being a Rafidi and that he did not doubt
that the reason why I declined from working for him was due to my being
a Rafidi. So Abul-Hassan wrote me saying, I have comprehended the
contents of your letters and what you stated regarding your life being
in jeopardy. If you know that should you accept the job, you would
behave according to the commands of the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) and your
assistants and clerks would be followers of your faith, and if you use
the gain you receive to help needy believers till you become their
equal, then one deed will offset another; otherwise, do not.’”[^37].

The author of *Al-Ghaiba* **الغيبة** quotes al-Hassan ibn al-Hassan
(al-Hassan II) saying, “I said to Abul-Hassan Musa (ﻉ) once, Can I ask
you a question?’ He answered, You must rather ask your own Imam.’ I
inquired, What do you mean? I do not know of any Imam other than your
own self.’ He said, He is my son ‘Ali to whom I gave my title (of
Imam).’ I said, Master! Please help me save myself from Hellfire! Abu
Abdullah (ﻉ) had said that you yourself are the Qa’im, the caretak­er of
this issue.’ He said, Was I not?’

Then he added, O Hassan! No Imam preaches to a nation except when he is
their Qa’im; so, when he leaves them (i.e. dies), his successor will be
the Qa’im and the Hujja (Proof) till he too leaves. We (the Imams) are
all Qa’ims; there­fore, from now on, redirect all your dealings to my
son ‘Ali, for by Allah do I swear twice that I did not do that on my own
accord but Allah did out of His love for him.’”[^38]

The Imam did his best to emphasize the error of that concept and how it
collided with the reality by continuously stating that the Imamate after
his demise would be the responsibility of his son ‘Ali, and he even made
a number of his followers and family testify to it. For example, Haider
ibn Ayyub says, “We were in Medina at Quba, where we used to meet
Muhammad ibn Zaid ibn Ali. He (the latter) came to us one day much later
than anticipated, so we asked him what caused him to be so late.

He said, Abu Ibrahim (Imam ar-Rida [ع]) invited seventeen of our men,
all descendants of Ali and Fatima, Allah’s blessings be upon both of
them, and he required us to bear witness to his will and testimony that
his son Ali would be his successor and representative during the
remainder of his own life and after his demise.’

Then Muhammad ibn Zaid said, By Allah, O Haider! He has today tied the
knot of Imamate for him, and the Shi'as will accept him as the Imam
after his father’s demise.’”[^39] Abdullah ibn al-Harith said, “Abu
Ibrahim called us to his presence and we responded. He said, Do you know
why I have gathered you all here?’ We answered in the negative. He said,
Bear witness that this Ali, my son, is my regent, the executor of my
will, and my successor after me; whoever entrusted me with anything, let
him take it back from him, and whoever insisted on seeking audience with
me, let him obtain his written approval first.’”[^40]

Abdul-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj is quoted as saying that Abul-Hassan Musa ibn
Ja'far (ﻉ) had nominated his son Ali for the Imamate and wrote a
statement to this effect in the presence of sixty witnesses from among
the most distinguished dignitaries of Medina.[^41]

There are many narratives narrated by some advocates and inventors of
Waqfism which clearly prove to us their false claims. For example, Ziyad
ibn Marwan al-Qandi narrates the following:

Once I visited Abu Ibrahim, and his son Ali was with him. He said to me,
“O Ziyad! His statements (referring to his son) are as good as mine, his
speech is like my speech, and his instructions are as binding as
mine.”[^42]

Ahmed ibn Muhammad al-Maithami, a Waqfi, says, “Muhammad ibn Isma'eel
ibn al-Fadl al-Hashimi told me the following: I visited Abul-Hassan Musa
ibn Ja'far (ﻉ) when he was suffering from an acute illness. I asked him:
If the matter regarding which I pray Allah that it would not happen
(Imam’s death) comes to pass, who shall we follow?’ He said, My son Ali;
his writing is as though I wrote it, and he is my regent and successor
after me.’”[^43]

Ghannam ibn al-Qasim is quoted as saying, “Mansur ibn Younus Barzaj told
me that he had visited Abul-Hassan, that is, Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ), and he
said to him, Have you come to know what new undertaking I have
undertaken today?’

He answered in the negative, so the Imam said, I have appointed my son
Ali as my regent and successor after me; so, entered the room and
congratulate him and tell him that I ordered you to do so.’ He,
therefore, entered Ali’s room and congratulated him and informed him
that his father had ordered him to do so, but al-Mansur reneged after
that, and he even confiscated the funds (of Muslims) entrusted to
him.”[^44]

There is another stance for the Imam which is not without an exciting
moment involving one of the main advocates of Waqfism. His stance was
like a clear warning to those who created the controver­sy of this
“sect” and promoted it; al-Bata’ini states the following:

I said to Abul-Hassan, “Your father had informed us of his successor,
and we wish you could inform us of yours.” So he took my hand and shook
it, then he recited the verse: “Allah will not mislead people after He
had guided them, in order that He may make clear to them what to fear
(and avoid).”[^45]

The recitation of that verse came almost like a prophecy about the
future of what that person and his friends would do and how they would
fall into the slippery paths of misguidance; therefore, he shook his
hand and recited a verse which predicted that those folks’ deviation
would take place after proof had been made manifest against them. The
Imam, as a matter of fact, referred clearly to the Waqfi movement after
him and even recited the epitaph of the faith of those who advocated
Waqfism in a narrative transmitted by Muhammad ibn Sinan who says,

I visited Abul-Hassan one year before he was transported to Iraq, and
his son was with him. He called upon me to be attentive, and I
responded. Then he said, “There will be a movement this year..., but do
not let it bother you.” Then he lowered his head contemplating, picking
the ground. Then he raised his head and recited this verse: “Allah leads
the oppres­sors astray and does whatever He pleases.”[^46] I said, “And
what is that, may my life be sacrificed for yours?” He said, “Anyone who
denies the right of this son of mine and refuses to recognize his
Imamate after me will be equal to one who denied the right of Ali ibn
Abu Talib (ﻉ) and did not recognize his Imamate after Muhammad (ﺹ).” So
I understood that he was implying that his death was near, and that he
was appointing his son as his successor.[^47]

The Imam (ﻉ) was briefly contemporary to ar-Rashid ’s regime during
which he suffered the tragedy of the assassination of his father Imam
Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) and other Alawides. After the murder of his father,
he was not safe from the schemes of some of those who flattered the
rulers, followed their course, and pretended to show their loyalty by
instigating enmity against the regime’s opponents, encouraging their
elimination, thinking that that would increase the rulers’ liking for
them and nearness to them, that it would stren­gthen their position,
grant them unique distinctions, and raise them to the highest pinnacles.

Ja'far ibn Yahya says, “I heard asa ibn Ja'far say to Harun (ar-Rashid )
upon leaving ar-Riqqa for Mecca, Remember your oath by the dignity of
the descendants of Abu Talib that: should anyone after Musa (al-Kadhim
[ﻉ]) claim to be the Imam, you would strike his head with the sword.
This Ali, his son, claims so, and people are addressing him in the same
way they used to address his father.’ He looked at him angrily and said,
Why? Do you expect me to eliminate each and every one of them?’” Musa
ibn Mahran says that when he heard Ja'far ibn Yahya say so, he went to
him (i.e. to Imam ar-Rida) and told him what he had heard. Ar-Rida (ﻉ)
responded by saying, “What do I have to do with them? By Allah, they
cannot hurt me in the least.”

Such instigation was not confined within a reasonable limit but went
beyond it to where instigation might cause ar-Rashid to pay serious
attention, for the Barmakis were most antagonistic towards the
Descendants of the Prophet (ﺹ) and the most cruel among them in their
grudge, so much so that it is reported that Yahya ibn Khalid al-Barmaki
was the one who ordered Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ) to be murdered[^48]
when the Abbaside caliphate was under their mercy.[^49]

Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) rendered Allah’s retribution against the Barmakis to
their persecution and oppression the worst of which was suffered by Imam
al-Kadhim (ﻉ).[^50] Suffices for proof is the fact that Yahya ibn Khalid
was the one who plotted the ugly plot against Imam al-Kadhim (ﻉ) after
causing Harun ar-Rashid to be angry with him, instigating ar-Rashid
against the Imam (ﻉ) and using some simpleton weaklings among the
Alawides to achieve his goal.[^51]

Finally, ar-Rashid is surrounded by a large number of courtiers
instigating him to kill Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ), and they succeeded in stirring
his feelings against the Imam (ﻉ). Abul-Salt al-Harawi narrates saying
that one day he was sitting with the Imam (ﻉ) at his house when a
messenger from Harun ar-Rashid came in and ordered the Imam (ﻉ) to
present himself before the caliph. The Imam (ﻉ) said, “O Abul-Salt! He
does not call upon me at such time of the night except for trouble. By
Allah! He cannot do anything which I hate to me because of what I had
come to know of certain statements said by my grandfather the Messenger
of Allah (ﻉ).” Abul-Salt continues his narrative to say that he
accompanied the Imam (ﻉ) as he entered Harun ar-Rashid ’s court.

When the latter looked at him, ar-Rida (ﻉ) recited a certain
supplication by the Prophet (ﺹ). When the Imam (ﻉ) stood before
ar-Rashid , the latter looked carefully at him and then said, “O
Abul-Hassan! We have ordered a hundred thousand dirhams for you; write
down of all your family’s needs.” When the Imam (ﻉ) left the court, the
caliph kept looking at him as he was leaving and said behind his back:
“I wished something, and Allah wished otherwise, and what Allah wished
was good.”

Thus did Allah save the life of the Imam (ﻉ) who sought refuge with Him,
seeking His assistance through the sincere words which he had come to
know that his grandfather the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) had articu­lated.
Ar-Rashid , on the other hand, went back to himself satisfied after
destiny had opposed his vicious intention just to realize that what
Allah had done was, indeed, better than what he himself had intended to
do.

Safwan ibn Yahya is quoted as saying, “When Abul-Hassan Musa (ﻉ) passed
away and ar-Rida (ﻉ) started preaching his mission, we were worried
about his life (ar-Rida’s) and we said to him, You have declared
something of great magnanimity, and we worry about your safety because
of this tyrant.’ He said, Let him try his best, for he shall not have
the means to hurt me.’”[^52]

Muhammad ibn Sinan said, “During Harun’s reign, I said to Abul-Hassan
ar-Rida (ﻉ), You have made yourself well-known because of this matter
and followed in the footsteps of your father while Haroun’s sword is
dripping with blood.’ He said, What made me bold in this regard is that
the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) had said, If Abu Jahl harms even one hair on
my head, then bear witness that I am not a Prophet at all,’ and I tell
you that if Harun took one hair away from my head, then bear witness
that I am not an Imam at all.’”[^53]

Some Waqfis tried to warn him against declaring himself as the Imam (ﻉ)
and openly acting as such, and he told them that such a matter did not
require a warning, and that the fear that Harun might hurt him was
groundless.

Those individuals had only one objective in mind: to discourage ar-Rida
(ﻉ) from making his Imamate public so that they might be able to promote
their “sect” which claimed that the Qa’im was Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ)
and that he was still alive as we mentioned above. Let us review the
dialogue between the Imam (ﻉ) and some of those Waqfis. Abu Masrooq has
stated the following:

"A group of Waqfis entered the house of the Imam (ﻉ) once and among them
were men like Abu Hamzah al-Bata’ini, Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Ammar,
al-Husayn ibn Umran, and al-Husayn ibn Abu Sa'd al-Makari. Ali ibn Abu
Hamzah said to him, “May my life be sacrificed for you! Tell us how your
father is doing.” He said, “He, peace be with him, passed away.” He
said, “Who did he recommend to succeed him?” He answered, “Myself.” He
said, “You are claiming something which none among your forefathers
claimed, starting from Ali ibn Abu Talib downwards.” He said, “It was
said by the best of my forefathers and the most distin­guished among
them: the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ).” He asked, “Do not you fear for your
safety?” He said, “Had I worried about my safety, I would have been in a
position to do something to protect myself. The Messenger of Allah (ﻉ)
was approached once by Abu Lahab who threatened him; the Messenger of
Allah (ﻉ) said to him: If I am scratched by you even slightly, then I
am, indeed, a liar.’ That was the first time the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ)
instigated someone, and this is the first time I do likewise and tell
you that if I am scratched by Harun even slightly, then I am, indeed, a
liar.” Husayn ibnMahran said to him, “If this comes to pass, then we
will have achieved our objective.” He said, “What do you exactly want?
Should I go to Harun and tell him that I am the Imam (ﻉ) and that he is
nobody? This is not how the Messenger of Allah behaved at the onset of
his mission; rather, he said so to his family and followers and those
whom he trusted from among the public. You believe that Imamate belongs
to my father, claiming that what stops me from admitting that my father
is alive is my own fear. I do not fear you when I say to you that I am
the Imam; so, how can I fear you if my father is, indeed, alive?”[^54]

The Imam’s expectation proved to be true; Ar-Rashid breathed his last
without hurting the Imam (ﻉ) in the least.

As regarding the Imam’s life during al-Amin’s reign, we cannot recount
any incident regarding the government’s stance towards Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ),
and this may be attributed to the confusing environment in which the
Abbaside caliphate found itself due to internal dissents which led in
the end to a serious split among the members of the ruling dynasty.

Such split which was caused by al-Amin who deposed his brother al-Ma'mun
from the post of heir to the throne and the nomination of his son, Musa,
in his place after listening to the advice of al-Fadl ibn ar-Rabi'’ who
had a personal vendetta against al-Ma'mun and who feared him for his
post should he become the caliph instead, since he had already opposed
him openly.[^55]

There is disagreement regarding caliph al-Amin’s school of thought. Some
think that he was Shi'a, while others think that he only pretended to be
so out of his concern for Imam ar-Rida’s feelings and for those of other
Alawides while in reality he was otherwise. But his discourses, debates,
and his serious method whereby he challenged what was regarded as
accepted facts by those who opposed his views dispel any doubts
regarding his acceptance of Shi'aism.

Moreover, there are certain noteworthy measures which he undertook
supporting this view such as his belief that the Holy Qur’an was the
Word of Allah created by Him, and his insistence that scholars and
faqihs should indicate and promote this view, so much so that he stirred
quite a reaction among contemporary Islamic circles to the extent that
it was referred to as “the Holy Qur’an’s ordeal.”

His father, ar-Rashid , differed from him in this regard. When he heard
that Bishr al-Marisi endorsed the concept that the Holy Qur’an was
created by Allah, he said, “If I ever lay my hand on him, I shall strike
his neck with the sword.”[^56] Also, he believed in the temporary
marriage of mut’a, and he refuted the views of the second caliph in this
regard with arguments which have already been recorded by leading
historians.

Add to all this his preference of Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) over all other
companions of the Prophet (ﺹ) and his view that Ali was more worthy of
succeeding the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) as the caliph. Yet another
supporting argument is his serious attempt to make the cursing of
Mu'awiyah a tradition and enforce it on his subjects; he announced to
people once the following:

There shall be no pardon for anyone guilty of praising Mu'awiyah, and
the best of creation after the Prophet (ﺹ) is Ali ibn Abu Talib
(ﻉ).[^57]

That was in response to Mu'awiyah who made the cursing of Ali a
tradition which continued throughout the reign of all Umayyad rulers
till the days of caliph Omer ibn Abdul-Aziz who put an end to it in
order to safeguard the government of the Umayyads against the disgust
people felt towards such ignominous tradition. He sympathized with the
Alawides, and returned Fedak to them.

Al-Ma'mun, in fact, sincerely felt guilty about the crimes committed by
his predeces­sors against the Alawides as a letter he wrote to some
Hashemites testified as stated above wherein he said, “The Umayyads
killed anyone (among the Alawides) who unsheathed a sword, while we, the
Abbasides, have been killing them en masse; so, ask the great souls of
the Hashemites what sin they committed, and ask those who were buried in
Baghdad and Kufa alive...”[^58]

Al-Ma'mun’s inclination towards Shaism is the result of many factors of
a permanent impact upon his way of thinking, starting with his childhood
when a Shi'a educator planted deeply in his soul the allegiance to Ali
and the family of Ali (ﻉ), and ending with his residence in parts of
Khurasan where mostly Shi'as lived. Al-Ma'mun himself narrated an
anecdote with a moral which taught him to sympathize with Shi'as. It
involved an encounter with his father ar-Rashid who was very well known
for his cruelty, tyranny, arrogance and hatred of the Alawides,
especially Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ) whom he poisoned. Al-Ma'mun states
that when Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ) met ar-Rashid at Medina, ar-Rashid
showed a great deal of humbleness before him and a great deal of respect
to a degree which attracted his own attention; so, he continues to say,
“When there was nobody else present, I said, O commander of the
faithful! Who is this man whom you have held with such high esteem,
respected a great deal, stood up to receive, and even seated in the most
prominent place while seating yourself in front of him, and you even
ordered us to hold the rein of his horse?!’ He said, This is the Imam of
the people, the Proof of Allah’s Mercy to His creation (Hujjatullah) and
His caliph among His servants.’

I asked, O commander of the faithful! Are not all these attributes yours
and fulfilled in your person?’ He replied, I am the Imam of the masses
by force and through oppression, while Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ) is the Imam
in truth. By Allah, son, he is more worthy of being the successor of the
Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) as the caliph than I am and anyone else among the
people! By Allah! If you yourself attempt to take such caliphate from
me, I shall take it away from you even if that means gouging your eyes,
for power is blind!’”[^59]

Harun ar-Rashid was still not satisfied till he divided the domains of
the state into three sections, granting al-Amin authority over Iraq and
Syria up to the end of his western possessions; to al-Ma'mun he gave the
territories from Hamadan up to the eastern borders of his domains; to
al-Qasim he gave the peninsula, the sea ports, and the metropolises
after having secured the oath of allegiance for him after his brother
al-Ma'mun and giving him the option to keep or depose al-Ma'mun.[^60]

Thus, ar-Rashid thought, the ghost of dissension would be averted, and
the govern­ment after his death would be secured for all his sons since
he gave each one of them a portion thereof whereby he would maintain a
force strong enough to deter the aggression of the other.

People predicted ominous consequences because of what ar-Rashid had
done. Some of them said that he sowed the seeds of evil and war among
his sons.[^61] Some wise men said that he caused them to fall into an
inner conflict the perils of which victimized the subjects.[^62] The
conflict among the two brothers was worsened by the instigation of some
top rank politicians in each party.

On one hand, we find al-Fadl ibn ar-Rabi'’, who caused the army to
renege on its sworn promise of support for al-Ma'mun in Khurasan as soon
as ar-Rashid died, marched to Baghdad in order to strengthen al-Amin’s
position, trying to aggravate the tension between al-Amin and his
brother al-Ma'mun, instigating the first to nullify the allegiance to
al-Ma'mun and change it to his son Musa, depending in so doing on
various means of instigation which in the end pushed al-Amin to attack
his brother.

Al-Fadl, by doing so, was trying to get rid of al-Ma'mun as the regent
for fear that should he come to rule, he would certainly seek revenge
against him due to his going back on his promise to support al-Ma'mun
whom he slighted and the oath of allegiance to whom he violated.[^63]

*Al-Irshad* narrates that al-Ma'mun discussed the subject of regency
with ar-Rida (ﻉ), saying, “I have decided that you should be my
successor.” The Imam said, “Exempt me from that, O commander of the
faithful, for I have neither the ability nor the strength for that.” He
said, “I have decided that you should be my successor.”

The Imam said, “Exempt me from that, O commander of the faithful.”
Al-Ma'mun responded with a statement which was more of a threat than
anything else; he said to him: “Omer ibn al-Khattab entrusted six
persons to consult regarding the caliphate; one of them was your
grandfather, Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ), and he preconditioned that anyone
who went against their decision should be executed; therefore, you will
have to accept what I have decreed for you, for I see no way that I can
ever change my mind.”[^64]

The Imam (ﻉ), therefore, had to agree.[^65] It is also narrated that a
lengthy discussion went on between both men in which al-Ma'mun offered
the Imam to be the caliph and the Imam refused to accept, then he
offered him the regency and he again refused, so al-Ma'mun said to him,
“You always say what I hate to hear, and you think that you are safe
from my might; therefore, I swear by Allah that you should either accept
the regency willingly or I shall force you to do so; therefore, accept
out of your own will; otherwise, I shall certainly strike your neck with
the sword.”[^66]

What proves the fact that al-Ma'mun was not serious in his offer to the
Imam to be the regent is a narration stating that al-Fadl an-Nawbakhti,
who was an astronomer believed to be a Shi'a, wanted to test al-Ma'mun’s
intentions, so he wrote him saying, “The order of the stars indicates
that naming ar-Rida (ﻉ) as the regent at this time cannot be done;
otherwise, the person named will suffer a catastrophe.

Therefore, if al-Ma'mun’s intentions agree with what he proclaims in
public, he ought to postpone this matter till a more opportune time.” To
this, al-Ma'mun warned him against discouraging Thul-Riyasatayn from
contracting that agreement at that time, and that if he did not, he
would know that the postponement was instigated by an-Nawbakhti.

He also ordered him to return his own letter back to him so that nobody
else would come to find out about it. He then came to know that al-Fadl
was aware of the fact that time was not ripe for contracting the regency
because he himself had knowledge of the science of the stars; therefore,
an-Nawbakhti feared that the change of mind of al-Fadl ibn Sahl was
because of him personally, and he would thus be killed by al-Ma'mun, so
he rode to him and convinced him through his own knowledge of astronomy
that time was indeed ripe for it, contrary to the reality, because he
was more knowledgeable than him in astrology, and he kept confusing him
till he finally convinced him.[^67]

Having failed to convince the Imam that he would abdicate the throne for
him, al-Ma'mun requested him to accept to be the regent and to name him
the succeeding caliph after him, but the Imam again insisted on
refusing, so much so that al-Ma'mun had to seek the assistance of some
of his best aides despite the fact that they themselves were not
convinced that it was such a good idea, thinking that al-Ma'mun was
serious. In his book titled Kitab Al-Irshad, Shaikh al-Mufid states the
following:

"A group of historians and court biographers who were contemporary to
the [Abbaside] caliphs say that when al-Ma'mun wanted to name Ali ibn
Musa (ﻉ) as his successor, and having thought seriously about the
matter, he ordered al-Fadl ibn Sahl to come to him and he informed him
of his intention, ordering him to seek the assistance of his brother
al-Hassan ibn Sahl[^68] in this regard, and he did just that. So they
met with him, and al-Hassan kept pointing out the magnanimity of the
consequen­ces of his suggestion, acquainting him with the outcomes
resulting from taking his family out of it and affecting his own life.

Al-Ma'mun, thereupon, said to him: “I pledged to Allah that if I lay my
hand on the person who deposed me, I would hand the caliphate over to
the best person among the progeny of Abu Talib, and I do not know anyone
better than this man on the face of earth.” So, when both al-Fadl and
al-Hassan saw his determination to carry out this matter, they stopped
opposing him and he sent them to ar-Rida (ﻉ). They offered him the
position, but he refused to accept it, and they continued pressing him
till he finally agreed, so they went back to al-Ma'mun and told him
about his approval whereupon he was very pleased."[^69]

Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani stated something similar to the above with this
variation: “He dispatched them to Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (ﻉ) and they
offered it to him, and they continued pressing him while he was refusing
till one of them said to him, If you agree, let it be so, but if you do
not, we shall surely harm you,’ and he threatened to kill him. Then one
of them said, By Allah he ordered me to strike your neck with my sword
if you go against his wish.’”[^70]

Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) knew beforehand about al-Ma'mun’s intentions through
his knowledgeable foresight of the circumstances which led al-Ma'mun to
vest the regency upon him, and he was contented that he would not
actually accede to the throne in the future. Al-Madaini quotes one of
his sources saying, “When ar-Rida (ﻉ) was seated during the regency
celebration, with the orators and poets surrounding him and the flags
fanning him, one individual who was present there and then said, I was
close to him that day, and he looked at me and noticed my optimistic
smile regarding the event, so he beckoned for me to come close. When I
did, he said the following to me while nobody except me could hear him:
Do not let this excite you, and do not be overly optimistic, for it will
never materialize.’”[^71]

Al-Ma'mun was not satisfied with all of that; he went ahead and
subjected the Imam (ﻉ) to a strict surveillance whereby he was closely
watching all his movements, and he indirectly restricted his contacts
with others; ar-Rayyan ibn as-Salt narrates the following:

"Hisham ibn Ibrahim ar-Rashid i was the closest person to ar-Rida (ﻉ)
before he was taken to the caliph’s palace, and he was a courteous and
brilliant scholar. Ar-Rida’s contacts used to be transacted through him
and under his supervision, and he used to collect all monies on his
behalf before he, Abul-Hassan, was taken away. When he was taken away to
the palace, Hisham ibn Ibrahim contacted Thul-Riyasatayn and he tried
his best to win his favour and started informing him and al-Ma'mun about
ar-Rida’s movements, thus he won their confidence and did not conceal
anything regarding the Imam (ﻉ) from them.

Al-Ma'mun, therefore, appointed him as the Imam’s chamberlain, and
nobody could have audience with the Imam (ﻉ) except those whom he liked,
and he enforced a tight surveillance on the Imam (ﻉ), so much so that
none of his supporters could reach him without Hisham’s approval, and he
used to inform al-Ma'mun and Thul-Riyasatayn of anything and everything
ar-Rida (ﻉ) said at home."[^72]

What prompted al-Ma'mun to take such a harsh measure was his great
apprehension that the Alawides, who predominated Khurasan, encouraged
and directed by the Imam (ﻉ), might move topple his government.

Having evaluated the general status of the political policies of his
government, which were surrounded by tumultuous events starting with
Baghdad going back against its promise of support to him and passing by
the Shi'a Alawide throngs surrounding his base of government in Khurasan
and ending with the Alawide rebellions in Iraq, Hijaz and Yemen,
al-Ma'mun thought of curing this weak point by a brilliantly acceptable
political move which would be something to divert the attention of the
Alawides and the Shi'a residents of Khurasan and, at the same time,
constituting a terrible threat to the Abbaside masses in Baghdad.

All such measures, he hoped, would strengthen his influence and help him
control all parties involved. This could not be accomplished without
naming Imam Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (ﻉ) as the successor to the throne. And
so it happened; the caliph sent letters to the Imam (ﻉ) ordering him to
go to Merv. The Imam (ﻉ) refused, and a great deal of correspondence
ensured between both men till al-Ma'mun finally convinced him to go
there, sending a special force to escort him which included al-Dhahhak,
or, according to al-Mufid and Abul Faraj al-Isfahani, al-Jalladi.
History books do not say much about that trip except small bits and
pieces which do not provide us with a clear vision of its nature and
mission.

Al-Ma'mun had already ordered his messenger to take a group of
dignitaries who were descendants of Abu Talib to the Basra highway, then
to al-Ahwaz and Persia, keeping in mind that the alternate route, which
was Kufa-al-Jabal-Kerman Shah-Qum, was mostly inhabited by Shi'as and it
has their strongholds, and they might be carried away by their
enthusiasm upon finding out that the Imam (ﻉ) was among them and might
decide to keep him there and thus involve the government in dangerous
consequences which might cause its weakening and collapse.

When he entered Nishapur[^73], he stayed at a neighbourhood called
al-Qazwani where there were crowds of pigeons, the pigeons which they
call today ar-Rida (ﻉ) pigeons, and there was a spring there the water
of which had receded, so he hired workers who repaired it till its water
became plentiful. He had a pool built on its outside where stairs were
also built according to his instructions leading to the low level of the
spring water, so the Imam (ﻉ) went down, made his ablution, came out and
said his prayers on the outside.

The Imam (ﻉ) continued his trip till he finally reached Merv where
al-Ma'mun had prepared a comfortable place for him, surrounding him with
respect and. It was then that al-Ma'mun started to execute the plan
which he had plotted for the regency.

Having been convinced to accept, the Imam (ﻉ) said to al-Ma'mun: “I also
agree not to name anyone in a post nor remove anyone from a post, that I
do not cancel any decree or custom, and to remain as an advisor.” The
caliph agreed.[^74]

In another encounter, al-Ma'mun tried to press the Imam (ﻉ) into
participating in the state affairs. Mu’ammar ibn Khallad said that
Abul-Hassan ar-Rida (ﻉ) had said to him, “Al-Ma'mun said to me, O father
of al-Hassan! You may suggest the names of some individuals whom you
trust to be governors of the areas where corruption is manifest,’ and I
said to him, If you honour your part of the agreement, I shall certainly
honour mine. I agreed to what I agreed on the condition that I do not
issue orders nor overrule others, nor depose anyone nor appoint anyone,
nor do I go anywhere except wherever Allah sends me. By Allah! Caliphate
is something which I never desired, and I used to live in Medina where I
would go traverse its alleys on the back of my animal, and when its
residents or others asked me to do them a favour, I would do them a
favour, and thus they become like my own uncles. My letters still carry
weight in various lands, and you have not increased me in the least in
whatever blessing Allah has bestowed upon me.’ So he said, I shall
honour it.’”[^75]

One of the manifestations of the inaugural regency ceremony was the Eid
prayers which al-Ma'mun insisted that the Imam (ﻉ) should conduct in
person because he himself had caught a very bad cold, or he may have had
another excuse. Al-Irshad quotes Ali ibn Ibrahim who, in turn, quotes
Yasir the servant and ar-Rayyan ibn as-Salt saying that when the Eid
approached, and ar-Rida (ﻉ) had already been named as the caliph’s
successor, al-Ma'mun invited him to ride to the place where the occasion
was to be celebrated and to lead the congregational prayers and deliver
the sermon. Ar-Rida (ﻉ) sent him word saying, “You know what terms exist
between both of us; so, please exempt me from conducting the prayers to
people.” Al-Ma'mun answered saying, “My intention is that people’s
hearts must rest at peace regarding you and they should come to know
your excellences.”

Messengers kept going between both men carrying messages, and when
al-Ma'mun insisted on his suggestion, he sent him a message saying, “If
you exempt me, I would appreciate it, and if you do not, I shall come
out just as the Messenger of Allah (ص) and the Commander of the Faithful
Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) did,” whereupon al-Ma'mun said, “Come out however
you please.”

He ordered the commanders of the army and the chamberlains as well as
the public at large to go early to ar-Rida’s house. People waited in the
alleys and on rooftops to see Abul-Hassan ar-Rida (ﻉ), and women and
children waited for him, too. The army commanders and their attending
troops stood guard at his door mounted on their horses till the sun
started rising.

Abul-Hassan washed, put on his outdoor clothes. He wore a cotton turban,
leaving a tassel of it drape down on his chest and between his
shoulders. He rubbed his hands with some perfume, took a cane and told
his servants to do likewise. So they all came out, and he was barefoot.
He raised his trousers up to half the leg, and his clothes were hanging
loosely on him. He walked for a short while, raised his head above and
made the takbar and his servants did likewise. Then he walked till he
reached his doorstep.

When the leaders and their troops saw him looking like that, they all
swiftly alighted, so much so that lucky was whoever happened to have a
knife to cut the leather stirrups so that he could jump faster than the
rest, take his sandals off and remain barefoot just as the Imam (ﻉ) had
done. Ar-Rida (ﻉ) made takbar again, and everyone else did likewise; it
seemed as if the sky and the walls echoed with him, and Merv was shaken
with the noise of weeping and hassle when its residents saw Abul-Hassan
and heard him say *Allahu Akbar! Allahu Akbar!...*

Al-Ma'mun came to know about all of that. Al-Fadl ibn Sahl
Thul-Riyasatayn said to him, “O Commander of the faithful! If ar-Rida
(ﻉ) reaches the mosque in such a condition, people will be fascinated by
him and we all will have to fear for our lives; so, send him a messenger
and tell him to return.”

Al-Ma'mun sent him a message saying, “We have over-burdened you and wore
you out, and we do not wish that you should suffer any hardship on our
account; so, go back home, and let people say their prayers behind
whoever they have been praying.” Abul-Hassan, therefore, asked for his
sandals back, put them on and went back. People on that day differed
regarding their prayers, and he did not congregate with them.

Al-Ma'mun’s reign was plagued with dissensions and discords both at home
and abroad, and part of the problem was the influence the caliph had
awarded to his prime minister al-Fadl ibn Sahl. The latter did many
things on his own, letting the caliph know what he wanted him to know.
Many dignitaries, including top ranking government officials and
commanders of the army, were not happy about such an influence.

They were sincere in their intentions to save the deteriorating
situation by requesting Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) to disclose the reality of the
status quo to al-Ma'mun, since he was the only one who could not be
harmed by al-Fadl nor could anyone instigate al-Ma'mun against him. Ibn
Khaldun writes the following:

"As discords took place in Iraq because of al-Hassan ibn Sahl (brother
of al-Fadl), and due to people’s resentment of his and his brother’s
excessive influence over al-Ma'mun, then [their outrage at] the
nomination of Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (ﻉ) and the possibility of the
caliphate slipping away from the Abbasides’ hands, al-Fadl ibn Sahl was
meanwhile concealing all of that from al-Ma'mun.

He was going to extremes in such concealment for fear al-Ma'mun might
change his heart about him and about his brother. When Harthamah came,
he knew that he was going to tell al-Ma'mun about all of that, and that
al-Ma'mun trusted the advice of Harthamah; so, he perfected his
instigation against him with al-Ma'mun till he made him change his mind
about the man and kill him, and he did not even listen to what he wanted
to say; therefore, the displeasure of the Shi'as there, as well as that
of the residents of Baghdad, intensified against him, and dissensions
became widespread.

The commanders of al-Ma'mun’s army started talking about it, but they
could not inform him of it, so they approached Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) and asked
him to convey the matter to al-Ma'mun. And so it was. He informed him of
the rioting and killing in Iraq and that people criticized him for the
favourite status which he had granted both al-Fadl and al-Hassan, and
for his (ar-Rida’s) nomination.

Al-Ma'mun asked him, “Who else besides you knows all of that?” He said,
“Yahya ibn Maad, Abdul-Aziz ibn Imran and other prominent army leaders.”
So he called them to him, and they did not reveal anything except after
he had offered them sworn guarantees of their own security, so they told
him exactly what ar-Rida (ﻉ) had already told him."[^76]

At-Tabari provides us with a clear and more precise picture of Imam
ar-Rida’s situation; he writes the following in his famous history book:

"It was rumoured that Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad [ar-Rida],
the Alawide, told al-Ma'mun about the dissension and inter-killing among
people, that since the assassination of his brother, al-Fadl was
concealing the news from him, that his own family and the public
criticized him for certain reasons and said he was a bewildered madman,
and that since they saw that he was doing all of that, they swore the
oath of allegiance to his uncle Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi as the caliph.

Al-Ma'mun said, “They did not swear the oath of allegiance to him;
rather, they accepted him as a governor ruling them in the way al-Fadl
had instructed him.” He informed him that al-Fadl had indeed lied to him
and that he cheated him as well, adding, “The war between Ibrahim and
al-Hassan ibn Sahl is raging; people criticize him for the status which
you gave him (al-Fadl) and his brother, and they criticize your
nomination of myself as your successor.”

He asked him, “Who else in my army is aware of that?” He said, “Yahya
ibn Mad, Abdul-Aziz ibn Imran, and a number of prominent military
commanders.” So he called them to his court, and they were Yahya ibn
Mad, Abdul-Aziz ibn Imran and Musa and Ali ibn Abu Sa'd, who was son of
al-Fadl’s sister, and also Khalaf the Egyptian. He asked them about what
he had heard, but they refused to tell him anything unless he guaranteed
their safety against the threat of revenge by al-Fadl ibn Sahl.

He guaranteed that for them, and he wrote each one of them a statement
in his own handwriting to that effect. Then they told him about the
discords among his subjects, about the deliberate misinforma­tion he
heard from al-Fadl regarding Harthamah, and that Tahir ibn al-Husayn had
done an excellent job serving him and opened many lands to his
government and strengthened his caliphate.

When he accomplished all of that, he was “rewarded” by banishment to
Riqqa where he was not permitted to receive funds from anyone, till his
authority was undermined and his troops mutinied, that had his caliphate
been in Baghdad, he would have had a better control and nobody would
have dared to mislead him as al-Hassan ibn Sahl had. The land from one
end to the other was shaking under his feet. Tahir ibn al-Husayn had
been forgotten that year, since the murder of Muhammad in Riqqa, without
being utilized in these wars while someone who was a lot less qualified
was in charge...[^77]

The picture now was turned upside down in the eyes of al-Ma'mun, but he
did not try to change the way how he was dealing with al-Fadl because
the latter was in charge of the government base in both Khurasan and
Baghdad.

In Khurasan, the psychological war, which he waged by deposing Tahir ibn
al-Husayn and by having Harthamah murdered, nurtured the desire among
the commanders of the army for mutiny, pushing them to yield to his
wishes and expectations after having felt that al-Ma'mun represented no
more than a magic wand in al-Fadl’s hands. As regarding Baghdad, it was
in the grip of his brother al-Hassan ibn Sahl who was considered as
al-Fadl’s right hand and the big stick whereby he threatened al-Ma'mun.

As regarding those men who exposed to al-Ma'mun the reality of al-Fadl’s
conduct and the dangers it implied, they were terrified when al-Fadl
tore down the assurances which had been written by al-Ma'mun
guaranteeing their safety against his wrath and revenge upon coming to
know about their instigation and their support of what Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ)
had said about him. At-Tabari says,

"When that became certain to al-Ma'mun, he ordered preparations to march
to Baghdad, and when al-Fadl ibn Sahl came to know about those
preparations, he came to know only about some of them, so he
interrogated those men, whipping and jailing some of them and pulling
the hair out of the beards of others. Ali ibn Musa [ar-Rida] came to his
court and told him what had happened to those men and reminded him of
his assurances to them. He [al-Ma'mun] answered him by saying that he
was only tolerating."[^78]

Al-Ma'mun was now convinced that he had no choice except to get rid of
al-Fadl ibn Sahl whose job in modern times is equivalent to prime
minister. It is also interesting that chance should play a major role in
the execution of al-Ma'mun’s plan to eliminate al-Fadl, and it may even
have been arranged by al-Ma'mun himself.

While on his way to Baghdad, al-Fadl, who was in the company of
al-Ma'mun, received a letter from his brother al-Hassan ibn Sahl in
which he said, “I have looked in the changing of this year according to
the calculations of the movements of the stars and I found out that you
will in such and such month, on a Wednesday, taste the pain of red-hot
iron and of the burning fire, and I am of the view that you should today
go in the company of ar-Rida (ﻉ) and the commander of the faithful to
the bath-house to take a bath and then pour blood over your body so that
the ill luck of this omen may leave you.” Al-Fadl, therefore, sent a
letter to al-Ma'mun asking him to go with him to the bath-house, and to
request Abul-Hassan (ﻉ) to join them too.

Al-Ma'mun wrote a letter in that same meaning to ar-Rida (ﻉ) who wrote
him back saying that he would not enter the bath-house the next day, nor
would he recommend that the commander of the faithful should enter it
either, nor even al-Fadl. But al-Ma'mun repeated his request twice, and
Abul-Hassan wrote him again saying, “I shall not enter the bath-house
tomorrow for I saw in a vision the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) last night
telling me not to enter the bath-house tomorrow; therefore, I do not
advise the commander of the faithful nor al-Fadl to enter the bath-house
tomorrow,”

Whereupon al-Ma'mun wrote him saying, “You have, master, said the truth,
and so has the Messenger of Allah (ص); I shall not enter the bath-house
tomorrow, and al-Fadl knows best what he should do...”[^79] Al-Fadl
entered the bath-house just to be received by the swords of the
assassins as the letter he had received from his brother al-Hassan ibn
Sahl had “predicted,” or was it really a prediction?!

We do not think it is unlikely that the letter prepared by al-Ma'mun
imitated the writing style of the al-Fadl’s brother, al-Hassan, in order
to avoid being accused of murdering his prime minister. It is also
possible that al-Ma'mun wished to get rid of both al-Fadl and Imam
ar-Rida (ﻉ) by that method of assassination, but the Imam (ﻉ) was alert
in the face of al-Ma'mun’s cunning and scheming, so he resisted the
insistence of al-Ma'mun to enter the bath-house with him and with
al-Fadl by tact and caution.

The last paragraph of the anecdote tells us clearly that the letter was
a plot by al-Ma'mun to kill both al-Fadl and the Imam (ﻉ); otherwise,
why did al-Ma'mun abstain from warning al-Fadl against entering the
bath-house although the Imam (ﻉ) had asked him to do just that?

What provides evidence is the fact that those who killed al-Fadl were
among the closest courtiers and train members of al-Ma'mun and,
according to one account, they later on faced al-Ma'mun with their
accusation that he was the one who asked them to do it. At-Tabari writes
the following:

When he [Ma'mun] reached Sarkhas, some men assaulted al-Fadl ibn Sahl at
the bath-house and struck him with their swords till he was dead, and
that was on a Friday two nights before the end of Shaban in the year 202
A.H./817 A.D. They were arrested, and it became clear that those who
assassinated al-Fadl were among al-Maman’s closest courtiers. They were
four in number: Ghalib al-Mas'udi, the black man, Qistantine
(Constantine), Faraj al-Daylami, and Muwaffaq of Sicily; they killed him
and he was sixty years old and they ran away. Al-Ma'mun posted a reward
of ten thousand dinars for anyone who would bring them to him, and they
were brought to him by al-Abbas ibn Haitham ibn Bazar-Jamhar al-Daynari,
and they said to al-Ma'mun, “But you ordered us to kill him!” He ordered
them to be killed. It is also said that when those who killed al-Fadl
were arrested, al-Ma'mun interrogated them, and some of them said that
Ali ibn Abu Sa'd the son of al-Fadl’s sister had dispatched them, while
others among them denied that, and he ordered their execution. After
that he ordered Abdul-Aiz ibn Imran, Ali, Musa, and Khalaf, to be
brought to him, and he interrogated them. They denied having any
knowledge of the matter, but he did not believe them and ordered their
execution too, sending their heads to al-Hassan ibn Sahl in Wasit as a
trophy and informing him about his own pain because of the tragedy of
the murder of al-Fadl and that he appointed him in his place.[^80]

Thus did al-Ma'mun get rid of the strongest power base within his
government which threatened his authority and his fate, leaving only one
obstacle in his way to guarantee to uproot the rebellion in Baghdad by
dealing with its root causes which included the presence of Imam ar-Rida
(ﻉ) who, according to the Abbasides, was a difficult knot they could not
be loyal to al-Ma'mun except if he untied it, for its presence meant the
end of the Abbaside rule and the beginning of the Alawide.

It was not politically feasible for al-Ma'mun to reach Baghdad
accompanied by Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ), for that would stir the winds of
dissension against him which he might not be strong enough to withstand.
We are convinced that al-Ma'mun was the one who plotted to end the life
of the Imam (ﻉ) by giving him poisoned grapes. Al-Ma'mun’s letter to the
Abbasides and the residents of Baghdad, which he wrote after the demise
of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ), lends credence to such a conviction. “He wrote the
Abbasides and their supporters as well as the people of Baghdad
informing them of the death of Ali ibn Musa and that they had resented
his nominating him as his successor, asking them now to go back to their
loyalty to him.”[^81]

This may be understood as a clear admission that the death of the Imam
(ﻉ) was not natural during those circumstances, and the text Ibn Khaldun
provides in expressing the contents of this letter provides even clearer
clues to accusing al-Ma'mun of murdering him; he says the following in
his Tarikh:

"... And al-Ma'mun sent messages to al-Hassan ibn Sahl, to the people of
Baghdad, and to his supporters apologizing for naming him his heir to
the throne and inviting them to go back to his loyalty.[^82]

As-Saduq narrates saying, “While ar-Rida (ﻉ) was breathing his last,
al-Ma'mun said to him, “By Allah! I do not know which of the two
calamities is greater: losing you and parting from you, or people’s
accusation that I assassinated you...’”[^83]

In another narrative by Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani, al-Ma'mun said to him,
“It is very hard for me to live to see you die, and there was some hope
hinging upon your stay, yet even harder for me is people saying that I
have poisoned you, and Allah knows that I am innocent of that.”[^84]

This situation discloses the fact that the accusation of his own murder
of the Imam (ﻉ) was the subject of argument, maybe even of conviction,
even then, for al-Ma'mun asserts people’s accusation of him and he tries
to extract an admission from the Imam (ﻉ) clearing him of it, as
Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani mentions in his book *Maqatil at-Talibiyyin*.

Accounts regarding the method al-Ma'mun employed to kill Imam ar-Rida
(ﻉ) are abundant. Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani and Shaikh al-Mufid say that he
killed him by poisoned pomegranate juice and poisoned grape juice. In
his book *Al-Irshad*, al-Mufid quotes Abdullah ibn Bashir saying,
Al-Ma'mun ordered me to let my nails grow as long as they could without
letting anyone notice that; so I did, then he ordered to see me and he
gave me something which looked like tamarind and said, Squeeze this with
both your hands,’ and I did.

Then he stood up, left me and went to see ar-Rida (ﻉ) to whom he said,
How are you?’ He answered, I hope I am alright.’ He said, I, too, by the
Grace of Allah, am alright; did any well-wisher visit you today?’ He
answered in the negative, so al-Ma'mun became angry and called upon his
servants to come, then he ordered one of them to immediately take the
pomegranate juice to him, adding, ... for he cannot do without it.’ Then
he called me to him and said, Squeeze it with your own hands,’ and so I
did. Then al-Ma'mun handed the juice to ar-Rida (ﻉ) in person, and that
was the reason for his death for he stayed only two days before he (ﻉ)
died.’”

Abul-Salt al-Harawi is quoted as saying, “I entered ar-Rida’s house
after al-Ma'mun had already left; he said to me, O Abul-Salt! They have
done it...!’ and he kept unifying and praising Allah.” Muhammad ibn
al-Jahm is quoted as saying, “Ar-Rida (ﻉ) used to love grapes. Some
grapes were said to be prepared for him; they were pierced with needles
at their very tips and were kept like that for several days. Then the
needles were taken out, and they were brought to him and he ate some of
them and fell into the sickness to which we have referred. The grapes
killed him, and it was said that that was one of the most effective
methods of poisoning.”[^85] Al-Ma'mun was, indeed, the one who killed
Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ), there is no doubt about it.

His death occurred at Toos in a village called Sanabad, of the Nooqan
area, and he was buried at the house of Hameed ibn Tahtaba under the
dome where Harun ar-Rashid had been buried, and he was buried beside him
facing the *qibla*.[^86]

When ar-Rida (ﻉ) died, al-Ma'mun did not disclose when it happened,
leaving him dead for one day and one night, then he called for Muhammad
ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad and a group of descendants of Abu Talib.

When they were present, he showed him [Imam] to them; his corpse looked
alright; then he started weeping and addressed the corpse saying, “O
Brother! It is indeed very hard for me to see you in such a condition,
and I was hoping to go before you, but Allah insisted on carrying out
His decree,” and he showed a great deal of agony and grief and went out
carrying the coffin with others till he reached the place where it is
now buried...[^87]

... So al-Ma'mun was present there before the grave was dug, and he
ordered his [Imam’s] grave to be dug beside that of his father, then he
approached us and said, “he person inside this coffin told me that when
his grave is dug, water and fish will appear underneath; so, dig...”
They dug. When they finished digging, a spring of water appeared, and
fish appeared in it, then the water dissipated, and ar-Rida (ﻉ) was then
buried.[^88]

In Yemen, in the aftermath of the Imam’s assassination, Ibrahim ibn Musa
ibn Ja'far rebelled and took control of the government after banishing
al-Ma'mun’s governor. In Mecca, al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan al-Aftas
revolted, and Muhammad ibn Ja'far was named caliph. In Basra, Zaid ibn
Musa ibn Ja'far rebelled. He was nicknamed “Zaid of the fire” due to the
number of the homes of the Abbasides and of their followers which he had
burnt. Whenever he came across a man draped in black, he would burn his
home. Ali ibn Sa'd marched to him.

Zaid requested him to guarantee his safety if he gave up, and Ali
agreed. But he nevertheless arrested him[^89] and sent him to al-Hassan
ibn Sahl who ordered to have him executed while al-Hajjaj ibn Khaythamah
was present, so he said, “Prince! Do not rush, for I have a piece of
advice for you.” He stopped the executioner and came close to him. He
said, “Prince! Did you receive instructions from the commander of the
faithful to do what you are about to?” He answered in the negative, so
he asked again, “Then why are you executing the cousin of the commander
of the faithful without his knowledge or consultation?” Then he narrated
for him the story of Abu Abdullah al-Aftas whom ar-Rashid jailed under
the watchful eyes of Ja'far ibn Yahya. Ja'far killed him without his
knowledge and sent his head on a platter to him together with other
Nawraz[^90] presents.

When ar-Rashid ordered Masrar to kill Ja'far, he said to him, “If Ja'far
asked you about his crime for which you are killing him, tell him that
you are killing him for his own killing of my cousin Ibn al-Aftas whom
he killed without my knowledge.” Then al-Hajjaj ibn Khaythamah said to
al-Hassan ibn Sahl, “O Prince! Do you feel secure should anything happen
between you and the commander of the faithful if you kill this man and
use it as an excuse just as ar-Rashid had done against Ja'far ibn
Yahya?” Al-Hassan said to al-Hajjaj, “May Allah reward you!” Then he
ordered Zaid to be returned to his prison where he was kept till he was
transported to al-Ma'mun. Once he was there, al-Ma'mun sent him to his
brother ar-Rida (ﻉ) who set him free.[^91] One of the interesting
anecdotes narrated about him is the following:

"When he was brought to al-Ma'mun, the latter said to him, “O Zaid! You
led the uprising in Basra, and instead of starting with the homes of our
common enemies: the Umayyads, Banu Thaqaf, Uday, Bahila and al Ziyad,
you targeted the homes of your own cousins.” Zaid, who had a humorous
temper, said, “I, indeed, erred from each direction, O commander of the
faithful! If I go back, I will start with our enemies!” Al-Ma'mun
laughed and sent him to his brother ar-Rida (ﻉ) saying, “I have pardoned
him just to please you.” When he was brought to the Imam (ﻉ), he was
reprimanded then released."[^92]

What we try to get acquainted with by examining the Imam’s stand towards
his brother “Zaid of the fire” was the reality regarding the Imam’s
viewpoint of the revolutionary method employed by the Alawides in their
revolutions against the Abbasides. We find the Imam (ﻉ) taking a
strictly negative stand towards his brother Zaid. Yet he did not rebuke
him and blame him simply because he had revolted against the government,
but rather because he had committed several unlawful acts according to
Islamic Shari’a such as looting, confiscating, burning, in which acts he
did not distinguish between the innocent and the guilty.

Other than that, the sincere Alawide revolutions which aimed at standing
in the face of injustice and oppression used to enjoy the support of the
Imams who considered them the only way to disclose to the nation how
corrupt the government was, and to make them aware of its infringements
and transgressions.

Al-Ma'mun’s tolerance towards those who rebelled against him was not in
contradiction with his general conduct. On one hand, he wanted to
compete with the Alawides in winning the public opinion to his side. On
the other hand, he was trying to stay away from getting involved in
shedding their blood and seeking revenge against them which did not
agree with his inclination, though in theory, towards the Alawides.

The Imam (ﻉ) had sided with the Alawide revolution of Ibn Tabataba under
the command of Abul-Saraya; this is a fact. Muhammad ibn al-Athram,
Medina’s chief of the police force of Muhammad ibn Sulayman al-Alawi
during the days of Abul-Saraya, is quoted as saying, “His near in kin
and some people from Quraish gathered around him and swore the oath of
allegiance to him saying, If you send word to Abul-Hassan (ﻉ), he will
surely support us, and we will be thus united.’

Sulayman said to me, Go to him and convey my greetings to him and tell
him that his kinfolk have gathered and desired that he should join them;
so, if you wish, please do so.’ So I met him at al-Hamra and I conveyed
the message to him. He said, "Convey my greeting to him and tell him
that I will join him after twenty days." I conveyed to him the message
with which I was sent. On the 18th day, Warqa, al-Jalladi’s commander,
marched towards us, whereupon I ran in the direction of the two Surs.
When I heard someone calling me 'O Abu Athram!’, I turned back, and it
was Abul-Hassan (ﻉ) asking me: 'Did the twenty days pass already?!”[^93]

Such cautious stand of the Imam (ﻉ) was not due to evading his
participation in the revolutionary movement but was the result of a
realistic calculation of the development of events in the sphere of the
movement of revolutions along the Abbaside rule and before them the
Umayyad. For this reason, we cannot conclude that the Imam’s lack of
participation in a rebellion meant that he was not convinced of the
principle of its necessity.

Now let us turn to the intellectual contributions of this great sage to
Islam in particular and to humanity in general. Nobody can do justice to
all the rich aspects of the intellectual life of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ), but
let us glance at his intellectual output in various fields of knowledge
and scholarship.

Some historians doubted the scholarship of the Imams, let alone their
scholarly superiority, basing their doubts on the claim that had they
been truly scholars, their books would have been made available to the
public as is the case with all other scholars.

Anyone who considers the revolution of Imam Husayn (ﻉ) against Yazid as
a mistake committed by the Imam (ﻉ) and a gross miscalculation can be
expected to make a statement like this which we cannot attribute to
ignorance or to lack of the ability to know, but it is nothing other
than the dark cloud of sectarian prejudice forming a curtain between a
prejudiced person and his seeing events, issues, and reflections as they
really are. This is true about Muslims and non-Muslims.

A “fair-minded” historian is asked to tell us about the books authored
by the sahaba and their works from whom he derived the principles and
precepts of the creed of the Prophet (ﺹ), or even the works of the
tabieen whom he regards as the second class that is knowledgeable of the
issues of the sharaa, custodians of its structure. What books did the
“righteous caliphs” write?! Can you call the title of any of them
besides Nahjul-Balagha or Mushaf Fatima?! Let us stop here for a minute;
surely many readers have heard and probably read Nahjul-Balagha, but not
many of them are familiar with Fatima’s mushaf; so, let us shed some
light on it here.

Linguistically, the word “mushaf” means: a collection of suhuf, plural
of sahafa, a page or a tablet. The word “qur’an” means: a reading
material, a written text. Both words are used at the present time to
denote the Book of Allah, the Holy Qur’an, but that was not the case
during the dawn of Islam.

Mushaf Fatima, or Fatima’s mushaf, is not a copy of the Holy Qur’an as
one may be tempted to believe. One of the scholars who sheds light on it
is Thiqatul-Islam Muhammad ibn Ya'qub al-Kulayni. He does so on page 295
and following pages of Vol. 1 of his famous classic work titled *Usul
al-Kafi*. The edition consulted for this book was published by Dar
at-Ta'aruf (Beirut, Lebanon) in 1411 A.H./1990 A.D.

Al-Kulayni quotes a dialogue between Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq **(**ﻉ**)**
and his great companion, Abu Busayr, wherein the Imam **(ﻉ)** details
the most precious relics Ahl al-Bayt **(ﻉ)** have, and the list
includes, among others, Fatima’s mushaf. The Imam **(ﻉ)** described this
*mushaf* as follows: “It is a *mushaf* three times the size of the
Qur’an, yet it does not contain even one Qur’anic verse.” The Imam
**(ﻉ)** continued to describe the extent of its contents to Abu Busayr.

It contains, among others, a chronology of Islamic events, numerous
traditions of the Prophet (ﺹ), numerous *qudsi* traditions and many
narratives related by arch-angel Gabriel to the Prophet (ﺹ). Refer to
this text for a description of "al-jami'a", a 70-yard long book written
on ox skin by the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ).

The legacy our Imams, members of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) in various fields of
knowledge is narrated about them by those with whom they associated,
their admirers and sincere followers, and it is sufficient to acquaint
us with the extent of their knowledge and superiority over all others
barring none. Is it really possible that Ibn Khaldun did not review such
legacy of ahadith which reached us through them and recorded by scholars
and thinkers and upon which the structure of their school of thought, in
which a large section of the nation believes, stood? We doubt it; nay,
we are sure about the unrealistic nature of such an odd question
especially since Ibn Khaldun is one of the most knowledgeable, highly
intellectual, and mature writers. A writer of such caliber is not
expected to be so ignorant. Ignorant he was not, prejudiced he surely
was, and so are millions others...

The Imams were tested during various periods of their lives by pressing
crises due to the trespassing of oppressive rulers on their civil
liberties. They pursued their followers and sincere adherents,
straitening on them in various aspects of their everyday life, so much
so that the word rafidi came to represent in the eyes of the rulers the
final indictment of anyone proven to be “guilty” of its context, a
believer in its background.

Because of that, the chance was lost for many of those who sought
knowledge to derive from that leading fountainhead, and the chance to
find the scholarly solutions for the intellectual problems because of
which they were disturbing their minds. Despite all these pressures and
violent trespassing, mankind is not intellectually deprived of a great
deal of intellectual masterpieces which the Imams (ﻉ) dictated to their
students and disciples in various aspects of scholarship.

Some of those students used to bribe the jailers so that they might
agree to carry written questions to the jailed Imam (ﻉ) and bring them
back his answers. They only desired to benefit from the presence of the
Imam (ﻉ), and they aspired to be faithful to the trust of scholarship.
They, moreover, wanted to protect the faith from the abyss of doubt and
suspicion.

The biography of the jailed Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ) bears witness to
these facts according to the testimony of those who quoted him.
Historians and biographers of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) do, in fact, mention some
books authored by the Imam (ﻉ) besides his narration of hadith. They
record what he dictated to those who asked him various questions and
whatever he confided to his close companions who used to frequently
question him about various types of knowledge which they could not fully
comprehend and digest.

Among such books is *Al-Fiqh ar-Radawi* which **الفقه الرضوي** was for
some time the object of debate among scholars. There are among the
latter those who considered it to be authored by the Imam (ﻉ), relied on
it, and built their arguments on its premises. Among such scholars were:
al-Majlisi (both al-Majlisi senior, the father, and his son, the renown
author of *Bihar al-Anwar*, Sayyid Bahr al-Ulum, Shaikh an-Nawari, and
others. The story of how this book surfaced is interesting.

A a group of the residents of Qum brought a copy with them to Mecca
where the ruler-judge (qadi-emir) Sayyid Husayn al-Isfahani saw it and
testified to its being authored by ar-Rida (ﻉ) and made a copy of it for
himself which he brought to Isfahan. There, he showed it to al-Majlisi
(senior) who was, likewise, sure it was authored by the Imam (ﻉ) and so
was his son the second al-Majlisi (junior). The latter quoted the
ahadith it contained in his voluminous book Bihar al-Anwar, making the
book one of his references, and this is how its fame spread.

In his Introduction to *Bihar al-Anwar*, al-Majlisi writes, “I was told
about the book *Fiqh ar-Rida* by the virtuous traditionist the
ruler-judge Husayn, may Allah be Gracious to his soul, after returning
to Isfahan. He said to me, It happened that during the time when I was
neighbouring the House of Allah, a group of the residents of Qum visited
me while performing their *hajj* and they had with them an old book the
date of its writing agreed with the date during which ar-Rida (ﻉ) was
alive.’” Al-Majlisi continues to say, “I heard my father saying that it
was written in the handwriting of ar-Rida (ﻉ), and a large number of
dignitaries testified to the same.”

Among the Imam’s scientific books is what is known as *Ar-Risala
at-Thahabiyya fil Tibb* (the golden medical dissertation) for which
sources are counted reaching sometimes to Muhammad ibn Jumhar, and
sometimes to al-Hassan ibn Muhammad an-Nawfali who was accepted as
trustworthy by an-Najjashi who described him as “highly esteemed and
trustworthy; he narrated one text about ar-Rida (ﻉ),” which could be
“the golden medical dissertation.”

It is possible that the dissertation’s fame among scholars, and their
consensus in various centuries that the Imam (ﻉ) was its author, and
that nobody doubted such an authorship, are enough proofs leading the
researcher to comfortably conclude that it was, indeed, from the
intellectual output of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) himself. But what is this
dissertation all about, anyway?

This dissertation is one of the most precious pieces of Islamic legacy
dealing with the science of medicine. It is a summary of a number of
medical sciences such as anatomy, biology, physiology, pathology and
preventive medicine. Its contents are also relevant to the sciences of
nutrition and chemistry, in addition to other medicine-related branches
of science. The Imam (ﻉ) sent this dissertation to the caliph al-Ma'mun
around the year 201 A.H./816 A.D., that is to say, when medicine was a
primitive science and its research was not conducted scientifically but
based on practice alone rather than on scientific discoveries.

The science of bacteriology was not yet discovered, nor was there any
significant knowledge of nutritional supplements such as vitamins, nor
were there other significant medical discoveries for fighting microbes
such as penicillin, streptomycin, oromycin, etc. On the surface, the
dissertation seemed to be very simple in order to be in line with the
mentality of that time, but it is quite deep and complicated in its
implications and it is worthy of a serious scientific study and lengthy
researches to unveil its secrets and uncover its treasures. It should be
compared with modern scientific facts.[^94]

Al-Ma'mun was very pleased to receive that dissertation and he expressed
how much he cherished it by ordering to have it written down in gold and
to be deposited at his “depository of wisdom,” hence its name, “the
golden dissertation.”

In praising it, al-Ma'mun said, “I have reviewed the dissertation of my
learned cousin, the loved and virtuous one, the logical physician, which
deals with the betterment of the body, the conduct of bathing, the
balance of nutrition, and I found it very well organized and one of the
best blessings. I carefully studied it, reviewed and contemplated upon
it, till its wisdom manifested itself to me, and its benefits became
obvious, and it found its place to my heart, so I learned it by heart
and I understood it by my mind, for I found it to be a most precious
item to post, a great treasure, and a most useful thing, so I ordered it
to be written in gold due to its being precious, and I deposited it at
the depository of wisdom after I had it copied down by the descendants
of Hashim, the youths of the nation. Bodies become healthy by balanced
diets, and life becomes possible by overcoming disease, and through life
wisdom is achieved, and through wisdom Paradise is won. It is worthy of
being safeguarded and treasured... It is so because it came out of the
house of those who derive their knowledge from the knowledge of the
Chosen One (ﻉ), the missive of the prophets, the arguments of successors
to the prophets, the manners of scholars, the cure to the hearts and the
sick from among the people of ignorance and blindness..., may Allah be
pleased with them, bless and be merciful to them, the first of them and
the last, the young and the old. I showed it to the elite from among my
closest train who are known for their wisdom and knowledge of medicine,
and who are authors of books, those who are counted among the people of
knowledge and described with wisdom. Each one of them lauded it and
thought highly of it, elevated it with esteem and evaluated it in order
to be fair to its author, submitting to him, believing in the wisdom he
included therein.”[^95]

Al-Ma'mun had a very inquisitive mind and a thirst for knowledge; he was
always eager to obtain more and more knowledge. During one of his
scientific debates, a group of physicians and philosophers in Nishapur,
including Yuhanna (John) ibn Masawayh, the physician, Jibraeel (Gabriel)
ibn Bakhtishoo[^96], the physician, Salih ibn Salhamah, the Indian
philosopher, in addition to others, had gathered. Discussion turned to
medicine and how through it can the bodies be improved.

Al-Ma'mun and his attendants were involved in a very lengthy discussion
of the subject. They were debating how Allah created the human body and
the contradictory things in it, the four elements, the harms and the
benefits of various types of food. All this went on as the Imam (ﻉ) kept
silent and did not take part in any of it. Al-Ma'mun, therefore, said to
him, “What do you have to say, O father of al-Hassan, about today’s
subject of discussion?”

Abul-Hassan (ﻉ) said, “I have of it the knowledge of what I have
personally tested and came to know about its accuracy by experience and
by the passage of time in addition to what I was told by my ancestors of
what nobody can afford to be ignorant of, nor excused for leaving out. I
shall compile it with an equal portion of what everyone should know.”
Al-Ma'mun, following that, had to go in a hurry to Balkh, now a province
in northern Afghanistan the capital of which is Mazar Sharif[^97], and
Abul-Hassan (ﻉ) did not accompany him; therefore, al-Ma'mun sent him
from there a letter asking him to fulfill his promise and to make that
compilation. Ar-Rida (ﻉ) wrote him saying,

*In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful*; My reliance is
upon Allah. I have received the letter of the commander of the faithful
ordering me to acquaint him with what is needed of matters which I have
tested and heard, about foods and drinks, medicines, venesection, blood
letting, bathing, poisons, what should be avoided, and other things
which manage the health of the body, and I explained what is needed to
be done regarding one’s own body, and Allah is the One Who grants
success.

After that he initiated his dissertation. A good number of scholars
attempted to write commentaries on the dissertation; here is a partial
listing of some of them so that the discreet reader may refer to them if
he so wishes:

1. *Tarjamat al-Alawi lil Tibb ar-Radawi* ***ترجمة العلوي للطب
الرضوي***of Sayyid Diaud-Dan Abul-Rida Fadlallah ibn Ali ar-Rawandi (d.
548 A.H./1153 A.D.).

2. *Tarjamat at-Thahabiyya* **ترجمة الذهبية** by mawla FaydAllah ‘Usarah
at-Tasatturi, an authority on medicine and astrology during the regime
of Fath-Ali Khan. This book was written in secrecy in about 107 A.H./725
A.D. A handwritten copy of the manuscript dated 1133 A.H./1721 A.D. is
available at the Mishkat Library of Tehran’s University.

3. *Tarjamat at-Thahabiyya* ***ترجمة الذهبية*** by Muhammad Baqir
al-Majlisi. It is available at the private library of the late Sayyid
Hassan as-Sadr in Kadhimiyya (north Baghdad, Iraq).

4. *‘Afiyat al-Bariyya fi Sharh at-Thahabiyya* ***عافية البرية في شرح
الذهبية*** by Mirza Muhammad Hadi son of Mirza Muhammad Salih
ash-Sharazi. It was authored during the reign of Sultan Husayn as-Safawi
(the Safavid). It is in handwritten manuscript form and is available at
the Sayyid Husayn al-Hamadani Library, Najaf al-Ashraf (Iraq).

5. *Sharh Tibb ar-Rida* ***شرح طب الرضا*** by mawla Muhammad Sharif
al-Khatunabadi. He authored it around 1120 A.H./1709 A.D.

6. *Tarjamat at-Thahabiyya* ***ترجمة الذهبية*** by Sayyid Shamsud-Din
Muhammad ibn Muhammad Bada ar-Radawi al-Mashhadi. Its writing was
finished in 1155 A.H./1743 A.D. and is available at the Shaikh Muhammad
Ali Akbar an-Nahawandi Library in Khurasan (Iran).

7. *Sharh Tibb ar-Rida* ***شرح طب الرضا*** by Sayyid Abdulllah
ash-Shubber who died in 1242 A.H./1827 A.D. Shaikh an-Nawari indicated
in some of his writings that he had seen that copy himself.

8. *Sharh Tibb ar-Rida* ***شرح طب الرضا*** by mawla Muhammad ibn al-Hajj
Muhammad Hassan al-Mashhadi who taught at Mashhad and died in 1257
A.H./1842 A.D.

9. *Sharh Tibb ar-Rida* ***شرح طب الرضا*** by mawla Nawraz Ali
al-Bastami.

10. *Al-Mahmoodiyya* ***المحمودية*** by al-Hajj Kadhim al-Musawi
az-Zanjani who died in 1292 A.H./1876 A.D. It is in manuscript form and
is available with the author’s grandsons.

There are others besides these scholars who explained and commented on
it, revealing what is hidden of its secrets and obscure treasures.
Probably the latest person to explain it and to conduct a comparative
study between its theory and the latest modern scientific discoveries is
Dr. Abdul-Sahib Zaini who did so in the “Multaqa al-Asrayn” periodical
series.

Among other works, credit for which goes to this great Imam (ﻉ), is
Sahafat ar-Rida which deals with fiqh. The author of *Mustadrak
al-Wasa’il* described it as “among the well-known books which is relied
upon and which no other book, before it or after it, is more esteemed or
reliable.”

Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin, in his encylopædic work titled A’yan
ash-Shi'a[^98], mentions an isnad (ascription) related to it alone from
Shaikh Abdul-Wasi’ al-Yemani az-Zaydi for the copy brought by the said
Shaikh from Yemen and published in Damascus, Syria. Also, some of its
copies contain its ascription to Abu Ali at-Tibrisi.

*Al-Mustadrak* states the following: “The esteemed Mirza Abd-Allah
Afandi, in his *Riyad al-Ulema’*, has compiled all its sources and said,
Among them is a copy of this *Saheefa* which I saw at the town of
Ardabil (chief town of the Azerbaijan district, Iran), and its sanad
was...,’ then he goes on to indicate its *sanad*. Among other works
attributed to the Imam (ﻉ) is the book titled Mahd al-Islam wa Shara’i
ad-Dan which is referred to by as-Saduq in his Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida
through al-Fadl ibn Shathan, but he did not indicate that it was written
in response to al-Ma'mun’s request.[^99]

*Ajwibat Musa’il Ibn Sinan* (“Answers to ibn Sinan’s Queries”) can be
described as one of the works of the Imam (ﻉ). It contains his answers
to questions put forth to him by Ibn Sinan. But this cannot be described
as a book authored by the Imam (ﻉ); otherwise, the collection of his
answers to the questions of many others, which deal with various fields
of knowledge and scholarship, must be also described as such. Ilal Ibn
Shathan: This book contains the Imam’s answers to questions relevant to
ailments put forth to him by Ibn Shathan.

On various occasions, al-Ma'mun tried to force Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) into the
arena of complex debates with various groups and creeds. He used to
conduct scientific and intellectual sessions to which he invited great
thinkers, leading scientists, the atheists of the century, and debaters
whose scientific caliber was feared, and before the stubbornness of
whose complex arguments the evidence was muted, and due to the
fierceness of whose doubt the proof was weakened. In all such debates,
the Imam would come out victorious over his opponents due to the
tremendous power of knowledge with which the Almighty endowed him, for
such are the miracles of the Infallible Imams.

None of them ever had to force himself into the sophistry of arguments
to which some might have resorted in order to smash his opponent’s
argument and weaken his ability to provide evidence. Rather, he depended
in his debates on honest arguments in order to prove right to be right
and on his miraculous ability of conviction and calm stylistic method.

An-Nawfali tried to warn the Imam against attempting to deal with the
debates of such people when the Imam asked him why al-Ma'mun had invited
him to debate them, for al-Ma'mun had asked the Catholic archbishop, the
High Rabbi, the leading Sabians, the Hindu high priest, followers of
Zoroaster, Nestus the Roman medical scientist, and a group of orators of
his time, to engage in scientific debates with Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ).

He dispatched Yasir, the servant, to tell the Imam about the time when
the debate would start, requesting him to attend. When Yasir went out
and an-Nawfali was alone with the Imam, the Imam (ﻉ) turned to him and
asked him in the form of a dialogue, “O Nawfali! You are an Iraqi, and
the heart of an Iraqi is not severe; so, what can you gain from causing
your cousin to require us to meet with disbelievers and rhetoricians?”
An-Nawfali answered, “May my life be sacrificed for yours! He wants to
put you to test, and he loves to know how much knowledge you have. He
has, indeed, built his assumption on a shaky foundation, and doomed, by
Allah, is what he has built.”

He asked him, “And what has he built?” He answered him saying, “Scholars
of kalam and innovators are the antithesis of the scholars. A scholar
does not deny the undeniable, whereas rhetoricians and polytheists are
people who deny and try to prove what is not true. If you argue with
them and tell them that Allah is One, they would say, Prove His
Oneness,’ and if you say that Muhammad (ﺹ) is the Messenger of Allah,
they would say, Confirm his Message,’ then they would press their lies
on a person while he tries to disprove their lies, and they would
continue to prove that he is mistaken till he abandons his argument; so,
beware of them, may my life be sacrificed for you.”

The Imam (ﻉ) smiled and asked him, “O Nawfali! Do you fear that they
will disprove my argument?” He answered, “No, by Allah! I have never
worried about you, and I hope Allah will enable you to have the upper
hand over them.” The Imam asked him again, “O Nawfali! Would you like to
know when al-Ma'mun will feel remorseful?” He answered, “Yes.”

He said, “When he hears me argue with the people of the Torah quoting
their own Torah, with the people of the Gospel (Bible) quoting their own
Gospel, with the people of the Psalms quoting their own Psalms, with
Zoroastrians arguing in their Persian language, with the Romans in their
own Latin, and with rhetoricians using their very rhetoric. So, if I
closed all the avenues of argument in the face of each arguing party and
disproved his claim, making him renounce his statement from its onset
and referring to my own statement, then al-Ma'mun will realize that he
will not achieve what he aspires. It is then that he will feel
regretful; We are Allah’s, and Unto Him is our return.”

Thus does the Imam show that he was not concerned about such persons
whom al-Ma'mun wished to gather together against him trying to embarrass
him with their falsification and arguments which he hoped might close
for the Imam (ﻉ) all the avenues of argument.

Whenever a session started and the Imam (ﻉ) was invited to join it,
discussion started and the Imam (ﻉ) debated with the Catholics, making
the Bible his reference to prove his own defense of the Unity of Allah
(versus their Trinity) and disprove the so-called godhead of Christ (ﻉ).

Then he would follow up with a magnificent discussion proving that the
Bible in circulation today is not the same which Allah had revealed to
Christ (ﻉ) and that it is authored by some of the disciples of Jesus (ﻉ)
who are the authors of the four gospels, not Jesus (ﻉ), depending in his
argument on the fact that the details presented by each one of them
stand in flagrant contradiction with those of the other. To the right of
this text is cover page of the author’s book Mary and Jesus in Islam, a
thorough research that proves, from “Christian” references, that Jesus
(ع) was not the one who was crucified but that Judas Iscariot was, that
he was not born on December 25, that the concept of Trinity crept into
Christianity in the 3rd century…, in addition to evidences that
Christianity has borrowed so much from ancient Babylonian, Greek, Roman
Persian and Indian mythologies.

Let us digress here for a minute to tackle the issue of Christianity in
brief, particularly that of Catholicism, then we will bring the reader a
debate between Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) and a Catholic archbishop.

The reader already knows that the only Bible accepted by Muslims is the
one compiled by Saint Barnabas, a gospel which was not canonized at the
famous Nicæa, N.W. Asia Minor, conference of 325 A.D. called for by
Emperor Constantine who aspired to put an end to the sectarian
differences among the Christians of his time. The next few paragraphs
are excerpted from my book *Mary and Jesus in Islam*:

According to the Gospel of Matthew, and to be exact Ch. 10, verse 4, the
list of the twelve disciples of Jesus Christ is as follows: Simon (or
Peter), Andrew (Peter’s brother), James (son of Zebedee), John (James’
brother), Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew (the tax collector),
James (son of Alphaeus), Thaddaeus, another Simon who is said to be "a
member of The Zealots,’ a subversive political party," and Judas
Iscariot. Why is the name of Saint Barnabas not among them, and how did
he come to write his own Gospel, the only one accepted by Muslims as the
true Bible?

With all their prejudices, speculations, sectarian motivations, it is
unwise to accept what today’s or yesterday’s Christians tell us about
Saint Barnabas and his Bible, or about the other disciples. The
Encyclopedia Britannica III, for example, describes those who believed
that Christ was human and not divine as heretics, and so do many
Christian writers and theologians. An independent research, therefore,
will yield better results, that’s for sure.

One such research has been undertaken by M.A. Yusseff who published his
findings in a very interesting book titled The Dead Sea Scrolls, the
Gospel of Barnabas, and the New Testament which was published in 1405
A.H./1985 A.D. by the American Trust Publications of Indianapolis,
Indiana, U.S.A.[^100] Saint Barnabas was originally called Joseph the
Levite, or Joses the Levite, and is better known as Matthai, or
Matthias.

In the Christian document known as Recognitions, Matthias is identified
as another name for Apostle Barnabas, which is correct. In another
document known as Homilies, Barnabas is said to be a personal Apostle of
Jesus, "a strict servant of the Law," and, hence, one of the original
twelve Disciples (or Apostles) of Jesus Christ.

The Jews, too, list his name among not twelve but five apostles, the
remaining four being: Naki, Nester (perhaps Nestor after whom Nestorian
Christians are named), Buni, and Todah. But we find the name "Lebbacus"
among these disciples in Matthew 10:13, that of "Judas son of James" in
Luke 6:16 and Acts 1:13, both contradicting other Biblical accounts; so,
which one is correct and which one is not?!

Saint Barnabas was born in Cyprus in the first century A.D. Other
references to him are recorded in the Bible in Acts 11:19 and 15:41. He
is said as having joined the Jerusalem church "after the alleged
crucifixion of Jesus[^101]," which is not true, sold his property, and
gave the proceeds as a donation to his community. He founded the church
in Antioch (Turkish Antakya; see footnote above about the history of
this city), where he preached.

Inviting Paul of Tarsus (Turkey) to be his assistant, he undertook
missionary activity and then went to Jerusalem. Shortly after 48 A.D., a
conflict separated both men, and Barnabas sailed home to Cyprus. Where
did he write his Gospel and when? Nobody seems to know. How did he die?
Nobody seems to know, yet he is called a martyr... We are also told that
he knew St. Mark. In 488 A.D., his grave was discovered near the
Monastery of St. Barnabas in the Cypriot city of Salamis. A copy of his
Gospel was found buried with him[^102]. The accurate list of the twelve
disciples of Jesus exists in the Gospel of St. Barnabas himself who
records the following:

Jesus, having returned to the region of Jerusalem, was found again of
the people with exceedingly great joy, and they implored him to abide
with them, for his words were not as those of the scribes, but were with
power; for they touched the heart.

Jesus, seeing that great was the multitude of them that returned to
their heart for to walk in the law of God, went up into the mountain,
and abode all night in prayer. When the day came he descended from the
mountain and chose twelve whom he called apostles, among whom is Judas,
who was slain upon the cross[^103].

Their names are: Andrew and Peter his brother, fishermen; Barnabas, who
wrote this, with Matthew the publican, who sat at the receipt of custom;
John and James, son of Zebedee; Thaddaeus and Judas[^104]; Bartholomew
and Philip; James, and Judas Iscariot the traitor. To these he always
revealed the divine secrets. He made Judas Iscariot his dispenser of
that which was given in alms, but he took the tenth part of everything.
(The Gospel of Barnabas 14)

The Gospel of St. Barnabas is the one that contains the true teachings
of Jesus Christ; it will be discussed later how it refers to Prophet
Muammed as the "Paraclete," a Greek word meaning "Messenger" and
"Comforter," in Arabic al-Amin... Even if you set aside the Gospel of
St. Barnabas, a good Greek translation of the original of John 14:16
will be: "And I will Pray the Patera, and he shall give you another
Paraclete, that he may abide with you forever." The Greek word Patera is
erroneously translated into "the Father," a reference to the Almighty,
in a "modern" version of the Bible which gives the following text for
John 14:16-17: "And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another
Counselor to be with you forever\_\_the Spirit of Truth."[^105] No man
of righteousness has earned the title of "the Spirit of Truth" (in
Arabic al-adiq) more than Prophet Muammed.

A good scholar of Greek will do better than that; he will translate
Patera into "Nourisher" or "Sustainer," and Paraclete into "Comforter,"
al-Amin in Arabic, a title given to Prophet Muammed even before he had
started his mission. The translation of what John has in 14:16-17 should
instead run as follows:

"And I will request the Nourisher (God) to send you another Messenger,
so that he may be (your) guide always, the inspired, the Truthful, whom
the world at large will not welcome because it will not comprehend or
appreciate him, but you (believers) will recognize him. He will dwell
with you and (his message) will find a place in your hearts."

A testimony to the truth of the statement saying "... and (his message)
will find a place in your hearts" is that most converts to Islam used to
follow one sect of Christianity or another. Upon acceptance of Islam,
such converts do not abandon Christ; they simply rediscover him and get
to know the real Christ whose message has been and is still being
distorted. The best Christians in the world are the Muslims. Muslims
wholeheartedly honour Jesus Christ and his true and pristine message
presented by Prophet Muammed; read the following verses of the Holy
Qur’an and see for yourself how such message is described:

***Allah said: O Jesus! I am going to terminate the period of your stay
(on earth) and cause you to ascend unto Me and purify you of those who
disbelieve and make those who follow you above those who disbelieve till
the Day of Resurrection... (3:55)***

Carefully examine the above verse especially this portion: "... and make
those who follow you above those who disbelieve till the Day of
Resurrection" and see how the Almighty raises the status of those who
follow Jesus above those who disbelieve in him till the Day of Judgment.
Those who believe in Jesus Christ and who follow his pristine message
are none other than the Muslims, whereas the rest may be divided into
two groups:

1) those who have distorted the message of Jesus Christ and lied about
it one generation after another and are still doing so, and

2) the Jews who disbelieved in him and in his message and disbelieved in
his virgin birth. Although the Jews now are the masters of the world,
thanks to the West in general and to the U.S. in particular, but such
power they will not keep forever. They will eventually weaken because
the promise of the Almighty is true and irreversible; they will be
exposed for what they really are: the anti-Christ, the Dajjal, the
disseminator of falsehood through their absolute control over the news
and information media.

The Imam (ﻉ) asked the Catholic, “O Christian! Are you familiar with a
statement in the Bible wherein Jesus says: 'I am going to my Lord and
your Lord, and the Paraclete is coming who shall testify to my truth
just as I testified for him, and he shall explain everything to you, and
he shall be the one to expose all the sins of nations, and he shall be
the one to smash the pillar of apostasy’?[^106] The Catholic said, 'We
admit all what you have just quoted of the Bible.” The Imam asked him,
“Do you testify that such a statement is actually fixed in the Bible?”
“Yes,” said the Catholic. Imam ar-Rida said, “O Catholic! Could you tell
me about the first Bible, how you lost it then found it, and who put
your existing Bible together?” The Catholic said, “We did not lose the
Bible except for one single day then we found it fresh; John and Matthew
brought it back to us.” Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) said, “How little your
knowledge of the Bible and its scholars is! If such is your claim, then
why do you dispute with one another about the Bible? Rather, controversy
has always revolved around the Bible which is in your hands today. Had
it been the same as the first one was, you would not have thus disputed
(with one another) about it, but I shall inform you of such controversy
myself.”

The Imam went on to state the following:

“Be informed that when the first Bible was lost, the Christians gathered
around their scholars and said to them: 'Jesus son of Mary has been
killed, and we do not know where the Bible is. You are the scholars; so,
what do you have with you?’ Luke and Mark said to them, We have learned
the Bible by heart; so, do not grieve in its regard, and do not forsake
the churches, for we shall recite to you one Gospel after another on
each Sunday till we put it all together.’

Luke, Mark, John and Matthew sat together, and they put this Bible of
yours for you after you had lost the first (original) one. These four
men were students of the early disciples; are you aware of that?!” The
Catholic answered, “This I did not know and now I do. It is also now
clear to me how much you know about the Bible, and I have heard from you
things with which I was familiar and to which my heart testifies to be
the truth. I have, therefore, gained a better understanding.”

Imam ar-Rida then said to him, “How do you, then, find the testimony of
these men?” “Accurate,” said the Catholic, “since they are the scholars
of the Bible, and everything to which they testified is the truth.”

Imam ar-Ria then turned to al-Mamoon and his company and said, “Bear
witness to what he has just said.” They said, “We testify.”

Then the Imam turned to the Catholic and said, “I challenge you to swear
by the son and his mother whether you know if Matthew had said, The
Messiah is David son of Abraham son of Isaac son of Jacob son of Yehuda
son of Khadrun’, and that Mark said about the lineage of Jesus son of
Mary that he was 'The word of God which He placed in the human body, so
it became human’, and that Luke said, 'Jesus son of Mary and his mother
were humans of flesh and blood, so the Holy Spirit entered into them’.
Then you testify that Jesus had himself said the following about his
creation: 'I tell you the truth: None ascends the heavens except that he
descends therefrom except the man who rides the camel, the seal of the
prophets, for he shall ascend to the heavens then shall he descend;’ so,
what do you say about that?” The Catholic said, “This is the speech of
Jesus, and we do not deny it.”

Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) said, “If so, what do you say about the testimony of
Luke, Mark, and Matthew with regard to Jesus and what they had
attributed to him?” The Catholic said, “They lied about Jesus...”

Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) turned to the audience and said, “O people! Has he not
(a moment ago) testified to their truthfulness, saying that they were
the scholars of the Bible and what they said is the truth?!” The
Catholic said to the Imam (ﻉ), “O scholar of the Muslims! I would like
you to excuse me from discussing these men.”

After a while the Imam (ﻉ) turned to that Catholic, who was an
arch-bishop, and said, “In the Bible, it is written: 'The son of the
virtuous woman is departing, and the Paraclete is coming after him, and
he shall lighten the burdens and explain everything to you, and he shall
testify for me as I have testified to you. I have brought you the
parables, and he shall bring you the interpretation.’ Do you believe
that such a text exists in the Bible?” The Catholic answered in the
affirmative.[^107]

The Holy Qur’an, moreover, tells us in Surat as-Saff (Ch. 61) that
“Jesus son of Mary said: 'O Children of Israel! I am the prophet of
Allah to you testifying to that which is before me of the Torah and
giving the glad tidings of a Prophet who will come after me; his name is
Amed; but when he came to them with clear arguments, they said: This is
clear magic” (Qur’an, 61:6). Compare this Qur’anic verse with the
following text in the Gospel of St. Barnabas:

Thereupon said the disciples, “O master, it is thus written in the book
of Moses, that in Isaac was the promise made.”

Jesus answered with a groan, “It is so written, but Moses wrote it not,
nor Joshua, but rather our rabbins (rabbis), who fear not God. Verily, I
say to you that if you consider the words of the angel Gabriel, you
shall discover the malice of our scribes and doctors. For the angel
said: Abraham, all the world shall know how God loves you, but how shall
the world know the love that you bear to God? Assuredly it is necessary
that you do something for the love of God.’ Abraham answered, 'Behold
the servant of God ready to do all that which God shall will.’

“Then spoke God, saying to Abraham, 'Take your son, your firstborn
Ishmael, and come up the mountain to sacrifice him.’ How is Isaac
firstborn, if when Isaac was born Ishmael was seven years old?!”

Then answered Jesus, “Verily I say to you that Satan ever seeks to annul
the laws of God. Therefore he with his followers, hypocrites and
evildoers, the former with false doctrine, the latter with lewd living,
today have contaminated almost all things, so that scarcely is the truth
found. Woe to the hypocrites, for the praises of this world shall turn
for them into insults and torments in hell.

“I, therefore, say to you that the messenger of God is a splendor that
shall give gladness to nearly all that God has made, for he is adorned
with the spirit of understanding and of counsel, the spirit of wisdom
and might, the spirit of fear and love (of God), the spirit of prudence
and temperance. He is adorned with the spirit of charity and mercy, the
spirit of justice and piety, the spirit of gentleness and patience,
which he has received from God three times more than He has given to all
his creatures. O blessed time, when he shall come to the world. Believe
me that I have seen him and have done him reverence, even as every
prophet has seen him. Seeing that of his spirit God gives to them
prophecy. And when I saw him my soul was filled with consolation,
saying, O Muammed, God be with you, and may he make me worthy to untie
your shoe latchet, for obtaining this I shall be a great prophet and
holy one of God.” (The Gospel of Barnabas 44)

“... unworthy to untie your latchet” above brings to memory what St.
Mark said in 1:7: “And this was his message: After me will come one more
powerful than I, the thongs of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop
down and untie.” The speaker is undoubtedly Jesus and the one whose
coming he is predicting is none other than Prophet Muhammad (ﺹ). But
people look at things and make them appear as they would like them to.
Such is the truth which all other disciples, with the exception of
Barnabas, had deliberately hidden.

The reader is encouraged to obtain a copy of the Gospel of Saint
Barnabas[^108] and compare it with other existing Bibles, be they those
accepted by the Catholics or those endorsed by the Protestants, and
judge for himself as to how much distortion the message of Christ has
suffered and is still suffering...

The Catholic archbishop slipped into an obvious self-contradiction; for
he on one hand sanctified the authors of the four gospels and held them
above lying while, on the other hand, he admitted to the Imam that they
did tell lies about Christ (ﻉ).

Then the Imam (ﻉ) debated with the High Rabbi, the most distinguished
scholar of the Jews, to prove the prophethood of Prophet Muhammad (ﺹ)
from the previously revealed divine testaments, after which he follows
with a very logical debate. Having argued with him that one of the
requirements of a Prophet was to perform something all other creation
are unable to perform, he asked him about the reason why they, the Jews,
refrained from believing into the miracles of all prophets other than
Moses (ﻉ) son of Imran (Amram), and the High Rabbi answered him by
saying, “We cannot admit the prophethood of any who professes
prophethood except after bringing us knowledge similar to that brought
by Moses.”

Ar-Rida (ﻉ) said to him, “Then how come you admitted the prophethood of
other prophets who preceded Moses (ﻉ) who did not split the sea, nor did
they cleave the stones so that twelve springs would gush forth from it,
nor did they take their hands out shining white as Moses did, nor did
they turn a cane into a snake?!” It was then that the High Rabbi
overcame his stubbornness, submitted to the argument, and admitted that
any supernatural act beyond human capacity was indeed a proof of
prophethood.

The Imam (ﻉ) then asked him about the reason why the Jews did not
believe in the prophethood of Jesus (ﻉ) despite the fact that he brought
forth miracles beyond human capacity such as bringing the dead back to
life, healing those who were born blind and the lepers, and about the
reason why they did not believe in the prophethood of Muhammad (ﺹ)
despite his bringing an extra-ordinary miracle, the Holy Qur’an,
although he was neither a scholar nor a writer. The High Rabbi had no
answer at all.

Then came the turn of the Zoroastrian high priest whom the Imam debated
based on the priest’s belief in the prophethood of Zoroaster. The
Zoroastrian told the Imam (ﻉ) that Zoroaster brought them what no other
man had ever brought them before. “We did not see him,” he continued,
“but the tales of our ancestors informed us that he legalized for us
what no other person before had made legal; so, we followed him.” The
Imam (ﻉ) asked him, “You believed in the tales which came to you about
him, so you followed him, didn’t you?” “Yes,” he answered. The Imam (ﻉ)
said, “This is the case with all other nations. Tales came to them about
what the prophets had accomplished, what Moses (ﻉ), Jesus (ﻉ), and
Muhammad (ﺹ) had all brought them, so why did you not believe in any of
these prophets, having believed in Zoroaster through the tales that came
to you about him informing that he brought forth what others did not?”
The Zoroastrian high priest had no more to say.

After that the Imam turned to the debate’s witnesses, having finished
debating with the chief representatives of those creeds, asking anyone
else to go ahead and put forth any question to him. Everyone abstained
from doing so. It was then that Imran the Sabian, who was one of the
most distinguished scholars of the science of kalam of his time,
approached the Imam (ﻉ) and asked him how he could prove the existence
of the Creator. The discussion between them delved into the deepest
depths of this complex question, while the Imam answered the man’s
questions through clear scientific facts in a very simple way.

Among the questions Imran asked the Imam (ﻉ) was: “Master! Was the Being
known to Himself by His Own Self?” The Imam said, “Knowledge is acquired
by something which would negate its antithesis (ignorance). So that the
thing itself would be existing through what it is negated, without the
existence of anything which contradicts its existence, a need arises to
negate that thing about itself by defining what is known about it. Do
you understand, O Imran?” He said, “Yes, by Allah, master! Tell me,
then, by what means did He come to know what He knew, by a pronoun or by
something else?”

The Imam (ﻉ) said, “If it had been by a pronoun, would He then find
anyway not to establish for that pronoun a limit where knowledge ends?”
Imran answered, “Yes, He will have to find such a way.” The Imam asked
him, “Then what is that pronoun?” Imran could not provide any answer.
The Imam (ﻉ) said, “Is it alright if I ask you about the pronoun and you
define it by another pronoun? If you answer in the affirmative, then you
would make both your claim and statement void. O Imran! Ought you not
come to know that the One cannot be described by a pronoun and would not
be described except by a verb, a deed, an action, and He cannot be
expected to be parts and kinds like human beings?”

Imran asked him, “Master! The knowledge I have says that the being is
changed in his essence by his action of creating...” The Imam (ﻉ) said,
“Does your statement, O Imran, mean that the being does not in any way
change its essence except when it affects its own essence in a way which
changes it? O Imran! Can you say that the fire changes its own nature,
or that the heat burns itself, or have you seen anyone seeing his own
vision?” Imran said, “No, I have not seen that; could you please tell
me, master, is it the creation, or is it the nature of creation?”

The Imam (ﻉ) said, “Yes, O Imran, He is above all of that; He is not in
the creation, nor is the creation in Him; He is elevated above that, and
bad indeed is your knowledge about Him, and there is no might except in
Allah. Tell me about the mirror: are you in it or is it in you? If
neither one of you is in the other, then how did you come to see your
own reflection in it?” Imran said, “Through the light between myself and
it.”

The Imam (ﻉ) said, “Can you see of that light more than what you can
with your own eyes?” He answered, “Yes.” The Imam (ﻉ) said to him, “Then
show it to us...” It was then that the man was too baffled to say a
word. The Imam (ﻉ) said, “I do not see the light except leading you and
the mirror to come to know each other without being in either one of
you. There are many such examples which the ignorant simply cannot
observe, and Allah Has the greatest example.”

Thus did the Imam face the challenge of Imran the Sabian’s doubting
method, smashing it and dispelling the ambiguity of the complex doubts
which he could not understand till vision became clear to him. The Imam
(ﻉ) did not determine an evidence except after building it with simple,
easy to understand, proofs derived from everyday life in order not to
leave any room for the opponent to doubt after transforming a most
complex theory into an easy and commonsense idea, all of that by
employing a very beautiful and miraculously effective style.

In another session, al-Ma'mun invited the Imam (ﻉ) to debate Sulayman
al-Marazi, Khurasan’s scientist in kalam, and the debate between them
dealt with some significant topics which were being debated then by
scholars of the science of kalam. The starting-point of the discussion
was the issue of *bada’*. The Imam (ﻉ) explained its sound meaning,
indicating that the Sublime and Dear God had innermost knowledge which
nobody but He knew: that was the source of *bada’* and the knowledge
whereby He taught His angels and Prophets.

To explain it in a way which would remove all confusion and ambiguity,
we can say about *bada’* is that Allah makes it clear that His Divine
Will is always linked to an advantage, a benefit, that necessitates it,
brings about such Will, carries it out..., whereas what is apparent is
that His Will is hinging on what is opposite thereto. Then He, after
that, makes manifest His actual Will when the advantage is satisfied
from all aspects, and the reasons for which it was not previously
manifested are removed, and it appears to the creation as if Allah
willed to abandon His first Will, hence it is in the view of creation,
not in the reality of Will, *bada’*. This is the theory of *bada’* in
its simple logical context which Imamis (Shi'as) uphold and which some
people misunderstood and misinterpreted, giving it a wrong meaning which
necessitated attributing ignorance (!!!) to the Almighty God, an excuse
to wage an unfair campaign of defamation against Imami Shi'as by their
opponents from among the followers of other sects.

First, the Imam (ﻉ) has proven the accuracy of *bada’* in which Ahl
al-Bayt (ﻉ) believe by: First quoting the Holy Qur’an where Allah
Almighty says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ فَمَا أَنتَ بِمَلُومٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So leave them alone, for you shall not be blamed for that” (Qur’an,
51:54),***

meaning thereby that He intends to annihilate them. Then the Almighty,
according to the bada’ theory, says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَكِّرْ فَإِنَّ الذِّكْرَى تَنفَعُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So remind (them), for (such) reminding may avail the believers”
(Qur’an, 51:55),***

which indicates a shift from the first decision as observed from
studying the context of both verses.

Second, he tries to prove it through traditions narrated from his
forefathers citing the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) saying, “Allah sent his
wahi to one of His prophets to inform him that he would die on a
particular day, and when that prophet was told of it, he plead toed
Allah, the King, while on his bed, and kept saying, Lord! Postpone my
demise till I see my son growing up to carry out my will’ till he fell
from his bed, whereupon Allah sent his wahi again to the same prophet to
inform him that He decided to postpone it.”

It is apparent that *bada’* in the meaning which we indicated requires
no reason whatsoever to be alarmed, and it does not justify waging a
campaign of defamation against those who believe in it by those who do
not.

The same discussion led to discussing the will’s eternity and
transience, and the Imam (ﻉ) stood to disprove the theory which called
for the eternity of the will, proving its being transient by revealing
its self-contradiction, removing the confusion which may occupy anyone’s
mind in its regard.

Will, as the Imam (ﻉ) says, is one of the actions of the Almighty. It is
not one of His attributes; therefore, it is transient, not perpetual,
since an action is a form of event, and the deed cannot be identical to
the doer, so the will cannot be identical to the willing person. Will is
not like hearing, or seeing, or knowing as al-Marazi tried to prove; it
does not make sense, the Imam says, to say that

He “wanted” Himself. Does He want to be “something,” or does He want to
be alive, Seeing, Hearing, or Able?! If this is according to His Will,
it would require the impossible which is the change occurring to the
self, for the meaning then would be that He wanted Himself to be
something which was not... Sublime is Allah greatly above all of this
sophistry.

Thus did the debates between the Imam and al-Marazi take place
frequently about the eternity of the will versus its transience with
regard to relevant matters.

In his debates with the Imam (ﻉ), al-Marazi kept arguing and coming back
to the same point from which he had started his argument in an
inflexible argumentative manner. While accepting that to desire
something (to “will”, to wish, to desire, to decide) is a verb, he goes
back to deny that, claiming that it is an adjective, and he may admit
something and say something else.

The Imam asked him, “O Abu Sulayman! Can you tell me if the will is a
verb or not?” He said, “Yes, it is a verb.” The Imam (ﻉ) asked him, “Is
it causative, since verbs are?” “It is not a verb,” came the answer. The
Imam (ﻉ) asked him, “Is there anyone besides Him who, too, is eternal?”
Sulayman answered, “Willing is doing.”

The Imam (ﻉ) said, “O Sulayman! This is the same (sophistry) because of
which you criticized Dirar and his followers, saying that everything
Allah Almighty has created in His heavens and earth, ocean or land, dog
or pig, monkey, human, or an animal, is Allah’s will, and that Allah’s
will gives life and takes life away, and it goes here or drinks from
there, marries, enjoys food, commits immoral acts, disbelieves and
commits shirk...”

Sulayman said, “It is like hearing, seeing, or knowing; that is, it is
an adjective, an attribute.” Having abstained from providing an answer
to the Imam’s question, Sulayman went back to the beginning of the
argument regarding whether the will is an adjective, an attribute, or a
verb, but the Imam nevertheless repeated his argument with him by
following another route different from the one he took first. This
indicates how commonsense the idea seems to him and demonstrates his
ability to prove it however he willed.

The debate continued between them in the same calm manner in which the
Imam (ﻉ) coined his questions, which is the most magnificent method of
debate. In his way of providing answers, the Imam never blocked the
avenue before his opponent to continue the debate; rather, he left him
completely free to debate in whatever manner he wished through his
questions till he brought him to a dead-end where he could not proceed
anymore just to go back to seek another route which the Imam himself
wanted him to seek out of his own will, and after his own conviction.

But Sulayman kept fumbling about in his answers to the Imam’s questions
after the Imam had closed before him all avenues of argument, and
al-Ma'mun was quick to notice his fumbling about which indicated
Sulayman’s loss, so he rebuked the latter and criticized him. It is
reported that during the debate, when ar-Rida (ﻉ) asked him to continue
his questions, he said, “Will is one of His attributes.”

The Imam said, “How many times have you said that it is one of His
attributes?! Is it a new attribute, or has it always been so?” Sulayman
said, “New.”

The Imam (ﻉ) said, “Allahu Akbar! You are telling me that His attribute
is new! Had it been one of His attributes, an eternal one, then He
willed and He created as long as His will and His creation are
eternal...! This means it is an attribute of someone who did not know
what he did! Allah is Elevated above this...”

Sulayman said, “Things are not a will, and He did not will anything.”
Here the Imam said, “You have hissed, O Sulayman! He did and He created
as long as His will and His creation are eternal...?! This is the
attribute of someone who does not know what he is doing! Elevated is
Allah above all of that.” Turning to al-Ma'mun, Sulayman then said,
“Master! I have already informed him that it is like hearing and seeing
and knowing.” Al-Ma'mun said, “Woe unto you, Sulayman! How you have
erred and how often you have repeated yourself! Stop it and take another
route, for you seem to be unable to provide any answer better than
that.”

The debate continued after that till Sulayman’s tongue was tied,
whereupon al-Ma'mun said, “O Sulayman! This is the most learned
descendant of Hashim,” and the session was terminated.

The Imam (ﻉ) also conducted a very magnificent debate with Ali ibn
al-Jahm dealing with the infallibility of prophets in which he explained
in a very beautiful way. He underscored the fact that the superficial
meaning of some verses may give the impression of self-contradiction.
The Imam (ﻉ) started his discussion with Ali ibn al-Jahm by criticizing
him and those who interpreted the Book of Allah according to their own
viewpoints, stating that he and those folks have to refer to those whom
Allah endowed with the faculty of knowledge and understanding in order
to learn the actual and accurate interpretation of such verses. This is
according to the sacred verse which says,

***“And none knows its interpretation except Allah and those deeply
grounded in knowledge” (Qur’an, 3:7).***

Then the Imam (ﻉ) started explaining the verses whose superficial
meaning indicates the fallibility and possibility of sinning by
prophets. He indicated that Adam’s transgression took place while he was
in Paradise, not on earth, and the infallibility in question is earthly,
and that he did not commit any sinning act as long as he lived on earth
which contradicted his infallibility as proven by the following sacred
verse:

***“Allah did indeed choose Adam and Noah, the family of Abraham, and
the family of Imran above all people” (Qur’an,3:33).***

As regarding the verse which states the following:

***“And remember Thun-nan when he departed in wrath; he imagined that We
had no power over him, but he cried through the depths of darkness,
There is no God but You! Glory to You; I was indeed wrong”(Qur’an,
Al-Anbiya’:87),***

what is meant by “he imagined that We had no power over him” is that he
realized that Allah was not going to sustain him.” Had he thought that
Allah was unable to overpower him, he would have then committed kufr
(apostasy) and he would have also committed *‘isyan*, transgression.

As regarding the verse “And (with passionate lust) did she desire him,
and he would have desired her” (Qur’an, Yousuf:24), the case regarding
what the wife of al-‘Aziz wanted, and what Yousuf (ﻉ) desired to do, are
two different things, for she wanted to commit a sin while he desired to
kill her if she forced him; therefore, Allah saved him from the deed of
killing her and its terrible consequences, and saved her from her own
wishful desire to commit a sin.

As regarding prophet David (ﻉ), his statement that the defendant had
committed injustice by asking for the ewe, it was an error only within
the framework of the case, and it took place before he had asked the
defendant about his defense against the plaintiff’s claim, and it is not
a transgression, for Allah corrected his decision for him by bringing
him the example of the two kings.

As regarding his marriage with the widow of Uryah, which was regarded by
people at that time as a sin and criticized him for it, it was done for
the sake of effecting a legislative interest whereby David wanted to
shatter the then prevalent custom of a widow not getting married after
the death of her husband.

It is similar to what happened to the Prophet with Zainab daughter of
Jahsh, wife of Zaid ibn Harithah who had been adopted by the Prophet
(ﺹ). By marrying Zainab after granting her divorce from Zaid, the
Prophet (ﺹ) wanted to shatter the pre-Islamic custom whereby a man would
not be permitted to marry the former wife of someone whom he had
adopted, as is clear in the text of the Holy Qur’an. The Prophet (ﺹ) was
apprehensive of the criticism of the hypocrites of his action, so the
Almighty addressed him by saying,

***“Do not fear people; it is more fitting that you should fear Allah”
(Qur’an, Al Ahzab:37),***

since it was Allah Who ordered him to marry her as we understand from
the verse,

***“Then when Zaid had dissolved (his marriage) with her, with the
necessary (formality), We joined her in marriage to you in order that
(henceforth) there will be no difficulty to the believers in (the matter
of) marrying the wives of their adopted sons, when the latter have
dissolved with the necessary (formality, their marriage) with them, and
Allah’s command must be fulfilled” (Qur’an, Al Ahzab:37).***

By providing such glorious knowledge of the exegesis of sacred Qur’anic
verses, and by giving such honest interpretations which safeguard the
integrity of the context, the Imam (ﻉ) used to dispel the confusion of
those who did not have a deep actual understanding of the Glorious Book
of Allah.

In his book *Al-‘Iqd al-Farid*, Ibn Abd Rabbih al-Andalusi recorded a
debate on the subject of Imamate between the Imam and caliph al-Ma'mun
which seems to be stamped with artificiality, and we think it is
possible that some fanatics from among those who deviated from the line
of the Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) had fabricated it, for he stated the following in
his book:

Al-Ma'mun said to Ali ibn Musa (ﻉ), “Why do you claim it (Imamate) for
your own selves?” The Imam (ﻉ) answered, “Due to Ali and Fatima (ﻉ)
being near in kin to the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ).” Al-Ma'mun said, “If it
is only a matter of kinship, then the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) had left
behind him those who were closer in kinship to him than Ali or any of
his relatives, and if you mean the kinship of Fatima (ﻉ) to the
Messenger of Allah (ص), then the matter (Imamate) after her should have
belonged to al-Hassan and al-Husayn (ﻉ) whose right was confiscated by
Ali even while they were still alive, taking control of what was not
his.” Ali ibn Musa (ar-Rida [ﻉ]) could not provide an answer.

Let us record the following regarding this quotation:

The Imam did not claim his right to caliphate only on account of his
kinship to the Prophet (ﺹ), but rather on account of the clear
statements made by the Prophet (ﺹ) emphasizing that he was to be the
caliph after him, in addition to the personal qualifications which
adorned Imam Ali (ﻉ) and which distinguished him above the rest of
*sahaba*.

The concept of caliphate according to Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) is that it is
decreed according to a divine text, not dictated due to factors of
kinship, politics, etc. Allah is the One Who chooses, and His choice is
conveyed by His Prophet (ﺹ), whoever He sees to be most fit to safeguard
the Message and the interest of the nation. The claim of those who said
that they deserved caliphate due to their kinship to the Prophet (ﺹ) is
similar to the claim of those who said that the muhajiran (immigrants)
were more qualified than the ansar (supporters of Medina) due to the
nearness of the first party to the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ). The Imam, if
this story is true at all, would not have been unable, as it suggests,
to answer al-Ma'mun’s objection that there are among the Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ)
those who had more priority than Ali (ﻉ) or any of his relatives, an
apparent reference to his grandfather al-Abbas ibn Abdul-Muttalib[^109],
to caliphate.

It was al-Abbas himself who approached the Imam requesting him to
stretch his hand to him so that he would swear the oath of allegiance to
him when he felt that the fate looked ominous and that the environment
was threatening of a revolt. But the Imam refused to accept such an oath
privately; rather, he preferred that such an oath be sworn to him in
public and before eye witnesses after finishing the funeral rites for
the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) whose corpse was still lying in state waiting
to be bathed and buried[^110]. If you suppose that al-Abbas had any
right to the caliphate, he would then have relinquished it.

As regarding al-Hassan and al-Husayn, they were then very young; Hassan
was 10 and Husayn was 9. Neither wilayat nor wisayat can be enforced on
caliphate till they were old enough, for caliphate is a post which
permits no wisayat at all; therefore, the issue of caliphate was
confined to Ali (ﻉ) alone.

The fact that al-Ma'mun’s way of thinking regarding the issue of
caliphate, and his views with which he confronted the faqihs in his
debates, as the author of *Al-‘Iqd al-Farid* ***العقد الفريد*** himself
mentions, proving that caliphate was the legitimate right of only Ali
rather than anyone else among the sahaba, this fact itself convinces us
that this fabricated dialogue quoted above was written by some fanatic
followers of other sects.

Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) did not write a book on exegesis, but he explained the
meanings of the Qur’anic verses about which he was asked, and we will
indicate here some such explanations in order to acquaint you with the
magnificent method and innovative style of the Imam (ﻉ) in this regard.

Al-Ma'mun asked him once to explain some Qur’anic verses out of his
curiosity about the knowledge which Allah bestowed upon the Imam (ﻉ).
Among such verses was this one:

***“He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and His
throne was over the water, so that He might try you which of you is best
in conduct” (Qur’an, Hud:7).***

He said, “The Praised and Exalted Allah created the Throne, the water,
and the angels before the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the
angels used to know Allah through their own creation, through the Throne
and the water. Then He made His Throne over the water in order to
manifest His might to the angels so that they might know that He is
capable of doing whatever He pleased. Then He raised the Throne through
His might, moved it and made it above the seven heavens. Then He created
the heavens and the earth in six periods of time. He was capable of
creating them in a twinkle of the eye, but the Exalted One created them
in six periods in order to show the angels what He was creating, one
creation after another, so that they would know time, and so that they
would again know that Allah was the absolute Originator of each and
every thing. Allah did not create the Throne because He was and is
independent of it and of everything He created; He cannot be described
by anything in the cosmos simply because He has no physical body;
Exalted is He above the characteristics of what He created a great deal
of Exaltation.

“As regarding His saying, ...so that He might try you which of you is
best in conduct,’ He has created them in order to test them through the
responsibility of obeying and worshipping Him, not out of His desire to
test or to try them, since He already knows all things.”

Al-Ma'mun also asked him about the meaning of this verse:

***“Had it been thy Lord’s Will, they would all have believed, (so would
have) all those on earth! Will you then compel mankind, against their
will, to believe?! No soul can believe except by the Will of Allah”
(Qur’an, Younus:99-100).***

Quoting his forefathers, ar-Rida (ﻉ) said, “Muslims said to the
Messenger of Allah (ﺹ), We wish you forced those whom you have
conquered, O Messenger of Allah, to accept Islam, so that our number
would increase, and we would become stronger in the face of our
enemies.’ The Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) said, I am not going to meet Allah,
the Almighty and the Exalted, having invented an innovation which He did
not command me to do, nor am I the type of person who forces others to
do anything at all.’ It was then that this verse was revealed: Had it
been thy Lord’s Will, they would all have believed, (so would have) all
those on earth,’ by means of forcing them, or when they find no other
choice while in this world, just as will those who will believe only
after witnessing Allah’s might and retribution in the life after death.
If I do such a thing to them, they would not deserve any reward, but I
wish they accept it out of their own choice rather than being forced to
do so in order that they may deserve to be close to me and blessed
through me, and they will thus remain in Paradise forever.’

“As regarding the meaning of No soul can believe except by the Will of
Allah,’ it does not mean that it is prohibited from believing (without a
prior consent from Allah); it simply means that Allah invites it to
believe without forcing it to do so.”

The Imam (ﻉ) said the following in his explanation of the verse which
says,

***“[Allah is He] Who has made the earth your couch, and the heavens
your canopy” (Qur’an, Al-Baqara:22):***

“He made the earth suitable to the creation of your nature, agreeable to
your bodies; He did not make it too hot to burn you, nor too cold to
freeze you, nor too windy to cause you dizziness, nor too stinky to
damage your heads, nor as liquid as water to cause you to drown, nor too
solid to enable you to build houses and graves for your dead; rather,
the Exalted and the Sublime One made it strong enough to be useful for
you, for your bodies, and for your buildings, making it usable in your
homes and graves and a great deal of other advantages as well; thus, He
made the earth a couch for you.

“As for the heavens, He made them like a protective ceiling above your
heads in which He let the sun and its moon and the stars orbit for your
own good. He ... 'sent down water from the heavens, and brought forth
therewith fruits for your sustenance,’ meaning thereby water which He
caused to descend from a high altitude in order to reach the summits of
your mountains and hills, valleys and plains. He caused it to descend as
showers and as moisture which soil inhales, and He did not cause it to
pour down at once to ruin your lands, trees and other vegetation and
fruits. And brought forth therewith fruits for your sustenance’ (Qur’an,
Al-Baqara:22)

means whatever grows on earth for your sustenance, so Do not set up
rivals unto Allah while you know (the truth),’ that is, rivals’ such as
similitudes and such things like idols which have no comprehension,
hearing, sight, nor are they able to do anything at all, while you know
that they cannot create any of these great blessings with which He, your
Lord, the Exalted, the Most High, has blessed you.”

About the subject of the infallibility of Prophets, the Imam (ﻉ) was
asked to explain the meanings of some verses whose superficial meanings
suggest that Prophets were not infallible at all, that they were liable
to commit sins. At one of the meetings arranged by al-Ma'mun, the latter
asked the Imam (ﻉ): “O Son of the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ)! Don’t you
claim that Prophets are infallible?”  
 The Imam (ﻉ) answered in the affirmative.

Al-Ma'mun then asked him, “Then what is the meaning of this verse: Thus
did Adam disobey his Lord and allow himself to be se­duced’?”

The Imam answered this question by explaining that Allah had forbidden
Adam and Eve from coming close to a particular tree without forbidding
them from eating its fruit or the fruit of similar trees. They obeyed
Allah by not coming near that tree, but Iblis (Eblis) confused them in
this regard and suggested that they should eat not from that tree but
from other similar trees, swearing to them by Allah that he was only
providing them with advice. So they believed in his oath, and they ate
the fruit of a similar tree, and that was before Adam was considered as
a Prophet and before his descent to earth.

What he did was not a sin for which the penalty is Hellfire, but it was
a minor disobedience which could be forgiven and could be committed by
Prophets before wahi (revelation) reaches them. When Allah chose him and
made him a Prophet, he became infallible and was not permitted to commit
a sin, minor or major, telling him, “Thus did Adam disobey his Lord and
allow himself to be seduced. But his Lord chose him (for His Grace); He
turned to him, and gave him guidance.’”

Then he asked him about Ibrahim (Abraham) al-Khalil (ﻉ), the Friend of
Allah, and about the stage of doubt through which he passed as appears
on the surface in the Holy Qur’an when he is mentioned, till truth
became manifest to him and he believed therein. The Almighty says:

***“When the night covered him, he saw a star. He said, This is my
Lord.’ But when it set, he said, I do not love those that set.’ When he
saw the moon rising in splendour, he said, This is my Lord.’ But the
moon set, so he said, Unless my Lord guides me, I shall surely be among
those who go astray.’ When he saw the sun rising in splendour, he said,
This is my Lord; this is the greatest (of all).’ But when the sun set,
he said, O my people! I am indeed free from your (guilt) of ascribing
partners to Allah. For me, I have set my face firmly and truly towards
Him Who created the heavens and the earth, and never shall I attribue
partners to Allah’” (Qur’an, Al An’am:76-79).***

About this issue, the Imam (ﻉ) commented thus:

“Ibrahim (ﻉ) never passed through a stage of doubt in Allah; rather, his
story may be summarized thus: He lived in a society where three types of
worship dominated: the worship of Venus, the worship of the moon, and
the worship of the sun. The outward pretense of Ibrahim (ﻉ) to follow
these religions before declaring his belief in Allah was only to deny
the validity of each one of them and to prove to others the fact that
they were invalid, not due to his temporary belief in them. He simply
wanted to prove to their fellows, through the method of argument which
he employed in a spirit filled with belief in Him, that their type of
creed and their norm of worship of Venus, the moon, and the sun, were
not appropriate due to the variation which occurred to them and which is
one of the attributes of the creatures, not of the Creator.”

Then the Imam (ﻉ) added saying, “What Ibrahim al-Khalil (ﻉ) did was
actually according to the inspiration which he had received from Allah
by the token of the verse that says, That was the reasoning about Us
which We gave to Abraham (to employ) against his people’ (Qur’an,
Al-An’am:83). What he did, therefore, was merely a method to win the
argument against his people regarding the invalidity of their norms of
worship and in their belief in gods other than Allah, which is a unique
method among Qur’anic methods to invite others to believe.”

Al-Ma'mun then asked him about the meaning of the verse which says,

***“... till the apostles give up hope (of their people) and (their
people come to) think that they proved them to be liars, Our help will
then come to them” (Qur’an, Yousuf:110).***

The reason for questioning is attributing despair to Allah’s Messengers
after being promised help from Allah. Despair and despondency are forms
of kufr (disbelief); the Almighty has said,

***“Never give up hope of Allah’s mercy; truly none despairs of Allah’s
mercy except those who have no faith” (Qur’an, Yousuf:87).***

So, how can despair find its way to the heart of a messenger of Allah,
or a prophet, knowing that, according to this verse, only kafirs can do
so, and what is a greater sin than committing *kufr*?!

What is superficially obvious from the text of this verse is that the
time when they despaired was after receiving the Message and
inspiration. To this, the Imam (ﻉ) answered by saying that the subject
of despair in this verse is not Allah’s help promised to His messengers,
but rather losing hope of their people ever believing in them and
accepting their message; i.e. to believe in Him and renounce their
previous disbelief and disobedi­ence by their worship of gods other than
Allah. The meaning of this verse, then, will be something like this:
When the messengers lost hope that their people would ever believe in
them, and when those people thought that they succeeded in proving those
messengers liars, it is then that Our help came to them.

Thus is the outward ambiguity of the verse removed, and thus does the
Imam (ﻉ), through providing such glorious explanations to the sacred
verses of the Holy Qur’an whose outward meaning is actually the opposite
of that of the context, dispel the cloud of doubt which may come to
one’s mind regarding the infallibility of Prophets. They are not mere
justifica­tions or one’s own personal opinions; rather, they are actual
facts; to uphold to the contrary is not possible.

There are other verses the superficial meaning of which gives the
impression that Allah has limbs just as humans do which He uses to
achieve His purpose. An example is His statement addressing Iblis when
the latter refused to prostrate to Adam as commanded by Allah: “What
prohibited you from prostrating to what I have created with My own
hands?” and also the verse saying, “When a leg will be uncovered and
they are invited to prostrate...”

The Imam (ﻉ) explains the meaning of Allah’s hand to be His might. The
meaning of the previous verse would be, “What prohibited you from
prostrating to what I have created with My might and power?” Allah does
not have eyes, legs, hands, or any such things as we may imagine which
would put limits to Allah like those to man, and the revealed texts
containing a reference to such things are given meanings which agree
with conceiving Allah to be Exalted above having physical dimensions a
great deal of exaltation.

The “leg” is interpreted by the Imam as a barrier of light which, when
removed, will cause the believers to fall prostrating, while the legs of
the hypocrites become too stiffened to prostrate.

Thus does Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) portray for us an accurate picture which is
honest in interpreting the meanings embedded in the Glorious Book if we
wish to honestly and wisely interpret its verses.

One more thing remains. There are narratives which contain some
interpretations of Qur’anic verses attributed to Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) the
authenticity of which is questioned simply because some of those who
reported them are not free of the practice of distortion or fabrication.

What we feel comfortable with is: if such narrations do not contain
anything which disagrees with the beliefs of followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt (ﻉ) regarding the interpretation of Qur’anic verses, it will be
a testimony to their authenticity. Add to this the fact that we think it
is quite unlikely that some narrators would deliberately tell lies about
the Imam (ﻉ) in cases where telling lies does not benefit the narrator a
bit, particularly in the interpretations of the verses which we have
quoted above. This is why we find scholars of exegesis rely on such
narratives and their likes in explain­ing the Holy Qur’an. If they
contradict one another, they accept the one which seems to have the most
sound meaning, or to the ones which agree with the basic principles of
the School of Thought.

In the case where the interpretation of certain verses becomes the basis
of a legislative rule, or in the process of deriving one, then the
authenticity of narration or interpretation has to be verified first as
one provided by the Prophet (ﺹ) or by members of his Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ),
and attempts should be made to make sure that the integrity of their
narrators is not questioned.

Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) justifies the
existence of Qur’anic verses which can be interpreted in more than one
way by saying, “The Almighty has done so in order to foil the attempt of
wrong-doers from among those who would take control over the legacy of
the knowledge of the Book left by the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ), which he
did not intend them to acquire, rendering them unable to explain the
various possible meanings thereof.”

It is as if Allah willed that the Prophet (ﺹ) and those who would bear
the Message after him would have a special distinction which is: the
understanding of what others are not able to understand, so that people
would resort to them when they are unable to understand certain verses
of the Holy Qur’an which they need to under­stand for the betterment of
their life and the comprehension of their creed.

The Imam’s answers to theological questions were all in harmony with the
environment of the occasion surrounding their legislation. Causes may be
to achieve a social benefit, when the social aspect of legislation is
more apparent than any other, or for a health-related, spiritual or
psycho­logical benefit. For example, when he explains the causes for the
prohibi­tion of adultery, the Imam (ﻉ) says, “Adultery is prohibited due
to the corruption it causes such as murders, loss of lineage, child
desertion, chaos regarding inheritance, and other such aspects of
corruption.”

The Imam (ﻉ) explains to us why usury (riba) is prohibited by saying,
“The reason for prohibiting usury is because it eliminates favours,
ruins funds, causes greed for profit, causes people to abandon their
dealing with loans to each other or in paying with cash, or when they do
each other favours, and due to all the bad consequences of corruption
and oppression and the exhaustion of funds.”

As regarding the prohibition of eating the meat of pigs, rabbits, dead
animals, spleens, the Imam (ﻉ) says, “As regarding pigs, their creation
was distorted by Allah in order to provide a moral lesson to man, and in
order to remind man to fear Allah, and as an evidence of Allah’s might
to distort what He creates at will, and because the food they eat is the
filthiest of filth, in addition to many other reasons. As regarding the
rabbits, they are like cats: Their claws are like those of cats and like
wild animals. Their behaviour, therefore, is equally wild, in addition
to their own inner dirtiness and due to their bleeding which is similar
to the bleeding of women during their menstrual period because they are
miscreants. As regarding dead animals, the prohibition of eating their
meat is due to the damage such meat will cause to the body, and due to
the fact that Allah has made lawful the meat of animals slaughtered in
His name so that that would be a distinction between what is lawful and
what is not. As regarding the spleen, it is prohibited because of the
bad blood it contains, and the cause of its prohibition is similar to
that of dead animals; it is equally bad in its consequences.”

The Imam (ﻉ) has said the following regarding the legislation of the
pilgrimage (*hajj*): “The reason for the hajj is to seek to be the guest
of Allah, to request more blessings, to part with past sins, to feel
repentant about the past, and to look forward to the future. It is due
to spending on the trip seeking nearness to Allah, tiring the body,
abstaining from pleasures and desires, seeking nearness to Allah by
worshipping Him, yielding and submitting to Him, looking up towards Him
in cases of hot weather and chilling cold, during security and fear,
incessantly doing so, and due to all the benefits in it of desiring the
rewards and fearing the wrath of Allah, the Dear One, the Exalted.”

As regarding marital relations between man and woman, the Imam (ﻉ)
justifies for us some legislative rules in this regard. For example, the
reason why a man may marry up to four women, while a woman is prohibited
from marrying more than one man, is that when a man marries four women,
his children will all be related to him; had a woman married two
husbands or more simultaneously, nobody would know for sure who fathered
the sons she gave birth to, since they all were in cohabiting with her,
and this causes a complete disorder for relating one to his father, and
who should inherit who, and who is the kin of who.

The reason for repeating the divorce statement thrice is due to the time
interval between each, and due to a possible desire for reconciliation
or the calming of anger, if any, and to teach women to respect their
husbands and deter them from disobeying them.

The reason why a husband can never remarry his wife whom he divorced
thrice (articulating, in the process, the divorce statement nine times
all in all), is that it is his right penalty so that men do not take
divorce lightly or take advantage of women and think of them as weak,
and so that the man would be considering his affairs, remaining awake
and aware, so that he would lose all hope of a reunion after the ninth
pronouncement of the divorce statement.

The reason why a wife during her waiting period (iddat) cannot remarry
her previous husband who had divorced her twice till she marries someone
else, is due to the fact that Allah had permitted divorce twice, saying,
“A divorce is only permissible twice: after that, the parties should
either hold together on equitable terms, or separate with
kindness,”[^111] that is, after he had already divorced her for the
third time, due to his committing something which Allah Almighty hates
for him to do; therefore, He prohibited him from marrying her again
except after she marries someone else in order to prohibit people from
taking divorce lightly and in order to protect women’s rights.

Regarding the monetary distribution of inheritance by allotting the male
heir twice the share of that of the female, the Imam (ﻉ) says the
following: “The reason for giving women half what men get of inheritance
is that when the woman marries, she receives, while the man gives;
therefore, Allah decided to assist the males to be able to give.”

He provides another reason why the man is given twice as much as the
woman: The woman is considered dependent on the man when she needs, and
he has to take care of her living expenses and to spend on her, while
the woman is not required to take care of the expenses of the man, nor
can she be required to pay his expenses if he was in need; therefore,
Allah decreed to give the man more according to the Qur’anic verse, “Men
are the protectors and maintainers of women because Allah has given the
one more than the other, and because they support them from their
means.”[^112]

Regarding the common custom of defining the value of the dower to be
equivalent to the value of five hundred dirhams, the Imam (ﻉ) says in a
narrative: “Allah the Almighty and the Exalted has promised that if one
believer pronounced *Allahu Akbar!* one hundred times, and
*Subhana-Allah* one hundred times, and *Alhamdu-Lillah* one hundred
times, and *La Ilaha Ila-Allah* one hundred more times, and send
blessings unto His Prophet (ﺹ) yet a hundred more, then he pleads to Him
to grant him in marriage the huris of Paradise with large lovely eyes,
He would surely marry him to one, then He determined women’s dowers to
be five hundred dirhams. If any believer asks the hand of a woman from
another Muslim brother, pays him the five hundred dirhams, and the
brother does not marry him to that woman, he would have committed ‘uqooq
(disobedience of Allah’s commandments) towards him, and Allah will not
marry him to a huri.”

The hadith of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) contains precious jewels and invaluable
treasures in which man senses the depth of the idea, the magnificence of
tafsir, the beauty of performance, with neither the artificial manner of
expression, nor the ambiguity of meaning, nor the stubbornness of
instruction. When he is asked about the reasonable comprehension of some
ahadith of the Prophet (ﺹ) in which a cloud of ambiguity hovers above
their narration, he defines their actual objective with flexibility and
ease, as if hadith has no other connotation except the one he provides.

Some people asked him (ﻉ) about the meaning of this tradition: “My
companions are like the stars: If you follow any of them, you shall
receive guidance,” and another one saying, “Leave my companions to me.”
Both of these traditions are considered by Sunnis as the foundation of
their generalization of judgement regarding all companions of the
Prophet (ﺹ) barring none, thus justifying even their acts which
contradicted Islamic justice, calling what they could not justify as “an
error in ijtihad.”

But the Imam (ﻉ) provides us with the actual explanation of these and
other such ahadith with honesty and integrity, outlining in an easy
manner their exact meaning. In his answer regarding the first tradition,
he said, “Yes; he did say this hadith, meaning thereby the companions
who did not make any alteration after him or any change (to the Islamic
creed).”

He was asked, “How can you tell that they altered and changed?” He said,
“This is due to what is reported about him (ﻉ) that he said, Certain
individuals among my companions will be pushed away by force from my
Pool (of Kawthar) on the Day of Judgement just as strange camels are
pushed away from the watering place, and I shall cry, O Lord! My
companions! My compan­ions!’ and it shall be said to me, You do not know
what innovations they invented after you,’ so they will be pushed away
towards the left side (where Hell is), and I shall say, Away with them;
ruined they shall be.’” The Imam continued to say, “Such will be the
penalty of those who alter and change (the *hadith* and the Sunnah).”

This *hadith* is narrated, with a minor variation in its wording, by
al-Bukhari who quotes Abdullah ibn Mas'ud citing the Prophet (ﺹ) saying,
“I shall be the first to reach the Pool, then the souls of some men from
among you will be resurrected and they shall be prohibited from coming
near me, and I shall say, Lord! These are my companions!’ And it shall
be said to me, You do not know what they did after you...’”[^113] A
number of huffaz and narrators of hadith reported this tradition in
various wordings which maintained the same contextual meaning, proving
thus that it is consecutively reported.

The Imam (ﻉ), through his frank and proven answer, saved us the effort
to look for lame excuses for the flagrant transgressions in which a
number of the sahaba fell, and from far-fetched artificialities to
justify the errors of conduct which they deliberately committed with
determination and which the same *huffaz* could not justify except by
saying that they were cases of “mistaken ijtihad” which, according to
them, did not contradict the justice expected of them, having been
pressed by their attempt to attribute absolute justice to the sahabi no
matter what he did...!

A companion (*sahabi*) of the Prophet (ﺹ) who was distinguished with the
honour of being so close to the Prophet (ﺹ) is the custodian over the
fruits of the Message and the protector of its structure through his
faith and deeds. He is a man who ought to be taken as a role model of
conduct. He is a man, as the Imam (ﻉ) used to say, who does not alter or
change any of the statements of the Prophet (ﺹ).

As regarding those who altered and changed, these cannot be awarded a
unique distinction, just because they were companions of the Prophet
(ﺹ), which raised their status above that of other Muslims simply
because they were not up to par with the level of responsibility of
being honest, which is expected of them, to carry out after the demise
of the Prophet (ﺹ) and the cessation of *wahi* (divine inspiration).

The *hadith* which the Imam (ﻉ) narrated about Ibn Mas'ud, and which is
recorded by a number of those who learned the Holy Qur’an and hadith by
heart in their books, is considered as an explanation of this hadith and
of its connotation.

Moreover, it puts the sahaba on equal footing with the others in
subjecting their behaviour to criticism and discussion, and it shatters
the self-immunity which was granted to them in accordance with alleged
Prophetic “statements” actually fabricated by a number of *huffaz* and
traditionists without permitting themselves or others to discuss but
take for granted.

In another *hadith*, the Imam (ﻉ) proves to us, through a clear
tradition by the Prophet (ﺹ), that some individuals who were regarded as
sahaba were not actually so, which shatters all the excuses used to
justify the mistakes and the transgression committed by them. For
example, Muhammad ibn Ishaq at-Taliqani reported that a man in Khurasan
swore by divorce that Mu'awiyah was not among the true companions of the
Messenger of Allah (ﺹ), and this happened when Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) was
present there. The jurists there issued their verdict that the man had
actually divorced his wife, and the Imam (ﻉ) was asked to provide his
own opinion in this regard. He decided that the man’s wife was not
divorced; therefore, those jurists wrote a statement and sent it to him.
In it, they asked him, “How did you come to say, O son of the Messenger
of Allah (ﺹ), that the woman was not to be divorced?” He wrote down on
the same sheet saying, “It is so because of what you yourselves narrate
from Abu Sa’eed al-Khudri who quotes the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) saying
about those who accepted Islam on the day of conquering Mecca, that is,
Friday, the 20th of the month of Ramadan, 8 A.H., corresponding to
January 14, 630 A.D., when he was surrounded by a large number of
people, You are good; my companions are good; and there shall be no
migration after this Fath (conquest),’ without including these (meaning
Mu'awiyah) among his companions.” The jurists had to adopt the decision
of the Imam (ﻉ).

Thus did the Imam (ﻉ) deny that Mu'awiyah was a companion of the Prophet
(ﺹ). Such a claim used to surround this man with a halo of sanctity and
was used to justify the very serious transgressions which he committed.
Such transgressions left their terrible marks on the structure of the
Islamic government since then.

They justified such transgressions by saying that he was a sahabi, and
that, as such, whatever he did or said could not possibly cast a doubt
about his integrity, adding, “If we see the good aspect of his action
missing, we may say that he attempted *ijtihad*, and he erred,” even if
such error was at the expense of the Prophet's Message itself...!

If we accept this argument, we would be justifying all the
transgressions and erroneous behaviour of some companions of the Prophet
(ﺹ) regardless of their motives or horrible consequences. The
transgres­sions of Mu'awiyah and his norms of conduct, in which he
departed from the line of the Islamic Message altogether, and which
agreed with the attitude of animosity towards Islam, and whose motives
and impulses were to cast doubts and suspicions, nobody is really
obligated to defend and describe as within the Islamic Shari’a simply
because they were the result of an erroneous ijtihad wherein the
mujtahid is rewarded with one reward, due to his “immunity” which does
not include Mu'awiyah simply because the latter was not a companion of
the Prophet (ﺹ) but was just like any other Muslim whose conduct was
subject to accountability and criticism, and the verdict in his regard
is based on the anticipated results of his deeds.

The directive which the Imam (ﻉ) intended by denying that those who
accepted Islam, including Mu'awiyah, were not all companions of the
Prophet on the day when Mecca was conquered, is one of the strongest and
deepest of his directives, for he drew a line between the Prophet (ﺹ)
and his true companions on one hand, and those who accepted Islam after
the conquest of Mecca and under the pressure of a superior power and
authority on the other.

Had it not been for their reaction to the precarious situation versus
the might of their opponent, realizing that they had no choice except to
make asylum and submit to the word of Islam, they would have otherwise
dealt with Islam in a quite different manner...

Al-Ma'mun once asked the Imam (ﻉ) why the Commander of the Faithful Imam
Ali (ﻉ) is called the divider of Paradise and of Hell, and how that
attribute came to be applied to him. The Imam (ﻉ) in turn asked him, “O
commander of the faithful! Have you not narrated from your father from
his forefathers quoting Abdullah ibn Abbas saying that he had heard the
Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) saying, Loving Ali (ﻉ) is iman, and hating him is
*kufr*?’” Al-Ma'mun answered in the affirmative, so the Imam (ﻉ) said,
“If the distribution of Paradise and of Hell is done according to loving
or hating him, then he is the distributor of Paradise and of Hell.”

Al-Ma'mun then said, “May Allah never permit me to live after your
demise, O father of al-Hassan! I testify that you are the heir of the
knowledge of the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ).”

Abul-Salt al-Harawi said, “After the Imam (ﻉ) had gone back home, I came
to visit him, and I said to him, O son of the Messenger of Allah! What
an excellent answer you have given the commander of the faithful!’ He
said, O Abul-Salt! I spoke to him in the way he understood best, and I
have heard my father telling hadith from his forefathers about Ali (ﻉ)
saying, The Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) said, O Ali! You are the distributor
of Paradise and of Hell on the Day of Judgement; you say to Hell: This
is mine, and that is yours...’”

In another narrative, he asked the Imam (ﻉ) about the Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (ﻉ) as to why he did not restore Fadak to its rightful
owners after becoming the caliph. He answered him by saying, “We are
members of a family who, upon becoming rulers, do not take their rights
from those who confiscated them. Should we become in charge of the
Muslims, we shall rule them and restore their confiscated rights to
them, but we do not do so for our own selves.”

Fadak remained the symbol of the lost justice according to the Ahl
al-Bayt (ﻉ); for az-Zamakhshari says the following in his great book
titled *Rab'i’ al-Abrar*: "Harun ar-Rashid kept pressing Musa ibn Ja'far
(ﻉ) to take Fadak back, and he kept refusing. When he insisted that he
should, he said, “I shall not take it back except in its boundaries.” He
asked him, “And what are its boundaries?” He said, “The first is Aden;”
ar-Rashid ’s face changed colour, yet he asked him, “And what is the
second boundary?”’ He said, “Samarkand;” now his face started shaking in
anger.

He asked him, “And what is the third boundary?” He said, “Africa;” and
the caliph’s face now turned black in outrage, yet he asked him, “And
what is the fourth boundary?” He said, “The ocean, and whatever lies
beyond the Caspian Sea and Armenia.” Harun ar-Rashid then said, “There
is nothing left for us; so, come and take my throne as well!” The Imam
(ﻉ) said, “I had told you before that if I defined its boundaries, you
would refuse to give it back to me.”

From this dialogue between Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (ﻉ) and Harun ar-Rashid
, we can comprehend the vast dimension of the significance of Fadak to
Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ), and that it did not represent simply a piece of land
and a few palm trees but a big missionary objective whose significance
was linked to the significance of the Message itself in its connotation
and depth.

Another person asked him about the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali
(ﻉ) as to why people deserted him after knowing his distinction, his
past feats, and the status he enjoyed in the eyes of the Messenger of
Allah (ﺹ). He answered, “They deserted him and preferred others over him
after having come to know his merits simply because he had killed a
great number of their fathers, grandfathers, brothers, uncles, and other
relatives who defied Allah and His Messenger (ﺹ); therefore, they kept
their grudge against him inside their hearts and they did not like it
when he became their ruler. They did not have grudge against anyone else
as much as they had against him, for nobody else was so forceful in
making jihad in the defense of the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) as much as he
was; so, they deserted him for someone else.”

The Prophet (ﺹ) realized the seriousness of Ali’s stand, the difficulty
of the situation after his demise, and the dire consequences awaiting
him due to his firm jihad in the Cause of Allah. The statements he (ﺹ)
made regarding Ali (ﻉ), therefore, were meant to deter those who were
waiting for a chance to get even with him. Had they not been veiled by
grudges, and by his own glorious past, they would have been described as
the beginning of the tragedy of justice and righteousness.

We cannot find a better explanation for the change in public opinion
regarding Ali’s stand after the death of the Prophet (ﺹ) better than
what Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) provided. If we set aside the clear ahadith which
named the Imam (ﻉ) as the caliph succeeding the Prophet (ﺹ) without any
question and consulted the faculty of reason in all the criteria and
logical orders to determine the person who should succeed the Prophet
(ﺹ) as the caliph, the unavoidable outcome would certainly be none other
than Ali (ﻉ). Besides, had the grudges and the past not been the cause
of the removal of Ali from the post of ruler, the question would have
remained unan­swered by any honest and equitable person.

Another person asked the Imam (ﻉ), “Tell me, O son of the Messenger of
Allah! Why didn’t Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) fight his enemies during the
twenty-five years after the demise of the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) as he
did during the days of his caliphate?” He answered, “It is due to his
following the example of the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) who did not fight
the polytheists of Mecca during the thirteen years after his
Prophethood, or the ones in Medina during the nineteen months period of
his stay there; it is due to the number of his supporters being too
small.

Likewise, Ali (ﻉ) did not engage himself in fighting his enemies because
his own supporters were too few. Since the Prophethood of the Messenger
of Allah (ﺹ) was not nullified by the fact that he did not make jihad
during the period of thirteen years (in Mecca) and nineteen months (in
Medina), the Imamate of Ali (ﻉ) was not nullified because he did not
perform jihad for twenty-five years, for the deterring factor in both
examples was one and the same.”

Among the *ahadith* of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) is one narrated by Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Hamadani; he said, “I asked Abul-Hassan ar-Rida (ﻉ), What is
the reason for which the Almighty and Exalted Allah drowned Pharaoh even
after Pharaoh had believed in Him and admitted His unity?’ He answered,
Because he believed only when he saw Allah’s retribution, and belief to
avoid danger is not accepted. This is Allah’s judgement regarding past
and future generations. The Exalted and the Almighty has said,

***When they saw Our Punishment, they said, We believe in Allah, the One
God, and we reject the partners we used to associate with Him,’ but
their professing the faith when they (actually) saw Our Punishment was
not going to benefit them’ (Qur’an, Al Mu’min [or Ghafir]:84-85).***

The Exalted and Almighty has also said,

***The day that certain Signs of thy Lord do come, no good will it do to
a soul to believe in them then, if it did not believe before nor did it
earn righteousness through its faith’” (Qur’an, Al An’am:158).***

***So when Pharaoh was about to be drowned, he said, “I believe that
there is no God except the One in Whom the children of Israel believe,
and I am of those who submit (to Allah in Islam).’ (It was then said to
him), Ah now! But a little while before were you in rebellion! And you
did mischief (and violence)! This day shall We save you in your body, so
that you may be a Sign to those who come after thee!’” (Qur’an,
Younus:90-92).***

This narrative has a moral for those who wish to learn, for iman is not
that one believes and returns to his Lord only when he sees no avenue of
salvation before him and despair overcomes him; rather, iman is belief
in Allah and going towards Him voluntarily in both cases of despair and
of hope.

Another *hadith* narrated by Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) stated the following:
“Anyone who meets a poor Muslim and greets him in a greeting different
from the one whereby he greets the rich, he would meet the Exalted and
the Almighty on the Day of Judgement and He is angry with him.” In this
tradition, the Imam (ﻉ) provides us with a very beautiful example of
humanity enjoined by genuine Islamic conduct governing the Muslim’s
conduct with his Muslim brother, for Islam united all members of the
nation in its law of personal conduct; there is no distinction for the
wealthy man over the deprived poor man, and all people are equal under
the judgement of Islam.

Another *hadith* of the Imam (ﻉ) is one in which he was asked by Ibn
as-Sikkit, “Why did the Almighty and Exalted God send Musa (Moses) ibn
Imran (ﻉ) with a miraculous cane and white hand and the tool of sorcery,
asa (Jesus [ﻉ]) with miraculous medicine, and Muhammad (ﺹ) with
miraculous speech and oratory?”

The Imam (ﻉ) said, “When the Almighty and the Exalted One sent Moses
(ﻉ), sorcery dominated the minds of people of his time. He, therefore,
brought them from the Almighty and the Exalted One something which they
never had, nor could they bring about anything like it, thus rendering
their sorcery void and driving his argument against them home. When the
Almighty and the Exalted God sent Jesus during a period of time when
chronic diseases became widespread and people were in dire need of a
cure, Jesus (ﻉ) brought them from Allah, the Almighty and the Exalted,
something they never had, bringing the dead back to life, curing those
born blind and the lepers by the Will of Allah, proving his argument
against them. And when the Almighty and the Exalted One sent Muhammad
(ﺹ) during the time when speeches and oratory (and I think he said with
poetry, too), he brought them the Book of the Almighty and the Exalted
God and with the wisdom and counsel, thereby voiding their arguments.”
Ibn as-Sikkit said, “By Allah I have never seen anyone like you! What is
the argument against people these days, then?” He answered, “Reason.
Through it can you come to know who tells the truth about Allah, so you
believe in him, and who tells lies about Allah, so you disbelieve in
him.” Ibn as-Sikkit said, “This, by Allah, is the right answer...”

A miracle is a supernatural thing which the ordinary individual is
unable to perform due to his limited energies and motivational powers.
Miracles are different from sorcery. Sorcery is not an actual
supernatural act but a swift movement which causes the viewer to see the
realities turned upside down, or turns the visible picture into its
contrary.

This may take place by subjecting the viewer to obscure effects which
veil from his sight a certain colour or a picture. What leads us to that
conclusion is the statement of the Almighty in the context of narrating
how Moses (ﻉ) fared with the wizards from the descendants of Israel,
saying,

***“So their ropes and canes seemed to him, because of their sorcery, as
though they were crawling” (Qur’an, Taha:66).***

Sorcery, then, is nothing more than stimulating the imagination, making
things look different than they are, and causing one to fall under a
magical spell. A miracle is an actual result of a super-natural deed
intended to win the argument against people in the process of proving
one’s true prophethood and mission, and it is an act which Allah causes
to take place.

It is different from sorcery because it is not subjected to
psychological effects, or complications in the movement, but a
broaden­ing of the energy which affects matters viewed by man due to the
effect of the Might of the Almighty. In narrating the story of Moses
(ﻉ), the Almighty states,

***“... and (appoint him) an apostle to the children of Israel, (with
this message): I have come to you, with a Sign from your Lord, in that I
make for you out of clay, as it were, the figure of a bird, and I
breathe into it, and it becomes a bird by Allah’s leave; and I heal
those born blind, and the lepers, and I bring the dead back to life by
Allah’s leave’” (Qur’an, Ali Imran:49).***

And the Almighty has also said,

***“And it was never the part of an apostle to bring a Sign except as
Allah permitted. For each period is a Book (revealed)” (Qur’an,
Al-Ra’d:38).***

Every prophet had a miracle which distinguished him from other prophets
and messengers and which was in harmony, in its own particular way, with
the common phenomena prevailing upon the social condition of the time,
so that the psychological effect caused by its miraculous effect would
become a reality, as the Imam (ﻉ) meant in the tradition stated above.

The miracles of prophets, according to the contexts of the verses and
narratives, were not the result of the effect of a natural human energy;
rather, they were the results of a creative energy whereby Allah
distin­guished His Prophets for the purpose of establishing the
superiority of their argument when such a miracle was necessitated by
their mission.

As regarding the miracles of the Imams which are reported in order to
testify to their Imamate and to their being the most rightful for the
post of caliphate, this is not something unusual about them since they
were selected by Allah to be His vicegerents on earth. He entrusted them
to carry out the responsibilities of the message after the demise of His
Prophet (ﺹ), but what must be researched is that many such miracles were
proven to have been performed by them and were attested to by an
acceptable medium. But the Imams never needed a miracle beyond the
qualifications of knowledge and conduct which distinguished them in
order to prove the authenticity of their Imamate, for the qualifications
which characterized them were by themselves the miracles proving their
right.

Among the ahadith of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) which deal with the Islamic
legislative system is one narrated by Abdullah ibn Tawoos who said, “I
told Abul-Hassan ar-Rida (ﻉ) that I had a nephew whom I married off to
my daughter and who used to frequently pronounce the divorce statement.
He said, If he is a descendant of one of your (Shi'a) brethren, there is
nothing to worry about, but if he is from these (Sunni) brothers, then
recall your daughter, for they shall have to separate.’

I said, But, may my life be sacrificed for yours, did not Abu Abdullah
(ﻉ) use to say, Beware of those divorced thrice at one time, for they
shall marry more than once?’ He said, Yes, this is the case if the man
is one of your brethren, not one of these; whoever follows the creed of
certain people is bound to follow their [juristic] rules.’”

As regarding the issue of divorce, which is the subject-matter of this
hadith, the school of thought of the Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) determines that if
the divorce statement contains “thrice” in it, rather than being
repeated twice again, is not considered binding but it would be if the
statement were repeated twice provided it meets the other conditions
such as the presence of two just witnesses, the absence of the use of
force, and the woman being tahir (clean), that is, she has not cohabited
with her husband prior to his pronouncement and has not taken her ghusul
(ceremonial bath) yet, in addition to other conditions which validate
divorce. This is what is commonly accepted, while others have decided
that it will be void as the apparent understanding of this hadith
suggests.

But if the husband repeats his statement, “She is divorced!” three
times, it is, according to Imami (Shi'a) Muslims considered as one-time
divorce with rendering the repetition null if such repetition is to be
doubtful. The rest of Muslim sects regard divorce in both instands as
binding and the husband cannot go back to her before she marries another
husband.

Another *hadith* narrated by the Imam (ﻉ) says, “The Almighty and
Exalted One has decreed three rites each depends on yet another: He
decreed the prayers and the payment of zakat; so, He does not accept the
prayers of anyone who says his prayers but does not pay zakat; He
decreed that one must thank Him and thank his parents, too; so, He does
not accept the thanks of one who thanks Him but is not grateful to his
parents; and He decreed that one should fear Him and remain in constant
contact with his kin; so, anyone who does not remain in close touch with
his relatives does not in turn fear Allah, the Exalted, the Almighty.”

Still another says, “A believer (mu’min) cannot be truly so except after
acquiring three attributes: from his Lord, from his Prophet (ﺹ), and
from his fellow humans. From his Lord, he must learn how to keep a
secret;

The Almighty and the Exalted said,

***He (alone) knows the Unseen, nor does He make anyone acquainted with
his Mysteries, except an apostle whom He has chosen’ (Qur’an,
Al-Jinn:26-27).***

***From his Prophet, he must learn patience while dealing with people;
the Exalted and the Almighty ordered His Prophet to be patient with
people saying, Uphold forgiveness; command what is right; but turn away
from the ignorant (folks).’ (Qur’an, Al-Araf:199).***

***From his fellows, he has to learn patience during periods of poverty
and adversity, for the Dear and the Almighty One says, ... And to be
firm and patient in pain and in adversity’ (Qur’an, Al- Baqara:177).***

A man asked the Imam (ﻉ) once about the meaning of the verse saying,
“Whoever relies on Allah, He suffices him.” He said, “Reliance on Allah
is in various degrees one of which is that you rely on Him in everything
related to you, and when He does something to you which you know will
not bring you anything good, you rely on His wisdom in doing it, so you
nevertheless put your trust in Him willingly. Another is to believe in
the Unseen regarding Allah of which you have no knowledge, so you relied
on Him and on His custodians, trusting in Him in their regard, and in
others.” He was also asked once about the extent of such reliance.

He said, “It is that you fear none save Allah.” What the Imam here means
is that you submit to the Will of Allah and accept His decree. Ahmed ibn
Najm asked him about the pride which spoils one’s deeds. He said, “Pride
is degrees; among them is that one sees his bad deed as good, so he
likes it and feels proud of it; another is that one believes in Allah
and feels he is doing Him a favour by believing in Him, whereas He is
the One who enabled that person to believe in Him.”

He, peace be with him, said once, “If one lacks five attributes, do not
expect to gain anything good out of him for your life in this world or
for the life to come: if his lineage is known to be untrustworthy, if
his nature lacks generosity, if his temper lacks balance, if he lacks a
noble conduct, and if he lacks fear of his Lord.”

He (ﻉ) was asked once who a lowly person is. He said, “Anyone who has
something (a serious moral defect, habit, etc.) to distract him from
Allah.”

Among the jewels of his wisdom are the following; read them, digest
them, and share them with those whom you love:

“Allah abhors hearsay, the loss of one’s funds (through foolishness),
and excessive questioning.”

“To be courteous to people is to cross half the way to achieving
wisdom.”

“The discretion of a Muslim is not complete except after he acquires ten
merits: Allah accepts his good deeds, he is trustworthy, he sees as
plentiful the little good that others do for him, while seeing his own
abundant good as little; he does not fret from being asked for favours,
nor does he feel tired of constantly seeking knowledge; poverty reached
in order to please Allah is better for him than wealth accumulated
otherwise; to be subjected to power while trying to serve Allah is
better in his regard than achieving power over his foe, and obscurity he
prefers over fame.” Then he said, “And the third one..., do you know
what the third one is?”

It was said to him, “What is it?” He said, “Whenever he meets someone,
he says to himself, He is better than me and more pious.’ People are two
types: a person better than him and more pious, and one who is more evil
than him and more lowly. If he meets the one who is more evil than him
and more lowly, he says to himself, Maybe the goodness of this
(statement) is implied, and it is better that he hears such a
compliment, while my own goodness is apparent and it is detrimental to
me.’ And when he sees someone better than him and more pious, he would
humble himself before him trying to raise himself to his level. So if he
does that, his glory will be higher, his reputation will be better, and
he will become distinguished above his contemporaries.”

“Silence is one of the gates of wisdom. Silence wins the love of others.
It is an indication of everything good.”

“Everyone’s friend is his reason; his enemy is his ignorance.”

“Among the habits of Prophets is cleanliness.”

“One who is blessed with plenty must spend generously on his family.”

“If you mention someone who is present, use a kunya (surname) for him,
and if he is absent, mention his full name.”

“Time will come when one’s safety lies in ten things nine of which are
in staying aloof from people, and the tenth in staying silent.”

“Whoever scrutinizes his behaviour wins; whoever does not do so loses.
Whoever fears the consequences will live safely. Whoever learns a moral
from others achieves insight, and whoever achieves insight achieves
wisdom, and whoever achieves wisdom achieves knowledge. One who
befriends the ignorant will be worn out. The best of wealth is that
which safeguards one’s honour. The best of reason is one’s knowledge of
his own self. If a true believer becomes angry, his anger does not cause
him to abandon righteousness; when he is pleased, his pleasure will not
tempt him into wrong-doing, and when he achieves power, he does not take
more than what rightfully belongs to him.”

“If one’s attributes become plentiful, they will relieve him from having
to win praise by mentioning them.”

“Do not pay attention to the view of someone who does not follow your
advice for his own good. Whoever seeks guidance from the appropriate
source will never slip, and if he slips, he will find a way to correct
himself.”

“People’s hearts are sometimes coming towards you, sometimes keeping
away from you; sometimes they are active, sometimes they are relaxed. If
they come along, they will achieve wisdom and understanding, and if they
stay away, they will be exhausted and worn out; so, take them when they
come to you and when they are active, and shun them when they stay away
or are relaxed.”

“Accompany with caution the person who has authority over you; be humble
when in the company of a friend; stay alert when facing an enemy, and
mingle with the public with a smile on your face.”

“Postponement is detrimental to the fulfillment of desires. Fulfillment
is the gain of the strict. Wastefulness is the calamity of one who can
afford it. Miserliness tears up honour. Passion invites trouble. The
best and most honourable of virtues is to do others favours, to aid the
one who calls for help, to bring the hope of the hopeful to reality, not
to disappoint the optimist, to have an ever increase of the number of
friends when you are alive, and the number of those who will cry when
you die.”

“The miser one is never restful. The envious is never pleased. The
grumbling is never loyal. The liar has no conscience.”

“One who struggles to satisfy the needs of his family shall have more
rewards than those who perform *jihad* in the Way of Allah.”

“Assisting the weak is better for you than your act of charity.”

“No servant of Allah achieves true belief except when he acquires three
attributes: 1) He derives juristic deductions from the creed; 2) He is
wise regarding his livelihood, and 3) He is patient while facing
calamities.”

“Beware of one who wants to offer you advice by speaking behind others’
backs; he does not realize how bad his own end shall be.”

He (ﻉ) was asked once who the best of believers are; he said, “They are
the ones who are excited with expectation when they do a good deed, who
pray for Allah’s forgiveness when they commit a bad one, who show
gratitude when they are granted something, who are patient when they are
tried, who forgive those who anger them.”

He (ﻉ) was asked once, “How did you start your day?” He answered, “With
a shorter life-span, with our deeds being recorded, with death round our
necks, with Fire behind our backs, and we do not know what will be done
to us.”

He (ﻉ) also said, “Wealth is not accumulated except by five means:
extreme miserliness, a long-standing optimism, an overwhelming care, a
boycott of the relatives, and a preference of this life over the life to
come.”

Ali ibn Shu'ayb said that he once visited Abul-Hassan Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ)
who asked him, “O Ali! Do you know whose subsistence is the best?” He
answered, “You, master, know better than me.” He said, “It is that of
the one through whom others’ subsistence is improved. Do you know who
has the worst subsistence?” Ali answered, “You know better than me!”

The Imam (ﻉ) answered saying, “It is that of the one who does not
include others in it.” Then he added, “O Ali! Be thoughtful to the boons
for they are wild: if they leave people, they never come back to them. O
Ali! The worst of people is someone who stops his contributions to
charity, eats by himself, and whips his slave (or servant).”

When al-Hassan ibn Sahl died, He (ﻉ) said, “To congratulate one for a
reward in store for him is better than to console him on a swift
calamity.”

This is a truly magnificent bouquet of shining statements made by Imam
a-Rida (ﻉ) which emanate with his wisdom, overflow with his iman, and
over-brim with tasty intellectual fruits, but this book is too small to
contain all of them. This book was originally meant to be no more than a
hundred pages, yet the Almighty has enabled it to grow, for He, and only
He, helps promote and disseminate a good word and a good deed. In his
statements, the Imam (ﻉ) defines glorious ethical and educational
manners and the upright conduct of a true belief, offering some glimpses
of humanity for social cooperation and coexistence a Muslim is supposed
to implement if he wants to be in harmony with the principles of Islam.
They make up, if implemented, a milestone in the social change, turning
an oppressive ignorant society into an advanced civilized one built upon
virtue and love, justice and equity, respect and morality. But who is
there to take upon himself such a task? Who has the power to implement
the moral precepts provided by this great Imam (ﻉ) and social reformer?
The answer is too obvious to state...

We have to translate these statements into actions in our daily life and
be in harmony with their ethical and humane practical implications if we
wish to direct our individual and social conduct to the right direction
which safeguards its principles and precepts in order to create a nation
based on virtues and humanity, and build it from within in a firm
spiritual structure. Such a structure is reflects its practical reality
and affects its intellectual and social objectives so that it would be
“the best nation that ever was” (Qur’an, Sarat Aali ‘Imran:110).

May the Almighty enable us and your own self to follow in the footsteps
of Imam a-Rida (ﻉ), and may He strengthen our conviction, keep our feet
firm on His Right Path, the Path of happiness in the life of this world
and of salvation in the life to come, Allahomma aammen.

6) Imam Muhammad At-Taqi (as)
-----------------------------

His name is Muhammad; “Abu Ja'far,” at-Taqi and al-Jawad are his titles.
He is sometimes called Abu Ja'far II, the first being Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir (ﻉ). His father’s name is Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ); his respected
mother is known as Subaika or Sukayna. He was born in Medina on the 10th
of Rajab 195 A.H./April 8, 811 A.D. At that time, al-Amin son of Harun
ar-Rashid was the monarch of Baghdad.

It is a sad story that Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (ﻉ) had to face series of
misfortunes since his early childhood. For only a very brief peaceful
period, he enjoyed the love and availed himself of the teachings of his
father. He was five years old when Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) was forced to
leave Medina for Khurasan. The sire never saw his son again since then,
for Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) died in Merv three years after this separation.

The astonishment of people knew no bounds when, a few years later, they
saw the boy arguing and expostulating with the renowned scholars of
fiqh, tafsir, hadith and kalam, and subduing them in the presence of
al-Ma'mun. They had to admit that God-gifted knowledge never depends on
material resources or on age.

Political exigencies had compelled al-Ma'mun to cultivate relations with
the descendants of Imam Ali and Fatima (ﻉ) in order to win the support
of the Shi'as. After all, being a Hashemite himself, he was related to
them though remotely. He was aware of the political need to maintain
close relations with them; therefore, at one of the gatherings relof
heir-apparent­ship, he married his sister Umm Habiba to Imam Ali ar-Rida
(ﻉ) and betrothed his daughter Umm al-Fadl to the son of Imam ar-Rida
(ﻉ), this Muhammad at-Taqi (ﻉ). He thought that those steps would enable
him to win over Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) completely.

But al-Ma'mun soon realized that Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) continued to lead the
same simple and saintly life which characterized the descendants of the
Prophet (ﺹ). The pattern of his true Islamic life, which was bound to
disseminate the spirit of fraternity and equality, was obviously harmful
to al-Ma'mun’s authority, especially when Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) was now a
member of the royal family. It was at this point that he decided to put
an end to the Imam’s life.

But as he thought it expedient that he should keep the Shi'as,
particularly the Persians, on his side, he pretended to be very
depressed at Imam Ali ar-Rida’s death, as the reader has already come to
know. This was also necessary for him in trying his best to prove that
he had no hand in killing him. In order to isolate himself from any
suspicion, he summoned ar-Rida’s son, Muhammad at-Taqi, from Medina to
Baghdad to marry him off to his daughter Umm al-Fadl although she was
already engaged.

The appointment of Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) as heir-apparent had been an
intolerable dilemma for the Abbasides; so, when ar-Rida died, they
sighed in relief. They also succeeded in causing al-Ma'mun to appoint
his son Trenchaman as his successor who later came to be known as caliph
al-Muta'sim Billah. During the time when Imam ar-Rida was the
heir-apparent, the colour of the caliph’s court and royal robes had been
changed from black to green. After the Imam’s death, they changed it
again to black which signalled the restoration of Abbaside traditions.
All these steps undertaken by al-Ma'mun sufficiently satisfied the
Abbasides who thought that he was acting in accordance with their own
desires.

But when al-Ma'mun procliam ed that he was going to marry his daughter
off to the son of Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ), their tribal attitude was
stimulated. They could no longer hide their feelings, and their
delegation approached al-Ma'mun and complained in in the most
unambiguous statements they could make, telling him that the honours
which he had showered on Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) had grieved them, and that
they tolerated it because the Imam could be respected in view of his
age, learning and other virtues, and that he deserved those honours only
to a certain extent.

But elevating his son, who was quite young, so much as to prefer him
over all other dignitaries and learned scholars did not befit the
caliph. Furthermore, the marriage of al-Ma'mun’s sister to Imam Ali
ar-Rida (ﻉ) did not prove prosper­ous. Why did the caliph, then, wish to
offer the hand of the princess to ar-Rida’s son, anyway?

Al-Ma'mun told them that ar-Rida’s son, Muhammad, was no doubt a boy of
tender age, but he had inherited his father’s virtues and qualities in
full; the learned scholars of the Islamic world could not compete with
him, and that if they doubted, they could put the boy to test. This
reply, though totally said in jest, amounted to a challenge. Prompted by
al-Ma'mun’s taunt, they consented to judge the boy’s knowledge in a
contest with the most learned authority of Baghdad then, namely Yahya
ibn Aktham.

Al-Ma'mun convened a pompous gathering for this open expostula­tion.
There was anxiety to see this unequal match where a boy of eight was to
contend with the seasoned and renowned Chief Justice of the land. People
crowded from every quarter. Historians have recorded that apart from
dignitaries and the nobility, 900 seats were reserved only for scholars.
Al-Ma'mun’s reign was described as the golden age of learning; experts
from every trade and profession had assembled in that great capital from
every corner of the world.

Al-Ma'mun had a carpet laid by the side of his throne to seat Imam
Muhammad at-Taqi. In front of him was accommodated the Chief Justice
Yahya ibn Aktham. There was pindrop silence among the audience who
waited to hear the arguments. Silence was broken by Yahya who said,
“Will His Majesty allow me to put some questions to Muhammad at-Taqi?”
Al-Ma'mun answered: “You may seek that permission from Muhammad at-Taqi
himself.”

Yahya (to Muhammad at-Taqi): “Do you allow me to ask you a question?”
Muhammad at-Taqi: “Yes, you may ask whatever you please.” Yahya: “What
is the atonement for a person who hunts a game while he is dressed in
the pilgrimage garb?”

The question itself indicated that Yahya underestimated the status of
his opponent. Intoxicated with the pride of position and knowledge, he
thought that the young boy might well be aware of simple daily routine
problems of prayer or fasting, but the possibility that he might be
totally ignorant of the statutes of pilgrimage or of the atonements of
the sins or mistakes committed by a pilgrim never enter­tained his mind.

The sagacious, young Imam was clever enough to respond to the old
seasoned inquirer. Instead of giving a general or a vague reply, he
analyzed the different aspects of the question so aptly that the
audience immediately had a true evaluation of the Imam’s knowledge and
of Yahya’s shallow-mindedness. Yahya, too, was puzzled and felt
humiliated when the Imam addressed him thus:

“Your question is utterly vague and lacks definition. You should first
clarify whether the game killed was outside the sanctified area or
inside it; whether the hunter was aware of his sin or did so in
ignorance; did he kill the game purposely or by mistake? Was the hunter
a slave or a free man? Was he an adult or a minor? Did he commit the sin
for the first time or had he done so before? Was the hunted game a bird
or some thing else? Was it a small animal or a big one? Is the sinner
sorry for his misdeed or does he insist on it? Did he kill it secretly
at night or openly during daylight? Was he putting on the pilgrimage
garb for hajj or for the umra?! Unless you clarify and define these
aspects, how can you have a definite answer?”

Whatever Yahya’s knowledge might have been, he was undoubt­edly a
well-read man specialized in jurisprudence. While the Imam was unfolding
all such aspects of the problem, he had concluded that he was no match
for his ingenious opponent. His face lost colour and the onlookers knew
the situation as it was. His lips were sealed and he made no reply.
Al-Ma'mun fully assessed his condition and thought it useless to put any
further pressure on him.

He, rather, requested Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (ﻉ) to solve all the aspects
of the question one by one so that the listeners might gain knowledge.
The Imam, in spite of his young age, explained the various aspects of
the question. Yahya, silent and puzzled, gazed at him. But al-Ma'mun was
bent on carrying the matter to its very extreme. He, therefore,
requested the Imam to put some questions to Yahya if he liked. The Imam
accordingly said, “May I ask you a question?”

Disillusioned, Yahya, who now had a correct idea about the Imam’s
ability and had now no misunder­standing about himself, said in a humble
tone: “Your grace can ask; I shall reply if I can or I shall get it
solved by your own self.” Then the Imam put up a question in reply to
which Yahya admitted his ignorance. The Imam explained it, too.
Al-Ma'mun’s joy knew no bounds. Addressing the audience, he said, “Did I
not tell you that this Progeny has been gifted by Allah with unlimited
knowledge? None can cope with even the children of this elevated House.”

The excitement of the gathering was great: all unanimously exclaimed
that al-Ma'mun’s assumption was correct and that Imam Muhammad at-Taqi
(ﻉ) was peerless. Al-Ma'mun then thought it advisable to marry his
daughter off to Imam Muhammad at-Taqi there and then. The Imam (ﻉ)
recited the marriage sermon in person. This sermon, as a remembrance, is
being recited at weddings everywhere throughout the Muslim world ever
since. Overjoyed at this auspicious occasion, al-Ma'mun demonstrated his
generosity by giving away millions in charity to the poor. Common people
were given with regards to his grants.

One year after the marriage, Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (ﻉ) lived in Baghdad.
Then al-Ma'mun allowed him to return to Medina with his daughter Umm
al-Fadl surrounded with great pomp.

Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (ﻉ) occupied the highest position in human virtues
and moral attainments, such is the Prophet’s family. To meet everyone
humbly, fulfill the needs of the poor, maintain Islamic equality and
simplicity, help the destitute secretly, treat even the foes fairly,
extend hospitality, impart knowledge to the scholars of religion and the
like, all marked his saintly life.

Common people, who could not appreciate such heights of moral
excellence, might have thought that the new relationship, i.e. to become
son-in-law of the most influential monarch of his time, must influence
the pattern of life of the Imam and change his manners altogether.
Al-Ma'mun, too, might have thought on the same lines because
spiritualism which was the chief characteristic of this Progeny, was
against the practices of worldly rulers.

In order to uphold their imperialistic and luxurious norms of life,
monarchs like al-Ma'mun wanted to do away with these saints who
personified righteousness, compassion, faith, piety, fraternity and
justice as taught by Islam. Yazid’s demanding obedience from Imam Husayn
(ﻉ) or al-Ma'mun appointing Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) as his heir-appaent
were two different aspects of one phenomenon. The procedures were
different but the purpose was the same. Imam Husayn (ﻉ) did not bow to
pay homage, so he was slain on the battlefield. Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) did
not serve the cause of Abbaside imperialism, so he was silenced with
poison.

Undoubtedly, Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) did not conform to al-Ma'mun’s designs,
nor desires, but this did not disappoint him. Ar-Rida’s mature way of
thinking and simple norm of life could not be changed. But there was the
hope that in all probability a tender boy, who was brought up in the
luxurious atmosphere of a royal palace, would grow up to be an
ambitious, merry-making prince\_\_altogether against his ancestral ways
and views.

With the exception of a few enlightened persons, everybody would think
on such lines. But the world stood aghast to see that the young
son-in-law of the most distinguished monarch of his time refused to stay
in the royal palace and lived instead in a rented house, thus
maintaining his ancestral anti-monarchical conduct, leading a simple and
modest life.

In the Middle East, it is usually seen that if the bride’s people are
fairly rich, they wish that the groom might live with them; if not in
the same house, at least in the same town. The will-power of the Imam
(ﻉ) can be judged from the fact that he lived in a separate dwelling.
After one year, when al-Ma'mun realized that his son-in-law was not
pleased with staying in Baghdad, he had to allow him to go to Medina
with Umm al-Fadl.

Having returned to Medina, he maintained the same ancestral, unimposing
behaviour: no body-guards, no pomp, no restrictions, no visiting times,
no discrimination. He spent most of his time sitting at the Prophet’s
Mosque, where Muslims came to avail from his preaching. The narrators of
hadith and other students of theology came to inquire about religious
sciences, and the Imam guided them by explaining every complicated
issue. All the world saw that Imam Ja'far’s successor, seated on the
same mat, was guiding the people towards faith and piety.

Imam at-Taqi (ﻉ) allowed the same amount of freedom to his wife Umm
al-Fadl and imposed the same restrictions on her as his ancestors had
done with their wives. He did not care much about the fact that Umm
al-Fadl was a princess. Although she lived with him, he married another
lady who was a descendant of Ammar ibn Yasir. Allah had intended to
continue the line of Imamate through her, and she gave birth to (later)
Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ), the tenth Imam. Umm al-Fadl complained about this
to her father. Surely this would have passed heavily on al-Ma'mun’s
heart but he could not interfere in the matter. He wrote his daughter
saying, “Do not make such complaints to me in the future. I cannot stop
Muhammad atTaqi from those things which Allah has made lawful.”

There are precedents, no doubt, that in view of the high personal
virtues of a woman, her husband does not marry another lady. For
example, while Khadija lived, the Holy Prophet did not marry any other
wife. Similarly, Imam Ali (ﻉ) married no other woman during the
life-time of Fatima az-Zahra’ (ﻉ). But the same distinction could not be
awarded to the daughter of a king because it was against the spirit of
Islam which the Prophet’s descendants were to safeguard, implement, and
preserve.

Imam Muhammad at-Taqi’s speech was very moving and effective. During the
hajj season, he once addressed a gathering of Muslims, stating the
commandments of the Divine Law of Sharaa. The audience included learned
scholars who admitted that they had never heard such a comprehen­sive
speech.

During the days of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ), there was a group which believed
that the Imamate had come to an end with Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ). They
were called the Waqfiyya (Waqfism) **الواقفة**. Imam Muhammad at-Taqi
(ﻉ) admonished them so nicely, they abandoned their wrong beliefs for
good. Nobody of that creed persisted in adhering to such beliefs.

Through Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ), scholars came to learn the teachings of Ahl
al-Bayt (ﻉ). A collection of brief and wise sayings is also among his
legacy, resembling and ranking in wisdom next to the sayings of his
ancestor Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ). Some profound discourses on
theology and monotheism are also to his credit.

Al-Ma'mun died in 218 A.H./833 A.D. He was succeeded by his brother
al-Mu’taman, the second heir apparent after Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ). He came to
be known as al-Muta'sim Billah al-Abbasi. His niece, Umm al-Fadl, now
began to send him more complaining letters than she did during the days
of her father. As al-Ma'mun had given her in marriage to Imam at-Taqi
(ﻉ) in spite of the opposition of all the tribe, he paid no attention to
her letters. Rather, he silenced her with disappointing replies. But
al-Muta'sim was jealous of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ). He had also led the
opposition in the matter of Imam at-Taqi’s marriage with his niece.

Al-Muta'sim now got a chance to settle his difference in this matter.
Imam Muhammad at-Taqi’s fame as a great scholar and people’s gathering
around him, as well as the fame of his world-renown noble character,
annoyed him. The failure of the political tactics, too, intensified his
resentment. All these factors intensified his enmity.

In the second year of his reign, he summoned Imam Muhammad at-Taqi from
Medina to Baghdad, writing to the governor of Medina expressly in this
regard. Imam Muhammad at-Taqi had no choice except to set out for
Baghdad leaving his son Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) with his mother in Medina.

Upon his arrival at Baghdad, Imam at-Taqi was not harmed by al-Muta'sim.
But the Imam’s stay in Baghdad was a forcible act which can be labelled
as custody or house arrest. Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ), therefore, was killed
with the very same soundless weapon which was quite frequently used
against his ancestors.

He was poison, so he died on the 29th of Thul-Qida, 220 A.H./November
24, 835 A.D. and was buried near his grandfa­ther Imam Musa al-Kadhim
(ﻉ). It is due to these two saints’ tombs that the place is called
Kadhimain (the two Kadhims, the enduring ones). Inna Lillah wa Inna
Ilayhi Rajian; surely we belong to Allah, and to Him shall we return.

7) Imam ‘Ali An-Naqi (as)
-------------------------

His name, Ali, is usually prefixed by his titles “Abul-Hassan” and
“an-Naqi,” the pure one.Since both Imams Ali al-Murtada and Ali ar-Rida
(ﻉ) were also called “Abul-Hassan” each, Imam Ali an-Naqi is known as
“Abul-Hassan III.” His mother’s name is Sumana Khatun. He was born in
Medina on Rajab 5, 214 A.H./September 8, 829 A.D.

He enjoyed the love of his father Imam at-Taqi (ﻉ) for only six years
because his father had to leave for Baghdad where he died on the 29th of
Thu al-Qida 220 A.H./November 24, 835 A.D. and the responsibilities of
Imamate devolved on his young son’s shoulders. Providence was the only
tutor and instructor that reared and raised him to the extreme zenith of
learning.

Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) was still young when the Abbaside ruler al-Muta'sim
Billah died and was succeeded by al-Wathiq Billah who died in 236
A.H./850 A.D. Al-Mutawakkil, the most cruel and deadly enemy of Ahl
al-Bayt (ﻉ), ascended the throne in the same year then died in 250
A.H./864 A.D. and was succeeded by al-Muntasir Billah who ruled for only
six months. On his death, al-Mustain was installed on the throne of the
Abbasides in Baghdad. The latter had to part with his crown, as well as
with his head, in 253 A.H./867 A.D. and was succeeded by al-Mu'tazz
Billah during whose regime Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) died.

Al-Muta'sim remained preoccupied with war against the Byzantines and had
to deal with the troubles created by the Abbaside tribesmen in Baghdad.
He did not harass the young Imam who carried out his responsibilities
peacefully. After him, al-Wathiq Billah, too, treated Imam Ali an-Naqi
(ﻉ) fairly. But when he was succeeded by his brother al-Mutawakkil son
of al-Muta'sim, the period of persecution and misfortune began on a full
scale. This ruler exceeded all his predecessors in bearing animosity
towards Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ).

During the 16 years of his Imamate, Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) had become
famous throughout the Islamic world. Those who loved to learn the
teachings of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) always flocked around him. In the 4th year
of al-Mutawakkil’s reign, the governor of Medina, Abdullah ibn Hakim,
started harassing the Imam. After persecuting him personally, he sent
hostile reports against him to Baghdad. He wrote the central government
there saying that the Imam was assembling apparatuses of kingdom, and
that his followers were in such numbers that he could rise against the
government whenever he wished.

Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) became aware of such antagonism in sufficient time.
In order to counteract, he, too, wrote a letter to al-Mutawakkil
explaining the personal enmity the lying governor had borne against him.
As a political step, al-Mutawakkil was quick to dismiss the governor. At
the same time, he sent a regiment under the command of Yahya ibn
Harthamah to explain to the Imam in a friendly way that the caliph
wished him to stay in the capital for a few days before going back to
Medina.

The Imam knew very well the motives behind this request. He knew that
the polite invitation actually meant his banishment from his ancestral
city. But to refuse was useless, as it would involve a forcible
departure later. Leaving the sacred city was as painful to him as it had
been for his respected forefathers, viz. Imam Husayn (ﻉ), Imam Musa
al-Kadhim (ﻉ), Imam Ali ar-Rida (ﻉ) and Muhammad at-Taqi (ﻉ). This type
of harassment had almost become a legacy.

Al-Mutawakkil’s letter to the Imam was full of respect and terms of
endearment. The military detachment sent to escort him as retinue or
bodyguards was actually a deceitful ploy. So when the Imam reached
Samarra’ (Surra man Ra’a), and al-Mutawakkil was informed, he neither
arranged for his reception nor for his stay. He ordered to accommodate
him in a wilderness where the city’s beggars usually dwelt. Although the
Prophet’s descendants gladly associated with the poor and the destitute,
and they did not covet luxurious living, al-Mutawakkil meant to thus
insult the Imam who stayed there for three days; thereafter,
al-Mutawakkil placed him under the custody of his secretary Razzaqi,
banning his meetings with others.

It has been seen that during the imprisonment of Imam Musa al-Kadhim
(ﻉ), the Imam’s moral charm had softened the guards’ stone hearts.
Likewise, Razzaqi was impressed by the greatness of Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ)
and began to provide for his comfort. This leniency could not remain
hidden from al-Mutawakkil who transferred the Imam (ﻉ) to the custody of
Sa'd, a cruel and ruthless man in whose jail Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) spent
twelve long years.

In spite of all the hardships he had to suffer there, he spent his time
worshipping his Maker, fasting during the day and praying during the
night. Although confined within the four walls of a dark dungeon cell,
his fame was on the wing. He was known in every house of Samarra’,
rather throughout all of Iraq. Millions hated the cruel ruler who had
put such a man of noble character in prison.

Al-Fadl ibn Khaqan, who loved the Prophet’s Progeny, had risen to the
post of Minister in al-Mutawakkil’s cabinet solely by virtue of his
intellectual and administrative merits. On his recommendation,
al-Mutawakkil ordered the Imam’s imprisonment to be changed to house
arrest, granting him a piece of land and allowing him to build his house
on it to live therein. But Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) was forbidden from
leaving Samarra’. Sa'd was ordered to keep a tight surveillance on the
Imam’s movements, contacts and correspondence.

During this period, too, Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) set an admirable example
of trust in Allah, ignoring all worldly gains. In spite of permanent
residence in the capital, he neither made a protest to the caliph, nor
did he ever ask him for a favour. He continued the same worshipping and
hermit-like life that he had led during his imprisonment.

The tyrant had changed his behaviour but the saint had maintained his
own. Even during such circumstances, Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) was not
allowed to live peacefully. He was not harassed physically but
psychologically. His house was periodically searched for arms or
dissenting correspondence undermining the position of the government.
Such an act is certainly painful for a man of an innocent and noble
character. To top all this, the Imam was once summoned to the royal
palace where the cups of wine were in rotation.

Surrounded by his courtiers, al-Mutawakkil was very much given to
merry-making, so much so that in the excess of vanity and lewdness, the
arrogant and shameless ruler handed the cup of wine to the Imam and
asked him to drink. This order was surely more painful than a thousand
strokes of the sword, but the guardian of faith said with unruffled
dignity: “Spare me this order, for the flesh and blood of my forefathers
and my own have never mixed with wine.” Had there been a slight sense of
faith in al-Mutawakkil, he would have been impressed by the dignity of
this saintly reply. But he was dead to such a feeling; he, therefore,
said, “Well, if you do not like it, then sing a song for us.”

The Imam replied: “I do not know that art, either.” At last the haughty
monarch said, “You shall have to recite a few verses of poetry, then, in
any tone you like.” This crude and ridiculous behaviour would have
infuriated any ordinary person, but the dignified Imam remained
undisturbed and sought to do what he was compelled to. He turned the
ruler’s order for recitation of poetry into an opportunity for
preaching, and he recited the following poetic verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
باتوا على قلل الأجبال تحرسهم غلب الرجال، فلم تنفعهم القلل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واستنزلوا بعد عز من معاقلهم و اسكنوا حفرا، يا بئسما نزلوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ناداهم صارخ من بعد دفنهم: أين الأساور و التيجان و الحلل؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أين الوجوه التي كانت منعمة من دونها تضرب الأستار و الكلل؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فافصح القبر عنهم حين ساءلهم: تلك الوجوه عليها الدود تقتتل
  </p>
</blockquote>

**  
**

قد طال ما أكلوا دهرا وقد شربوا واصبحوا اليوم بعد الأكل قد أكلوا

*The glories of our blood and state*  
*Are shadows, not substantial things.*  
*There is no armour against the fate;*  
*Death lays its icy hand on kings.*  
*Sceptre and crown*  
*Must tumble down.*  
*And in the earth be equal made*  
*To the labourer’s scythe and spade.*

*No fortress on the mountain peak*  
*Could save the kings from the jaws of death.*  
*Their pomp and power proved too weak;*  
*They lie in graves, deprived of breath.*

*The cold earth asks them in contempt:*  
*“Whither is the robe, the crown, and the throne?!*  
*“Did cruel Death thy beauty exempt?!*  
*“Did it respect thy royal blood and bone?!”*

*The grave replies*  
*With sorrowful sighs:*

*“Those beautiful forms*  
*“Are now food for the worms!”*

Having heard these lines recited by the Imam so profoundly, the
gathering became spell-bound. The drunkards making merry just a moment
ago now burst into tears. Even the proud king began to weep and wail. As
soon as he recovered a bit, he allowed the Imam to go home.

Another incident that disturbed him a great deal was al-Mutawakkil’s
oppressive order forbidding the public from visiting Karbala’’ and
Najaf. Throughout his territories ran the order that people should not
go to visit the tombs of Imam Ali (ﻉ) and Imam Husayn (ﻉ). Anybody
disobeying this order would do so under the penalty of death. He further
ordered that the buildings in Najaf and Karbala’’ be levelled to the
ground, that all the mausoleums be razed and the land around Imam
Husayn’s tomb be ploughed. It was not, however, possible to stop those
who loved Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) from visiting those holy shrines. They
disobeyed, and thousands of them were put to death indiscriminately.
Undoubtedly, the Imam was as sorry for each one of them as he could have
been on the death of a near relative of his. Due to this oppressive
environment, he could not even preach or convey to the faithful the
necessary instructions. This sorrowful situation lasted till
al-Mutawakkil’s death in 247 A.H./861 A.D.

At al-Mutawakkil’s court, Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) was mimicked and
mocked by the buffoons while al-Mutawakkil and his courtiers burst into
laughter. It was such an insulting scene that once al-Mutawakkil’s son
could not help protesting thus: “It was somewhat tolerable if you spoke
ill of Imam Ali (ﻉ) yourself, but since you yourself say that he was
related to you, how do you allow these wretched buffoons to mock him
like that?”

Instead of being sorry, al-Mutawakkil jested with his son and composed
two couplets abusive of his mother which he instructed the singers to
sing. They used to always sing those couplets as al-Mutawakkil laughed
heartily.

Another event of those wretched times is equally painful. Ibn as-Sikkit
of Baghdad, the acknowledged scholar of lexicography and syntax and the
genius of his time, was the tutor of al-Mutawakkil’s son.

One day the cruel ruler asked this great scholar: “Are my two sons more
respectable than Hassan and Husayn (ﻉ)?” Ibn as-Sikkit loved Ahl
al-Bayt. He could not control his feelings and flatly replied: “Not to
speak of Imams Hassan and Husayn (ﻉ), Imam Ali’s slave Qanbar is more
respectable than both of your sons.” Hearing these words, al-Mutawakkil
flew into a passion and ordered that Ibn as-Sikkit’s tongue be cut off.
This barbaric order was carried out immediately, leading to the death of
one of those who cherished the Prophet’s Progeny (ﻉ).

Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) was not physically connected with these events. But
each was like a blow of the sword, not striking his neck but torturing
his soul. Al-Mutawakkil’s cruelties caused him to be the object of
common hatred. Even his own children set their hearts against him. One
of them, al-Muntasir, conspired with his chief slave Baqir ar-Rumi to
murder al-Mutawakkil while the latter was asleep, using his own sword,
thus the world heard a sigh of relief and the population of hell
increased by one; the death of the tyrant and the caliphate of
al-Muntasir were proclaimed. After assuming the throne, al-Muntasir
revoked the unjust orders of his father.

Visiting the shrines of Najaf and Karbala’’ was permitted without any
restriction. The tombs, moreover, received minor repairs. Al-Muntasir’s
conduct towards Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) was fair. But the life of the new
ruler proved to be mysteriously too short; he died in 248 A.H./862 A.D.
after a brief rule of only six months. After him, caliph al-Mustaan
Billah, too, did not mistreat the Imam (ﻉ).

As stated above, Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) had built a house in Samarra’ and
did not go back to Medina either out of his own free will or under the
orders of the rulers. Due to his continued stay there and the lack of
interference by the regime, the students of the teachings of Ahl al-Bayt
(ﻉ) surrounded him. Al-Mustaan Billah died in 252 A.H./866 A.D. and was
succeeded by al-Mu'tazz Billah who was alarmed by the Imam’s
popular­ity, so he put an end to his life.

Imam Ali an-Naqi’s conduct and moral excellence were the same as those
of each and every member of the sacred series of Infallibles.
Imprisonment, confinement or freedom, in every case these sacred souls
were engaged in worship, helping the poor, living a most ascetic and
God-fearing life, disseminating knowledge and scholarship and promoting
virtue.

Totally refraining from succumbing to their own desires, greed or
worldly ambitions, they lived dignified in misfortune. Dealing fairly
even with the foes and helping the destitute were the qualities marking
their conduct. The same virtues were reflected during the lifetime of
Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) as well.

During the period of his imprisonment, the Imam (ﻉ) had a grave dug up
for him and was ready by his prayer-mat. Some visitors expressed either
apprehension or bewilderment thereat. The Imam explained thus: “In order
to remember my end, I keep the grave before my eyes.” Be it so, but in
reality, it was a silent, unspoken protest against those cruel rulers
who wanted the Imam (ﻉ) to give up his pure Islamic teachings. It was a
negation of their demand of obeisance. It showed that the worldly rulers
who can frighten common men with death can never bend a saint who is
ready to embrace death at any moment.

In spite of this fearlessness, he never took part in any secret or
subversive activity against the government. Living permanently in a
capital where daily conspiracies were sapping the roots of the Abbasside
regime, he could never be accused of treason by the strong secret
intelligence of those kings.

Can you imagine the extent of the political turmoil of those unstable
days? Al-Mutawakkil was opposed by his own son al-Muntasir and he ended
in being slain by his own Turkish slave Baqir ar-Rami. After
al-Muntasir’s death, the court nobility decided to take away the
governemnt from the ruling dynasty.

The regime of al-Mustaan was shaken by the uprising of Yahya ibn Omer
ibn Yahya ibn Zaid al-Alawi in Kufa, and by the occupation of Tabaristan
by Hassan ibn Zaid (titled “Dai al-Haqq,” the caller to justice) and his
establishment of a permanent government there; the revolt of the Turkish
slaves in Samarra’ and al-Mustaan’s flight to Baghdad to take refuge in
its fort, and in the end his compulsory abdication and murder by
al-Mu'tazz. Add to this list the Byzantine aggression during the reign
of al-Mu'tazz who feared the danger of his own brother; Muayyad’s
demise; Muwaffaq’s imprisonment in Basra\_\_it was a continuous chain of
chaos of which an opportunist could easily take advantage.

But Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) could not be suspected even of taking part in
any of these struggles for power. Any opportunist, excited by greed or
revenge, will always take arms against a regime which not only harassed
him but also exiled, insulted and imprisoned him. Yet, these sacred
souls considered it below their spotless honour and dignity to partake
in those vainglorious bids for power. They looked down upon all these
struggles and always rose above the vile level of temporal temptations,
declaring that all such acts were below them and their standard of
virtue.

The Imam (ﻉ) died during the reign of al-Mu'tazz Billah in Samarra’ on
the 3rd of Rajab 254 A.H./June 28, 868 A.D. His death was attended only
by his son Hassan al-'Askari who led the funeral prayers and arranged
his burial, laying him to rest in his own residence. Now high stands his
mausoleum which is being visited daily by tens of thousands of pilgrims
from all over the world.

8) Imam Hassan Al-'Askari (as)
------------------------------

His name is al-Hassan, “Abu Muhammad.” Being a resident of Askar, a
suburb of Samarra’, he is titled “al-'Askari.” His father was Imam Ali
an-Naqi (ﻉ) and his mother was Salal Khatun, a role model of piety,
adoration, chastity and generos­ity. He was born in Medina on the tenth
of Rabi' al-Akhir, 232 A.H./ December 4, 846 A.D. He lived under the
care of his respected father upto the age of 11. Then his father had to
leave for Samarra’ and he was to accompany him and thus share the
hardships of the journey with the family.

At Samarra’, he spent his time with his father either in imprisonment or
in partial freedom. He had, however, the opportunity to benefit from his
father’s teaching and instruction. His father died in 254 A.H./868 A.D.
when he himself was twenty-two. Four months before his death, the father
declared his son to be his successor and executor of his will, asking
his followers to bear witnes to the fact. Thus were the responsibilities
of Imamate vested upon him which he fulfilled even in the face of great
difficulties and hostilities.

Imam Hassan al-'Askari partook in all misfortunes and hardships suffered
by his father, whether imprisonment or confinement. In the early days of
his Imamate, al-Mu'tazz Billah, was the al-Abbasi caliph who, when
deposed in 255 A.H./869 A.D., was succeeded by al-Muhtadi.

After The latter’s brief reign of only eleven months and one week,
al-Mu'tamid ascended to the throne. During these caliphs’ regimes, Imam
Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) did not enjoy any peace of mind at all. Although
the Abbaside dynasty was involved in constant complications and
disorder, each and every king thought it necessary to keep the Imam
imprisoned.

One of the Holy Prophet’s traditions stated that the Prophet (ﺹ) would
be succeeded by twelve princes, the last of whom would be the Mahdi,
Qa’im Ali Muhammad. The Abbasides knew well that the true successors of
the Prophet were these very Imams (ﻉ). With Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ)
being the eleventh of this series, his son would surely be the twelfth,
the last.

They, therefore, tried to put an end to the life of Imam Hassan
al-'Askari (ﻉ) so that nobody would succeed him. The house arrest once
imposed on Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) was considered inadequate for Imam
Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ), so he was imprisoned, away from his family.
Undoubtedly, the revolutionary intervals between two regimes gave him
brief periods of freedom. Yet as soon as the new king came to the
throne, he followed his predecessor’s policy and imprisoned the Imam
again. The Imam’s brief life, therefore, was mostly spent inside dungeon
cells.

The hardship of imprisonment reached its peak time during the reign of
al-Mu'tamid Billah, although the latter knew the lineage, piety,
knowledge and righteousness of the Imam as did all his predecessors.

Once, during a devastating drought, a Christian hermit was able to
demonstrate that he could bring rain whenever he prayed to Allah. This
led many Muslims to convert to Christianity. In order to save Islam from
this calamity, Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) was brought out of jail. He
noticed how that Christian hermit raised his hands in prayers, and how
as soon as he did so, rain started pouring down.

He told the gathering that the piece of bone belonged to the corpse of
one of the Prophets of Allah, and he proved his point by raising it
himself in his hand, and upon doing so, Lo, rain started pouring down
again, as if the skies were weeping for the prophet! The Imam (ﻉ) thus
removed the common doubts from the minds of the people and kept them
firmly on Islam. Al-Mu'tamid Billah was so impressed that he felt too
ashamed to send the Imam back to prison; so, he put him under house
arrest instead. Complete freedom, however, was not granted.

During all circumstances, the Imams (ﻉ) carried out their duties of
guiding the people no matter what. Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) was
subjected to numerous restrictions, so much so that those who sought to
learn the teachings of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) and their Shi'a point of view
could not reach him. In order to solve this problem, the Imam appointed
certain confidants as his deputies in view of their knowledge of
jurisprudence.

These persons satisfied the curiosity of inquirers as much as they
could. But if they could not solve certain theological problems, they
would keep them pending the solutions provided by the Imam (ﻉ) whenever
they got the opportunity to see him. Of course, the visit to the Imam
(ﻉ) by a few individuals could be allowed by the government but
certainly not by groups who wished to see the Imam on a regular basis.

The khums (1/5 of total savings), which was being paid to the Imams by
the believers who cherished them and regarded them as representatives of
the Divine Law, was spent by these sacred saints on religious matters,
and to sustain the Prophet’s descendants. This khums was now secretly
collected by these deputies who spent it according to the directives of
the Imam (ﻉ).

They, accordingly, were in constant danger of being identified as such
by the government’s powerful secret intelligence service. In order to
avert this danger, Othman ibn Sa'd and his son Abu Ja'far Muhammad, two
prominent deputies of the Imam (ﻉ) in the capital Baghdad, ran a large
shop trading in oils. This provided them with free contact with the
concerned people. It was thus that even under the very thumb of the
tyrant regime, those devotees managed to run the system of the Divine
law unsuspected.

Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) was one of the illustrious series of the
immaculate Infallibles each member of whom displayed the moral
excellence of human perfection. He was peerless in knowledge,
forbear­ance, forgiveness, generosity, sacrifice, and piety. Whenever
al-Mu'tamid Billah asked anybody about his captive Hassan al-'Askari, he
was told that the Imam (ﻉ) fasted during the day and adored his Lord
during the night, and that his tongue uttered no word but remembrance of
his Maker.

During the brief periods of freedom and stay at home, people approached
him hoping to avail from his benevolence, and they went back well
rewarded. Once when the Abbaside caliph asked Ahmed ibn Abdullah ibn
Khaqan, his Minister of Endowments (*awqaf*), about the descendants of
Imam Ali (ﻉ), he reported: “I do not know anybody among them who is more
distin­guished than Hassan al-'Askari. None can surpass him in dignity,
knowl­edge, piety and abstinence, nor can anybody match him in
nobleness, majestic grandeur, modesty and honesty.”

When his father Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) died and the family was busy
arranging for his burial, some servants stole certain articles, thinking
that none would notice it. When the burial was over, he called the
servants and said to them, “I ask you about some missing items; if you
tell me the truth, I will pardon you; but if you speak falsely, I shall
get all those items from you then punish you.” Then he asked each for
the items which he had stolen. When they confessed their guilt, he got
the articles back from them and spared them the penalty.

Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) had a brief span of life, only twenty-eight
years, but even during this short period of time, which was ruffled by a
chain of troubles and tribulations, several high ranking scholars
benefitted from his ocean of knowledge. He also uprooted the atheism and
disbelief which ensued from the philosophers of that age. One of those
philosophers was the renown Ishaq al-Kindi who was then writing a book
on what he called “self-contradictions” in the Holy Qur’an.

When the news reached the Imam, he waited for an opportunity to refute
and rebut him. By chance, some of Ishaq’s students came to visit him.
The Imam (ﻉ) asked them: “Is there anyone among you who can stop Ishaq
from wasting his time in this useless effort fighting the Holy Qur’an?”
The students said, “Master! We are his students; how can we object to
his teaching?” The Imam urged that they could at least convey to their
teacher what he had to tell them. They replied that they would be ready
to cooperate as much as they could.

The Imam (ﻉ) then recited a few verses from the Holy Qur’an which the
philosopher considered as contradictory of one another. He then
explained to them thus: “Your teacher thinks that some of the words in
these verses have only one meaning. But according to the Arabic tongue,
these words have other meanings too which, when taken into
consideration, indicate no contradiction in the overall meaning. Thus,
your teacher is not justified for basing his objections and allegations
of contradictions on the premises of the ‘wrong meaning’ which he
himself selects for such verses.” He then put up some examples of such
words before them so clearly that the students absorbed the point and
comprehended the precedents of more than one meaning.

When these students visited Ishaq al-Kindi and, after routine
discussions, reproduced the disputed points, he was surprised. He was a
fair-minded scholar, and he attentively listened to his students’
explanations.  
 Then he said, “What you have argued is above your capacity; tell me
truly who has taught you these points?” The students first said that it
was their own reflection, but when he insisted that they could never
have conceived those points, they admitted that they were explained to
them by Abu Muhammad Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ).

Al-Kindi said, “Yes; this level of knowledge is the heritage of that
House, and only that House.” Then he asked the students to set all such
works of his to fire. This is a famous incident, and the reader is
encouraged to research it on his own. This and so many other religious
services were performed silently by the Prophet’s descendants.

The Abbaside dynasty, which unfairly claimed to be “the defender of the
faith,” was deeply drunk with lustful merriment. Had it ever recovered
from its drunkenness and thus come to its senses, it would not have
thought that those sincere and saintly souls were a “danger” to its
power. It, therefore, issued orders to put some more restrictions on
their movements. Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ), the lofty mountain of
dignity and piety, put up with such unfair restrictions and unwarranted
persecution with determined fortitude.

Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) was a reliable authority on traditionists who
have recorded several traditions in their collections on his own
authority. One tradition about drinking runs thus: “The wine drinker is
like an idolater.”

It has been recorded by Ibn al-Jawzi in his book Tahrim al-Khamr
(prohibition of wine drinking) with continuous chain of references
tracing its narrators. “Abu Na'im,” namely Fadl ibn Waka, states that
the tradition is true as it has been narrated by the Prophet’s
descendants and some of his companions such as Ibn Abbas, Abu Hurayra,
Anas, Abdullah ibn 'Awf al-Aslami and others.

In his book titled *Kitab al-Ansab* (a geneaology book), as-Sam’ani
indicates that “Abu Muhammad Ahmed ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim al-Alawi
al-Balathiri heard many traditions in Mecca from the Imam of Ahl al-Bayt
(ﻉ), i.e. Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ), which he recorded.” The names of
some of his prominent students who, availing of his discourses, speeches
and addresses, became authors of some books, are given here:

1. “Abu Hashim,” Dawud ibn Qasim al-Ja'fari, one of the deputies of the
Imam, was a scholar of advanced age. He acquired knowledge from Imam
ar-Rida (ﻉ), from his son Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (ﻉ), from his son Imam
Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ), and from the latter’s son Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ).

2. Dawud ibn Abu Zaid an-Nishapuri[^114]. He often visited Imam Ali
an-Naqi (ﻉ) and Imam Hassan (ﻉ) al-'Askari (ﻉ).

3. Abu Tahir Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Bilal.

4. Abul-Abbas Abdullah ibn Ja'far al-Humairi al-Qummi. He was a scholar
of a high caliber. He authored many books including Qurb al-Isnad which
is a major source of Al-Kafi, etc.

5. Muhammad ibn Ahmed ibn Ja'far al-Qummi was the Imam’s chief deputy.

6. Ja'far ibn Suhail Saiqal was one of his most distinguished deputies.

7. Muhammad ibn Hassan as-Saffar al-Qummi was a high ranking scholar,
author of several books including the famous classic work titled Basa’ir
al-Darajat. He sent written inquiries to the Imam (ﻉ) and received their
answers from him.

8. Abu Ja'far Hamani al-Barmaki (Barmakid); he obtained written answers
to his questions in jurisprudence from the Imam (ﻉ) and compiled a book
using their text.

9. Ibrahim ibn Abu Hafs, “Abu Ishaq,” al-Katib is a companion of the
Imam and author of a book.

10. Ibrahim ibn Mehr-Yar. He has a book to his credit.

11. Ahmed ibn Ibrahim ibn Isma'eel ibn Dawud ibn Hamdan al-Katib
an-Nadam. He was an authority on literature and lexicography, author of
many books, and a confidant of the Imam (ﻉ).

12. Ahmed ibn Ishaq al-Ashari, “Abu Ali,” al-Qummi was an acknowl­edged
scholar and author of several books including *Hilal as-Sawm*.

These are only a few names; the details of all the students and
companions would require a whole volume. The best reference the reader
may consult is the encyclopوdia titled Ayan ash-Shi'ah, which is
discussed above. “Abu Ali” Hassan ibn Khalid ibn Muhammad prepared a
commentary of the Holy Qur’an which should be considered the work of the
Imam (ﻉ) himself. The Imam (ﻉ) used to dictate its contents and Abu Ali
recorded them. Scholars indicate that the book consisted of 1,920 pages.

Unfortunately, these precious treasures of knowledge are not available
now. Baghdad was repeatedly attacked by raiders from various nations
that burnt or drowned thousands of precious books. A book recently
published under the title Tafsir Hassan al-'Askari (exegesis of Hassan
al-'Askari) is a separate work which was traced and rendered to the
fourth century A.H. Shaikh as-Saduq, namely Muhammad ibn Ali Babawayh
al-Qummi, says that it was actually dictated by the Imam (ﻉ). But the
Shaikh’s sources from which he copied are obscure. The biographers are
not, however, sure about attributing it to the Imam (ﻉ).

These are the details of the Imam’s scholarly attainments, a wonderful
performance when one reflects on the fact that he died at the young age
of twenty-eight, having served as Imam for only six years, a period
constantly disturbed by the troubles already stated above.

A busy man, who is engaged in the service of religion and scholarship,
usually does not have time for politics or subversive activities. But
the Imam’s spiritual supremacy and his increasing popularity made him
intolerable to his contemporary monarchs. Al-Mu'tamid Billah, the
Abbaside ruler, administered his poisoning, so the Imam (ﻉ) died on the
8th of Rabi' al-Awwal of 260 A.H./­January 1, 874 A.D. and was buried in
Samarra’ by his father’s side. His mausoleum, in spite of hostile
circum­stances, has been a sacred shrine for his admirers ever since and
is visited daily by tens of thousands of pilgrims from all over the
world.

9) The Awaited One, Imam Al-Mahdi (as)
--------------------------------------

Muhammad son of Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) is a facsimile of his name-sake
and great ancestor, the Holy Prophet Muhammad (ﺹ), in form and in
manners. His mother was Nerjis Khatun, granddaughter of the contemporary
Byzantine king who was a descendant of prophet Sham’un (Shemon, or
Simon, trustee of Jesus Christ [ﻉ]). He was born on the 15th of Sha'ban,
255 A.H./July 29, 869 A.D. His father, Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ), gave
away loaves of bread and meat as charity and sacrificed several goats
for aqiqah, birth celebration. He also instructed his pious sister,
Halima Khatun, to tutor his child in the Divine Law.

Al-Mahdi (ﻉ) is usually called by his titles rather than by his first
name. These are numerous, second in number to those of Imam Ali ibn Abu
Talib (ﻉ). Famous among them are:

1. Al-Mahdi: ***المهدي*** This is the title which has acquired the
status of a name to which reference is made in the prophecies of the
Holy Prophet (ﺹ). Hence, the concept of al-Mahdi, the Guided One,
al-Muntazar, the Awaited One, is commonly acknowledge by Muslims.  
 Undoubtedly, there are some differences of opinion among scholars in
his regard, but these deal with his life events or qualities. The belief
in the reappearance of Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ) from his occultation is
entertained by all except those who call themselves Muslims only for
political or other necessities while not believing even in the unseen
God. How can we expect such people to believe in the prophecies of the
Holy Prophet (ﺹ) regarding Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ)?

“Al-Mahdi” means: “the guided one.” It indicates that Allah is the real
Guide; all creatures are guided by Him. In this sense, the Prophet and
all Imams are Mahdis, yet in reality, this title is exclusively used for
the 12th Imam.

2. “Al-Qa’im.” **القائم** This title is based on some traditions
(ahadith) where Prophet Muhammad (ﺹ) asserts that, “This world will not
come to its end unless there rises a Qa’im from my offspring who will
fill it with equity and justice after its being filled with injustice
and oppression.”

3. “Sahib az-Zaman” **صاحب الزمان** (master of the time). This is in
view of the fact that he is the real guide of our time.

4. “Hujjatullah.” **حجة الله** Every Prophet or Imam is Hujjatullah, the
“proof” or “sign” of the Mercy Allah, our Creator; he fulfills the
responsibility of guiding humanity, thus leaving for people no excuse to
commit wrongdo­ing. Since in our time the responsibility of guiding the
world is fulfilled by the 12th Imam (ﻉ), he will be called Hujjatullah
till Doomsday.

5. “Al-Muntazar” **المنتظر** (the expected or awaited one). All Muslim
scholars have been repeating the prophecies regarding the reappearance
of Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ). Not only the Muslims but even people of other
religions, too, believe in a “comer” to come in the last days. His name
in various creeds may be different, but the coming of such a person is
universally accepted. He was expected before his birth, and after birth
and disappearance. Now his reappearance is awaited, hence his title.

Those who deny al-Mahdi (ﻉ) base their denial on the incorrect claim
that there is no reference to al-Mahdi (ﻉ) in the Holy Qur’an. There are
two considerations to be borne in mind while studying the Holy Qur’an:

**First:** Names of individuals are not always stated explicitly. For
example, the holy Prophet of Islam (ﻉ) is mentioned by name as:
Muhammad, Ahmed, Taha and Yasin, whereas he is mentioned implicitly
throughout the entire text of the Holy Qur’an.

**Second:** Scholars of the Holy Qur’an tell us that there are at least
four meanings for each Qur’anic verse: “ma’na zahir,” an apparent or
explicit meaning, “ma’na batin,” a hidden or implicit meaning,
“tanzeel,” revelation (the circumstances under which that particular
verse was revealed), and “ta’weel,” interpretation. In order to fully
comprehend a verse, we have to fathom all these four meanings;
otherwise, our understanding of it will be extremely shallow, and
“little knowledge is a dangerous thing.”

The following references are all quoted from the most reliable Sunni
sources:

On p. 443 of *Yanabi' al-Mawaddah*, the Hanafi *hafiz* Sulayman
al-Qanduzi quotes Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari narrating a lengthy
hadith in which a Jew named Jandal ibn Junadah ibn Jubair accepted Islam
at the hands of the Prophet (ﺹ) and the new convert asked the Prophet
(ﺹ) who his wasis were. The Prophet (ﺹ) counted them for Jandal till he
said, “.. and after him (i.e. Imam Hassan al-'Askari [ﻉ]) his son
Muhammad, who shall be called al-Mahdi and al-Qa’im and al-Hujjah. He
shall occult, then shall he come back.

When he comes back, he shall fill the world with justice and equity just
as it was filled with injustice and iniquity; blessed are those who
persevere during his occultation (*ghayba*, or absence); blessed are
those who persist in their love for them, for they are the ones whom
Allah described in His book saying,

***‘It is guidance sure, without doubt, to those who fear Allah, who
believe in the Unseen (ghayb*** ***الغيب)’ (Qur’an, 2:2-3).”***

On p. 505 of the same work, the author, who belongs to the major Sunni
sect the Hanafi, quotes Muhammad ibn Muslim who cites Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq (ﻉ) explaining the meaning of verse 155 of the same Sura which
states the following: ***“We shall test you with something of fear and
hunger; some loss in goods or lives or the fruits (of your toil), but
give glad tidings to those who patiently persevere (Qur’an, 2:155)***.”

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) indicated that there would be signs indicating
the coming (reappearance) of al-Mahdi (ﻉ) which are means whereby Allah
tests the faithful:

“Something of fear” is a reference to masses perishing by contagious
diseases; “hunger” is a reference to high prices of foodstuffs; “some
loss in goods” is reference to scarcity and famines; “lives” is
reference to mass destruction (of human lives, probably due to global
wars); “fruits” is reference to lengthy periods of droughts; so when all
that happens, then “give glad tidings to those who patiently persevere”.

“This is its interpretation,” continued the Imam, quoting verse 7 of Ali
‘Imran (Qur’an, 3:7), which indicates that only those who are “firmly
grounded in knowledge” are capable of interpreting the verses of the
Holy Qur’an, adding, “We (Ahl al-Bayt) are the ones firmly grounded in
knowledge.”

On p. 321 of the same work, the author quotes Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ)
interpreting verse 83 of Chapter 3 of the Holy Qur’an then commenting
thus: “When the Qa’im, al-Mahdi (ﻉ), reappears, there will be no land on
earth where the shahada (the testimony that La ilaha illa-Allah,
Muhammadun rasulullah: There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah) is not said.” This could be a prediction that by the
time al-Mahdi (ﻉ) reappears, all continents of the world will have
Muslim populations. They already do.

At the end of Vol. 2 of Fara’id as-Simtayn, and on p. 269 of Ibn
Khaldun’s Introduction, Ibn Abbas is quoted as saying that the Messenger
of Allah (ﺹ) said, “Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) is the Imam of my nation
and my successor therein after me; among his offspring is the awaited
Qa’im who shall fill the world with justice and equity after it had been
filled with injustice and iniquity.

By the One Who sent me in truth a bearer of glad tidings, and a warner,
I swear that those who persist adhering to his Imamate even during his
ghaybat (occultation) are more rare than red sulphur.” Jabir ibn
Abdullah al-Ansari stood up to ask the Messenger of Allah (ص): “O
Messenger of Allah! Will there be a ghayba for that Qa’im from among
your offspring?” He (ﻉ) answered: “Ay by my Allah! (then he quoted this
verse:) ‘Allah desires to purify those that are true.’ O Jabir! This is
one of Allah’s orders and a secret of His which is obscure from His
servants; therefore, beware of doubting, for to doubt the order of
Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime, is apostasy (*kufr*).”

On p. 507, the *hafiz* al-Qanduzi states in his book *Yanabi'
al-Mawaddah* the explanation of verse 89 of Chapter 6 (al-An'am) quoting
Muhammad ibn Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) saying, “The person implied in this
verse is the Qa’im, al-Mahdi (ﻉ), who is safeguarded by Allah; even if
all people perish, Allah will bring him and his companions out, for they
are the ones entrusted by Allah and who do not disbelieve.”

Another author who follows the Shafi'i sect and who enjoys the title
*‘allama* is ash-Shiblinji, author of *Nur al-Absar*. He quotes Abu
Ja'far (ﻉ) explaining verse 86 of Chapter 11 (Hud) in a lengthy *hadith*
in which the Imam says, “When he (al-Mahdi (ﻉ)) reappears, he shall lean
on the Ka'ba, and three hundred and thirteen men of his companions shall
join him there; the first statement he shall utter there will be:

***‘That which is left for you by Allah is best for you (Qur’an,
11:86).’***

Then he shall say: ‘I am what is left you by Allah, His vicegerent (a
descendant of Adam), and His Proof (Hujjatullah) over you;’ so whenever
someone greets him, he says, ‘Peace be with you, O the one left for us
by Allah’.”

The Shafi'i *faqih* Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abu Bakr as-Sayyuti, quoting the
Sunan of Abu Dawud, cites Abu Sa'id al-Khudri on p. 50, Vol. 6, of his
*Al-Durr al-Manthur*, saying that the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) had said,
“The Hour shall not come till al-Mahdi (ﻉ) takes charge on earth on my
own behalf; he shall have a high forehead, a straight nose, and he shall
fill the world with justice and equity after being filled with injustice
and iniquity.”

He also indicates that Imam Ahmed ibn Hanbal (founder of one of the four
Sunni sects, i.e. the Hanbali) quotes Abu Sa'id al-Khudri quoting the
Messenger of Allah (ص) saying, “I bring you the glad tidings of al-Mahdi
(ﻉ); Allah shall send him to my nation, in time quite different from
your own, and after series of earthquakes, and he shall fill the world
with justice and equity as it was filled before with injustice and
iniquity, and all the residents of the world shall be pleased with him,
and he shall distribute the wealth equitably.”

Allama al-Bahrani, quoting the Shafi'i *faqih* Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Hamawayni who in turn quotes Abdullah ibn Abbas on p. 692 of *Ghayat
al-Maram* saying that the Messenger of Allah (ﻉ) had said, “My
successors, wasis and hujaj are twelve: the first of them is my brother
and the last is my son.”

He was asked: “O Messenger of Allah! Who is your brother?!” He answered:
“Ali ibn Abu Talib.” “Then who is your son?” “Al-Mahdi (ﻉ) who shall
fill the world with justice and equity after being filled with injustice
and iniquity. By the One Who sent me in truth a bearer of glad tidings
and a warner, I swear that if there is only one day left in this world,
Allah will prolong that day till my son (descendant) al-Mahdi (ﻉ)
reappears, and the Spirit of Allah, Jesus son of Mary, shall say his
prayers behind him (then he quoted verse 69 of Chapter 39:)

***‘And the earth will shine with the glory of its Lord’ and his domain
shall encompass the East and the West.”***

Before the Imam’s birth, predictions regarding him were put forth by the
Holy Prophet and the Infallible Imams. Several scholars of the Sunni
School of Muslim Law have written volumes exclusively on this topic. For
example, *hafiz* Muhammad ibn Yousuf al-Kanji ash-Shafi'i has compiled
*Al-Bayan fi Akhbari Sahib az-Zaman* (the clear evidence regarding the
tidings of the Master of Age). *Hafiz* Abu Na’im al-Isfahani has written
*Na’t al-Mahdi (ﻉ)* (title of al-Mahdi (ﻉ)).

Abu Dawud as-Sijistani has devoted one complete chapter titled “Kitab
al-Mahdi (ﻉ)” in his *Sunan* dedicated entirely to this subject.
At-Tirmithi in his *Sahih*, Ibn Majah in his *Sunan*, and al-Hakim in
his *Mustadrak*, have all done likewise.

One tradition recorded by Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Hamawi (of Hama,
Syria) which ash-Shafi'i cited in his work *Fara’id as-Simtayn* says,
“Ibn Abbas heard the Prophet (ﺹ) saying, I am the chief of the Prophets,
and Ali is the chief of the Trustees (*wasis*). My trustees (or
successors) after me are twelve: the first of them is Ali and the last
is al-Mahdi.’”

Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari narrated saying that Fatima az-Zahra (ﻉ)
had a tablet (mushaf) on which the names of all the succeeding Imams
were written down; three of them were named “Muhammad” and four were
named “Ali”, all being her offspring, and the last was named al-Qa’im.

Shaikh as-Saduq, namely Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, records
in his book Ikmal ad-Din wa Itmam an-Ni'ma a tradition on the authority
of Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) who narrated it from his ancestors. It states that
Imam Ali (ﻉ) addressed his son Imam Husayn (ﻉ) once saying, “The ninth
from your descendants shall rise defending the truth; he shall protect
the faith and promote justice.”

As-Saduq, in his book *Ikmal al-Deen*, also quotes the Prophet (ﺹ) as
saying, “When the ninth among the descendants of my son Husayn is born,
Allah will extend his life-span during the period of absence
(occultation) and will project him at the appointed time.”

Imam Husayn (ﻉ), the chief of martyrs, is quoted as saying, “The ninth
of my descendants is the Imam who will rise with the truth. Allah will
grant life to earth through him after its death. The true faith will
supersede all religions through him. His absence shall be lengthy during
which multitudes would go astray. Only a few will be on the Right Path.
They shall suffer painfully.

People will oppress them, saying, Let us know when this promise is
fulfilled!’ Those who will bear the pain and deprivation patiently will
get the same rewards as those who accompanied the Prophet during his
expeditions for Jihad.” Imam Zain al-Abidin (ﻉ) has said, “Of us one
will be born whose birth will remain secret, so much so that people will
say that he was not born at all.” Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ) is quoted
in *Al-Kafi* by al-Kulayni as saying, “Nine Imams after Husayn are
destined; the last of them will be al-Qa’im.”

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) is quoted by Shaikh as-Saduq in his book *‘Ilal
ash-Sharai’* as saying: “The fifth descendant of my son, Musa, will be
the Qa’im, a descendant of the Prophet (ص).”

As recorded in *Ikmal ad-Din* of Shaikh as-Saduq, Imam Musa al-Kadhim
(ﻉ) was asked once: “Are you the Qa’im with the truth?” The Imam
replied: “I, too, rise truthfully, but the real Qa’im is he who will
remove the enemies of Allah from earth and will fill it with justice. He
shall be my fifth descendant. His absence will be lengthy during which
multitudes will turn away from the faith while only a few will uphold
it.”

When Du'bal al-Khuza'i, the famous poet, recited his poem to Imam
ar-Rida (ﻉ) which included these lines:

*The Riser will appear, I do confess,*  
*With grace he will rise, blessed and good:*  
*And will deal with the faithful and the faithless*  
*And will distinguish between truth and falsehood;*

Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) wept. Then, raising his head, he said, “O Du'bal, these
lines have been inspired to you by Gabriel. Do you know who this Riser
(Qa’im) is and when he shall rise?” Du'bal said that he did not know the
details, but that he had been hearing that an Imam who would purge the
world from evils and fill it with justice. The Imam explained: “O
Du'bal, my son, Muhammad, will come when I am gone. After him, his
descendant, al-Qa’im, will come. He will be awaited during his absence.
When he appears, the world shall bow down before him.”

Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (ﻉ) has said, “The Qa’im will be from amongst us,
the third of my descendants.”

Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) has said, “My successor is my son, Imam Hassan; but
what will be your condition during the reign of Imam Hassan’s
successor?” Those who were present asked him: “Why, what do you mean by
that?” Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) said, “You will not have the opportunity to
see him; later, you will not be allowed even to mention his name.” Then
he was asked as to how they should mention him. He said, “You may say
that he is the last of Muhammad’s (Infallible) descendants.”

Some people asked Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ): “Your revered forefathers
have said that the earth would never be without a Sign of Allah
(Hujjat-Allah) till Doomsday, and he who dies without knowing the Imam
of his time dies the death of the days of ignorance.” Imam Hassan
al-'Askari (ﻉ) said that that was as true as the shining day.

They inquired as to who would be the Imam and who would be the Sign of
the Mercy of Allah after his death. Imam Hassan explained thus: “He will
be my son, the namesake of the Holy Prophet. He who dies without knowing
him will die the death of the days of ignorance. His absence will be so
lengthy that the ignorant will wander puzzled and will surely stray; the
false will fall into eternal destruction. Those who will foretell the
exact date of his appearing will be wrong.”

All these predictions were recorded since the time of the Holy Prophet
who prophesied the advent of the Mahdi. The anecdote of Dubal
demonstrates that the concept was quite common. History tells us that
friends and foes of Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) knew the fact, and sometimes tried
to take wrong advantage thereof.

For example, one of the Abbasides named Muhammad had assumed the title
of al-Mahdi (ﻉ). Muhammad son of Abdullah Mahd, an offspring of Imam
Husayn (ﻉ), too, was considered by some people as the Mahdi. The
Kaisanis had attributed the same to Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya. But these
suppositions were refuted by the Imams who condemned them and explained
the qualities of the true Mahdi and asserted his absence. The
aforementioned events clearly indicate that the idea about the advent of
the Mahdi was unanimously acknowledged.

Besides, the traditions of the Holy Prophet continuously affirmed that
he would be succeeded by 12 persons. This number itself sufficed to
refute the claims of the false pretenders. But when the eleventh Imam
al-Hassan (ﻉ) al-'Askari (ﻉ) had come, people keenly awaited al-Mahdi
(ﻉ) who was sought even prior to his birth with the same eagerness as he
is now awaited since his absence.

Precedents existed that many Imams did not have an opportunity for
education; still, Providence Divine made arrangements to adorn them with
learning and moral accomplishments which elevated them to Imamate. For
example, Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) was six years old when his father Muhammad
at-Taqi (ﻉ) died. Imam at-Taqi (ﻉ) was eight years old at the time of
the death of his father Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ). Outwardly, a boy of this age
cannot be proficient in learning. But once we acknowledge that Allah had
specially gifted the Prophet’s Progeny, the question of age stands no
more. If Jesus Christ could speak in his cradle and assert his
prophethood (see the Holy Qur’an, 19:24 and 19:30-33), a believer cannot
think that the childhood of Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ) would negate or render his
Imamate faulty. Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ) could enjoy his father’s love and
instruction for a very short period of time because he was only five
years old when his father died in 260 A.H./874 A.D. Even at that young
age, Providence crowned him with Imamate.

When the Pharaoh of Egypt heard the prophecy that a child would soon be
born to destroy his kingdom, he tried his best to obstruct the child’s
birth or kill him after his birth. Likewise, the Abbaside ruler knew
that a child would be born to Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) who would
destroy his unjust kingdom.

He, therefore, made every possible arrangement that the child would not
be born, keeping Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) in continuous imprisonment
away from his wife. But even the greatest worldly power cannot fight
Providence. In spite of all the efforts of Pharaoh, Moses was born;
similarly, in spite of the efforts of the Abbaside government, the
awaited Imam came into the world.

His birth and upbringing were kept secret and, as Providence so wished,
it remained so. Only a few moments did he appear in public. It was the
time when his father’s coffin was ready for the funeral prayers. All
prominent Shi'ahs were present. The ranks had been formed. Imam Hassan
al-'Askari’s brother Ja'far stepped forward to lead the prayers and was
at the point of reciting the Takbir when suddenly a boy came out from
behind the curtains, passed the ranks quickly and took hold of Ja'far’s
robe and said, “Get back, Uncle; I am more than you worthy of leading
the funeral prayers for my father.” Ja'far at once withdrew and the boy
led the prayers.

Having performed this duty, the boy went back. It was not possible that
the Abbaside ruler could remain ignorant of the fact. The search for him
was carried out more seriously than ever before in order to arrest and
slay the boy. Some may ask: “How can a boy lead the funeral prayers in
the capacity of an Imam?” The question is provided by the Holy Qur’an.
Such skeptics should research the Holy Qur’an to see how another boy,
namely Yahya (John the Baptist), became a Prophet of Allah even while
being a young boy. See verse 12 of Chapter 19 (Surat Maryam).

The Prophet and the Imams had predicted al-Mahdi’s occultation
(disappearance from public eyes, absence) as has already been narrated.
His occultation is divided into two periods. The first period is known
as the minor occultation. It extended from 260 A.H. to 329 A.H. (874-941
A.D.) when very pious persons nominated by the Imam himself acted as his
deputies.

Their duty was to convey to the Imam all problems of the Shi'as, get
their solutions from the Imam or solve them themselves according to
their own discretion, collect *zakat* and *khums* and spend them in the
proper way, and convey the Imam’s instructions to the trusted persons.
Those deputies, four in number, were the most pious and learned, and
they were the trusted confidants. Here are their names:

1. Abu Amr Othman ibn Sa'd ibn Amr al-Amri al-Assadi. He was a deputy of
Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ), then of his son Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ). Having
performed the same duty for a few years for Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ), he died
in Baghdad and was buried there.

2. Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Othman ibn Sa'd al-Amri (son of the above).
Imam Hassan al-'Askari (ﻉ) foretold his being deputized. Then his
father, at the time of his death, proclaimed under the orders of the
Imam his appointment as deputy. He died in Jumada I of 305 A.H./November
917 A.D.

3. Abul-Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh ibn Abu Bakr an-Nawbakhti. A member of the
famous Nawbakhti family, he was distinguished for his knowledge,
philosophy, astrology and kalam. He was a top ranking scholar and a
pious man. Under the directions of Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ), Abu Ja'far
Muhammad ibn Othman appointed him as his successor. After having served
for fifteen years in that capacity, he died in Shaban of 320 A.H./932
A.D.

4. “Abu Hassan,” Ali ibn Muhammad as-Samari. He was the last deputy,
succeeding Husayn ibn Rah as directed by the Imam. He performed this
duty for nine years only and died on the 15th of Sha’ban of 329 A.H./May
15, 941 A.D. Having been asked on his deathbed as to who would succeed
him, he replied: “Providence now wishes to give the matter another shape
the duration of which is known by Allah Alone.”

After the demise of Abul-Hassan, there was no deputy. In this sorrowful
year, i.e. 329 A.H./941 A.D., Imam Ali ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, the
revered father of Shaikh as-Saduq, and Muhammad ibn Ya'qub al-Kulayni,
the learned compiler of Al-Kafi, also expired. Besides these sad events,
an extra-ordinary phenomenon was also witnessed. In the sky so many
stars did shoot that it seemed as if Doomsday had come. That year was,
therefore, named “the year of the dispersal of the stars.” After this
followed a dark period because none was left to approach Imam al-Mahdi
(ﻉ).

The period since 329 A.H./941 A.D. is called “the major occultation”
because there is none deputized by the Imam. It was for this period that
Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ) directed “to refer to those who know our traditions
the lawful and the unlawful matters because they will guide you on our
own behalf.” It is in view of this advice that the scholars and
mujtahids are called the Imam’s successors. But this succession means
general guidance of the people and is in no way by personal nomination.
They are, therefore, quite different from the deputies who served as
such during the minor occultation.

The predictions about these occultations had been made by the Infallible
ones. The Holy Prophet affirmed: “He will have an occultation in which
many groups will wander aimlessly; during this period, the number of
those who believe in and follow him will be meager.”

Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) said, “The Qa’im will have a long period of
absence (occultation). The scene is full in my view when the friends of
Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) will wander during his absence as animals wander in
search of a meadow.” Another tradition says that “He will reappear after
such a long period of absence during which only true and sincere
believers will uphold their religion.”

Imam al-Hassan (ﻉ) said, “Allah will prolong his life-span during his
absence.” Imam al-Husayn (ﻉ) said, “He will remain absent during which
period so many parties will go astray.” Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ) said,
“His absence will be so lengthy that many people will go astray.”

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) said, “Al-Mahdi (ﻉ) will be the fifth
descendant of the seventh Imam. He will remain unseen.” On another
occasion, he said that Sahib al-Amr (the master of command) will have an
occultation during which everybody must remember Allah, do good deeds
and uphold his religion.

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (ﻉ) said, “His person will remain unseen to the eye
but the believers will never forget him; he will be the Twelfth of our
line.”

Imam ar-Rida (ﻉ) predicted that he would be awaited during his absence.
Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (ﻉ) explained: “Al-Mahdi (ﻉ) will be awaited
during his absence and will be obeyed upon his reappearance.”

Imam Ali an-Naqi (ﻉ) clarified: “The Master of Command will be the one
about whom people will say: He has not been born yet.’” Imam Hassan
al-'Askari (ﻉ) said, “My son’s absence will cause doubts and disbeliefs
in the minds of people except those whom Allah guides.”

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (ﻉ) had also explained that the Qa’im of Ali
Muhammad would have two periods of absence, a very lengthy one and a
relatively short one. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) had similarly predicted
thus: “One of the two periods of absence will be quite lengthy.”

It was due to these predictions that after the death of Imam Hassan
al-'Askari (ﻉ), his followers and sincere believers did not entertain
any doubt about him. Instead of acknowledging the Imamate of some
present false claimant, they only believed in Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ), the
Absent, the Occultant.

Although absent and unrepresented, Imam al-Mahdi (ﻉ) still guides people
and defends the faith. Even though unseen, he supervises the world’s
affairs and guides it. This curtain will exist as long as Providence
deems it necessary; the time will come soon (though “soon” may occur to
many too late) when the curtain of absence will be removed, Imam
al-Mahdi (ﻉ) will reappear and fill the world with justice and equity,
discarding all the prevailing injustices and iniquities. May Allah
Almighty bring about his early reappearance and ease his coming,
Allahomma Aameen.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم أرزقنا شفاعة الحسين
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: In the writing of this chapter, I utilized one of the books which
I edited: Biographies of Leaders of Islam by Sayyid Ali Naqi Naqwi,
published in 1990 by Imam Husayn Foundation, P.O. Box 25-114, Beirut,
Lebanon.

[^2]: The city of Antioch is situated on the banks of the river al-asi
(Orontes). It was founded about 300 B.C. by Celeucus I (Nicator) who
died in 280 B.C. Celeucus I was a general of Alexander the Great.
Antioch is the city where the followers of Jesus Christ were called
"Christians" (rather than Nazarines) for the first time. It is the seat
of a Melchite, or Maronite, and a Jacobite patriarch. It fell to the
Persians in 538 A.D., to the Arabs in 637 A.D. (16 A.H.), to the
Byzantians from 969 - 1084 A.D. (358 - 477 A.H.), to Seljuk Turks in
1085 A.D. (478 A.H.), to the Crusaders in 1098 A.D. (491 A.H.), to
Egyptian Mamlukes in 1268 A.D. (666 A.H.), and to Ottoman Turks in 1516
A.D. (922 A.H.). It was transferred to Syria by Western powers in 1920
(1339 A.H.) but restored to Turkey in 1939 A.D. (1358 A.H.). This is why
the reader sometimes may see Antioch identified as a Syrian town and
some other times as Turkish! What a busy little town!

[^3]: Merv is an ancient city located in a large oasis of the Kara Kum
desert, Turkmenistan (formerly part of the Soviet Union). During the
Abbaside period, it served as the capital of ancient Persia and a
thriving center of Islamic culture.

[^4]: One of the greatest of all Arab poets, al-Farazdaq was born in
Basra in about 641 A.D. and died in about 732 A.D. His real name is
Hammam ibn Ghalib ibn Mujashi al-Darmi at-Tamimi. He was contemporary to
another very famous poet, Jarir, with whom he had exchanged extensive
literary criticism which lasted al his lifelong. Al-Farazdaq once
praised Imam as-Sajjad with a poem considered as one of the best
masterpieces of Arab poetry, and he did so in the presence of then
caliph Hisham ibn Abdul-Malik who asked him why he did not compose one
like it in his own praise. Al-Farazdaq said, “Had your grandfather been
like his grandfather (ﻉ), and had your father been like his father (ﻉ),
and had your mother been like his mother (ﻉ), I would have done so.”
Hisham was so angry that he ordered him to be jailed at a place called
Usfan, located between Mecca and Medina, where he continued to compose
poetry taunting and belittling Hisham who finally had to set him free,
hoping he would leave him alone and stop the barrage of poems exposing
him and his likes from among Banu Umayyah.

[^5]: The extent of al-Hajjaj’s passion for shedding blood can be
realized from this recorded and referenced incident: He entered once
al-Heera’s jail and commented about the prisoners saying, “I see heads
the time for whose harvesting has come.” They were all beheaded and
their heads were brought to him at his government mansion. He ordered a
carpet to be placed on the heads whereupon he sat and was served his
lunch. Having finished eating, he said, “This has been the tastiest meal
I have ever had.” More about al-Hajjaj is stated in another footnote
above. No wonder some Muslims do not teach Islamic history at all: It
indicts them.

[^6]: So that the reader may not misunderstand this statement, let him
be informed that whenever the Abbasides built a house or a mansion, they
used to bring a number of descendants of the Prophet (ﺹ) whom they would
place inside the new structure’s column; then they would continue the
construction, making their bodies part of the construction, slowly
killing them by suffocation, keeping their corpses inside the
structure... For numerous such incidents, the reader is referred to the
book titled Maqatil at-Talibiyyeen by “Abul-Faraj” Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn
Muhammad ibn Ahmed ibn Abdul-Rahman ibn Marwan ibn Abdullah ibn Marwan
ibn Muhammad ibn Marwan ibn al-Hakam ibn Abul-As ibn Umayyah ibn Abd
Shams ibn Abd Munaf, of the Umayyads of Quraish, famous as
“al-Isfahani.” This great Sunni author was born in Isfahan, Iran, in 284
A.H./897 A.D. and died in 356 A.H./967 A.D. He wrote more than 31 books,
the most famous of which are: Al-Aghani, Jamharat Ansab al-Arab, Nasab
Bani Taghlib, and, of course, Maqatil at-Talibiyyeen. Mankind seldom
produces writers as prolific and as fair this Isfahani. May he be
rewarded most generously by the Almighty, Ameen.

[^7]: Jabir’s name is immortalized in both the East and the West: it is
from his first name that the science of Algebra is derived. He was its
pioneer and founder.

[^8]: Ibn al-Atheer, Vol. 4, p. 375. “Al-Mansur,” Muhammad ibn Ibrahim
ibn al-Hassan, was brought in, and he was the most handsome man people
ever saw. The Abbaside caliph asked him, “Are you the one nicknamed the
yellow silk?” He answered, “Yes.” He said, “I shall certainly kill you
in a manner which I have not employed to anyone else,” then he ordered
him to be placed in a cylinder and it was built up on him while he was
still alive; thus, he died inside it.” al-Isfahani, Maqatil
at-Talibiyyeen, p. 136, indicates likewise.

[^9]: ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, pp. 180-183.

[^10]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 49, p. 211, as quoted by Ibn
Maskawayhi’s book Nadam at-Taraf.

[^11]: Ibid., Vol. 49, p. 100. It is narrated from al-Hakim by Abu
Abdullah, the hafiz of Nishapur.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: as-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 1, p. 203.

[^14]: Ibid, Vol. 2, p. 184.

[^15]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 203.

[^16]: al-Maghazili, Al-Manaqib, Vol. 4, p. 362.

[^17]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Kafi, Vol. 4, p. 81.

[^18]: as-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 226.

[^19]: Qur’an, Surat Al-Hujurat:13.

[^20]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 174.

[^21]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Kafi, Vol. 4, p. 23.

[^22]: as-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 237.

[^23]: Shaikh al-Mufid Al-Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 298.

[^24]: Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 3, p. 147; Surat Al A’raf:32.

[^25]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 516.

[^26]: as-Saduq, Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 178.

[^27]: Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 3, p. 143.

[^28]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al Kafi, Vol. 3, p. 502.

[^29]: Ibn al-Maghazili, Al-Manaqib, Vol. 4, p. 361.

[^30]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 360.

[^31]: Al Balad:11.

[^32]: as-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 264.

[^33]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 8.

[^34]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 297.

[^35]: Ibid., Vol. 5, p. 288.

[^36]: Qurb al-Isnad, p. 222, and Al-Kharaij wal Jaraih, p. 237, with a
slight textual variation.

[^37]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Kafi, Vol. 5, p. 111.

[^38]: Shaikh at-Tusi, Al-Ghaiba, p. 29.

[^39]: as-Saduq, Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 1, p. 28.

[^40]: Ibid., p. 27.

[^41]: Ibid., p. 28.

[^42]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 381; also al-Mufid’s
Al-Irshad, p. 286.

[^43]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 1, p. 20.

[^44]: al-Kashi’s Rijal, p. 398.

[^45]: al-‘Ayyashi, Tafsir, Vol. 2, p. 115 where verse 115 of Surat al
Tawba is discussed.

[^46]: Qur’an, Surat Ibrahim:27.

[^47]: as-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 1, p. 32.

[^48]: as-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 226.

[^49]: ‘Umdat at-Talib, p. 185, 1st edition (Najaf, Iraq).

[^50]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 48, p. 249.

[^51]: Shaikh at-Tusi, Al-Ghaiba, p. 22.

[^52]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 487. It is also mentioned in
as-Saduq’s book ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, in Al-Manaqib, and in Al-Irshad.

[^53]: Rawdat al-Kafi, p. 257.

[^54]: Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin, Ayan ash-Shi'a, Vol. 4, Part I, p. 138.

[^55]: Ibn al-Atheer, At-Tarikh al-Kamil Vol. 5, p. 138.

[^56]: as-Sayyati, Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 284.

[^57]: Ibid., p. 308.

[^58]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 49, p. 210 as quoted in Ibn
Maskawayhi’s book Nadam al-Farid.

[^59]: as-Saduq,’Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 1, p. 88.

[^60]: Ibid., p. 112.

[^61]: Ibn al-Atheer, At-Tarikh al-Kamil, Vol. 5, p. 113.

[^62]: as-Sayyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, p. 290.

[^63]: Ibn al-Atheer, At-Tarikh al-Kamil, Vol. 5, p. 138.

[^64]: al-Mufid, Kitab al-Irshad, p. 290. Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani,
Maqatil at-Talibiyyeen, p. 375.

[^65]: al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyeen, p. 375.

[^66]: as-Saduq, Ilal ash-Shara’i, p. 266.

[^67]: as-Saduq, \`Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, P. 148.

[^68]: It appears that al-Hassan ibn Sahl was al-Ma'mun’s ruler over
Iraq at that time, and we cannot explain why the name of al-Hassan is
mentioned in this story except in the case al-Ma'mun had called him to
meet with him to consult regarding the issue of selecting Imam ar-Rida
(ﻉ) as the regent as presumes Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin in his encyclopedic
work titled A’yan ash-Shi'a. But al-Fadl’s letter to his brother
al-Hassan regarding regency, as Ibn al-Atheer and at-Tabari and other
historians indicate, negates all that, and the addition may have been
the action of the narrator who was ignorant of all of that, thus causing
a major problem afflicting narratives.

[^69]: al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 291.

[^70]: al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyeen, p. 375.

[^71]: al-Mufid, Kitab Al-Irshad, p. 291.

[^72]: as-Saduq, Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 153.

[^73]: Founded in the third century A.D. by king Shapur I, Nishapur was
a major cultural center under the Seljuks. It is the town where Omer
al-Khayyam was born and buried.

[^74]: as-Saduq, Ilal ash-Shara’i, Vol. 1, p. 226.

[^75]: as-Saduq, Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 167.

[^76]: Ibn Khaldun, Al-Muqaddima, Vol. 3, p. 249.

[^77]: at-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 8, p. 564.

[^78]: Ibid., p. 565.

[^79]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 491. Shaikh al-Mufid,
Al-Irshad, p. 294.

[^80]: at-Tabari, Vol. 8, p. 565. Ibn Khaldun mentions a similar story
in Vol. 3, p. 250, of his work titled Al-Muqaddima fil Tarikh.

[^81]: at-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 8, p. 558, “Events of the Year 203 A.H.”.

[^82]: Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddima, Vol. 3, p. 250.

[^83]: as-Saduq,Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 242.

[^84]: Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyeen, p. 380.

[^85]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 297. A similar narrative is
mentioned in al-Isfahani’s book Maqatil at-Talibiyyeen, pp. 377-378.

[^86]: as-Saduq, Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 1, p. 18.

[^87]: al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyeen, p. 378.

[^88]: Ibid., p. 380.

[^89]: Ibn al-Atheer, At-Tarikh al-Kamil, Vol. 5, pp. 175-177.

[^90]: Nawraz is the first day of Spring and, hence, the first day of
the Persian (and Kurdish) new year. It is celebrated outdoors by
enjoying the beauty of nature.

[^91]: as-Saduq, Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 233.

[^92]: Ibid.

[^93]: as-Saduq, Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 208.

[^94]: Ibid., pp. 19-20.

[^95]: Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin, A’yan ash-Shi'a أعيان الشيعة, Vol. 4, pp.
2, 143 and 144.

[^96]: The reader can correctly conclude that there were many Christian
and Jewish scholars and scientists who received a great deal of respect
and support from caliph al-Ma'mun who was a scholar in his own right.
His time was, indeed, a golden period of learning and scholarship
despite all contemporary political turmoils.

[^97]: “Mazar Sharif” means: a sacred mausoleum. It is named so because
it houses the shrine of Khavajeh Abu Nasr Parsa, a pious man from the
Persian region of Parsa who died and was buried there.

[^98]: This great encylopedia falls in ten volumes, excluding its
thorough and very well arranged Index which constitutes a volume by
itself. The copy we have in our library is dated 1406 A.H./1986 A.D. and
is published by Dar at-Ta'aruf lil Matbu'at (P.O. Box 8601, Beirut,
Lebanon). It lists thousands of Shi'a men of letters, scholars,
theologians, poets, authors, politicians, narrators of traditions, etc.
It is edited by the author’s son, the renown scholar Hassan al-Amin,
author of many books probably the most famous of which is the 11-volume
encylopedia titled Al-Ghadir..

[^99]: as-Saduq, Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, Vol. 2, p. 121.

[^100]: For the benefit of our reader, the full address of the said
Publisher is: ATP, 10900 W. Washington Street, Indianapolis, IN 46231.
This book should be in every personal and public library.

[^101]: This misleading statement exists in Vol. One of the world renown
Encyclopedia Britannica III. How many other errors exist in this
Encyclopedia?

[^102]: That copy was later deposited at the Imperial Library at Vienna.
It was at a much later date translated into English and edited by
Lonsdale and Laura Ragg.

[^103]: This statement, among many others in the Gospel of St. Barnabas,
agrees with what we, Muslims, have in the Holy Qur’an. Jesus Christ was
not crucified.

[^104]: The reader can easily see that there were two men among the
disciples of Jesus named Judas; one of them was crucified, so he was
rewarded in heaven, and the other was not, so he was rewarded by the
Romans for his treachery. The latter is Judas Iscariot.

[^105]: The Great News: The New Testament (Colorado Springs, Colorado:
International Bible Society, 1984).

[^106]: This is a rough translation of the original Arabic text. A
thorough research of the Bible may yield better results and reveal the
exact Biblical verse the Imam was referring to. Unfortunately, the Imam
did not specify which of the four Gospels he was quoting. Consulting a
Bible in Arabic may also produce the same anticipated result: the number
of the exact verse and the name of the Gospel the Imam had in mind.

[^107]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 14, pp. 331-333. Again, since
this text is my translation from the Arabic original, the Imam’s
quotations may not be exact. Consulting a Bible written in Arabic will
be worthwhile and will provide the numbers of the chapters and verses to
which the Imam here refers. Unfortunately, I do not have a copy of the
Bible in Arabic.

[^108]: Since there is no copyright on The Gospel of Barnabas, the copy
of it consulted for this book does not contain the Publisher’s name nor
the place nor the date of publication.

[^109]: This is a direct reference to the Abbasides who regarded
themselves as more worthy of ruling the Muslims than all others although
they proved to be among the very worst who ever ruled the Islamic
nation. The title of the founder of their government, namely
“as-Saffah,” which means “the blood-shedder,” says it all.

[^110]: The very fact that the so-called “election” of the first caliph,
Abu Bakr, took place at Saqafat Bana Saida before the Prophet (ﺹ) had
been buried opens the eyes even of the blind to the fact that those who
were involved in such “election” masquerade were more concerned about
power and politics than about burying the corpse of their Prophet (ﺹ).

[^111]: Qur’an, Surat Al-Baqarah:229.

[^112]: Qur’an, Surat An-Nisa’:34.

[^113]: al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 8, p. 119, Amari edition.

[^114]: A footnote above discusses the city of Nishapur for the curious
reader.


