Introduction
============

This is our comprehensive rebuttal to Ansar.org's defence of Mu'awiya
bin Hind. Mu'awiya is a character whose antics have been meticulously
recorded in the annals of history. From his birth onwards, the
historians and Ulema of Ahl'ul Sunnah have managed to provide a
significant insight in to the character of Mu'awiya. His role within the
history if Islam during the advent of Rasulullah(s)'s mission is
non-existent.

In fact he spent the vast portion of it on the opposite side his
alleged father being 'Abu Sufyan leader of the Banu Umayya Clan who
sought to undermine, fight and destroy the message of Rasulullah (s).
'Abu Sufyan eventually conceded defeat following the conquest of Makka
and allegedly embraced Islam.

In much the same way Rasulullah (s) was opposed by Abu Sufyan, his
alleged son Mu'awiya carried on the mantle of his father opposing the
rightful khalifa 'Ali during his lifetime, refusing to give him bayya
(oath of allegiance) and even after his martyrdom vented his hatred of
Imam 'Ali via the disgraceful practice of cursing him during the Friday
Sermons.

Despite his disgraceful acts a new generations of Nasibi disguising
themselves Sunni have appeared in recent years declaring the affiliation
with Mu'awiya and defending his actions and praising them. 'Abu Sulaiman
is at the forefront of this neo-Nasibi ideology.

His appraisal of both Mu'awiya and Yazeed demonstrates how convoluted
Nasibi ideology is and how it seeks its utmost to raise doubts on the
stance of Ameeerul Momineen 'Ali ibne abi Talib (as) in an effort to
protect the persona of Mu'awiya. Hence we decided to lift the veils on
Mu'awiya and present his true image to our readers.


