Mu'awiya 'the Hadi' Took Interest
=================================

We read in Muwatta Book 31, Number 31.16.33 under the chapter "Selling
Gold for Silver, Minted and Unminted":

Yahya related to me from Malik from Zayd ibn Aslam from Ata ibn Yasar
that Muawiya ibn Abi Sufyan sold a gold or silver drinking-vessel for
more than its weight. Abu'dDarda said, "I heard the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, forbidding such sales except
like for like." Muawiya said to him, "I don't see any harm in it."
Abu'd-Darda said to him, "Who will excuse me from Muawiya?

I tell him something from the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, and he gives me his own opinion! I will not live in
the same land as you!" Then Abu'd-Darda went to Umar ibn al-Khattab and
mentioned that to him. Umar ibn al-Khattab therefore wrote to Muawiya,
"Do not sell it except like for like, weight for weight."

Muwatta Book 31, Number 31.16.33

Just contemplate the significance of this narration. Mu'awiya had
entered in to a profit making transaction that was haraam. Abu'd-Darda
corrected him and told him of the verdict of Rasulullah (s) on the
matter only permitting such transactions on a 'like for like' basis.
Rather than concede that he was wrong, Abu Sulaiman's Hadi replies "I
don't see any harm in it" - thus justifying his opinion over that of
Rasulullah (s). We congratulate Abu Sulaiman for grasping a Hadi who has
no shame in holding an opinion different to that of Rasulullah (s)!

One would think that the natural response would be for Mu'awiya to
desist from such actions in the future, Mu'awiya had been told clearly
by Abu'd Darda and Umar that an individual can only sell a like for like
item i.e. Gold for Gold. The position under the Sharia had been made
clear and yet as Khalifa, Abu Sulaiman's Hadi Imam continued to ignore
the order of Rasulullah (s) on the matter.

We read in Sahih Muslim Book 010, Number 3852: "Abil Qiliba reported: I
was in Syria (having) a circle (of friends). in which was Muslim b.
Yasir. There came Abu'l-Ash'ath. He (the narrator) said that they (the
friends) called him: Abu'l-Ash'ath, Abu'l-Ash'ath, and he sat down. I
said to him: Narrate to our brother the hadith of Ubada b. Samit. He
said: Yes.

We went out on an expedition, Mu'awiya being the leader of the people,
and we gained a lot of spoils of war. And there was one silver utensil
in what we took as spoils. Mu'awiya ordered a person to sell it for
payment to the people (soldiers).

The people made haste in getting that. The news of (this state of
affairs) reached 'Ubada b. Samit, and he stood up and said: I heard
Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) forbidding the sale of gold by
gold, and silver by silver, and wheat by wheat, and barley by barley,
and dates by dates, and salt by salt, except like for like and equal for
equal. So he who made an addition or who accepted an addition (committed
the sin of taking) interest. So the people returned what they had got.
This reached Mu'awiya. and he stood up to deliver an address.

He said: What is the matter with people that they narrate from the
Messenger (may peace be upon him) such tradition which we did not hear
though we saw him (the Holy Prophet) and lived in his company?

Thereupon, Ubida b. Samit stood up and repeated that narration, and
then said: We will definitely narrate what we heard from Allah's
Messenger (may peace be upon him) though it may be unpleasant to
Mu'awiya (or he said: Even if it is against his will). I do not mind if
I do not remain in his troop in the dark night. Hammad said this or
something like this".

Sahih Muslim Book 010, Number 3852

Yet again Mu'awiya allowed a transaction that was not based on the
'like for like principle' as stipulated by Rasulullah (s). It is
interesting to see Mu'awiya's denial of this matter declaring "they
narrate from the Messenger (may peace be upon him) such tradition which
we did not hear though we saw him". How can Mu'awiya deny knowledge of
this matter when it is proven from the previous narration in Muwatta
that as Governor of Syria under Umar this issue was brought to his
attention by Abu'd Darda and then confirmed in writing to him by the
Khalifa himself?

We also read in Sharra Ma'ani Lill Sharra Lill Thahavee page 263 that
Mu'awiya used to take interest. In this regard Imam Thahavee narrates a
very interesting incident in his work Mana al Ahsaar page 262:

"Mu'awiya purchased a Pearl and Yaqoot necklace for 4,600 dirhams. When
Mu'awiya got on to the Puplit Ibada Ibne Samaad stood up and said "No!
Mu'awiya entered in to an agreement based on interest and also ate
interest and as a result of this is in the Fire".

Mana al Ahsaar page 262

Interest is a despicable act in the eyes of Allah (swt) and In Sahih
Muslim hadith number 3881 Jabir bin Abdullah narrates: "Allah's
Messenger (peace be upon him) cursed the accepter of interest and its
payer, and one who records it, and the two witnesses; and he said: They
are all equal".

Sahih Muslim hadith number 3881

Mu'awiya's introduction of interest in clear violation to the Sharia is
worthy of note, particularly in light of the modern day book of Hanafi
Fatwas "Aqaaidul Islam" - rendered into English by Moulana Zahier Ahmed
Ragie. On page 158 we read the following fatwa:

"A person becomes an unbeliever if he makes lawful the unlawful acts of
Islam or vice versa e.g. legalizes interest etc" Mu'awiya 'the Hadi'
made changes to the Eid Salat Suyuti in Tarikh ul Khulafa page 200 notes
that:

"Zuhri narrates in relation to the Salat of Eid, the first to deliver
the Khutba before the Salat was Mu'awiya bin Abu Sufyan". We read in
Kitab al Ilm Volume 1 page 229 that:

"Imam Zuhri narrates that Rasulullah (s), Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman
lead the Eid Salat without Adhan, but Mu'awiya introduced the Adhan in
the Eid prayer".

Ibn Hajar Asqalani in Fathul Bari Volume 2 page 529 expands on this
matter yet further:

"There is a difference of opinion over who introduced the Adhan in Eid
Salat. Ibn Sheba has a tradition with a Sahih Isnad attributing this to
Mu'awiya, whilst Shaafi states Ibn Ziyad introduced this in Basra, Daud
claims that Marwan introduced this - but the vast bulk of traditions do
not support this. Mu'awiya introduced this in the same way that he
introduced the khutba of Eid before Salat".

Once again Abu Sulaiman's Hadi Imam is shown to have changed the
Sharia, this time in connection with Eid prayers, in that there is no
doubt, for we read in Sahih Muslim Book 004, Hadith Number 1926 Chapter
164: The prayer of the two Ids:

Jabir b. 'Abdullah reported: I observed prayer with the Messenger of
Allah (may peace be upon him) on the 'Id day. He commenced with prayer
before the sermon without Adhan and Iqama.

In addition to this clear proof we also present the fatwa of Imam Malik
taken from the English translation of his Muwatta under the chapter "The
Ghusl of the Two Ids, the Call to Prayer for The prayer, and the Iqama"
Book 10, Number 10.1.1:

"Yahya related to me from Malik that he had heard more than one of
their men of knowledge say, "There has been no call to prayer or iqama
for the id al-Fitr or the id al-Adha since the time of the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace." Malik said, "That is
the sunna about which there is no disagreement among us."

Mu'awiya 'the Hadi' issued a Fatwa deeming it permissible for a man to
marry two sisters at any one given time Imam of Ahl'ul Sunnah, al Hafidh
Jalaladeen Suyuti in Durre Manthur Volume 2 page 477 records the
following fatwa of Abu Sulaiman's Hadi Imam:

"Qasim bin Muhammad records that Mu'awiya was asked whether it was
permissible for a man to marry two sisters at any one given time.
Mu'awiya replied 'There is nothing wrong with that'. Upon hearing this
reply, Numan bin Basheer asked 'You have issued this fatwa?' to which
Mu'awiya replied 'yes'.

Mu'awiya 'the Hadi' wore prohibited items despite the fact that he was
aware that Rasulullah (s) deemed them haraam We read in Sunan Abu Daud
Book 32, hadith Number 4119:

Narrated Al-Miqdam ibn Ma'dikarib:

"Khalid said: Al-Miqdam ibn Ma'dikarib and a man of Banu Asad from the
people of Qinnisrin went to Mu'awiyah ibn AbuSufyan. Mu'awiyah said to
al-Miqdam: Do you know that al-Hasan ibn Ali has died? Al-Miqdam recited
the Qur'anic verse "We belong to Allah and to Him we shall return."

A man asked him: Do you think it a calamity? He replied: Why should I
not consider it a calamity when it is a fact that the Apostle of Allah
(peace\_be\_upon\_him) used to take him on his lap, saying: This belongs
to me and Husayn belongs to Ali?

The man of Banu Asad said: (He was) a live coal which Allah has
extinguished. Al-Miqdam said: Today I shall continue to make you angry
and make you hear what you dislike. He then said: Mu'awiyah, if I speak
the truth, declare me true, and if I tell a lie, declare me false.

He said: Do so. He said: I adjure you by Allah, did you hear the
Apostle of Allah (peace\_be\_upon\_him) forbidding use to wear gold?

He replied: Yes. He said: I adjure you by Allah, do you know that the
Apostle of Allah (peace\_be\_upon\_him) prohibited the wearing of
silk?

He replied: Yes. He said: I adjure you by Allah, do you know that the
Apostle of Allah (peace\_be\_upon\_him) prohibited the wearing of the
skins of beasts of prey and riding on them?

He said: Yes. He said: I swear by Allah, I saw all this in your house,
O Mu'awiyah. Mu'awiyah said: I know that I cannot be saved from you, O
Miqdam.

Khalid said: Mu'awiyah then ordered to give him what he did not order
to give to his two companions, and gave a stipend of two hundred
(dirhams) to his son. Al-Miqdam then divided it among his companions,
and the man of Banu Asad did not give anything to anyone from the
property he received. When Mu'awiyah was informed about it, he said:
Al-Miqdam is a generous man; he has an open hand (for generosity). The
man of Banu Asad withholds his things in a good manner".

So here we learn that Mu'awiya the Hadi:

Was asked whether he was aware that Rasulullah (s) had prohibited the
wearing of gold, silk and animal skin.


**Mu'awiya confirmed that he knew this to be the position**

The man testified that he had witnessed all three prohibited items
being worn in his house What a wonderful Hadi! One that is fully aware
that a matter has been prohibited by Rasulullah (s) but openly violates
this order. Can we define a Hadi as an individual that knowingly
violates an order of Rasulullah (s)?

**An appeal to justice**

We have cited just a few examples where Mu'awiya violated the rules of
Shari'a. What sort of Hadi could Mu'awiya be for others when he himself
was so misguided that he turned his back on the Qur'an and Sunnah and
followed practices that contradicted theses two sources? Can one who
introduces not just one, but countless bidahs into the Deen be deemed a
Hadi who has guided others?

This is completely illogical, guidance is based on following the Qur'an
and Sunnah not innovating and devising your own rulings to suit your
personal desires! Would Rasulullah (s) deem an innovator to be a hadi?
Clearly not! We had, in the previous section, highlighted the rulings of
Ahl'ul Sunnah Ulema on Ahl'ul bidah, let us now cite Rasulullah(s)'s
view on the matter Rasulullah (s) criticised those that praise Ahl'ul
Bidah Imam of the Salafis, Albanee verifies as authentic this hadith
taken from Baihaqi, in his commentary of Mishkaah al Masabih Volume 1
page 66 hadith number 189:

"He who honours an innovator has assisted him in the destruction of
Islam".

Abu Sulaiman and his fellow supporters should take note. They have set
out pathetic defence for their master Mu'awiya, honouring him as a Hadi,
despite the fact that he was the Chief of innovators having devised and
instituted the bidah of vilifying Imam 'Ali (as) during the Friday
sermons, he also introduced interest, made changes in Salat,
distribution of war booty, the law of inheritance etc.

Despite this Abu Sulaiman and his party continue to shower and extol
this innovator calling him a Hadi. In doing so, they are only harming
themselves for an innovator is an individual who is attacking Islam, and
in the eyes of Rasulullah (s) those that praise him have aided and
abetted him in the process.

Even if the advocates of Mu'awiya refuse to accept these facts, then
let us look at this alleged hadith from several other angles.


