Mu'awiya's Actual Motive Was Power
==================================

Since Mu'awiya had decided to take it on himself to avenge Uthman's
death, perhaps Abu Sulaiman could inform us what efforts Mu'awiya had
taken to protect Uthman while he was alive? Had Mu'awiya had any love
for his relative he would have sought to protect him, and protect he
could, after all he had command over the army of greater Syria (Syria
and Damascus).

With the largest army in the Empire at his disposal, what action did
Mu'awiya adopt? In Ahl'ul Sunnah's authority work al-Nasa'ih al-Kaafiyah
page 19 we learn that:

"Hadhrath Uthman asked Mu'awiya for assistance, but Mu'awiya did not
listen to him. When the situation got worse and there remained little
chance that Uthman would survive Mu'awiya sent Yazeed bin Asand ul
Kasheeree with an army and told him to reach the point of Zeekush and
remain there. The officer followed this order and when Uthman was killed
Mu'awiya ordered his army to return.

This was done in order to show the people that he had sent an army but
in reality this was just a trick, so that he could exploit Uthman's
death as a means of taking power".

The agreement between Mu'awiya and Amr bin Aas is clear proof that the
motive was power not avenging Uthman's murder Perhaps the advocates of
Mu'awiya will not be convinced, well let us hear the testimony from the
mouth of their Imam Mu'awiya. In Iqd al Fareed page 238 Volume 2 Chapter
"Dhikr Amr bin Aas" a detailed conversation is cited between Amr bin Aas
and Mu'awiya.

"Mu'awiya told Amr bin Aas to give him bayya. Amr replied 'if its with
regards to the next world, then Allah (swt) will not be with you, if its
in connection with this world then I would like a share". Mu'awiya
replied, "in my world there is an equal share". Amr said, "I would like
you to put into writing that you will give me Egypt and its surrounding
suburbs". Mu'awiya did so adding (in the agreement) that Amr give him
bayya.

Amr replied that it should also be written (in the agreement) that it
(bayya) will be subject to the conditions being met. Mu'awiya replied
"people will not look at this" but Amr said "Do this". At this point
Umro attended and Amr said "Mu'awiya I have sold my religion at your
hands". Umro said "Verily give him the full agreed amount as he was a
Sahaba of the Prophet".

Notice how the killing of Uthman is missing from the entire
conversation. The discussion is about power and Mu'awiya's bribing of
Amr with land to get him on board. Despite Abu Sulaiman's excuses, the
words used by Amr bin Aas "Mu'awiya I have sold my religion at your
hands", stand as clear testimony that even he felt that he had abandoned
his religion by siding with Mu'awiya, but alas for bin Aas his lust for
power was so great that it outweighed his iman. Power was the name of
the game not the enforcement "revenge for Uthman" was the war cry via
which Mu'awiya sought to enhance his ambitions.

We read in al-Akhbar al-Tiwal page 158 "Dhikr Siffeen" that Amr said to
Mu'awiya "Give me Egypt to eat from as long as you are a ruler". Tareekh
Abu Fida Volume 2 page 238 "Dhikr Siffeen" likewise states that Amr
placed a condition that to join Mu'awiya he would be given the power to
govern Egypt. It is indeed interesting to note how the promise of power
and authority was the factor that 'moved' Amr bin Aas over to the noble
cause of avenging the blood of Uthman.

Power was the name of the game not the enforcement "revenge for Uthman"
was the war cry via which Mu'awiya sought to enhance his ambitions. What
greater proof of the deviance of Mu'awiya can there be than the
admission of his key supporter Amr bin Aas. We read in in Ta'rikh Kamil
Volume 2 page 139 "Dhikr Siffeen" that Amr bin Aas said the following to
Mu'awiya:

"Avenging Uthman's blood was just an excuse, we are desirous of worldly
power, upon hearing this Mu'awiya agreed to hand over Egypt to Amr". Do
the defenders of Mu'awiya need to be convinced any further? This is the
testimony of one of the key central characters in this episode admitting
to Mu'awiya that Uthman's revenge was an excuse, the real motive was
just power. If Mu'awiya disagreed with this assertion then why did he
not admonish him and set the record straight?

**Mu'awiya's testimony further proves his real motive was power not
vengeance for the slain Uthman**

Advocate of Mu'awiya, Ibn Kathir records two interesting references
that further exposes the real reason for Mu'awiya's opposition:

In Al Bidayah page 131 Volume 8:

Un Sayeed bin Sadeed states that in Nakheela, Mu'awiya read Juma and
said this, "I haven't fought with you to fast, pray and give Zakaat go
on Hajj, you already do this, I fought to become Leader and Commander
you don't like this but I have achieved it". Al Bidayah Page 128 Volume
8

"Prior to the battle of Siffeen, 'Ali gave Jareer bin Abdullah a letter
that said 'Mu'awiya give me bay'a and obey me, do not create fitnah in
the Islamic State'. Mu'awiya replied to Jareer, 'If 'Ali makes me
Governor over the provinces of Egypt and Syria I will give him bayya, on
the condition that after him no one else is given bay'a save me".

Imam of Ahl'ul Sunnah Khawarzmi in his "Manaqib" page 179 Chapter
"Dhikr Siffeen" states that:

"Mu'awiya wrote a letter to 'Ali which he sent via the hand of
'Abdullah bin Ukbah. In the letter he stated 'I asked you about my
ruling Syria, and placed an additional condition that neither I give you
bay'a nor do I obey you, but you rejected this. I continue to hold the
same view about Syria and my not giving you bay'a".

This and the previous reference from al Bidaya proves he had NO
INTEREST in the killing Uthman rather his interest was one - gaining
power. Mu'awiya simply used Uthman's murder as an 'excuse' not to give
baya to Imam 'Ali (as). If he was indeed sincere perhaps Abu Sulaiman
can explain why Mu'awiya did not ask for the killers to be handed
following arbitration between the two sides at Sifeen? After all as Abu
Sulaiman states the Syrians loved him and Mu'awiya was so determined to
avenge Uthman's death that he deemed it appropriate to go to war.

This being the case how is it that he totally abandoned this
determination when the two sides were negotiating, if Uthman's death was
so important that thousands of lives could be lost, why did he all of a
sudden abandon this resolve? If he was sincere would this not have been
the very first thing that he demanded? This was clearly a farce and
Deobandi scholar Sayyid Ahmad Raza Bijnori in his commentary of Sahih al
Bukhari "Anwar ul Bari" states on Volume 12 page 73:

"Mu'awiya fought out of a personal desire for power and was motivated
by his pro Umayya bias".

Anwar-ul-Bari Sharah Sahih Al-Bukhari Vol. 12 page 73

Moreover Shah Abdul Aziz Dehlavi in his Fatwa Azizi page 161 Chapter 8
under the chapter "Marwan" in answer to question 5 makes the admission:
"The scholars of Ahl'ul hadith having relied on narration's have
concluded that Mu'awiya's actions were based on his personal grudge and
desire and it was not on account of the enmity that had been borne our
between the Quraysh and Banu Umayya following the murder of the
possessor of two lights [Uthman], the truth is that he was guilty of a
great sin, was a baghi (rebel) and a fasiq (transgressor)".

Fatwa Azizi page 161 Chapter 8

Mu'awiya Thaneeh's condemnation of his grandfather eludes the fact that
he fought Imam 'Ali (as) for power When Mu'awiya ibn Yazeed became
khalifa he gave the following sermon:

"Verily Khilafath is Allah (swt)'s. My grandfather fought one that was
more deserving of the khilafath and that was 'Ali ibne abi Talib and he
performed such acts that you are all aware of, and in consequence he is
suffering for these acts" A number of leading Sunni Ulama have recorded
this sermons (Tareekh Khamees Volume 2 page 301; Hayatul Hayawan Volume
page 88; Tareekh Ya'qubi Volume 2 page 241; Sawaiq al Muhriqa page 134;
Yanabi al Mawaddah Volume page 325).

This sermon by Mu'awiya's own grandson destroys the notion that he
sought Uthman's revenge. He clearly pointed out that his opposition was
without any basis rather he just fought for attaining power.


**Abu Sulaiman questions the justice of Imam 'Ali (as)**

In his defence of Mu'awiya Abu Sulaiman further uses his psychic
abilities citing the opinions of Mu'awiyas supporters:

Ansar.org states:"Mu'awiyah's supporters would say: "We cannot give
allegiance to anyone except the one who would act with justice and does
not oppress usAli is unable to act justly and we do not have to give
allegiance to such a person".

On the one hand the Ansar passionately use every method in the Book to
stir emotions to the masses, namely Shi'a don't respect the Sahaba, and
here Abu Sulaiman's Nasibi mentality shines so clear that he is even
supporting the view that Ali was unjust. Does this Nasibi really believe
Mu'awiya was more interested in justice than 'Ali (as)? This when we
have 'Abu Bakr narrating this hadith:

"Verily Allah (swt) and his Prophet (s) spoke the truth, I heard
Rasulullah (s) say on the night of Hijrah as we left Makka 'My hand and
Ali's hand are EQUAL in dispensing justice" (Taken from Manaqib by Ibne
Maghazli al Shaafi page 98, this hadith can also be found in Kanz al
Ammal Volume 11 page 604)

Interestingly whilst also defending the rebellious group, Abu Sulaiman
manages to travel back in his imaginary time machine and state on their
behalf that they would justify their opposition saying:

Ansar.org states:"Uthman's murderers are in the army of Ali, and these
murderers are unjust".


**Mu'awiya did not apply Qisas against Amr bin Aas**

Now perhaps Abu Sulaiman could inform us how Mu'awiya dealt with the
killers of Uthman in his own side, did he implement Qisas, as he
demanded? He did not and in fact the clearest evidence that Mu'awiya's
approach was nothing but a faade, comes from the very fact that he
failed to take any action against the killers of Uthman who were also in
his army.

Is it not logical that the first thing he would do would be to get his
own house in order and 'avenge' Uthman's murders by slaying the killers
hiding in his army? His trusted general at Sifeen was none other than
Amr bin al-Aas who openly admitted his role in the killing of Uthman
proudly declaring:

"I am Abu Abdullah. When I scratch an ulcer, I cut it. I used to
campaign against him vehemently. I even instigated the shepherds at the
top of the mountains to revolt against him." (Al-Tabari Volume 4, pages
356-57)

This can also be found in English version.

Al-Tabari Volume 14, pages 171-172

Despite this, not only did Mu'awiya not kill him, he promoted him to
his second in command - would he really have acted in this way if he
sincerely wanted to avenge Uthman's murder? Demanding the killers from
Ali's side and promoting the killers to Commanders on his own?

The comments of modern day Sunni academic Professor Masudul Hasan in
his book Hadrat Ali Murtada (R.A.A) page 248 are indeed worthy of note:
"Mu'awiya in spite of his cry for vengeance for the blood of Hadrat
Othman found no harm in making an alliance with a man who had in fact
incited the rebellion against Hadrat Othman.

'Amr bin Al-Aas in spite of his bitter opposition to Hadrat Othman
during his lifetime saw nothing wrong in joining the chorus for
vengeance for the blood of the man in whose murder he was indirectly if
not directly involved"

Hadrat Ali Murtada (R.A.A) by Professor Masudul Hasan. page 248
Mu'awiya's appointment of Yazeed as his successor Abu Sulaiman claims:

Ansar.org states:"Mu'awiyah did not force people to give allegiance to
his son Yazeed"

There is no evidence to support Abu Sulaiman's assertion. We learn from
history that Mu'awiya used many methods at his disposal to secure his
son's position as Khalifa. Methods included bribery and coercion [for
those interested they can consult Khilafat wa Mulukiyyat, chapter 4,
page 149, Ibn Atheer, vol 3, page249, Bidaya, vol 8, page 79, Tareekh
Ibn Kahldoon, vol 3, page, 15-16]

**Did Mu'awiya want to make Yazeed just a Crown Prince or Khalifa?**

In his effort to protect Mu'awiya we see Abu Sulaiman to yet again use
semantics stating:

Ansar.org states:Mu'awiyah was eager for people's agreement to give
allegiance to his son Yazeed. He resolved to take allegiance to Yazeed
as a crown prince. So he consulted the grandest companions, the masters
of the people and the district's governors. They all accepted.
Delegations from the districts came with acceptance to give allegiance
to Yazeed.

Many Companions gave him the allegiance as well. Al-Hafedh Abdulghani
Al-Maqdisay says: "His (Yazeed's) caliphate is rightful, sixty of the
companions of the prophet peace be upon him gave him the allegiance.
IbnUmar was one of them." [Qayd Al-Shareed min Akhbar Yazeed, by Ibn
Khaldoun, p.70]

Could Abu Sulaiman explain the definition of a Crown Prince? If this is
indeed the case, is there any evidence in the Qur'an and Sunnah
entitling individuals to give baya to a Crown Prince? In fact in Islam
Kingship is rejected outright, so even if this was correct Mu'awiya had
acted contrary to Islam.

If for arguments sake we accept this argument could Abu Sulaiman kindly
tell us what the difference is between him appointing Yazeed as Crown
Prince or Khalifa? Did he appoint someone separate as Khalifa? Did he
tell the people to give baya to another person? In any case this defence
is unsubstantiated and we challenge Abu Sulaiman to cite us a single
source where he had referred to Yazeed as his Crown Prince and ordered
people to give baya on this position.


**Mu'awiya made Yazeed his Khalifa during his lifetime**

The sources of history tell us quite the opposite. Abu Sulaiman's
claims are refuted by the last will and testament of Mu'awiya in which
it is clear that he has made Yazeed his khalifa:

"O my son, I have arranged everything for you, and I have made all the
Arabs agree to obey you. No one will now oppose you in your title to the
caliphate, but I am very much afraid of Husayn b. Ali, Abd Allah b.
'Umar, Abd ar-Rahman b. Abi Bakr, and Abd Allah b. az- Zubayr. Among
them Husayn b. Ali commands great love and respect because of his
superior rights and close relationship to the Prophet.

I do not think that the people of Iraq will abandon him until they have
risen in rebellion for him against you. As far as possible, try to deal
with him gently. But the man who will attack you with full force, like a
lion attacks his prey, and who will pounce upon you, like a fox when it
finds an opportunity to pounce, is Abd Allah b. az-Zubayr. Whenever you
get a chance, cut him into pieces." (Iqd al Fareed Volume 4 page 226)

Here they also try to rid Mu'awiya of the crimes his son Yazeed
committed against the Ahlul Bait at Kerbala.

From this text Mu'awiya had told his beloved son "No one will now
oppose you in your title to the caliphate" - he is not telling Yazeed
that he had made him Crown Prince he is informing him that he had laid
the foundation for him to succeed him as khalifa.

To this effect we even have evidence from Sahih al Bukhari:

Narrated Yusuf bin Mahak:

Marwan had been appointed as the governor of Hijaz by Muawiya. He
delivered a sermon and mentioned Yazeed bin Muawiya so that the people
might take the oath of allegiance to him as the successor of his father
(Muawiya). (Sahih al-Bukhari, Volume 6, hadith 352).

From this source it is clear that the baya was given to Yazeed as
khalifa, not Crown Prince, unless Abu Sulaiman is suggesting that
Mu'awiya deemed himself to be a Crown Prince!

The evidence is clear that the people gave baya to Yazeed as the
Khalifa. This is even evident from a source cited by Abu Sulaiman
himself. Although we will examine the tradition at length afterwards
suffice it to say Abdullah IbnUmar said:

Ansar.org states:"we have given the oath of allegiance to this person
(Yazeed) in accordance with the conditions enjoined by Allah and His
Apostle [Saheeh Al-Bukhari, Book of "Afflictions", vol.7, \#6694]"

According to IbnUmar baya was given to Yazeed "in accordance with the
conditions enjoined by Allah and His Apostle" clearly these conditions
are connected with giving baya to a khalifa not a Crown Prince.


