Mu'awiya Forced People To Give Bayya To Yazeed
==============================================

We have discussed this topic with complete references in our article on
Yazeed. Please see our article: Yazeed (L'aenn)

Deobandi scholar Rasheed Akhtar Nadwi in "Tahzeeb au Tamadhun e Islami"
comments on page 1: "Mu'awiya forced people to give bayya to Yazeed".

**Tahzeeb au Tamadhun e Islami**

Sayyid Muhammad Rashid Raza the Syrian scholar echoes similar words in
his book "Imamate al Uzma" page 99: Mu'awiya introduced the bad practice
of giving bayya to Yazeed by force".

Imamate al Uzma page 99

Professor Saeed Akbar Allahbadi in his book "Musalman ka 'Uruj-o-Zawal"
(Urdu) page 53 likewise states:

"Mu'awiya attained power by force and secured it for Yazeed in the same
manner. People who did not agree were forced to give it". Musalman ka
'Uruj-o-Zawal page 53

Abu Sulaiman had proclaimed that Mu'awiya:

Ansar.org states:consulted the grandest companions, the masters of the
people and the district's governors. They all accepted. Delegations from
the districts came with acceptance to give allegiance to Yazeed What Abu
Sulaiman fails to explain is the method Mu'awiya used that resulted in
delegates giving bayya to Yazeed. Let us shed light on his methods by
citing the comments of Syed Qutb Shaheed in "Social Justice in Islam"
(English translation pages 209-210):

"With the coming of Mu'awiya, the caliphate in Islam became a monarchy,
a tyranny confined to the Umayyad family It will be sufficient at this
point to quote as proof of this the account of the oath of allegiance to
Yazid. From here we may discover the foundation of Umayyad power and
find out whether Mu'awiya who established that power was true to the
spirit of Islam or to some other ideal. Mu'awiya summoned delegates to
represent all the provinces at the taking the oath of allegiance to
Yazid.

Then Yazid Ibn al Muqaffa stood up and said "The Commander of the
Faithful is here", and he indicated Mu'awiya, "If he dies his successor
is here" and he indicated Yazid. "And if anyone refuses - here" and he
pointed to his sword. The, said Mu'awiya, "Sit down O best of
preachers".

After the oath was taken to Yazid in Syria Mu'awiya gave Said ibn
al-'As the task of gaining the acceptance of the people of the Hejaz.
This he was unable to do, so Mu'awiys went to Mecca with an army and
with full treasury. He called together the principal Muslims and
addressed them thus: "You all know that I have lived among you, and you
are aware also of my ties of kindred with you.

Yazid is your brother and your nephew. It is my wish that you take the
oath of allegiance to Yazid as the next Caliph; then it will be you who
will bestow offices and depose from them, who will collect and apportion
money".

He was answered by Abdullah ibn Al Zubair, who gave him a choice of
three things to do, first he might do as Allah's Messenger had done and
appoint no successor, second he might do as Abu Bakr had done and
nominate a successor, third he might do as Umar had done, and hand over
the whole matter to a council of six individuals, none of whom was a
member of his own immediate family. Mu'awiya's anger was kindled, and he
asked "Have you any more to say?" "No".

Mu'awiya turned to the remainder of the company "And you?" "We agree
with what Ibn Al Zubair has said", they replied. Then he addressed the
meeting in threatening terms: "The one who warns is blameless. I was
speaking among you, and one of you was bold to get up and call me a liar
to my face. That I will bear and even forgive.

But I stand to my words, and I swear by Allah that if any of you speaks
one word against the position that I take up, no word of answer will he
receive, but first the sword will take his head. And no man can do more
than save his life".

Thereupon the commander of Mu'awiya's guard ordered two men to stand
over each of the nobles of the Hejaz who opposed him and to each he
said, "If your man leaves his guards to speak one word, either for me or
against me, then let the guards strike off his head with their swords".
Then he mounted the pulpit and proclaimed: "These men are the Leaders
and the choicest of the Muslims;

no matter can be successfully handled without them, nor can any
decision be taken without their counsel. They are now satisfied to take
the oath to Yazid , and have indeed already taken that oath by the name
of Allah". So the people took the oath.

**Mu'awiya bribed people to give bayya to Yazeed**

We read in al Kamil Volume 3 page 350:

"Mu'awiya kept Mugheera in his post. Mugheera arrived at Kufa and spoke
to his close representatives, bribing them with 30,000 dirhams to
maintain their support. Mugheera sent his son Musa bin Mugheera to Head
a delegation that visited Damascus, there they [the group] reiterated
their support for the nomination of Yazeed as Khalifa. Mu'awiya summoned
Musa and asked him how much money his father had spent to buy these
individuals, he replied 30,000 dirhams".

**Why did Imam Hussain (as) refuse to give bay'a to Yazeed?**

Abu Sulaiman claims:

Ansar.org states:Ibn Al-Zubair and Al-Hussain (as) disagreed on this
allegiance but it does not defame this allegiance because it must have
some objectors. From this we know that Mu'awiyah was eager to have the
acceptance of the Ummah in giving the allegiance to Yazeed.

The objection was not some simple matter like a difference of opinion
over a dinner table. This was a matter intrinsically linked to the Deen
(religion), that ultimately asks the question, 'was it legitimate for a
fasiq to be the khalifa of Rasulullah (s)?' On the one hand we had the
opinion of IbnUmar who deemed it correct, and on the other we had Imam
Hussain (as) who said that this was a sin in the eyes of Allah (swt).
The clearest proof comes from his letter to the Shi'a of Kufa:

"From Husayn b. Ali to the believers and the Muslims. Hani and Sa'id
came to me with your letters, they being the last among your messengers
and delegations to come to me. I have understood what you said and that
you have invited me to come to you because you have no Imam to guide
you, and that you hope my arrival there will unite you in the right path
and in the truth.

I am sending my cousin and the trusted one from my family [Muslim b.
Aqil] to report to me about your affairs. If his report conforms with
what you have written, I will soon come. But you must be clear about the
fact that the Imam is only one who follows the Book of God, makes
justice and honesty his conduct and behaviour, judges with truth, and
devotes himself to the service of God. Peace." (Tareekh Tabari Volume 2
page 235)

The last sentence of the letter, explaining the duties of an Imam and
the nature of the Imamate, helps us to understand Husayn's approach and
attitude towards the whole problem. The Imam was one who:

Followed the Quran and Sunnah
Was just and trustworthy
Was of good character
Was a true devotee of Allah (swt)

It is evident that Imam Hussain (as) did not see these conditions
inherent in Yazeed which is why he refused to give him baya. Tabari also
records this letter of Imam Hussain (as) to the Shi'a of Basra:

"God has chosen Muhammad from among his people, graced him with His
Prophethood and selected him for His message. After he admonished the
people and conveyed His message to them God took him back unto Himself.
We, being his family (ahl), his close associates endowed with the
quality of guardianship (awliya'), his trustees and vice regent
(awsiya'), and his heir and legatee (warith), are the most deserving
among all the people to take his place. But the people preferred
themselves over us for this [privilege].

We became contented, disliking dissension and anxious to preserve the
peace and well being [of the community], though we were fully aware that
we were more entitled to this [leadership] than those who had taken it
for themselves . . . I have sent my messenger to you and I call you to
the Book of God, and the Sunna of his Prophet, the Sunna which has
become obliterated and innovations have become active and energetic. If
you listen to me and obey my orders I will guide you to the right path.
May the Peace and the Mercy of God be upon you." (Tareekh Tabari Volume
2 page 240)

So Imam Hussain (as) felt that the Deen had been corrupted and he was
calling on the people to turn to him for guidance. This was far more
than just a difference of opinion it was a difference at the heart of
Deen, who has the right to call oneself the khalifa?

**Mu'awiya's development of lineal succession**

Ansar.org states:Mu'awiyah did not invent a new system for the
caliphate by inheriting the leadership to his son Yazeed. Abu Bakr was
the first to do it when he gave the leadership to Umar bin Al-Khattab
andUmar did the same when he limited the leadership in six Companions.

Mu'awiya created a completely new system. Abu Bakr deemedUmar the most
worthy for the role of succession and Umar selected six people who he
himself stated that were the most worthy to succeed him. For Mu'awiya he
created a system where succession was NOT based upon merit but upon
lineage character did not come in to the equation.

He then states that Imam Ali (as) in fact started the lineal succession
that appointed Imam Hasan (as). He accuses the Shi'a of applying
contradiction condemning:

Ansar.org states:"Mu'awiyah giving the leadership as an inheritance to
his son Yazeed yet the greatest doctrine of the Imamiyah Rafidites is
their belief that the leadership is a hereditary in the sons of Ali bin
Abi Talib by the father giving the leadership as an inheritance to his
son! Is it allowed for them and forbidden on others?"

This type of hereditary succession is in accordance with the will of
Allah (swt) and Rasulullah (s). The Shi'a concept of succession is that
the Imam is appointed by Allah (swt) BECAUSE he has the right to succeed
on account of his perfection / merits. Imam Ali's appointment of Imam
Hasan (as) is not on account of the fact that he is his son, but because
he is the most superior in the Ummah to lead the Ummah. Rasulullah had
made it clear that if you follow the Qur'an and Ahl'ul bayt (as) you
will NEVER go astray.

Hence the succession of Hasan (as) was not in any way shaped by
nepotism rather it was on account of his entitlement to lead as he was
the legitimate Imam appointed by Ali (as) through the will of Allah
(swt) who would prevent the people from going astray. Imam Hasan (as)
was qualified to take power, whilst the Banu Umayya possessed no such
qualities. Is Abu Sulaiman going to suggest to us that no one in the
entire Ummah was superior to Yazeed?


