Mu'awiya Forced People To Give Bayya To Yazeed Yazeed the 'protector of Afflictions'
====================================================================================

In his defence of Mu'awiya, Abu Sulaiman comments

Ansar.org states:"Perhaps the reason that pushed Mu'awiyah to take
allegiance to Yazeed was to push away the disagreement and to be one in
this crucial time at which the Ummah lived and where a lot of people
claimed the caliphate. Hence, Mu'awiyah thought that by giving the
leadership to Yazeed would be a good thing for the Ummah and it would
prevent another affliction of happening And what wonderful affliction
was prevented. Yazeed reigned for three years. In the first year Imam
Hussain his family and companions were martyred. In the second year
Yazeed ordered an attack on Harra that led to the slaughter of the
companions and the mass rape of their women folk.

In History of al-Fakhri, translated by C.E.J. Whitting, London, 1947,
pp. 113-115 we learn that Yazeed first asked Ubaydullah bin Ziyad to
lead an army against Medina, who made excuses, then he asked Muslim bin
Uqbah who led the army:

"Then Muslim, son of 'Uqbah, for three days gave Madinah to the sack.
He murdered, looted and took prisoners, so that it was said that a man
of Madinah thereafter, if he gave his daughter to wed, would not
guarantee her virginity, "She may have been raped in the battle of
Harrah." (from page 114) Ta'rikh Duwal al-Islam, al-Dhahabi, Hyderabad,
page 31 provides list of those Sahaba who were killed in Harra.

Yazeed's protection from affliction did not just end there. Fakhri on
page 114-115 states that Yazeed issued an order to go to Mecca, though
Muslim died before he reached Mecca and so that another person (who
Yazeed had nominated should Muslim die, since he was old led attack:

"The son of Zubair, with the men of Meccah, made a sally against him,
battle was joined and a Syrian versifier said:- "'Artillery' like a
foaming stallion, with which he shoots at the timbers of this mosque." A
footnote says 'timbers' refers to the Prophet's pulpit and other relics.
In al-Isabah fi tamyiz al-Sahaba, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani volume 3, page
470 also mentions the pillage of Medina, and stoning of Ka'bah during
Yazeed's reign.


**Nasibi appraisal of 'pious' Yazeed**

Abu Sulaiman states:

Ansar.org states:"It is also a lie that Yazeed was an alcohol drinking
person". We will let Muhammad bin Ali bin Abi Talib to answer this claim
because Muhammad knew Yazeed the best because he lived with him for a
while. Ibn Katheer says in Al-Bidayah: (When the people of Al-Medina
returned from Yazeed, Abdullah bin Mutee'a and his companions walked to
Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiyah.

They wanted Muhammad to agree to dismiss Yazeed, but Muhammad refused.
Ibn Mutee'a said: "Yazeed drinks alcohol, does not pray, and ignores the
rule of the Book." Muhammad answered them: "I never saw what you are
saying about him. I came to him, and stayed with him for a while and I
saw him taking care of his prayers, looking for goodness, asking about
jurisprudence, and clinging to the Sunnah.[Al-Bidayah wa Al-Nihayah for
IbnKatheer,vol.8,p.236]

It is agreed by Sunni and Shi'a alike that Yazeed was an ill character
individual, and he is reviled throughout the world in Muslim circles.
Curiously Abu Sulaiman seems to depart from the common Sunni line and
all of a sudden endorses the piety of Yazeed! No true Sunni would ever
utter praise for Yazeed. It is extremely insulting to see that yet again
Abu Sulaiman is presenting his Nasibi thinking and cloaking it as Sunni
Islam. In any case Abu Sulaiman has failed to substantiate his claim.

Assuming that this statement attributed to Ibn al-Hanafiyya is not a
fabrication, Muhammad bin Hanafiyya is stating that he (personally) had
NOT seen Yazeed drinking this so could not verify the allegation. Had
Abu Sulaiman had an ounce of honesty in him, this was a fact that few
ulama of Ahlul Sunnah deny.

**Ibn Kathir's comments on Yazeed the drunkard**

Interesting the very same text al Bidaya from where Abu Sulaiman had
sought to extol the virtues of his Imam Yazeed, also contains these
comments of Ibn Kathir proving that he was indeed a drunkard. Ibn Kathir
writes in al Bidayah Volume 8 page 239:

"Traditions inform us that Yazeed loved worldly vices, would drink,
listen to music, kept the company of boys with no facial hair, played
drums, kept dogs, not a day would go by when he was not in a drunken
state".

**Ibn Atheer's comments on Yazeed 'the drunkard'**

In Tareekh al Kamil Volume 3 page 450 Ibn Atheer narrates from Munzir
bin Zabeer:

"Verily Yazeed rewarded me with 100,000 dirhams but this cannot stop me
from highlighting his state, By Allah he is a drunkard"

Allamah Dhahabi's naration and verdict on Yazeed 'the drunkard'
Yazeed's drinking despite Abu Sulaiman's denials is such an established
fact that even Dhahabi, relied on as an authority by Abu Sulaiman,
testifies to this fact.

In "Siyar A'lam Al-Nubala" Volume 4 pages 37-38, Dhahabi narrates:

"Ziyad Hurshee narrates 'Yazeed gave me alcohol to drink, I had never
drunk alcohol like that before and I enquired where he had obtained its
ingredients'. Yazeed replied 'it is made of sweet pommey granet, honey
from Isfahan, sugar from Hawaz and grapes from BurdahYazeed indulged in
alcohol and would participate in actions that opposed the dictates set
by Allah (swt)".

In "Shadharat al Dhahab" page 69, Volume 1, Ibn al-'Imad al-Hanbali
cites these comments of Dhahabi:

"Mu'awiya's son Yazeed was an enemy of 'Ali, a Nasibi, a man of evil
nature, and a drunkard".

Ibn Jauzi's comments on Yazeed 'the drunkard' Ibn Jauzi in Wafa al-Wafa
Volume 1 page 217:

"Yazeed appointed his cousin Uthman bin Muhammad bin Abu Sufyan as
Governor of Madina. He sent a delegation to visit Yazeed who bore gifts
so that they might take the oath of allegiance to him. Upon their return
they said 'We have returned having visited a man who has no religion, he
drinks, plays instruments, keeps the company of singers and dogs, we
declare that we have broken our allegiance to him. Abdullah bin Abi Umro
bin Hafs Mukhzumee commented 'Yazeed gave me gifts, the reality is this
man is an enemy of Allah (swt) and a drunkard, I shall separate myself
from him in the same way that I remove my turban [from my head]."

**Ibn Hajr's comments on Yazeed 'the drunkard'**

In his book written against the Shi'a, Sawaiqh al Muhriqa, Ibn Hajr
sets out the Sunni position on Yazeed:

"One group made up of individuals such as Ibn Jauzi deem Yazeed a
kaafir, others say he was not a kaafir but rather this is a matter that
has caused a difference of opinion, the majority of Ahl'ul Sunnah agree
that he was a fasiq (transgressor), a fajir (one that commits
debauchery) and a drunkard.

Waqidi had recorded a narration 'verily we opposed Yazeed fearing Allah
(swt) would reign stones down on us, Yazeed considered nikah (marriage)
with mothers and sisters to be permissible and drank alcohol".

These comments are indeed interesting. Ibn Hajr asserts that in the
eyes of the vast bulk of Ahl'ul Sunnah, Yazeed was "a fasiq, a fajir and
a drunkard" while Abu Sulaiman who claims he is Ahl'ul Sunnah wants us
to believe in a tradition portraying him as a pious worshipper who never
drank alcohol.


**Imam Ahmad issued Takfeer against Yazeed**

In Sharh Fiqh Akbar page 77 we read:

"He considered alcohol halal and at the time of killing Husayn and his
companions, he approached the pulpit and said that he had avenged the
death of his ancestors at Badr. It is for reasons such as this that Imam
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal declared Yazeed to be a kaafir"

**The Sunni Ulema have deemed it permissible to curse the drunkard
Yazeed**

Both Allamah Damiri in Hayaat ul Hayawaan page 196 Volume 2 and Ibn
Khallikaan in Wafayat al-A'yan Volume 3 page 287 both record that:

"Ali bin Muhammad al Qiya al Harasee al Shafi'i was asked about what
evidence existed that deemed it permissible to curse Yazeed. He replied
'in our opinion it is unanimous, that we curse Yazeed. He sat in the
company of hunting animals, played chess and drank alcohol". We read in
Sharh Fiqh Akbar page 355:

"Some Ulema and Imams have declared it permissible to curse Yazeed,
because by ordering the killing of Husayn he had committed kufr". Ibn
Kathir in al Bidaya Volume 7 page 223 notes that:

"Ibn Jauzi wrote a book proving that it was permissible to curse
Yazeed".


**An appeal to our Sunni brethren**

We have faithfully cited the comments of grand Sunni Ulema who have
deemed Yazeed to be a drunkard and issued fatwas declaring it
permissible to curse him on account of his deeds. Sunni's likewise the
world over are united in their hatred of Yazeed ibn Mu'awiya, he is
despised and cursed whenever his name is mentioned.

Curiously by citing this tradition Abu Sulaiman has sought to present
an alternative viewpoint of Yazeed, one of an ardent pious worshipper.
This is a belief that is alien to Sunni aqeedah and one has to ask 'what
is this new belief system that Abu Sulaiman is seeking to pass off as
'the truth'? Clearly his views bear no correlation with Sunni Islam; the
only group that would have the audacity to praise Yazeed, killer of Imam
Husayn (as) would be Nasibis.

Would it not simply be better for Abu Sulaiman to stop adopting taqiyya
and instead acknowledge that his appraisal of Yazeed is in line with his
Nasibi ideology? Why is he seeking to make false misleading
representations on behalf of Sunni Muslims? Perhaps Abu Sulaiman is
seeking to amalgamate his Nasibi endorsement of Yazeed with mainstream
Sunni aqeedah.

Whatever his motives, we would urge our Sunni brethren to distance
themselves from Nasibis like Abu Sulaiman who are seeking to
indoctrinate Sunnis with the false thinking that Yazeed was a pious
Muslim.


