The Early Sahaba Fought Alongside Imam 'ali (as)
================================================

In his attempt to play down the actions of Imam 'Ali (as), 'Abu
Sulaiman had made this baseless claim:

With regards to Abu Sulaiman's claim that "many other of the first
believers from the muhajireen and Al-Ansar who isolated themselves from
the affliction and did not partake in the fight" - he has no evidence to
support this claims and fails to cite even a single source. The fact is
that the early converts the Muhajireen and Ansar WERE those that fought
with Imam Ali (as) at Sifeen. This has even been admitted by the Sunni
scholar Al Muhaddith Shah 'Abd al-'Aziz Dehlavi who in his book written
against the Shi'a states:

"The title Shi'a was first given to those Muhajireen and Ansar who gave
allegiance (bay'ah) to Ali (may Allah enlighten his face). They were his
steadfast faithful followers during his (Ali's) caliphate.

They remained close to him, they always fought his enemies, and kept on
following Ali's commands and prohibitions. The true Shi'a are these who
came in 37 Hijri" (NB 37 Hijri -the year Imam Ali (as) fought Mu'awiya
at Sifeen). Tuhfa Ithna 'Ashariyyah, (Gift to the Twelvers) (Farsi
edition p 18, publishers Sohail Academy, Lahore, Pakistan).

The Muhajireen and Ansar (Sahaba) were the Shi'a of Ali (as). One
wonders how Abu Sulaiman claims that MANY Muhajireen and Ansar did not
participate. Amongst those killed fighting alongside Imam 'Ali (as) were
prominent companions including Khuzema bin Thabit (al Isti'ab Volume 1
page 437; Usdul Ghaba Volume 2 page 133 - Chapter Dhikr Khuzema),
devotee of Rasulullah (s) Uways Qurni (Usdul Ghaba Volume 1 page 180; al
Isti'ab Volume 1 page 123). One prominent Sahaba killed fighting under
Maula 'Ali's banner was Hashim ibne Utbah. We learn in Usdul Ghaba
Volume 5 page 277 that when Hashim ibne Utbah was killed, Abu Tufail
Amar ibne Waseela said:

"you are a martyr because you fought an enemy of the Sunnah".

Usdul Ghaba vol. 5 page 277

We read in al Istiab Volume 3 page 229 that:

"Abdur Rahman Ibn Abdi narrates that eight hundred Sahaba who pledged
allegiance at Ridwan fought alongside 'Ali at Sifeen".

Al Isti'ab, by Ibn Abd al-Barr, Vol. 3, Page 229

This is a significat figure, particularly when one takes into account
that the number of Sahaba who pledged allegiance at Ridhwan totalled
1400. With the passage of thirty yeas there is no doubt that many would
have died whether via natural deaths or in the battlefield. Despite this
fact, we learn that a significant number stood shoulder to shoulder with
Imam 'Ali (as) at Sifeen.

It is indeed sad to see that the early Muslims knew where the truth lay
and fought with 'Ali (as) whilst we have a defender of Mu'awiya writing
some 1400 years later raising question marks on Imam Ali (as)'s position
and defending and showering praise on his enemies.


**Abu Sulaiman's refusal to describe Mu'awiya as a baghi**

We then witness Abu Sulaiman's deviant interpretation of the Qur'an so
as to protect Mu'awiya and apportion transgression to Imam Ali (as):

Ansar.org states:"Even if we supposed that the people who fought Ali
were insurgents and not depending on personal interpretation of texts,
then it would not be considered as a slander in their belief and their
deservance in entering heaven. Almighty Allah says: "If two parties
among the Believers fall into a quarrel, make ye peace between them:

but if one of them transgresses beyond bounds against the other, then
fight ye (all) against the one that transgresses until it complies with
the Command of Allah; but if it complies, then make peace between them
with justice, and be fair: for Allah loves those who are fair (and
just), The Believers are but a single Brotherhood: so make peace and
reconciliation between your two (contending) brothers;

and fear Allah, that ye may receive Mercy." [Surat Al-Hujarat, verses 9
and 10] Allah described the two parties by faith and made them brothers
despite the fact they fought each other and transgressed on each other.
Then what about if one of them transgressed on the other thinking he is
right? Does it prevent him from being an interpreter, wrong or right?
"

One can see how desperate Nasibis get to protect their beloved Imam. He
claims that:

Ansar.org states:"Allah described the two parties by faith and made
them brothers despite the fact they fought each other and transgressed
on each other"

The Qur'an says no such thing, it refers to one party transgressing:

"but if one of them transgresses beyond bounds" This is being done
intentionally he is seeking to describe Imam Ali (as) as a baghi too,
i.e. the battle was between two groups of baghis! Abu Sulaiman's refusal
to acknowledge which party had transgressed is quite intentional, the
moment his rebellion is proven then his actions can be condemned, which
would be too much for him.

The fact is Mu'awiya and his party had refused to give baya to Imam Ali
(as) and were defiantly opposing him. Is this not evidence of
transgression, opposing the Khalifa of the time? Whilst his Nasibi
leanings make it impossible to speak the truth we shall delve in to the
matter to determine the Ahl'ul Sunnah definitions of a baghi.

**Defining baghi (rebell)**

Durre Mukhtar page 113:

"Baghi is one who indulges in an act that is not halaal. A baghi is one
who opposes Imam-e-Haqqa". al-Nasa'ih al-Kaafiyah page 16

"Baghi is one who refuses to obey Imam-e-Haqq and opposes him". The
late scholar Sayyid Abu'l Ala Maudoodi in his 'Tafhim ul Qur'an' Volume
5 page 80 collates the opinions of the Ahl'ul Sunnah ulama about a
'baghi'. He writes:

"Ibne Khumman in Hidaya's commentary Fathul Qadir states that the
scholars have declared that a baghi is he who disobeys the rightful
Imam. Imam Shafii in Kitab ul-Umm states 'Baghi' is he who fights the
Adil Imam. Imam Malik declared that it is a duty to fight those who
oppose the 'Adil Imam [al Mudawanna]".

**Mu'awiya became baghi because he fought Imam 'Ali (as)**

Tuhfa Ithna Ashariyyah page 181 Chapter 7

"Anyone who knows Farsi and school child who read Jami Aqaid Ahl'ul
Sunnah should know there's a jamaah that from Ali's khilfath up to Sulh
Hasan Mu'awiya was a baghi because he didn't give bayya or obey the
Rightful Imam" Sharh al Maqasid page 306:

"The aqeedah in Ahl'ul Sunnah is that the first baghi in Islam was
Mu'awiya" Hidaya Page 134, Volume 3:

"Being a Judge under a Zaalim King is [permissible in the same way that
one is appointed as a Judge under an Adil Imam, for example the Sahaba
were Judges under Mu'awiya Zaalim even though the truth was with 'Ali"
Naylul Autar page 187 Volume 7:

"In hadith it is proven that Hadhrath 'Ali was on the path of truth and
Mu'awiya and his companions were on falsehood. Only a stubborn person
will deny this".

al-Nasa'ih al-Kaafiyah page 22:

"Mu'awiya and his companions are baghis without a doubt and they are
Qasitoon, Allah says Qasithoon are in deepest part of Hell". In Al Milal
wa al Nihal by Allamah Shahrastani in Volume 1 page 103 cites the
comments of the Sahabi Abul Hasan Ashari who expressed a clear opinion
namely that:

"Mu'awiya and Amr bin Aas fought against the rightful Imam. Ali fought
the rebels, he was with the truth and the truth was with him Mu'awiya's
rebellion was in violation of the Qur'an Allah (swt) says in his
Glorious Book:

"O you who believe! Obey Allah and his Apostle and those in authority
among you". (Al-Quran, Surah Nisa, Verse 59) It is interesting that 'Abu
Sulaiman has failed to comment on this verse in his lengthy article.
This is a clear verse that proves beyond a doubt that Mu'awiya's
opposition was one that contravened the Book of Allah (swt). This verse
provides no room for manoeuvre. Obedience to those in authority is on
par with obedience to Allah (swt) and the Prophet (s). This means that
disobeying the Leader amounts to disobeying Allah (swt) and his Prophet
(s). The verse is absolutely clear. How can anyone interpret this verse
as entitling someone to rebel against a leader. Anyone who does so is a
rebel.

Now we ask:

Does Imam Ali (as) not come within this verse?

Was he not 'those in authority'?

Is he not the fourth rightly guided khalifa?

Did Mu'awiya obey him?

In accordance with this verse and the definitions of Ahl'ul Sunnah,
Mu'awiya's disobedience of Imam Ali (as) had made him a rebel. His
entire rebellion was baseless since the Qur'an would not support it. He
had no text to justify his actions he was on the path of falsehood and
had led his supporters down that same slippery road of deviance.


**Mu'awiya's rebellion was in violation to the Sunnah of Rasulullah
(s)**

If this verse of the Qur'an is not a sufficient indictment against
Mu'awiya, then we also have this hadith in Sahih Muslim "Kitab al Imara"
Book 020, Number 4557:

It has been narrated (through a different chain of transmitters) on the
authority of Abu Huraira that the Messenger of Allah (may peace be upon
him) said: Who defected from obedience (to the Amir) and separated from
the main body of the Muslims - then he died in that state-would die the
death of one belonging to the days of Jahilliyya.

And he who is killed under the banner of a man who is blind (to the
cause for which he is fighting), who gets flared up with family pride
and fights for his tribe-is not from my Umma, and whoso from my
followers attacks my followers (indiscriminately) killing the righteous
and the wicked of them, sparing not (even) those staunch in faith and
fulfilling not his obligation towards them who have been given a pledge
(of security), is not from me (i.e. is not my follower).

Mu'awiya openly violated this tradition. He refused to obey Imam 'Ali
(as), he separated from the main body misleading others in the process.
The seriousness of this tradition is clear one who separates and died
"would die the death of one belonging to the days of Jahilliyya" i.e. he
would die a kaafir. Rasulullah (s) did not provide any defense for such
individuals. He did not say that they would be rewarded having exercised
ijtihad, he said that the perpetrators were not his followers.

This is in relation to those that rebel against any Leader, with
regards to those that rebel against Imam 'Ali (as) we read in al-Nasa'ih
al-Kaafiyah page 36 that Rasulullah (s) said:

"If anyone fights Ali's Khilafath, kill him". Rasulullah offered no
excuses for the opponents of Imam 'Ali (as), all who come against Imam
'Ali (as) should be killed; clearly Mu'awiya comes within this hadith.
Mu'awiya was from amongst Qasateen (those refrained from giving bayya to
Imam e Haqq) Usdul Ghaba page 114 V 4 Abu Sa'id narrates:

"Rasul ordered us to fight Nakisheen, Qasatheen and Marakeen. We asked
under who? He said Ali ibn abi Talib! .. Amar will be killed in this
war". Matalib al Sa'ul p 68 "Sahaba and Ayesha fought Ali and they were
amongst oath breakers. Ali fought Mu'awiya and he was amongst the
Qasatheen" Sharh al Maqasid Volume 2 page 304:

"Rasulullah (s) said to Ali 'Nakisheen, Qasatheen and Marakeen will
fight you'. Mu'awiya and his companions were Qasatheen they left the
truth, which was to follow Ali and give him bayya".

Of relevance here is the admission of the darling of the Nasibis, Ibn
Taymeeya, who writes in Minhaj al Sunnah page 210 Volume 3 "Dhikr
Mu'awiya": "During Ali's reign the most entitled person to be the
Khalifa of Rasulullah (s) was 'Ali. He was a rightly guided khalifa and
to obey him was mandatory"

So from this Nasibis own pen we have an admission that 'Ali was the
rightful Imam and that it was mandatory to obey him. From the hadith
mentioned before it is clear that those who refuse to submit to the
Rightful Imam and oppose him, are deemed as Qasatheen. The duty was to
obey Imam Ali (as) and yet Mu'awiyah and his supporters refused to
recognise his authority and give him bayya, hence they were the
Qasatheen.


**Mu'awiya was amongst the Fajireen (perpetrators of debauchery)**

Fara'id us Simtayn page 157
Kifaya al Talib p 221 Ch 58
Mawaddatul al Qurba p 45
Manaqib al Khawarazmi p 11
Nuzul ul Abrar "Dhikr Fadail Ali" p24
Kunuz al Haqaiq v 2 page 16
Jami' al Sagheer v 2 p 65
Qurrat al 'Aynayn p 141
Maula wa Mu'awiya p 141
al Mustadrak al Hakim Volume 3 page 129

All the above books record traditions in which Rasulullah (s) referred
to Imam 'Ali (as) as the killer of the Fajireen:

For example in Nuzul ul Abrar Chapter "Dhikr Fadail Ali" p24 we read
that The Prophet (s) said:

"O 'Ali you are the Imam of the pious and the slayer of those that are
fasiq and fajireen" In al Mustadrak al Hakim Volume 3 page 129, we read
a more lengthy tradition: "'Ali is Imam of the pious and killer of the
fajireen. Aided will be those that aid him, abandoned shall be those
that abandon him".

al Mustadrak al Hakim, Vol. 3, Page 129

In addition to this we have the comments of Imam 'Ali (as) taken from
Tareekh Tabari Volume 4 page 77: "The Fajir son of a fajir is Mu'awiya
and the fajir son of a kafir is Amr bin Aas"

**Abu Sulaiman's plea that both parties were believers**

Ansar.org states:[Surat Al-Hujarat, verses 9 and 10] "Allah described
the two parties by faith and made them brothers despite the fact they
fought each other and transgressed on each other".

We are not suggesting that Imam Ali (as) was fighting the Kuffar, he
was fighting believers. Since the duty is to fight until the
transgressors accept the truth, the verse makes it clear that believers
can be wrong and when they transgress one is permitted to fight them.
Perhaps Abu Sulaiman could elaborate 'What if this group of believer's
don't accept the truth and are killed while they were still
transgressors? Will they still be equal to those who were on the path of
truth? This clearly cannot be the case and Allah (swt) says "Are a Momin
and Fasiq equal? certainly not". The Ulema of Ahl'ul Sunnah have been
uncompromising in the criticisms of a baghi.

To rebel against the Imam is tantamount to Zina in a Mosque Naylul Atar
page 1893 Volume 7 Mu'awiya instituted the bid'ah of cursing Imam Ali
(as) In his attempt to protect his Nasibi Imam, Abu Sulaiman vigorously
seeks to deny the historically established fact that Imam Ali (as) was
cursed by Mu'awiya. He claims:

Ansar.org states:It is a lie that Mu'awiyah ordered to insult Ali from
the pulpits. There is no rightful or clear evidence about that.
Mu'awiya's biography and manners refuses this accusation. What some of
the historians mention about that has no value because when these
historians presents these words about Mu'awiyah, they do not
differentiate between true or false stories.

In addition, most of these historians are Shia. But some of the
Historians narrated in their books sound stories and false stories, but
they are excused when they attributed these stories to their narrators
so that we could judge these stories, whether to accept them or reject
them.

This being the case then what facts of history should we accept, only
those that support Nasibi's and defame Shi'a? Abu Sulaiman is stating
that anything that agrees with the Shi'a must be false on account of
Shi'a influence. By the same logic anything that supports Nasibi must
also be false as it is based on Nasibi influence.

Evidence of the tradition of cursing Ali and Mu'awiya being at its
heart can be found in a vast array of books of leading scholars of
Ahl'ul Sunnah. The books of Tarikh, Sirah and hadith are replete with
the fact that Mu'awiya introduced the bidah of cursing Imam of Guidance,
Ammerul Momineen Ali (as), in his Kingdom. If we are to accept Abu
Sulaiman's absurd claim then he is in effect suggesting that all the
classical Sunni historians were duped and into narrating this fable.

It would be one thing if this alleged fabrication could only be located
in scarcely known extant works, but the fact is that leading scholars of
Ahl'ul Sunnah have narrated that Imam 'Ali (as) was indeed reviled
during the reign of Banu Umayya upon the specific orders of Mu'awiya bin
Hind. Abu Sulaiman's attempts to hide this fact is in vain to suggest
that most of the historians (who narrated this) are Shia rather than
Sunni who would never find fault with Mu'awiya, laughable notion.

Especially for him and those wishing to examine the matter further we
shall insha'allah present a list of references where you can locate this
episode. We then leave it to readers to decided whether there is indeed
any basis for Abu Sulaiman's claims that this event never happened, did
all these historians get it wrong?


