Mu'awiya Asks Sa'd To Curse Hadhrath 'ali (as)
==============================================

We read in Sahih Muslim, Chapter of Virtues of Companions, Section of
Virtues of Ali - see Chapter p1284, Tradition \#5916

Muawiyah, the son of Abu Sufyan, gave order to Sa'd, and told him:
"What prevents you that you are refraining from cursing Abu Turab
(nickname of Ali)?" Sa'd replied: "Don't you remember that the Prophet
said three things about (the virtue of) Ali? So I will never curse Ali."
The Nasibi adherents of Mu'awiya have sought to redefine it to protect
their Imam. Abu Sulaiman is the perfect example who cites the pathetic
defence of Nawawi, namely that:

Ansar.org states:"This hadeeth does not mean that Mu'awiyah ordered
Sa'ad to insult Ali. But, as it is obvious, Mu'awiyah wanted to know the
reason that prevented Sa'ad from insulting Ali... Al-Nawawi says:
"Mu'awiyah's saying does not declare that he ordered Sa'ad to insult
Ali, but asked him for the reason that prevented him from insulting.

As if Mu'awiyah was saying to him: "Have you refrained from insulting
Ali as a result of piety, fear or anything like that? If it was as a
result of piety and veneration to refrain from insulting, then you are
rightful and if it were other than that, then there would be another
answer." Or it might be that Sa'ad was in a group of people who insults
Ali and he did not insult Ali with them, and could not prevent them and
controverted them so Mu'awiyah asked him this question.

They said: "And it may have another explanation, that what prevented
you from making Ali wrong in his thought and opinion, and to show to
people our good opinion and thought and that Ali was wrong?" [Ibid.
p250-252]

Clearly this is a case of defending the un-defendable. Why would
Mu'awiya want to know why Sad did not insult Ali? Was this a normal
practice for the Muslims of the time? If so who CURSED Ali (as)?

The above tradition clearly indicates that Mu'awiya was surprised why
he was refraining from cursing. Mu'awiya asks this question with
surprise "What prevents you" - you only ask a matter in this way if you
are surprised if for example an individual is acting in a manner that is
contrary to a norm / precedent.

I will give you an example; in the West it is enshrined in law and
customary to wear a seat belt when you go out driving. If I act contrary
to the act it in front of my acquaintances a common reaction would be or
them to ask "What prevents you from wearing a seat belt?". Why? Because
I am violating an accepted practice and they are enquiring WHY.

Likewise, it is clear common sense that Mu'awiya wanted to know why Sad
was NOT cursing Ali (as). This shows that cursing Ali was a common
practice and Mu'awiya wanted to know why he was acting contrary to it?
If this is not logical then the clearest proof comes from the next
narration from other sources of Ahl'ul Sunnah that shed light on
Mu'awiya's intention.

Mohibuddin al Tabari in his classical book of hadith Riyad ul Nadira
states that "Mu'awiya ordered Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas to curse 'Abu Turab"
(Volume 3 page 194).

Ibn Hajar Asqalani in his commentary of Sahih al Bukhari "Fathul Bari"
states:

"Mu'awiya issued an order to curse Hadhrath 'Ali. Upon hearing this
Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas said "Even if you place a sword over my head and
demand that I curse 'Ali, I will refuse to do so".

Fathul Bari, Vol. 7, Page 74, "Bab Manaqib 'Ali"

Today's modern day Nasibi whos concpet of authenticity is limited to
the writings of Ibn Taymeeya, Ibn Katheer, Bin Baaz should know that
this is one of your greatest hadith scholars, so his narration cannot
simply be rejected. We read in the Biographical Notes in 'Reliance of
the Traveller', Noah (Nuh) Ha Mim Keller, USA:

Sunna Books, 1991 CE, x159 (pg. 1054):

"Ibn Hajar Asqalani (w29.2(1)) is Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Muhammad al-Kinani,
Abu al-Fadl Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, born in Cairo in 773/
1372. A Shafii Imam and hadith master (hafiz), he reached the level of
Commander of the Faithful in Hadith, the only rank above that of hadith
master (hafiz).

Known as Sheikh al-Islam, scholars travelled to take knowledge from
him, and he was appointed to the judiciary in Egypt several times. He
authored a number of works on hadith, history, biography, Koranic
exegesis, poetry, and Shafii jurisprudence, among the most famous of
them his fourteen-volume Fath al-Bari bi sharh Sahih al-Bukhari [The
victory of the Creator:

a commentary on the "Sahih" of Bukhari] which few serious students of
Islamic knowledge can do without. He died in Cairo in 852/1449 (al-Alam
(y136), 1.178; Sheikh Shuayb Arna'ut; Sheikh Hasan Saqqaf; and A).

In Sunan Ibn Majah page 12 Dhikr 'Ali we read:

"On his way to Hajj, Sad met Mu'awiya and his companions mentioned 'Ali
upon which Mu'awiya showed disrespect towards Ali, Sad got angry and
asked 'why do you say such things?'"

In the Arabic text the words used by Mu'awiya are "fanala minho" and
the editor Muhammad Faula Abdul Bakee states in the footnotes that these
words mean that Mu'awiya cursed and disparaged 'Ali. If the word fanala
does not mean curse / disparage then what was the reason for Sa'd
getting angry? Ibn Kathir records that:

"Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas said to Mu'awiya you have sat me next to you on
your throne and begun to curse Hadhrath 'Ali"

Al Bidayah al Nihayah" page 341 Volume 7 the Chapter "The virtues of
'Ali" This reference is enought to shut the mouths of the Salafi who
love and admire the writings of Ibn Kathir, who they deem the definitive
word when it comes to ascertaining historical facts - the Ibn Kathir
that you worship cited the fact that Mu'awiya not just cursed but used
vile language about Imam 'Ali (as). Check out the link and weep!

Ibn Kathir also records:

"Mu'awiyah ibn Sufiyan ordered Sa'd [ibn Abi Waqas], saying to him:
'What prevents you from insulting (tasabb) Abu Turab?"

Al Bidayah wal Nihayah, Vol. 7, Page 352, Chapter "The virtues of 'Ali"
If the Nawawi party are to say that it doesn't mean anything bad, we
should point out that the word sabb according to the Hans Wehr's
dictionary that is the standard English-Arabic dictionary says: "Sabb.
To insult, abuse, call names, revile, rail at; to curese; to blaspheme,
curse, swear." The only other meaning that the word has is to cause
something, as in the word 'sabab' which means cause.

Obviously the hadeeth has no meaning with this second meaning, so
anybody who has even a basic knowledge of Arabic would know that the
tradition means to curse or swear at somebody The improtant thing to
note is that Mu'awiyah gave a command to Sa'd. "He commanded him saying:
What prevents you from insulting Abu Turab?" So it is not possible to
say that he was merely asking a general question, but in fact the
question was merely a way of giving an order, such as if you said to
somebody "Why don't you give me that book?" intending to tell that
person to give you a book.

The Syrian scholar Abu Zahra in his Tarikh ul Islam Volume 1 page 38
records:

When Mu'awiya was proceeding to Hajj he saw Sad, grabbed him by the
hand and sat him next to his pulpit. Thereafter he proceeded to curse
Ali, Sad got angry stating you have sat me next to you and began to
indulge in the awful act!

It is proven from Sahih Muslim that Mu'awiya would curse Hadhrath 'Ali.
Nawawi in his Sharh Muslim displays dishonesty in his defence of
Mu'awiya. An Ahl'ul Sunnah scholar took notice of this, basing his
comments on Sahih Muslim, we plead justice accordingly.

In Tashdheed al Mathan Volume 2 page 405, we read that scholar of
Ahl'ul Sunnah Wajideen Umar bin Abdul Muhsin in his famous work
"Hilyatul Azhar Sharra Mushraak ul Anwar wrote "When the people of
knowledge saw that Mu'awiya's language contravened the dictates of
norms, they sought to justify his actions and this is wrong, for it is
clear that Mu'awiya wanted Sad to curse Ali, and Sad objected. Mu'awiya
asked what prevented him from cursing Abu Turab, to which Sad replied
citing three traditions as his reasons"

Sibt Ibn Jauzi al Hanafi in His Tadhkiratul Khawass page 113
narrates:

"Mu'awiya ordered the people and Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas to curse 'Ali,
this angered Sa'd and fearing Allah (swt) he refused to do so, not
caring what anyone else thought".

Mu'awiya would curse Ali after the Friday Sermon and this bida became a
tradition during the Banu Umayya reign Ibn Abi al Hadeed in his
commentary of Nahjul Balagha Volume 1 page 464 states:

"At the end of the Friday sermon Mu'awiya would say 'O Allah, curse Abu
Turab, he opposed your Deen and path, curse him and punish him in the
fire.' He introduced this bidah during his reign, his Governors acted
upon it, this bidah continued until the reign of Umar bin Abdul Aziz" In
Mu'jam al Buldan, Volume 1 page 191 Allamah Yaqoot Hamawi states:

"Upon the orders of Mu'awiya, 'Ali was cursed during the reign of Banu
Umayya from Mashrik (east) to Mughrib (west) from the Mosque Puplits".
In Iqd al Fareed Volume 1 page 246 we read:

"Following the deaths of 'Ali and Hasan, Mu'awiya issued an order to
all Mosques including Masjidun Nabi that the people curse 'Ali".

In al-Nasa'ih al-Kaafiyah page 77 we read that "This practice (of
cursing) reached such state that the people considered that without
cursing Ali their Friday worship was incorrect" The comments on this
shameful practice of Pakistani Hanafi scholar Maulana Raghib Rahmani in
"Hadhrath Umar bin Abdul Aziz" page 246, are indeed very poignant:

"It is indeed unfortunate that this bidah was introduced that cut the
nose of the cities, this bidah even reached the pulpits and even
shamelessly reached the ears of those present in the Mosque of
Rasulullah (s). This bidah was introduced by Amir Mu'awiya".

Khalifatul Zahid, Page 246
**Mu'awiya refused to follow the peoples' demands that he abolishes the
practice of cursing Hadhrath 'Ali (as)**

In al-Nasa'ih al-Kaafiyah page 70 we read that:

Some people from Banu Umayya approached Mu'awiya and said 'You've
attained power so why don't you stop the practice of cursing 'Ali, he
replied "By Allah I wont, not until every child grows up, not until
every grown up becomes elderly, not until no one is left to praise
him".

In Tarikh Madhahib al Islam Muhammad Abu Zahra records in Volume 1 page
35:

"And during the reign of Banu Umayya the dignity of 'Ali was attacked,
he was cursed because Mu'awiya during his reign introduced the ugly
bidah of cursing 'Ali. His successors continued this tradition until the
reign of Umar bin Abdul Aziz.

The tradition entailed cursing the Imam of Guidance 'Ali at the end of
the Friday Sermons, the Sahaba's remonstrations that this was wrong was
ignored, Mu'awiya and his Governors refused to desist from their
actions. Ummul'Momineen Salma (ra) wrote a letter to Mu'awiya and his
respective Governors reminding them that by cursing 'Ali they were in
fact cursing Allah (swt) and his Prophet (s)".

Tarikh Madhahib al Islam Muhammad Abu Zahra page 35

This book has also been rendered in to Urdu by Professor Ghulam Hamid
Hurrayree and we attach the Urdu translation of the above text:

Islami Madhahib page 66

If today's Nasibi try and distance themselves from this reference by
deeming Abu Zahra's book as unreliable, they should know that their
beloved Website Ansar.org deemed the same book as reliable enough to
'prove' that the Shi'a betrated Zayd Ibn'Ali due to his refusal to
critisise the Shaykhayn, (please see footnote 6 in their article - 'Who
killed Imam Hussain'). If this source can be advanced as 'proof' by
Ansar.org against the Shi'a then by the same token this book can also be
used by the Shi'a as 'proof' against Mu'awiya.


**Mu'awiya's Governors would curse Hadhrath 'Ali (as)**

Egyptian Sunni scholar Ahmad Zakhee Safwaath in his book Umar bin Abdul
Aziz (Urdu tanslation bu Abdul Samhad al Azharee) pages 54-55 states:
"Hadhrath Umar abolished the practice of cursing 'Ali on the pulpits,
that started during the reign of Amir Mu'awiya.

Historians have recorded that in 41 Hijri, Mu'awiya wrote to his
Governors stating 'I have no responsibility for anyone who praises 'Ali
and his family. As a result [reciters] from every pulpit in every
village would curse 'Ali, they would distance themselves from 'Ali, and
would disrespect him and his family.

Mu'awiya issued an edict throughout the provinces that no one should
accept the testimony of any Shi'a or members of that person's family. In
a separate order he stated that if it is established that an individual
loves 'Ali and the Ahl'ul bayt, his name should be removed from the
register and his stipends should be with held. In another order Mu'awiya
said that any person who has friends that are Shi'a should be punished
and his house should be demolished.

Mu'awiya went on Hajj, upon his arrival in Madina he intended on
disrespecting 'Ali. People told him not to since Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas
would oppose such an action. Mu'awiya sent a man to Sa'd so as to
ascertain his viewpoint, Sa'd replied, 'If you perform such an act I
shall never set foot in the Mosque again'.

Mu'awiya chose to desist from this action until the death of Sa'd in 55
Hijri - it was then that he proceeded to climb on to the pulpit of 'Ali
and from there spoke out against him, he then wrote to his Governors to
discredit 'Ali. Umm Salmah wrote to Mu'awiya stating 'You are in fact
cursing Allah (swt) and his Prophet (s), verily I testify that
Rasulullah (s) loved him ['Ali]. Mu'awiya ignored her words".

Umar bin Abdul Aziz, Page 54 & 55 In Tarikh Kamil Volume 3 page 25 we
read that:

"Mu'awiya appointed Mughira as a Governor stating to him 'I have based
your appointment on common sense, give me bayya on the condition that
you continue with the practice, (namely) that you cease to disgrace and
curse 'Ali and praise Uthman. Mughira was the Governor of Kufa for some
time, during it he cursed and disgraced 'Ali".

In Tarikh Abul Fida Volume 1 page 120 we are told that:

"Mu'awiya and his Governors during the Friday Sermons would say things
in praise of Uthman and would curse 'Ali".

Dr Umar Farokh in his Seerat-i-Khilafat, under the Chapter "Dhikr Umar
bin Abdul Aziz" narrates as follows:

"One ugly shameful bidah practised during the Banu Umayya reign, one
that reached all the Mosque pulpits including the Mosque of Rasulullah
(s) and every ear was introduced by Mu'awiya and spread by his order to
his (provincial governors). The order was that they curse Hadhrath 'Ali
during the Friday Sermons as an act of obedience to him".

Mu'awiya agreed with Imam Hasan (as) that he would not curse Ali (as),
but then reneged on the promise In Tarikh Kamil Volume 1 page 203
Chapter "Dhikr Sulh Hasan" we read that during the negotiations with
Mu'awiya:

"Hasan placed a condition that Mu'awiya stop the practice of cursing
'Ali, a condition that he rejected. Hasan then asked that he refrain
from cursing 'Ali in his presence. Mu'awiya agreed but did not fulfil
this condition either".

Tarikh Ibn Wardi Volume 1 page 251 likewise states that despite the
agreement Mu'awiya continued to curse Imam 'Ali. Tarikh Ibn Wardi Vol. 1
page 251

Mu'awiya signing the Peace Treaty and the conditions is the clearest
proof that he cursed Imam 'Ali (as). If he did not then why did he agree
to abide by this condition? His reneging on the condition is yet further
proof that he was a munafiq, for we read in Sahih Bukhari hadith 4:403
that Allah's Apostle said, that one sign of a pure hypocrite is "if he
gives a promise, he breaks it". Mu'awiya's promise and his subsequent
breach are clear indictments with regards to his character.

**The admission by al Muhaddith Shah Abdul Aziz Dehlavi that Mu'awiya
cursed Hadhrath 'Ali (as)**

Al Muhaddith Shah Abdul Aziz was a leading Sunni scholars and a lead
name in his fight against the spread of Shi'aism in the Indian
Subcontinent. Despite his opposition to the Shi'a he also made the
acknowledgement in his Fatawa Azizi on page 214:

"The act of cursing 'Ali was introduced by Mu'awiya, this is not worse
than fighting, for we learn from hadith that cursing a Muslim is Fisq,
fighting him is kufr. It is established that Mu'awiya fought 'Ali and in
doing so he committed a great sin, to explain this away in terms of
ijtihad is wrong".

**The admission by leading Deobandi Ulema that Mu'awiya introduced the
bidah of cursing Ali (as)**

Deobandi's are rigid Hanafis from the Indian Subcontinent and are
strong opponents of the Shi'a hence there is NO opportunity for Abu
Sulaiman to claim that they were influenced by Shi'a leanings.

Maulana Sayyid Abu'l Ala Maudoodi records this fact in his "Khilafath
wa Mulukiyaat". On page 174 he writes:

"Ibn Kathir in al Bidayah records that one unlawful and outrageous
practice started by Mu'awiya was that he and his governors would curse
Hadhrath 'Ali during the Friday sermon from the Imam's position. This
took such an extreme that this practised even took place in the Mosque
of the Prophet, in front of the grave of the Prophet (saws), the cursing
of the most beloved relative would take place, in the presence of
Hadhrath 'Ali's family who would hear this abuse with their own ears."
(also: Tabari Volume 4 page 188, Ibn Athir Volume 3 page 234, al Bidayah
Volume 8 page 259 and Volume 9 page 80)

Khilafath wa Mulukiyaat page 174

Before supporters of Mu'awiya seek to attack Maudoodi it should be
pointed out that he was NOT expressing an opinion, he was citing the
facts recorded in the annals of Sunni history books, including al
Bidayah by Ibn Kathir. The sources are cited; Maudoodi has not just
fabricated them out of the blue.

The supporters of Mu'awiya were naturally perturbed by Maudoodi's
critical stance of Mu'awiya. This led to rebuttal and counter rebuttals
by Deobandi Ulema. Pakistani scholar Abu Khalid Muhammad Aslam in
"Khilafat wa Mulukiyyat wa Ulema-i-Ahle Sunnat" wrote in defence of
Maulana Maudoodi. He wrote:

"Maulana Ashraf Ali Thanvi in Hakayat Awliyaa page 124 wrote that Shah
Ismail Shaheed had a debate in Lucknow with a Shi'a by the name of
Subhan Khan. Shah Ismail asked him "Did they curse Mu'awiya in the court
of Ali? Khan replied, "Ali's Court was pure of such things. Shah Ismail
then asked did Mu'awiya curse Ali in his Court? To which Khan replied
"Yes he did". Maulana Ismail then said "The Ahl'ul Sunnah are
alhamdolillah followers of Ali and have left Mu'awiya'

From this it is proven that Shah Ismail and Thanvi both agreed that in
Mu'awiya's Court people would curse Ali. Now if someone continues to
deny this then we are left with no other choice but to adopt silence in
the presence of illiterates, one should take note of the individual who
was being cursed.

Zaynul Abideen Sajjad Meerathee in Tareekh ay Milath al Islam writes:
"The greatest achievement of Umar bin Abdul Aziz was, one that shall be
written in Gold is the fact he put an end to the Banu Umayya tradition
of cursing Ali [r] from the pulpits. When he became khalifa he ordered
this to be banned".

Maulana Shah Moinuddin Nadvi in Tareekh-i-Islam, Volume 1 pages 13-14,
writes "During his reign Mu'awiya introduced the tradition of cursing
Ali [r], his subjects followed suit. Mugheera bin Shu'ba was a great man
but in his obedience to Mu'awiya also followed this bidah" In previous
pages we have cited the comments of great Ulema, all who have confirmed
the fact that Ali was cursed.

Were they not Ulema of Ahl'ul Sunnah? If they were then what right do
their opponents have to call themselves Ahl'ul Sunnah? It would better
that they leave Ahl'ul Sunnah and embrace Yazeed and Nasibi aqeedah,
entertaining others with their new thought". [Khilafath wa Mulukiyyat wa
Ulema-i-Ahle Sunnath, by Abu Khalid Muhammad Aslam - pages 120-122]

Khilafath wa Mulukiyyat wa Ulema-i-Ahle Sunnath page 120-122

Mu'awiya's bidah of cursing Imam Ali during the Friday Sermon was a
practice that continued during the Banu Umayya reign until the reign of
Umar bin Abdul Aziz In Nifa Thafthee wa Islaal by Maulana Abdul Hai we
are informed on page 42 that:

"During the Banu Umayya reign Hadhrath 'Ali was cursed in the Friday
Sermons".

In Tafseer Mazhari Volume 5 page 21, Hanafi Scholar Qadhi Thanaullah
Uthmanee makes the admission that:

"There was a time when the Banu Umayya would curse the family of the
Prophet".

In Tarikh Madhaib al Islameeeya Volume 1 page 38 we learn that:

Abu Muhammad Abu Zahra writes:

During Banu Umayya reign Ali was openly cursed, this tradition was
started by Mu'awiya and continued until the reign of Umar bin Abdul
Aziz" In Tarikh Khamis Volume 2 page 316 we learn:

"When Umar bin Abdul Aziz came to power be put an end to the bidah
introduced by Mu'awiya, namely of swearing at 'Ali and cursing the
family of the Prophet at the end of the Juma Khutba".

Similarly we read in Tarikh Abul Fida Volume 1 page 301 "Dhikr
Mu'awiya":

"During the reign of Banu Umayya Banu Umayya would curse 'Ali in the
Friday Sermon, when Umar bin Abdul Aziz became khalifa he brought an end
to this horrible bidah that had been introduced by Mu'awiya".


