INTRODUCTION AND THE METAPHOR OF TITHONES
=========================================

New machines are forcing us to change our concepts. The ventilator for
example, by pumping air to the lungs, can prolong life of the comatos
people and delay death regardless of consciousness, but the question
here is not about “life” indeed it is about the “quality” of life. Our
state with technology is not that far from the story of Tithonus in
Greek mythology:

Tithonus a human, was considered very attractive to the point that the
daughter of Zeus, a goddess, fell in love with him. Tithonus lived on
earth, but she lived in the heavens with the rest of the goddesses. He
loved to always be near her, in order to keep him closer she asked her
father if he could give him some of the god’s attributes such as
eternity so he can live with them in the heavens. Then Zeus granted
Tithonus eternity and the daughter was able to raise him to heaven and
they both happily lived there. However, the daughter started to notice
that Tithonus started aging. She realized that she had made a mistake
and had forgotten to ask her father to not only give him eternity but to
also give him youth. He grew old, continuously without dying and unable
to do much and was left alone. He started to shout, make noise to get
attention, he became noisy and intolerable, and finally the daughter
asked her father to lock him in a cage, and Zeus did. After that
Tithonus was transformed into a grasshopper.

Ethics deals with the question: “how we ought to live?” it deals with
the actions of human beings. We traditionally have standards and codes
for the moral actions of people; these are usually found in monotheistic
religions also in philosophy. Since the nature of human actions has
changed, due to modern technology, therefore we should call for a change
in the traditional ethics as Hans Jonas rightly observed.1 The human
actions has been empowered by technology and changed due to the new
inventions to the point that machines became models for understanding
human beings. Worse than that “man has been added to the objects of
technology.”2


