FOUR GROUPS OF PHILOSOPHERS LOOKING AT TECHNOLOGY
=================================================

**To the influence of modern technology on our life, philosophers and
thinkers reacted differently. For the sake of clarification I will
simply divide them into four groups:**

1- A. The pessimist who wants to go back to nature and at the same time
attach the progress of technology to stop it as a harmful progress to
nature and man, an example here is the naturalists and the nature based
romantic people; a specific example could be Theodore Kaczynski.3 In
regards to artificial intelligence, Kaczynski postulated that if
computer scientists succeeded in developing intelligent machines that do
all things better than human beings, then, all work will be done by
machines with the least of human effort. In this case either machine
will make their own decisions without human oversight or human control
over the machines might be retained.

If machines were effectively controlling people, then people would not
be able to turn machines off because they would be so dependent on the
machines; that turning machines off would amount to suicide. On the
other hand, if humans control machines then the elite will have greater
control over the masses and because human work will no longer be
necessary then the masses will be superfluous; a useless burden on the
system. If the elite is ruthless, they may simply decide to exterminate
the mass of humanity. If they are humane, they may use propaganda,
psychological or biological techniques to reduce the birth rate until
the mass of humanity becomes extinct.

2- The optimists who believe that the progress of technology is a good
thing that will improve the human condition and make society better, an
example here are the majority of people who believe in the power of
technology such as almost all politicians to improve the state by better
technology, and Ray Kurzweil4 who replied to Kaczynski. Kurzweil thinks
that Kaczynski advocates a simple return to nature by dropping
technology and reverts to a simpler time, even though he made a
compelling case for the dangers and damages that have accompanied
industrialization, still Kaczynski’s vision is neither compelling nor
feasible. Kurzweil thinks that after all there is too little nature left
to return to.

3- The group that does not use technology but at the same time does not
attack technology or its progress, this community lives according to the
community standards and religious belief such as the Amish community.
Their concept of “progress” is also good, but is not defined in terms of
technological advancement.

4- The group of thinkers who are deeply and philosophically concerned
about the human condition and the future of humanity; have no problem
with the progress of technology as long as there is a parallel progress
in the moral and social aspects of society so that technology will not
affect the future of humanity. Those thinkers are neither pessimists nor
optimists. You can find thosethinkers in monotheistic religions and
other religions. In this group, we can distinguish two lines of
reasoning that are closely connected:

1- The group that calls for renewing moral philosophy by emphasizing the
role of “responsibility” such as Hans Jonas.

2- The group that commands the ethics of responsibility and goes further
to call for “preventive ethics” by reviving that which has been
neglected for many centuries.


