ETHICS OF RESPONSIBILITY
========================

In this section I will focus on the importance of responsibility as a
central theme in any moral philosophy that needs to handle modern
technology properly. Jonas thinks that our progress in technology, and
dealing with nature without the ethics of responsibility is an act
against the future of mankind, in this technological progress, Jonas
asks: “What kind of obligation is operative in it?” Is it Utilitarian or
just a command that we should not “saw off the branch on which we sit?”5
but the “we” here is not necessarily the present condition of man kind,
it is most likely the future generations who will pay the price; since
the human good known in its generality is the same for all time, its
complete locus is always the present. Modern technology brought us not
to the end but to the edge of our fate and unless we have a good vision
about where we are going, then we will neither be able to save ourselves
nor our future generations. This new vision has to be equipped with
practical philosophy and wisdom; it has to be different from the
previous traditional moral philosophy. Because with modern technology,
new issues have appeared such as: global conditions, environmental
issues, cloning, and genetic engineering. All these issues were not part
of the traditional ethical theories such as those of deontological
ethics, utilitarianism, and the ethics of virtue. Jonas rightly
commented that “previous ethics and metaphysics provided not even the
principles, let alone a ready doctrine”6 for such issues that are
essentially related to the future of humanity, most of these moral
theories are at their best ethics of the “here and now” let’s take
Kant’s categorical imperative, as an example: “Act so that you can will
that the maxim of our action be made the principle of a universal law.”
If we look at this rule, which is also called the rule of
universalization, it justifies an act as morally right if the act can be
universalized with no contradiction, take for example theft to the maxim
or universalize it that every one is stealing from everyone else, what
is wrong with that? Well, it contradicts the concept of personal
property; therefore stealing is immoral because it causes contradiction
on this maxim level. If we look carefully at this rule of Kant, then we
find the following:

**Can**

**Can Not**

**Contradiction or No contradiction**

This is based on a famous law in Aristotelian logic called the law of
non-contradiction: A can not be true and false at the same time. You
can’t “will” stealing and preserve its opposite (legal property) at the
same time, you can not negate property by stealing and preserve it at
the same time. This is contradictory, because A can not be true and
false at the same time. Thus, as Jonas noted Kant’s ethics is not about
moral dimensions, it is about logical compatibility.7

There was always an attempt to build ethics on Logic, such as Kant’s
attempt, or build it on geometry such as that of Spinoza, Ethics based
geometrical method, or on calculus, such as the attempt of Bentham and
Mill to measure pleasure. I think that all these attempts of seeking
consistency are of no use in ethics because consistency is a standard of
empty systems in pure mathematics where there is no relation to reality.

While in applied physics a theory has to be related to facts. In ethics,
values are related to human actions and how to control the desires of
the human soul, so we are not talking about consistency rather about
commitment, responsibility, sacrifice, and moderation. Also how to act
in way that is not harmful to the present and the future condition of
humanity. Jonas tried to modify Kant’s principle to be: “Act so that the
effect of your actions is compatible with the permanence of genuine
human life.” Or “In your present choices, include the future wholeness
of Man among the objects of your will.”8 Jonas believes that if you look
at his principle from the traditional approach you will immediately see
that there is no rational contradiction involved if you violate this
kind of imperative; it is possible to “will”the present good while
sacrificing the future good of humanity, but most importantly in this
imperative is that the new imperative “says precisely that we may risk
our own life-but not that of humanity…that we do not have the right to
choose, or even risk, nonexistence for future generations on account of
a better life for the present one.”9

If you raise the question why we have such an obligation toward
generations that do not even yet exist? Jonas has no answer, but he left
a good hint in saying: “To underpin this proposition theoretically is by
no means easy and without religion perhaps impossible. At present, our
imperative simply posits it without proof, as an axiom.”10 The first
hint is the need for justification, because in ethics, as a normative
field and part of philosophy, a rational justification is always needed
to prove validity of ideas. Second, he reflected the need for religion
for such justification otherwise it is impossible. To some extent this
reflects that Jonas thinks that ethics is based on religion or at least
moral values stemmed from religion. To this we might be able to see an
answer from an Islamic perspective.


