REFERENCES
==========

1- Elliott, David**Uniqueness, Individuality, and Human Cloning** .
Journal of Applied Philosophy 15 (3): 217–230, 1998.

2- Jonas, Hans.**The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an
Ethics for the Technological Age** . Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1984.

3- Kaczynski, Theodore.**The Unabomber Manifesto: Industrial Society &
Its Future** . Jolly Roger Pr. 1995.

4- Kant, Immanuel:**Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals** , trans.
H.J. Paton, Harper & Row, NY, 1964.

5- Kurzweil, Ray:**The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed
Human Intelligence** . New York, Viking, 1999.

Notes
-----

1- Jonas, Hans. The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics
for the Technological Age. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
[^1984]: P.1. Jonas’s ideas were first published as an article:
“Technology and Responsibility: Reflections on the New Tasks of Ethics,”
Social research 40, no.1(1973): pp 31-54. This article was later
published as a part of the book mentioned above. From this point on
throughout my paper, I will be referring to the book. On page 4, Jonas
summarized the characteristics of previous Ethics and traditional
theories: 1. All dealing with the non-human world, i.e., the whole realm
of techne (with the exception of medicine), was ethically neutral. 2.
Ethical significance belonged to the direct dealing of man with man.
Including the dealing with himself: all traditional ethics is
anthropocentric. 3. for actions in this domain, the entity “man” and his
basic condition was considered constant in essence and not itself an
object of reshaping techne. 4. The good and evil about which action had
to care lay close to the act, neither in praxis itself or in its
immediate reach, and were not a matter for remote planning.

2- Ibid. P[^18]:

3- Theodore Kaczynski in his book “The Industrial Society and Its
Future”

4- Ray Kurzweil: The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed
Human Intelligence. New York, Viking, [^1999]:

5- Jonas, Hans. The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics
for the Technological Age. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
[^1984]: Ibid, p. 7.

6- Ibid. P.[^8]:

7- Ibid. P.[^11]:

8- Ibid. P.[^11]:

9- Ibid. P.[^11]:

10- Ibid, P.[^12]:

11- Kant: Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. H.J. Paton,
Harper & Row, NY, 1964, p. [^102]:

12- David Elliott: “Uniqueness, Individuality, and Human Cloning,” p224
For further discussion


