Part I
======

The word hadith, according to the dictionary, has several meanings such
as "new," "novel," "recent," "modern," and "speech", "report,"
"account," and "narrative." However, in Islamic context, the term hadith
means "Prophetic tradition" or "narrative relating deeds and utterances
of the Prophet (S)." According to some, even the account of a dream
linked with the Holy Prophet (S) is also included in the category of
hadith.

In most cases, the words sunnah and hadith are used as interchangeable
synonyms by the scholars of the science of hadith. The author of the
book Talwih says: "Sunnah is a more general term than hadith, and
includes everything related to the Prophet (S) except the Qur'an: his
speech - which is hadith - and his behaviour and character."[^1]
According to another opinion, since the majority of Sunni Muslims
believe in Qur'an's being sempiternal (qadim), everything else except
the Qur'an from the Prophet (S) came to be called hadith, a word closely
related with hadith meaning "incidental" as opposed to "eternal".[^2]
Some are of the opinion that the sayings of the Sahabah (the Companions
of the Prophet) and the Tabi\`un (the second generation after the Holy
Prophet (S)) can also be included under the term hadith.[^3] On the other
hand, for the Shi\`ah authorities on hadith, the term can properly
include only the narratives relating the speech, biographical details
and deeds of the Prophet (S) and the Imams (A).[^4]

Here, we consider it necessary first to explain certain terms related
to our discussion.

Sunnah: The term in general means "habitual practice" or "customary
procedure," and in particular applies to the sayings and doings of the
religious leaders who are ma\`sum[^5] (i.e. the Prophet and the Imams,
who are considered as being free of sin and error). Accordingly, the
term is employed by the side of the Book (Qur'an). Sunnah is used in a
sense that is wider than that of hadith, although in some of the Sunni
texts of tradition, such as of Ibn Maja, al-Bayhaqi and others, the term
signifies hadith. The authorities of hadith differ as to meanings
covered by hadith and khabar (report). While some consider the terms as
being synonymous, others are of the opinion that khabar is a term which
is more general than hadith. According to them, khabar applies to every
narrative regarding the Prophet (S), while hadith is taken to mean a
narration quoting the Prophet (S) himself.[^6] Some, as pointed out
above, apply the term hadith to the sayings of the Sahabah and Tabi\`un
in addition. Accordingly, every hadith is also a khabar, though every
khabar is not a hadith; though some regard the terms as being
inter-changeable synonyms.[^7]

Riwayah: This term is synonymous with hadith. According to the author
of Majma\` al-bahrayn, "Riwayah is a khabar that is traceable through a
series of narrators to a ma\`sum."[^8]

Athar: Shaykh Baha'i in his Nihayat al-dirayah considers athar as being
identical with hadith. Others impute to it a wider meaning. Still others
confine its meaning to narrations that go back to the Sahabah.[^9]
Hadith-i Qudsi: Hadith-i qudsi is defined as the Divine communication
whose revelation is not the part of the Qur'anic miracle. Sayyid Sharif
Jurjani says: " [Hadith-i qudsi] is from God, the Most Exalted, from the
point of view of meaning, and from the Prophet (S) from the viewpoint of
actual wording. It constitutes what God has communicated to the Prophet
through revelation or in dreams. The Prophet - upon whom be peace -
informed others of its meaning in his own words. Accordingly, the Qur'an
is superior to the hadith-i qudsi, because it is the actual Word of
God."

There are six points of differences between the Qur'an and the hadith-i
qudsi: Firstly, the Qur'an is a Divine miracle; this does not
necessarily apply to the hadith-i qudsi. Secondly, salat (prayer) is not
valid without recitation of parts of the Qur'an; this is not so in the
case of the hadith-i qudsi. Thirdly, one who rejects the Qur'an is
regarded as a kafir (an unbeliever); this does not hold true in the case
of the hadith-i qudsi. Fourthly, whole of the Qur'an was communicated to
the Prophet (S) through the agency of the Angel Gabriel; this does not
apply to hadith-i qudsi. Fifthly, every word of the Qur'an is the Word
of God, but the wordings of the hadith-i qudsi may be ascribed to the
Prophet (S). Sixthly, the Qur'an cannot be touched without taharah (the
condition of bodily purity as prescribed by the Shari'ah) and this
condition does not apply to the hadith-i qudsi.[^10]

**Origins of the Science of Hadith**

The Holy Prophet of Islam (S), for a period of 23 years from the
beginning of his prophetic mission to the moment of his death, was
directly involved in the process of guidance and leadership of the
people. The multifarious kinds of questions that arose for the Muslims
in relation with their needs converged upon the Holy Prophet. The
Prophet responded to their questions through explanations and
discussions whose variety increased with the progress of Islam to the
extent of enveloping all aspects of the moral, social and civic affairs
of Muslims. The new society that emerged during this period was
significant and important from every aspect. The Muslims who were the
contemporaries of the Prophet had the advantage of personal recourse to
him and chance of putting to him various questions regarding their
social life. However, as long as the Prophet lived, and the source of
Divine Revelation was in the midst of the Muslims, the great importance
of recording his words was not fully realized. Nevertheless, soon after
the Prophet's death, the Muslims realized the imminent need of recording
the hadith so as to avoid the problems that would arise in the future
generations. Accordingly, from the time of the first caliph, the need
for recording of hadith was distinctly felt by the Muslim society. It
should not remain unsaid that \`Ali (A), the first Imam of the Shi\`ah
Muslims, had with characteristic foresight, pioneered the task of
recording the Prophet's sayings during the Prophet's lifetime itself.
Word for word, he wrote down what he had heard from the Prophet (S). The
author of Ta'sis al-shi\`ah writes:

...Know that the Shi\`ah were the first to embark on collecting the
records of the acts and sayings of the Prophet (S) during the era of the
caliphs. They followed in the footsteps of their Imam \`Ali, Amir
al-Mu'minin (A), for, he had recorded and categorized the hadith during
the times of the Holy Prophet. Al-Shaykh Abu al-Abbas al-Najashi, in the
translation of Muhammad Ibn \`Adhafar, said: "I was with Hakam ibn
\`Ayyinah by the side of Abu Ja\`far Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Baqir (A).
Hakam started asking questions with Abu Ja\`far reluctantly answering
them. There was a disagreement between them about one thing. Then Abu
Ja\`far said: "Son, get up and bring \`Ali's book." He brought a big
voluminous book and opened it. He looked closely in it for a while until
he found the problem (which was under debate). Abu Ja\`far (A) said:
"This is the handwriting of \`Ali and the dictation of the Messenger of
Allah, upon whom be God's peace and benedictions."[^11]

This tradition is in agreement with what I found in Najashi's Rijal. In
addition, two other sources confirm the contents of the abovementioned
hadith.[^12] Another narration that confirms the attention devoted by the
Shi\`ah to recording of hadith is that of an incident from the life of
Fatimah al-Zahra'(A). One day Fatimah (A) could not find a manuscript in
which hadith was recorded. She reportedly urged her housemaid to search
for it, saying, "Look for it. It is as precious to me as my sons Hasan
and Husayn."[^13]

Among the Ahl al-Sunnah, the recording of hadith started after the Holy
Prophet's death, and that too after prolonged controversies between
groups who favoured and opposed it.[^14] In this connection, \`A'ishah
reports: "My father Abu Bakr had collected five-hundred hadith of the
Messenger of Allah and one day he burnt them all."[^15] There are several
narrations regarding the second caliph which indicate that he stopped
people from relating the Holy Prophet's traditions.[^16]

The recording of hadith among the Sunnis started from the early second
century when the Umayyad caliph \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz ordered their
collection and compilation.[^17] As is widely accepted, Ibn Jurayj was
the first person to record and compile hadith among the Sunnis.[^18] Here
it is worth mentioning that apart from the Household of the Prophet (S),
their Shi\`ah followers preceded the Sunnis in their effort to record
the hadith. Abu Rafi\` was the first man to begin the task along with
the members of the Prophet's Household (A).[^19] However, there were also
several others who took up this task at the time of Abu Rafi\`, or after
him. Among them were: \`Ubayd Allah ibn Abi Rafi\`, \`Ali ibn Abi
Rafi\`, Salman al-Farisi, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, Asbagh ibn Nubatah and
others.[^20]

The Shi\`ah recorders of hadith can be divided into four groups:

1. In the first group, besides \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (A) and Fatimah
al-Zahra' (A), were Abu Rafi\`, Salman al-Farisi, Maytham al-Tammar,
Asbagh ibn Nubatah, Mujashi\`i al-Kufi, \`Ubayd Allah ibn Abi Rafi\`,
Harth ibn \`Abd Allah al-A\`war al-Hamdani, Rabi\`ah ibn Sami\`, Salim
ibn Qays, \`Ali ibn Abi Rafi\`, \`Abd Allah ibn Hurr, Muhammad ibn Qays
al-Bajali, Ya\`la ibn Murrah, Jabir ibn \`Abd Allah al-Ansari.

2. In the second group were Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-\`Abidin
(A), Ja\`far ibn Yazid al-Ju\`fi, Zayd ibn \`Ali, Husayn ibn Thawr,
Ziyad ibn al-Mundhir.

3. In the third group can be said to belong Yahya ibn Qasim, \`Abd
al-Mu'min, Zurarah ibn A\`yun, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Bassim al-Sayrafi,
Abu \`Ubaydah al-Hadhdha', Zakariyya ibn \`Abd Allah, Thawrab ibn
Qamamah, Majd ibn Mughirah, Muhammad ibn Za'idah al-Khadrami, Mu\`awiyah
ibn \`Amarah, Matlab al-Zahri, \`Abd Allah ibn Maymun.

4. This group of recorders of the hadith comprised of more than
four-thousand of the people of Iraq, Hijaz, Khurasan and Sham (Syria),
who related traditions from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) or Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq (A).[^21] The pioneers in recording of the hadith among the
Sunnis were Ibn Jurayj in Mecca; Ibn Ishaq and Malik in Medina; Rabi\`
ibn Sabih, Sa\`id ibn Abi \`Urubah, Hammad ibn Salamah in Basra; Sufyan
ibn Thawri in Kufa; al-Awza\`i in Syria, Haytham in Wasit; Mu\`ammar in
Yemen, Jarir ibn \`Abd al-Hamid in Rey, and Ibn Mubarak in Harran.[^22]
However, there is a disagreement among the Sunni scholars about who
first started recording hadith. According to Ibn Hajr, Rabi\` ibn Sabih
(died 160/777) and Sa\`id ibn Abi \`Urubah (died 156/773) were pioneers
in this field; they were followed by Malik in Medina and \`Abd al-Malik
ibn Jurayj in Mecca, who pursued the task of recording hadith.[^23] But
according to Haji Khalifah, \`Abd al-Malik ibn Jurayj and Malik ibn Anas
were the first ones to do so, and the first man to classify them and
divide them into chapters was Rabi\` ibn Sabih.[^24] In any case,
regardless of who it was to first record hadith among the Ahl al-Sunnah,
whether Rabi\` ibn Sabih or Malik or Sa\`id ibn Abi \`Urubah, all of
them belong to the second century of Hijra, and lived one hundred years
after the Shi\`ah had already started this work.

As we mentioned above, the Muslims recognized the need to record the
words of the Prophet (S) right after his demise; because they knew that
it was the only way to safeguard the future generations against various
problems. The realization of the significance of this work grew
gradually. After the Prophet (S) his close companions formed the primary
source of hadith. During their lifetimes, the solution of various
problems that arose could still be found and the narrations of the
Sahabah served as the guiding torch for the generation that followed
them, the Tabi\`un. It was during the generation of the Tabi\`un that
the Sahabah were questioned about various issues and their narrations
were committed to writing. This was the beginning of the science of
hadith. Hadith served as the key to the understanding of the Qur'an, and
became an addendum to the Book for the Muslims. However, as pointed out
earlier, the Shi\`ah had felt this need earlier during the lifetime of
the Prophet himself.

From the time that Muslims began to realize the need for collection and
recording of ahadith, they took great pains in this regard. A man like
Jabir ibn \`Abd Allah al-Ansari would cover months on camel-back to hear
a hadith.[^25]

The number of the Companions of the Prophet from whom traditions have
been related is put somewhere near 114 in some books.[^26] The most
important of them were: \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (A), \`Abd Allah ibn
Mas\`ud, Salman al-Farisi, Ubayy ibn Ka\`ab, \`Ammar ibn Yasir,
Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf, Anas ibn Malik, Abu
Musa al-Ash\`ari, \`A'ishah, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, Abu Hurayrah, \`Abd
Allah ibn al-\`Abbas, \`Ubadah ibn Samit, Jabir ibn \`Abd Allah
al-Ansari, Abu Sa\`id al-Khudri.

Among the Tabi\`un, there were such as Sha\`bi, Ibn Musayyab, Ibn
Sirin, and others.[^27]

The author of Tadrib al-rawi puts the number of traditions narrated
from each of the Companions in the diminishing order as follows:

1. Abu Hurayrah: 5,374 hadith.
2. \`Abd Allah ibn \`Umar: 2,630 hadith.
3. \`A'ishah: 2,208 hadith.
4. \`Abd Allah ibn al-\`Abbas: 1,660 hadith.
5. Jabir ibn \`Abd Allah al-Ansari: 1,540 hadith.
6. Abu Sa\`id al-Khudri: 1,170 hadith.[^28]

There is none among the rest of companions to be accredited with
narration of more than one thousand traditions. Evidently, the political
conditions prevalent during the Umayyad rule did not permit narration of
ahadith from \`Ali (A) and his followers. It is worth mentioning that
not all of the first narrators of hadith were equally reliable. This
issue will be discussed later in the chapter on dirayat al-hadith
(critical examination of hadith). But before we enter the discussion on
dirayat al-hadith, its origin and development, it is necessary to study
the course of development of the science of hadith among the Shi\`ah and
the Ahl al-Sunnah from the point of view of style of compilation of the
texts during various periods.


