Part Ii : Reasons Behind Emergence of `ilm Dirayat Al-hadith
============================================================

Unfortunately on account of various reasons, some of which we shall
mention shortly, the hadith did not remain immune from forgery and other
problems. A great number of incorrect traditions found way into
collections of prophetic sayings. The task of separating genuine
traditions from apocryphal material was as necessary as that of removing
weeds from a flower bed; as in case of weeds, their identification and
removal was not an easy task, nor could they be left to flourish
untouched, threatening the genuine material itself. This was the reason
why religious scholars, in their capacity as vigilant gardeners of the
Faith, began to look for ways of separating forged material from genuine
hadith. They needed new tools for this task, which was not an easy one,
as is evident from the fact that despite centuries of scholarly efforts
the remnants of these dangerous and destructive weeds have continued to
survive.

As to how these weeds found their way into the flower beds of prophetic
tradition, here are some of the important reasons:

1. There were some who wilfully sprinkled the seeds of such weeds, and
dedicatedly looked after their growth and survival. Amongst them were
supporters of Banu Umayyah and other opponents of Islam who dissembled
adherence to it.[^1]

2. Emergence of various sects in Islam led to forgeries by followers of
different sects who wished to produce documentary evidence in favour of
their own sect and to detriment of their opponents.[^2]

3. Fabrications made by the devout about virtues of piety and
abstinence from evil, who imagined that by this means they would be
better equipped to guide others.[^3]

4. Inclusion of Jewish myths, a process which was stimulated by the
popular sense of curiosity and the people's interest in the lives and
times of former prophets. Such imaginative accounts are replete in
narrations regarding the lives and deeds of prophets - such as the
account related by al-Tabari on the authority of Ibn Munabbih. According
to this account, the serpent, formerly, had hands and legs; but since it
allowed the Devil to enter its belly, God had made its limbs to sink
into its stomach![^4]

5. Tribal and regional prejudices and rivalries, which incited some to
forge traditions to be produced as evidence of their superiority over
others - as is evident from traditions related to some cities.

6. Personal ambition was another stimulant which prompted some to be
included among the scholars of hadith through forgery.

7. Fabrication of hadith as a means of procurement of personal gain or
of earning goodwill of the caliph in power.[^5]

8. Controversies and differences among jurists (fuqaha') prompted some
scholars to fabricate traditions to be invoked in support of their own
legal positions.

9. Story-tellers and reciters of fables, admittedly, were not averse to
letting their imagination wander into the domain of hadith.[^6]

Due to the above-mentioned and other reasons besides, a critical
examination of hadith was necessary. As a result of the efforts made by
Muslim scholars in this regard, a new branch was created in the science
of hadith; it came to be called "dirayat al-hadith".[^7]

The Nihayat al-dirayah defines dirayat al-hadith in these words: "It is
a science which investigates the isnad, contents, subject and the mode
of transmission of ahadith, so that acceptable traditions can be
separated from unacceptable ones."

**Dirayat al-Hadith**

The emergence of \`ilm dirayat al-hadith was followed by its division
into numerous branches. Certain rules and guidelines were evolved for
distinguishing reliable from unreliable ahadith. The body of such rules
came to be called "mustalah al-hadith", which together with \`ilm
al-rijal (lit. science of men), formed the means of scrutinizing hadith
material. However, for this purpose, knowledge of other preliminaries
such as Arabic grammar and syntax, familiarity with literary style and
form, knowledge of abrogated (mansukh) and the abrogating (nasikh)
verses of the Qur'an, knowledge of the history of Islam and that of
various Islamic sects and their beliefs, and other details regarding
hadith, is necessary.

Haji Khalifah, in his Kashf al-zunun defines \`ilm al-dirayah in this
manner: "\`Ilm dirayat al-hadith, which discusses the content and
meaning of the words of hadith on the basis of Arabic grammar and
syntax, and shar\`i criteria, and examines their correspondence with the
circumstances of the Messenger of Allah (S), linguistic standards of
Arabic sciences and reports about the Messenger (S), consists of \`ilm
al-rijal, (the science of narrators, their names, genealogical lineages,
lifetimes, their dates of death, their characters and circumstances of
reception and transmission of hadith, as well as its topic or subject)
and aims to distinguish acceptable from unacceptable traditions. It
entails classification of various modes of transmission, linguistic
background of narrators, their remarks and criticism about what they
have narrated, their connection with the prior source from whom they
have received, knowledge of possession of permission (ijazah)[^8] by a
narrator, and knowledge of various classifications of hadith, such as
sahih, hasan, da\`if, etc."[^9]

\`Ilm al-Rijal

The following verse of the Qur'an made it incumbent upon al-muhaddithin
(scholars of hadith) to make a thorough enquiry into details of
narrators of ahadith:

O believers, if an ungodly man comes to you with a report, investigate,
lest you afflict a people unwittingly and then repent of what you have
done. (49:6)

As to who were pioneers in this field, it must be admitted that the
Shi\`ah had taken a lead in this field. The first writer to compile a
book on this subject was Abu Muhammad \`Abd Allah ibn Jibillah ibn
Hayyan al-Kanani (died 219/834).[^10] But according to Jalal al-Din
al-Suyuti in his Kitab al-'awa'il, the first writer on \`ilm al-rijal
was Shu\`bah (died 260/87374).[^11] However, it is clear that the
statement of Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti does not correspond with historical
fact, for \`Abd Allah ibn Jibillah died forty years before Shu\`bah.

Another important point that should be noted here is that writing of
chronicles of persons or biographical accounts was current amongst the
Shi\`ah from the very early days of Islam. If this is taken into
account, Abu Rafi\` and his desendents took a lead before all
others.[^12]

Some books on \`ilm al-rijal give biographical accounts of narrators
without giving the dates of their death, such as Ta'rikh of Ibn Jarir,
Muruj al-dhahab of al-Mas\`udi, aI-Kamjl fi al-ta'rikh of Ibn al-Athir.
Some give dates of death without biographical accounts. Others, being
more comprehensive, give almost all essential details, such as the works
of Abu al-Faraj Jawzi and al-Dhahabi.[^13]

**Five Important Shi'ite Works**

The most important books compiled by Shi\`ah scholars on \`ilm al-rijal
are five. They are:

1. Kitab al-rijal by Abi al-\`Abbas Ahmad ibn \`Ali al-Najashi (died
450/1058), which later became known merely as "al-Najash", gives
accounts of lives of narrators who have compiled books, giving little
attention to others. Though the biographical accounts are given in an
alphabetical order, the compilation is not very orderly. However, later,
through the efforts of Kazim al-Ansari (died 1006/1597-8), Mulla
\`Inayat Allah Quhpa'i (died 1016/1607- 8) - the author of Majma\`
al-rijal - and Shaykh Dawud ibn al-Hasan al-Bahrayni (died 1104/1692-3),
these defects have been removed.

2. Kitab al-fihrist, by Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Tusi, known as "Shaykh
al-Ta'ifah" (died 460/1067-8). This book gives the biographical accounts
in an alphabetical order. Moreover, several others have worked upon
it.

3. Kitab al-rijal, also by al-Tusi, in which he gives the names of the
contemporaries of every Imam (A) in the order of their succession.

4. Ma\`rifat akhbar al-rijal, by \`Umar ibn Muhammad al-Kashshi.

5. Al-Du\`afa' by Ibn al-Ghada'iri, Ahmad ibn al-Husayn ibn \`Abd
Allah, a scholar of the fifth century Hijrah.

**Important Books Composed by Scholars of Ahl al-Sunnah**

The most important books compiled in the field of \`ilm al-rijal by
scholars of the Ahl al-Sunnah are four:

1. Kitab Ibn Mandah, Abu \`Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Yahya (died
301/913-14).
2. Hilyat al-'awliya' by Abi Nu\`aym al-'Isfahani (died 430/1038-9).
3. Kitab Abi Musa, Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr al-'Isfahani (died
581/1185-6), which is a continuation of the work of Ibn Mandah.
4. Al-'Isti\`ab by Ibn \`Abd al-Birr.

After the above four works, other writings on \`ilm al-rijal by Sunni
scholars were primarily based on them. \`Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Athir
al-Jazari (died 630/1132-3) brought them together in his Usd al-ghabah.
AI-Dhahabi produced a summarized version of Usd al-ghabah in his Tajrid
Asma' al-Sahabah, adding some new entries. Badr al-Din Muhammad al-Qudsi
and Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Kashghari, too, produced their own
condensed versions of the Usd al-ghabah.[^14]

A point worthy of notice here is that Shi\`ah scholars of \`ilm
al-rijal, in the fifth and sixth centuries, named such books as were
exclusively related to Shi\`ite narrators of hadith as "rijal", calling
accounts of others, including both Shi\`ah and Sunni narrators, as
"ta'rikh".[^15] Another notable point is that, in the past, there existed
a mutual, inseparable link between the three disciplines of dirayat
al-hadith, \`ilm rijal al-hadith and bibliography. Works dealing with
one of the topics, invariably discussed issues connected with the other
disciplines.


