Desertion Permitted
===================

   
 It is on such a straight path that the Master of Martyrs declared, in
his precious, wise and far-sighted statement, permission to his family
and companions to part with him for safety. The text the historians
narrate in this regard is his statement (‘a), to his family and
companions on the eve of the ninth of Muharram saying,

“*I know no companions better than mine nor family more righteous or
kind or united than mine; so, may Allah reward all of you. I think
tomorrow will be our last day in facing these folks. I am of the view
that you should all set out for safety, you do not owe me anything,
while the night is covering you with its covering. Ride it as you would
a camel, and each one of you should take the hand of one of my family
members. May Allah reward all of you with the best of His rewards; so,
disperse under the cover of darkness and go back to your towns, for
these people seek me, and if they get hold of me, they will not seek
anyone else*.”[^1]

What a pithy statement, O Father of the Oppressed, and how noble your
objective, O Master of Martyrs! How wise your statement and deeds, O
soul of Prophethood!

Yes, this golden statement was etched in letters of *noor* on the
forehead of time, that those righteous elite men, who were described by
the Commander of the Fatihful (‘a) as the masters of martyrs, and that
none ever reached their heights nor ever will[^2], were the cream of the
crop of all mankind and the elite of the cosmos.

We have been enlightened by such rays to realize their intention to be
determined in their firmness and sincerity to offer the holy sacrifice.
In all of these, there are sublime lessons for all those who wish to
follow in the footsteps of those honourable men to rise above loving
this life and to die under the banner of dignity and not to submit to
the oppressive authority, to either achieve the goal or attain martyrdom
and eternal happiness.  
    
 Had it not been for that permission to desert issued by the custodian
of the *Shari’a* and for those words that their pure souls permitted, no
succeeding generation could have realized the extent of their knowledge,
conviction, and variation of their faculties and ambition to the highest
goals and firmness in upholding their principles with sincerity and
insight.  
    
 The Master of Martyrs wanted by so doing to test their intentions.
Testing is done by a wise person who knows what was and what will be,
and it does not demean his knowledge and his being familiar with what is
hidden since the goal is precious and the status is sublime. This is
something to which we pointed out when we wanted to acquaint the reader
with the gifts adorning al-Husayn’s followers and those of Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a).

And such a test should not surprise anyone especially since the Creator
of all beings, the Almighty, from whose knowledge nothing small nor big
escapes, ordered His friend Abraham to sacrifice his son Isma’il. Being
knowledgeable of the extent of obedience to Him rendered by His
messenger, the Friend of Allah, Abraham, and of the firmness of His
prophet, Ishamel, he did not require it except for a benefit known to
the Lord of the Worlds though it is obscure from the comprehension of
humans.

The incident of the bald, the leprous, and the blind also testifies that
Allah Almighty wanted by granting them His blessings to make their story
a lesson of wisdom for those who come across it and who find themselves
bound to thank Him for His blessings, and that denying His blessings
will lead to loss.[^3]  
    
 Abu ‘Abdullah, Imam al-Husayn (‘a), wanted through this test to
acquaint the next generations with the status attained by his Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) and companions, the status of honour, dignity, purity and
submission to whatever pleases Allah and His Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny.  
    
 To know the extent of any man of purity in the world, and to uphold the
principle of obedience to the most pious person who most pleases the
Master, the Almighty, does not become possible except by his statements
supported by good deeds or by a testimony for him from someone familiar
with his every movement.  
    
 Nobody is ignorant of the defects in the history books in our hands
regarding many deeds of righteous men who exhaust all influence and
possession in order to support the authentic *Shari’a*. Nor does history
record any deeds undertaken by those elite ones, namely the martyrs of
Karbala’, indicative of the holiness of their conscience, the sincerity
of their intentions, the purity of their souls..., better than that
bloody scene.

Had it not been for those statements made by the companions of al-Husayn
(‘a), and of his family, when he gave them permission to leave him for
safety and to desert so that he would alone face those who surrounded
him, we would not have come to know the differences in their levels of
awareness and variations in their far-sighted views, nor their virtues
which no human being can attain.

Knowledge is a light that Allah Almighty casts in the heart of
whomsoever He chooses from among His servants in various degrees of
intensity.  
    
 Muslim Ibn ‘Awsajah al-Asadi, for example, does not have anything on
the pages of history to testify to his immortal deeds and good merits in
anything more or less than a statement made by Shabth Ibn Rab’i that he
invaded Azerbaijan on the side of the Muslims and killed six polytheists
before Muslim cavalry troops came to his rescue.

What can the reader know from this statement other than the extent of
his sure loyalty to the Prophet's caliphs and his not having changed as
time and circumstances changed? But his statement to al-Husayn (‘a) in
which he said,

“*Are we the type of men who would abandon you? What excuse shall we
produce before Allah Almighty for having thus fallen short of serving
you? By Allah! I shall never leave you till I break my lance in their
chests and strike them with my sword as long as I can hold its handle,
and even if I have no weapon to fight them with, I shall throw stones at
them till I die with you*.”  
    
 Such a statement informs us of the firmness of this man in upholding
his principles at the last stage of life, and that if one is not
concerned except about pleasing Allah Almighty and His Messenger (S), he
is not concerned about any pain or bleeding. This statement is
accompanied by actions when he faced the swords and the lances with his
chest and neck.

Moreover, he was not satisfied with all of this till he commended Habib
Ibn Muzahir, the man who benefitted from the science of fates and epics
from the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), to support al-Husayn (‘a), and
that he would not otherwise be excused by the Messenger of Allah (S) for
having fallen short of carrying out his responsibility even when he was
drawing his last breath His soul thus parted from his body as he
maintained his creed and submission.[^4]  
    
 He was followed in sincerity of loyalty and readiness to sacrifice by
Sa’id Ibn ‘Abdullah al-Hanafi who said, “By Allah! We shall never
abandon you till Allah knows that we safeguarded the absence of the
Messenger of Allah (S) in your person.

By Allah! Had I known that I will be killed then brought back to life,
then burnt alive, then my ashes strewn, and this is done to me seventy
times, I would still not abandon you till I meet death defending you.
Why should I not do so? It is only one death followed by a bliss that
lasts forever.”  
    
 He, therefore, defended Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) and admonished others to do
likewise. He was not satisfied with all the bleeding wounds which he
received when he assaulted the enemies of Allah Almighty in defense of
al-Husayn (‘a), who was then performing the noon prayers on the
battlefield, till he understood from the Father of the Oppressed that he
had discharged his responsibility towards the Message and proven his
faithfulness to what Allah had mandated on him, so he died feeling
elated for having pleased the Almighty God.

Anything besides this is a shortcoming and a loss. Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a)
comforted him of attaining happiness through martyrdom and of the
meeting with the Messenger of Allah (S) before him.  
    
 As soon as he had finished his speech, Zuhayr Ibn al-Qayn al-Bajali
stood up to recite for all future generations lofty teachings in
promoting the creed that immortalized him. To al-Husayn (‘a) he said,
“*By Allah! I wish I had been killed then brought back to life then
killed, and so on, for a thousand times, as long as my being killed
protects you and protects these youths of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)*.”  
    
 There is no doubt in Allah accepting obedience from any of His servants
if such obedience earns him victory on the Day of Eternity. But there is
something even beyond that of a more lofty objective: it is the
obedience of the people of conviction who are not concerned, when they
perform what they are obligated to perform, except to be closer to the
Lord, Praise to Him, Who is the only One worthy of being worshipped.

Ibn al-Qayn is a bastion of conviction and pure faith, a man who recited
for us in such a situation his far-sighted view, his true beliefs, and
his noble goals: protecting the man who was appointed by Allah Almighty
as the Imam and protecting the lives which were held dear by the
Messenger of Allah (S) without aiming by worshipping Allah, through
performing jihad against His enemies, except to earn the rewards of the
hereafter for his endeavour on the Day when wages shall be granted for
good deeds.

Rather, he aimed by performing this rite to protect the person who was
charged with safeguarding the Message, the *Hujjah* of his time, citing
the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and his Progeny.  
    
 “*Husayn is of me, and I am of Husayn,*”[^5] says the Messenger of
Allah (S). The one who brought us the *Shari’a* did not make this
statement simply to inform the nation that the *Taff* Martyr was part of
him (i.e. a member of his family), for such an interpretation is quite
shallow and is not expected of the master of orators. Of course every
offspring is part of his father and grandfather; so, there is no
distinction for al-Husayn (‘a) here.

Rather, he (S) intended for this golden statement to point out to the
responsibility vested upon the Master of Martyrs in cementing Islam’s
foundations, removing the thorns of falsehood from the path of the just
*Shari’a*, and alerting the nation against the crimes committed by those
who played havoc with the sanctity of the creed. Just as the Prophet (S)
was the first person to rise to disseminate the divine call, al-Husayn
was the last to rise to cement its foundations:  
  

The creed did moan, groan and complain

About him; it did complain to none but Husayn.

The Prophet's grandson saw that to cure the creed,

At Karbala’ to death he had to defend it and bleed.

Never did we hear that a patient could be cured

Only with the death of the one who cured and endured.

When Husayn was martyred, Islam's guidance standard rose high

When Husayn is remembered, Islam's fragrance does intensify.

   
 Had it not been for the open statements made by the son of the singers,
we would not have been able to realize his attitude *vis-a-vis* loyalty
[or the lack thereof] for those whom the Omnipotent, Praise to Him,
chose as the Infallible and as the beacons of guidance for His servants
and the custodians of His *Shari’a*.

Other than this fact, history has not recorded for the singers' son any
loyalty except to ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan *versus* his animosity towards the
grandson of the most pure Messenger of Allah (S).  
    
 As for the stand of ‘Abis Ibn Abu Shibib al-Shakiri, when the oath of
allegiance was sworn to Muslim Ibn ‘Aqil at Kufa, and on the *Taff* Day,
it reveals his superiority over many others, his firm conviction and
love for Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), and that nothing at all mattered to him in
his bid to protect the Imam (‘a) even at the cost of sacrificing his own
life and everything precious in his possession.

Having witnessed the betraying throngs assembled to swear the oath of
allegiance to Muslim Ibn ‘Aqil, he [‘Abis] said to him,

“I do not wish to inform you about these people, nor do I know what they
hide in their hearts and what attracts you to them, but by Allah I shall
tell you about what I have decided to do: By Allah! I shall respond to
you when you call, and I shall fight your enemy, and I shall defend you
with my sword till I meet Allah desiring nothing for doing so except
what Allah has in store for me.”[^6]  
    
 With these brief words did he interpret those people's intentions and
the feebleness of their wills, and that they were molded on betrayal,
hypocrisy and the following of their own whims, and that they did not
wish to openly declare their inclination to betray him else it should
weaken their already weak allegiance and become the cause of animosity.

So they said what was beautiful as they waited for the outcome. Muslim
Ibn ‘Aqil could not get even one of those thousands of men to lead him
to any highway to exit the city when the clouds of doom overshadowed
him, not even one, so he did not know where to go...  
    
 On the *Taff* Day, Ibn Abul-Shibin said to al-Husayn (‘a), “Nobody on
the face of earth, be he a kin of mine or a stranger, is dearer to my
heart than you. Had I been able to defend you with anything more
precious than my life, I would have most certainly done so.”[^7]  
    
 Yes, O son of Abul-Shibin! Men who are sincere to Allah Almighty are
endowed with self-denial. They regard the world as a vanishing thing and
hope to attain immortality through supporting the Imam, the essence of
beings, the orbit of existence itself.  
    
 Then Nafi’ Ibn Hilal stood and said, “By Allah! We are not too afraid
to submit to Allah's destiny, nor are we averse to the meeting with our
Lord. We are with our minds and intentions supporting whoever supports
you and are the enemy of whoever antagonizes you.” The rest of his
companions made similar statements.  
    
 When he (‘a), granted permission to his family members to leave, they
all said in one voice, “Shall we do so in order to survive you? May
Allah never permit us to see that happen.” Then he turned to ‘Aqil's
offspring and said, “Suffices you [the calamity that you have suffered
because of] Muslim's murder. I have permitted you to leave.”

They immediately expressed their unrelenting determination to support
the creed and to defend the Imam, the *Hujjah*, saying, “If we do so,
shall we then say to the people that we abandoned our mentor and master,
while our cousins are the best of cousins, without having shot one arrow
with them, nor have we stabbed anyone with our lances nor struck anyone
with our swords? No, by Allah!

We shall never do that; rather, we shall sacrifice ourselves, our
wealth, and our families for your sake and fight with you till we meet
the same fate as yours; abominable, indeed, it is to survive you.”  
    
 Such readiness to sacrifice in that precarious situation, wherein all
avenues of help and rescue were blocked, and even water, which was made
available to the animals, was denied them, reveals their attainment of
the most sublime attributes of perfection.

It reveals their renunciation of this vanishing life. Had they had in
their heart the least desire to stay, or to love this world, they would
have taken his permission to leave them as an excuse they would produce
on the Day of Judgment.

But these souls, which the Lord of the Worlds, Praise to Him, created of
a holy mould and blended with the *noor* of conviction, did not desire
to stay alive except to uphold what is right or to put an end to what is
false. How could they find life meaningful while knowing that the man
who was so much loved by the Messenger of Allah (S), the heart of Islam,
was suffering of bleeding wounds and of a painful agony?

Souls that wanted nothing but the legacy of their father

Are either killed without being avenged,

Or are killing those whom none will avenge.

Their souls were used to the battlefield,

Just as their feet were used to the pulpits.[^8]

   
 Meanwhile, news reached Muhammad Ibn Bashir al-Hadrami that his son was
captured in the outskirts of Ray, so he said, “To Allah do I entrust
him; I do not wish that he should be taken as a captive while I survive
him.”

When al-Husayn (‘a) heard him say so, he excused him from his oath of
allegiance to him so that he could manage to have his son released.
Having heard the Master of Martyrs say so, he now was fired with holy
zeal for the creed and was prompted by his sincere loyalty to
demonstrate his firm conviction in sacrificing everything he had to
defend the Imam, saying, “O Abu ‘Abdullah! May the wild beasts feed on
me should I ever part with you!”  
    
 Firm conviction and obedience to Allah Almighty and to His Messenger
(S) raise those who are thereby enabled to attain the zenith of
greatness to a level superior even to virtue itself. Had Ibn Bashir's
conviction been shaky, he would have seized the opportunity of the
permission that he had received from the Imam (‘a) to leave as his
excuse before the Master, Praise to Him, and before people.  
    
 Al-Husayn's martyrdom did not leave its hero any choice except to
release the black slave John who belonged to Abu Tharr al-Ghifari so
that his modesty might not keep him from fleeing. But the Master of
Martyrs, having come to know his persistence and firmness in the face of
calamities, wanted by testing him to acquaint those who had surrounded
him, as well as the succeeding generations, with his character.

He wanted to highlight the extent of John’s stand to defend the
*Shari’a* with which those who betrayed it played havoc no matter how
serious the danger was and how many the woes. He, therefore, excused
John from his covenant, permitting him to to seek his own safety saying,
“O John! You have accompanied us for your health's sake; so, do not be
afflicted by our own way of life.” It was then that John’s tears ran
down. John feared he would not succeed in earning eternal happiness.

He blended his tears with a statement that has been reverberating to all
succeeding generations ever since, acquainting them with success for
those who persevere during the time of trials and tribulations. Said he,
“Only rest follows fatigue...”  
    
 He also said, “Should I during the time of ease eat your food then
betray you during the time of hardship? My smell is bad, my descent is
lowly, and my colour is black, so do breathe upon me of the breath of
Paradise so that my smell will turn good, my descent will become
honourable, and my colour will be white!

No, by Allah! I shall never leave you till my blood is mixed with
yours.”[^9]  
    
 Had it not been for such frank statements made by al-Husayn (‘a),
nobody would have come to know the purity of the conscience of that
slave or of his good intentions. His insistence to be killed, even after
receiving permission to be released and to part with the group,
demonstrates a very firm conviction.  
  

Summary
-------

** **  
 Safeguarding the Imam (‘a) is like safeguarding the Prophet (S),
something which reason and the *Shari’a* mandate, something which nobody
should abandon or hesitate to safeguard against those who wish to
eradicate it. What is obligatory is to sacrifice one's own life for his
[Imam’s] sake in order to thus remove the aggression against the life of
the Imam who is the life of existence and the existence of the cosmos
itself.

The Imam (‘a) was also required to call others to support and to defend
him with the knowledge that whoever responded would be jeopardizing his
life, and that there was no choice except to avoid the fatal danger. He,
in such case, was obligated not to require anyone to defend him, for it
would then be in vain.  
    
 Al-Husayn (‘a) was familiar with what he was going to endure. “A
destiny which cannot be altered, a decree which cannot be reversed,”
said he to Umm Salamah adding, “If I do not die today, I will tomorrow,
and if not tomorrow, then the day after. Do you think that there is
anyone who can avoid death? Do you think that you know what I do not?”  
    
 He, then, is not required to obligate others to defend him. Yes; any
human who is unfamiliar with divine decrees is not exempted from being
required to defend the person of the Imam, the *Hujjah*.

Nobody is excused upon seeing how those people besieged a man whom Allah
chose as His viceregent in dealing with His servants, how they cut off
all supply routes from him and even prohibited him from having access to
water, without rising to remove such an oppression or to protect his
sacred life.

Allah Almighty does not accept the excuse of one who sees such a
situation and is reluctant to support him even when it is quite
precarious except when the *Hujjah* of his time grants him permission to
part with him and to leave him to face his enemy, since he is fully
familiar with the best course; he is informed by the Wise One, the
Knowing, the Sublime.

In such a case, neither reason nor the *Shari’a* requires him to stay
and to defend him, nor will his parting be regarded as a violation of
what the *Shari’a* has decreed. He will then have an excuse when the
books of deeds are spread: he was granted permission by the Imam (‘a)
not to support him.

The Imam himself will not then be jeopardizing his life upon permitting
others to abandon him to face his foes alone and to excuse them from
having sworn the oath of allegiance to him; he will not be going beyond
the actual facts at all. If one does not see the Imam seeking his help
and support, he does not carry any obligation or responsibility.

Contrariwise, if he sees the Imam in such a precarious situation,
repeatedly asking for help, it does not befit him to be too reluctant to
support him. In such a case, the Imam will be in a very dire need for
his help; so, no excuse shall ever be accepted from him on the Day of
Judgment.  
    
 Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) met ‘Ubaydullah Ibn al-Hurr al-Ju’fi at Qasr Muqatil
and solicited his support saying, “I advise you that, if you could, you
should avoid hearing us crying and mourning our dead, and do not witness
our tragedy. Do so, for by Allah, none who hears us mourning our dead
without supporting us except that Allah will hurl him headlong into the
fire of hell.”  
    
 This statement supports our rebuttal of the claims of those who heard
the Imam pleading for help without helping him. As for one who does not
hear such mourning, and he is granted permission to leave, he surely is
excused.

Al-Dahhak Ibn ‘Abdullah al-Mashriqi, therefore, will have no excuse on
the Day of Judgment because he heard al-Husayn (‘a) pleading for help,
and he saw him greatly outnumbered. He was obligated to support him to
the last breath  
    
 A man came to al-Husayn (‘a) before the battle started and said, “I
would like to fight on your side as long as I see others doing so, but
if I do not see anyone fighting with you, shall I then be permitted to
leave you?”

Al-Husayn (‘a) answered him in the affirmative. The man hid his horse in
a deserted place upon seeing how al-Husayn's horses were being hamstrung
and kept fighting on foot. When al-Husayn (‘a) stood alone on the
battlefield, al-Dahhak asked him, “Is my term still honoured?” The Imam
(‘a) said, “Yes; you are free, if you can, to flee for safety.”

The man, therefore, took his horse out of its hiding place, rode it and
assaulted the foes forcing his way through their ranks. They made way
for him, then fifteen men pursued him.

He came to an old dried-up well near the bank of the Euphrates. The
chasing party caught up with him. Ayyub Ibn Mashrah al-Khaywani, Kathir
Ibn ‘Abdullah al-Sha’bi, and Qays Ibn ‘Abdullah al-Sa'idi recognized him
and said to their brethren, “This is our cousin! We plead to you in the
Name of Allah to spare his life.” He was spared.[^10]

His being told by al-Husayn (‘a) that he was excused will not avail him
on the Day of Judgment because Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) could not have asked
him to stay till he could meet his death, knowing that the man had set
his mind, from the beginning, on leaving safely.

The Creator, Praise to Him, will not excuse him on the Day of Gathering
because he had heard the Father of the Oppressed (‘a) pleading for help,
and whoever hears the Imam thus pleading and does not support him will
be hurled by Allah into the fire headlong.

[^1]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 1, p. 238. Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 4,
p. 24. Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, Vol. 8, p. 178, where the author mentions
the Imam's permission to others to desert and his companions' insistence
to sacrifice themselves for his sake. Al-Fadl Ibn Shathan al-Naishapuri
has mentioned it in his book Ithbat al-Raj’a, relying on the authority
of Imam Abu Ja’far, al-Baqir (‘a). It is also narrated by Shaikh
al-Mufid in his book Al-Irshad, by al-Tabarsi in his books I’lam al-Wara
and Rawdat al-Wa’izin, and by al-Khawarizmi who discusses al-Husayn’s
martyrdom on p. 246, Vol. 1, of his book Maqtal al-Husayn.

[^2]: Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, pp. 969-970.

[^3]: al-Bukhari, “Kitab al-Anbiya’” (book of the prophets), in the
chapter titled “The bald and the leprous.” Fath al-Bari, Vol. 6, p. 323.

[^4]: Such a level of readiness to sacrifice for the son of the
Prophet's daughter (‘a) reminds me of the excuse produced by Sa’d Ibn
Abu Waqqas when the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) asked him for his
support. As stated on p. 59 (second edition) of the book titled Al-Jamal
by Shaikh al-Mufid, his answer was, “I hate to participate in this war
and accidentally kill a believer unless you give me a sword that
distinguishes a believer from an unbeliever.”

[^5]: From among Imamite Shi’as, this hadith is narrated by Ibn
Qawlawayh on p. 53 of his book Kamil al-Ziyarat, and by the following
from among the Sunnis: al-Tirmithi in his book Al-Jami’ fi Manaqib
al-Husayn, Al-Hakim on p. 177, Vol. 3, of his book Al-Mustadrak, Ibn
‘Asakir on p. 314, Vol. 4 of his book Tahthib Tarikh al-Sham, Ibn Hajar
on p. 181, Vol. 9, of his book Mujma’ al-Zawa’id, Ibn Hajar al-’Asqalani
on p. 115 of his book Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa in tradition 23, al-Bukhari
in his book Al-Adab al-Mufrad, al-Muttaqi al-Hindi on p. 107, Vol. 7, of
his book Kanz al-’Ummal, al-Safuri on p. 478 of his book Nuzhat
al-Majalis, and al-Sayyid al-Murtada on p. 157, Vol. 1, of his Amali,
majlis 15.

[^6]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 199.

[^7]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 254.

[^8]: Ibn Nama, Muthir al-Ahzan.

[^9]: Ibn Tawus, Al-Luhuf, p. 61 (Saida edition).

[^10]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 255.


