The Prophets are on Al-Husayn’s Side
====================================

   
 The discussion of al-Husayn's martyrdom has been one of the mysteries
of creation, one of the legacies of the prophets, and one of the
subjects quite often discussed by the *wasis* and the bearers of the
secrets, so that the Master, Praise to Him, would acquaint them with
this great revolutionary and with his superiority over everyone else: he
was the one who safeguarded the conclusive *Shari’a*.

All those prophets came to pave the way for such *Shari’a* and train the
souls to accept it. Allah will surely reward them for grieving over him,
for denouncing such a painful tragedy.

Adam wept over him, and so did Abraham, the Friend of Allah Moses (‘a)
and Jesus (‘a) condemned his killer and ordered the Israelites to curse
him saying, “Whoever lives to see him should fight on his side for he
would be rewarded as though he was martyred fighting on the side of a
prophet, whether charging or retreating. It is as though I can see his
spot; each and every prophet visits it.” He also addressed it saying,
“You are a spot of plenty of goodness; in you shall be buried the
magnificent moon.”[^1]  
    
 Prophet Isma’il (‘a), the one who was truthful to his promise, opted to
follow his example after being informed of his martyrdom so that the
Awaited Imam, may Allah hasten his reappearance, may avenge his
murder.[^2]

Yahya chose his head to be conveyed and displayed,

Finding his solace in the example of Husayn.

   
 The news of Husayn's impending martyrdom caused the holiest Messenger
of Allah (S) to weep, and he eulogized him though he was still
alive[^3], so what if he had seen him slain at Karbala’ among a group of
his kinsfolk who all were like lanterns that shatter the darkness after
depriving him and all those with him from drinking the same water they
had permitted the animals to drink?  
    
 Yes, the Prophet of Mercy (S) witnessed a piece of his heart in such a
condition for which the heavens are rent asunder, and he saw that a huge
multitude immersed in falsehood was bent on eradicating his Progeny anew
from the world. Some of those who were with him saw him looking once at
them and once at the sky, submitting to destiny.[^4]  
    
 When the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) passed by Karbala’ on his march
to *Siffin,* he alighted there, pointed to a particular spot and said,
“There shall they alight,” then he pointed to another spot and said,
“There shall their blood be spilled.

The offspring of Muhammad (S) shall alight there.” After a while he
said, “Alas! O soil from which some people shall enter Paradise without
judgment!”[^5] Then he released his tears, and all those who were with
him shed their tears, too, for seeing him thus weeping. He informed his
closest followers that his son al-Husayn (‘a) would be martyred on that
spot together with many youths who descend from Muhammad (S) together
with his companions who are the masters of martyrs. Nobody ever reached
their lofty status, nor will any..., ever.[^6]  
    
 In another statement which he (‘a) made when word was circulated that a
group of young people belonging to Muhammad's family would be killed at
Karbala’, he said, “The heavens and the earth shall weep for them,
too.[^7]

May my father be sacrificed for one whose only supporter was Allah.”[^8]
Then he added saying, “Banu Umayyah shall not cease immersing themselves
in their misguidance till they unjustly spill the forbidden blood during
the forbidden month It is as though I look at a handsome young man
swimming in his blood. So once they do so, they will have none to seek
excuses on their behalf, nor will they be able to maintain their
government.”[^9]

Salman the Persian once passed by Karbala’ on his way to Mada'in and
said, “These are the places where my brethren will be killed, and this
is the place where they will camp and their blood spilled! Here will the
son of the best of the first generations and of the last will be
killed.”[^10]

Jesus son of Mary (‘a) passed once by the land of Karbala’ and saw
gazelle grazing. The gazelle told him that they were grazing there only
because of their love for the soil of the blessed offspring of Ahmad the
Prophet (S), and that they felt secure in that land. Jesus (‘a) took
some of their dung, sniffed it then supplicated saying, “O Allah!
Preserve it so that his [Husayn's] father may sniff it, too, and find in
it means of condolence and solace.”

The dung remained there till the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) came to
Karbala’. By that time, it had turned yellow due to the passage of time.
He took it, sniffed it then wept. He passed it on to Ibn ‘Abbas saying,
“Keep it; if you one day see it boiling in blood, you should then know
that al-Husayn is killed.” He did. On ‘Ashura Day in the afternoon, he
saw it boiling in blood.[^11]

[^1]: Shaikh Abul-Qasim Ja’far Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ja’far Ibn Musa Ibn
Qawlawayh al-Qummi (d. 367 A.H./978 A.D.), Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 67.

[^2]: Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 65.

[^3]: al-Suyuti, Al-Khasa’is, Vol. 2, p. 125, quoting Umm al-Fadl and
Anas. It is also narrated by al-Marudi on p. 83 of his book A’lam
al-Nubuwwa quoting ‘Ayisha. When such news came to the Messenger of
Allah (S), he was in the company of ‘Ali (‘a), Abu Bakr, ‘Umar,
Huthayfah, ‘Ammar, and Abu Tharr. Ibn Hajar al-Haythami narrated it on
p. 188, Vol. 9, of his book Mujma’ al-Zawa'id quoting ‘Ayisha. It is
also narrated by Zakariya al-Ansari in his book Fath al-Baqi edited by
the faqih al-Iraqi where it is mentioned at the end of p. 25, Vol. 1.

[^4]: Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 65.

[^5]: Nasr Ibn Muzahim, Siffin, pp. 157-159.

[^6]: Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 27.

[^7]: Abu Na’im, Dala'il al-Nubuwwa, Vol. 2, p. 211.

[^8]: Usd al-Ghabah, Vol. 4, p. 169.

[^9]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha (first Egyptian edition),
Vol. 4, p. 363.

[^10]: al-Kashshi (Indian edition), Rijal, p. 13.

[^11]: as-Saduq, Ikmal ad-Din, p. 295.


