Muslim’s Uprising
=================

   
 When Muslim came to know about what had happened to Hani, he feared
being assassinated; therefore, he rushed to rise prior to the date that
he had set with the public. He ordered ‘Abdullah Ibn Hazim to call upon
his men, who had then filled the houses surrounding him, to gather
together. Four thousand men assembled. They were shouting Badr's call
that was: “O Supported One! Annihilate them!”  
    
 ‘Ubaydullah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Aziz al-Kindi was placed in command of the
Kindah and the Rabi’ah quarters. “March ahead of me,” said Muslim, “in
command of the cavalry.” Muslim Ibn ‘Awsajah al-Asadi was placed in
command of Mathhaj and Banu Asad. “Take charge of the infantry,” Muslim
ordered him.

Abu Thumama al-Sa’idi was placed in charge of Tamim and Hamdan, whereas
al-’Abbas Ibn Ja’dah al-Jadli was given the command of the Medina
troops.  
    
 They marched towards the governor's mansion. Ibn Ziyad fortified
himself inside it, locking all its gates. He could not resist because
there were only thirty policemen with him and twenty of his close men
and slaves.

But the substance from which the people of Kufa were made was treachery;
so, their standards kept disappearing till no more than three hundred
men remained out of the original four thousand.[^1] Al-Ahnaf Ibn Qays
described them as a whore who demanded a different man every day.[^2]  
    
 When those inside the mansion called upon the people of Kufa saying, “O
Kufians! Fear Allah and do not expose yourselves to Syrian cavaliers
whose might you have already tasted and whom you have already tested on
the battlefield,” the remaining three hundred dispersed, so much so that
a man would come to his son, brother, or cousin and tell him to go home,
and a wife would cling to her husband till he returned home.[^3]  
    
 Muslim offered the evening prayers at the [grand Kufa] mosque
accompanied by only thirty men. Then, when he went to Kindah's quarters,
only three men accompanied him.[^4] He hardly proceeded for a short
while before finding himself without anyone at all to show him the
way.[^5]

He alighted from his horse and cautiously traversed Kufa's alleys not
knowing where to go.[^6]  
    
 When people abandoned Muslim, their noise died down, and Ibn Ziyad
could not hear the voice of any of their men. Ibn Ziyad ordered his
bodyguards to inspect the mosque's courtyard to see whether there were
any men lying in ambush.

They, therefore, kept lowering their lanterns down its walls and
lighting reeds then lowering them down with ropes till they reached the
mosque's courtyard.

They could not see anyone, so they informed Ibn Ziyad who ordered his
caller to call people to assemble at the mosque. When they filled the
mosque, he ascended the pulpit and said, “‘Aqil's son has caused the
dissension and disunity with which you all are familiar; so, there is no
security henceforth to any man in whose house we find him.

Anyone who captures him and brings him to us will be paid his blood
money. O servants of Allah! Fear Allah and safeguard your obedience and
oath of allegiance, and do not expose yourselves to peril.”  
    
 Then he ordered al-Hasin Ibn Tamim, chief of his police force, to
search homes and highways, warning him that he would kill Muslim should
the latter succeed in fleeing from Kufa.[^7]  
    
 Al-Hasin stationed his guards at highway crossroads and pursued the
dignitaries who had supported Muslim, arresting ‘Abd al-A’la Ibn Yazid
al-Kalbi and ‘Imarah Ibn Salkhab al-Azdi. He threw them in jail then
killed them. Then he jailed a group of prominent leaders as a safeguard
against what they might do. Among them were al-Asbagh Ibn Nubatah and
al-Harith al-A’war al-Hamadani.[^8]  
  

[^1]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 207.

[^2]: al-Balathiri, Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. 5, p. 338. Abul-Faraj
al-Isfahani, Al-Aghani, Vol. 17, p. 162. Ibrahim Ibn al-Ashtar described
them as such to Mis’ab when the latter had asked the first to raise for
him an army from among the people of Iraq.

[^3]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 208.

[^4]: al-Dinawari, Al-Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 240.

[^5]: al-Shareeshi, Sharh Maqamat al-Hariri, Vol. 1, p. 192, at the
conclusion of the tenth maqam.

[^6]: Ibn Nama, Al-Luhuf, p. 29.

[^7]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, pp. 209-210.

[^8]: On p. 169, Vol. 6, of Ibn Sa’d's Tabaqat, Sadir's edition, the
author says, “Al-Harith al-A’war died in Kufa during the caliphate of
‘Abdullah Ibn al-Zubayr, and his governor over it was ‘Abdullah Ibn
Yazid al-Ansari al-Khatmi. He performed the funeral prayers for him
according to his own will.”


