al-Mukhtar is Jailed
====================

   
 When Muslim marched, al-Mukhtar was at a village called
Khatwaniyya[^1]. He came accompanied by his supporters raising a green
standard while ‘Abdullah Ibn al-Harith was raising a red one. Having
planted his standard at the door of ‘Amr Ibn Harith's house, he said, “I
want to stop ‘Amr.”[^2]

It became obvious to them that both Muslim and Hani had been killed, and
it was suggested to them that they would feel more secure in the company
of ‘Amr Ibn Harith, and so they did. Ibn Harith testified that they had
both avoided Muslim Ibn ‘Aqil... Ibn Ziyad ordered them jailed after
having reviled al-Mukhtar and hit his face with a lance, gouging one of
his eyes.[^3] They remained in prison till Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon
him, was martyred.[^4]  
    
 Ibn Ziyad ordered Muhammad Ibn al-Ash’ath[^5], Shabth Ibn Rab’i,
al-Qa’qa’ Ibn Shawr al-Thuhli[^6], Hijar Ibn Abjar[^7], Shimr
Thul-Jawshan, and ‘Amr Ibn Harith to surrender and to discourage people
from rebelling[^8]. A number of men, who were controlled by fear,
responded positively to his call in addition to others who coveted rich
rewards and were thus deceived, whereas those whose conscience was pure
went underground, waiting for an opportunity to launch an attack on the
camp of falsehood.

[^1]: al-Balathiri, Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. 5, p. 214. On p. 449, Vol. 3,
of his encyclopaedia titled Mu’jam al-Buldan, Yaqut al-Hamawi says it is
one of the suburbs of Babylon, Iraq.

[^2]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 215.

[^3]: According to p. 253 of his Al-Ma’arif, Ibn Qutaybah, in a chapter
dealing with those with deformities, and also on p. 303 of Ibn Habib's
Mahbar, ‘Ubaydullah Ibn Ziyad hit al-Mukhtar on the face with his whip,
causing him to lose the vision from one of his eyes.

[^4]: al-Balathiri, Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. 5, p. 215.

[^5]: According to p. 331, Vol. 1, of Khalifah's Tabaqat, Muhammad Ibn
al-Ash’ath is the son of Qays; his mother is Umm Farwah daughter of Abu
Quhafah. He and Mis’ab were killed in 67 A.H./686 A.D. during
al-Mukhtar's uprising. This is also stated on p. 206, Part 2, Vol. 2, of
Al-Jarh wal-Ta’dil.

[^6]: On p. 328, Vol. 1, of Khalifah's Tabaqat, his full name is given
as al-Qa’qa’ Ibn Shawr Ibn al-Nu’man Ibn Ghanal Ibn Harithah Ibn Abbad
Ibn Imri'ul-Qays Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Shayban Ibn Thuhl, a resident of Kufa.
This is also stated on p. 137, Vol. 3, of Al-Jarh wal-Ta’dil.

[^7]: On p. 84, Vol. 6, of al-Tabari's Tarikh, the author indicates that
he was Christian, and that he died in 40 A.H./661 A.D.

[^8]: Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 4, p. 12.


