Muslim at the House of Taw’a
============================

   
    
 Ibn ‘Aqil's feet took him to the quarters of Banu Jiblah of the tribe
of Kindah He stood at the door of a house of a freed bondmaid named
Taw’a who had a number of sons. She used to be the bondmaid of
al-Ash’ath Ibn Qays who freed her.

Asid al-Hadrami married her, and she gave birth to his son Bilal who was
in the crowd when his mother was standing at the door waiting for him.
Muslim requested her to give him some water, which she did. He then
requested her to host him, telling her that he was a stranger in that
land without a family or a tribe, that he belonged to a family capable
of intercession on the Day of Judgment, and that his name was Muslim Ibn
‘Aqil.

She took him to a room that was not the same one where her son used to
sleep, and she served him some food. Her son was surprised to see her
entering that room quite often, so he asked her about it. She refused to
answer his question except after obtaining an oath from him to keep the
matter to himself.  
    
 But in the morning he informed Ibn Ziyad of where Muslim had been
hiding. Ibn Ziyad dispatched al-Ash’ath accompanied by seventy men who
belonged to the Qays tribe in order to arrest him. Upon hearing the
horses' hoofs ploughing the ground, Muslim realized that he was being
pursued[^1], so he hurried to finish a supplication that he was reciting
following the morning prayers. Then he put on his battle gear and said
to his hostess Taw’a:

“You have carried out your share of righteousness, and you have secured
your share of the intercession of the Messenger of Allah (S). Yesterday,
I saw my uncle the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) in a vision telling me
that I was going to join him the next day.”[^2]  
    
 He came out to face them raising his unsheathed sword as they assaulted
the house, succeeding in repelling their attack. They repeated their
attack, and again he repelled them as he recited these poetic verses:

It is only death; so, do whatever you devise,

For you shall no doubt meet your demise;

So I shall be patient about the Command

Of Allah, His Glory is Grand!

Allah's decree is always done

In His creation; this is well known.

He killed as many as forty-one of their men[^3], and he was so strong
that he would take hold of one man then hurl him on the rooftop.[^4]  
    
 Ibn al-Ash’ath sent a messenger to Ibn Ziyad requesting
re-enforcements. The messenger came back to him carrying the latter's
blame of his incompetence. He, therefore, sent him this message:

“Do you think that you sent me to one of Kufa's shopkeepers or to a
Nabatean from Hira?! Rather, you sent me to one of the swords of
[Prophet] Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah (S)!” Ibn Ziyad then assisted him with
additional soldiers.[^5]  
    
 Fighting intensified. Muslim and Bakir Ibn Hamran al-Ahmari exchanged
blows. Bakir struck Muslim on the mouth, cutting his upper lip, wounding
the lower one and breaking two of his lower teeth. Muslim fiercely
struck him with one blow on his head and another on his shoulder muscle,
almost splitting his stomach, killing him instantly.[^6]  
    
 Then they attacked him from the house's rooftop, hurling rocks at him.
They kept burning reed bales then throwing them at him. He attacked them
in the alley as he quoted the following *rajaz* verses composed by
Hamran Ibn Malik:  
  

I swore not to be killed except as a free man,

Though I found death something repelling;

Every man will one day face evil,

And what is cold will be mingled with what is hot.

The soul's ray returned, so it did settle,

I fear only being charged with lying or being tempted.[^7]

   
 His wounds were numerous; he bled extensively, so he supported his body
on the side of the house. It was then that they assaulted him with
arrows and stones. “Why do you hurl stones at me,” he asked them, “as
non-believers are stoned, the member of the household of the pure
Prophet (S) that I am?

Do you not have any respect for the Messenger of Allah (S) with regard
to one of his own descendants?” Ibn al-Ash’ath said to him, “Please do
not get yourself killed while you are under my protection.” Muslim asked
him, “Shall I then be captured so long as I have some strength in me?
No, by Allah! This shall never be.”

Then he attacked Ibn al-Ash’ath who fled away before him. They attacked
Aqil from all directions. Thirst had taken its toll on him. A man
stabbed him from the back, so he fell on the ground and was
arrested.[^8]  
    
 Another account says that they dug a hole for him that they covered
then fled before him, thus luring him into falling in it, then they
arrested him.[^9] When they took his sword away from him, he cried. ‘Amr
Ibn ‘Ubaydullah al-Salami was surprised to see him cry.  
  

[^1]: Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil al-Talibiyyin. al-Tabari, Tarikh,
Vol. 6, p. 210. al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 208, chapter
10.

[^2]: Shaikh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Nafs al-Mahmum, p. 56.

[^3]: Ibn Shahr Ashub, Manaqib, Vol. 2, p. 212.

[^4]: Shaikh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Nafs al-Mahmum, p. 57.

[^5]: Shaikh Lutfallah Ibn al-Mawla Muhammad Jawad al-Safi
al-Gulpaygani), Al-Muntakhab, p. 299, tenth night.

[^6]: al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 210, chapter 10.

[^7]: These verses are mentioned by Ibn Tawus on p. 30 of his book
Al-Luhuf (Saida's edition), and by Ibn Nama in his book Muthir al-Ahzan,
in reference to what he calls the Battle of the Qarn. They are also
cited on p. 209, Vol. 1, chapter 10, of al-Khawarizmi's book Maqtal
al-Husayn with the author providing the name of the poet who composed
them. Ibn Shahr Ashub cites six lines of the original poem on p. 212,
Vol. 2, of his book Al-Manaqib (Iranian edition). No historian who wrote
about battles during the jahiliyya period makes any reference to such a
battle. But on p. 64, Vol. 7, of Yaqut al-Hamawi's encyclopedia Mu’jam
al-Buldan, on p. 1062, Vol. 3, of al-Bakri's Mu’jam bima Ista’jam, and
p. 310, Vol. 9, of Taj al-’Arus, this name is given to a mountain where
a battle, in which Banu ‘Amir lost, took place. On p. 321 of
al-Qalqashandi's book Nihayat al-Arab, the author says, “Banu Qarn are
one of the branches of the tribe of Murad. Among them is Oways
al-Qarni.” Yet all of this does not really tell us the whole truth. Yes,
Muhammad Ibn Habib, the genealogist, on p. 243 of Risalat al-Mughtalin
[a dissertation about those assassinated], which is listed among the
seventh group of rare manuscripts researched by ‘Abd al-Salam Harun, it
is indicated that [the tribe of] Khath’am killed al-Samil, brother of
Thul-Jawshan al-Kilabi, so Thul-Jawshan raided them assisted by ‘Ayeenah
Ibn Hasin on the condition that the latter would take the booty. They
fought Khath’am at Fazar, a mountain, killing some of their men and
taking booty. Hamran Ibn Malik Ibn ‘Abd al-Malik al-Khat’ami was fought
at the mountain. He was ordered to surrender, whereupon he recited these
lines:   I swore never to be killed except as a free man; I saw death
something abominable; I loathe being deceived or tempted. Then he was
killed. His sister composed a poem eulogizing him in which she said: Woe
upon Hamran, one who did not give himself away, He did more than his
share of goodness, He owed others nothing at all, A valiant fighter who
stubbornly fought: How could he possibly accept the shame?

[^8]: Ibn Shahr Ashub, Manaqib, Vol. 2, p. 212. al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal
al-Husayn, Vol. 1, pp. 209-210.

[^9]: al-Turayhi, Al-Muntakhab, p. 299 (published by the Hayderi Press,
Najaf, Iraq), in the discussion of the tenth night.


