The Journey to Iraq
===================

When it came to Husayn's knowledge that Yazid had appointed ‘Amr Ibn
Sa’id Ibn al-’As as the head of an army, ordering him to take charge of
the pilgrimage caravans and to kill al-Husayn (‘a) wherever he could
find him[^1], he decided to leave Mecca before finishing the pilgrimage
and be satisfied with performing only the *‘umra* because he hated that
the sanctity of the House might otherwise be violated.[^2]

Mecca: Al-Husayn (‘a) delivers a Sermon
---------------------------------------

   
 Before departing, al-Husayn (‘a) stood up to deliver a sermon. He said,

“*All praise is due to Allah. The Will of Allah be done. There is no
might except in Allah. Allah has blessed His Messenger. Death is
inscribed on Adam's children like a necklace on a girl's neck. My
passion to be reunited with my ancestors is like that of Jacob for
Joseph, and the demise I shall soon meet is better for me.*

*I see my limbs being torn by speeding steeds in the desert between
al-Nawawis and Karbala’, so they shall fill, through my death, hollow
bellies and starved pouches. There is no avoiding a day recorded by the
Pen.*

*Whatever pleases Allah also pleases us, we Ahl al-Bayt. We shall be
patient as we face His trial, and He shall give us in full the rewards
due to those who persevere. The Prophet's offspring shall not deviate
from His path. Rather, they shall be gathered before him in the presence
of the most Holy One.*

*His eyes shall be cooled upon seeing them assembled, and he shall
fulfill his promise. Anyone among us who is ready to sacrifice himself
and is determined to meet Allah should join our departing party, for I
shall depart in the morning if Allah Almighty so wills*”.[^3]  
    
 His departure took place on the 8th of Thul-Hijjah, 60 A.H/September
12, 680 A.D. He was accompanied by his family, slaves, and Shi’as from
the people of Hijaz, Basra and Kufa who joined him during his sojourn in
Mecca. He gave each one of them ten dinars and a camel to carry his
luggage.[^4]  
  

Attempts to Dissuade Him From Departing
---------------------------------------

   
 A group of his family members, in addition to others, asked him to
postpone his trip till he could get to know the condition of the public.
They feared the treachery of the Kufians and were apprehensive of a
possible reversal in the situation. But the “Father of the Oppressed”
was unable to reveal the knowledge with him about his fate to everyone
he met.

The facts, as they stand, are not to be revealed to just anyone who
seeks them due to the different levels of people's comprehension and the
differences in their ability to absorb. He, peace be upon him, had to
answer each person according to his own condition and ability to
comprehend.  
    
 He, for example, said to [‘Abdullah] Ibn al-Zubayr, “My father told me
once that there is a ram in Mecca through which its sanctity would be
violated, and I do not like to be it. Should I be killed outside Mecca
even the distance of a span, it is better for me than being killed
inside it.[^5]

By Allah! Had I been inside one of these holes, they would have taken me
out of it and done what they wish to do. By Allah! They shall oppress me
and transgress just as the Jews oppressed and transgressed the sanctity
of the Sabbath.”  
    
 As soon as Ibn al-Zubayr had left, al-Husayn (‘a) said to those in his
company, “There is nothing in this world this man loves more than seeing
me depart from Hijaz. He knows very well that people do not equate him
with me, so he wished to see me leave so that the space will be all
his.”[^6]

During the same night following which al-Husayn (‘a) left for Iraq,
Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyya came to him and said, “You know very well how
the Kufians betrayed your father and brother, and I fear lest your case
should be like theirs.

Stay here, then, for you are the most respected one in the *Haram*, and
the most secure.” Al-Husayn (‘a) said to him, “I fear lest Yazid son of
Mu’awiyah should assassinate me inside the *Haram*, thus becoming the
one on whose account the sanctity of this House is violated.” Ibn
al-Hanafiyya suggested to him to go to Yemen or to other parts of the
peninsula, so Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) promised him to think about it.  
    
 During the early hours of the morning, al-Husayn (‘a) started the
preparations for his departure. Ibn al-Hanafiyya again came to him and
held the reins of the she-camel upon which al-Husayn (‘a) had already
mounted, saying,

“Did you not promise me to think about my suggestion?” “Yes,” al-Husayn
(‘a) answered, “*But after your departure, the Messenger of Allah (S)
came to me in a vision and said, ‘O Husayn! Get out! Allah Almighty has
decreed to see you slain.'*”

Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyya said, **“*****Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi
rajia’un*****”** (We are Allah's, and to Him is our return). He asked
him about the reason for letting his family accompany him. Al-Husayn
(‘a) said, “*It is the Will of Allah to see them taken captives*.”[^7]  
    
 ‘Abdullah son of Ja’far at-Tayyar, and also his sons ‘Awn and Muhammad,
wrote him saying, “I plead to you in the Name of Allah to go home once
you read this letter, for I fear lest you should be killed and your Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) be eradicated.

If you get killed, the light on earth will be put out, for you are the
standard of guidance and the hope of the faithful. Do not hurry in
marching, for I shall see you shortly after you read this letter, and
peace be with you.”  
    
 ‘Abdullah took a letter from Yazid's governor over Mecca, ‘Amr Ibn
Sa’id Ibn al-’As, granting al-Husayn (‘a) security. He brought it to
al-Husayn (‘a) who was then accompanied by Yahya Ibn Sa’id Ibn al-’As,
and he tried very hard to dissuade al-Husayn (‘a) from marching to his
destination, but Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) refused. He informed ‘Abdullah that
he had seen the Messenger of Allah (S) in a vision giving him an order
which he had to carry out.

He asked him what he had seen. “*I have not narrated this vision to
anyone*,” said Imam Husayn (‘a), “*and I shall not narrate it till I
meet my Lord, the most Exalted One, the most Great*.”[^8]  
    
 Ibn ‘Abbas said to him, “O cousin! I seek solace, but you are not
solacing me, and I fear for you if you do it lest you should perish and
be eliminated. The people of Iraq are treacherous; so, do not go near
them. Stay in this land, for you are the master of the people of Hijaz.
If the people of Iraq want you, as they claim, then let them unseat
their governor and enemy, then you should go to them.

If you insist on going out, go to Yemen, for it has fortresses and
valleys, and it is a wide and spacious land, and your father has many
supporters there. You will be insulated from [the evil] people. You will
then be able to write people, dispatch your messengers and disseminate
your message, for you will then realize your objective in good health”
Al-Husayn (‘a) said to him,

“*O cousin! By Allah! I know that you are an advisor with compassion,
yet I have already decided to go*.” Ibn ‘Abbas then said, “If you insist
on going, do not take your women and children, for I fear lest you
should be killed as they look on.” Al-Husayn (‘a) said, “*By Allah! They
[the Umayyads] shall not leave me alone till I am dead. Should they do
so, Allah will appoint over them those who will humiliate them till they
become more degraded than a woman's rag*.”[^9]

 

Why did the Imam Leave?
-----------------------

   
 This is the ultimate end of anyone seeking to know why al-Husayn (‘a)
did not tarry before going to Iraq. The father of ‘Abdullah [Imam
al-Husayn, peace be upon him] was not unfamiliar with the nature of the
Kufians or with their treachery and hypocrisy. But what could he do
after they had expressed their loyalty, obedience and submission to his
orders?

Can the Imam of a nation be excused for not providing guidance when he
is solicited, or from redeeming them from the claws of misguidance and
guiding them to what best pleases the Lord of the World, especially
since their dissension and disunity had not yet become manifest?

The reason he gave for marching to meet them, despite their treacherous
nature which manifested itself in the way they treated him, his father
and his brother (‘a), would prompt those who look at the exterior
appearance of matters to blame him.

The Imam chosen for the guidance of the public is too great to do
anything that would be used as an argument against him. The country to
which Ibn ‘Abbas and others referred has no security, and what happened
between Busr Ibn Arta'ah and the people of Yemen underscores the
latter’s weakness of resistance and inability to face an oppressor.  
    
 Such is the view expressed by al-Shaikh al-Shushtari, may Allah elevate
his status. He has said, “Al-Husayn (‘a) had two obligations: a real
one, and an evident one: a) As for the real one that caused him to face
death and to expose his family to captivity and his children to
slaughter, despite his knowledge [of such an imminent fate], it is due
to the fact that the tyrants from among Banu Umayyah had convinced
themselves that they were right and that ‘Ali and his offspring and
supporters were wrong, so much so that they made cursing him part of
their Friday congregational prayers...

One of them forgot once to curse ‘Ali (‘a) in his Friday sermon, so they
had to remind him of it. Since he was travelling, he had to repeat his
prayers as *qaza*! Had al-Husayn (‘a) surrendered and sworn the oath of
allegiance to Yazid, there would have been no trace of the truth left.

This is so because there were many who thought that entering into a
covenant with the Umayyads was indicative of their legitimacy and good
conduct. But after al-Husayn (‘a) had fought them, exposing his sacred
life and those of his family and children to the atrocities that befell
them, it became quite clear to the people of his time, and to succeeding
generations, that right was on his side and that those who oppressed him
were the misguided ones.

b) As regarding the superficially evident cause, he (‘a) sought to
safeguard himself and his family by all possible means, but he could not
do so. They prohibited him from going anywhere.

Yazid wrote his governor over Medina to kill him. He, therefore, had to
get out of it fearing for his life, then he sought refuge with Allah's
Sacred House, the safe haven of anyone in apprehension. But they sought
him even there to either arrest or to kill him even if he had been found
clinging to the curtains of the Ka’ba.

He had no choice except to perform a singular *‘umra* rather than a
complete *Hajj*. Then he went to Kufa because its people had written him
and sworn the oath of allegiance to him, stressing the importance of his
going to meet with them in order to save them from the evil of the
Umayyads.

He evidently was, therefore, morally obligated to go along with what
they had suggested in order to bring his argument against them home, and
so that they would not argue on the Day of Judgment saying that they
sought refuge with him and solicited his help against the oppression of
the oppressors, but he accused them of dissension and did not help them.

Had he not gone to them, where else would he have gone especially since
the earth suddenly became straitened before him despite its vastness?
This is the meaning of his saying to Ibn al-Hanafiyya, ‘Had I entered
inside one of these land cracks, they would have taken me out of it and
killed me!'”  
    
 The Imam (‘a) had likewise said to Abu Harrah al-Asadi once, “*Banu
Umayyah confiscated my wealth, yet I remained patient. And they defamed
my honour, and I again remained patient. Then they sought to kill me, so
I fled.*”[^10]  
    
 Everyone in Mecca was grieved to see him leave. When they persisted in
their attempts to dissuade him from leaving, he quoted poetic verses
composed by a poet from the Aws tribe who had been warned by one of his
cousins against participating in the *jihad* in support of the Messenger
of Allah (S):

I shall proceed, for there is no shame

In death to a man who set his mind

To follow the truth

And to perform *jihad* as a Muslim.

He consoled the righteous men in person,

Leaving behind the depraved,

Opposing the criminals.

Then he cited the verse saying, ***“And Allah's Command is a decree
already passed.”(33:38)***[^11]

He loathed peace in humiliation,

Honour loathes a free man being subdued,

So he said: O soul! Refrain from shame:

At the time of death, what is bitter tastes good!

Surrounded he became by his family's best youth

A family to which sublime honour and prominence belong

If it marches in the darkness of the night it shines:

Its shiny faces over-shining the brightest of the stars

By brave knights on wading steeds

In whose walk there is pride and grace.

Swift in the desert, dignified in stature,

Might in his help, subdued for him the conveyance.

Slapping the earth's face, red in hue

Not by slapping reddened but by the enemy's blood.

These are the folks from ‘Ali the conqueror

The darkness through them dissipates

And harm at bay is kept.

Thousands do they meet, courageous and bold

If and when their banners unfold

On a day when the face of death frowned,

When sharp swords did smile,

When the day of death is in black and in woe,

Their faces with delight become bright and mellow

As the faces of startled brave men turn yellow.

They stood on the battlefield only to cross

To death: the bridge is awaiting everyone who walks.

They assault, while heroes out of fear hesitate

And lions are accustomed to assault.

Till they were spent under the clouds of dust

On a battle resembling the Assembly Day!

Nay! Less terrifying is the Assembling Day!

They died in dignity, for them the war testifies

That they were men of honour when faced by what terrifies.

White bandages decorated their every head,

Blood outfitted them with outfits of crimson red.

Again and again the Oppressed One went back to his foes

With his sword and mare helping him to give them blows.

On the day of struggle with dust he covered every face

Of his troops as horizons grew pale shrouding the place.

If his lance composes poetry in one's heart,

His sword writes prose on his foes' necks on its part.

So one is not one when the swords clamour,

Nor two are two when lance clashes with the armour:

Had he wished to finish his foes at hand

He would have shaken existence itself at his command.

But decree had already passed, so he opted to march

To death patiently, for patient are the oppressed.

On the hot desert sands he dawned

A corpse that fell a prey

To every sword and lance in every way.

Between the ends of the lances he was spent

Thirsty, his corpse trampled upon by trained steeds

O son of Hasan! I complain to you for these are

Agonies crowding my heart

Do you know how much trial and tribulation

Your revered offspring faced at the *Taff*?

Let me console you in their regard,

For they approached death with heart.

Not a drop wetted their thirst,

Buried under the heat, in the desert,

Wind burying them with the dust...

What will you, O bereaved one, assault and be

Turning the blood of your foes into a sea?

Will you close your eyes when revenge can you take

From seeing the blood which, though on the right guidance

Dawned having none to console?

Near the *Taff* are the youths of Hashim

Buried under the lances' tips, their blood is sought

By everyone! No respite there shall be till you

Raise it so nothing can stand in its way.

A fire you shall light, a war no mighty host can subdue

How many times did Umayyah stir your wounds

No healing of the wound till the Meeting Day,

No healing to babes whom Umayyah nursed with death

Instead of breasts' milk, blood was given instead.

Here they lie dead, here the arrows embrace them,

Here the sands make their every bed.

A free lady who used to be confined

Dawned on the plains hot like timber lit by the heat

And a pure woman not used to mourning

Is now with whips driven, rebuked.

And a startled youth whose heartbeat almost

Sparks with fright... And another confused,

By the sight of steeds not at all amused,

Welcomed the night without a haven, without resort

Her veil, in enemy hands,

Is being passed from this to that,

So with her hands she seeks to hide

What with her veil she used to shield

Walked unveiled before the enemy eyes.

From one country to another she cries...

They grew up confined, they never knew

What slavery was, what’s the plain or the terrain.

Now they were insulted and dismayed,

By their enemy were they now displayed

For all to jeer at and to see:

A war trophy they now came to be...

Taken from land to distant land,

Handled by a filthy hand.[^12]

 

al-Tanim
--------

   
 Al-Husayn (‘a) marched on his way out of Mecca via al-Tan’im[^13] where
he met a caravan laden with merchandise and clothes sent to Yazid Ibn
Mu’awiyah by Bahir Ibn Yasar al-Himyari, his governor over Yemen.

Al-Husayn (‘a) seized it and said to those who tended to the camels,
“Whoever among you wishes to join us in our march to Iraq will be paid
in full, and we will keep him good company. And whoever prefers to part
with us, we shall compensate him according to the distance he
travelled.” Some of them parted from him, whereas others preferred his
company.[^14]  
    
 Al-Husayn (‘a) considered that caravan his own wealth that Allah
Almighty put at his disposal on account of his being the Imam appointed
by the Omnipotent, Praise to Him. Yazid and his father had already
confiscated what belonged to him as well as what belonged to the
Muslims, so it became mandatory on him to take control of the Muslims'
spoils to distribute to the needy among them.

He, indeed, gave of it generously to the bedouins who accompanied him on
the way and who complained to him of the pain of poverty from which they
were suffering. But it was a destiny that the Master of the Youths of
Paradise could not give what the oppressors had confiscated of Prophet
Muhammad's nation back to its rightful owners, although his precious
sacrifice removed from visions the veils of the misguidance of those who
transgressed on Divine Authority.  
  

al-Sifah
--------

   
 At al-Sifah, al-Husayn (‘a) met al-Farazdaq Ibn Ghalib, the poet, so he
asked him about the people whom he had left behind. Al-Farazdaq said,
“Their hearts are with you; the swords are with Banu Umayyah, and
Destiny descends from the heavens!”

Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) said, “*You have said the truth. To Allah belongs the
affair, and Allah does whatever He pleases. Every day, our Lord deals
with a matter. If Destiny descends with what we love, we shall praise
Allah for His blessings, and He is the One Whose help we seek so that we
may thank Him enough.*

*But if we are destined not to attain our desires, then none whose
intention is to effect righteousness, and whose heart is full of piety,
has transgressed*.” Al-Farazdaq asked the Imam (‘a) about his verdicts
regarding issues such as *nathr*, rituals, etc. After that, they
parted.[^15]  
    
 It is narrated that al-Farazdaq said, “I went out of Basra seeking to
perform the *‘umra*. I saw an army in the desert and inquired who it
belonged to. I was told that it was the army of al-Husayn Ibn ‘Ali (‘a),
so I decided to express my gratitude to the Messenger of Allah (S). I
came to him and greeted him.

He asked me, ‘Who is the man?' I said, ‘Al-Farazdaq Ibn Ghalib.' He
said, ‘This is a short name!' Said I, ‘Your name is even shorter! You
are the son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah!'”[^16]

That ‘Irq
---------

   
 Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) marched on. At That ‘Irq[^17] he met Bishr Ibn
Ghalib and asked him about the people of Kufa. “Their swords are with
Banu Umayyah,” he said, “and their hearts are with you.” “You have said
the truth,” said the Imam (‘a).[^18]  
    
 Al-Rayyash narrated about those who met al-Husayn (‘a) on his way to
Kufa. This narrator says, “Having performed the pilgrimage, I set out on
the highway alone. As I thus walked, I noticed a number of tents, so I
went in their direction and inquired who they belonged to. I was told
that they belonged to al-Husayn son of ‘Ali and Fatima, peace be upon
all of them.

I went to see him, and I saw him leaning on the entrance of the tent
reading a book in his hand. I said, ‘O son of the Messenger of Allah!
May my parents be sacrificed for your sake! What brought you to this
desolate land which has neither countryside nor strongholds?'

He, peace be upon him, said to me, ‘These people [the Umayyads]
terrorized me, and here are the letters of the people of Kufa, my
assassins. So, once they do it, leaving no sanctity of Allah without
violating it, Allah will send them those who will kill them till they
become more debased than a bondmaid's rag'.”[^19]  
  

al-Hajir
--------

   
 Having reached al-Hajir[^20] from the direction of al-Rumma, he sent
the people of Kufa the answer to the letter he had received from Muslim
Ibn ‘Aqil and dispatched it with Qays Ibn Mushir al-Saydawi[^21]. In it,
he said, “Muslim Ibn ‘Aqil's letter reached me.

In it, he informs me of your consensus to support us and to demand our
rights; therefore, I plead to Allah to enable us to do what is good and
to reward you with the greatest of His rewards. I have come to you from
Mecca on the eighth of Thul-Hijjah; so, if my messenger reaches you,
maintain your stand, for I shall reach you in a few days.”  
  

Some Informers
--------------

   
 Al-Husayn (‘a) departed from al-Hajir. As he passed by each watering
place of the Arabs, the number of those who joined him kept
increasing[^22]. Finally he reached a watering place where he met
‘Abdullah Ibn Muti’ al-’Adawi.

When the latter came to know that al-Husayn (‘a) intended to reach Iraq,
he said to him, “I fear for you, O son of the Messenger of Allah, lest
the sanctity of Islam should be violated, and I plead to you in the Name
of Allah with regard to the Arab's sanctity. By Allah! If you seek what
is in the hands of Banu Umayyah, they will kill you, and once they have
killed you, they will not fear anyone else after you,” but al-Husayn
(‘a) insisted on marching[^23].  
** **

al-Khuzaymiyya
--------------

   
 He, peace be upon him, stayed at al-Khuzaymiyya[^24] for one day and
one night. In the morning, his sister Zainab, peace be upon her, came to
him and said, “I heard a voice saying:  
  

O eyes, do exceedingly celebrate!

Who, after me, shall the martyrs mourn?

Who shall mourn folks driven by fate

To their destiny, to fulfill a promise sworn?”

He said, “O sister! Whatever is decreed shall come to pass.”[^25]  
  

Zarud
-----

   
 When al-Husayn (‘a) reached Zarud[^26], Zuhayr Ibn al-Qayn
al-Bajali[^27], who did not support him and even hated to be near him,
alighted near him. Water gathered them somehow at the same place. As
Zuhayr and his group were eating, a messenger sent by al-Husayn (‘a)
came to them inviting Zuhayr to meet his master Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a).

Zuhayr hesitated to say anything, but his wife, Dulham daughter of ‘Amr,
urged him to meet the Imam (‘a) and to listen to what he had to
say[^28].  
    
 Zuhayr, therefore, went and swiftly returned elated with his face
showing signs of excitement. He ordered all is belongings to be packed.
He also ordered everyone to go to the Master of the Youths of Paradise
(‘a). He said to his wife, “Go to your family, for I hate to see you
receiving any harm on my account.”

Then he said to those around him, “Whoever among you loves to support
the son of the Messenger of Allah (S), let him join us; otherwise, this
should be the last time I see you.”  
    
 Then he narrated to them what Salman al-Farsi had foretold him with
regard to the imminent battle. Zuhayr said, “We invaded Ballinger[^29]
and we were victorious, so we acquired a great deal of booty and we,
therefore, were very glad. When Salman al-Farsi[^30] saw how excited we
all were, he said, ‘If you ever meet the Master of the Youths from the
Progeny of Muhammad, peace of Allah and blessings be upon him and his
progeny, you should then be more elated for fighting on his side than
you now are elated on account of your booty; as for me, I now bid you
farewell.'”[^31]  
    
 Zuhayr's wife said, “Allah has chosen this honour for you, and I
request you to remember me on the Day of Judgment and say a good word on
my behalf to al-Husayn's grandfather, peace be upon him.”[^32]  
    
 At Zarud, the Imam (‘a) was informed of how Muslim Ibn ‘Aqil and Hani
Ibn ‘Urwah were killed, so he kept repeating: *Inna lillah wa inna
ilayhi rajia’un* (We belong to Allah, and to Him shall we return), as he
wept, pleading to Allah to have mercy on them[^33].

With him the Hashemites wept, too, and there was a great deal of wailing
coming from the women’s quarters, so much so that the whole place was
shaken because of Muslim Ibn ‘Aqil being killed. Tears poured
profusely.[^34]  
    
 ‘Abdullah Ibn Salim and al-Munthir Ibn al-Mashma’il, both from the
tribe of Asad, said to the Imam (‘a), “We plead to you in the Name of
Allah, O son of the Messenger of Allah, to go away, for you will not
find any supporter in Mecca.”  
    
 ‘Aqil's offspring stood up and said, “We shall not leave before seeking
revenge or taste of what our brother has tasted.” Al-Husayn (‘a) looked
at them and said, “*There is nothing good in life after these
folks*.”[^35]  
  

O ‘Aqil's son! May you be sacrificed by every soul

For your calamity is the greatest of all...

Let's mourn it with hearts grieved,

For what values our every salted tear?

How many daughters of yours are bereaved,

With hearts within set on fire not fear?

Consoled by the Prophet's grandfather?

So she may near him be pleased.

Now says she, “An uncle of mine is now gone,

“Now who shall his own orphan console?

“Bereaved, spending the night stung by pain,

“Expelled, from her home exiled?”

And how many a courageous warrior

In whose heart did she the fire of grief ignite?

Your cousin, on the *Taff*, did you support,

With his counselling family did he mourn you.

Surrounded by youths like the morning shone,

Youths whose lineage to everyone is known.

We mourned your youth and tragedy

Marked with death and sad destiny.

A *ma'tam* he held for you despite his condition

And even white deer wailed for you.

He called upon his near in kin:

“Avenge his death, O family of the Fatiha!”

Into the mire of death did he lead them,

But now the deer are the ones mired.

Says he, “O folks stingy with their souls!

“Your battle, though serious, is mocked,” he calls.

 

al-Tha’labiyya
--------------

At al-Tha’labiyya, a man came to Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and asked him about
the meaning of the verse saying,

***“(Remember) the Day when We will call every people by their Imam”
(Qur’an, 17:71).***

He, peace be upon him, said to him,

*“An Imam calls others for guidance and is answered positively, while
another imam calls others to misguidance and is also answered
positively: this group shall be in Paradise, and that shall be in hell,
and it is the explanation of the verse saying,*

***‘A party shall be in Paradise, and another shall be in the burning
fire' (Qur’an, 42:7)**.”*[^36]  
    
 At the same place, a man from Kufa met him. The Imam said to him, “By
Allah! Had I met you in Medina, I would have showed you the marks
Gabriel had left in our house and the place where he used to descend
with revelation to my grandfather, O brother of Kufa! It is from us that
knowledge initiates. Have they become learned while we became ignorant?
This shall never be.”[^37]  
    
 Bajir, of al-Tha’labiyya, narrates saying, “Al-Husayn passed by us when
I was a young lad. My brother said to him, ‘O son of the daughter of the
Messenger of Allah! I see your followers to be very small in number.'
With his whip he pointed to a saddlebag a man was carrying [for him] and
said, ‘This is full of letters.'”[^38]  
  

al-Shuquq
---------

At al-Shuquq[^39], al-Husayn (‘a) saw a man coming from Kufa[^40], so he
asked him about the people of Iraq. He informed the Imam (‘a) that they
were all against him. He, peace be upon him, said, “The affair is with
Allah; our Lord does whatever He pleases. Our Lord, Praise to Him, each
day manages the affairs.” Then he quoted the following verses of
poetry[^41]:

If this abode is held as dear,

In the abode of Allah, the rewards

Are more sublime and noble.

If wealth is hoarded to be left behind,

Why should one be miser with what is left?

If sustenance is destined in proportion,

To be less concerned about it is more beautiful.

And if the bodies are for death made,

One killed for the sake of Allah is surely better.

So peace of Allah be upon you,

O family of Muhammad!

For I see myself from you soon departing.

Zubala
------

 

At Zubala, he was informed that ‘Abdullah Ibn Yaqtur, the man dispatched
by al-Husayn (‘a) to Muslim Ibn ‘Aqil, had been killed. Al-Hasin Ibn
Namir arrested him at al-Qadisiyya and sent him to ‘Ubaydullah Ibn Ziyad
who ordered him to ascend the pulpit and to curse the liar son of the
liar.

When ‘Abdullah Ibn Yaqtur looked at the people from the pulpit, he said,
“O people! I am the messenger of al-Husayn son of Fatima (‘a) to you so
that you may support and assist him against the son of Marjana,”
whereupon ‘Ubaydullah ordered him thrown from the mansion’s rooftop. He
was hurled down from there. His bones were crushed, but he did not die.

A man named ‘Abd al-Malik Ibn ‘Umayr al-Lakhmi came to him and cut his
throat. When the latter was shamed for having done so, he said, “I
killed him in order to put an end to his suffering.” It is also said
that the man who killed him was tall and that he looked like ‘Abd
al-Malik Ibn ‘Umayr.  
    
 The Imam (‘a) informed those who were in his company of what had
happened, giving them the option to leave. They dispersed right and
left. Those who remained with him were his own companions who had come
with him from Mecca.

Actually, a large number of bedouins had joined him thinking that he was
going to a land where he would be welcomed by supporting natives. He,
peace be upon him, hated for them to march with him except with their
knowledge of what to expect, knowing fully well that if he permitted
them to leave, only those who were ready to support him to the end would
remain.[^42]  
  

In the Heartland of al-Aqaba
----------------------------

   
 The Imam (‘a) left Zubala, reaching al-’Aqaba's heartland where he said
to his companions, “*There is no doubt in my mind that I am going to be
killed. In a vision, I saw myself being mauled by dogs the most fierce
among them was spotted*.”[^43]  
    
 ‘Amr Ibn Lawthan, of Banu ‘Ikrimah, suggested to him to return to
Medina due to the treachery and betrayal upon which the people of Kufa
were bent. Abu ‘Abdullah, peace be upon him, said, “I am not unfamiliar
with their attitude, yet Allah's will shall never be overruled.”[^44]

Then he, peace be upon him, said, “*They shall not leave me till I am
dead, and once they have done it, Allah will send upon them those who
will humiliate them till they become the most abased among all
nations.*”[^45]  
  

Sharaf
------

   
 Al-Husayn (‘a) left al-’Aqaba then set up his camp at Sharaf[^46]. In
the pre-dawn, he ordered his servants to fill their water bags with
water. At midday, he heard a man among his companions crying, “Allahu
Akbar!” Al-Husayn (‘a) asked him about the reason. “I did so upon seeing
palm-trees,” said the man, but those who were in his company denied that
there could be any palm-trees in such a place, and that what he saw
could have been lances and horses' ears.

Al-Husayn (‘a) said, “I am of the same view,” then he asked them whether
they could shelter themselves anywhere. They suggested a place called
Thu Hasam[^47] on their left side. Al-Husayn (‘a) swiftly moved there
and set up his camp.  
    
 Soon, al-Hurr al-Riyai[^48] came to them face-to-face escorted by a
thousand cavaliers. He was dispatched by [‘Ubaydullah] Ibn Ziyad in
order to prohibit al-Husayn (‘a) from going back to Medina, to arrest
him, and to bring him to Kufa. It was a very hot midday when al-Hurr and
his men confronted al-Husayn (‘a).[^49]  
    
 When the Master of Martyrs (‘a) saw how thirsty that band was, he
ordered his followers to serve water to them and to their horses. They
gave each and every one of them water, then they filled water pots and
brought them near the horses each one of which drank three to five times
of them till they all drank to their fill.[^50]  
    
 ‘Ali Ibn al-Ti’an al-Muharibi was in al-Hurr’s company. He happened to
be the last to be served, so he was suffering acutely of the pangs of
thirst. In his Hijazi accent, al-Husayn (‘a) said to him, *“Ankhi
al-rawiya*,” but the man did not understand what he (‘a) meant. The Imam
(‘a), therefore, repeated his statement, this time using classical
Arabic: *“Ankhil-jamal*.”

When the man tried to drink, he caused the water to run wastefully out
of the water-bag, so the Fragrant Flower of the Messenger of Allah (S)
now said to him, *“Ankhi al-siqa*,” but the poor man did not know
exactly what to do due to his inability to think because, again, of the
thirst from which he was severely suffering.

This time the Imam (‘a) stood up and adjusted the water-bag for that man
in person till he drank enough, then he (‘a) watered his horse as well.

Such is the kindness and compassion of the most Oppressed One towards
that band that met in a desert where each drop of water was as precious
as life itself. Surely he was fully aware of the situation being so
precarious, knowledgeable of the consequences should water run out the
next day, knowing that it could be the sole cause of death. But the
Prophet's blood that ran in his veins, and the exemplary generosity of
his father ‘Ali (‘a), did not leave him any choice.  
  

O son of al-Zahra’, heart of ‘Ali the valiant,

O soul of the guiding Prophet!

Strange how these people did not

Come to you to sacrifice themselves for you;

But they did not value your precious soul:

How can dust be compared with the mountain?

How wondrous to see Allah's Clemency

When they, as He watched, violated your sanctity!

How strange, the favourites of Allah became

For Yazid and for Ziyad a booty to claim!

   
 Then al-Husayn (‘a) welcomed them. He praised Allah and glorified Him
then said:

“*This is to seek pardon of Allah, the most Exalted One, the most
Mighty, and of your own selves: I did not come to you except after
having received your letters which your messengers delivered to me,
requesting me to come to you, saying, “We have no Imam, so come to us,
perhaps Allah will gather all of us under the shade of His guidance.”*

*So if the case is as such, then I have come to you; therefore, provide
me with that whereby I can trust your promises and covenants. But if you
hate my arrival, then I shall leave you and go to where I had come
from.*”  
    
 The men did not utter one word. Al-Hajjaj Ibn Masruq al-Ju’fi called
the *athan* for the noon prayers. It was then that al-Husayn (‘a) asked
al-Hurr, “Would you like to lead your men for the prayers?” He answered:
“No. Rather, we will all pray behind you.”

The Imam (‘a) led the prayers.  
    
 Having finished the prayers, the Imam (‘a) faced them, praised and
glorified Allah and blessed Prophet Muhammad (S) then said,

 “*O people! If you fear Allah and wish to get to know who follows
righteousness, it will please Allah better. We, the family of Muhammad
(S), are more worthy of you in shouldering the responsibility of
authority, more so than these who lay a claim to what does not belong to
them, whose tradition is oppression and transgression.*

*If you insist on hating us and ignoring our right, and if your view now
is different from what your letters to me described, then I will part
from you*.”  
    
 Al-Hurr said, “I do not know what letters you are talking about.”
Al-Husayn (‘a) immediately ordered ‘Uqbah Ibn Sam’an to bring out two
saddlebags full of letters. Al-Hurr said, “I am not among their senders,
and I have been ordered not to part with you once I meet you till I
bring you to Ibn Ziyad in Kufa.”

Imam al-Husayn (‘a) said, “*Death is closer to your reach than that.*”
He ordered his companions to ride, and the women, too, rode, but al-Hurr
forbade them from going to Medina, so al-Husayn (‘a) said to al-Hurr,
“May your mother lose you! What do you want of us?” “Should anyone else
other than you say so to me,” al-Hurr responded, “and he is in the same
boat as you now are, I would not hesitate to let his mother lose him no
matter who he may be!

By Allah! I have no way to refer to your mother except in the very best
of way of which we are capable. But let us come to a mid-way between
both of us which neither leads you to Kufa nor takes you back to Medina
till I write Ibn Ziyad, perhaps Allah will grant me safety and not try
me with anything relevant to your issue.” After a short while he added
saying,

“I admonish you to remember Allah with regard to your life, for I
testify that should you fight, you will be killed.” Al-Husayn (‘a) said,
“*Are you scaring me with death?! Will your calamity really lead you to
kill me? In that case, let me say what the brother of the Aws [tribe]
said to his cousin who desired to support the Messenger of Allah, peace
of Allah be upon him and his Progeny*:[^51]  
  

I shall proceed: There is no shame

A man to his death goes.

If he truly intends so and

As a Muslim struggles,

And if he the righteous with his life consoles,

Leaving a depraved one, opposing a criminal.

So if I live, I shall not regret or be shamed

But if I die, surely I shall not be blamed

Humiliation suffices you if you accept to be oppressed.”

   
 Having heard him say so, al-Hurr stayed away from him. Al-Husayn (‘a),
therefore, rode with his companions in one area while al-Hurr and his
fellows rode in another.[^52]  
  

al-Bayda
--------

   
 At al-Bayda[^53], the Imam (‘a) delivered a speech to al-Hurr's
companions after having praised and glorified Allah. In it he said,

 “*O people! The Messenger of Allah (S) has said, “If one sees an
oppressive ruler, who makes lawful what Allah has made unlawful, and he
does not get him to alter his conduct through something he does or says,
it will be incumbent upon Allah to resurrect him in that ruler's
company. These folks have upheld Satan and abandoned their obedience to
the most Merciful One, demonstrating corruption and making mischief
evident.*

*They idled the limits (set forth by Allah) and took to their own selves
what belonged to others, prohibiting what Allah has permitted and
permitting what He has prohibited. I am the best suitable* *person to
change the situation. Your letters reached me, and so did some of your
messengers who brought me your oath not to hand me over [to my foes] or
to betray me.*

*If you, therefore, complete the terms of your oath of allegiance, you
will achieve the right guidance, for I am al-Husayn son of ‘Ali and
Fatima daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S). My soul is with yours, my
family is with your families, and you have in me a model of conduct.*

*But if you do not, and if you violate your promise and renege in your
oath of allegiance to me, then, by my life, it will not be the first
time that you do so: you did so to my father, to my brother [Imam
al-Hasan (‘a)], and to my cousin Muslim.*

*Deceived is whoever trusts you. Surely it is to the detriment of your
own luck that you thus err, rendering your lot a loss. Whoever reneges,
he, indeed, reneges against his own soul, and Allah shall suffice me for
you, and peace be with you and the mercy and blessings of Allah*”.
[^54]  
  

al-Ruhayma
----------

At al-Ruhayma[^55], a Kufian named Abu Haram met the Imam (‘a) and said
to him, “O son of the Messenger of Allah! What made you leave the
sanctuary of your grandfather?” The Imam (‘a) said, “*O Abu Haram! Banu
Umayyah taunted my honour, and I took to patience. And they confiscated
my wealth, and I again took to patience.*

*Then they sought to kill me, so I fled. By Allah! They will kill me.
Allah will then cover them with an overwhelming humiliation and with a
sharp sword which He will place over their heads, a word that will abase
them*[^56] *till they become more abased than the people of Saba'
(Sheba) who were ruled by a woman over their wealth and their
lives.*”[^57]  
  

al-Qadisiyya
------------

   
 At al-Qadisiyya, al-Hasin Ibn Namir al-Tamimi arrested Qays Ibn Mushir
al-Saydawi, al-Husayn's messenger to the people of Kufa. Al-Hasin had
been ordered by Ibn Ziyad to station cavaliers to guard the area between
Khafan and Qatqatana[^58]. When he wanted to search the messenger, the
latter took the letter out and shredded it.

He was brought to Ibn Ziyad who asked him why he had shredded the
letter. He told Ibn Ziyad that he did so in order that they would not
know what it contained. But Ibn Ziyad insisted that he should tell him
about its contents. Qays refused, whereupon Ibn Ziyad said to him,
“Ascend the pulpit and curse al-Husayn and his father and brother;
otherwise, I will cut you to pieces.”  
    
 Qays ascended the pulpit, praised and glorified Allah and blessed the
Prophet (S) and his Progeny (‘a) and was profuse in imploring Allah's
blessings on the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) and on al-Hasan and
al-Husayn (‘a).

Moreover, he cursed ‘Ubaydullah Ibn Ziyad and his father and all Banu
Umayyah, then he said, “O people! I am the messenger of al-Husayn (‘a)
to you! I have left him in such-and-such a place; so, you should rush to
his aid.” Ibn Ziyad ordered him to be thrown from his mansion's rooftop.
He was thrown; his bones were crushed, and he died[^59].

Some accounts say that he did not die immediately, so ‘Abd al-Malik Ibn
‘Umayr al-Lakhmi slit his throat [as stated above]. When he was blamed
for doing so, he said, “I only wanted to put an end to his
suffering.”[^60]  
  

al-Utahyb
---------

   
 At ‘Uthayb al-Hajanat[^61], al-Husayn (‘a) met four men who were
leaving Kufa on camel-back, taking with them “al-Kamil,” a horse
belonging to a man called Nafi’ Ibn Hilal. They were: ‘Amr Ibn Khalid
al-Saydawi, his slave Sa’d, Majma’ Ibn ‘Abdullah al-Mathhaji, and Nafi’
Ibn Hilal. Their guide, al-Tirimmah Ibn ‘Adiy al-Ta’i, was chanting the
following verses:

 

O my she-camel! Do not complain of my impatience,

And set out just before the sun rises,

So we may join the best of riders and embark

Upon the best journey till we reach

One beautified with the best of descent,

The munificent, the free, the open-hearted one

Whom Allah brought for the best of affair:

May He preserve him as He preserves time!

When they reached al-Husayn, peace be upon him, they chanted those
verses for him, so he (‘a) said, “By Allah! I hope what Allah fares with
us will be good, whether we are killed, or whether we win victory.”  
    
 Al-Husayn (‘a) asked them about the public opinion. They said,
“Prominent personalities have received great bribes; people's hearts are
with you, while the swords are turned against you.” They informed him of
Qays Ibn Mushir al-Saydawi having been killed, so he, peace be upon him,
quoted the Qur’anic verse saying,

***“... of them is he who accomplished his vow, and of them is he who
awaits” (Qur’an, 33:23).***

“*O Allah!*” he added, “*Make Paradise our home and theirs, and include
us and them in Your mercy and in all what is desired of Your treasured
rewards*.”  
    
 Al-Tirimmah has said, “I saw people before my departure from Kufa
meeting outside. I asked them about it, and they said to me, ‘They are
being paraded, then shall they be sent away to fight al-Husayn.' I,
therefore, plead to you in the Name of Allah not to go to fight them,
for I see none aiding you. If only this group fights you, the same one I
see watching you, they will suffice to put an end to you.

Come with us in order to settle at our mountain, ‘Aja. It protected us
from the kings of Ghassan and Himyar, from al-Nu’man Ibn al-Munthir, and
from al-Aswad and al-Ahmar. By Allah, after no more than ten days, Tay's
men will come to your aid riding or on foot. I guarantee you twenty
thousand men from Tay who will defend you with their swords till it
becomes clear to you what you wish to do.”  
    
 Al-Husayn (‘a) prayed Allah to reward him and his people with goodness
then said, “*A covenant binds us to the people, and we cannot depart
till destiny deals between us and them*.”

Al-Tirimmah then asked his permission to get provisions to reach his own
family, promising that he would hurry back to support him. He granted
him permission as others accompanied him.  
    
 Al-Tirimmah delivered the provisions to his people then quickly
returned. Having reached ‘Uthayb al-Hajanat, he came to know that
al-Husayn, peace be upon him, had been killed, so he went back.[^62]  
  

Qasr Bani Muqatil
-----------------

A-Husayn (‘a) marched from ‘Uthayb al-Hajanat till he reached Qasr Bani
Muqatil[^63]. There, he saw a tent, a lance planted in the ground, and a
mare waiting. He inquired about them and was told that they belonged to
‘Ubaydullah Ibn al-Hurr al-Ju’fi[^64]. Al-Husayn (‘a) sent him al-Hajjaj
Ibn Masruq al-Ju’fi as his messenger.

Ibn al-Hurr asked him what he wanted. He said, “I have a gift for you
and I have esteem, if you only accept. Al-Husayn (‘a) invites you to
support him. If you fight for him, you will be rewarded, and if you get
killed, you will be a martyr.” Ibn al-Hurr said, “By Allah! I did not
leave Kufa except on account of the large number of people whom I saw
going out to fight him, and on account of his own Shi’as betraying him;
so I realized that he was certainly going to be killed and that I am
unable to do much for him; I do not like him to see me, nor do I like to
see him.”[^65]  
    
 Al-Hajjaj relayed what he had heard to al-Husayn (‘a) who stood up and,
accompanied by a number of his family members and companions, entered
al-Hurr's tent. The latter seated the Imam (‘a) in the middle. Ibn
al-Hurr himself narrated later saying, “I never saw in my life anyone
better looking or greater than al-Husayn, nor did I ever feel sorry for
anyone as much as I felt sorry for him when I saw him walking surrounded
by very young men.

I looked at his beard and found it as dark as a raven's wing, so I asked
him whether it was naturally black or whether he had dyed it. He said to
me, ‘O Ibn al-Hurr! Gray hair hastened to me,' so I realized that he had
dyed it.”[^66]  
    
 Having settled there, Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) praised Allah and glorified
Him then said, “O Ibn al-Hurr! Your countrymen wrote me saying that they
were unanimous in supporting me. They asked me to go to them, but it
seems it is not as they claimed[^67].

You have committed a great many sins; so, would you like to seek
repentance whereby you wipe out your sins?” He said, “And how is that, O
son of the Messenger of Allah?” Al-Husayn (‘a) said, “You should support
the son of your Prophet's daughter and fight on his side.”[^68]  
    
 Ibn al-Hurr said, “By Allah! I know that whoever supports you will be
happy in the hereafter, but how much help can I afford you, having left
in Kufa none to support you? I, therefore, plead to you in the Name of
Allah to agree to this plan of mine, for I hate to die!

My mare, al-Mulhiqa, is such that I never pursued anything except that
it caught up with it, nor did anyone pursue me except that I outran him.
Take her; she is yours.” Al-Husayn (‘a) said, “Should you prefer your
own safety over supporting our cause, we have no need for your mare or
for you[^69]:

***‘You should not take those who mislead others for friends' (Qur’an,
18:51)***[^70].

I advise you just as you advised me, that if you can, do not hear our
cries, nor should you witness our battle, for by Allah, whoever hears
our mourners and refuses to come to our rescue will be hurled by Allah
into the fire of hell headlong.”[^71]

Ibn al-Hurr regretted having lost the opportunity to support al-Husayn
(‘a), so he composed the following poetic lines:  
  

So long as I live, so shall my sigh

Reverberating between my chest and my choke

When he did say to me at the mansion:

“Should you really leave us and from us depart?”

Husayn in humility seeks my support

Against the people of enmity and dissension.

Should sighing cleave a freeman's chest,

My heart would now be cleft.

Had I defended him with my life

I would have earned mercy on the Day of Meeting.

Had I fought beside Muhammad's son, may I

For him sacrifice my life;

So bid farewell and hurry to set out,

Surely winners are those who support Husayn,

While deeds of others, the hypocrites, will be in vain.

   
 At the same place, ‘Amr Ibn Qays al-Mashfari and his cousin met
al-Husayn (‘a) who asked them whether they had met him in order to
support him. They said to him, “We have a large number of dependents and
we have many items which belong to others.

We do not know what will happen, and we hate not to give people back
what they had entrusted to us.” He, peace be upon him, said to them,
“Go, and do not hear our women mourn, nor should you see us wearing
black, for whoever hears our women wailing or sees our black without
supporting us, it will be incumbent upon Allah, the most Exalted, the
most Great, to hurl him in hellfire headlong.”[^72]

The Taff Villages
-----------------

   
 When the night came to a close, the Imam (‘a) ordered his servants to
fill their water bags and to leave Qasr Bani Muqatil. On their way,
al-Husayn (‘a) was heard repeating: ***Inna lillah wa inna ilayhi
rajia’un, wal hamdu lillahi rabbil ‘a lamin..**.* (We belong to Allah
and to Him shall we return, and all Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of
the worlds).

His son, ‘Ali al-Akbar, heard him and asked about the reason which
prompted him to keep repeating these statements. Said the Imam (‘a), *“I
drowsed for a moment, whereupon I saw a horseman saying, ‘These people
are marching as fates march towards them,' so I realized that we are
being eulogized*.” “May Allah never permit you to see any evil,” said
‘Ali al-Akbar,

“Are we not right?” “*We are, by the One to Whom all the servants shall
return*,” al-Husayn (‘a) answered. “O father! In that case, we do not
mind at all having to die so long as we are right,” said ‘Ali. Al-Husayn
(‘a) said, “*May Allah reward you for being such a good son with the
best of rewards whereby He rewards a son on behalf of his
father*.”[^73]  
    
 Al-Husayn (‘a) kept marching till he arrived at Ninawa[^74].  
 There, an armed man riding a camel was seen coming in their direction.
They waited for him. He turned out to be a messenger sent by Ibn Ziyad
to al-Hurr carrying a letter wherein he was ordering al-Hurr to be rough
in treating al-Husayn (‘a) and not to permit him to set up his camp
anywhere other than in the wilderness where there was neither access to
water nor any natural fortifications.  
    
 Such was the letter which al-Hurr himself had read to al-Husayn (‘a)
who said to him, “Let us camp at Ninawa, or al-Ghadiriyya, or Shufayya.”
“I cannot do that,” said al-Hurr, “for the man [governor] has already
assigned men to spy on me.” [^75]  
    
 Zuhayr Ibn al-Qayn said, “O son of the Messenger of Allah! Fighting
this band is easier for us than fighting those who will come after them.
By my life! Armies will come to us which our eyes had never seen
before.”

Al-Husayn (‘a) said to him, “I shall not be the one who fights them
first.” Then Zuhayr said, “There is a village nearby at the bank of the
Euphrates; it is defensible and it overlooks the Euphrates from all but
one direction.” Al-Husayn (‘a) asked him about its name, and when he
came to know that it was called “al-’Aqr,”[^76] [which means in Arabic
“hamstringing”], the Imam (‘a) said, “We seek refuge with Allah against
hamstringing.”  
    
 Al-Husayn (‘a) then turned to al-Hurr and asked him to keep on marching
further.  
    
 They all marched till they reached an area called Karbala’. There,
al-Hurr and his company stopped in front of al-Husayn (‘a), forbidding
him from going any further, saying, “This place is near the Euphrates.”
It is said that as they were marching, al-Husayn's horse stopped and
refused to move just as Allah had caused the she-camel of the Prophet
(S) to stop at the Hudaibiya[^77].

It was then that al-Husayn (‘a) inquired about the name of that place.
Zuhayr said to him, “Keep on marching and do not ask about anything till
Allah brings us ease. This land is called al-*Taff*.” He, peace be upon
him, asked him whether it had any other name, so he told him that it was
also called “Karbala’”. It was then that the Imam (‘a) started
weeping[^78].

He said, “O Allah! I seek refuge with You against the *karb*
[affliction] and *bala’* [trial and tribulation]![^79] Here shall we
camp, and here will our blood be spilled and our graves be dug! My
grandfather the Messenger of Allah (S) had told me so.” [^80]  
  

By Allah! Never shall I forget, even if all do,

How his charging mare stood at al-*Taff*,

O mare of his! Did the hand of fate tie you

So you stood and refused to budge?

You used to be faster than a cloud's lightning;

Calamity descends whether you speed or not.

Should you not have avoided the road and strayed

From that valley to the wide expanse?

How did you take him to perdition, may you

Lose your father, how dared you?

Why did you not refuse, why?

O what a great stand when

Those throngs did gather and stand!

A great stand that shook the foundations

Of Allah's ‘Arsh a great shaking,

So shall Yazid stand One Day

When it will be said to Ahmad:

“Stand up and intercede!”

A stand, it was, followed by a fall

That gave us a drink hard to take

A stand, it was, that caused Muhammad's progeny

To always grieve till the Pretender, for eternity.[^81]

 

[^1]: Shaikh Lutfallah al-Gulpaygani, Muntakhab al-Athar fi Akhbar
al-Imam al-Thani ‘Ashar, Radiyy ad-Din al-Qazwini, p. 304, 10th night.

[^2]: Ibn Nama, Muthir al-Azan, p. 89. Al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p.
177.

[^3]: Ibn Tawus, Al-Luhuf, p. 33. Ibn Nama, p. 20.

[^4]: Shaikh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Nafs al-Mahmum, p. 91.

[^5]: On p. 150, Vol. 2, of al-Azraqi's Tarikh Mecca, it is stated that
Imam Husayn (‘a) made this statement to Ibn ‘Abbas.

[^6]: Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 4, p. 16.

[^7]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 10, p. 184.

[^8]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 219. Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 4,
p. 17. Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, Vol. 6, p. 163.

[^9]: Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 4, p. 16. The rag Imam al-Husayn (‘a)
is referring to is one used by a woman to absorb the blood during her
menstruation.

[^10]: Al-Khasa’is al-Husayniyya, p. 32 (Tabriz edition).

[^11]: On p. 137 of Tathkirat al-Khawass of Ibn al-Jawzi, the grandson,
al-Husayn (‘a) cited these verses when al-Hurr warned him against
disputing with Banu Umayyah.

[^12]: Excerpted from a poem by the hujjah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn
al-Kayshwan published in ‘Allama Shaikh Sharif al-Jawahiri's Muthir
al-Ahzan.

[^13]: On p. 416, Vol. 2, of Yaqut al-Hamawi's Mu’jam al-Buldan, it is
said to be a place located two farasangs from Mecca. It is named as such
because on its right there is a mountain called Na’im and another on its
left called Na’im, while the valley is called Na’iman, and a mosque is
there. On p. 60 of Ahmad Ibn Muhammad al-Khadrawi's book Fada’il
al-Balad al-Amin, it is said to be three or four miles from Mecca.

[^14]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 218. Al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal
al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 220. Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, Vol. 8, p. 166. Shaikh
Al-Mufid, Al-Irshad. Ibn Nama, Muthir al-Ahzan, p. 21. Ibn Abul-Hadid,
Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 4, p. 327 (first Egyptian edition). All these
references say that the wealth confiscated by al-Husayn (‘a) had been
transported to Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan, and that al-Husayn (‘a) wrote
Mu’awiyah in its regard saying, “A caravan coming from Yemen carrying
merchandise, outfits, and amber passed by us on its way to you so that
you may deposit it in the coffers of Damascus to thereby elevate the
status of your father's offspring after you take of it whatever
satisfies you. I need it, so I am taking it.” Mu’awiyah wrote him back
saying, “You took that wealth while you were unworthy of it after your
admission that it belonged to me. The wali has a greater right to fare
with the wealth; moreover, he has expenses to pay. By Allah! Had that
wealth been left alone till it reached me, I would not have diminished
your share of it, but there is in your head a certain desire, and I very
much like to see it come out during my own time so that I may recognize
your value and overlook what you have done. But I, by Allah, fear lest
you should be tried by one who does not regard you more than he regards
a she-camel's hiccup.”

[^15]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 218. Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol.
4, p. 16. Al-Thahabi, Tathkirat al-Huffaz, Vol. 1, p. 338. This meeting
is referenced in al-Mufid's Irshad as well. al-Thahabi says that the
meeting between al-Husayn (‘a) and al-Farazdaq took place at That ‘Irq,
whereas in Yaqut al-Hamawi's Mu’jam al-Buldan, it is said to have taken
place at al-Sifa between Hunayn and the Haram's nusub, on the west side
upon entering Mecca.

[^16]: Sayyid ‘Ali Khan, Anwar al-Rabi’, p. 703, in a chapter dealing
with repetition.

[^17]: According to p. 317, Vol. 2, of Al-Bahr al-Ra’iq by the Hanafi
author Ibn Najim, it is located at the distance of two stages between
That ‘Irq and Mecca. On p. 216, Vol. 2, of Ibn Muflih's book Al-Furu’,
it is said to be located at the distance of two days' travel. It is
named as such after a small mountain in its locality as indicated on p.
8, Vol. 7, of Taj al-’Arus. According to Sunnis, That ‘Irq marks the
timing zone of the people of the east, including Iraq and Khurasan.
Traditions recorded by Imamites, however, say that the Messenger of
Allah (S) marked al-’Aqiq as the timing zone for the people of Iraq,
which is recommended by Imam al-Shafi’i who says so on p. 118, Vol. 2,
of his book Al-Umm, believing that there is no hadith designating That
‘Irq for such timing, and that it was [second caliph] ‘Umar who
designated it as such; this is what al-Bukhari tells us as he quotes
[the caliph’s son, ‘Abdullah] Ibn ‘Umar. On p. 257, Vol. 3, of Ibn
Qudamah's book Al-Mughni, Ibn Abd al-Barr is cited as saying that the
wearing of the ihram garb is better done at al-’Aqiq, despite the fact
that it was That ‘Irq that designated the timing zone for all the people
of the east [i.e., Muslims residing in the eastern region of the then
Islamic domain]. On p. 250, Vol. 3, of Fath al-Bari, it is indicated
that al-Ghazali, al-Rafi’i, al-Nawawi, and those who documented
al-Shafi’i emphatically insist that there is no tradition designating
That ‘Irq a timing zone as such. The Hanafis, Hanbalis, and Shafi’is
have all testified to this fact. On p. 199, Vol. 6, of Mu’jam al-Buldan,
it is indicated that al-’Aqiq is situated in the valley of Thu Halifa,
and it is closer to Mecca. Imamite faqihs have been cautious,
recommending not to wear the ihram at That ‘Irq which lies at the end of
al-’Aqiq.

[^18]: Ibn Nama, Muthir al-Ahzan, p. 21.

[^19]: On p. 169, Vol. 8, of Al-Bidaya, however, this statement is
altered to read: “... more lowly than a bondmaid's scarf,” but I could
not make much sense of it, nor is it supported linguistically! The
accurate wording is what is indicated above. The rag referred to is used
by a woman to insert in her vagina to absorb her menstrual blood.

[^20]: According to Mu’jam al-Buldan, “al-hajir” is a water jetty built
at the borders of a valley as a safeguard against the flood. On p. 290,
Vol. 4, however, it is also referred to as a resting area for those
travelling from Basra to Medina, a place where the people of Kufa and
Basra meet. On p. 136, Vol. 3, of Taj al-’Arus, it is said to be a place
on the highway to Mecca. On p. 195, Vol. 1, of Tarikh al-Adab al-’Arabi,
(History of Arab Literature), where Zuhayr Ibn Abu Sulma's biography is
detailed. The latter is quoted as saying that al-Hajir is located in the
south of today's city of Riyadh, in Najd. According to p. 219, Vol. 2,
of Mu’jam al-Buldan, it is indicated that it lies within the expanse of
al-Rumma, a plateau in Najd. Riďa Kahhalah, in a footnote on p. 274 of
his book Jughrafyat Shubh Jazirat al-’Arab (Geography of the Arabian
Peninsula), quotes Ibn Durayd saying that al-Rumma is a spacious low
land in Najd in which the rainfall pours from several valleys. Ibn
al-’Arabi says that al-Rumma is wide and expansive and is traversed by
one travelling for a full day, a place upon the high lands of which Banu
Kilab descend, then they depart there from, whereupon Abas and Ghatfan
people do likewise, then Banu Asad. Al-Asma’i says, “Al-Rumma's low land
is a huge valley acting as a barrier to the right of Falja and
al-Duthayna till it passes through the quarters of al-Abyad and al-Aswad
which are separated by a distance of three miles.” He continues to say,
“Al-Rumma extends from the Ghawr [deep low land] to Hijaz. The high
areas of al-Rumma are inhabited by the people of Medina and to Banu
Salim. Its middle part is inhabited by Banu Kilab and Ghatfan, while its
south is populated by Banu Asad and Banu Abbas, then it ends at the sand
dunes of al-’Uyun.”

[^21]: On p. 152 of ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Fattal al-Naishapuri's book
Rawat al-Wa’izin, it is indicated that he was dispatched by ‘Abdullah
Ibn Yaqtur, and it is quite possible he had sent them two letters, one
with ‘Abdullah Ibn Yaqtur and another with Qays Ibn Mushir. On p. 492,
Vol. 3, of Al-Isaba (of Ibn Hajar al-’Asqalani), following the
discussion of Qays's lineage, the author says, “He was with al-Husayn
(‘a) when he [al-Husayn (‘a)] was killed at the Taff.” This is
incorrect. Ibn Ziyad killed the man at Kufa.

[^22]: Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, Vol. 8, p. 168.

[^23]: al-Mufid, Al-Irshad.

[^24]: It is named after Khuzaymah Ibn Hazim and it is located one stage
after Zarud on a traveller's way from Kufa to Mecca. In the arrangement
of these stages, we rely on Mu’jam al-Buldan.

[^25]: Ibn Nama, Muthir al-Ahzan, p. 23.

[^26]: On p. 327, Vol. 4, of Mu’jam al-Buldan, it is described as sand
dunes between al-Tha’labiyya and al-Khuzaymiyya on a pilgrim's way
coming from Kufa, and it lies one mile from al-Khuzaymiyya. There is a
lake in it, and it is the site of the Battle of Zarud.

[^27]: Having discussed the Bajali tribes, Ibn Hazm, on p. 365 of his
book Jamharat Ansab al-’Arab, says, “[His full name is:] Zuhayr Ibn
al-Qayn Ibn al-Harith Ibn Amir Ibn Sa’d Ibn Malik Ibn Zuhayr Ibn ‘Amr
Ibn Yashkur Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Malik Ibn Sa’d Ibn Tuzayn Ibn Qasr Ibn ‘Abqar
Ibn Anmar Ibn Arash Ibn ‘Amr Ibn al-Ghawth Ibn Nabt Ibn Malik Ibn Zayd
Ibn Kaylan Ibn Saba'.” On p. 310, the author traces the lineage of Saba'
[known to Westerners as Sheba] thus: “Saba' Ibn Ya’rub Ibn Qahtan
(Joktan).”

[^28]: Ibn Tawus, Al-Luhuf, p. 40.

[^29]: According to both Mu’jam al-Buldan and Al-Mu’jam fi ma Ista’jam
[Concordance of what is non-Arab], it is one of the cities of the Khazar
conquered in 33 A.H./653 A.D. by Salman Ibn Rabi’ah al-Bahili. I could
not find any reference in either of these books to any other city
bearing the same name, but Ibn Hajar al-’Asqalani, on p. 274, Vol. 3, of
his book Al-Isaba, details the biography of Qays Ibn Farwah Ibn Zurarah
Ibn al-Arqam adding, “He participated in the conquests of Iraq and was
martyred at Ballinger, Iraq.” (!!!) He placed the accent marks on the
word then added saying that Salman Ibn Rabi’ah was the commander of the
army.

[^30]: The statement by Salman is cited in Al-Irshad by the mentor
al-Mufid and also by al-Fattal on p. 153 of his book Rawat al-Wa’izin,
by Ibn Nama on p. 23 of his book Muthir al-Ahzan, by al-Khawarizmi on p.
225, chapter 11, Vol. 1, of his book Maqtal al-Husayn, by Ibn al-Athir
on p. 17, Vol. 4, of his book Al-Kamil, and by al-Bakri on p. 376, Vol.
1, of his concordance Al-Mu’jam fima Ista’jam. This is supported by what
al-Tabari states on p. 77, Vol. 5, of his Tarikh, and by Ibn al-Athir as
he states so on p. 50, Vol. 3, of his book Al-Kamil. Both authors
testify that Salman participated in that invasion.

[^31]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 224. al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal
al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 222.

[^32]: Ibn Nama, Muthir al-Ahzan, p. 23. Ibn Tawus, Al-Luhuf, p. 40. On
p. 224, Vol. 6, of al-Tabari's Tarikh, first edition, it is stated that
Zuhayr said to his wife, “You are divorced! So go back to your family,
for I do not wish any harm to reach you on my account.” But I do not
understand what his objective behind this divorce might have been! Did
he wish to exclude her from inheriting him, or did he permit her to
remarry after three months, or did he not wish her to be his wife in the
hereafter?! The Commander of the Faithful (‘a) had divorced some of the
Prophet's wives. Imam al-Riďa (‘a) had divorced Umm Farwa, al-Kaďim's
wife [Imam Musa al-Kaďim being his {al-Riďa’s} father]. This free woman
had actually done him [Zuhayr] a favour: she paved for him the path to
eternal happiness through martyrdom. Our only solace is the fact that
the person who had narrated that “tradition” was none other than
al-Suddi.

[^33]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 995. Ibn Kathir, on p. 168, Vol. 8,
of his book Al-Bidaya, says that he did so repeatedly.

[^34]: Ibn Tawus, Al-Luhuf, p. 41. But I could not find even one
reliable reference stating that al-Husayn (‘a) took Muslim's daughter
Hamida by the head, so she sensed that something terrible must have
happened.

[^35]: Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 4, p. 17. al-Thahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala’, Vol. 3, p. 208.

[^36]: as-Saduq, Amali, p. 93. Al-Tha’labiyya was named after a man
belonging to Banu Asad named Tha’labah who had been there and who was
able to dig a well in it. It is one stage after al-Shuquq for one
travelling from Kufa to Mecca as we are told by Mu’jam al-Buldan. On p.
35, Vol. 2, of al-Samhudi's book Wafa’ al-Wafa’, it is an area located
near a watering place called al-Tha’labiyya. On p. 311 of al-Ya’qubi's
book Al-Buldan, and also according to the offset edition of Ibn Rastah's
book Al-A’laq al-Nafisa, it is a city surrounded by a bulwark.

[^37]: al-Saffar, Basa‘ir al-Darajat, p. 3. It is also recorded in
al-Kafi's Usul, in a chapter headed “Knowledge Derived from the
Fountainhead of the Prophet's Family.”

[^38]: al-Thahsbi, Siyar A’lam al-Nubala’, Vol. 3, p. 205.

[^39]: According to p. 213, Vol. 2, of Ibn Shahr Ashub's book, it is one
stage following Zubala on the way of one who travels from Kufa to Mecca,
and it belongs to Banu Asad. According to Mu’jam al-Buldan, al-Abadi's
grave lies there.

[^40]: On p. 233, Vol. 1, of his book Maqtal al-Husayn, al-Khawarizmi
claims he was al-Farazdaq, the poet, but this is an error that he made.

[^41]: Ibid. But al-Khawarizmi does not quote the fifth line of the
original Arabic text, attributing these lines to the Imam, peace be upon
him.

[^42]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 226. It is located after al-Shuquq
on a traveller's way from Kufa to Mecca. There is a fort there and a
mosque for Banu Asad named after Zubala daughter of Mas’ar, a woman
belonging to the ‘Amaliqah. The Battle of Zubala is well known to the
Arabs, and there are some narrators of hadith whose last names are
derived from Zubala as we are told by Mu’jam al-Buldan.

[^43]: Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 75.

[^44]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 226.

[^45]: al-Mufid, Irshad. Shaikh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Nafs al-Mahmum, p. 98
and following pages, first edition (Iran).

[^46]: Mu’jam al-Buldan tells us that it is named after a man bearing
this name who had dug a well there followed by many large and plentiful
wells of sweet water. According to p. 87, Vol. 4, of al-Tabari's Tarikh,
when Sa’d Ibn Abu Waqqas was at Sharaf, al-Ash’ath Ibn Qays joined him
with a hundred Yemenites. He left the throngs of men at Sharaf and took
to Iraq.

[^47]: It is named after a mountain where al-Nu’man Ibn al-Munthir used
to hunt, and al-Thubyani, the genius poet, composed poetry about it.

[^48]: According to p. 215 of Ibn Hazm's book Jamharat Ansab al-’Arab,
his full name is al-Hurr Ibn Yazid Ibn Najiyah Ibn Qa’nab Ibn ‘Atab
al-Radf Ibn al-Harmi Ibn Riyah Yarbu’. ‘Atab is called “al-Radf” because
kings used to ride with him. On p. 213 of the same reference, the name
of Yarbu’ is provided as: Yarbu’ Ibn Hanzalah Ibn Malik Ibn Yazid-Manut
Ibn Tamim.

[^49]: al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 230, Chapter 11.

[^50]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 226.

[^51]: The reference to his citing these verses has already been
indicated above.

[^52]: al-Mufid, Irshad. On p. 193, Vol. 2, of his book Al-Manaqib, Ibn
Shahr Ashub adds the following verses to them: My soul do I present, not
sparing it, To meet a lion in the battle, a charging one.

[^53]: It is located between Waqisa and ‘Uthayb al-Hajanat and is a
spacious land inhabited by the offspring of Yarbu’ Ibn Hanzalah.

[^54]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 229. Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol.
4, p. 21.

[^55]: According to Mu’jam al-Buldan, it is located about three miles
from Khifya, and the latter is located westward more than ten miles from
al-Rahba.

[^56]: as-Saduq, Amali, p. 93, majlis 30.

[^57]: al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 226. Ibn Nama, Muthir
al-Ahzan, where the entire hadith is cited.

[^58]: According to Vol. 3, p. 451, of Mu’jam al-Buldan, Khafan is a
place near Kufa where there is a well near a village inhabited by the
offspring of ‘Eisa Ibn Musa al-Hashimi. On p. 125, Vol. 7, al-Qatqatana
is located more than twenty miles from Ruhayma.

[^59]: al-Mufid, Al-Irshad. al-Fattal, Rawdat al-Waizin. Ibn Kathir,
Al-Bidaya, Vol. 8, p. 118. al-Tabarsi, I’lam al-Wara, p. 136 (first
Iranian edition). It is stated on p. 151, Vol. 1, of al-Thahabi's book
Mizan al-I’tidal, that Abd al-Malik Ibn ‘Umayr al-Lakhmi was made
governor of Kufa after al-Sha’bi, but his memory was weak, and he was
prone to err quite often. On p. 309, Vol. 1, of al-Nawawi's book
Thahthib al-Asma’, he died in 136 A.H./754 A.D. at the age of a hundred
and three.

[^60]: al-Mufid, Al-Irshad. al-Fattal, Rawdat al-Wa’izin.

[^61]: Al-’Uthayb is a valley inhabited by Banu Tamim where a Persian
garrison is [then and there] stationed. The distance between it and
al-Qadisiyya is six miles. It was named so because the horses of
al-Nu’man, king of Hira, used to graze there.

[^62]: al-Bukhari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 230.

[^63]: “Qasr Muqatil” means: the castle of Muqatil, namely Muqatil Ibn
Hassan Ibn Thu’labah who, according to Yaqut al-Hamawi's Mu’jam
al-Buldan, descended from Imri'ul-Qays Ibn Yazid Ibn Manat Ibn Tamim
[the famous poet] . It is situated between ‘Ayn al-Tamr and
al-Qatqatana. It was demolished by Eisa Ibn ‘Ali Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn
al-’Abbas, then he rebuilt it.

[^64]: On p. 168, Vol. 7, of al-Tabari's Tarikh, and also on p. 385 of
Ibn Hazm's book Ansab al-’Arab, it is stated that this man was a staunch
follower of ‘Uthman [Ibn ‘Affan] ; this is why he went out to support
Mu’awiyah against ‘Ali (‘a) in the Battle of Siffin. On p. 169, Vol. 7,
first edition, of al-Tabari's Tarikh, a number of incidents are narrated
with regard to his violation of the Shari’a, his confiscation of wealth,
and even his involvement in highway robberies. On p. 112, Vol. 4, of his
book, Ibn al-Athir says the following about him: “When he over-extended
his stay in Syria, the brother of his wife married the latter off to
‘Ikrimah Ibn al-Khabis. When the man heard about it, he returned and
raised a complaint against ‘Ikrimah to ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib (‘a). ‘Ali
(‘a) said to him, ‘You have [only recently] fought against us on the
side of our enemy...' Ibn al-Hurr said, ‘Does this mean that you are
going to deprive me of your justice on that account?' The Imam (‘a)
answered, ‘No.' The Commander of the Faithful (‘a) took the woman, who
was by then pregnant [by ‘Ikrimah] and entrusted her to the custody of
someone whom he could trust till her delivery. Once she gave birth, she
was ordered to hand the newborn over to ‘Ikrimah. Then he (‘a) reunited
her with ‘Ubaydullah who went back to Syria till the time when ‘Ali,
peace be upon him, was killed.” To this incident does Muhammad Ibn
al-Hasan refer on p. 136, Vol. 10, of his book Al-Mabsut, in a chapter
dealing with the Kharijites, but he did not mention the name of
‘Ubaydullah Ibn al-Hurr. During the reign of ‘Abd al-Malik [Ibn Marwan
Ibn al-Hakam, an Umayyad “caliph,” cousin and bearer of the seal of
third caliph ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan], in the year 68 A.H./687 A.D.,
‘Ubaydullah was killed near al-Anbar. On p. 297, Vol. 5, of
al-Balathiri’s book titled Ansab al-Ashraf, his killer is identified as
‘Ubaydullah Ibn al-’Abbas al-Salami. Once he was seriously wounded, he
boarded a boat to cross the Euphrates. The followers of his killer
wanted to seize the boat, so he, being extremely frightened of them,
hurled himself into the river as he was bleeding and died. On p. 268 of
Risalat al-Mughtalin by Ibn Habib, his name is included in the seventh
group of rare manuscripts examined by Harun ‘Abd al-Salam. That page
states that ‘Abd al-Malik dispatched ‘Ubaydullah Ibn al-Hurr al-Ju’fi to
fight Mis’ab with a large army, but the army had lagged behind him till
all those in his company were killed. It was then that he was confronted
by ‘Ubaydullah Ibn al-’Abbas al-Salami who fought him, forcing him to
flee. Having fled, he boarded a ferry to cross the Euphrates.
‘Ubaydullah Ibn al-Salami threatened to kill the ferry's attendant if
the latter succeeded in transporting the fugitive to the other side of
the river bank, so he attempted to take him back, but Ibn al-Hurr
embraced him, causing him to drown with him. Ibn al-Hurr's corpse was
taken out of the river and installed as a practicing target. On p. 492
of his book Al-Mahbar, Ibn Habib says that Mis’ab Ibn al-Zubayr
displayed Ibn al-Hurr's head at Kufa. On p. 583 of his book Jamharat
Ansab al-’Arab, Ibn Hazm says that ‘Ubaydullah Ibn al-Hurr's sons are:
Sadaqah, Barrah, and al-Ash’ar who all participated in the Jamajim
Battle fighting on the side of Ibn al-Ash’ath. On p. 289 of Al-Akhbar
al-Tiwal of al-Dinawari, it is stated that when al-Mukhtar decided to
seek revenge for al-Husayn (‘a), ‘Ubaydullah Ibn al-Hurr al-Ju’fi was on
the mountain staging assaults on people's properties, so al-Mukhtar sent
him a message inviting him to take part in his bid to avenge the killing
of Imam al-Husayn (‘a), but he did not send him any answer. Al-Mukhtar,
therefore, demolished his house after confiscating all its contents and
took his wife whom he jailed in Kufa. Had he sincerely repented for
lagging behind, rather than supporting the oppressed Imam (‘a), he would
have assisted al-Mukhtar in killing those who had killed al-Husayn (‘a).
How could he have been able to attain repentance, having refused to
respond to the invitation of the Master of Martyrs who knowingly walked
to his Place, crowned with the divine light and surrounded by his family
members?

[^65]: al-Dinawari, Al-Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 246.

[^66]: al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Khazanat al-Adab, Vol. 1, p. 298 (Bulaq,
Egypt, edition). al-Balathiri, Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. 5, p. 291.

[^67]: Shaikh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Nafs al-Mahmum, p. 104.

[^68]: Sayyid Kaďim al-Ha’iri, Asrar al-Shahada, p. 233.

[^69]: al-Dinawari, Al-Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 249.

[^70]: as-Saduq, Al-Amali, p. 94, majlis 30.

[^71]: Khizanat al-Adab, Vol. 1, p. 298.

[^72]: as-Saduq, ‘Iqab al-A’mal, p. 35. Al-Kashshi, Rijal, p. 74.

[^73]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 231. On p. 48 of Maqtal al-’Awalim
(of ‘Abdullah Nur-Allah al-Bahrani), it is stated that “Al-Husayn (‘a)
took a nap in the after-noon at al-Uthayb. He saw in a vision someone
saying, ‘You are speeding, yet death is speedily taking you to
Paradise.'” According to p. 226, Vol. 1, of al-Khawarizmi's book Maqtal
al-Husayn, al-Husayn (‘a) reached al-Tha’labiyya where he slept in the
after-noon. He woke up weeping. His son, ‘Ali al-Akbar, asked him why he
was weeping. ‘Son! This is an hour in which no vision tells a lie! Just
as I felt drowsiness overtaking me..., etc.'”

[^74]: According to Vol. 10, bound edition No. 7, dated 1330 A.H./1912
A.D., it was one of the Taff villages, a town full of scholars and
scholarship. It reached its zenith during the time of Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (‘a). At the beginning of the third century, it did not amount
to anything.

[^75]: al-Mufid, Kitab al-Irshad.

[^76]: al-Ghadiriyya is named after Ghadira, a clan of Banu Asad. It is
said to lie to the north of ‘Awn’s grave. In Manahil al-Darb by Sayyid
Ja’far al-A’raji al-Kaďimi, a manuscript at the private library of the
authority Shaikh Agha Buzurg al-Tehrani, ‘Awn is the son of ‘Abdullah
Ibn Ja’far Ibn Mar’i Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Hasan al-Banafsaj Ibn Idris Ibn
Dawud Ibn Ahmad al-Mas’ud Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Musa al-Juhn Ibn ‘Abdullah
Ibn al-Mahz Ibn al-Hassan II Ibn [Imam] al-Hasan (‘a) son of the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a). He lived at the holy city of al-Ha’ir,
and he had an estate two farasangs from Karbala’ where he died. He was
buried there, and his grave lies under a dome. His shrine is sought by
pilgrims and by those who have nathr. Many people are confused about
him. Some say he is the son of ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib (‘a), whereas others
say he is the son of ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja’far at-Tayyar, since the latter
was buried at the martyrs' cemetery at al-Hair. There are ruins there of
a citadel known as Banu Asad's citadel. As regarding Shufayya, it is a
well belonging to Banu Asad. Al-’Aqr used to be the area where the
people of Bachtnuzzer used to reside. The Battle of ‘Aqr is the one
wherein Yazid Ibn al-Muhallab was killed in 102 A.H./720 A.D. All these
places are villages close to each other. On p. 95, Vol. 3, of his
concordance titled Al-Mu’jam fima Ista’jam, al-Bakri says, “People used
to say that the offspring of Harb sacrificed their religion in the
Battle of Karbala’; the offspring of Marwan sacrificed their manliness
in the Battle of ‘Aqr. It means that the first did so when they killed
al-Husayn (‘a) at Karbala’, whereas the other party did so when they
killed Yazid son of al-Muhallab at ‘Aqr.” On p. 16 of his book Tarikh
al-Mosul, Ibn Iyas (who died in 334 A.H./945 A.D.) cites Kathir Ibn
‘Abdul-Rahman al-Khuza’i saying, “Goodness, by Allah, was annihilated
when the son of al-Muhallab was killed.” And on p. 16, it is stated that
al-Farazdaq eulogized Yazid Ibn al-Muhallab with verses one of which is
the following: No female ever conceived nor did any deliver Anyone after
the one killed at ‘Aqr.

[^77]: al-Turayhi, Muntakhab, p. 308, Hayderi Press edition (dated 1369
A.H./1950 A.D.).

[^78]: Ibn Shadqam, Tuhfat al-Azhar (a manuscript). On p. 209, Vol. 3,
of Siyar A’lam al-Nubala’, al-Thahbi writes saying that when al-Husayn
(‘a) asked which land it was, and when he was told it was called
Karbala’, he said, “Karb (affliction) and bala’ (trial and
tribulation).”

[^79]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 10, p. 188.

[^80]: See Al-Luhuf of Ibn Tawus.

[^81]: Excerpted from a 93-line poem by Shaikh Muhammad Ibn Sharif Ibn
Falah al-Kaďimi, the same poet who had composed the “Kerrari Poem” in
praise of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), one critiqued by as many
as eighteen of his contemporary poets. Both poems are among the
manuscripts at the library belonging to the authority critic al-Amini,
author of the Al-Ghadir encyclopaedia.


