Karbala’
========

   
 His arrival at Karbala’ took place on Muharram 2, 61 A.H/October 5, 680
A.D.[^1] He gathered his children, sisters, and other family members. He
cast a look at them then burst in tears. He supplicated saying,

“*O Allah! We are the progeny of Your Prophet Muhammad! We have been
expelled and estranged from our grandfather's sanctuary, and Banu
Umayyah oppressed us. O Allah! Seek revenge on them on our behalf, and
grant us victory over the oppressing people.*”  
    
 He approached his companions saying, “P*eople are the worshippers of
this life, giving religion their lip-service; they uphold it as long as
their livelihood is profitable. Once they are afflicted with a trial,
few, indeed, will be those who uphold religion*.”[^2]

   
 Then he praised Allah and glorified Him, blessing Muhammad and his
Progeny, adding,  
  “*Our affair has reached the point which you can see. Life has changed
and turned against us. Its goodness has abandoned us, leaving nothing
but a trickle like a pot dripping and a life of hardship like an
afflicted pasture.*

*Do you not see how righteousness is not upheld and how falsehood is not
shunned? Let every believer desire the meeting with Allah I see death as
nothing but a source of happiness while living with the oppressors as
sure displeasure*”.[^3]  
    
 Zuhayr stood up and said, “We have heard your statement, O son of the
Messenger of Allah! Had life been secured for us forever, we would still
have preferred to rise with you rather than remain therein.”  
    
 Burayr stood up and said, “O son of the Messenger of Allah! Allah has
blessed us with your company so that we may fight defending you till our
parts are cut off for your sake, then your grandfather will intercede on
our behalf on the Day of Judgment.”[^4]  
    
 Nafi’ Ibn Hilal said, “You know that your grandfather the Messenger of
Allah (S), could not instill his love in the heart of people nor make
them obey him and do what he liked them to do, and there were many
hypocrites among them who promised to support him while hiding their
treacherous intentions against him.

They would meet him and speak to him words sweeter than honey then
depart from him with those more bitter than colocynth till Allah took
his soul away. Your father ‘Ali underwent the same.

There were folks who were unanimous in supporting and fighting with him
against those who broke their promises, who regarded themselves as more
fair than him, and who abandoned the creed altogether, till he met his
fate.

He went to a mercy from Allah and pleasure. Today, you are with us in
the same situation: there are those who reneged from their promise of
support and who abandoned their oath of loyalty. These shall not harm
except their own selves, and Allah shall suffice you for them; so, march
with us, being rightly guided and in good health, be it to the east of
the earth or to the west.

By Allah, we are not too scared to meet Allah's destiny, nor do we hate
to meet our Lord. We are determined to befriend whoever befriends you
and be the enemy of whoever antagonizes you.”[^5]  
  

With my father's life do I sacrifice

Those who, with their own demise,

Opted to meet and support al-Husayn.

They stood to thwart the lances,

And the arrows, like solid statues.

With white necks did they shield him against the swords,

With their glorious faces they kept arrows from him.

A band, they were, that

In a night battle, their lances would sparkle

And if the swords sing, and the cups of death go round,

And everyone sober is elated with joy,

They distanced themselves from the swords,

They separated the foes' souls from their bodies.

Their greatest feast was when they joined al-Husayn

So they became his sacrifice at the *Taff*.

Never shall I forget, though distant from them,

How lofty their glory was though their foe

Numbered as much as the valley's water flow.

Defending the Prophet's creed he was

With a spark that removes the darkness of *shirk*.

So hearts would fly away in terror at his sight,

Whenever he mounted his steed as though on wings;

Then when thirst, and the sun, and the bleeding,

When his arms weighed heavily on him,

He stood for a short respite; it was then when

Fate shot him with an easy arrow,

And the throne fell on the ground,

And with the ashes of the calamity

All was covered with the dark.

My heart was on fire for Zainab when she

Saw how in the dust, heavy with wounds, was his body.

Stole her tongue away was the calamity,

So she addressed him with her tears that were

More eloquent than words could ever be:

O one who shatters misguidance, who brightens the night,

O shade from the heat, O bright light of the day!

You were for me a fortified haven, a cool shade,

When life was still within you,

Can you see how the people

Whenever we pass by you, prohibit us

From mourning you, from weeping, from wailing?

If my humiliation rests easily with you,

If my estrangement with the foes, if my exile,

And if my being a captive in the hands of the foes

Riding on bare she-camels,

Is against my wish to see you

Lingering among dark lances and white swords,

Your corpse on the sands, your head raised on lance's tips.

How I lament those who drank of the pool of death,

How they were kept away from accessible Euphrates...

How I lament those who wore reddened attires

Decorated by wanton winds...[^6]

   
 Al-Husayn (‘a) bought the lots where his grave now stands from the
residents of Ninawa and al-Ghadiriyya for sixty thousand dirhams. He
then turned and gave it back to them as charity on one condition: they
lead people to his gravesite and host whoever visited it for three days.
Al-Husayn's sanctuary, which he bought, was four miles long by four
miles wide.

It is lawful for his offspring and those loyal to him and is prohibited
from those who oppose them. It is full of bliss. Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) has
said that those people did not fulfill that condition.[^7]  
    
 When al-Husayn (‘a) camped at Karbala’, he wrote Ibn al-Hanafiyya and a
group from Banu Hashim saying, “It is as if this life has never been,
and as if the hereafter has always been, and peace be with you.”[^8]

[^1]: This date is provided by al-Tabari on p. 233, Vol. 6, of his
Tarikh, by Ibn al-Athir on p. 20, Vol. 4, of his book Al-Kamil, and by
al-Mufid in his book Al-Irshad.

[^2]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 10, p. 198. Al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal
al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 237. The reader cannot escape the implication of
al-Husayn, peace be upon him, inquiring about the name of that land. All
things related to the Master of Martyrs are obscure mysteries. To us,
Imamites, an Imam is acquainted with what goes on in the cosmos of
events and epics, knowledgeable of the characteristics which Allah, the
most Exalted One, decreed to the beings, the Creator of the heavens and
earth that He is, Exalted is He. In this book's Introduction, we
provided proofs for this statement. The secret behind his inquiry about
the name of the land which they were prohibited from crossing, or about
the fact that Allah Almighty caused his horse to halt just as He had
caused the she-camel of the Prophet (S) to halt at the Hudaibiya, is to
acquaint his companions with that land, the stage of the sacrifice which
they had been promised as was the Prophet (S) or his wali, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon them, were foretold, so that the hearts might
feel contented, and so that the men might be tested, so that the
determination may remain firm, and so that sacrifice would be for the
sake of the truth. It is then that the knowledge of their cause
increases; it is then that they prepare themselves to attain their
objective, so that there will be no room for anyone to cast any doubt
about Karbala’, his resting place. These issues are not haphazard
especially since similar ones had already been reported about the
Prophet (S) who had asked about the names of both men who once stood to
milk his she-camel and about both mountains on his way to Badr. Was not
the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny,
knowledgeable of all of that? Of course he was. He knew, but reasons
hidden from us prompted him to raise the questions. We have referred to
such questions on p. 90 of our book, Muslim, the Martyr, under the
heading “Muslim is not superstitious.” Such sort of questioning is
labelled by the scholars of oratory “rhetorical.” Consider how the
Creator of everything, the One Whose knowledge encompassed everything
small and big, asked Moses, “And what is that in your right hand, O
Moses?” (Qur’an, 20:17). He also asked Jesus, “Did you tell people to
take you and your mother as two gods?” (Qur’an, 5:116). There is a
reason why He raised such questions. He, Glory to Him, had also asked
His Friend Abraham: “Have you not already believed [that I can bring the
dead back to life] ?” (Qur’an, 2:260). The Almighty was fully
knowledgeable of Abraham's conviction. An Imam whom He installs in order
to safeguard His Shari’a cannot be thus ignorant. Also, the Master of
Martyrs (‘a) was not superstitious when he sought refuge with Allah
against afflictions, trials and tribulations, when he heard the word
“Karbala’.” A superstitious person is not knowledgeable of what will
happen to him. Rather, he bases his superstition on certain things the
Arabs used to regard as ominous. Al-Husayn (‘a) was convinced of what
would happen to him of Allah's destiny at the Taff land. He had already
been informed of the affliction that would befall him, his family and
companions. He was foretold of all of that more than once.

[^3]: This text is recorded in Al-Luhuf by Ibn Tawus. Al-al-Tabari, on
p. 229, Vol. 6, of his Tarikh, says that al-Husayn (‘a) had delivered
this speech at Thu Hasm. On p. 312, Vol. 2, of Al-’Iqd al-Farid; on p.
39, Vol. 3, of Hilyat al-Awliya’; on p. 333, Vol. 4, of Ibn ‘Asakir's
book, all texts agree with what is recorded in Al-Luhuf of Ibn Tawus. It
appears from reviewing p. 192, Vol. 9, of Mujma’ al-Zawa’id of Ibn Hajar
al-Haythami, from p. 149 of Thakhair al-’Uqba, and from p. 312, Vol. 2,
of Al-’Iqd al-Farid (by Sayyid Muhammad Riďa al-Asterbadi al-Hilli),
that he had delivered that speech on ‘Ashura. On p. 209, Vol. 3, of
al-Thahabi's book Siyar A’lam al-Nubala’, it is stated that al-Husayn
(‘a) made this statement to his companions when ‘Umar Ibn Sa’d
confronted him.

[^4]: Ibn Tawus, Al-Luhuf, p. 44.

[^5]: al-Bahrani, Maqtal al-’Awalim, p. 76.

[^6]: This poem was composed by the scholar Sayyid Riďa son of Ayatullah
Sayyid Muhammad al-Hindi.

[^7]: Shaikh al-Baha'i, Kashkool, Vol. 2, p. 91 (Egyptian edition),
quoting Kitab al-Ziyarat by Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Dawud al-Qummi. He is
quoted by al-Sayyid Ibn Tawus in the latter’s book Misbah al-Za'ir. It
is amazing to read on p. 245 of Kitab al-Matajir how the author did not
believe that al-Husayn (‘a) had bought four miles of land surrounding
his sacred grave, claiming he could not verify this incident from
whatever he had read of what other scholars have documented. Actually,
the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) had bought the area between
al-Khawarnaq and al-Hira from one direction, and from there to Kufa from
the other, for forty thousand dirhams. He told those who criticized him
for doing so that that land was barren. “I heard the Messenger of Allah
(S),” said the Imam (‘a), “that there are two Kufas: the first will
answer the call of the second; seventy thousand shall be gathered from
there to enter Paradise without reckoning; so I desired that they would
do so from my own property.” See also p. 29, Chapter Two, of Ibn Tawus's
book Farhat al-Ghari (Najaf: The Hayderi Press).

[^8]: Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 75, Chapter 23. Abul-Faraj
al-Isfahani, on p. 151, Vol. 8, of his book Al-Aghani (Sasi edition),
says that al-Hasan al-Basri wrote ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz about that
when the latter became caliph. According to Muruj al-Thahab, ‘Umar Ibn
‘Abd al-’Aziz wrote Abu Hazim al-Madani al-A’raj saying, “Admonish me,
and be brief,” so he wrote him back stating the above.


