The Intention to Kill
=====================

 

Introductory Note
-----------------

   
 By necessity, the human society needs a reformer to bridge the gaps
among its sectors, to correct its error, to complete its deficiency, and
to enable it to stand on its own. The reason for all of this is the fact
that the elements of corruption are present in it.

Had there been none to curb the nation's evil intentions, their whims
and desires would have played havoc with them and divided them, so much
so that even a relative would not be able to trust his relative, and all
individuals would be the victims of their own ambition. Such a reformer
is chosen by the Master, Glory to Him, from among His servants because
He, and only He, is the One Who best knows the purity and integrity of
the souls, of their renunciation of what displeases the Lord of the
Worlds.

He will have to be protected against the immoralities the servants of
Allah have and against all abominable inclinations so that he may not
partake of them and thus worsen the situation and abandon informing
others and guiding them to the paths of guidance and warning them
against the pitfalls of perdition.

Allah had created the greatest Prophet (S) from the light of His
sanctity and bestowed upon him the most perfect of good ethics to the
extent that he surpassed in his good conduct everyone else and excelled
over every being in existence. He, therefore, started explaining what is
divinely permissible and what is not, supported by divine inspiration.  
    
 One's pen is surely incapable of defining such a brilliant personality
about which the Prophet (S) said to the Commander of the Faithful,
“*Nobody knows Allah except I and you; nobody knows me except Allah and
you, and nobody knows you except Allah and I.”*[^1]  
    
 Since the Prophet (S) was not to live forever, being a mortal like any
other human being whose end is predetermined, and since a number of his
injunctions were quite general the time for whose specifics had not come
yet, it was mandatory on the legislator that called for reforming the
nation to appoint a successor to continue the march in his footsteps, in
his determination, sincerity and infallibility.

Nobody knows what someone hides within himself except his Creator. Had
the nation been entrusted to select such a person, it would have been
impossible for it to distinguish one person from another because of its
inability to determine the characteristics that had to be present in the
Imam.

Chaos, corruption, disputes and dissension would then result. This is
contrary to the Munificence of the Master, Glory to Him.

***“Your Lord creates whatever He pleases and chooses: they have no
choice to make in the affair” (Sura Al-Qasas, 28:68).***

***“No believing man nor woman has any choice with regard to their
affairs if Allah and His Messenger make a decree, and whoever disobeys
Allah and His Messenger strays a manifest straying” (Sura Al-‘Azab,
33:36).***  
    
 Succession [to the Prophet] is a divine post for which Allah, the most
Exalted One, enables someone to carry the burdens of prophethood, so he
conveys the message and calls for the details of the *Shari’a* brought
by the Supreme Saviour.

He will guide the ignorant, alert the heedless, discipline the
transgressor and explain in detail what the Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him and his Progeny, had summed up either to secure the
common good of people, or he neglected to explain it because it was not
opportune to do so yet.  
    
 After the Message had been conveyed by the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a), he was succeeded by his son al-Hasan then by al-Hasan's brother
al-Husayn, the Master of Martyrs, then by his (Husayn’s) son ‘Ali Zayn
al-’Abidin, then by his son Muhammad al-Baqir followed by his son Ja’far
as-Sadiq followed by his son Musa al-Kaďim followed by his son ‘Ali
al-Riďa, then by his son Muhammad al-Jawad then by his son ‘Ali al-Hadi,
then by his son Hasan al-’Askari, then by his son the Awaited One,
Abul-Qasim, Muhammad al-Mahdi, may Allah hasten his reappearance.  
    
 Consecutively narrated traditions have told us that Allah, the Great,
deposits with the Imam, whom He appointed for the nation as the proof
and the guiding light whereby those who stray are guided, a divine power
and a light whereby he can inquire about the beings and what happens in
existence of events and epics. An authentic *hadith* says, “*When one of
us is born, a pole of light will be raised for him whereby he sees the
deeds of Allah's servants and whatever takes place in the lands.*”[^2]  
    
 Such a statement refers to the divine power poured by the Truth, Glory
to Him, for the purpose of discovering all facts as they are, be they
statements or actions or anything else relevant to the material or
spiritual world. It is through such a divine power that the curtains of
ignorance are lifted and the barriers of heedlessness are removed; so,
nothing remains except that it is present before them in its essence and
before their holy selves.

Such a light dispels the darkness, so the one seeing will find what the
deep darkness had veiled from him standing before his very eyes. Abu
‘Abdullah, Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), has already informed us of how the Lord,
Great is He, bestowed upon Ahl al-Bayt the ability to be acquainted with
what happened to the early generations and what will happen to the last
ones, what is in the heavens and in the earth, and what was and is, so
much so that all things are present before their very eyes.[^3]  
    
 Then he records explaining thus, “Whatever belonged to the Messenger of
Allah (S), the same belongs to us except his prophethood and
wives.”[^4]  
    
 There is no exaggeration in this statement that comes from those whom
Allah had purified according to the text of the Holy Qur’an that says,

***“Allah desires to remove from you, O Ahl al-Bayt, all abomination and
purifies you with a perfect purification” (Sura Al-‘Azab, 33:33).***

in order to be able to carry the most divine superabundance. There is no
miserliness in the Supreme Lord, numerous are His Signs.

To exaggerate about someone is to point out one of his characteristics
which may either be comprehended or not, due to the limitation of one's
own comprehension. Reason does not negate the divine generosity. How
could it, since the most Great One pours His bounties upon those who go
to extremes in their oppression and who rebel against the sanctity of
His Greatness, as if they were the ones who were doing Him a favour?!

Yet all of this did not stop Him from showing mercy and benevolence to
them and granting them His favours. It is as though they had been the
ones who did Him a favour! Yet all this did not stop Him from showing
mercy to them and benevolence to them and granting them of His favours
that whose treasures are not exhausted, nor can it fail anyone who seeks
it. This is one of the self-explanatory causes.

If the condition of the Overwhelming Lord, Praise to Him, is as we have
just described with regard to those tyrants, how would He, the
Omnipotent and the Great that He is, fare with the truth relevant to
Ahmad (S) whom He created from the most sacred light, great is He,
indeed?! So a meeting took place between an ever-flowing fountainhead
and souls that are always ready to give.

It is no *bid’a* at all in what is narrated about them, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon them, bearers of the knowledge of the
unknown, with what Allah's servants do or do not, and with what happened
in the lands or what will.  
    
 The knowledge of the unknown, in as far as they, peace be upon them,
are concerned, is not relevant only to the Creator, the most Exalted
One, so that it would be inaccessible to them. Such knowledge is
characteristic of the Almighty Himself. As far as the Imams are
concerned, Allah, Praise to Him, bestowed upon them such knowledge. It
is through His grants and Munificence that they could know the nature of
things and of events.  
    
 The knowledge of the unknown, then, is of two types:  
    
 1) One which has to exist and which comes only from the Creator of the
heavens and the earth. It depends on Divine boons. It is what the
prophets and their *wasis* had had, and it is to such type of knowledge
that the scholar of exegesis al-‘Alusi attracted our attention when he
explained the following verse:

“Say: None in the heavens and in the earth knows the unknown except
Allah” Al-‘Alusi said, “It may be said that, as a matter of fact, the
knowledge of the unknown, from which everyone other than Him, the most
Exalted One, is excluded, is that which is specifically relevant to one
person without means whereby he acquires it.  
    
 2) As regarding the knowledge with certain individuals, this is
acquired when He somehow bestows it upon them; so, it cannot be said
that they were familiar with the unknown through the first avenue, for
one who says so will certainly be committing apostasy. Rather, it should
be said that they were distinguished from others when they were
acquainted with the knowledge of the unknown.”[^5]  
    
 A testimony to this fact is what Imam Abu Ja’far al-Jawad (‘a) said
once to his wife, Umm al-Fadl, daughter of caliph al-Ma’mun, when she
unexpectedly found herself menstruating. She said to him, “Nobody knows
the unknown except Allah” Said the Imam (‘a), “And I know it because
Allah, the most Exalted One, acquaints me with it.”[^6]  
    
 The Imams (‘a) are at all times in need of Divine favours. “Had it not
been for the continuity of their link with Him and the consecutive boons
which He bestows upon me,” said Imam Abu ‘Abdullah, as-Sadiq (‘a), “*I
would have exhausted what I have with me*.”

He has also said, “*Had it not been for an increase every Friday evening
in what we have, what is with us would have depleted.*”[^7] The Imam
(‘a) by saying so meant to tell us that the Imams' knowledge is directly
from the Creator, the most High, and that they are in continuous need
for His knowledge and for the continuation of His mercy, Glory to Him.

His specifying Friday evening is due to its being a blessed one. It is
blessed by the descending of Divine Munificence from the beginning of
the evening till its end, unlike other nights. It is to such meaning
that Imam al-Riďa (‘a) refers when he says, “*Knowledge is made [by
Allah] accessible to us; it is then that we know, and it is withheld
from us, so it is then that we do not know*.”[^8]  
    
 In Surat al-Jinn, we read the following verse:

***“The One Who knows the unknown, so He does not acquaint anyone with
His knowledge of the unknown except a messenger with whom He is
pleased.”(Sura al-Jinn, 72:26-27)***[^9]

Nobody who reads this verse should doubt (the gist of) what is stated
above. The Messenger who stood the distance of two bows or closer was
none other than the Seal of all the Prophets, the Messenger with whom
Allah is pleased, the one over whom Allah never preferred anyone else
from among all His creation. Imam Abu Ja’far, al-Baqir (‘a), used to
say, “*By Allah, Muhammad was the one with whom Allah is quite
pleased.*”[^10]

Allah never distances the successors of the Prophet (S) from such a
status after having derived their light from that of Prophet Muhammad
(S). Another testimony is the answer provided by Imam al-Riďa (‘a) to
‘Amr Ibn Haddab.

The latter rejected the notion that the Imams, peace be upon them, had
with them the knowledge of the unknown, deriving his argument from the
above quoted verse. The Imam (‘a) responded to his rejection by saying,
“*The Messenger of Allah (S) is the one who was familiarized by Allah
with His knowledge of the unknown, and we are the heirs of that
Messenger who came to know Allah's knowledge of the unknown; so, we thus
came to know what was and what will be till the Day of
Judgment*.”[^11]  
    
 Why would not the Messenger with whom Allah was pleased be the same one
whom Allah loved especially since the Creator, Glory to Him, honoured
him by addressing him directly without an intervening angel? Zurarah
reports saying that he once asked Abu ‘Abdullah, Imam as-Sadiq (‘a),
whether the Messenger of Allah (S) used to be overcome with a swoon
whenever he received revelation. “*No,*” answered the Imam (‘a), “*it
was not.*

*He swooned whenever he communicated with Allah, the Omnipotent, the
Great, directly, without anyone intervening between them. As for Gabriel
(‘a), he never visited him except after seeking and being granted his
permission to do so. So, whenever he entered, he sat before the
Messenger of Allah (S) just like a slave sitting before his
master.*”[^12]  
    
 When the Messenger of Allah (S) was in no condition to grant permission
for Gabriel to enter, the latter remained outside by the drainpipe till
he was granted permission to enter.[^13]  
 And he received the *wahy* without any angel intervening as proven by
Burhan ad-Din al-Halabi,[^14] al-Suhayli,[^15] Ibn Sayyid al-Nas[^16],
al-Suyuti,[^17] and al-Zarqani.[^18]  
    
 Based on these traditions, which tell us about the status reserved by
the Master, sublime are His Signs, for the greatest Messenger (S),
Shaikh as-Saduq recorded his belief in the *wahi* and in the swoon
[referred to above].[^19] The view held by Shaikh al-Mufid is not
different from his.

Says he, “*Wahy* is of two types: one the Prophet (S) hears directly
without anyone interferring, and one wherein he hears through the
angels.”[^20] The great authority, Shaikh Muhammad Taqi al-Isfahani, who
is well known as Aqa Najafi, follows in his footsteps. Add to this, the
Prophet's knowledge of the Qur’an and whatever knowledge and secrets of
natures and characteristics of things it contains even prior to its
revelation to him.

What is most important is that the Master, Great is He, had told him not
to make such knowledge public before receiving its revelation. He, Glory
to Him, said, “Do not hasten with the Qur’an before its revelation is
mandated to you.”[^21] Had the Prophet (S) not been fully acquainted
with what the Glorious Qur’an contains of secrets and knowledge, such a
prohibition from making it public would have had no meaning.

This quite clearly proves that the Prophet (S) knew what events took
place and what events will take place, and that such knowledge was not
totally dependent on Gabriel (‘a), descending upon him. The sacred boon
that he had received from the Almighty had already acquainted him with
all facts even before Gabriel was created...  
    
 At this juncture, another phenomenon becomes evident, one that was not
realized by those who could not realize the degrees of greatness and
beauty such a magnanimous personality enjoyed. It is the fact that the
greatest Messenger (S) was familiar with reading and writing all
languages regardless of their variations and methods of writing before
and after his Prophethood due to his attainment of the highest degrees
of [human] perfection.

Such a quality was not to be withheld from him. Had he not been thus
endowed with such knowledge, he would have sought help from others
whenever he needed to read or to write anything, and he would then have
been in need of someone's favour: he is the embodiment of all favours
and virtues. This is not only our view; it is the view to which renowned
verifiers have submitted.[^22]

The verse saying, “You do not write it with your own right hand” does
not negate his knowledge of writing; it only negates his own writing it
down, and there is no connection between such recording and his ability
to write.

He, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny, was
familiar with writing, but he did not actually write anything down, and
the reason for that is the doubt those who disbelieved in him would have
then cast as the Holy Qur’an states.  
    
 We can conclude from all the above that Allah, the Almighty and the
Great, bestowed upon the Imams from among the offspring of the Prophet
(S) all the merits and virtues which their most holy grandfather had had
with the exception of his prophethood and his wives. He, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny, being the Seal of the
Prophets of Allah that he was, was permitted to marry more than four
women.  
    
 Anyone who does not know the implication of the knowledge of the
unknown, which these geniuses had, is surely to find such an issue
tremendous, so he rejects it. One who does not know the *fiqh* of the
*Shari’a* unknowingly admits the error of his belief.

Shaikh Zadah al-Hanafi says, “Qasim al-Saffar caused a verdict labelling
as “illegal” any marriage based on one merely testifying to the unity of
Allah and to the Prophethood of the Messenger of Allah (S), claiming
that such person had also to believe in the Prophet's knowledge of the
unknown. But the head of the Tatar-Khans rejected the notion that he
should be called an apostate because certain things are demonstrated
before the purified soul of the Prophet (S), so he thus comes to acquire
some of the knowledge of the unknown whereas Allah has said,

***“The One Who knows the unknown, so He does not acquaint anyone with
His knowledge of the unknown except a messenger with whom He is
pleased.”(Sura al-Jinn, 72:26-27)***[^23]

Neither of these men understood the meaning of “the knowledge of the
unknown” discussed here, nor did either of them realize the truth about
the Seal of the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and
his progeny, so they said whatever they were able to comprehend and no
more.  
    
 Having explained its connotation, the discreet reader has no excuse for
hesitating, or for entertaining any doubt. Yes, nobody can deny that the
Creator, Praise is due to Him, has with Him knowledge with which He, and
only He, is familiar, the knowledge which He did not share with anyone
else at all, including the time of the Hour.  
    
 As regarding Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) denying having any knowledge of the
unknown, such as the following statement of Imam Abu ‘Abdullah, as-Sadiq
(‘a), “*Strange how some people claim that we know the unknown! None
knows the unknown except Allah I was about to hit my bondmaid when she
ran away from me and hid: I have no idea in which room she hid!*,” this
statement is interpreted as being said by way of *taqiyya* due to the
presence at the time of men like Dawud al-Raqqi, Yahya al-Bazzaz, and
Abu Busayr.

These men could not comprehend the mystery of how Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) knew
what they knew. Abu ‘Abdullah (‘a) wanted to deny having any knowledge
of the unknown in order to demonstrate his support for those men's
beliefs. What supports this theory is Sadir, the narrator of this
incident, visiting the Imam (‘a) thereafter and expressing to him his
amazement at how he denied his knowledge of the unknown.

The Imam comforted him by saying that he knew what was even more than
that: the Book of Allah in its entirety and all the knowledge and
secrets it contains. Yet this incident is brushed aside by al-Majlisi,
who states so in his book *Mir'at al-’Uqul*, due to the ignorance of
those who have narrated it.  
    
 The reason why the Imam (‘a) denied knowing his bondmaid's whereabouts
may have been to deny having seen her in her hiding place rather than
having known where that place actually was. His phrase “I have no idea”
means: “I did not actually see in which room she entered;” otherwise,
one who has said about himself “The knowledge of what had passed before
me is with me, and so is that which has not come to pass” cannot be
ignorant of his bondmaid's whereabouts.

When Mubashshir knocked at the door of Abu Ja’far, Imam al-Baqir, and
the maid went out to open it, he caught her hand, whereupon Abu Ja’far
(‘a) called upon him from inside the house, “Enter, may you lose your
father!” He entered and apologized by saying that he did not entertain
any ill thought but only wanted to increase (his conviction that the
Imam knew who was at the door). The Imam (‘a) said to him, “*Had the
walls obstructed our vision as they obstruct yours, we and you would
have been on par*.”[^24]

He also said once to Muhammad Ibn Muslim, “Had we been ignorant of what
you all do or not do, we would not have been preferred over the rest of
the people,” then he mentioned the incident at the Rabatha involving him
and his fellow with regard to the subject of Imamate.[^25]  
    
 The Prophet's *hadith*: “*Had I known the unknown, I would have
acquired plenty of goodnes*s” does not carry any meaning other than the
Prophet (S) being in need of Allah, the most Exalted, to acquire
knowledge, and that he did not know the unknown on his own.

There is no doubt about that, for everyone believes that Allah, the most
Exalted, is the One Who bestowed upon the Prophet (S) and upon his
offspring, peace be upon them, the divine faculty whereby they were able
to acquire the knowledge of the world.[^26]  
    
 Another testimonial is when Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), who was with his
followers in jail, asked his followers about the presence of those who
were spying on them. They told him that they had no knowledge of such
spies.

He, thereupon, said, “*Thrice do I swear by the Lord of this building
that had I been present with Moses and al-Khidr (‘a), I would have told
them that I am more knowledgeable than [both of] them, and I would have
informed them of the knowledge with which they were not familiar. They
were, indeed, granted the knowledge of what had already passed and what
is to pass till the time of the Hour, and we [Ahl al-Bayt] have
inherited all such knowledge from the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him and his Progeny*.” [^27]  
    
 This narration is authentic; nobody accuses Ibrahim Ibn Ishaq al-Ahmar
of any weakness in what he narrates. We, furthermore, say that it does
not contradict his vast knowledge due to the fact that the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) are not obligated to reveal all what they knew.

Rather, they had to act upon whatever met the principle of *taqiyya*, or
due to their concern about some of their companions on account of being
under surveillance. His statement is similar to another wherein he said,
“*I know what is in the heavens and in the earth, and what is in
Paradise and in hell; I know what was and what will be.*”

Having said so, the Imam (‘a) realized its tremendous effect on his
audience; he was concerned about those who were in his company then and
there, so he (‘a), went on to say, “*I came to know all of it from the
Book of Allah: The most Exalted One says that His Book contains the
explanation of everything.*”[^28]  
    
 The Imam (‘a) took into consideration his companions' condition, so he
brought them an argument to convince them, and so were the other Imams
(‘a) in as far as their knowledge of temporal circumstances and personal
conditions were concerned.

His statement about Moses and al-Khidr (‘a), that they were granted the
knowledge of what was, does not contradict al-Khidr's knowledge of the
future of the young boy [whom he killed], for it is one of the causes
with which Allah informed him for a temporal reason.  
    
 As regarding the Imams, peace be upon them, stating that when one[^29]
of them wants to know something, Allah informs him of it, it does not
prove the limitation of their knowledge at a particular time.

Such a statement proves that putting the divine power with which they
are endowed at birth to work depends on their will which is determined
by the presence of an interest necessitating the revelation of a veiled
fact and producing what they had had with them of treasured knowledge.
Yet this explanation occurs in no more than three narrations all of
which are refuted by al-Majlisi in his book *Mir'at al-’Uqul*, proving
the weakness of some of them and the ignorance of those who reported the
others.  
    
 What can be concluded from the above is that Allah, the most Sublime,
has bestowed upon His purified vicegerents a divine faculty whereby they
could comprehend events, the nature of things, the secrets of
everything, in addition to whatever good or evil takes place in the
universe.

There is no exaggeration in all of this especially since the nature of
these Imams is capable of absorbing such divine overflow, and since the
Lord, Glory to Him, is never miser in what He grants those upon whom He
bestows of His knowledge. The Imams, peace be upon them, have declared
the same, saying that they always are in need of His subsequent
blessings, Great is He; otherwise, their storehouse of knowledge may
deplete.

This is not unexpected with regard to those whose ultimate objective is
to obey Allah Almighty, and whose substance is integrity. Such are
Allah's friends and the truthful ones in addition to those whom the
Creator appointed as the custodians of His *Shari’a*.

This view is endorsed by renowned critics and is stated by Shaikh
al-Mufid on p. 77 of *Al-Maqalat*, and by al-Majlisi on p. 187, Vol. 1,
of *Mir'at al-’Uqul*. Al-Ashtiyani, the critic, has followed in their
footsteps as stated on p. 60, Vol. 2, of his commentary on Shaikh
al-Ansari's Letters.  
    
 Ibn Hajar al-Haythami states the following:  
 “*The verses stating: “Say: None knows the unknown in the heavens and
in the earth save Allah” and “The One Who knows the unknown, so He does
not acquaint anyone with His knowledge” do not contradict the prophets'
and the walys' knowledge of portions of the unknown.*

*They know of such knowledge because Allah Almighty informs them of it.
This is not the same knowledge like that relevant to Him whereby He is
praised and glorified. In both of these verses, He is simply saying that
none shares His knowledge of the latter.*

*As far as other types of knowledge are concerned, He informs whomsoever
He pleases of some of the knowledge of the unknown. The Almighty
informing His prophets and friends of some of the knowledge of the
unknown is possible; it is not impossible at all.*

*Anyone who denies it is stubborn. It goes without saying that such
granted knowledge does not in the end lead to the recipients sharing
with Allah the knowledge which He has reserved for Himself and whereby
He is praised, glorified, and is known since eternity. This is the same
view upheld by al-Nawawi in his verdicts*”.[^30]  
    
 This clearly proves that Ibn Hajar was not too far from accepting the
notion that the *walis* knew the unknown, but he did not agree with the
Shi’as with regard to their belief that their Imams from among Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be upon them, are capable of knowing the events which
took place as well as those which will take place till the Day of
Judgment.

He believes that such ability is characteristic of the Great Creator.
The criterion he has set for the *walis* to know some of the knowledge
of the unknown is their being empowered by their Master, Glory to Him,
to do so; He is the One Who informs them of some of the knowledge of the
unknown. Such empowering, he believes, keeps the Shi’a beliefs in check.

If the criterion of Allah Almighty empowering others to know the unknown
becomes the particular divine faculty of certain individuals who are the
offspring of the Messenger of Allah (S), then it is quite possible that
such faculty reaches its utmost limit to the extent that it will not be
confined to some but rather to all such knowledge, so much so that one
of such individuals may see things as if they are before his very eyes
as Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says.

The exception to this, of course, is the knowledge that Allah Almighty
has confined only to Himself. None can be acquainted with such knowledge
even if he reaches the degree beyond the zenith of perfection.  
    
 This is also the view held by Ibn Hajar. Al-Naishapuri, author of the
*Tafsir*, has recorded it as follows: “*If the walis are not granted
such a faculty, it is either because Allah is entitled not to grant a
believer what he wants, or because the believer simply is not worthy of
it, and either one is far from the other. If a believer is empowered to
attain it, it surely is the very greatest of all of what He grants a
servant of His. If the One Who is most generous does not withhold the
very best, He likewise is generous enough not to give what is the
least.*”[^31]

He further says, “*There is no contradiction between the verse saying,
‘No soul knows what it shall earn in the morrow' and the advance
knowledge of the Prophet (S) of the conquest of Mecca and of the
imminent wars against the renegades, those who deviated from the right
path, and the apostates. All what the verse says is its negation of the
knowledge of the future, but if this is done by Allah informing someone
of it, then the case is not so. It is quite possible that Allah informs
His Prophet (S) of what will be*.”[^32]  
  

[^1]: al-Hasan Ibn Sulayman al-Hilli (one of the students of the First
Martyr who was alive in 802 A.H./1400 A.D.), Al-Muhtadir, p. 165, and
also on p. 125 of his book Al-Basa’ir.

[^2]: al-Saffar, Basa’ir al-Darajat, Vol. 9, p. 128.

[^3]: Mukhtasar al-Basa’ir, p. 101.

[^4]: al-Hasan Ibn Sulayman al-Hilli, Al-Muhtadir, p. 20.

[^5]: Ruh al-Ma’ani, Vol. 20, p. 11.

[^6]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 12, p. 29 (Kampani edition),
quoting al-Tabarsi's Mashariq al-Anwar.

[^7]: as-Saduq, Usul al-Kafi, as quoted in a footnote on p. 185, Vol. 1,
of Mir’at al-’Uqul.

[^8]: Mukhtasar al-Basa’ir, p. 63.

[^9]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 15, p. 74. Ibn Hajar al-’Asqalani
discusses this verse on p. 284, Vol. 13, of his book Al-Fath al-Bari in
“the Book of Tawhid.”

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 12, p. 22, in a chapter dealing with the
Imam's visit to Basra. It is also discussed on p. 74, Vol. 15, where the
subject of khiraj taxes is discussed.

[^11]: as-Saduq, Tawhid, p. 102, in the chapter denying the possibility
of Allah being seen by anyone, and it is also discussed on p. 14,
Chapter 7, of ‘Ilal al-Sharai’ and on p. 86 of al-Fayd's book ‘Ilm
al-Yaqin.

[^12]: Tawhid, p. 102, in the chapter that denies the possibility of
Allah being seen by anyone. It is also cited on p. 14, Chapter 7, of
‘Ilal al-Sharai’, and on p. 86 of al-Fayd's book ‘Ilm al-Yaqin.

[^13]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 11, p. 216, in a chapter dealing
with as-Sadiq's companions.

[^14]: al-Halabi, Sira, Vol. 1, p. 294, in a chapter discussing the
inception of the wali.

[^15]: al-Suhayli, Al-Rawd al-Anif, Vol. 1, p. 154.

[^16]: ’Uyun al-Athar, Vol. 1, p. 90.

[^17]: al-Suyuti, Al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, Vol. 2, p. 193.

[^18]: al-Zarqani's explanations of Al-Mawahib al-Laduniyya, Vol. 1, p.
221 (first edition).

[^19]: In this scholar's Appendix to Chapter 11 of his book I’tiqadat.

[^20]: as-Saduq, Sharh al-I’tiqadat, p. 211 (Tehran edition).

[^21]: Al-’Inayat al-Radawiyya, p. 51.

[^22]: Shaikh al-Mufid has indicated the same on p. 123 of Al-Maqalat,
and by Shaikh al-Tusi on p. 423, Vol. 2, of his book Al-Tibyan. It is
also indicated in Al-Mabsut, in Ghayat al-Murad by the First Martyr, in
Al-Tahrir wal Qawa’id, by Sayyid Mujahid in his book Al-Manahil. Ibn
Shahr-Ashub has declared so on p. 161, Vol. 1, of his book Al-Manaqib.
So has al-Majlisi on p. 147, Vol. 1, of his book Mir’at al-’Uqul, in
Riyad al-Ahzan (of Muhammad Hasan al-Sha’ban Kurdi al-Qazwini). The same
is stated by al-Fadil al-Hindi in his book Kashf al-Litham, by al-Miqdad
in his book Al-Tanqih, and by al-Hajj Mulla ‘Ali al-Kanni in his book
Al-Qada’. The word “al sara’ir” in the said verse connotes inclusion of
everything; thus have these scholars all agreed upon when they discussed
the judge recording something in their discussion of legislation.
Al-Shihab al-Khafaji, on p. 398, Vol. 2, of his book Sharh al-Shifa,
indicates the same in a chapter dealing with his names. On p. 514, he
includes a section dealing with his miracles. On p. 4, Vol. 21, of Ruh
al-Ma’ani, al-‘Alusi comments on the phrase “you do not write it down
with your own right hand” in the verse referred to the above by saying,
“A group of scholars once discussed this phrase and were of the view
that he [the Messenger of Allah] knew how to write.” Then he quoted
al-Bukhari saying in his Sahih, “He (S) wrote down the covenant of the
peace treaty [of al-Hudaybiya].” Prof. ‘Abdul-’Azim al-Zarqani, on p.
260 (first edition) of his book Manahil al-’Irfan, records what negates
that he learned how to write but that he already knew how to. On p. 249,
Vol. 6, of Tahthib Tarikh Ibn ‘Asakir, the author states that Abul-Walid
al-Baji wrote a dissertation about the Prophet (S) being able to write,
and he is supported in his views by Ahmad Ibn Muhammad al-Lakhmi and
Ja’far Ibn ‘Abdul-Jabbar in addition to others.

[^23]: Mu’jam al-Anhur, Vol. 1, p. 320 that discusses the Hanafi fiqh.

[^24]: Ibn Shahr Ashub, Manaqib, Vol. 2, p. 274. It is also quoted on p.
70, Vol. 11, of Bihar al-Anwar from Abul-Saba al-Kinani

[^25]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 11, p. 72, quoting Al-Khara’ij.

[^26]: al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shifa’, Vol. 3, p. 150, where he says, “What
is denied in these verses is his [Prophet's] knowledge of the unknown
without means [enabling him to know]. As regarding his knowledge of the
unknown, it is done by Allah, the most Exalted One, informing him. This
is a recognized fact. It is ascertained by the verse saying, “He does
not acquaint anyone with His knowledge of the unknown except a Messenger
with whom He is pleased.”

[^27]: as-Saduq, Usul al-Kafi, as quoted on p. 189, Vol. 1, of Mir'at
al-’Uqul.

[^28]: Ibid., p. 190.

[^29]: Ibid., p. 187.

[^30]: Al-Fatawa al-haditha, p. 222.

[^31]: ’Abdul-Qadir al-’Aidarusi, Al-Nur al-Safir fi A’yan al-Qarn
al-’Ashir, p. 85

[^32]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 1, p. 427 (first
Egyptian edition), p. 427.


