Ibn Ziyad Delivers a Speech
===========================

Ibn Ziyad gathered people at Kufa's grand mosque where he delivered a
speech to them, saying,  
  “O people! You tried Abu Sufyan's offspring and found them just as you
like, and you have come to know how good in conduct the commander of the
faithful, Yazid, has been and how generous to his subjects. The highways
have become, during his regime, quite safe. So was the case during the
time of his father Mu’awiyah.

His son, Yazid, is even more generous towards Allah's servants,
enriching them with wealth. He has doubled your payment and ordered me
to make funds available to all of you and to require you to come out to
fight his enemy, al-Husayn; so, you should listen to him and you should
obey”.  
    
 As soon as he came down from the pulpit, he distributed money then went
out to al-Nukhayla[^1] where he camped. He called to his presence
al-Hasin Ibn Namir al-Tamimi, Hijar Ibn Abjar, Shimr Ibn Thul-Jawshan,
Shabth Ibn Rab’i, ordering them to go to Ibn Sa’d's aid.

Shabth sent word saying that he was sick[^2], so he sent him a letter in
which he said, “My messenger informs me of your pretending to be sick,
and I fear lest you should be among those who, when they meet the
believers, say that they believe, and when they meet their demons say:
‘We are with you! We only laugh at them!' So, if you are one of our
subjects, come swiftly to us.”

He went to meet him after the evening prayers so that he would not
clearly see that there were actually no signs of any sickness showing on
his face. He agreed to do what he [Ibn Ziyad] had required of him.[^3]  
    
 ‘Ubaydullah Ibn Ziyad put Zajr Ibn Qays al-Ju’fi in charge of five
hundred cavaliers, ordering him to station his troops at the bridge in
order to prohibit anyone from reaching al-Husayn (‘a). ‘Amir Ibn Abu
Salamah Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Arar al-Dalani passed on the bridge, so Zajr
said to him, “I know exactly where you are going; so, go back.”

‘Amir charged at him and at his company, forcing them to flee. None of
them dared to come close to him. He reached Karbala’ and joined
al-Husayn (‘a) and stayed with him till he was killed in his defense. He
had previously participated in all the wars waged by the Commander of
the Faithful, ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib, peace be upon him.[^4]  
  

[^1]: It is the same as al-’Abbasiyya, according to Ibn Nama, and it is
presently called al-’Abbasiyyat. It lies near Thul-Kifl. On p. 147,
Chapter 46, of Al-Yaqin by Radiyy ad-Din Ibn Tawus, al-Nukhayla is two
farasangs from Kufa.

[^2]: al-Dinawari, Al-Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 253.

[^3]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, citing Maqtal Muhammad Ibn Abu Talib.

[^4]: al-Hamadani, Al-Iklil, Vol. 10, p. 87 and p. 101. Dalan are a
family branch of Hamadan. Among them are Banu ‘Urar, named after ‘Urar
Ibn Ru'as Ibn Dalan Ibn Jabish Ibn Mashbih Ibn Wadi’ah. On p. 321 of Ibn
Hazm's book Jamharat Ansab al-’Arab, the lineage of Wadi’ah is provided
in detail.


