Al-Shimr’s Oppressiveness
=========================

Having read Ibn Sa’d's letter, Ibn Ziyad said, “This is a letter of
someone who advises his people and who is compassionate towards them.”
He was about to respond to it when al-Shimr[^1] stood up as he said, “Do
you really accept such an offer from him after his having settled in
your land? By Allah! If he ever departs from your land without making an
agreement with you, he will get even stronger, while you will get
weaker.”

Ibn Ziyad found his statement to be the wisest, so he wrote Ibn Sa’d
saying, “I did not dispatch you to al-Husayn so that you would spare
him, nor to negotiate with him, nor to give him any glimpse of hope of
security, nor did I dispatch you so that you would intercede on his
behalf with me.

See if Husayn and his company surrender to my authority; if so, send
them to me safely; if not, attack them and kill them and mutilate their
bodies, for they surely deserve it. If al-Husayn is killed, let the
horses trample over his chest and back. I do not think that this will
hurt him after his death, but this is in fulfillment of a promise that I
had made to do just that.

If you carry out our order, we shall reward you as someone who listens
to us and who obeys, but if you refuse, then remove yourself from our
business and our troops, and let Shimr Ibn Thul-Jawshan take charge of
the army, for we have granted him authority to do so.”[^2]  
    
 When Shimr brought this letter, Ibn Sa’d said to him, “Woe unto you!
May Allah never make your home near, and may He reveal the ugliness of
what you have done! I believe you are the one who discouraged him from
doing it and thus foiled our hopeful attempt to bring about
reconciliation. By Allah!

Husayn shall never surrender, for there is an honourable soul within
him.” Al-Shimr said to him, “Tell me what you are going to do: Are you
going to carry out your prince's order or not? If not, let me take
charge of the army.” ‘Umar Ibn Sa’d answered him by saying, “I shall do
it, and no thanks to you; but you should be in charge of the
infantry.”[^3]  
  

[^1]: Ibn Kathir, on p. 188, Vol. 8, says, “Al-Husayn (‘a) used to
narrate to his companions at Karbala’ what his grandfather (S) used to
tell him, which was: ‘It is as if I see a spotted dog licking the blood
of my Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).' When he saw that al-Shimr was leprous, he
immediately said, ‘He is the one who shall kill me!'” On p. 222 of his
book Al-A’laq al-Nafisah, Ibn Rastah says, “Al-Shimr Thul-Jawshan, who
killed al-Husayn (‘a), was leprous.” On p. 449, Vol. 1, of his book
Al-I’tidal, al-Thahabi says, “Shimr son of Thul-Jawshan was one of those
who killed al-Husayn, peace be upon him.” This narrative, therefore, is
not an original. When he was asked, “Why did you side with the enemies
of the son of Fatima (‘a)?,” he said, “Our men of authority ordered us.
Had we disobeyed them, we would have been more wretched than red
camels.” Al-Thahabi says, “This is only an ugly excuse; obedience is due
to what is right.” On p. 303 and on the following pages of his book
titled Siffin (Egyptian edition), Naar Ibn Muzahim says, “Shimr Ibn
Thul-Jawshan was with the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) at Siffin. From
the company of Mu’awiyah came out Adham Ibn Muhriz challenging anyone
from ‘Ali 's army for a duel. Shimr Ibn Thul-Jawshan went out, and they
exchanged two blows. Adham struck Shimr on his forehead, causing his
sword to reach the man's bones. When Shimr responded with a blow of his
own, he could not harm Adham in the least; therefore, he went back to
his camp to drink some water. He took a spear and composed these lines
of poetry:   I have reserved for the brother of Bahilah A swift blow,
only should I live A final blow shall I strike him with, A blow like
death, or death itself.   He charged at Adham, pierced him with his
sword, causing him to fall from his horse. Adham's fellows carried him
away, so Shimr left. On p. 143, Vol. 2, of his book Nafh al-Tib (‘Eisa
al-Babi Press), al-Maqrizi says, “Al-Samil Ibn Hatim Ibn al-Shimr Ibn
Thul-Jawshan was a chief of Mudar who bore a great deal of grudge
against the Yemenites.” This is stated on p. 222 of the Beiruti edition
edited by Muhammad Muhyi ad-Din.” In a footnote in the same book, Hatim,
son of al-Shimr, was with his father at Kufa. When al-Mukhtar killed
Shimr Ibn Thul-Jawshan, it is stated that Hatim fled to Qinnasrin. On p.
145, he says that al-Samil was governor of Serqasta. He left it to be
the governor of Tulaytala. On p. 67, Vol. 1, of his book Al-Hulla
al-Sayra, Ibn al-Abar says, “When al-Mukhtar appeared in Kufa, al-Shimr
Ibn Thul-Jawshan, who killed al-Husayn Ibn ‘Ali (‘a), fled to Syria
accompanied by his wife and sons. He stayed there in dignity and
security. It is said that al-Mukhtar killed him, whereas he fled till
Kulthum Ibn ‘Iyad al-Qushayri went out to invade al-Maghreb. Al-Samil
was one of the dignitaries selected by the army from among the people of
Syria. He entered Andalusia under the authority of Balaj Ibn Bishr who
looked after the Mudarites in Andalusia when Abu al-Khattar al-Husam Ibn
Dirar al-Kalbi demonstrated his fanaticism in support of the Yemenites.
Al-Samil died in the prison of ‘Abdul-Rahman Ibn Mu’awiyah in the year
142 A.H./759 A.D. He was a poet.” On p. 234, Vol. 1, of his book Tarikh
‘Ulama' al-Andalus, Ibn al-Fawti says the following, “Shimr Ibn
Thul-Jawshan al-Kila’i, a Kufian, is the one who presented the head of
al-Husayn (‘a) to Yazid Ibn Mu’awiyah at the Balaj garrison. He is
grandfather of al-Samil Ibn Hatim Ibn Shimr al-Qaysi, a fellow of
al-Fahri.” What is really accurate is the account narrated by
al-Dinawari on p. 296 of his book Al-Akhbar al-Tiwal: “Shimr Ibn
Thul-Jawshan was killed by the supporters of al-Mukhtar at al-Mathar.
His head was sent to Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyya.” On p. 222 of his book
Al-A’laq al-Nafisa, Ibn Rastah says, “Al-Shimr Ibn Thul-Jawshan was
leprous.” On p. 122, Vol. 7, of his Tarikh, al-Tabari says the same, and
so does Ibn al-Athir in his book Al-Kamil.

[^2]: Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 4, p. 23.

[^3]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 236.


