Day Nine
========

   
 In the eve preceding Thursday, on Muharram 9, 61 A.H/October 12, 680
A.D., Ibn Sa’d stood up and called upon his army to attack al-Husayn
(‘a) who was sitting in front of his tent leaning on his sword.
Heaviness descended upon him and he saw, by way of a fleeting vision,
the Messenger of Allah (S) saying, “Shortly you will join us!”

Zainab, his sister, heard the men's voices, so she said to her brother,
“The enemy is getting close to us.” Al-Husayn (‘a) said to his brother
al-’Abbas, “*Ride, may I be your sacrifice*[^1], *so that you may meet
them. Ask them about the reason why they had come and about what they
want*.”

Al-’Abbas set out escorted by twenty men, including Zuhayr and Habib, on
horseback. He asked them, and their answer was: “An order from the
*Amir* (governor) came that we should make you an offer either to
surrender to his authority or we shall fight you.” Al-’Abbas (‘a) went
back to inform al-Husayn (‘a) as his escorting party stood to admonish
those folks.

Habib Ibn Muzahir said to them, “By Allah! The worst people in the sight
of Allah tomorrow [in the hereafter] are those who come to Him after
having killed the offspring of His Prophet, his Progeny, his Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a), the worshippers of this land who offer *tahajjud* in the pre-dawn
and remember Allah quite often.” ‘Izrah Ibn Qays said to him, “You can
keep on lauding yourself as long as you like.”

Zuhayr said to him, “O ‘Izrah! Allah has already lauded and guided my
soul! So, fear Allah, O ‘Izrah, for I am only admonishing you. I plead
to you in the Name of Allah, O ‘Izrah, not to be among those who support
the people of misguidance in killing the pure souls.”  
    
 ‘Izrah then said, “O Zuhayr! You are not in our regard as one of the
Shi’as of Ahl al-Bayt but a man who thought the opposite of their
thinking.” Zuhayr said, “Do you not conclude, having seen where I stand
with their regard, that I am one of such Shi’as?

By Allah! I never wrote him a letter, nor sent him a messenger, nor
promised to support him, but a meeting with him on a highway tied me to
him; so, when I saw his face, I remembered the Messenger of Allah (S)
and his status with him and came to know what a crime his enemy wants to
commit. It was then that I decided to support him, to be in his party,
and to defend him with my life because you yourselves have discarded
your duty to the Messenger of Allah (S).”  
    
 Al-’Abbas informed his brother Abu ‘Abdullah of what those folks were
up to. Al-Husayn (‘a) said, “Go back to them and ask them to give us
this evening as a respite till tomorrow so that we may pray to our Lord,
supplicate to Him, and seek His forgiveness, for He knows how much I
love prayers, the recitation of His Book, the abundance of invocations,
and the seeking of His forgiveness.”  
    
 Al-’Abbas went back and negotiated an evening's respite. Ibn Sa’d stood
up and asked his companions what they thought. ‘Amr Ibn al-Hajjaj said,
“Glory to Allah! Even if they had been from Daylam and made such a
request, you ought to have granted it to them.”

Qays Ibn al-Ash’ath said, “Grant them what they ask, for by my life, he
[al-Husayn] shall fight you tomorrow.” Ibn Sa’d said, “By Allah! If I
was sure that he would fight me tomorrow, I would not then postpone it
till tomorrow!”

Then he sent the following message to al-Husayn (‘a): “We have postponed
fighting you till tomorrow. If you surrender, we shall send you to the
governor [‘Ubaydullah] Ibn Ziyad, but if you refuse, we shall not leave
you alone.”[^2]  
  

Umayyah strayed from the goal

When swords met to do battle.

They wanted to drive an unyoked horse

Like one subjugated in yoke.

And in their hand they wanted him to be

Servile, though the father of lions he may be.

Unattainable, it seems, to ‘Umar to subdue

The Prophet's son, the pure, the sublime.

Umayyah aimed to attain what they could

So they paid no heed to what they ought and should.

They eyed the mirage with an eye,

Towards glory surely sly,

And slanted, and was seduced,

Ignorance its soul induced.

The ignorant only temptation produced.[^3]

[^1]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 137. ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Fattal
al-Naishapuri, Rawdat al-Wa’izin, p. 157. al-Mufid, Al-Irshad. Ibn
Kathir, Al-Bidaya, Vol. 8, p. 176. The implication of this golden
statement is not hidden, an implication that defies reason. How could he
soar to the zenith of the truth that comes from a holy one? It is
fathomed only by a discreet critic. Do not be misled, dear reader, into
thinking that this statement is insignificant especially after the Imam
(‘a), reciting the ziyarat of the martyrs, had said, “By both of my
parts, you have proven your good mettle, and good is the land wherein
you are buried.” The Imam (‘a), by doing so, is not actually the one who
is addressing them. He was actually teaching this text to Safwan, the
camel lessor, admonishing him to address them thus. The incident, as
narrated by the mentor al-Tusi in Misbah al-Mutahajjid says that Safwan
had sought Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (‘a) to perform the pilgrimage (ziyarat)
to the shrine of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and to teach him what he should do
and say. Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said to him, “O Safwan! Fast for three days
before you start your trip..., etc.” Then he continued to say, “When you
reach al-Ha’ir, say: Allahu Akbar!” Then the Imam continued to describe
the ritual to him till he said, “Then exit out of the door next to the
feet of ‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn (‘a); face the martyrs and say: ‘Assalamo
Alaikom, O friends of Allah..., etc.'”

[^2]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 337.

[^3]: These verses are from a poem by al-Ka’bi, may Allah have mercy on
his soul.


