The Steed
=========

 

Ibn Sa’d shouted, “Who volunteers to make sure that the chest and the
back of al-Husayn (‘a) are run over by the horses?” Ten men stood
up.[^1]  
    
 Those miscreant “volunteers” were: Ishaq Ibn Hawiyyah,[^2] al-Ahbash
Ibn Murshid Ibn ‘Alqamah Ibn Salamah al-Hadrami, Hakim Ibn al-Tufayl
al-Sinbisi, ‘Amr Ibn abi al-Saydawi, Raja' Ibn Munqith al-’Abdi, Salim
Ibn Khaythamah al-Ju’fi, Salih Ibn Wahab al-Ju’fi, Wakhit Ibn Ghanim,
Hani Ibn Thabit al-Hadrami, and Asid Ibn Malik.

They rode their horses and trampled upon the body of the fragrant flower
of the Messenger of Allah. Then the ten “men” went back to Ibn Ziyad
with Asid Ibn Malik in their vanguard reciting this *rajaz* verse of
poetry:

We did crush the chest and the back:

Mighty steeds made it like a river track.

Ibn Ziyad ordered generous awards to be given to them.[^3]  
  

What a martyr whose body the sun baked,

And its rising from his origin is born!

And what a slaughtered one trampled upon

By the steeds from whose names the cavaliers freeze.

Did they not know that Muhammad's soul,

Like his Qur’an, in his grandfather personified?

Had those steeds, like their riders, only knew

That the one under their hooves was but Ahmad,

They against their riders would mutiny declare,

Just as they against him rebellious they were.[^4]

Al-Biruni has said,  
  They did to al-Husayn (‘a) what no other nation had ever done to their
most evil ones: killing with the sword or the spear, with stone
throwing, and with horse trampling.[^5]

Some of those horses reached Egypt where their shoes were pulled out and
fixed on doors as means of seeking blessings. This became a custom among
them, so much so that many of them started making the like of those
shoes and hanging them over the doors of their houses.[^6]  
  

May hands that fought you be to pieces chopped,

May feet that oppressed you be forever paralyzed,

May the steeds over your body charged be hamstrung,

Crushing your ribs, having lost to your swords their riders.

You became their victim, so no pleasure shall today be

Nor a moon in the night shall ever be shiny.[^7]

[^1]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 161. Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 4,
p. 33. al-Mas’udi, Muruj al-Thahab, Vol. 2, p. 91. al-Maqrizi, Khutat,
Vol. 2, p. 288. Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, Vol. 8, p. 189. al-Khamis,
Tarikh, Vol. 3, p. 333. Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad. al-Tabarsi, I’lam
al-Wara, p. 888. al-Naishapuri, Rawdat al-Wa’izin, p. 662. Ibn Shahr
Ashub, Al-Manaqib, Vol. 2, p. 224.

[^2]: On p. 31, Vol. 4, of Taj al-’Arus, her name is recorded as
“Huwayza.”

[^3]: Ibn Tawus, Al-Luhuf, p. 75. Ibn Nama, Muthir al-Ahzan, p. 41. On
p. 39, Vol. 2, of his book Maqtal al-Husayn, al-Khawarizmi adds the
following verses to the above:   Till we disobeyed some of the
Commandments of Allah, The Omnipotent, when dealing with al-Husayn, the
Pure One.

[^4]: Excerpted from a poem by Sayyid Salih son of the ‘Allama Sayyid
Mahdi Bahr al-’Ulum.

[^5]: Abul-Rayhan al-Biruni, Al-Athar al-Baqiya, p. 329.

[^6]: al-Karakchi, Kitab al-Ta’ajjub, p. 46.

[^7]: These verses were composed by Abu Thib Shaikh Yousuf al-Qatifi who
died in 1200 A.H./1786 A.D.


