The Severed Heads
=================

Ibn Sa’d ordered the heads to be severed from their bodies. They were
distributed to various tribes that used them as means to seek favour
with Ibn Ziyad. The Kindah tribe took thirteen brought by their envoy,
Qays Ibn al-Ash’ath.

The Hawazin tribe brought twelve with their “man,” Shimr Ibn
Thul-Jawshan. The Tamim tribe brought seventeen; the Banu Asad tribe
brought sixteen; the Mathhaj tribe brought seven, and the other tribes
brought the rest.[^1] The tribe to whom al-Hurr al-Riyahi belonged
refused to cut anyone's head or to trample on the Imam's body with its
horses.[^2]  
    
 On the tenth day, Ibn Sa’d had already entrusted the head of Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) to Khawli Ibn Yazid al-Asbahi and Hamid Ibn Muslim
al-Azdi. He entrusted the heads of the Imam's family members and those
of his companions to al-Shimr, Qays Ibn al-Ash’ath and ‘Amr Ibn
al-Hajjaj.[^3]

Khawli's house was one farasang from Kufa. Khawli hid the head from his
Ansari wife whom he knew to be loyal to Ahl al-Bayt, peace be upon them.
But when she saw a light emanating from the bakery oven [where it was
hidden], she was terrified. When she came closer, she heard the voices
of al-Husayn's women mourning al-Husayn in the most somber way.

She mentioned this to her husband then went out crying.[^4] Since then,
she never used any kohl nor any perfume out of her grief for al-Husayn
(‘a). She was called ‘Ayoof.[^5]  
    
 In the morning, Khawli took the head to the governor's mansion. By
then, Ibn Ziyad had returned from his camp at al-Nakhila. Khawli put the
head in front of Ibn Ziyad as he recited these poetic verses:  
  

Fill my stirrup with silver or with gold:

I killed the master of every honour told,

Their best when they mention descent.

I killed the best of people, son of the best parent.

But these words, spoken in front of everyone, were met by Ibn Ziyad with
outrage. “Since you knew that he was that honourable,” said Ibn Ziyad,
“why did you then take part in killing him?! By Allah, you will receive
nothing from me at all.”[^6]  
  

[^1]: Ibn Tawus, Al-Luhuf, p. 81. al-’Ayni, ‘Umdat al-Qari fi Sharh
al-Bukhari, Vol. 7, p. 656, where the name of ‘Urwah Ibn Qays is
included among them.

[^2]: al-Hajj Shaikh Muhammad Baqir Ibn Mawla Hasan al-Qa’ini
al-Birjandi al-Safi (henceforth referred to only as Shaikh Muhammad
Baqir al-Birjandi al-Safi), Al-Kibrit al-Ahmar.

[^3]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad.

[^4]: Rawdat al-Shuhada'. On p. 190, Vol. 8, Ibn Kathir says that his
wife saw the light emanating from underneath the lid, and it was
stretching to the heavens as white birds kept hovering around it. He
adds saying that his other wife, Nuwar daughter of Malik, said to him,
“Have you brought the head of the son of the Messenger of Allah, peace
of Allah and His blessings upon him and his family, here?! I shall never
share a bed with you henceforth.” She separated from him.

[^5]: al-Balathiri, Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. 5, p. 238.

[^6]: According to p. 133, Vol. 1, of al-Yafi’i's book Mir'at al-Jinan,
Ibn Ziyad was very angry with him, so he killed him, but the author does
not identify the name of the head bearer. On p. 213, Vol. 2, of Al-’Iqd
al-Farid of Sayyid Muhammad Riďa al-Asterbadi al-Hilli, the head bearer
is identified as “Khawli Ibn Yazid al-Asbahi who was killed by Ibn
Ziyad.” Historians contend among themselves about who had brought the
head and who had said the above verses. According to Ibn Jarir
al-Tabari, who indicates so on p. 261, Vol. 6, of his Tarikh, and Ibn
al-Athir who states so on p. 33, Vol. 4, of his book Al-Kamil, the poet
was Sinan Ibn Anas who recited them to ‘Umar Ibn Sa’d. On p. 144 of
Tathkirat al-Khawass of Ibn al-Jawzi, the grandson, it is stated that
‘Umar said to him, “You are insane! Had Ibn Ziyad heard you, he would
have killed you!” On p. 193, Vol. 1, of al-Sharishi's Maqamat, the
author says that the poet recited them to Ibn Ziyad. According to
al-Irbili's Kashf al-Ghumma and al-Khawarizmi's p. 40, Vol. 2, of Maqtal
al-Husayn, Bishr Ibn Malik recited them to Ibn Ziyad. On p. 76 of Ibn
Talhah's Matalib al-Sa’ul, there is the addition of “... and whoever
says his prayers in both Qiblas,” whereupon Ibn Ziyad became very angry
with him and had him beheaded. On p. 437 of Riyad al-Masa'ib, it is
stated that al-Shimr is the one who recited these verses. Since you know
that al-Shimr is al-Husayn's killer according to the text of the ziyarat
of the sacred area and according to a host of historians, you likewise
know that he must be the one who recited them. It is very unlikely that
he kills him and lets someone else take the head and use it to seek
favour with Ibn Ziyad. We have mentioned the story from Khawli only to
follow in the footsteps of those who wrote about the Imam's martyrdom.


