The Burial
==========

   
 Historians record that the Master of Martyrs (‘a) set up a tent on the
battlefield,[^1] ordering those killed from among his companions and Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) to be carried to it.

Whenever a fresh martyr was brought, he (‘a), would say, “You have been
killed just as the prophets and the families of prophets are
killed.”[^2] He did so to everyone with the exception of his brother
Abul-Fadl al-’Abbas (‘a), whom he left where he fell near the riverbank
of the Euphrates.[^3]  
    
 When ‘Umar Ibn Sa’d accompanied those whom he arrested of the
custodians of the Message and left for Kufa, he left behind those who
were described by the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) as the masters of
martyrs in the life of this world and in the hereafter, an honour to
which nobody ever preceded nor will anyone succeed them,[^4] lying on
the sands incinerated by the sun and sought by the wild beasts of the
desert.  
  

Stabbing changed every sense of theirs

Except virtues, from all they are secure.

Among them was the Master of the Youths of Paradise who was in a
condition that would split the hardest of the stones, yet divine lights
were emanating from his corpse, and sweet scents were surrounding him
from all directions.

A wounded one whose beauty the swords could not change,

Nor did they make of him something new

He was a moon and now he is the morning sun,

Since the hand of blood outfitted him with its garment.

His rays protect the eyes so

Whenever they try a path, I fancy it blocked,

And trees of lances give him shade,

So the heat refused to send him missive.

   
 A man belonging to Banu Asad has narrated the following:  
 “Once the army had left, I came to the battlefield and saw light
emanating from those corpses that were covered with blood yet smelled
sweet scents.

I saw a terrifying lion walking between the amputated parts till he
reached the Embodiment of Sanctity and the Sacrifice of Guidance. He
rubbed himself on his blood and rubbed his body on his as he kept
muttering and letting out a very strange sound. I was amazed. Never have
I ever seen such a fierce lion abandon what would be for his likes
nothing but a meal.

I hid among the marshes and kept watching to see what else he would do.
I was more amazed when midnight came. It was then that I saw candles and
heard voices that filled the earth with painful cries and
wailing.”[^5]  
    
 On the thirteenth day of Muharram, Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) came to bury
his martyred father (‘a), since only an Imam buries another Imam.[^6]

This brings to memory a dialogue that once took place between Imam [‘Ali
son of Musa] al-Riďa (‘a) and ‘Ali Ibn Abu Hamzah. The Imam [by way of
testing the veracity of the man] (‘a) was asked, “Tell me: Was al-Husayn
Ibn ‘Ali (‘a) an Imam?”

He (‘a) answered in the affirmative. The Imam (‘a) was again asked, “If
so, then who took care of burying him?” ‘Ali (‘a) said, “‘Ali Ibn
al-Husayn al-Sajjad (‘a) did.” Imam al-Riďa (‘a) in turn asked him, “But
where was ‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn at the time?”

‘Ali Ibn Abu Hamzah said, “He was jailed at Kufa inside Ibn Ziyad's
prison, but he came out without their knowledge in order to bury his
father then returned to the prison once he was through”

Imam al-Riďa (‘a) said, “Then the One Who enabled ‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn
(‘a) to go to Karbala’ in order to take care of his [slain] father then
return is the same One Who will enable the person entrusted with a
similar task [meaning himself] to go to Baghdad [from Khurasan,
northeast Iran] in order to take care of his father, and he is neither
jailed nor confined.”  
    
 When al-Sajjad (‘a) came to the place, he saw Banu Asad assembled
around the slain not knowing what to do. They could not identify the
corpses especially since their killers had separated the heads from the
bodies. Had it been otherwise, they could have inquired about them with
the families and the tribes of those slain.

But he (‘a), informed them that it was his task to bury those pure
bodies. He informed them of the names of the slain, identifying those
who belonged to Banu Hashim from the rest. Crying and wailing rose, and
tears filled the eyes of everyone present there and then. The ladies of
Banu Asad loosened their hair in grief and beat their cheeks.  
    
 Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) walked to his father's body, hugged it and
wept loudly. Then he came to the gravesite and lifted a handful of its
soil. A grave already dug appeared, and so did a pre-constructed
shrine...

He placed his hands under the Imam's back and said, “In the Name of
Allah, and according to the creed of the Messenger of Allah Allah has
said the truth, and so has His Messenger (S). The will of Allah be done;
there is no power nor might except in Allah, the Great.”

Then he took it and went down without being assisted by anyone from
among the Banu Asad to whom he said, “I have with me someone who will
assist me.”

Once he laid it down in the grave, he put his cheek on his father's
sacred neck and said, “Congratulations to the land that contains your
pure body, for the world after you is dark whereas the hereafter in your
light shall shine.

As to the night, it is the harbinger of sleep, while grief remains
forever, for Allah shall choose for your Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) your abode
wherein you shall abide. From me to you is *Salam*, O son of the
Messenger of Allah, and the mercy of Allah and His blessings.”  
    
 On the grave he wrote: “This is the grave of al-Husayn son of ‘Ali son
of Abu Talib, the one whom they killed even as he was a thirsty
stranger.” Then he walked to the body of his uncle, al-’Abbas (‘a), and
he saw him in a condition that had left the angels in the heavens'
strata baffled and caused the *huris* to weep even as they were in the
chambers of Paradise

. He fell upon it kissing his sacred neck and saying, “May the world
after you be obliterated, O moon of Banu Hashim, and peace from me to
you, O martyr, and the mercy of Allah and His blessings.”  
    
 He dug a grave for him and took him down in it by himself just as he
had done to the corpse of his martyred father (‘a). He said to Banu
Asad, “There is someone with me to help me.”  
    
 Yes, he gave a piece of jewelry to Banu Asad as a token of appreciation
for consoling him in burying the martyrs, and he assigned for them two
places, ordering them to dig two pits in the first of which he buried
those slain from Banu Hashim and in the second those slain from among
their companions.[^7]  
    
 As regarding al-Hurr al-Riyahi, his corpse was taken away by his tribe
that buried it where it now stands. It is said that his mother was
present then and there, and when she saw what was being done to the
corpses, she carried her son's corpse somewhere else.[^8]  
    
 The closest in proximity to the grave of al-Husayn (‘a) from among the
martyrs is his son ‘Ali al-Akbar (‘a).

In this regard, Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says to Hammad al-Basri, “The father
of ‘Abdullah was killed as a stranger, away from home; he is mourned be
whoever visits his gravesite, and whoever does not visit it grieves for
him; whoever does not see him is very depressed on account of being
deprived of doing so, therefore he grieves; whoever sees the grave of
his son at his feet in a desolate land, far away from his kin, invokes
Allah's mercy for him because of the fact that he was not supported when
he called upon people to uphold righteousness, and because the renegades
assisted one another against him till they killed him and did not have
any respect for him, so much so that they exposed his corpse to the wild
beasts and prohibited him from drinking of the water of the Euphrates of
which the dogs drink.

They disregarded their obligations in his regard towards the Messenger
of Allah (S) who had enjoined them to be kind to him and to his Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a). He was abandoned in his grave, slain among his kinsfolk
and Shi’as.

In loneliness, being near his grave removes the pain of loneliness and
so is his being distant from his grandfather (S) and from the house
which none could enter except those whose conviction of heart Allah
tested, and by those who recognize our rights.

My father has told me that since he was killed, his place has never been
empty of those who bless him from among the angels, the jinns, mankind,
and even the wild beasts. Whoever visits it is envied and is rubbed for
blessing, and looking at his grave is done in anticipation of earning
goodness.

Allah boasts to the angels of those who visit it. As far as what such
pilgrim receives from us, we invoke Allah's mercy for him every morning
and every evening. It has come to my knowledge that some Kufians as well
as others in Kufa's outskirts pay it a visit in the eve of the middle of
Sha’ban. They recite the Holy Qur’an; they narrate his story; they mourn
him, and women eulogize him while others compose their own eulogies.”

Hammad said to the Imam (‘a), “I have personally witnessed some of what
you have just described.” The Imam (‘a), then said, “Praise to Allah Who
has made some people come to us, praise us, and mourn us, and praised is
He for making our enemy shame them for doing so, threaten them, and
describe what they do as ugly.”[^9]  
  

Today fell the one who

Most protects honour,

The most true teller,

The one who most feeds the beasts

With his foe's corpses,

The one who most stains

The bird and the vulture.

He is spent, having returned the swords

To the lances. He left his impact

On them and on death itself.

The man of glory passed away

Under the swords, and what was

Broken on him buries him.

So if he does receive

The time of the eve

With a dusted forehead,

The war's morning did turn

The regiment dusted.

And if he is spent thirsty, heart-broken

He had terrified the heart of death

Till the heart is split.

And he crushed the foes

And he did annihilate

What fates give birth to suckle on death

From between two shields he emerged:

Battle and patience, and patience is

The strongest of all.

He showed his might,

The most mighty protector of all

A protector of honour he was,

And the most courageous to lead the hosts.

His support in the heat of blows was keen:

Though his supporters were a few,

They were still many.

It stumbled till it died

The edge of his sword

But his grip did not.

As if the sword granted him patience,

So he did not leave the battle

Till his sword was broken to pieces.

Allah is his Supporter, how his heart

From patience was split then did depart.

Had patience been stone, it would have cracked.

He bent to kiss his son

But the arrow before him kissed his neck.

Both he and death were born in an hour

And before him the arrow in his neck make *Takbir,*

And in captivity there were elite ones of chambers,

Hard for their men to see them thus driven.

They had, before, protected their chambers

And in protecting their honours

They remained ever vigilant.

On the Day of *Taff* fate walked blindly

Not leaving any support for them

Without taking him away.

He forced them to traverse the desert at night,

Never before the *Taff* did they know

What the desert was, nor did they know

How to traverse at night,

Not even their eyes

Had seen their shadows.

Till they appeared and wailed

At the Ghadiriyya, unveiled...[^10]

 

[^1]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 256. Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil, Vol. 4,
p. 30. al-Mufid, Al-Irshad.

[^2]: This is narrated on p. 211, Vol. 10, and p. 125, Vol. 13, of
al-Majlisi's Bihar al-Anwar where al-Nu’mani's book Al-Ghayba is cited.

[^3]: This is what a group of historians have recorded. Refer to p. 115
of my book Qamar Bani Hashim (Hayderi Press edition, Najaf).

[^4]: Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 219.

[^5]: Sayyid Hashim al-Bahrani, Madinat al-Ma’ajiz, p. 263, chapter 127.

[^6]: al-Mas’udi, Ithbat al-Wasiyya, p. 173. On p. 402 of my book Zayn
al-’Abidin, I quoted the traditions proving that an Imam is not buried
except by another Imam. Traditions do not reveal such a safeguarded
mystery. Perhaps it is to be understood that the corpse of an infallible
person, when journeying to the Supreme One, at the termination of his
earthly life, is granted certain privileges such as nobody can come
close to it unless he is one of his status. A case in point is how one
particular person came close to the Seat of Divinity two bow's throw or
even closer, arriving at a station from which even the Trusted One
(Gabriel) kept his distance, leaving the Prophet (S) alone in the oceans
of the divine domain. A claim put forth with regard to our Imams is not
out of the ordinary, especially since, in all reality, they were created
of the same substance [noor] from which Muhammad (S) was created. They
shared all the merits of their grandfather with the exception of
Prophethood and consorts. Such is stated on p. 22 of Sulayman al-Hilli's
book Al-Muhtadir (Najafi edition). Such mysteries cannot be realized by
a human mind, and there is no way to deny them just because we cannot
fully comprehend them unless they reach the limit of impossibility.
Authentic traditions have stated that there are many unusual situations
which surround the Imams (‘a), situations which other humans cannot
emulate, such as bringing the dead back to life in the latter's original
physical forms, their ability to see one another [despite the distance
that separates them or the time], their bodies ascending to heavens, and
their listening to the greetings of those who visit their gravesites.
All of this is endorsed by our mentor, al-Mufid, as stated on p. 84 of
Al-Maqalat (Tehran edition), by al-Karakji in his book Kanz al-Fawa’id,
by al-Majlisi on p. 373, Vol. 1, of his book Mir’at al-’Uqul, by Kashif
al-Ghiťa’ on p. 51 of his book Manhaj al-Rashad, and by al-Nawari on p.
289, Vol. 1, of his book Dar al-Salam.

[^7]: See Al-Kibrit al-Ahmar (of Shaikh Muhammad Baqir al-Birjandi
al-Safi), Asrar al-Shahada (of Sayyid Kaďim al-Rashti al-Ha’iri), and
Al-Iyqad.

[^8]: Shaikh Muhammad Baqir al-Birjandi al-Safi, Al-Kibrit al-Ahmar. On
p. 344 of his book Al-Anwar al-Nu’maniyya, Sayyid al-Jaza’iri cites
testimonials to this statement. He, for example, details how [sultan]
Isma’il al-Safawi [founder of the Safavid dynasty who lived from 904 -
930 A.H./1499 - 1524 A.D. and ruled Iran from 907 - 930 A.H./1502 - 1524
A.D... N. Tr.] dug up the place, whereupon he saw the deceased as though
he had just been killed, and there was a bandage on his head. Once he
untied it, blood started pouring out, and the bleeding did not stop till
he tied it back again. He built a dome above the grave and assigned
someone to tend to it. So, when al-Nawari, in his book Al-Lulu’ wal
Marjan, denies that he had been buried, he did not support his denial
with any evidence. On p. 37, Vol. 1, of Tuhfat al-’Alim, Sayyid Ja’far
Bahr al-’Ulum states that Hamad-Allah al-Mustawfi has indicated in his
book Nuzhat al-Qulub saying that there is in Karbala’ the grave of
al-Hurr [al-Riyahi] which is visited by people. He is the latter's
grandfather up to 18 generations back. One of them used to say:   Point
out to the Hurr and see, How doing so suffices every man free.   The
authority Sayyid Muhammad al-Qazwini responded to him with these verses:
  Visit the Hurr, the martyr, and do not delay, The first of the martyrs
should you his visit pay; Do not hear one who calls and does say Point
out to the Hurr then a salutation pay.

[^9]: Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 325. al-Majlisi, Mazar
al-Bihar, p. 124, citing the previous reference.

[^10]: This poem was composed by Sayyid Hayder al-Hilli, may Allah
enlighten his mausoleum.


