Al-Husayn: A Conqueror
======================

   
 Al-Husayn (‘a) was convinced that he was a divinely supported conqueror
due to the life his martyrdom would provide for the religion of the
Messenger of Allah (S) and to the death of the innovations introduced
therein. His martyrdom exposed the ugliness of the deeds committed by
his foes.

It made the nation realize that Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), more than anyone else,
deserved to be the caliphs. It is to this principle that his letter to
Banu Hashim refers. In it, he said, “*Whoever among you decides to join
us will be martyred, and whoever lags behind will miss victory*.”[^1]

The victory he referred to in this letter was the outcome of his
uprising and sacrifices: these would undermine the foundations of
misguidance and remove the thorns of falsehood from the path of the
purified *Shari’a* and the establishment of justice and *Tawhid*, and
that the nation was obligated to resist abominations.  
    
 This is the same meaning we can derive from reviewing a statement made
by Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) to Ibrahim Ibn Talhah Ibn ‘Ubaydullah who
had asked the Imam (‘a) upon his return to Medina, “Who won?” Said the
Imam (‘a), “When it is time for the prayers, call the *athan* and the
*iqama*, and it is then that you will know who the winner is.”[^2]  
    
 Here, he is referring to achieving the objective for which the Master
of Martyrs had sacrificed his sacred life and the failure of Yazid in
his attempts to put out the *noor* of Allah Almighty and the efforts of
the Messenger of Allah (S) which his father [Mu’awiyah] had aimed to
foil by killing the *shahada* after it had become mandatory on the
nation during the five known times [of prayers], a testimony for the
Prophet of Islam.

The Islamic faith undermined the foundations of *shirk* and put an end
to idol worship. It likewise became mandatory on the nation to bless the
Prophet (S) and his pure Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) whenever the believers make
the *tashahhud*. Any blessing short of blessing his progeny is
curtailed.[^3]  
    
 Zainab, the wise lady, daughter of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a),
too, pointed out to this victory when she said to Yazid, “*Plot your
plots, exert your effort, and perfect your schemes, for by Allah you
shall never be able to wipe our name out, nor will you ever kill our
wali, nor will you ever attain our status, nor will you ever be able to
wash away the shame and infamy of what you have committed.*”  
    
 Anyone who contemplates upon the *Taff* event will clearly realize that
the sacrifices offered in it are greater than those offered during the
Battle of Badr even though the latter was the first military victory
achieved in Islam.

The reason is that the Muslims had then braved death under the
protection of the flag of the Prophet (S) and were supported by angels
numbering three thousand strong, while the Prophet (S) kept filling
their ears with his calls for victory, urging them to assault their
enemy. The Muslims, hence, faced the tyrants from Quraish feeling
confident of subduing them.  
    
 As regarding the *Taff* event, the suffering undergone during it was
much more painful, and the agony was greater. The tides of death
clamoured, the war uncovered its fangs, and Banu Umayyah surrounded the
grandson of the Prophet (S) [and his tiny band] from all sides.  
  

Oppression spurred it to action,

So it came mounting its tyranny;

Throngs that filled the earth,

Overwhelming every ravine and highway.

He trampled upon the beasts when

He found no route to escape.

The birds did not leave their nests.

   
 Yet the band that sided with the truth did not lose heart, meeting
those dangers without counting on any support or expecting any help. All
essential supplies were cut off from them. Even water, the most
plentiful of anything, and which was free for all, was denied them.
Women and children were terrified on account of the imminent peril. The
children's cries because of their thirst filled everyone's ears.

Yet they faced mountains of steel with open arms and relentless
determination. All what those pure souls were concerned about was
fighting Banu Umayyah. They spilled their pure blood only in defense of
their honour, something which was abandoned by others. The government of
the descendants of Harb became like a dog licking its nose, so the
surface of the earth was in the end cleansed of their shame.  
    
 One poet belonging to Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) did well when he said:  
  

Had not all sublime merits been grouped in us,

The Battle of *Taff* would have sufficed,

When we rose like lions while our foes

Like beasts of burden came to throng.

They came in seventy thousand strong;

So ask those among them who did survive:

If they met us though we brought only seventy.[^4]

   
 The *Taff* battle, then, is an Islamic victory over the *jahiliyya*
that was revived through the actions of the Umayyads and their fellows
who did not seek the shining light of *Tawhid* and Prophethood.  
    
 Al-Husayn (‘a) did not aim by his march to attain authority, power, or
recognition. Had this been his goal, he would have sought the means that
would lead him to it, and he was the most knowledgeable man of such
means.

He would not have informed those who were with him from among the
natives of Mecca and Medina that he and those with him would be killed,
and that his family would surrender to captivity. His army, as a result,
abandoned him, and his might diminished. Yet his holy soul, as is the
case with all free men, insisted on telling the truth rather than
misleading anyone. He even tested them by granting them permission to
leave him.

Those whose concern was accumulation, did in fact leave him, while the
select few insisted on helping and supporting him; neither cowardice
subdued them nor discouragement surfaced among them, for such is the
doing of one who has lost hope from attaining his objective.

Those folks were convinced that they would win what they hoped to win as
testified by their statements whereby they responded to al-Husayn (‘a)
telling them on the eve of ‘Ashura that the situation had reached a
critical point, and he even excused them from their oath of allegiance
to him and released them.

They said, “Praise is due to Allah Who honours us with being killed on
your side! Had this world remained forever, and had we, too, been
immortalized, we would still have preferred to rise with you rather than
remain therein.”  
    
 He (‘a), found them ready to sacrifice their lives waging *jihad* with
him and defending the sanctity of the *Shari’a*. He recited a line from
their white tablet when he said, “*I find my companions to be the most
loyal, and my Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) to be the most kind and the best in
staying together*.”[^5]

I am surprised at the narrators and historians who transmitted a great
deal and who charged those pure souls with what the face of humanity
resents and is rejected by a truthful conscience. Some of them said,
“Those people were shaken and their complexion kept changing colour
whenever fighting intensified with the exception of al-Husayn (‘a) whose
face shone like a full moon.”[^6]  
    
 They said so after finding themselves unable to find fault with the
honourable and dignified martyr. Finding no way to belittle him, they
charged his companions and his Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). This is only because of
the hidden disease residing in the body of those who mixed poison with
oil and passed it on to simpletons who regarded it as a fact. They, by
so doing, distorted history, but any discreet critic can easily assess
the nature and the schemes of such people.  
    
 More strange than such talk is Zajr Ibn Qays al-Ju’fi’s following
statement to Yazid: “We surrounded them as they sought refuge with
thickets and holes just as pigeons seek to hide from an eagle.”[^7]

May gravel fill your mouth! As if you never witnessed that terrifying
situation when they demonstrated courage and determination to defend the
creed, so much so that their stand on that day surpassed the Battle of
Siffin wherein they fought on the side of the chosen one (‘a) as well as
in other bloody wars which caused the people of Kufa to talk about
nothing in their meetings except their courage.  
    
 Yes, those circumstances stunned you, so you do not know what you are
saying, or time separated you from them, so you forgot what actually
happened. But did you also forget the cries of the orphans, the wailing
of the widows of Kufian families everywhere throughout Kufa on account
of what those elite men had done with their swords to the enemies of
Allah and of His Messenger (S)?

Your excuse is that you came out unscathed, so you took to distorting
their stand, for which they will forever be appreciated, seeking to
please Yazid, the product of wines.  
    
 Their avowed enemy, ‘Amr Ibn al-Hajjaj, had described the truthfulness
of their intentions, urging his men saying, “Do you know who you are
fighting? You are fighting the land's knights, the people of vision,
those who welcome death with open arms. None of you dares to come out to
fight them except that they will kill him despite their very small
number. By Allah! If you throw stones at them, you will be able to kill
all of them.”[^8]  
    
 A man who had participated in the *Taff* Battle on the side of Ibn Sa’d
was asked once, “Woe unto you! Did you really kill the Progeny of the
Messenger of Allah?!” He answered by saying, “May I be stoned to death!
Had you seen what we saw, you would have done what we had done.

We were assaulted by a group of men holding their swords and charging
like fierce lions, crushing the cavalry right and left, throwing
themselves in the jaws of death, accepting no security, desiring no
wealth, nothing stopping them except either death or taking control of
the government. Had we given them a chance, they would have annihilated
our entire army; so, what do you expect us to do, may you lose your
mother?”[^9]  
    
 Ka’b Ibn Jabir, too, testified for them. Having killed Burayr, he was
reprimanded by his wife who said to him, “Did you really assist in
killing Fatima's son? Did you kill the master of *qaris*? You have done
something monstrous. By Allah! I shall never speak one word to you.” He
then composed the following lines in his answer to her statement:  
  

Never did my eyes see their likes, in their time,

Nor before, among the people, since my youth;

None strikes with the sword in the battle

Better than one defending honour, protecting it.

Steadfast were they when swords and lances worked,

Even as they were defenseless.

They sought duels, had they only had their way.

   
 Which one of them, anyway, was upset to the extent that he shook in
fear?! Was it Zuhayr Ibn al-Qayn who put his hand on Husayn's shoulder
and said the following lines seeking his permission to fight:

Come forth, may you be guided!

For you are the guide who is rightly guided:

Today shall I meet your grandfather the Prophet...?

   
 Or was it Ibn ‘Awsajah who advised Habib Ibn Muzahir to support
al-Husayn (‘a) even as he was drawing his last breath, as if he was not
satisfied with sacrificing his life and with all the trials and
tribulations he underwent?  
    
 Or was it Abu Thumama al-Sa’idi who, seeking to please his Lord, the
most Exalted One, was not concerned about calamities, pain, or anything
except the prayers whose time was approaching?  
    
 Or was it Ibn Shibib al-Shakiri who laid down all his protective gear
to entice someone to kill him so that he would win the honour of
martyrdom even as courageous heroes well known for their bravery take
pains in covering their bodies with all protective coverings so that
death may not reach them?  
    
 Or was it John who was excused [because of his age] by al-Husayn (‘a)
from having to fight, so he fell down to kiss the Imam's feet, tearfully
begging and pleading to him saying, “My colour is black, my descent is
lowly, my smell is bad, so breathe upon me with the breath of Paradise
so that my colour will be whitened, and my descent will be honourable,
and my smell will be good”?  
    
 If we think about the statement of Imam Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (‘a)
wherein he said, “*The companions of my grandfather al-Husayn (‘a) did
not feel the pain of iron*,”[^10] the steadfastness of those righteous
men will become evident to us, and that they were not mindful of the
pain and of the wounds which they received due to their attachment to
their goal and to their eagerness to meet the Chosen One (S).  
    
 Nobody finds this statement unusual except one who does not know how
someone in love feels, and how, when such a lover's feelings are
directed towards the person he loves, he does not feel any fatigue or
exhaustion. Historians tell us that “Kathir ‘Azza,”[^11] the poet, was
once in his tent peeling arrows when ‘Azza entered. The moment he saw
her, he was in such awe that he kept peeling his fingers and kept
bleeding without feeling any pain.[^12]

Narrators say that a young man from the Ansar came face to face with a
woman, and he very much liked her. He watched her as she entered an
alley as he chased her. He did not see a piece of glass etched in a
wall, so his face was wounded but he did not feel the pain at all. When
he could not see that woman any longer, he noticed that blood was
running over his clothes and chest, so he went to the Messenger of Allah
(S) and narrated to him what had happened to him. It was then that the
following verse was revealed:[^13]  
    
***Tell the believing men that they should cast down their looks and
guard their private parts; that is purer for them; surely Allah is Aware
of what they do.(Qur’an, Sura an-Nur, 24:30)***  
    
 The Messenger of Allah (S) is quoted as saying that a martyr killed for
the Divine Cause does not feel the pain of killing except as a pinch.
[^14]  
    
 Rushayd al-Hajari[^15] was called to Yazid's court where the latter
asked him about what he had been informed by the Commander of the
Faithful Imam ‘Ali (‘a). He said, “Yes, I came to visit him one day, and
many of his companions were present.

He was in an orchard. He ordered dates to be brought to him from a date
tree. ‘Are these dates good, O Commander of the Faithful?,' I asked him.
He (‘a), informed me that the adopted bastard (*da’iyy*), ‘Ubaydullah
[Ibn Ziyad], would force me to dissociate myself from him (from ‘Ali )
or cut off my hands, legs and tongue, then he would crucify me on the
trunk of this same date tree. I asked him, ‘Will my ultimate destination
be Paradise?' He (‘a) said, ‘*You are with me in the life of this world
as well as in the life hereafter.*' I said, ‘Then I shall never, by
Allah, dissociate myself from you.'”  
    
 Rushayd used to go to that date-tree quite often during daytime and
water it. He used to say the following to it as he watered it: “For you
have I been nourished, and for me have you been grown!” It was not long
before [‘Ubaydullah] Ibn Ziyad became the *wali* of Kufa, so he called
him in and asked him about what the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) had
informed him. He said, “My friend told me that you would require me to
dissociate myself from him, yet I would not do so, and that you would
then cut off my hands, legs and tongue.”

Ibn Ziyad said, “In this case, I shall prove him a liar.” He ordered to
have his hands and legs cut off and to spare his tongue. Then Rushayd
was taken back to his family where people surrounded him. He kept
telling them what he had learned from the Commander of the Faithful (‘a)
of the knowledge of what fate has in store for men and the trials and
tribulations they would have to endure as well as the distinction Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) enjoyed over all other humans. Then he said, “O people! Ask
me!

These folks [meaning Ibn Ziyad's people] have one requirement in my
regard which they have not yet carried out.” A man hurried to Ibn Ziyad
and said, “What have you done?! You cut off his hands and legs yet he
tells people many serious matters!” Ibn Ziyad, therefore, ordered
Rushayd's tongue to be cut off. The man died the same night. On the next
day, his corpse was crucified[^16] on the door of ‘Amr Ibn Hurayth's
house.[^17]

Qanwa, his daughter, says, “I asked my father about the pain he was
suffering. He said to me, ‘Daughter! I do not have any pain except like
one feeling the pressure of people in a stampede.'”[^18] Rushayd
al-Hajari benefitted from keeping company with the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) who taught him the knowledge of fatal events and of
imminent calamities.[^19] He used to narrate what he was going through,
so the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) named him “Rashid,” rightly
guided.[^20]  
    
 Such condition enlightens anyone who carefully discerns it with the
conviction that anyone who directs all his feelings towards the Lord,
Praise to Him, and once the Divine Attributes are manifested to him, he
sees what eternal bliss awaits him as a reward for promoting the creed,
and he will not feel the pain of his wounds.

It also underscores what we have stated about a lover becoming unmindful
of his pain once he sees the loved one just as the women [referred to in
Surat Yousuf] did not feel the pain of cutting their fingers off at
merely seeing the beauty of the truthful one, Yousuf (‘a), as the
Almighty tells us:

***“So when they saw him, they deemed him great and cut their hands and
said: Far it is from Allah! This is not a human; this is a glorious
angel” (Qur’an, Sura Yusuf, 12:31).***  
    
 Since those women[^21] did not feel the pain of their wounds, it is not
strange to find al-Husayn's companions, who were the world’s cream of
the crop, did not feel the pain of iron as a result of their love for
the manifestations of divine beauty, and due to the eagerness of their
souls to reach the ultimate end of sanctity after being electrified by
their loyalty for the Master of Martyrs (‘a).  
  

My father do I sacrifice for countenances that

In Karbala’ shook hands with shields,

 

Countenances that light up with hope

Whenever the world frowns and drips of liberality.

They glow under the darkness of clamour

Like lanterns bright, stealing the sight.

They regarded their lives as cheap in defending

The son of the Prophet's daughter,

Lives that eagerly anticipate with Allah a union.

So they were spent while from

Their sides dignity forever emits fragrance.

No water did they taste except

From the heart's blood the wounds choked in pain

Of their blood they would have drunk

Only if it could their thirst quench

Stripped were they, so they, instead of the fabric

Of the earth did they weave shrouds of wind.[^22]

[^1]: Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 75. Al-Saffar, Basa’ir
al-Darajat, Vol. 10, p. 141.

[^2]: Shaikh al-Tusi, Amali, p. 66.

[^3]: Ibn Hajar al-’Asqalani, Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, p. 87. Al-Sha’rani,
Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 1, p. 194. Refer also to p. 371 of the book titled
Zayn al-‘abidin by the author of this book [al-Muqarram].

[^4]: Shu’ara’ al-Ghari, Vol. 1, p. 387, attributed to Baqir al-Hindi,
may Allah fill his grave with noor.

[^5]: Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 4, p. 24.

[^6]: Shaikh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Nafs al-Mahmum, p. 135, citing Ma’ani
al-Akhbar. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 3, p. 134, in a chapter
about death swoons. Al-Majlisi, Ibid., Vol. 10, p. 167, citing Ma’ani
al-Akhbar.

[^7]: Sayyid Muhammad Riďa Ibn Abul-Qasim Ibn Fathallah Ibn Nejm ad-Din
al-Husayni al-Kamali al-Asterbadi al-Hilli (d. 1346 A.H./1927 A.D.)
(Henceforth referred to only as Sayyid Muhammad Riďa al-Asterbadi
al-Hilli), Al-’Iqd al-Farid fi Ma’rifat al-Qira’a wal Tajwid (henceforth
referred to only as Al-’Iqd al-Farid), Vol. 2, p. 313, where Yazid's
reign is discussed.

[^8]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 6, p. 247.

[^9]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Shar Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 1, p. 307, first
Egyptian edition

[^10]: al-Rawandi, Al-Khara'ij, p. 138, Indian edition.

[^11]: Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani, Al-Aghani, Vol. 6, p. 37.

[^12]: al-Mirzabani, Al-Muwashshah, p. 144, where Kathir, the poet, is
discussed by Abu ‘Obaydah. Muhammad [Ibn al-Hanafiyya] Ibn ‘Ali (‘a)
[Imam Husayn's brother from his father's side] said to Kathir once, “You
claim that you are one of our Shi’as, yet you praise Marwan's
offspring.” He said to him, “I make fun of them, turning them into
snakes and scorpions, and I take their money!”

[^13]: as-Saduq, Usul al-Kafi, commenting on Mir'at al-’Uqul, Vol. 3, p.
511, chapter 160 which deals with what is lawful to see of a woman,
citing Imam al-Baqir (‘a), who is also quoted on p. 731, Vol. 3, of
Tafsir al-Burhan explaining this same verse.

[^14]: Ibn al-Dayba’, Taysir al-Wusul, Vol. 1, p. 129. al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Kanz al-’Ummal, Vol. 2, p. 278, where the merits of martyrdom
are discussed.

[^15]: According to ‘Allama al-Hilli's book Al-Khulasa, his name is
Rushayd, and according to Abu Dawud, his last name is pronounced
“al-Hajari,” and so is the view of al-Suyuti which is stated on p. 277
of his book Lubb al-Albab. The same is recorded by al-Sam’ani. He is
from Hajar, in the distant regions of Yemen. A number of famous men
carry this last name and are mentioned by al-Sam’ani. One of them is
another Rushayd from Kufa who narrates hadith from his father. On p.
305, Vol. 1, Part Two, of Bukhari's Tarikh, he is said as having
narrated hadith from his father from ‘Abdullah. On p. 285, Vol. 3, of
Ibn al-Athir's book Al-Lubab, it is stated that, “Rushayd al-Hajari is
named after a well known region in Yemen. As regarding Hajar, a town
near Medina, Ibn al-Qaysarani discusses it on p. 223 of his book
Al-Ansab al-Muttafiqa. It is also discussed in Taj al-’Arus. It is also
mentioned in Lisan al-’Arab in the discussion of “hajar,” and in Ibn
al-Athir's book Al-Nihaya. The list of others who discuss it includes
al-Mas’udi who does so on p. 386, Vol. 2, of his book Wafa' al-Wafa',
and it is mentioned on p. 280 of Athar al-Bilad by Zakariyya Ibn Mahmud
al-Qazwini, among the others.

[^16]: Rijal al-Kashshi, p. 51.

[^17]: al-Thahabi, Mizan al-I’tidal, Vol. 2, p. 339. Ibn Hajar, Lisan
al-Mizan, Vol. 2, p. 461.

[^18]: Rijal al-Kashshi, p. 51. On p. 113 of Bisharat al-Mustafa, and on
p. 103 of al-Tabarsi's Amali, majlis No. 6, first edition, she is
referred to as “Amatullah,” bondmaid of Allah.

[^19]: al-Saffar, Basa’ir al-Darajat, Vol. 6, p. 73, in a chapter about
the Imams being acquainted with the conditions of their Shi’as. He is
quoted on p. 246, Vol. 11, of Bihar al-Anwar, where Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far
(‘a) is discussed.

[^20]: Shaikh al-Tusi, Amali, p. 104, Majlis No. 6, first edition.

[^21]: On p. 39 of Diwan al-Sahaba, in a footnote on decorating markets,
it is stated that the number of women who had cut off their hands
reached forty, nine of whom did so due to their love and passion [for
Prophet Yousuf {Joseph} (‘a)].

[^22]: Shu’ara' al-Hilla, Vol. 3, p. 214, excerpted from a poem
eulogizing al-Husayn (‘a) by Sayyid ‘Abdul-Muttalib al-Hilli.


