The Arba’in
===========

   
    
 It is customary to pay tribute to the deceased forty days after his
death by doing acts of righteousness on his behalf, by eulogizing him
and enumerating his merits. This is done at organized gatherings in
order to keep his memory alive just when people's minds start to forget
about him and their hearts start to ignore him.

An immortal portrayal is brought back to such minds through the medium
of well composed poetry transmitted from one person to another, one
which takes its place in people's hearts. Epochs, hence, pass by, and so
do years, while his memory remains fresh and alive.

Or maybe someone delivers a moving speech recorded in books and in other
records, so it would become an enduring part of history. The lost one
remains alive whenever such poetry is recited, or whenever a researcher
comes across what was said in his eulogies recorded in books, so he
develops an interest in investigating him and in getting to know his
merits and feats.

Such a commendable custom becomes more significant as the greatness of
the lost one increases and is proportionate with his feats. Such is the
case with reformers and role models emulated by others. This is more
important because disseminating their merits and teachings calls for
following them and walking on their footprints to effect reform and to
cultivate the souls.  
    
 Both Abu Tharr al-Ghifari and Ibn ‘Abbas quote the Prophet (S) as
saying, “The earth mourns the death of a believer for forty
mornings.”[^1] Zurarah quotes Abu ‘Abdullah Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) saying,
“The sky wept over al-Husayn (‘a) for forty mornings with blood, while
the earth wept over him for forty mornings with blackness. The sun wept
over him for forty mornings with the eclipse and with redness, whereas
the angels wept over him for forty mornings.

No woman among us ever dyed with *henna*, nor used any oil or any *kohl*
nor cohabited with her husband till the head of ‘Ubaydullah Ibn Ziyad
was brought to us, and we are still grieving even after all of
that.”[^2]  
    
 This is the basis of the ongoing custom of grieving for the deceased
for forty days. On the 40th day, a special mourning ceremony is held at
his gravesite attended by his relatives and friends. This custom is not
confined to Muslims.

Christians hold mourning ceremonies forty days after the death of their
lost one. They gather at a church and repeat a special prayer that they
call a funeral prayer service. They do likewise six months after his
death and then one year after his death. Jews renew their mourning
service thirty days after one's death, nine months after one's death,
and one year after one's death.[^3]

All of this is done in order to keep his memory alive and so that people
may not forget his legacy and deeds if he is great with merits and
feats.  
    
 At any rate, a researcher does not find in the band described as
reformers a man so well shrouded in feats of the most sublime meanings,
one whose life, uprising, and the tragic way in which he was killed, a
divine call and lessons in reform, even social systems, ethics, and
sacred morals..., other than the Master of the Youths of Paradise, the
man who was martyred for his creed, for Islam, for harmony, the martyr
for ethics and cultivation, namely al-Husayn (‘a).

He, more than anyone else, deserves to be remembered on various
occasions. People ought to make a pilgrimage to his sacred gravesite on
the anniversary of the passage of 40 days following the date of his
martyrdom so that they may achieve such lofty objectives.  
    
 The reason why most people hold only the first such an anniversary is
due to the fact that the merits of those men are limited and temporal,
unlike those of the Master of Martyrs: his feats are endless, his
virtues are countless, the study of whose biography keeps his memory
alive, and so is the case whenever he is mentioned. To follow in his
footsteps is needed by every generation.

To hold an annual ceremony at his grave on the anniversary of his
*Arba’in* brings his revolution back to memory. It also brings back to
memory the cruelty committed by the Umayyads and their henchmen. No
matter how hard an orator tries, or how well a poet presents his theme,
new doors of virtue, that were closed before, will then be opened for
him.  
    
 This is why it has been the custom of the Shi’as to bring back to
memory on the *Arba’in* those events every year. The tradition wherein
Imam al-Baqir (‘a) says that the heavens wept over al-Husayn (‘a) for
forty mornings, rising red and setting red,[^4] hints to such a public
custom.  
    
 So is the case with a statement made once by Imam al-Hasan al-’Askari
(‘a) wherein he said, “There are five marks of a believer: his fifty-one
*rak’at* prayers, *ziyarat al-Arba’in*, audible recitation of the
*basmala*, wearing his ring on the right hand, and rubbing his forehead
with the dust.”[^5]

Such a statement leads us to the ongoing public custom being discussed.
Holding a mourning ceremony for the Master of Martyrs and holding
meetings in his memory are all done by those who are loyal to him and
who follow him.

There is no doubt that those who follow his path are the believers who
recognize him as their Imam; so, one of the marks highlighting their
*iman,* as well as their loyalty to the Master of the Youths of
Paradise, the one who was killed as he stood to defend the divine
Message, is to be present on the *Arba’in* anniversary at his sacred
grave in order to hold a mourning ceremony for him and remember the
tragedies that had befallen him, his companions and Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).  
    
 To twist the meaning of *ziyarat al-Arba’in* by saying that it means
visiting the gravesites of forty believers is simply indicative of
twisted mentalities, an attempt at distortion, one which good taste
resents. Moreover, it is without any foundation. Had the goal been to
visit forty believers, the Imam (‘a) would have used the term “*ziyarat
Arba’in [mu'minin]*.”

The original wording indicates that *ziyarat al-Arba’in* is one of the
conditions enumerated in the *hadith* cited above saying that it is one
of the marks of one's *iman* and an indication of his loyalty to the
Twelve Imams (‘a).  
    
 All the Imams who descended from the Prophet (S) were *the* gates of
salvation, *the* arks of mercy. Through them can a believer be
distinguished from a non-believer.

They all left this world after being killed as they stood to defend the
Divine Message, accepting the possibility of their being killed for the
stand which they took in obedience to the Command of their Lord, Glory
to Him, the One Who sent His *wahi* to their grandfather, the Prophet
(S). Father of Muhammad, al-Hasan (‘a), son of the Commander of the
Faithful, ‘Ali (‘a), has pointed out to this fact saying, “The mission
that we undertake is assigned to Twelve Imams (‘a) each one of whom is
either to be killed or poisoned.”  
    
 A mourning ceremony ought to be held in commemoration of the *Arba’in*
of each one of them. The statement made by Imam Hasan al-’Askari (‘a)
does not contain any clue restricting the commemoration of the *Arba’in*
to al-Husayn (‘a) alone, but scholars have understood it to imply
emphasis on visiting al-Husayn's gravesite in particular, since the
cause defended by the Master of Martyrs (‘a) is the one characterized by
enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong.

This is why it is said that Islam started with Muhammad (S) and it stays
alive through al-Husayn (‘a). So is the implication of one *hadith* by
the Messenger of Allah (S) saying: “Husayn is of me, and I am of
Husayn.”

This *hadith* conveys the same message because the hardship from which
the Master of Martyrs (‘a) suffered was for the sake of firming the
foundations of Islam and removing the thorns of falsehood from the path
of the *Shari’a*, and to warn the following generations of the crimes
committed by the promoters of misguidance. This is exactly the cause for
which the Prophet of Islam (S) stood to disseminate the divine call.  
    
 For all of these reasons, the Imams from among the Prophet's Progeny
(‘a) found no alternative to attracting the attention to such a glorious
revolution because it contains tragedies that would split the hardest of
rocks. They knew that persistence in demonstrating the injustice dealt
to al-Husayn (‘a) would stir the emotions and attract the hearts of
sympathizers.

One who hears the tales of such horrible events will come to conclude
that al-Husayn (‘a) was a fair and just Imam who did not succumb to
lowly things, that his Imamate was inherited from his grandfather, the
Prophet (S), and from his father, the *wasi* (‘a), that whoever opposes
him deviates from the path of equity. Whoever absorbs the fact that
right was on al-Husayn's side and on that of his infallible offspring
would be embracing their method and following their path.  
    
 This is why the Imams (‘a) did not urge the holding of mourning
ceremonies for the *Arba’in* anniversary of any of them, not even for
that of the Prophet of Islam (S), so that it alone would be the memory
of his tragedy that would make a strong case for safeguarding the
religious link.

Turning attention to it is more effective in keeping the cause of the
Infallible Ones dear to all those who discuss it: “Keep our cause alive,
and discuss our cause.”  
    
 The kind reader, anyway, can easily see why *ziyarat al-Arba’in* is an
indication of one's *iman* when he gets to know similar indications to
which the *hadith* has referred.  
    
 The first of such marks, namely the 51-*rak’at* prayers, legislated
during the night of the Prophet's *mi’raj,* and which, through the
Prophet's intercession, were reduced to only five during the day and the
night, are: seventeen *rak’at* for the morning, the noon and the
afternoon, the sunset and the evening, and the *nafl* prayers timed with
them, in addition to night's *nafl* prayers: they all make up
thirty-four: eight before the noon-time prayers, eight before the
after-noon prayers, four after sunset prayers, and two after the evening
prayers regarded as one, and two before the morning prayers, and finally
eleven *rak’at* for the night's *nafl* prayers.

Add to them the *shaf’* and *witr rak’at*, and you will come to a total
of obligatory and optional prayers of fifty-one *rak’at*. This is
applicable only to the Shi’as.

Although they agree with the Shi’as with regard to the number of
obligatory *rak’at*, the Sunnis differ when it comes to optional
prayers. On p. 314, Vol. 1, of Ibn Humam al-Hanafi's book *Fath
al-Qadir*, they are: two *rak’at* before the *fajr* prayers, four before
the noon prayers and two after that, four before the afternoon prayers,
or just two *rak’at*, two more after the sunset prayers and four
thereafter, or just two, making up twenty-three *rak’at*.

They differ about the night's *nafl* prayers whether they ought to be
eight, only two, or thirteen, or even more. Hence, the total of optional
and compulsory *rak’at* will in no case be fifty-one; so, the fifty-one
*rak’at* are relevant to Imamite Shi’as only.  
    
 The second on the list of marks referred to in the said *hadith* is the
audible pronunciation of the *basmala*. Imamites seek nearness to Allah,
the most Exalted One, by making it obligatory to pronounce it audibly in
the audible prayers and voluntary in the inaudible ones, following the
text of their Imams (‘a).

In this regard, al-Fakhr al-Razi says, “Shi’as are of the view that it
is a Sunnah to audibly pronounce the *basmala* in the audible prayers as
well as in the inaudible ones, whereas the majority of [Sunni] *faqihs*
differ from them.

It is proven through *tawatur* that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (‘a) used to
audibly pronounce the *basmala*. Anyone who follows ‘Ali (‘a), in as far
as his creed is concerned, will surely be on the right guidance by token
of the *hadith* saying: ‘O Allah! Let right be with ‘Ali wherever he
goes'”.[^6]

This statement of al-Razi was not digested by Abul-Thana' al-Alusi who
followed it with a comment in which he said, “Had anyone acted upon all
what they claim to be *mutawatir* from the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a), he will surely be an apostate; so, there is no alternative to
believing in some and disbelieving in others.

His claim that anyone who emulates ‘Ali (‘a) in as far as his creed is
concerned will be on the right guidance of Islam is accepted without any
discussion so long as we are sure that it is proven as having been said
by ‘Ali (‘a). Anything else besides that is steam.”[^7]  
    
 Shi’as are not harmed when al-'Alusi and others assault them especially
since their feet are firm on the path of loyalty for the Master of
*wasis* (‘a) to whom the Messenger of Allah (S) says, “O ‘Ali ! Nobody
knows Allah, the most Exalted One, (fully well) except I and you, and
nobody knows me (fully well) except Allah and you, and nobody knows you
(fully well) except Allah and I.”[^8]  
  

If you, woe unto you, never heard of his merits and feats,

Then hear them from “Hal Ata,” O fool,

For it should suffice you![^9]

   
 Sunnis have opted to do the opposite with regard to such a
pronouncement. On p. 478, Vol. 1, of Ibn Qudamah's book *Al-Mughni*, and
also on p. 204, Vol. 1, of *Badai’ al-Sanai’* by al-Kasani, and also on
p. 216, Vol. 1, of al-Zarqani's *Sharh* of Abul-Diya's *Mukhtasar* of
Malik's *fiqh*, audible pronouncement is not a Sunnah in prayers.  
    
 The third mark mentioned in the said *hadith*, that is, wearing a ring
in the right hand, is something practiced religiously by the Shi’as on
account of the traditions they quote from their Imams (‘a). A multitude
from among the Sunnis disagrees with them.

Ibn al-Hajjaj al-Maliki has said, “The Sunnah has recorded everything as
abominable if handed by the left hand and everything *tahir* if handed
by the right. In this sense, it is highly recommended to wear a ring in
the left hand to be taken by the right one and then placed on the
left.”[^10]

Ibn Hajar narrates saying that Malik hated to wear a ring on his right
hand, believing it should be worn on the left.[^11]  
*Shaikh* Isma’il al-Barusawi has said the following in *‘Iqd al-Durr*:
“Originally, it was a Sunnah to wear a ring on the right hand, but since
this is the distinguishing mark of the people of *bid’as* and of
injustice, it *became* a Sunnah **in our time** to place the ring on a
finger on the left hand”.[^12]  
    
 The fourth mark mentioned in the said *hadith* is the placing of the
forehead on dust [or dry soil]. Its message is to demonstrate that
during the *sajda*, the forehead has to be placed on the ground. Sunnis
do not place their forehead on the ground.

Abu Hanifa, Malik, and Ahmad are reported as having authorized the
prostrating on turban coils,[^13] or on a piece of garment[^14] worn by
the person performing the prayers or any piece of cloth. Hanafis have
authorized placing it on the palms if one feels grudgingly that he has
no other choice.[^15] They also permit prostrating on wheat and barley,
on a bed, on the back of another person standing in front of you who is
also performing the same prayers...![^16]  
    
 The objective behind such a reference is that it is highly commendable,
when one prostrates to thank Allah, to rub his forehead on the dust as a
symbol of humility and to shun arrogance. An examination of the original
text will show any discreet person that it is equally commendable to rub
both sides of the face on it. It is to this meaning that Sayyid Bahr
al-’Ulum, may Allah sanctify him, refers in a poem wherein he says this
line about *sajdat al-shukr*:  
  

The cheek is more worthy of being rubbed,

The *hadith* clearly says so

Whereas in reference to the forehead,

It states it can be done, too.

Rubbing the cheeks exists when reference is made to *sajdat
al-shukr*,[^17] something whereby prophet Moses son of ‘Imran [Amram]
(‘a) deserved to be drawn closer to the Almighty whenever he addressed
Him silently [during the *munajat*].[^18] Nobody contradicted the
Imamites with regard to such rubbing, be it on the forehead or on the
cheeks. Sunnis never obligate themselves to rubbing their foreheads on
dust when performing their prayers or when performing *sajdat al-shukr*.
This is so despite the fact that al-Nakh’i, Malik, and Abu Hanifa have
all disliked performing *sajdat al-shukr,* although the Hanbalis observe
it,[^19] and so do the Shafi’is[^20] whenever they receive a divine
blessing or whenever a sign of Allah's wrath is removed from them.

[^1]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 2, p. 679.

[^2]: al-Nawari, Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, p. 215, chapter 94.

[^3]: Nahr al-Dhahab fi Tarikh Halab, Vol. 1, pp. 63 and 267.

[^4]: Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 90, chapter 28.

[^5]: This is narrated by Shaikh al-Tusi on p. 17, Vol. 3, of his
Tahthib, in a chapter discussing the merits of visiting the gravesite of
al-Husayn (‘a) wherein he quotes Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-’Askari
(‘a). It is also narrated on p. 551 of the Indian edition of Misbah
al-Mutahajjid.

[^6]: Mafatih al-Ghayb, Vol. 1, p. 107.

[^7]: Ruh al-Ma’ani, Vol. 1, p. 47.

[^8]: Al-Muhtadir, p. 165.

[^9]: According to p. 140, Vol. 4, of Ibn al-’Imad's book Shatharat
al-Thahab, a number of Hanbalis used to recite this line from the
pulpits of Baghdad.

[^10]: Al-Madkhal, Vol. 1, p. 46, in a chapter dealing with the
etiquette of entering mosques.

[^11]: Al-Fatawa al-Fiqhiyya al-Kubra, Vol. 1, p. 264, in a chapter
dealing with what to wear.

[^12]: This is narrated by the authority Shaikh ‘Abd al-Husayn Ahmad
al-Amini al-Najafi in his 11-volume encyclopedia titled Al-Ghadir
quoting p. 142, Vol. 4, of the exegesis titled Ruh al-Bayan. This is not
the first issue wherein Sunnis practice the opposite of what the Shi’as
practice. On p. 137, Vol. 1, of Abu Ishaq al-Shirazi's book
Al-Muaththab, on p. 47, Vol. 1, of al-Ghazali's book Al-Wajiz, on p. 25
of al-Nawawi's Al-Minhaj as well as on p. 560, Vol. 1, of its Sharh by
Ibn Hajar titled Tuhfat al-Muhtaj fi Sharh al-Minhaj, on p. 248, Vol. 4,
of al-’Ayni's book ‘Umdat al-Qari fi Sharh al-Bukhari, on p. 681, Vol.
1, of Ibn Muflih's book Al-Furu’, and on p. 505, Vol. 2, of Ibn
Qudamah's book Al-Mughni, to plane graves is looked upon as a mark of
“innovators.” On p. 88, Vol. 1, of al-Sha’rani's book Rahmat al-Ummah bi
Ikhtilaf al-A'immah, a book written as a comment on the exgesis titled
Al-Mizan by ‘Allama Tabatabai, the author states the following: “It is a
Sunnah to plane graves. But since it became a distinguishing mark for
the Rafidis, it is better to do contrariwise.” Among other issues
wherein Sunnis do the opposite of what the Shi’as do is blessing the
Prophet (S) and his progeny (‘a). Some of them suggest its elimination
altogether. For example, al-Zamakhshari states the following comment
after trying to explain verse 56 of Surat al-Ahzab in his book
Al-Kashshaf: “It is makruh to bless the Prophet (S) because it causes
one to be charged with being a Rafidi, especially since he [the Prophet
(S)] has said, ‘Do not stand where you may be prone to being charged.'”
The same theme exists on p. 135, Vol. 11, of Ibn Hajar's book Fath
al-Bari, in “Kitab al-Da’awat” (book of supplications), where the author
tries to answer the question: “Should one bless anyone else besides the
Prophet (S)?” Says he, “There is a disagreement with regard to blessing
anyone besides the prophets although there is a consensus that it is
permissive to greet the Living One. Some say it is permissive in its
absolute application, while others say it is conditional because it has
become a distinguishing mark of the Rafidis.” Even in the manner of
dressing do some Sunnis want to distinguish themselves from others: On
p. 13, Vol. 5, of al-Zarqani's book Sharh al-Mawahib al-Saniyya, it is
stated that, “Some scholars used to loosen their tassels from the left
front side, and I have never read any text that a tassel should be
loosened from the right side except in a weak hadith narrated by
al-Tabrani. Now since this has become a distinguishing mark of the
Imamites, it ought to be abandoned in order to avoid looking like them.”

[^13]: al-Sha’rani, Al-Mizan, Vol. 1, p. 138.

[^14]: al-Marghinani, Al-Hidaya, Vol. 1, p. 33.

[^15]: Al-Fiqh ‘ala al-Mathahib al-Arba’ah, Vol. 1, p. 189.

[^16]: Ibn Najim, Al-Bahr al-Ra’iq, Vol. 1, p. 319.

[^17]: Al-Kafi ‘ala Hamish Mir'at al-’Uqul, Vol. 3, p. 129. as-Saduq,
Al-Faqih, p. 69. Shaikh al-Tusi, Al-Tahthib, Vol. 1, p. 266, in a
chapter dealing with what ought to be recited following the prayers.

[^18]: Shaikh as-Saduq, Al-Faqih, p. 69.

[^19]: Ibn Qudamah, Al-Mughni, Vol. 1, p. 626. Ibn Muflih, Al-Furu’,
Vol. 1, p. 382.

[^20]: Kitab al-Umm, Vol. 1, p. 116. al-Mazni, Al-Mukhtasar, Vol. 1, p.
90. al-Ghazali, Al-Wajiza, Vol. 1, p. 32.


