[Introduction]
==============

In this paper I propose to describe the teachings of Shi'ite Islam about
authority in a manner accessible to Catholic partners in dialogue. For
this purpose, I will contrast Shi'ite views on these issues with those
of Catholics, and those of Sunni theologians, and I will also mention a
few of the differences of opinion on these matters among the various
Shi'ite sects and Sufis.

To begin with, we need to clarify what is meant by authority. Needless
to say, there is no concept in the Muslim intellectual traditions that
is exactly equivalent to the concept of authority as understood by
Christians. The differences between Shi'ite and Catholic thinking about
what Catholics would describe as issues of*authority* , are likely to
lead to misunderstandings if not directly addressed.

Authority is multifaceted. There is political authority, teaching
authority, sacramental authority, spiritual authority, legal authority,
and more; but it may be convenient to limit ourselves to these five
facets of authority.

Next we can speak of*de facto* and*de jure* authority. Someone has de
facto authority when he holds a position, and by virtue of holding that
position is accorded authority. The person holding the position is able
to carry out various activities that are not permitted to persons who do
not hold the position. De facto authority may be challenged by those who
claim that the person who holds the position does not do so
legitimately. They claim that although the person holding the office may
have de facto authority, the person lacks de jure authority.

Finally, we should speak of the ways in which authority is conferred,
and its source or sources. Various sorts of authority are won by
military strength, knowledge, appointment by God, popular approval,
birth, wealth, and by other means. Of course, not all of the ways in
which people gain positions of de facto authority are considered
acceptable. Bribery is a means of gaining various sorts of de facto
authority, but it is never a means of winning de jure authority.

After discussing the facets, propriety, and transfer of authority in a
rather abstract fashion, we can turn to an examination of how Catholics
and Shi'ites understand these issues.

Once we have examined authority, we will turn very briefly to the issue
of tradition. Our approach to tradition will not, however, review the
relevant concepts in all their generality, but only as they pertain to
issues of authority.


