Authority and Wilayah
=====================

There are various types of authority. Teachers have authority over their
students. Employers have authority over their employees. Parents have
authority over their children. None of these sorts of authority are
absolute. Parents do not have authority to abuse their children.
Authority is not mere liberty to command. The limits on authority are
especially pronounced in Islam.

All authority belongs ultimately to God, and different people exercise
specific types of authority according to the responsibilities given to
them. One who exercises authority may be required to use personal
discretion, but discretion is always to be employed in order to carry
out one's duties in the best possible way, and does not imply that one
has a free hand to do whatever one wants.

If there is any absolute authority, it is the authority of God. (This
sentence questions if there is any absolute authority…. How about: The
only absolute authority is the authority of God. )Here, however, there
is a difference between Shi'ite and Ash'arite views.

Most Sunnite theologians accept an Ash'arite position, according to
which all moral obligation derives from divine commands, and that since
it does not make sense to speak of God commanding Himself, He is not
constrained by any moral obligations. It would not be wrong for Him to
command murder and stealing, but rather, if He commanded them, they
would become morally obligatory.

Shi'ites, on the other hand, along with the Mu'tazilites, hold that what
we know by reason to be wrong, could never be commanded by God. The
Ash'arites object that this seems to imply that reason—or the absolute
moral values discerned by reason—has an authority above the authority of
God. Heaven forbid!

Shi'ites respond that this is a misunderstanding of the nature of
authority. God cannot command what is wrong because He is essentially
just, not because He is subservient to justice or reason, or because He
lacks sufficient power to be unjust. God has absolute authority, not in
the sense that He could command what is wrong, but that He does whatever
He wills, and He necessarily wills what is just and what is better than
justice, e.g., grace, because He is essentially just and merciful.

The God of Abraham, Noah, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad (peace be with him
and his progeny and with them all) is no Pater Liber.1

The absolute authority of God does not mean that God is at liberty to do
evil, but neither does it imply that He is not at liberty. Likewise, the
expertise of a craftsman does not mean that if the craftsman were to
produce something unbefitting his skill, then he has the authority to do
so because of his expertise.

Neither does it imply that the craftsman who exercises his skill is not
at liberty to make what he wants. God does whatever He wills, but His
will is not arbitrary. God does whatever He wills, but His willing is
never evil, because this would contradict His essence.

In Shi'ite sources, there is no general term for authority as it occurs
in Western languages, used for the concepts of divine authority,
scriptural

authority, church authority, etc.. Occasionally, one who has the power
of command is referred to by the word*sulţan* (from which comes the
English “sultan”), malik (sovereign), malik (owner, possessor), and
hujjah. Among the Names of God mentioned in the Qur'an, we
find***al-Malik (20:114),*** and*Malik al-Mulk* (which has been
translated as “Master of the Kingdom”, “Owner of All”, and “Master of
all sovereignty”).

There are no divine Names based on the roots of*sulţan* or hujjah,
although reference to divine authority can be found in which such terms
are employed. Other terms that are used to indicate divine authority
are:*al- Haqq* (the Truth),*al-Rabb (* Lord),*Dhê al-Jalal* (Possessor
of Majesty), and a number of others, each of which repays study with a
greater appreciation of the nature of divine authority in Islam.

The notion of authority is closely related to that of obedience; so, we
should also look at what the Qur'an has to say about obedience and
following in order to get a clearer picture of how authority is viewed
in Islam.

Let's begin with*sulţan* . What is most characteristic of the use of
this word in the Qur'an is that it is used to condemn idolatry as
unauthorized, in contrast to which the missions of the prophets are
described as authorized.

The following verses may be grouped together because they all pertain to
the condemnation of unauthorized idolatry [which is contrasted with the
authorized message of monotheism (*tawhid* ) brought through the
prophets].

We could say that these verses indicate a negative concept of authority,
in that they deny authority for idolatry. These verses are relevant to
teaching authority, for they condemn false unauthorized religious
teachings, and to sacramental authority, for they condemn unauthorized
worship of false gods.

<p dir="rtl">
سنُلْقِى فى قُلُوبِ الّذِينَ كَفَرُوا الرّعْب بِمَا أَشرَكوا
بِاللّهِ مَا لَمْ يُنزِّلْ بِهِ سلْطناً وَ مَأْوَاهُمُ النّارُ وَ بِئْس
مَثْوَى الظلِمِينَ
</p>

***We shall cast terror into the hearts of the faithless because of
their ascribing to Allah partners for which He has not sent down any
authority, and their refuge shall be the Fire; and evil is the abode of
the wrongdoers. (3:151)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَ كيْف أَخَاف مَا أَشرَكتُمْ وَ لا تخَافُونَ أَنّكُمْ أَشرَكْتُم
بِاللّهِ مَا لَمْ يُنزِّلْ بِهِ عَلَيْكمْ سلْطناً فَأَى الْفَرِيقَينِ
أَحَقّ بِالأَمْنِ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

***How could I [Abraham] fear what you ascribe as partners, when you do
not fear ascribing to Allah partners for which He has not sent down any
authority to you? (6:81)***

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ إِنّمَا حَرّمَ رَبىَ الْفَوَحِش مَا ظهَرَ مِنهَا وَ مَا بَطنَ
وَ الاثْمَ وَ الْبَغْىَ بِغَيرِ الْحَقِّ وَ أَن تُشرِكُوا بِاللّهِ مَا
لَمْ يُنزِّلْ بِهِ سلْطناً وَ أَن تَقُولُوا عَلى اللّهِ مَا لا
تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

***Say, 'My Lord has only forbidden indecencies… and that you should
ascribe to Allah partners for which He has not sent down any authority…
(7:33)***

<p dir="rtl">
أَ تُجَدِلُونَنى فى أَسمَاءٍ سمّيْتُمُوهَا أَنتُمْ وَ ءَابَاؤُكُم
مّا نَزّلَ اللّهُ بِهَا مِن سلْطنٍ
</p>

***…Do you dispute with me regarding names that you have named—you and
your fathers—for which Allah has not sent down any authority? (7:71)2***

<p dir="rtl">
مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِهِ إِلا أَسمَاءً سمّيْتُمُوهَا أَنتُمْ وَ
ءَابَاؤُكم مّا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ بهَا مِن سلْطنٍ إِنِ الْحُكْمُ إِلا للّهِ
أَمَرَ أَلا تَعْبُدُوا إِلا إِيّاهُ ذَلِك الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ وَ لَكِنّ
أَكثرَ النّاسِ لا يَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

***You do not worship besides Him but names that you and your fathers
have coined for which Allah has not sent down any authority. Sovereignty
belongs only to Allah… (12:40)***

<p dir="rtl">
وْ لا يَأْتُونَ عَلَيْهِم بِسلْطنِ بَينٍ
</p>

***…if only they would bring some clear authority concerning them [gods
besides Him]… (18:15)***

<p dir="rtl">
أَمْ أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ سلْطناً فَهُوَ يَتَكلّمُ بِمَا كانُوا
بِهِ يُشرِكُونَ
</p>

***Have We sent down to them any authority which might speak of what
they associate with Him? (30:35)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَ يَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللّهِ مَا لَمْ يُنزِّلْ بِهِ سلْطناً وَ
مَا لَيْس لهُم بِهِ عِلْمٌ
</p>

***They worship besides Allah that for which He has not sent down any
authority, and of which they have no knowledge… (22:71)***

The link between authority and knowledge is important. Those without
legitimate authority don't know what they're talking about. This would
seem to indicate a lack of teaching authority, since the reference to
eavesdropping indicates that those condemned lack knowledge on which to
base their pronouncements. They are ridiculed by God in the following
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَمْ لهمْ سلّمٌ يَستَمِعُونَ فِيهِ فَلْيَأْتِ مُستَمِعُهُم بِسلْطنٍ
مّبِين
</p>

***Or do they have a ladder whereby they eavesdrop? If so let their
eavesdropper produce a manifest authority. (52:38)***

No one becomes privy to the divine knowledge by illegitimate means:

<p dir="rtl">
يَمَعْشرَ الجِْنِّ وَ الانسِ إِنِ استَطعْتُمْ أَن تَنفُذُوا مِنْ
أَقْطارِ السمَوَتِ وَ الأَرْضِ فَانفُذُوا لا تَنفُذُونَ إِلا بِسلْطنٍ
</p>

***O company of jinn and humans! If you can pass through the confines of
the heavens and the earth, then do pass through. But you will not pass
through except by an authority. (55:33)***

Likewise, the attribution of polytheistic doctrines about God is
declared to be unauthorized and not based on any knowledge.

<p dir="rtl">
قَالُوا اتّخَذَ اللّهُ وَلَداً سبْحَنَهُ هُوَ الْغَنىّ لَهُ مَا فى
السمَوَتِ وَ مَا فى الأَرْضِ إِنْ عِندَكم مِّن سلْطنِ بهَذَا أَ
تَقُولُونَ عَلى اللّهِ مَا لا تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

***They say, 'Allah has taken a son!' Immaculate is He! To Him belongs
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. You have no
authority for this. Do you attribute to Allah what you do not know?
(10:68)***

This verse has figured prominently in theological disputes between
Christians and Muslims, but the point is general, and asserted in much
the same way against polytheists who held that the angels were the
daughters of God. Christians respond that they do not hold that the
second person of the Trinity is a son in the sense condemned in the
above verse.

However, this is not the place to review the history of that discussion.
What is at issue here is that improper religious beliefs are condemned
as being taught without authority; and once again, it is primarily
teaching authority that is at issue, and those condemned for
unauthorized teaching are condemned for making attributions without
knowledge.

<p dir="rtl">
أَمْ لَكمْ سلْطنٌ مّبِينٌ
</p>

***Do you have a manifest authority? (37:156)***

[asked of those who hold that Allah has begotten daughters]

<p dir="rtl">
إِنّ الّذِينَ يجَدِلُونَ فى ءَايَتِ اللّهِ بِغَيرِ سلْطنٍ أَتَاهُمْ
إِن فى صدُورِهِمْ إِلا كبرٌ مّا هُم بِبَلِغِيهِ
</p>

***Indeed those who dispute the signs of Allah without any authority
that may have come to them—there is only vanity in their breasts, which
they will never satisfy…. (40:56)***

Next we have verses that declare the divine authorization of the
prophets, for whom Moses stands as an exemplar. These verses indicate a
positive concept of authority, the divine authorization given to the
prophets. Here, the authority is not limited to teaching, but has legal
and political dimensions, as well.

<p dir="rtl">
وَ ءَاتَيْنَا مُوسي سلْطناً مّبِينا
</p>

***…and We gave Moses a manifest authority. (4:153)***

وَ لَقَدْ أَرْسلْنَا مُوسى بِئَايَتِنَا وَ سلْطنٍ مّبِينٍ)69 (إِلى
فِرْعَوْنَ وَ مَلايهِ فَاتّبَعُوا أَمْرَ فِرْعَوْنَ وَ مَا أَمْرُ
فِرْعَوْنَ بِرَشِيدٍ

***Certainly We sent Moses with Our signs and a manifest authority/ to
Pharaoh and his elite, but they followed Pharaoh's dictates, and
Pharaoh's dictates were not right. (11: 96-97)***

<p dir="rtl">
ثمّ أَرْسلْنَا مُوسى وَ أَخَاهُ هَرُونَ بِئَايَتِنَا وَ سلْطنٍ
مّبِين
</p>

***Then We sent Moses and Aaron, his brother, with Our signs and a
manifest authority… (23:45).***

This is similar to (28:35), just Moses is mentioned with the signs and
manifest authority at (40:23), (51:38). Moses tells Pharaoh that he has
a manifest authority from God at (44:19), where opposition to freeing
(giving over to Moses) the Israelites, “the servants of God”, is
considered rebellion against God. So, the authority given by God to the
prophets is over whoever God wishes, and is not confined to the prophet
himself or his people. Moses has de jure authority over Pharaoh, even if
Pharaoh refuses to recognize it.

<p dir="rtl">
وَ لَكِنّ اللّهَ يُسلِّط رُسلَهُ عَلى مَن يَشاءُ
</p>

***…but Allah gives authority to His apostles over whomsoever He wishes
(59:6)***

While various people challenge the authority of the prophets, the
prophets acknowledge that whatever authority they bring is only by the
permission of God. Here the authority may be indicated in the form of a
miracle, or sign indicative of their mission.

<p dir="rtl">
قَالُوا إِنْ أَنتُمْ إِلا بَشرٌ مِّثْلُنَا تُرِيدُونَ أَن تَصدّونَا
عَمّا كانَ يَعْبُدُ ءَابَاؤُنَا فَأْتُونَا بِسلْطنٍ مّبِينٍ قَالَت
لَهُمْ رُسلُهُمْ إِن نحْنُ إِلا بَشرٌ مِّثْلُكمْ وَ لَكِنّ اللّهَ يَمُنّ
عَلى مَن يَشاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ وَ مَا كانَ لَنَا أَن نّأْتِيَكُم
بِسلْطنٍ إِلا بِإِذْنِ اللّهِ وَ عَلى اللّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكلِ
الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
</p>

***…They said, 'You are nothing but humans like us who desire to bar us
from what our fathers used to worship. So bring us a manifest
authority.' Their apostles said to them, 'Indeed we are just human
beings like yourselves, but Allah favors whomever of His servants He
wishes. We may not bring you an authority except by Allah's leave, and
in Allah let all the faithful put their trust.' (14:10-11)***

Another important instance of negative authority, or authority denied,
is the case of Iblis, or Satan. What is denied here is not specifically
teaching authority, but a quasi-political/legal right to rule over or
command.

<p dir="rtl">
إِنّ عِبَادِى لَيْس لَك عَلَيْهِمْ سلْطنٌ وَ كَفَى بِرَبِّك وَكيلاً
</p>

***As for My servants, you [Satan] shall have no authority over them
(17:65)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَ قَالَ الشيْطنُ لَمّا قُضىَ الأَمْرُ إِنّ اللّهَ وَعَدَكمْ وَعْدَ
الحْقِّ وَ وَعَدتّكمْ فَأَخْلَفْتُكمْ وَ مَا كانَ لىَ عَلَيْكُم مِّن
سلْطنٍ إِلا أَن دَعَوْتُكُمْ فَاستَجَبْتُمْ لى
</p>

***…Satan will say, 'Indeed Allah made you a promise that was true and I
made you a promise, but I failed you. I had no authority over you,
except that I called you and you responded to me… (14:22)***

Just as Satan admits that he had no legitimate authority over man, the
idols will testify against their worshippers at the end of the world:

<p dir="rtl">
وَ مَا كانَ لَنَا عَلَيْكم مِّن سلْطنِ بَلْ كُنتُمْ قَوْماً طغِينَ
</p>

***…we [what wrongdoers used to worship] had no authority over you; no,
you were an insolent people… (37:30)***

Satan does exert a sort of de facto authority over man, as is indicated
by the words I called you and you responded to me, but this is not a
legitimate form of authority. It merely means that Satan is obeyed by
men. We see the same distinction in the following verses.

<p dir="rtl">
إِنّ عِبَادِى لَيْس لَك عَلَيهِمْ سلْطنٌ إِلا مَنِ اتّبَعَك مِنَ
الْغَاوِينَ
</p>

***Indeed as for My servants, you [Iblis] do not have any authority over
them, except the perverse who follow you (15:42)***

إِنّهُ لَيْس لَهُ سلْطنٌ عَلى الّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَ عَلى رَبِّهِمْ
يَتَوَكلُون)99) إِنّمَا سلْطنُهُ عَلى الّذِينَ يَتَوَلّوْنَهُ وَ
الّذِينَ هُم بِهِ مُشرِكُونََ

***Indeed he [Satan] does not have any authority over those who have
faith and put their trust in their Lord. His authority is only over
those who befriend him and those who make him a partner [of Allah].
(16:99-100)***

The possibility of de facto Satanic authority is the result of the free
will granted to human beings. Satan is able to tempt:

<p dir="rtl">
وَ مَا كانَ لَهُ عَلَيهِم مِّن سلْطنٍ إِلا لِنَعْلَمَ مَن يُؤْمِنُ
بِالاَخِرَةِ مِمّنْ هُوَ مِنْهَا فى شكٍ َ
</p>

***He [Iblis] had no authority over them, but that We may ascertain
those who believe in the Hereafter from those who are in doubt about it…
(34:21)***

Often the believers have been protected by God from the de facto
authority of tyrants:

<p dir="rtl">
وَ لَوْ شاءَ اللّهُ لَسلّطهُمْ عَلَيْكمْ فَلَقَتَلُوكُمْ
</p>

***…had Allah wished, He would have given them authority against you,
and then they would surely have fought you. (4:90)***

There is a recurrent association of tyranny and the illegitimate
exercise of authority, the taking up of idols, the failure to follow the
prophets, and disputing religious tenets without divine authority.

<p dir="rtl">
الّذِينَ يجَدِلُونَ فى ءَايَتِ اللّهِ بِغَيرِ سلْطنٍ أَتَاهُمْ كبرَ
مَقْتاً عِندَ اللّهِ وَ عِندَ الّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا كَذَلِك يَطبَعُ اللّهُ
عَلى كلِّ قَلْبِ مُتَكَبرٍ جَبّارٍ
</p>

***Those who dispute the signs of Allah without any authority that may
have come to them—[that is] greatly outrageous to Allah and to those who
have faith. That is how Allah seals the heart of every arrogant tyrant.
(40:35)***

Authority often has the sense of permission. The signs brought by the
prophets are by the permission of God. The religious/legal permission to
take retribution for murder is also described as an authority.

<p dir="rtl">
وَ مَن قُتِلَ مَظلُوماً فَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا لِوَلِيِّهِ سلْطنا
</p>

***…and whoever is killed wrongfully, We have certainly given his heir
an authority (17:33)***

Likewise permission for self-defence against hostile idolaters is
described as an authority, perhaps better translated in this case and
the above as authorization. The authorization here pertains to what is
to be considered lawful, not to teaching, spirituality, or worship.

<p dir="rtl">
وَ أُولَئكُمْ جَعَلْنَا لَكُمْ عَلَيهِمْ سلْطناً مّبِينا
</p>

***…and it is such against whom We have given you a clear authorization.
(4:91)***

When the hoopoe doesn't show up on time for Solomon, he says:

<p dir="rtl">
لأُعَذِّبَنّهُ عَذَاباً شدِيداً أَوْ لأَاذْبحَنّهُ أَوْ لَيَأْتِيَنى
بِسلْطنٍ مّبِينٍ
</p>

***'I will surely punish him with a severe punishment, or I will surely
behead him, unless he brings a clear authority (27:21)***

The meaning of “authority” here is also that of an authorization or
excuse. When one has no excuse left to offer, one is said to lack
authority:

<p dir="rtl">
هَلَك عَنى سلْطنِيَهْ
</p>

***My authority has departed from me (69:29)***

This is spoken by the sinners who are given their books in their left
hands on the judgment day and have no legal excuse on the basis of which
to seek to avoid punishment.

Treachery is seen as an invitation to disaster, as if one were giving
permission to God to make one wretched. Of course, God does not need the
permission of humans for anything; yet by failing to carry out the
conditions needed for being granted a reward, it is as though one gives
permission to the authority not to grant the reward.

<p dir="rtl">
يَأَيهَا الّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا لا تَتّخِذُوا الْكَفِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ
مِن دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَ تُرِيدُونَ أَن تجْعَلُوا للّهِ عَلَيْكمْ
سلْطناً مّبِينا
</p>

***O you who have faith! Do not take the faithless for friends instead
of the faithful. Do you wish to give Allah a clear authorization against
yourselves? (4:144)***

Every believer seeks divine guidance, and so seeks an authority from
God. Divine authority is associated more with divine authorization,
assistance, signs and guidance than with having free reign or liberty to
rule. Here the authority mentioned is more clearly associated with
spiritual guidance than those previously mentioned.

<p dir="rtl">
وَ قُل رّب أَدْخِلْنى مُدْخَلَ صِدْقٍ وَ أَخْرِجْنى مخْرَجَ صِدْقٍ
وَ اجْعَل لى مِن لّدُنك سلْطناً نّصِيرا
</p>

***And say, 'My Lord! Admit me with a worthy entrance, and bring me out
with a worthy departure, and make for me a helping authority from
Yourself.' (17:80)***

The examination of these verses and the above-mentioned reflections
enable us to reach the following conclusions about the concept of
authority in Islam.

1. Divine authority is beneficial. What God commands is for the good of
those commanded. Because of this, practical reason is understood to
endorse obedience to the divine commands.

2. Divine authority is always presented in contrast to usurped authority
or deceitful authority, which is arbitrary, selfish, and of no real
benefit, although appearances to the contrary commonly deceive many.

3. Divine authority is guiding, while de facto authority without divine
permission is oppressive and misleading.

4. Authority is backed up by signs, by reason, and by knowledge. It is
linked to proof (hujjah) and clear explanation (bayyinah). The
recognition of authority is by appeal to individual conscience and
reason. No one can be forced to recognize the divine authority given to
the prophets.

5. The divine authority given to human beings is limited. For example,
one is permitted retribution, but one must not be excessive in this.
Divine authority cannot be abused because it is conditioned on proper
exercise. As soon as one acts abusively, one forfeits any claim to
divine authority. No one can claim divine authority for oppression.

6. The divine authority given to the prophets is not divided. Through
them, divine guidance is provided in all areas of life: legal,
spiritual, sacramental, teaching, political, etc. For example, rules of
good hygiene are woven into the rules of ritual practice; moral
teachings are not separated from religious law; and spirituality informs
the political decisions of the prophets. On the other hand, authority
delegated to others is limited to specific authorizations, e.g.,
retribution.

7. Authority is authorization. One has authorization for what has a good
reason, for what excuses one, for what one has been given explicit
divine permission, and for what has been divinely commanded.

Our examination of the above verses suffices to establish that the
source of authority in Islam is God. This is not surprising. God's
authority, however, is not arbitrary. God does whatever He wishes, but
His wishes are not capricious. This point is one on which Shi'ite
theology differs with the Ash'arite theology that is common among Sunni
Islam.

The above verses also demonstrate a principle by which authority is
transmitted: by authorization. God delegates authority to the prophets,
peace be with them.

The difference between Shi'ite and Sunni accounts of the succession to
the Prophet is often portrayed as a political dispute. This is
misleading. There is a dispute about the political leadership of the
Muslim community, but this is secondary to a more fundamental
disagreement about authorization. According to the Shi'ah, the ultimate
basis of authority is not what anyone wants—neither the will of the
people, nor anyone else.

Even the will of God can only be considered the source of authority
because of God's essential justice and mercy. Of course, authority is
granted by God's will, but it is not because God wills capriciously for
the prophets to have authority that they have it; rather, God wills that
the prophets have their authority because of His wisdom and mercy, and
the prophets' capacity to provide guidance. He chooses whoever He wills
in accordance with His wise and beneficent plan for humanity.

God wills justice, for He is just. Justice means that everything should
be in its proper place. Those who require guidance should obey those who
can best provide it. Thus, God sends His messengers with authority to
provide guidance that will enable those who obey His Messengers to
arrange their relations with God and men in the way they can acquire
virtue and thereby move toward Him.

Likewise, the succession to the Prophet through the Imams is neither
determined by heredity nor by the arbitrary selection of the previous
authority, but through divine selection announced through the
appointment of each of the Imams by the one who held the authority prior
to him.

The Prophet Muhammad was authorized by Allah to bring a law for the
people that differed in some respects from what was current among the
Christians and Jews of the time, although there were many points in
common among them.

The successors of the Prophet were not authorized to bring any other
law. In this sense there is a difference in the legal authority given to
the prophets and to the Imams. Both are given authority in the sense of
authorization to

guide the people, with a right to obedience from the people, not for
their own sakes, but in order to fulfil the divine mandate. However, the
law promulgated by the Imams is the law that had been given to Muhammad,
and the scripture they taught was the scripture given to Muhammad.

The authority given to both the prophets and Imams to guide the people
and which requires obedience is called*wilayah* .*Wilayah* is a special
friendship with God, which is usually translated into English as
sainthood, but the*waliy* in Shi'ism is not understood as the saint in
Catholicism.

Sometimes*wilayah* and walayah are distinguished, so that the former
means the guardianship and right to obedience that characterizes the
relation of the*mawla* over his followers, while the latter is used to
characterize the special friendship and devotion to God of the*waliy
Allah* , as well as the love and devotion of the people toward him.
Shaykh Saduq tells us that the most noble servants of Allah are those
whose*waliy* is the*waliy Allah* and whose enemy is the enemy of Allah.3
In practice the terms are often confused, and the markings that would
distinguish the words*wilayah* and walayah are often omitted in Arabic
texts.

Like the Catholic saint, the*waliy* is a very holy person, one who has
an especially intimate relation with God expressed as love and devotion.
However, the*waliy* also takes the utmost care to follow the path
prescribed toward God through the guidance given His Prophet, and
because of his success in following the way toward God, he becomes the
means through which God guides others to Himself, too, and thus God
grants him the right to leadership and to the obedience of the people.

One of the most important narrations on which the authority of Imam 'Ali
is based is that of Ghadir, according to which the Prophet appointed
'Ali as his successor after the farewell pilgrimage. It is reported that
he brought 'Ali before the people, raised 'Ali's hand in his own and
said: “For whomever I am*mawla* , this ('Ali) is his*waliy* . O Allah,
befriend those who befriend him and have enmity for those who have
enmity toward him.”4

An early claim to authority that invokes the concept of*wilayah* may be
found in a hadith according to which the grandson of the Prophet, Imam
Husayn, is reported to have written the following in a letter to the
Shi'ah of Basra:

God has chosen Muhammad from among his people, graced him with His
prophethood and selected him for His message. After he admonished the
people and conveyed His message to them, God took him back unto Himself.
We, being his family (ahl), his devotees (awliya), his trustees, heirs,
and legatees, are the most deserving among all the people to take his
place.5

In this statement it is clear that the sort of authority understood by
the Imam to have been given through the appointment of the Prophet
includes the authority to command, that is, to provide political
leadership to the community, and that this authority is based on
spiritual authority through which the Imam guides his followers toward
God.

Furthermore, the political authority is also rooted in the spiritual
authority, for the political direction of the community is not for the
sake of merely worldly benefits or by the arbitrary exercise of power,
rather, the

community is guided politically by the*waliy* so as to provide an
appropriate framework for the spiritual perfection of its members.
However, the guidance of the community is not only in order to provide
this framework for individual spiritual perfection. The Muslim community
or ummah also has a moral and spiritual role to play in the greater
community of nations.

The political and spiritual guidance of the community and its members by
the Prophet and Imams would not be possible if it were not based on a
proper knowledge of the divine Will. Because of the possession of this
knowledge, the*waliy* has teaching authority.

Authority may be further delegated by the Prophet or Imams to others.
For example, although the authority to bring a covenant with God in the
form of religious law ends with the Prophet Muhammad, the legal
authority to issue rulings based on this law and to interpret how the
law is to be applied in new circumstances is delegated to those who have
gained the appropriate knowledge of the law and are God-fearing.

Likewise, teaching authority is further delegated to those who have the
appropriate knowledge and are pious, regardless of whether that
knowledge is of the law, doctrine, hadiths, the recitation of the
Qur'an, its interpretation, etc.

Sacramental authority is a special case that deserves attention given
the great differences in this between Catholicism and Islam. There is no
priesthood in Islam. There are no sacraments, or special rituals that
serve as vehicles for obtaining grace, that require a special person
with specific authority to perform them.

All of the major sacraments of Islam (if we may be allowed to use the
Catholic terminology for them here), that is, bearing witness, prayer,
alms, fasting and hajj, can be performed by any Muslim with knowledge of
the relevant laws without the presence of the clergy (although leading
prayers requires both knowledge of the ritual and justice).

There is no power or authority invested in any person by any Muslim
religious institution for the performance of any ritual or for the
issuing of any decree of Islamic law or for the statement of doctrine.6

To find something analogous to the Catholic notion of religious
authority in Islam, we would do best to take a glance at the Sufi
Orders. According to Sufis, spiritual authority has been passed down
through a chain of specific designations, called a silsilah, on the
basis of which claims are made to spiritual authority. Among both Sunni
and Shi'i Sufis, these chains go back to the Prophet through 'Ali.

This not only provides the Sufis with a doctrine of spiritual authority
derived by appointment or designation, but it also introduces a sort of
sacramental authority that is absent from non-Sufi Islam. The Sufis hold
that the pledge between the master and disciple, called bay'ah, is a
vehicle of divine grace or barakat, in a manner comparable with Catholic
teachings on the sacraments.

This initiatory ceremony must be conducted by the Sufi master or someone
appointed by him and the initiate. This provides an approximation to the
Catholic idea of a sacrament that also can be found in Islam, although
it does not correspond to any particular Catholic sacrament.

An even closer approximation in Sufism to a specific Catholic sacrament,
that of Holy Orders, may be found in the appointment of a*shaykh* by the
Sufi*pir* , although this is in some ways more like the appointment of a
bishop than like the sacrament through which one becomes a Catholic
priest.

At any rate, even these analogies to Catholic sacraments are only found
in Sufi Islam, whether Shi'i or Sunni branches of Sufism. In non-Sufi
Shi'i Islam as in non-Sufi Sunni Islam, there is nothing like a
sacrament that requires performance by a religious authority.

Sunni and Shi'i theologians differ on the nature of political authority.
For the Shi'ah, the*wilayah* of 'Ali is comprehensive, in the sense that
it includes spiritual, teaching, legal and political authority. For
Sunni theologians, the*wilayah* of 'Ali is such that he can be
recognized as a spiritual authority, (although his spiritual authority
is not comparable with that of the Prophet), but this is held to have no
political implications.

'Ali's political authority is limited, in Sunni Islam, to the period of
his caliphate. He is recognized as a teaching authority, but only to the
extent that he had knowledge of the Qur'an and the teachings of the
Prophet. He is accorded legal authority in Sunni Islam because of this
same knowledge. The political authority of the caliphs, according to
Sunni Islam, is based on the virtues of the caliph and on his acceptance
by the Muslim community.

The authority of the Imams in Shi'ite Islam, on the other hand, does not
require acceptance by the Muslim community. Their authority is appointed
whether anyone recognizes it or not. In theory, there is no significant
difference in this regard among the various Shi'i sects. Ismaili Shi'a,
for example, accept the same basic theory of Imamate as the Twelver
Shi'a, but differ as to the identity of some of the Imams.

In traditional Sunni Islam, legal authority is confined to four schools
of jurisprudence: Hanbali, Hanafi, Maliki, and Shafi'i. Although there
are Sunni Muslims who have called for a re-examination of the
formulation of Muslim law in these four schools, the traditional opinion
has been that the doors to*ijtihad* (the independent deriving of the law
from its sources) are closed.

In Shi'i Islam, on the other hand, the doors to*ijtihad* have never been
closed. For the Shi'ah, legal authority requires not merely a knowledge
of the sources, it implicitly also requires the wisdom to derive rulings
on specific issues in changing circumstances. Legal authority to derive
such rulings is based solely on knowledge and intelligence (as well as
piety), however, and does not require any specific sort of permission,
according to the dominant view among the Shi'i 'ulama, called*usuli* .

During the Safavid period, there was a debate between*usuli* and akhbari
schools of Shi'i jurisprudence; and the akhbaris argued that any sort of
religious authority, whether legal or merely for the narration of
hadiths, required permission from a previous authority. Although many
Shi'i religious authorities continue to receive permission from their
teachers or from the seminaries for*ijtihad* , there are notable
mujtahids who have practiced*ijtihad* without obtaining any such
permission.

According to Twelver Shi'a, religious authority and*wilayah* is
currently accorded to the Twelfth Imam, who is in a state of*ghaybah* ,
or occultation. The period of*ghaybah* is divided into two: minor and
major. During the minor*ghaybah* , the 12th Imam appointed deputies in
order to attend to various affairs of his followers and to provide
guidance on some matters. The period after the death of the last deputy,
who acted as an intermediary between the people and the Imam, marks the
beginning of the major occultation.

So, the question arises as to where religious authority is to be found
during the major occultation. For this purpose we need to distinguish
authority needed for practical affairs and authority pertaining to
doctrine. With regard to teaching, the Qur'an and the hadiths are
available to all who have the ability to understand them. Teaching
authority is based on knowledge.

There is no magisterium to settle doctrinal disputes in Islam. Such
disputes can only be settled through strength of argument, reason and
knowledge of the relevant sources. It is the duty of each Muslim to
ascertain the truth of the fundamental teachings of the religion by his
own intellectual efforts, and merely taking the word of an expert is
specifically forbidden.

With respect to legal and political matters, however, some criterion for
action is a practical necessity. In matters of religious law, each Shi'a
must either have competence to derive the law from its sources or follow
the rulings of someone who has such competence.

Those who are not experts are advised to investigate, by asking who
devote their lives to the study of Islamic law; and on the basis of this
investigation to follow the pious mujtahid they believe is the most
knowledgeable as a source or marji' of imitation (*taqlid* ) in matters
of the practical laws of Islam.

According to some hadiths, not only did the Imams refer people to the
scholars of Islamic law for legal rulings, but also for arbitration of
disputes. This has been taken by many Shi'i scholars to indicate a
general delegation of practical authority over disputed issues to the
'ulama. The political form of this idea of delegation is known as the
doctrine of*wilayah al-faqih* , the guardianship of the jurisprudent.

Imam Khomeini also argued on rational and practical grounds for the need
of religious government. The basic idea is that Islam includes teachings
about social, economic and political affairs that can only be put into
practice through an Islamic government, a government guided by the
teachings and rulings of Islam as understood by those with appropriate
expertise in such matters.

There are various interpretations of the doctrine of*wilayah al-faqih* ,
which differ on such issues as the qualifications for the position and
the scope of its authority; however there is general agreement that the
institution is based on exigency and the application of reason to
various principles of Islam and governance. It is not a position, like
that of the papacy, authorized through something like apostolic
succession. One of the most famous statements of the doctrine in recent
history is that of Hajj Mulla Ahmad Naraqi (1771-1829):

As for the jurists' duty over people's affairs and over what they have
full and all-embracing*wilayah* we, by divine grace, say that a just
jurist's*wilayah* lies in two matters. First, every*wilayah* possessed
by the Prophet and the Imams (who were the sovereigns and pillars of
Islam) is bestowed upon the jurists as well, except what is excluded by
juridical proof such as ijma' (consensus) or nass (established text)….
Secondly, every action concerning the people's faith and worldly affairs
is necessary and inescapable according to reason and habit or according
to*Shar'* (law)….

It is obvious and understood by every common or learned man, that when
the messenger of God is on a trip, someone behind him is assigned as his
substitute, successor, trustee, proof…. This person will accrue all the
power that the Prophet enjoyed over his community.

There is no doubt that most nusus (texts) concerning the awsiya (heirs)
of the infallible Imam imply the transfer of all power, not merely some
of it. This becomes clear especially in connection with the traditions
concerning the rank and place of jurists, who are the most excellent men
after the Imams….7

When we look through the history of Shi'i political thought, we find
that from time to time there have been groups of Shi'a who have taken a
position diametrically opposed to that expressed above by Naraqi. One of
the most extreme of these groups has been the*hujjatiyyah* , who argue
that during the greater occultation of the Twelfth Imam, the Shi'a
cannot enforce Islamic law, carry out its punishments, or hold Friday
prayers.

Others, such as Shahid Mutahhari, argued that during the major
occultation, many of the responsibilities of the Imam can be carried out
by the office of*wilayah al-faqih* , but that some remain as the
exclusive authority of the Imam. The dominant view among the Shi'i
'ulama today, however, tends to favor the position that there are no
specific areas of authority that are reserved by the Imam and cannot be
carried out by the office of*wilayah al-faqih* .

Despite precedence in Shi'i theological writings, such as the above
quote from Mulla Ahmad Naraqi, the doctrine of*wilayah al-faqih* was not
put into practice in the formation of a government until the Iranian
Islamic Revolution in 1979. Since the Revolution, the office has become
recognized in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Clerical authority in Shi'i Islam, however, takes various forms. At the
core is the capacity for*ijtihad* , the ability to derive the rulings of
religious law from its sources. The conditions traditionally given for
one to have this ability are knowledge and piety. Not all who wear the
Shi'i clerical robes and turban have reached the level of*ijtihad* ,
however.

In an Islamic government, the judges will be appointed by the wali
al-faqih. Even in the absence of Islamic government, however, it has
been common for Muslim communities to appeal to their local scholars to
act as judges in various sorts of disputes. One who has reached the
level of*ijtihad* is able to issue a legal ruling on the basis of the
sources of Islamic law, called a fatwa. One who issues such rulings is
called a mufti (although this term is not widely used among contemporary
Shi'a).

As mentioned above, every Shi'i who is not able to derive religious
rulings on the basis of their sources must follow one who has this
ability. The mujtahid who is followed is called a marji'*taqlid* (source
of following). Traditionally, the conditions given for being a
marji'*taqlid* were that he should be the most learned of the pious
scholars. In order to determine who has such qualifications, one should
himself be a scholar or one should consult with those who have
sufficient expertise.

In recent years, however, it has been suggested that the condition of
learning includes deep awareness of contemporary issues and views, as
well as social and political problems. In the case of*wilayah al-faqih*
, the person who is to occupy this position should be a mujtahid, he
should be pious and just, he should have administrative talent and
courage, and he should have social and political insight.8

In addition to*ijtihad* , maj'iyah,*wilayah al-faqih* , and judgeship,
the Shi'i clergy plays many other roles, such as leading prayers,
teaching, leading people in the performance of hajj, giving sermons,
doing research on theological issues, etc. Each of these positions has
its own specific requirements. In general, however, the appeal to the
clergy to perform any such function is based on the requisites of
knowledge and piety.

With regard to the recognition of authority, there is no compulsion.
Each believer is advised to use his own reason to accept the authority
of those best qualified for its exercise. No one can be compelled to
accept any particular person as marji'.

Even with respect to the office of*wilayah al-faqih* , the current
Leader himself, Ayatollah Khamenei (may Allah protect him), has ruled
that no one can be compelled to accept his authority and if one
erroneously rejects this authority on the basis of his own reasoning, he
is not to be considered a sinner because of this. However, failure to
recognize authority is no excuse for disobedience of the law or criminal
activity.


