Tradition and Sunnah
====================

In both Catholicism and Shi'i Islam, tradition may be seen as a source
for religious teaching second only to scripture, and thus as
authoritative. However, what is meant by tradition differs in these two
faiths, although there are also several common points. Both Catholics
and Muslims agree that divine guidance has been delivered by scripture
and by the passing down of narrations from one generation to another.

However, for Christians, scripture is also a record of what was passed
down about the life of Jesus and his apostles, the epistles of Paul, and
other written documents that were selected by the Church as
authoritative, while for Muslims, scripture is the record of the
revelation given to the Prophet.

To Muslims, the New Testament looks more like a book of hadiths than the
direct revelation (*wahy* ) of God. Nevertheless, Christians and
Muslims, along with Jews and Zoroastrians, are recognized by the Shi'a
as ”*ahl al-kitab* ”, people of the book; and the books in question are
taken as containing divine messages for their peoples. These books reach
contemporary believers in any of these faiths by being handed down from
one generation to another, that is, by tradition.

For Catholics, however, Church tradition is itself authoritative.
Catholics believe that the history of the Church, the decisions made in
its councils and the statements of doctrine enunciated by its popes are
guided by the Holy Spirit, and as such have divine authority.

For the Shi'a, on the contrary, there is no analogous belief.
Theological doctrines that were common at one time may be rejected later
if good reason is found for so doing regardless of traditional
acceptance. Because of this, for example, Shaykh Saduq's theology was
largely superceded by that of Shaykh Mufid, and later the akhbari school
of thought was displaced by the*usuli* *school* .

The fact that a given doctrine or practice becomes accepted by the
majority of scholars at any given time carries no theoretical weight for
other scholars. Each scholar must use the best of his own cognitive
abilities to study the sources and reach his own conclusions. In this
sense, the Shi'i approach to religion is a rationalist one.

*Sunnah* , which is often translated as “tradition”, is indeed
authoritative for Muslims, but not the*sunnah* of the clergy, of the
seminaries, or of the Muslim community; rather, it is the*sunnah* of the
Prophet (s) that is taken by Muslims as second in authority only to the
Qur'an.

In Islamic jurisprudence, four sources of legal rulings are commonly
mentioned:

1. the Qur'an

2. the*Sunnah*

3. reason (Shi'i) or analogy (Sunni)

4. consensus

The reliance on consensus in Sunni legal theory is in some respects
similar to the Catholic reliance on tradition, although Catholics have
focused more on doctrinal issues while Muslims have been more concerned
with practical rulings. However, for the Shi'a, consensus is reduced to
the

*Sunnah* , since it is valid only when it unveils the view of the
Prophet or the Imams.

Hence, for all practical purposes, in present circumstances the sources
of legal rulings among the Shi'a are limited to the first three
mentioned above: the Qur'an, the*Sunnah* , and reason.

Sunni and Shi'i Muslims are in agreement that what is meant by
the*Sunnah* is the example of the Prophet (s) in word and deed as
recorded and passed down in the form of narrations, called hadiths. For
the Shi'a, however, narrations of the words and deeds of the twelve
Imams are also taken as authoritative.

Sometimes this is justified on the grounds that knowledge of the*Sunnah*
of the Prophet (s) was best preserved in his household, his ahl al-bayt.
Nevertheless, the authority of the Imams is seen as derivative relative
to the*Sunnah* of the Prophet (s), and the Imams themselves often
justified the stance they took with reference to the*Sunnah* of the
Prophet (s).

Notes
-----

[^1]: Pater Liber is one of the Roman gods who came to be identified
with Dionysus, or Bacchus, the god of licentiousness and drunkenness.

[^2]: See also 53:23.

[^3]: Muhammad ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, A Shi‘ite Creed, tr. Asaf A. A.
Fyzee (Tehran: WOFIS, 1982), 85-86. Available also on line at:
http://www.al-islam.org/a-shiite-creed-shaykh-saduq

[^4]: This narration is found in various Shi‘ite as well as Sunni
collections of hadiths. See the book: Shi‘ism in Sunnism by Sayyid
Muhammad Reza Mudarrisi Yazdi (Qom: Ansariyan, 2003), p. 52. Available
on line at:
http://www.al-islam.org/shiism-in-sunnism-sayyid-muhammad-ridha-mudarris...

[^5]: This narration is reported in Tabari, cited by S. H. M. Jafri in
The Origins and Development of Shi‘a Islam (Qom: Ansariyan, 1989),
179-180. Also available on line at:
http://www.al-islam.org/the-origins-and-early-development-of-shia-islam-...

[^6]: There is an established idea among many Shi‘a jurists that in the
time of the presence of Imams as well as in the reign of a just jurist,
certain positions such as acting as a judge or Friday and Eid prayer
leader must be decided by appointment. (Editor’s note)

[^7]: Hajj Mulla Ahmad Naraqi, ‘Awaid al-Ayyam (Qom: Maktab-e Basirati,
n.d.) 187-188, translated in Wilayah and Marjaiyah Today (Houston:
Al-Fajr, 1995), 214.

[^8]: See Ayatollah Ali Meshkini, “Wilayat al-Faqih,” in Wilayah and
Marjaiyah Today, 195-200.
