Definition
==========

If we look at a school and ponder on it, we find that it contains a
headmaster, an assistant, and staff. Each of them performs specific
duties. In school there is a schedule to arrange and organise lessons,
breaks, and official holidays. For each class there is a monitor who
keeps order. There is a program organising time, conditions for
accepting students, and their relations with the school and other
students. If one of the students breaks a rule, he/she will surely be
questioned and punished for it. All of these criteria and other rules
related to school affairs are called the School Order.

Thus, each school has an order. Without it the school could not run
efficiently and the student would not learn anything. The school would
be in a state of disorder and confusion and would not provide successful
and useful projects.

We can compare school order to the life of a small society which needs
such a system. Indeed the great human society, made up of families,
villages, cities, states and provinces, are more in need of a concise
system and law to organise the relations among the individuals and to
solve their problems.

We know that man is a social creature who lives with a mother, father,
wife, children and other relatives and friends. He lives in villages and
cities. He has neighbours, friends and relatives. He lives in a bigger
society of people whose number may reach millions. He will have
relations and ties with these people as a whole, such as family
relations, marriage, divorce, alimony, heritage, the relation of
obedience, respect and co-operation.

He will also interact with individuals and groups of other societies and
deal with them in selling, buying, working, earning a living, Cupertino
and other affairs. Sometimes it may happen that differences arise and
problems among people develop.

Problems develop among individuals of a family or in a society. Problems
arise in buying and selling or some encroachment upon the rights of
another. Man's emotions cause him to beat someone, or steal someone's
property, and deprive someone of his rights.

All of these relations, ties and problems of society need organisation
and solutions so that human society does not exist in a state of
confusion, conflict, and problems. People should not lose their
happiness or their society.

Allah, the All Wise, sent messengers and apostles with Divine Books and
Messages to organise the human society and solve its problems. He sent
these prophets to acquaint society with the Creator and to worship Him
alone as He ought to be worshipped, so that people could live in
happiness and benevolence.

It is clear, through proofs and certainty, that our Prophet Muhammad (s)
is the Last of the Prophets and his Message completes and finalises all
previous heavenly messages. After 124,000 prophets, Allah sent Prophet
Muhammad (s) as the final guide for humanity, to bring it out of the
darkness, into which it had fallen, to light.

The Prophet (s) came with the Holy Qur'an as the main source for the
social system. It is the Holy Qur'an which directs Muslims on how to
organise society by explaining family order, social relations, economic
systems, judicial policies, politics and law and order. In fact, it
teaches these things to all humanity, but the Muslims are ordered to
follow these rules. This complete set of guidelines and rules solves the
problems of the society and shows man how to worship Allah, the Most
High.

Thus, the Holy Prophet (s) explains for us, through his actions and
traditions (sunnah) and his progeny, the Ahlul-Bait (a), these Islamic
systems. By obeying the Holy Qur'an, Muslims can live a happy and
peaceful life in this world and gain the reward in the Hereafter. They
also achieve justice and dignity living in the light of brotherhood and
love.

***“And (as for) the believing men and the believing women, they are
guardians of each other; they enjoin good and forbid evil and keep up
prayer and pay the poor-rates, and obey Allah and His Messenger; (as
for) these, Allah will show mercy to them; surely Allah is Mighty,
Wise.” Holy Qur'an (9:71)***

It becomes clear that Islam provides various systems which organise life
including social, political, judicial and ritual procedures so that
people can live happily, without problems, conflicts and misery. It also
overcomes oppression, poverty, ignorance, infidelity and corruption. The
Islamic system is a collection of laws, orders and instruction which
organise the life of people and society.

Among the main systems of Islam which concern organising the life of
humanity we find:

1. Ritual System.

2. Political System.

3. Economic System.

4. Social System.

5. Jihad (Holy Struggle) System.

6. Judicial System.

A brief explanation of each of these systems will acquaint the reader on
how to practice Islam, how to live a happy life by following its
principles and how to avoid the man-made systems and laws.

Man-made laws and systems are different from the Divine Systems which
were sent with the prophets and messengers (a). The man-made systems
mislead the people and turn them away from Divine Systems. The results
of following these laws of man are the spread of poverty, corruption,
infidelity, fear and oppression, wars and enmity among the nations, the
domination of colonialists over the oppressed and downtrodden, and other
miseries and problems which mankind is suffering from today.


