1. Ritual System
================

The essential aim of a religion is to introduce mankind to their Creator
and to teach them to worship Him, the One Who has no partner.

Islam legislated a series of rituals which explain how to worship and
obey the Creator such as: prayer, supplication (Du'a), commemoration,
dedication, fasting, pilgrimage (Hajj), one-fifth levy as a yearly tax
(Khums), charity to the poor (poor-rates (zakat)), enjoining what is
good and forbidding what is bad, calling to Islam (Da'wah), Holy
Struggle (Jihad) in the way of Allah, reciting the Holy Qur'an and other
ritual actions which bring man near to Allah, the Almighty.

Islam made it clear that these rituals keep man from deviating from his
worship of Allah, and no one has the right to worship anything or anyone
other than the One True God.

Worship includes some conditions such as true intention and full
sincerity to Allah alone so that an act or deed is far from being
sanctimonious and hypocritical, which would nullify the deed and its
reward.

Islam also prevents Muslims from devoting themselves entirely to worship
and not working for life's necessities in this world.

The Almighty Allah says:

***“...and seek by means of what Allah has given you the future abode,
and do not neglect your portion of this world, and do good (to others)
as Allah has done good to you...” Holy Qur'an (28:77)***

Islam creates balance between the life of this world and the Hereafter.
A Muslim should strive for both this life and the life after death. He
should grow crops, build, manufacture, seek knowledge, entertain with
the good and lawful things of this world, and perform his obligatory
duties as well as work for his life in the Hereafter.

Worship in Islam, besides being an obedience to Allah, has various
social, psychological and sanitary benefits. It encourages man to avoid
arrogance and vanity. When a Muslim prostrates himself before Allah
during prayer, he really wants to make himself submissive to the Great
Lord. As prayer needs cleanliness which in itself preserves man's health
and beauty, so does fasting give man the strength of determination and
fills him with sympathy for the sufferings of the poor. Fasting also
preserves the health of the body.

Congregational prayer instructs Muslims on how to cooperate and acquaint
themselves with each other. Giving charity and financial offerings help
to solve economic and social problems. Man is naturally impatient, Hajj
teaches him endurance and acquaints him with other Muslims from
different nationalities so that he can cooperate with them regarding the
affairs which benefit Islam and all Muslims.

In reciting supplication (Du'a), man feels he is in need of Allah, the
Most High, so he liberates (purifies) himself from pride and vanity and
asks goodness for himself, his parents and the believers. He purifies
himself from selfishness and learns the love of good to all people due
to his calling for goodness for them. In this way, the best morals are
created in him who desires good for all.

These virtues educate man perfectly, socially and ethically. They
encourage him to participate in the progress of the society and its
reformation, in addition to being obedient and involved in the worship
of Allah alone.

Summary:
--------

1. Rituals are limited deeds. It is unlawful to omit any part of them or
add anything to them.

2. The aim of worshipping is to obey Allah and approach Him.

3. Muslims are ordered, by Allah, to achieve a balance between the life
of this world and the Hereafter. In this life we do everything which
benefits us and causes our progress and to perform our ritual
obligations.

4. Truthful intention and sincerity are the main basis of worship.

5. Rituals have reformatory and educational interests which have a great
effect on the life of individuals and groups.


