3. Economic System
==================

It is the system that outlines for Muslims how to gain wealth, invest,
spend and distribute it. The ultimate goal of the economic system in
Islam is to spread justice among people so that not a single person
remains destitute among the people.

***“Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good (to
others)...” Holy Qur'an (16:90)***

How Wealth is Distributed in Islam
----------------------------------

By wealth we mean money and possessions such as land, minerals,
livestock, water, woodlands, crops, foodstuffs, clothes, furniture,
means of transportation, all of which are of great benefit to the
Muslims.

Allah, the Beneficent, has created whatever man needs to lead his life
on earth. Wealth is abundant and plentiful. This wealth is for all
people and everyone has the right to have his share.

The Most High says in the Qur'an:

***“And the earth, He has set it for living creatures.” Holy Qur'an
(55:10)***

Man can get his wealth through two channels:

### 1. Labor

The Holy Qur'an says:

***“...so walk in its broad ways and eat of His provision, and to Him is
the return**.” Holy Qur'an (67:15)*

Man can work and get whatever he deserves as a reward. He can work in
agriculture, industry, trade, or any other acceptable domain.

### 2. Need

The man who can no longer meet his basic requirements due to sickness,
infirmity, disability, old age, loss of the one who supports him or
because his income cannot meet his needs, is supported by the Islamic
government.

He is given a share from the money collected from *zakat,* khums and
other sources. Man's life is financially secure in Islam if he is unable
to work. But, if he can work and does not want to work, then he is
deprived of any financial support. Islam wants man to be an active,
fruitful worker who depends on himself to secure his needs and
provisions.

Poverty and its Solution in Islam
---------------------------------

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) is quoted as saying:

“Allah, the Most Powerful and High, certainly made in the wealth of the
rich an adequate share for the poor, if it was not so He would certainly
make their share greater. If they are needy, it is because some of the
rich *refuse to give them their share.”* [^1]

This tradition *hadith* shows the extent of attention given to solving
the problem of poverty and preventing its evil consequences. Poverty is
a dangerously grave problem for society and is one of the root causes of
backwardness and decay. Poverty is often the primary cause of ignorance,
crime, disease, unbelief and corruption. To solve this complicated
dilemma, Islam sets certain laws like the poor-rates *(zakat)* which is
mandatory on the rich, exhortation to work, warning against
wastefulness, monopolies, etc.

In Islam's view, the main reasons behind poverty are:

1. *Insufficient Production.*

2. *Poor Consumption Habits.*

3. *Weak Distribution System.*

### 1. Insufficient Production

One basic reason for poverty is an inadequacy in manufacturing whatever
man needs, such as food, clothing, household goods, housing, etc.
Underproduction is attributed to:

#### A. Laziness and Unemployment

Islam warns man against laziness and unemployment and orders him to work
actively, diligently and patiently to gain the means to satisfy his
needs. Islam regards work as something endearing to Allah.

Allah, the Glorified, says:

***“And say: Work; so Allah will see your work and (so will) His Apostle
and the faithful; and you shall be brought back to the Knower of the
unseen and the seen, then He will inform you of what you did.” Holy
Qur'an (9:105)***

The Prophet Muhammad (s) is quoted as saying:

*“Allah certainly likes the faithful professional”*

He had labelled work and seeking provisions “the greater *jihad.”*

### B. Ignorance of Technology

A man who knows how to produce machines and equipment, how to develop
them and make them more efficient, can multiply his production. The
result would be the satisfaction of people's basic needs.

Islam urges us to seek knowledge, and to think and devise new products
through inventions and discoveries. Ignorance of technology makes it
impossible to progress and causes the society to be dependent on others
for their needs.

The Holy Prophet (s) said:

*“Seeking knowledge* is *an obligation on every male and female
Muslim.”*

2. Poor Consumption Habits
--------------------------

The Most High says in the Qur'an:

***“And give to the near of kin their right, and to the destitute and
the traveller; and squander not wastefully. Surely the squanderers are
Satan's brothers...” Holy Qur'an (17:26-27)***

Squandering is the second cause of poverty. Extravagance, prodigality
and spending money on forbidden things like drinking alcohol, dancing,
singing, corruption, and the production of weapons that can wipe mankind
off the face of the earth, are but a few examples of the misuse of the
fruits and wealth of the earth.

Such abuses of wealth lead to the depletion of means, and create poverty
and destitution.

3. Weak Distribution System
---------------------------

When a group of people monopolises a great amount of wealth, while the
rest of the people can hardly make both ends meet, the community becomes
divided into two groups.

*A. The Affluent*

*B. The Deprived*

This particular distribution system is found prevalent in the capitalist
system today in which communities are subjugated to the rule of man-made
laws.

It is for the amelioration of all people that Islam makes it an
obligation to distribute wealth fairly and equally. It makes usury and
monopoly forbidden, and sets rules for *zakat, khums,* atonements, vows
to Allah, alms, etc. These taxes and payments bring in great amounts of
money that are given by the rich and those who are obliged to pay them,
and are distributed to the poor.

Furthermore, the Islamic state opens the doors for employment to all the
unemployed, and supports the needy and the disabled, the aged, orphans
and the sick. In addition to that, Islam forbids usury which is an
interest taken by a creditor from the debtor as practised in banks,
companies and between individuals. The ruling has been instituted so
that money will not be accumulated in the pockets of some people while
others remain deprived. Islam thus makes usury forbidden.

Profiteering refers to hoarding articles and badly needed goods such as
foodstuffs and medicines for a period of time, then selling them at
staggeringly high prices. Islam forbids this kind of monopoly so that
merchants cannot play with these much needed commodities, or their
prices, to amass wealth at the expense of the people.

Summary
-------

1. The Islamic Economic System is the system which outlines how to gain
wealth, invest it, spend and distribute it justly and also how to
achieve financial equality among the people.

2. The Islamic Economic System is established on the foundation of
justice and providing the needs of the people to save them from poverty
and need.

3. The main reasons for poverty are unemployment, poor consumption
habits, weak distribution, hoarding commodities and cheating with
prices.

4. Islam forbids usury and monopoly and sets the rules of financial
obligations so that money and wealth will not be in the hands of a few
while the masses live in poverty and misery.

5. Islam forbids extravagance, prodigality and spending money on
forbidden things like drinking alcohol, dancing, singing, gambling, etc.
It preserves human wealth from corruption and loss. Allah has created
the earth with ample provisions for the needs of all creatures.

6. The Islamic state is responsible for the poor, disabled people, and
those who are unable to find a source of living or who cannot find
anyone to support them and should provide them with their needs.

[^1]: Kulaini, al-Kafi, vol.3, p. 497, 3rd Edition


