4. Social System
================

An Islamic society is the society whose members have faith in Islam,
apply its laws in their life, abide by its moral standards of love,
brotherhood, equality, mercy, and trust, performing religious duties and
abstaining from doing what is unlawful.

In a true Islamic society, drinking alcohol, practising usury, dressing
immodestly, deceiving each other, giving or taking bribes, injustice,
violating others rights, are all avoided and prohibited.

Even when the society is so-called Muslim but in it people discard Islam
and commit unlawful acts publicly without the slightest feeling of
shame, and no power or authority exists to deter them, this society
cannot be considered an Islamic one. What matters is the lifestyle and
system they adopt, not the name they call it.

Principles of the Social System
-------------------------------

The social system in Islam is based on ties and relationships which draw
Muslims close together and organise their lives. They include:

### 1. Love and loyalty among the faithful

Allah, the Most Glorified, says:

***“Surely the faithful are but brothers...” Holy Qur'an (49:10)***

***“And the faithful men and women, are friends of each other...” Holy
Qur'an (9:71)***

### 2. Respecting the rights of the individual and the group, both having mutual rights and duties towards each other.

### 3. Islamic society is built on right, justice, and mutual kindness.

Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“Surely Allah bids to justice, benevolence and giving to relatives,
and He forbids indecency, evil and transgression. He exhorts you so that
you may remember**.” Holy Qur'an (16:90)*

### 4. The bond of unity and co-operation

Allah, the Compassionate, says:

***“...and cooperate (with each other) for righteousness and cooperate
not in sin and enmity...”Holy Qur'an (5:2)***

In every aspect of life, the members of an Islamic society cooperate
wholeheartedly with each other. For example, in building mosques and
schools, helping the needy, fighting oppression, establishing economic,
social and cultural associations, are all forms of co-operation within
the society.

### 5. Maintaining good morals

It is another significant principle of the social system in Islam.
Honesty, sacrifice, mercy, sympathy, love, faithfulness, keeping ties
with near kin, respecting neighbours, and being kind and gentle to
others, are factors which consolidate a society and gladden its members.
They become serene and free from worries and pressures. There is no
sadness.

It is our responsibility to form an Islamic society and keep it safe
from subversive and corrupt elements by means of enjoining good and
forbidding evil.


