Abstract
========

Islamic mysticism as a system of knowledge is a kind of ontology or
world view obtained through mystical experiences via living a mystical
way of life. In this view, the real being is the Absolute Being or the
Almighty God, Who is one, infinite and absolutely perfect. The world
with all its multiplicity is the manifestation of His names and
attributes. Among the creatures of the world, the human being enjoys a
special status. He is composed of a physical body and an immaterial
soul. With such a combination, human beings have all the merits that can
be found in other creatures. Whatever exists in the world exists in
human beings. For this reason the human being is known as the microcosm
and the most universal being. The human being is the goal of creation
and, thus, everything else is created for him. With such a creation, the
human being has reason and free will from one side, and enjoys
animal-like desires and impulses from the other side. The seed of human
existence has both the potential for blossoming and growing, and the
possibility for decay and fetidness. The perfect man is the one who has
actualized all his potentials in the best possible manner. He is the
most perfect manifestation of God’s names and attributes. He is the
mediator for others to receive God’s grace, the fruit of creation, and
is the divine vicegerent in the world. He is the proof of God and enjoys
the status of*wilayah* (divine authority).


