Nabī, Rasūl and Walī
====================

Each name of God has a requirement in God’s explicit knowledge which is
called a fixed entity. The name “Allah” which is the most comprehensive
name has a reflective eternal fixed entity that is called al-haqīqah
al-Muhammadiyyah (the reality of Muhammad). The external manifestation
of this reality in each period of history is one of the prophets. Its
most perfect manifestation is in the person of the Prophet Muhammad (s).
Therefore, all prophets, and thus all their messages, originated from
the same source and are different reflections of the same light.

Here, we should distinguish between three connected concepts: al-nabī
(the prophet),*al-rasūl* (the messenger) and*al-walī* (the saint, the
friend of God). One person may accumulate in himself all three concepts,
as the great prophets, such as Moses, Jesus and Mohammad, do. Each of
these concepts constitutes one dimension of a prophet’s spiritual
personality. Walī is the one who has a direct relation to God; his acts,
qualities and essence are annihilated in God. Nabī is the one who
receives the message from God via a medium like an angle. And rasūl is
the messenger who has a shari’ah and is obliged to deliver God’s message
to the people. The wilayah of a nabī is the inner dimension of his
prophethood and thus the wilayah of a nabī is higher than his
prophethood. All rasūls are nabī and walī. All nabīs also are*walī* ,
but all walī is not necessarily nabī or rasūl. Nubuwwah (prophethood)
and*risalah* (messengerhood) are not eternal. After the last prophet
there will not be any nabī or rasūl; however, wilayah is eternal and the
world will never be without a walī. For the word “*al-Walī* ” is one of
the names of God which requires a manifestation, unlike “*nabī* ” and
“rasūl.”[^20] According to Shi‘ite doctrine, after Prophet Muhammad,
each of the twelve Imams of his household are walī.

Beside the cosmic roles that prophets and sages play as the perfect men,
they are masters and guides for the religious and mystical life. They
are gates for salvation. Without following their teachings and examples
spiritual journey of mystics is not complete. Therefore, knowing the
walī and following him is essential. As the Qur’ān says: “[O Muhammad]
Say, ‘If you love Allah, then follow me; Allah will love you and forgive
you your sins, and Allah is All-forgiving, All- merciful’” (3/31).


