Divine Manifestation
====================

From the viewpoint of Islamic mysticism, real being and genuine reality
is God, and the rest of the world consists of the manifestations of His
names and attributes. God is infinite perfection. His one and simple
essence contains all perfections in an infinite manner. Each name and
attribute of God indicates one of His perfections. God knows Himself and
sees Himself in Himself and does not need anyone else. However, since
His perfection is absolute and His grace is eternal and never ending,
the world manifests Him and He discloses Himself in the world and thus
sees Himself in the world. Hence, God created the world in order to see
His face in the mirrors of His manifestations.

In this view, God’s names and attributes have consequences that are
called immutable archetypes (*al-a’ayan al-thabitah* = eternal
essences/fixed entities). They are mental/intellectual correlates of
things (*wujud al-’ilmi lil ashya’* ) in the knowledge of God. These
archetypes that are essences of things are created by the most holy
emanation of God (*al-fayd al-aqdas* ). Realities of the world are
external consequences of God’s names and attributes and objective
existences of those essences. Each objective being is the manifestation
of one or some of God’s names and the reflection of some of God’s
perfections. These realities came into existence by God’s holy emanation
(*al-fayd al-muqaddas* ). Thus, the real being is God and the rest are
manifestations of His names and attributes. Each reality is like a
mirror in which some of God’s perfections reflected. And the world in
its totality is the exhibition in which God’s perfection is explicitly
manifested. Each being reflects God’s perfection according to its
capacity.[^2]


