The Greatest Manifestation
==========================

Although realities of the world are manifestations of God’s names, and
the whole world can show all His names; however, before the creation of
the human being there was no single creature that was capable of being
the manifestation of all God’s names. God wants to create something that
can alone show all His names and thus God can see Himself with all His
names in this mirror. The only thing in the world that has such a
capacity is the human being.[^3] Even celestial beings, angles and
intellects do not have this capacity. Therefore, God created the human
being that is his greatest manifestation and the most perfect
theophany.[^4] Since the name “Allah” is the most comprehensive name of
God, the perfect man is the manifestation of this name. “The perfect man
is the manifestation of God’s most comprehensive name (al-ism al-jami’)
and the mirror for the disclosure of his greatest name (*al-ism
al-a’dam* ).”[^5] Therefore, we can say that manifestation of God is
either in a separate manner and explicitly in the multiplicity of the
world, or implicitly in a unitary way of appearing in the perfect man.

It is noteworthy that the human being is a species; and thus all its
individuals potentially have this capacity; however, its actualization
depends on one’s own free efforts, and thus, at the end, only some
individuals enjoy this status. These individuals are in fact described
as the perfect man (al-insan al-kamil), divine great manifestations,
microcosm and the most universal being. These are prophets, and saints
(*anbiya’ wa awliya’* ). They are not all at the same level; rather,
their perfection has degrees. Highest of all is the status of the seal
of prophets: Muhammad (s).[^6] Other people depending on the spiritual
status that they earn enjoy some degrees of this perfection.


