Creation of the Human Being
===========================

The difference between human beings and other creatures has its roots in
the creation of the human being. Human beings, like other material
beings, have a physical dimension, and, like other living beings in
nature, have biological life. The Qur’ān explicitly mentions the origin
of human natural life and stages of development from the embryo to
death: “If you are in doubt about the resurrection, (consider that) We
indeed created you from dust, then from a drop of [seminal] fluid, then
from a clinging mass, then from a fleshy tissue… then We bring you forth
as an infant …” (22/5) In chapter 23 says: “Certainly We created man
from an extract of clay. Then We made him a drop of [seminal] fluid…Then
We created the drop of fluid as a clinging mass. Then We created the
clinging mass as a fleshy tissue. Then We created the fleshy tissue as
bones. Then We clothed the bones with flesh” (23/12-14).

But according to the Qur’ān, human life is not restricted to its natural
biological life as at the end of the previous verse the Qur’ān says:
“Then We produced him as [yet] another creature. So blessed is Allah,
the best of creators!” (23/14) It says that after its corporeal and
biological creation God bestowed on him another creation. Thus, besides
its physical nature, the human being has a nature of a different and
higher kind which is its immaterial nature. In another verse the Qur’ān
elaborates it more explicitly: “When your Lord said to the angels,
‘Indeed I am going to create a human out of a dry clay [drawn] from an
aging mud. So when I have proportioned him and breathed into him of My
Spirit, then fall down in prostration before him’” (15/28-29).

The human being has a substance that makes him different from others and
makes him closer to God. He enjoys a divine soul. A famous hadith says
that God created man in His own image.[^7] Although there are some
controversial discussions about the authenticity and the interpretation
of this hadith, many mystics agree that the hadith means that God
created man in His own image. This is in accord with the overall
mystical view of the status of human being as the best manifestation of
God and His vicegerent. Some verses of the Qur’ān also support this
idea. For example, God says that He gave the human being the best form:
“He created the heavens and the earth with the truth, and He formed you
and perfected your forms, and toward Him is the destination” (64/3).
Also: “We certainly created man in the best of forms” (95/4).


