Value and Dignity of the Human Being
====================================

No doubt, from the Qur’ānic view, the human being has a special status
in the world. This is the human being that has a different creation,
enjoys reason and free will, is the most perfect creature, and is
created in the image of God. Thus, the human has the highest value,
honor and dignity among all creatures. The Qur’ān states: “Certainly We
have honored the Children of Adam, and carried them over land and sea,
and provided them with all good things, and given them an advantage over
many of those We have created with a complete preference ” (17/70). The
human being enjoys such a noble status that God commands the angles to
prostrate before him. Because he has a divine soul, he deserved to be
honored: “So when I have proportioned him and breathed into him of My
Spirit, then fall down in prostration before him” (15/29).

As we can see, from the Islamic perspective, the human’s value totally
depends on his relation to God, not autonomously and on his own. Because
he is the best manifestation of God, has a divine soul, and is created
in the image of God, he has the highest value among the creatures. For
God is the only source of value, dignity and honor. At the same time, we
can say that human dignity is essential, not accidental, for his
relation to God is in his very essence and existence. And this is the
difference between Islam and Humanism, Liberalism and other secular
schools of thought with regard to human value. We must also add that
since human value has its roots in human existence itself, the value of
individuals is genuine and not dependent on their status in the society.

In this view, the value of the human being is not only static and
predetermined; rather he has of two types of values: first the essential
value of the human species, which has its root in his creation and,
therefore, is common to all individual humans; and second, the dynamic
dimension of value and perfection that each individual acquires by
his/her own free will. This value depends on each individual’s
knowledge/faith and practice/piety and therefore, is different from one
to another. The Qur’ān says: “O mankind! Indeed We created you form a
male and a female, and made you nations and tribes that you may identify
with one another. Indeed the noblest of you in the sight of Allah is the
most Godvary among you” (46/13).

The first part of the verse refers to the common value of all people;
and the second part refers to the acquired and therefore different
values of individuals. This value depends solely on piety (*taqwā* )
which is the natural combination of faith and good deeds. Knowing God,
loving God and obeying God are three essential elements of the way to
perfection. Whoever goes further along this way reaches the higher
stages of perfection.

It must be noted that according to Islamic mysticism, there is no ending
point in human perfection. Whatever stage one reaches he/she can go
further and further toward the infinite. And this is another advantage
for human beings among other creatures.


