The Other Side of the Coin of the Human Being
=============================================

Because of its combination of material and spiritual substances, and
because of its conflicting desires, on one hand, and its free will, on
the other hand, man’s final destiny depends on his own choice. He
himself decides his future destiny. He can ascend upward to heaven or
descend downward to hell. He can go beyond the angels or below the
beasts. “We certainly created man in the best of forms; then We
relegated him to the lowest of the low, except those who have faith and
do righteous deeds. There will be an everlasting reward for them”
(95/4-6).

The human being in its nature has a tendency toward the good, however,
he has selfish desires, too. The Qur’ān says that the example of one who
denies the truth while he knows, “is that of an ass carrying books”
(62/5). Elsewhere the Qur’ān compares those who follow their selfish
desires and turn their backs toward the truth to dogs. “Had We wished,
We would have surely raised him by their means, but he clung to the
earth and followed his [base] desires. So his parable is that of a dog:
if you make for it, it lolls out its tongue, and if you let it alone, it
lolls out its tongue, such is the parable of the people who deny Our
signs” (7/176). Those who are slaves of their desires and do not benefit
from their reason are lower than all creatures. “Indeed the worst of
beasts in Allah’s sight are the deaf and the dumb who do not apply
reason” (8/22). Hell is the consequence of the behavior of those who so
indulge in the lower pleasures that they neglect the truth. They are no
longer human beings. “Certainly We have created for hell many of the
jinn and humans: they have hearts with which they do not understand,
they have eyes with which they do not see, they have ears with which
they do not hear. They are like cattle; rather they are more astray. It
is they who are heedless” (7/179). Thus, although man can fly toward
light and happiness by the two wings of faith and good deeds, however,
if his selfish desires overcome his reason, he will be imprisoned in
darkness and misfortune. The Qur’ān says: “By Time! Indeed man is at a
loss, except those who have faith and do righteous deeds” (Ch. 103).


