The Most Universal Being
========================

In Islamic mysticism, the human being is not merely a creature besides
other creatures; rather, he is a comprehensive being who contains within
himself all beings. Since man is the greatest manifestation of God, the
world in its totality is summarized in him. In other words, since man
reflects all names of God, he encompasses everything and is present in
all worlds.

In this view, the human being is not only a species among others; rather
he is a world that contains all other worlds. Mystics recognize four
stages of worlds: the world of fixed entities (‘alam al-a’yan
al-thabitah), the world of intellects (‘alam al-’uqul) the imaginary
world (*‘alam al-mithal* ), the world of nature (*‘alam al-tabi’ah* )
and the world of most universal being or the world of human being (‘alam
al-insani).[^8]

Since the human being in his arc of descent (*al-qows al-nuzuli* ) has
crossed all worlds and contains and comprehends all, he has a kind of
unity with all worlds.[^9] The unity of the perfect man with the world
and his presence in all stages of the world is likened to the unity and
presence of the soul with and in its faculties.[^10] Hence, Ibn Arabi
says that the perfect man is the spirit of the world and the world is
his body. The world without the perfect man is like a body without soul,
i.e., a dead body.[^11] Therefore, the perfect human being is called the
minor world or the microcosm (*al-’alam al-saghir* ) and the world is
called the greater human (*al-insan al-kabir* ). This description is
according to the outward form, however, in reality, the human being is
the macrocosm and the world is microcosm.[^12]

Since the human being represents both God and the world, knowing the
human is the key to knowing God and the world. As a prophetic hadith
says, “one who knows himself knows his lord;” or knowing the self is the
most beneficiary knowledge and the key to all knowledge.[^13]


