Foreword
========

Polygamy: What a disgusting title apparently it is!

What is particularly amusing is that those very people who accept the
evils of permissive society and consider it consistent with civilization
find polygamy abhorrent.

These people are fully aware, that it is not possible to establish a
law whereby a man can derive full satisfaction with one wife. These very
people who proclaim maximum love for one woman, have been found to have
established illicit sexual affairs with others.

When these people come to know of a faithful Muslim with two wives who
enjoy maximum and equal love from their husband,

and who has no illicit sexual relations in his life, they start to
redicule the idea of polygamy, citing examples to prove that such a
situation is not practicable.

Polygamy is not necessarily practiced to fulfil the sexual urge. The
aim of polygamy is to stop the degeneration of society and prevent
promiscuity. It ensures maximum fulfilment for both men and women while
keeping the society safe and spreading love within the society. Such a
society can easily be built when polygamy is allowed.

Polygamy, being a controversial issue requires deep thought and serious
debate. Leaving aside the issue of establishing legal polygamy, let us
examine the opinion, thought and critism of the Westerners and where
they have gone wrong.

This booklet presents the arguments for allowing polygamy in a lucid
manner.


WORLD ORGANIZATION FOR ISLAMIC SERVICES
(Board of Writing, Translation and Publication)

In the Name of Allah the Beneficent,the Merciful


**Introduction**

Islam has allowed a man to marry more than one wife. This has been done
for the purpose of solving many social and domestic problems which a
family is confronted with from time to time. Many are the times when the
general welfare of both man and woman depends upon the husband marrying
another wife.

As Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, Chief Mis- sionary of the Bilal Muslim
Mission of Tanzania, wrote in the \`Submission to the Commission on the
Law of Marriage and Divorce and Matrimonial Status of Women,' which was
appointed by the Kenya Government:-

"Polygamy: African society was, and to a certain extent is, a
polygamous society. Islam also permits polygamy. It has allowed four
wives at a time and has enjoined equailty in treatment of all wives.

"It should be remembered that polygamy is not a compulsory thing nor is
it advocated. It is just a permission with certain limitation and
conditions. And in some of the circumstances this permission proves
extremely useful.

"For example: If the wife is chronically ill, or is barren, or for some
other reasons it is not desirable for the couple to live as husband and
wife. The remedy offered by certain societies is to divorce the wife and
remarry. But is this justice? Is it kind or noble to turn out a woman in
her old or middle age from her home, just because she remains sick or
she happens to be barren? Islam discourages such cruelty by permitting
polygamy." (The Light, vol.1, nos.ll-12)

Unfortunately, the West, and particularly the Christian church leaders,
have used this permission of polygamy for criticizing Islam. Their
motive seems just to oppose Islam, hoping thereby to hamper its
progress, by degrading it in the eyes of the world.

In their propaganda against this permission, the- critics present the
following arguments:-

a) that marrying more than one wife is against the natural law;

b) that this permission encourages lust and sensuality, which is
detrimental to the family well-being;

c) that the system of polygamy has social disadvantages, injures the
delicate feelings of women; causes deep frustrations and
disappointments, giving rise to the feeling of hate and hatred which
upsets the proper bringing-up of children;

d) that this lam disturbs the familyplanning, as plurality of wives
naturally increases the number of children; this in its turn causes
economic problems.

Before commenting on these objections, let us first examine whether it
was Islam which originally promulgated the system of polygamy,

or it existed since pre-historic days. Also let us see whether it is
found in other religions. Then we should see on what grounds and with
what conditions has Islam allowed a man to marry more than one wife.
Does it offer solutions to the social problems facing many countries
today?


