Polygamy: an Ancient Institution
================================

S. V. Mir Ahmad Ali writes:-

"Polygamy was prevalent among all the nations of antiquity, not
excluding the Hindus and Budhists.

The world in general and Arabia in particular before the ministry of
the Holy Prophet was lying deeply buried under gross licentiousness and
depravity.

Which historic fact no educated one among us can ever contradict,
particularly about the private life of the rulers of the states. The
great king Dasarata, the father of Sri Rama, was polygamous. The
Christian Monarchs of Europe could not help themselves against having
wives more than one. Henry the VIII of England had' as many as eight
wives.

Even the great Apostles of God like Abraham, Solomon and the others had
wives more than one." (Translation of the Holy Qur'an, footnote
no.499)


**Polygamy: According To Hindu Law**

Further he writes:-

"There is a good deal of controversy as to whether polygamy is
sanctioned by Hindu Law. According to Mann the Law on the subject is as
follows:-

a) "For the first marriage of twice-born men (wives) of equal caste are
recommended, but for those who through desire proceed (to marry again)
the following females, (chosen) according to the (direct) order (of the
castes) are most approved." (Here follows the list of women who may be
approved of). (Manu, iii 12)

A) "If twice-born men wed women of their own and of other (lower
castes), the seniority, honour, and habitation of those (wives) must be
(settled) according to the order of the castes (Varna)." (Manu, ix 85)

c) "If, after one damsel has been shown, another be given to the
bridegroom, \`he may marry them both" for the same price that Manu
ordained." (Manu, viii 204) d) "Among all (twice-born men) the wife of
equal caste alone (not a wife of a different caste by any means), shall
personally attend her husband and assist him in his daily sacred rites."
(Manu,ix 86)

e) "But he who foolishly causes that (duty) to be performed by another
while his wife of equal caste is alive, is declared by the ancients (to
be) as (despicable) as a Kandala (spring from the) Brahamana caste."
(Manu, ix 87)

"The above quotations clearly indicate that Manu sanctioned polygamy,
\`and it is now quite settled in the Courts of British India that a
Hindu is absolutely without restriction as to the number of his wives,
any one may marry again without his wife's consent, or any
justification, except his own wish." (Mayne, On Hindu Law and Usage,
p.113)\*

\* S. V. Mir Ahmad Ali, Ibid


**Polygamy: According To Jewish Law**

"If he take him another wife, her food, her raiment, and her duty of
marriage shall he not diminish."

It is evident to even a casual reader of Old Testament that not only is
polygamy permitted but also practised, and that regulations for that
have been stipulated in the scriptures.


**Polygamy: According To Christianity**

In Exodus (chap.21, ver.10) it is stated:-

The Christian writers say that "monogamy (i.e., marrying one wife only)
is the divine ideal. The Creator constituted as a union between one man
and one woman (Gen. 2:18-24; Matt. 19:5; 1 Cor. 6:16) He preserves the
number of males practically equal to the number of females." ( The
Westminster Dictionary of Bible, 1944 edition)

We will talk about this supposed equal numbers of males and females
later on. Here I would like to quote from the Bible where God addresses
David in the following words:- "And I gave thee (David) thy master's
house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the House of
Israel and of Judah." (11 Sam. 12:8)

How is it that God Himself gave him his \`master's wives' if His
intention was to keep the \`one man with one woman' rule. Even in the
seventh generation after Adam we find that "Lamech took unto him two
wives" (Gen. 4:19); Abraham had three wives; Jacob had two wives besides
concubines; Moses did not forbid it, instead he brought Laws to regulate
it, as has been mentioned in the previous heading.

Christians try to overcome these difficulties implying that the
previous prophets had made a mistake in marrying more than one wife. But
the insurmountable difficulty faces them in the case of Moses. This is
because Moses had brought a Law from God, and if it was God's intention
to make marriage a \`union between one man and one wife,' Why did 1le
give Moses regulations about polygamy? The above-mentioned Dictionary of
Bible tries to gloss over this difficulty by saying, "Moses, who was
correcting abuses, not suddenly abolishing them, did not forbid
polygamy, but discouraged it."

It is a claim which cannot be justified, because Moses himself married
two wives: one.

was Zipporah, daughter of Jethro (known in Islamic language as
Shu'ayb), the other was a Cushite woman whom Moses married in the second
year of the sojourn of the Israelites in the wilderness. (Num. 12:1)

There is no mention anywhere in the scriptures or any other writing
that Zipporah was not alive at that time.

So far about Moses and the Prophets before him. Now we come to the
prophets who came after this supposed \`discouraging.' We find that
polygamy continued to be practised even after the time of Moses, as by
Gideon, Elkanah, Saul, Rehoboam and countless others. For the details,
see Judge. 8:30; I Sam. 1:2; II Sam. 12:8; 21:8.

Prophet "David took him more euncubines and wives out of Jerusalem."
(II Sam. 5:13). Prophet Solomon "had seven hundred wives, princesses and
three hundred concubines." (I Kings, 11:3)

Now we come to the period after the ministry of Jesus Christ. S.V. Mir
Ahmad Ali writes in his translation of the Holy Qur'an:- "It has often
been asserted that Christianity interdicted polygamy, and made monogamy
obligatory on all. Nothing can be farther from the truth.

"Ameer Ali, speaking of the general prevalence of polygamy among all
nations, remarks:- 'And so it was understood by the leaders of
Christendom at various times that there is no intrinsic immorality or
sinfulness in plurality of wives. One of the greatest fathers of the
Christian Church (St. Augustine) has declared that polygamy is not a
crime where it is a legal institution of a country, and the German
reformers, even as late as the sixteenth century, allowed and declared
valid the taking of a second or even a third wife, contemporaneously
with the first, in default of issue, or any other cause.' (Ameer Ali,
Life and Teachings of Mohammad, p.220; and Mohamedan Law, vol.1I,
p.23)

'When Christianity made its appearance in Rome, history shows that
polygamy was recognised and the early Christian Emperors seem to have
admitted its validity.' Says Ameer Ali: -

'The Emperor Valentiniah II, by an Edict, allowed all the subjects of
the Empire, if they pleased, to marry several wives; nor does it appear
from the ecclesiastical history of those times that the Bishops and the
heads of the Christian churches made any objection to this law. Far from
it, all the succeeding Emperors practised polygamy, and the people
generally were not remiss in following their example.

Even the clergy often had wives. This state of the laws continued until
the time of Justinian, who ... resulted in their embodiment in the
celebrated laws of Justinian. \`But these laws owed little to
Christianity, at least directly.' The greatest adviser of Justinian was
an atheist and a pagan. Even prohibition of polygamy by Justinian failed
to check the tendency of the age.' "

(Ameer Ali,Life and Teachings of Mohammad, pp.222-223) \*

It should be mentioned here that Justinian was in the thirteenth
century of Christian era, it means that up to thirteenth century there
was no prohibition of polygamy in Christianity, at all.

The following paragraphs from An Apology for Mohammed and the Koran (by
John Davenport) show clearly that polygamy was not frowned upon by the
Christian leaders up to \* S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali, Foot-Note no.499.

at least the sixteenth century:- "St. Chrysostom, speaking of Abraham
and Hagar, says, \`These things were not then forbidden.' So St.
Augustine observes that \`there was a blamesless custom of one man
having many wives, which at that time might be done in a way of duty,
which now cannot be done but from licentiousness, because, for the sake
of multiplying posterity, no law forbad a plurality of wives.

"Boniface, Confessor of Lower Germany, having consulted Pope Gregory,
in the year 726, in order to know in what cases a husband might be
allowed to have two wives, Gregory replied, on the 22nd November of the
same year, in these words - \`If a wife be attacked by a malady which
renders her unfit for conjugal intercourse, \* (See Grotius, De Jure,
vol.i, p.268, note).

the husband may marry another, but in that case he must allow his sick
wife all necessary support and assistance.'

"Many works have been published in defence of polygamy even by writers
professing Christianity. Bernardo Ochinus, General of the Order of
Capuchins, published, about the middle of the sixteenth century,
dialogues in favour of the practice, and about the same time appeared a
treatise on behalf of a plurality of wives; the author, whose real name
was Lysarus, having assumed the pseudo one of Theophilus Aleuthes.

"Selden proves, in his \`Uxor Hebraica,' that polygamy was allowed not
only among the Jews, but likewise arnong all other nations. "But the
most distinguished defender of polygamy was the celebrated John Milton,
who, in his A Treatise on Christian Doctrine, (p.237 et seq.) after
quoting various passages from the Bible in defence of the practice,
says, \`Moreover, God, in an allegorical fiction (Ezekiel, xxiii),
represents Himself as having espoused two wives, Aholah and Aholiah, a
mode of speaking which Jehavoh would by no means have employed,

especially at such length even in a parable, nor, indeed, have taken
upon himself such a character at all, if the practice which it implied
had been intrinsically dishonourable or shameful.' "On what grounds,
then, can a practice be considered as so dishonourable or shameful which
is prohibited to no one even under the Gospel; for that dispensation
annuls none of the merely civil regulations which existed previously to
its introduction ...

"Lastly, I argue as follows, from Hebrews, xiii. v.4:- Polygamy is
either marriage, fornication or adultery. The Apostle recognises no
fourth state. Reverence for so many patriarchs who were polygamists
will, I trust, deter every one from considering it as fornication or
adultery, for \`wheremongers and adulterers God will judge,' whereas the
patriarchs were the objects of his especial favour, as he himself
witnesses.

If, then, polygamy be marriage properly so called, it is also lawful
and honourable: according to the same Apostle., \` marriage is
honourable in all and the bed underfiled.' " (An Apology for Mohammed
and the Koran, pp.157-159) John Milton has earlier written in the same
book (A Treatise On Christian Doctrine) as follows:-

"In the definition which I have given (i.e. of marriage) I have not
said, in compliance with the common opinion, \`of one man with one
woman,' lest I should by implication charge the holy patriarchs and
pillars of our faith, Abraham, and the others who had more than one wife
at the same titnc, with habitual fornicahon and adultery, lest I should
be forced to exclude from the sanctuary of God as spurious the holy
offspring which sprang from them, yea, the whole of the sons of Israel,
for whom the sanctuary itself was made.

For it is said (Deut. 23:2): \`A bastard shall not enter into the
congregation of Jehovah, even to his tenth generation.' Either,
therefore, polygamy is a true marriage or all children born in that
state are spurious; which would include the whole race of Jacob, the
twelve holy tribes chosen by God.

But as such an assertion would be absurd in the extreme, not to say
impious, and as it is the height of injustice, as well as an example of
most dangerous tendency in religion, \`to account as sin what is not
such in reality,' it appears true that, so far from the question
respecting the lawfulness of polygamy being trivial, it is of the
highest importance that it should be decided." (pp.231-232)


