Does Polygamy Encourage Sensuality?
===================================

The above quotation has brought us to the 34next objection of the
Christian priests, that polygamy encourages lust and sensuality. We have
already shown by arithmetical calculations and historical facts that the
system of monogamy has compelled and is compelling millions and millions
of unfortunate girls to live immoral life, and these writers still have
the cheek to tell us that polygamy (which is the only cure to this
malady) leads to sensuality!

The following paragraphs, taken from Polygamy in Islam, give us a fair
picture of Western monogamy:-

"Islam allows its followers legal marriage in addition to the first one
and, having allowed fullest possible legitimate outlet to the sex
impulse, it prescribes very severe and deterent punishment for adultery,
because adultery destroys peace, harmony, tranquillity prevailing in
homes, throws doubt on the fatherhood of children and legitimacy of
inheritance, and ultimately results in broken homes, ruined families and
dissolutions of marriages.

"In Europe and America, it is just the other way about, and they have
solved the problem of sexual outlet in a peculiar way. They have allowed
women full and free inter-mixing with strangers of opposite sex in the
name of so-called emancipation of women, and this has resulted in
over-increasing cases of fornication and adultery.

Bertrand Russell says, \`With the growth of women's freedom there has
come a much greater opportunity for conjugal infidelity than existed in
former times. The opportunity gives rise to the thought; the thought
gives rise to the desire and in the absence of religious scruples, the
desire gives rise to the act.

'( Marriage and Morals, p.72) "The result is that the men and women
born during the present century is the so-called civilized Europe and
America do not believe that fornication and extra-martial relations as
such are a sin. There is neither internal nor external control in
matters of sex. Conjugal fidelity is not expected now-a-days. The sexual
revolution is in full swing.

"Of course, polygamy is considered an infringement of the rights of
women, but practically these monogamists go on practising surrep
titious, clandestine and underhand polygamy by defiling secretly the
wives, daughters and sisters of other people.

Polygamy is considered an evil but left-handed wives are kept without
any scruples. No eye-brows are lifted on sexual promiscuity. Enticement
is provided by seminude dresses, freedom of intermixing with strangers
of opposite sex, posters showing nude women, sex symbols,
sex-insinuating material and obscenity in cinemas where physical
contours move in synchronisation with seductive and vulgar music."
(pp.9-11)

Mrs. Annie Besant worte on this subject:- "There is pretended monogamy
in the West, but there is real polygamy without responsibility.

The mistress is cast off when the man is weary of her and she sinks
gradually to be the woman of the street: for the first lover has no
responsibility for her future: and she is hundred times worse off than a
sheltered wife and the mother in the polygamous home.

When we see thousands of miserable women, who crowd the streets of
Western towns during the night, we must surely feel that it does not lie
in Western mouths to reproach Islam for its polygamy. It is better for a
woman, happier for a woman, more respectable for a woman to live in
Islamic polygamy united to one man only with the legitimate child in her
arms and surrounded with respect, than to be seduced, cast out in the
streets perhaps with an illegitimate child, outside the pale of law,
un-sheltered and uncared for, to become a victim of any passerby, night
after night, rendered incapable of motherhood, despised by all."

George Bernard Shaw advised the people of Europe to adopt the system of
polygamy to save Europe from inundation of adultery.

Another Western writer, J.E. McFarlance, writes in his The Case for
Polygamy or The Case Against the System of Monogamous Marriage:-
"Whether the question is considered socially, ethically or religiously;
it can be demonstrated that polygamy is not contrary to the highest
standards of civilization. The suggestion offers a practical remedy for
the Western problems to destitute families; the alternative is continued
and increased prostitution, concubinage and distressing spinsterhood."

A Bishop from lbadan (Nigeria), Rev. Odotula, in a religious conference
held in Toronto, shed another light on this subject. He said: "The West
by prohibiting; the law of (polygamy) act with hypocrisy, as by frequent
divorces they have in fact been practising this custom." And that Bishop
is not alone. Even as early as last century the Christian clergy had
realized that Islamic polygamy is infinitely better than the Western
monogamy. Rev. Canon Issac Taylor, LL. D. speaking on \`Mohamedanism' at
the Church congress at Wolverhampton, on 7th October, 1887, said:-

"Owing to polygamy, Muslim countries are free from professional
out-casts, a greater reproach to Christendom than polygamy is to Islam.
The strictly regulated polygamy of Muslim lands is infinitely less
degrading to women and less injurious to men than the promiscuous
polyandry which is the curse of Christian cities, and which is
absolutely unknown in Islam." (The Times, London, Saturday, 8th Oct.,
1887) And recently, such a personality as

Dr. Billy Graham said:-

"Christianity cannot but compromise on the question of polygamy. If
present day Christianity cannot do so, it is to its own detriment. Islam
has permitted polygamy as a solution to social ills, and has allowed a
certain degree of latitude to human nature but only within the strictly
defined framework of law.

Christian countries make a great show of monogamy, but actually they
practice polygamy. No one is unaware of the part mistresses play in
Western society. In this respect Islam is a fundamentally honest
religion, and permits a Muslim to marry a second wife if he must be
strictly forbidden all clandestine amatory associations in order to
safeguard the moral policy of the community."

(quoted in The Position of Woman in Islam, published by the Islamic
Foundation, Karachi)


**Does Polygamy Injure The Feelings of Woman?**

The third objection is that polygamy has social disadvantages, and
injures the delicate feelings of women. We have already seen that far
from creating social disadvantages, polygamy cures the social
disadvantages, and that it is the pretended monogamy which is the
rootcause of the vast array of the social abuses in the Western
countries.

Now, we may briefly explain the subject of the supposed injury to the
delicate feelings of the women. One wonders if the prevalent
permissiveness of the Christian countries does not injure the delicate
feelings of the wives who see their husbands flirting with all types of
\`emancipated' women.

So far as Islamic societies are concerned.

the instances are not uncommon, where a wife herself persuades the
husband to marry a second wife. Often, she herself chooses the
bride-to-be.

The writings of Westerners do not carry any weight on this subject,
because they do not live in a Muslim society, and whatever they write is
based on mere presumption and imagination. If there is to be any
discussion on this subject, it must be based on the data gathered from
Islamic societies.

According to the Ittila'at (daily), Tehran, (no.13114), "A man with his
three wives approached the Matrimonial Tribunal to seek their permission
to marry a fourth wife. All three existing wives recommended and
approved the intended marriage. The reporter of Ittila'at approached the
mother of the wife-to-be, to investigate the background of this
incident.

He learnt that in that village there were 2000 women compared to 400
males (half of them still below fourteen years of age). The wouldbe
mother-in-law preferred to give her daughter to a man already having
three wives to the alternative of keeping her unmarried for the rest of
her life."

The same paper (no.13075) published the following news:-

"A young wife who did not bear children and, as a result, was very much
distressed, approached the Matrimonial Tribunal and asked them to
persuade her husband to take a second wife. \`Do not think that I do not
love my husband, or that there is no accord between us. On the contrary,
because of my deep love to him, I do not want him to remain without
child, due to no fault of his own. I have tried to persuade him to marry
another wife, but he does not agree.

Therefore, I request this Tribunal to intervene. I solemnly pledge to
live in harmony and with co-operation with the second wife.' " The same
newspaper (no.13091) reported another woman saying:-

"Some years ago, my husband married me so that the two sons of his late
brother do not remain without a guardian. Later we had a child of our
own, but he died after one month only. My husband is younger than me;
and I resolved to find for him a younger wife. Now I have succeeded in
getting him married to another girl."

These are a few examples to show that polygamy does not injure the
feeling of the wives. Of course, there are instances of discord and
disputes in a polygamous household. But they are neither more nor less
than the discords and disputes in a monogamous household.

Will the Western writers suggest to abolish the institution of
\`Marriage' because it creates domestic troubles, disputes and discords,
which sometimes result in divorce?


**Polygamy VS. Family Planinng**

This objection is based on short-sightedness. In Islam, the husband is
responsible to maintain his wife or wives and all his children. It is an
obligation which must be fulfilled in all circumstances.

If a husband follows the tenets of Islam, he is bound to think twice
before entering a new marriage whether he would be able to meet his
financial and other obligations concerning the new wife and her
off-spring. If his financial condition is not strong, he has to refrain
from the new marriage. Therefore, the question of \`economic problems'
does not arise at all.

Thus, in the words of John Davenport:-

"Mohammed, therefore, did but legalize a practice not only honoured but
even blessed by God himself, under the old dispensation, and declared to
be lawful and honourable under the new one; and, consequently, he must
be exonerated from the charge of having sanctioned polygamy, and thereby
encouraged licentiousness." (An Apology for Mohammed and the Koran
p.159)

Before ending this booklet, I would like to quote here a letter written
by an African Mr. S.M. Werottere of Karatina (Kenya) which was published
in the Sunday Post (Nairobi) of 19th August, 1973. He writes:-

"POLYGAMY OR PROSTITUTION?"

"IN A SURVEY to find out the cause of the increase of prostitution and
continued marriage breakages in Nyeri District, I have discovered
various reasons. But one that caught my attention is that women
out-numbered men.

"It will be interesting to note that except in very few families, girls
are more than boys in most cases; 5-3, 4-3, 2-l, 6-2, 4-1 and so on.
These figures indicate that women are, roughly, two thirds of the
country's population. "Normally, it is a boy that approaches a girl when
he considers it fit to marry her; a girl simply waits to be consulted by
anyone who may be interested in her.

"It is a common belief, especially in Christian circles, that the
system of \`one man, one wife' should be maintained. That would mean
that \`one half' of girls would never be married. The Church has
remained mute as to where the half of the girl population should go.

"The Church teaches that the Bible directs a man should have, one wife.
Yet we know of some holy men in the Bible that were poly gamous. There
seems to exist some contradic48 tions, anyway.

"Indeed, people appreciate present Government efforts to control human
population by introducing Family Planning services; they com mend some
religious institutions, for example Muhammedans, who allow polygamy to
their followers.

"Through experience, we now know that although the system of \`one man,
one wife'- is aimed at having peaceful families, a good many families in
this category have not justified the situation. Some have even divorced
or are separated.

"We cannot deny that \`one half of the girls' (or even more) are
without husbands. We have not been able to direct them on how to face
life - especially as we arc already aware that life is too brutal to
them. Particularly when the majority of young girls lack skills to
enable them earn a living.

"The Church priests, the peasants, the economists, the administrators
and others quietly admit that the unmarried women should struggle to
survive even if it is by prostitution, perhaps (?). \`It is time,' one
man told me, \`that the Christian churches examined the present state of
affairs and relax the \`one man, one wife' rule to help save the
situation now facing the world.' "And one Christian woman told me: \`I
won't mind being a second wife of a man I love.

Life becomes hopeless when a woman doesn't have a man's protection. It
is better than remaining unmarried.'

"Said a known prostitute: \`When I got my baby boy and took five years
without getting married, day to day problems pushed me towards
prostitution. I have no choice; I can be second or third wife if
consulted. Life has been very insecure.'

"One Christian minister told me that although he agreed that polygamy
would reduce prostitution to a certain degree, he does not believe that
it would serve the situation fully. He maintains further that with
family planning, the problem would be saved in future. He had no answer
as to what would be done to the problem at present.

"In general, the majority of the people I have talked to - married or
not - want the Church to reconsider its stand so that people can be free
to choose between polygamy and monogamy, depending on one's wealth."
(Sunday Post, Nairobi)

And with this quotation, I close this booklet, hoping that the readers
will fully appreciate


**THE END
**


