Sura Mursalat (those Sent Forth) (no.77 (verses 41-50)
======================================================

(41) إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي ظِلَالٍ وَعُيُونٍ

(42) وَفَوَاكِهَ مِمَّا يَشْتَهُونَ

(43) كُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ

(44) إِنَّا كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنينَ

(45) وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

(46) كُلُوا وَتَمَتَّعُوا قَلِيلًا إِنَّكُم مُّجْرِمُونَ

(47) وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

(48) وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ ارْكَعُوا لَا يَرْكَعُونَ

(49) وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلْمُكَذِّبِينَ

(50) فَبِأَيِّ حَدِيثٍ بَعْدَهُ يُؤْمِنُونَ


41."The righteous are amidst shades and fountains (of Heaven) ,"

42. And fruits such as they desire.

43. Eat ye and drink ye pleasantly (until you are satiated) in return
for what ye did.

44. Thus do We certainly reward the Doers of Good.

45.Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth.

46. (O ye Unjust!) Eat and enjoy yourselves (on earth) a little while,
(but be warned that an evil End in the Hereafter awaits you) for that ye
are sinners

47. Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth.

48. And when it is said unto them: Bow down, they bow not down.

49. Ah woe, That Day, to the Rejecters of Truth.

50. (If they do not believe in Holy Qur'an) then what statement, after
that, will they believe in?


**Commentary:
What statement will they believe in, if they do not believe in Holy
Qur'an?**

We know that the Qur'anic style generally couples warning with glad
tidings, threats with encouragement, and the fate of the Righteous with
that of the sinners, so that the affairs are better understood. On this
basis, after describing various punishments of the sinners, in the
Hereafter, in the aforementioned verses, there follows a short, but
meaningful verse about the state of the Righteous on that Day: The
righteous are amidst shades and fountains (of Heaven) .

Meanwhile, the sinners are in the shade of stifling smoke from fire, as
it was understood from the previous verses. The Arabic word /zilal/
'shadows' is the plural form of zill 'shadow' ; whether in the shade of
a tree and the like, during the day, or in the shadows of the darkness
at night, while fi is 'to cast a shadow by only a single source of
light' such as the shadow of trees which intercepts the rays of the
sun.

Then it says: And fruits such as they desire.

It is clear that fruits, shadows, and fountains are a small part of the
Blessings that Allah will bestow on them: a small part, describable in
human language, is in comparison with all the Blessings in Heaven, but
so plentiful and beyond the imagination of the Earth's dwellers, that it
is indescribable.

It is interesting to note that they will be entertained so excellentlym
and abundantly at Allah's feast that they are told: Eat ye and drink ye
pleasantly (until you are satiated) in return for what you did The
statement which is said to them directly, whether by Allah or by Angels,
is full of kindness and affection; clearly is a sustenance for their
soul.

The phrase, for what you did , denotes that these gifts are not given
to anyone undeserving, and nothing is obtained by raw claim or
imagination but, is actually prepared by good deeds.

As Raqib cited in Mufradat: hani means anything that is wholesome and
has no pain afterward. So, water and the daily meal are thus called and
it is sometimes used for life, too.

Therefore, this shows that the fruits, foods and drinks, in Heaven, are
not the same as those in this world; of which we sometimes suffer
malnutrition, pain and undesirable effects.

Some commentators believe that this imperative sentence denotes the
allowance of using these Blessings, lawfully, while some others believe
that this is just a command.

But, on the whole, it should be understood that, at ceremonies, these
commands are a kind of hospitality and the host's desire is that the
guests would be asked to help themselves, as a kind of respect and
dignity shown to them, because he likes that his meal will be eaten
completely, by the guests, and this shows that they honor him.

The next verse emphasizes that these gifts are not undeservedly given:
Thus do We certainly reward the Doers of Good.

Note that the first verse insists on 'righteousness' and 'devotion',
then another verse is based on 'deed', and this verse emphasizes on
'doing good'.

'Righteousness' or 'virtuousness' means avoidance of any sin,
corruption, paganism and the denial of Allah and 'doing good' is used
for any good action; while 'deed' refers only to the activities which
are piously done. So, the blessings bestowed by Allah are for these
groups, not for the false claimants of faith and committers of various
kinds of sin, though they appear to he among the faithful people.

At the end of this part, the refrain is, again, mentioned: Ah woe, that
Day, to the Rejecters of Truth. Woe to those who are deprived of these
blessings and affections. The pain of the regret of this deprivation is
not minor to the blazing fire of Hell.

Since being busy with worldly pleasures and the desire of having
unconditional freedom for following after carnality, is one of the
factors of the denial of Resurrection, the next verse addresses the
sinners and in a threatening tone says: (O ye Unjust!) Eat and enjoy
yourselves (on earth) a little while, (but be warned that an evil End,
in the Hereafter, awaits you) for that ye are sinners.

The term /qalila/ 'a little' can refer either to the short period of
life in this world, or to the few blessings of this world in comparison
with the countless, immense blessings of the next world.

In fact, the righteous are highly regarded in the Hereafter and are
addressed with this affectionate sentence: Eat ye and drink ye
pleasantly (until you are satiated) ...; but worldly men are addressed
with this threatening sentence: (O ye Unjust) Eat and enjoy yourselves
(on earth) a little while....

The Righteous are told: ...in return for what ye did, but the unjust
are told: ..for that ye are sinners.

Further, it makes it clear that it is Man's sin, originating from
faithlessness or lusts, that paves the way for Allah's punishment.

Then, the aforementioned warning is followed again by:

Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth.

Woe to those who were deceived by this scintillating world and its
lusts, and consequently prepared Allah's punishment for themselves.

In the next verse another source of their disaster, that is: 'pride and
self-conceit', is touched on where it says:

And when it is said unto them: Bow down, they bow not down Many of the
commentators have said that this verse was revealed about the Thaqif
tribe when the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) told them to say prayers and they
answered that they would never bow; that it would be a disgrace for
them. Then he (p.b.u.h.) said: Religion is worthless without bowing and
prostration.

They not only refused bowing and prostration, but also had this quality
of pride throughout their life and permeating their ideas. They resigned
neither to Allah's Will nor to the Prophet's instructions nor to
people's rights; they were humble neither to the Creator nor to other
human beings. In fact, these two elements, 'pride and carnality', are
the most important factors in committing crimes, sins, cruelties, and
denial.

Then, finally, for the tenth time in this Sura, it says:

Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth.

In the last verse of Sura Mursalat, in a scorning tone and with
profound astonishment, it questions:

(If they do not believe in Holy Qur'an) then what statement, after
that, will the believe in?

One who does not believe in Qur'an; that which if it were sent down on
a mountain, that mountain would humble itself and cleave asunder for
fear of Allah would not resign to believe in any Holy Book or any
rational logic, and this is a sign of enmity and obstinacy.

As it was mentioned, at the beginning of this Sura, the verse: Ah woe,
that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth, is repeated ten times for emphasis
on one important fact: Resurrection. Repetitions, like this one, are
found in the statements of all eloquent speakers for what they want to
emphasize on; whether it be prose or verse.

But some commentators believe that each time the verse is repeated, it
means that it is about a new subject, and which comes just before the
one that the rejecters deny; so, therefore, actually there is no
repetition of the verse.

We conclude this Sura with a sentence from 'Ruh-al-Bayan' which says:
This Sura was revealed to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) in a cave somewhere
close to 'Qif Mosque' in Mina and I have seen the cave myself.

**Supplication:**

O Lord! Bestow on us Your Grace not to reject Your verses.
O Lord! Protect us against pride and carnal desires; the main sources
of sin.?
O Lord! Set us in the Bliss of the Righteous among those who will be
highly regarded at Your Feast.


**The End of Sura Mursalat (Those sent Forth)**


