Sura Nabaa (the Great News) No. 78 (verses 1-5)
===============================================

<p dir="rtl">
**بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم**
</p>

(1) عَمَّ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ

(2) عَنِ النَّبَإِ الْعَظِيمِ

(3) الَّذِي هُمْ فِيهِ مُخْتَلِفُونَ

(4) كَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ

(5) ثُمَّ كَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ


**In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful**

1. O what do they ask (one another) ?

2. Of the Great News,

3. That in which they differ.

4. Nay! they shall soon (come to) know,

5. Nay indeed! they shall soon (come to) know.


**Commentary:
The Great News!**

In the first verse, it astonishingly questions: 0 what do they ask (one
another) ? Then, without expecting them to reply, the Qur'an answers: Of
the Great News.

That in which they differ.

For the meaning of /naba'-in-'azim/, the commentators have put forth
different ideas. Some of them say it means: 'the Day of Resurrection'
while some others have meant it as 'the revelation of the Holy Qur'an
and still others have said it means: 'The whole Islamic Principles'. In
some narrations it has been commented on to mean 'vicegereney and
guardianship'; which will be dealt with later.

Paying careful attention to all verses of the Sura, especially to some
points in the following verses and specifically to the sentence: Verily
The Day of Sorting out is (a day) appointed, which has come after
mentioning some Signs of Allah's Power in the heavens and on the Earth,
and also paying attention to the fact that the most intensive opposition
of the Unbelievers was about the existence of 'Resurrection': all in all
most commentators approve of the first idea, that is, in the sense of
'Resurrection' for the phrase /naba'-in-'azim/.

As Raqib says in his book, Mufrad!, the term /naba'/ means: 'a great
news which is useful and man is acquainted with it or has a strong
conviction to it; and these three things are the conditions of
/naba'/.

Therefore, the term /'azim/ 'great' is more emphatic and, on the whole,
indicates that this news, about which some were doubtful, has been a
known fact, great and full of importance, and therefore, its most
appropriate meaning is 'Resurrection'.

The phrase 'they ask (one another) ' may refer only to the Unbelievers
who used to ask each other about the Resurrection: of course, not for
their research and comprehension, but, due to their doubts.

It is also probable that the question is from the believers or from the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) , himself.

Here, a question may arise that: if /naba'-in-'azim/ refers to the
Resurrection, which apparently all the disbelievers denied, why does it
say That in which they differ?

To answer this question, we say that: the denial of the Resurrection,
in an absolute form, does not decisively exist even among the
disbelievers, because many of them assume that there is the existence of
the spirit after death, or in other words, 'the spiritual
Resurrection'.

Some of them were doubtful about the bodily Resurrection as in Sura
Naml, No. 27, verse 66: Still less can their knowledge comprehend the
Hereafter: nay, they are in doubt and uncertainty regarding it, nay,
they are blind thereunto!. And some of them completely denied the
Resurrection and even said that the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) was mad, because
of his claim about Resurrection; as in Sura Saba. No. 34, verse 7-8: The
Unbelievers say (in ridicule) : Shall we point out to you a man that
will tell you, when you are all scattered to pieces in disintegration,
that you shall (then be raised) in a New Creation?. Has he invented a
falsehood against Allah, or has a spirit (seized) him? Nay, it is those
who believe not in the Hereafter, that are in (real) Penalty, and in
farthest Error. Thus, their rejection of the Resurrection is certain.

It further states: Nay! they shall soon (come to) know.

Nay indeed! they shall soon (come to) know.

When they will be informed, they will cry and will be sorry for
themselves; each of them saying: Lest the soul should (then) say: Ah!
Woe is me! in that I neglected (my Duty) towards Allah (Sura Zumar, No.
39, verse 56) .

On the Day that they are surrounded by massive punishment, and they
wish to return to their former life, they ask: Is there any way (to
effect) a return?(Sura Shura, No. 42, verse 44.) .

Even when they, being at the point of death, are sure about the
partition and Resurrection; because all the curtains will be removed,
then, and the facts of the next world will become obvious, they cry
saying: ...O my Lord! send me back (to life) , In order that I may work
righteousness in the things I neglected..., (Sura Momin, No. 23, verses
99-100) .

The Arabic term saya' lamun 'they shall soon come to know', begins with
" س " (S) which is usually used as a sign for near future, and denotes
that the Hereafter is near; that this whole life is just a fleeting
moment in comparison to it.

Commentators have suggested different ideas about the twice repeated
verse, mentioned above, which says the same facts for emphasis: To
inform them that the Hereafter is in the near future, or to tell them
two separate matters: (1) That they will see the punishment of this
world in the near future, and (2) that they will see the next world's
punishment after that (of which, the first idea seems more appropriate)
.

It is also probable that this refers to the improvement and progress of
Man's knowledge, when there will be so many reasons and evidences for
the possibility of the Resurrection that even the disbelievers cannot
afford to deny, but can only confess, the Reality.

However, the fault in this commentary is that this kind of knowledge is
for the later generations of Mankind, which this verse refers to, and
not for those who used to live at the Prophet's time (p.b.u.h.) and
differed on the existence of the Hereafter.

**Explanation:**

The proposition of 'Vicegereny' and /naba'-in-'azim/ (The Great News)
';

As was mentioned earlier, it has been said that the phrase
/naba'-in-'azim/ has several meanings: 'the Hereafter, the Holy Qur'an,
the entire Islamic Principles', etc. But, the whole concept, taken from
the verses altogether, leads us to 'Resurrection' as having the closest
meaning.

There are a lot of narrations, some of which have been cited by the
Household of the Prophet 'Ahlul-Bait'. (p.b.u.h.) , and some others by
Sunni commentators, that say the phrase /aba'-in-'azim/efers to Hazrat
Ali's (p.b.u.h.) vicegerency and Imamat (the leadership of the Islamic
community) , which is a matter of dispute among a group of Muslims, even
today. Or it is interpreted as vicegerency, in general. Three of the
narrations are as follows:

Hafiz-Mohammad-ibn-Mo'min - Shirazi, one of the scholars of the Sunni
Community, has narrated a tradition from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) on the
commentary of the first verse of this Sura, and he (p.b.u.h.) said: It
means the vicegereney of Ali; about which everyone will be asked in the
grave, and no one in the East or West, in the seas or over the land
passes away without the angels asking him about the vicegerency of
Amir-al-Mo'minin, and he will also be asked what his religion is, who
his Prophet is, and who his Imam is.(1)

2. Another narration says that on the day of the Battle of Sefin, a
man

(1) Risa'lat-uI-I'tiqad, Abu Bakr-Mohammad-ibn-i-Shirazi (Based on
Ihqaq-ul-Haqq, vol.4, p.484) from the troops of Sham (Damascus) , having
his armor on and carrying a Qur'an with him, entered the battlefield
while he was reciting Sura Nabaa. Then Ali (p.b.u.h.) , himself, faced
him and questioned him: Do you know what /naba'-in-'azm/ (the Great
News) , in which they differ,is?

The man replied: No, I do not know.

Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.) said: I am, by Allah, the very /naba-in-azim/ (the
Great News) that you differ in and you quarrel against my vicegereney.
You turned away from my vicegereney after you had pledged allegiance to
it, and only on Dooms Day will you really comprehend, once more, what
you had understood about it before. (1)

3. A narration from Imam Sadiq says: 'The Great News' is the same as
Vicegerency .(2)

To gather the contents of these narrations and the commentary of the
verse, in the same sense as 'Resurrection', which was previously
mentioned, is possible in two ways: (1) The phrase /naba'-in-'azim/ has
a broad meaning which includes all of the meanings previously given,
though when these verses were revealed the Qur'an insisted on
'Resurrection' more than anything else.

Still, this does not hinder us from finding more interpretations, of
the verse, other than the above and (Tafsir-i-Borhan, vol.4, p.419,
Tradition 3.) as we know and as it has been mentioned repeatedly, the
Qur'an has various meanings; that is, a verse may have several meanings,
in different dimensions, among which only one is obvious by the apparent
words and the other meanings are hidden, but they can be found with the
help of other explanations and are not clear to anyone except 'the
distinguished ones'.

This is not the only verse that has obvious and hidden meanings.There
are many other verses, in the Holy Qur'an, of which the Islamic
narrations contain different commentaries.

But, we emphatically state that it is not possible to understand the
hidden meanings of the Qur'an without the clear explanations or
commentaries from the Prophet or sinless Imams (P.B.U.H.th) , and the

(1) Tafsir-i-Borhan, vol.4 p.420, Tradition 9.

(2) Tafsir-i-Borhan, vol.4 p.419, Tradition 3.

existence of hidden meanings, in the Qur'an, should not be a possible
way of misusing it by the mischief-makers who comment on the verses in
whatever way they wish.

**Why Is the Resurrection emphasized on so much?**

It was mentioned, before, that the most important thing which is
emphasized on and spoken about, in the thirtieth part of the Holy
Qur'an; whose Suras are mostly Meccan, is the Resurrection and Man's
state in the Hereafter.

This is so because, for the improvement of Man, the first step is to
know that there is a Reckoning Day. And there is a flawless Court in
which nothing is hidden from its Judges; a Court where you can find no
transgression, no oppressor, and no mistake.

Neither recommendations nor bribes are useful therein. No one can tell
a lie or deny the Truth. In short, there is no way to flee from the grip
of punishment, there; the only way is staying away from sin, here; in
this world.

The belief in there being such a Court shakes Man, awakens the sleeping
souls, makes the spirit of piety and responsibility come alive, and
invites human beings to be careful of their duties.

Generally, the main factor in the appearance of corruption, in any
environment, is one of two following points: (1) the weakness of the
watchmen, or (2) the weakness of judicial organization.

If the watchful guards look over the deeds of Man, and careful courts
verify the offenders' crimes and let no mischief leave without penalty,
then, in such a safe and sound environment, surely inequity, corruption,
transgression, and rebellion will decrease to the minimum.

When the worldly life, under the control of its watchmen and courts is
so, then Man's divine spiritual life is obvious.

Belief in an Omnipresent Unity that: ..from whom is not hidden the
least little atom.... (Sura Saba No. 34, verse 3) , and belief in the
existence of Resurrection, which according to Sura Zi1al No. 99, verses
7-8: So, whoever has done an atom's weight of goad shall behold it!. And
whoever has done an atom's weight of evil shall behold it, nothing will
he forgotten and everything will be in front of Man. This kind of belief
supplies such a piety in Man that can guide him to the path of charity
and goodness throughout his life.


