Sura Nabaa (the Great News) No. 78 (verses 6-16)
================================================

(6) أَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ مِهَادًا

(7) وَالْجِبَالَ أَوْتَادًا

(8) وَخَلَقْنَاكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا

(9) وَجَعَلْنَا نَوْمَكُمْ سُبَاتًا

(10) وَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ لِبَاسًا

(11) وَجَعَلْنَا النَّهَارَ مَعَاشًا

(12) وَبَنَيْنَا فَوْقَكُمْ سَبْعًا شِدَادًا

(13) وَجَعَلْنَا سِرَاجًا وَهَّاجًا

(14) وَأَنزَلْنَا مِنَ الْمُعْصِرَاتِ مَاءً ثَجَّاجًا

(15) لِنُخْرِجَ بِهِ حَبًّا وَنَبَاتًا

(16) وَجَنَّاتٍ أَلْفَافًا


6. Have We not made the earth as a (wide) expanse?

7. And the mountains as pegs

8. And We created you in pairs,

9. And We made your sleep for repose,

10. And We made the night as a covering

11. And We made the day for (seeking) livelihood,

12. And We built above you seven firmaments

13. And We made (therein) a blazing lamp,

14. And We sent down from the clouds water in abundance

15. That We may bring forth thereby grain and plants,

16. And gardens of luxurious growth?


**Commentary:**

These verses are, in fact, an answer to the questions of the rejecters
of the Resurrection, and those who differ on /aba'-in-'azim/ 'the Great
News' since, these verses mention a portion of the wise order of this
world of being and its reasonable gifts, which have a very effective
function in Man's life. They are, on the one hand, a few of the clear
Signs of Allah's power over all things; including the rebirth of the
dead, and on the other hand, they point to the fact that this Wise order
cannot exist in vain since, if with the end of this material world all
other things end, too, this life will certainly be in vain.

Thus, these verses can be considered as some reasons for the
Resurrection from two points of view: (1) Through the 'reasoning of
power', and (2) through the reasoning of knowledge'.

In these eleven verses, twelve important blessings are pointed out,
mixed with grace and affection and accompanied with reasoning and
stimulation of the sentiments. As bare rational reasoning is not quite
sufficient, sentiments and affections are needed.

first, it begins with the earth and says: Have We not made the earth a
(wide) expanse?

The term /mihad/, as Raqib cites in his book, Mufradat, means 'a level
and tidy place'. It is derived from the term mahd 'a bed, cradle'. Some
commentators and philologists have rendered it to mean 'bed', which is
both soft and comfortable.

The use of this term, for the earth, is full of meaning because, on the
one hand, most parts of the land are so smooth and level that man can
build houses thereon and prepares gardens and farms thereabout.

On the other hand, all his necessities are found over the Earth or
hidden on its insides in the form of raw materials and valuable mines.

And, then again, the earth swallows up man's refuse, and the corpse of
the dead are burned in it; (because of their dissolution and the
absorption of their various microbes in the soil) , to be vanished by
the wonderful properties of dust.

Furthermore, the Earth, itself, rotates and then rotates around the Sun
by which the days and nights and the four seasons of the year appear and
these, too, play an important role in Man's life.

In addition, the earth stores up, under its surface, much of the water
that falls down from heaven nd then, gradually, distributes it through
springs and subterranean canals.

In short, everything useful for the comfort of the creatures living on
the land, is supplied on this smooth bed; the Earth. The importance of
this great blessing will be made clear only when some slight changes
happen to it.

Then, in order that the importance of the mountains may not be
forgotten, in contrast to the smoothness of the surface of the Earth, it
says: And the mountains as pegs?.

Mountains have deep and expanding formations joined together under the
ground. They, armor-like, protect the Earth's surface against the inner
pressure caused by the central molten lava, and the outer pressure
resulting from the moon.

Also, mountains stand as lofty walls in the way of terrible storms, and
as safe abodes for men to rest, therein. If they were not so, Man's life
would be quite uncomfortable under the constant strikes of violent
storms.

In addition, mountains are the source of sweet water as well as
different precious mines.

Adding, still, to all of the above, the mountains' peaks; like gears of
a wheel, restrain, by friction, the thick air mass around the globe, as
if dragging it along with themselves.

Some scientists say that if the surface of the Earth were a flat plain,
then, when the globe turns, the air would slide over it and great storms
would develop. This constant turmoil would make the surface too hot and
uninhabitable.

After mentioning these two phenomenal blessings of Allah, it refers to
the spiritual signs of Allah and says: And we created you in pairs.

The term /azwaj/ is the plural form of the term /zauj/ which means
'mate, companion, a couple, and gender (husband or wife) ' from which
not only is a man created and through which his generation survives, but
also his spouse is counted as the reason for his spiritual tranquillity,
as Sura Rum, No. 30. verse, 21 says: And among His Signs is this, that
He created for you males from among yourselves, that you may dwell in
tranquillity with them, and He has put love and mercy between your
(hearts)

In other words, the genders (masculine and feminine) are the complement
of each other then, they become complete and this makes them a whole.

Since the term /azwaj/ also means: 'kinds, species, and classes', some
commentators have rendered it to mean: 'the variations in Man from the
point of color, race, language, different spiritual levels and talents';
which are signs of Allah's greatness and the cause of perfection in
societies.

Then, it refers to 'sleep' a grand divine gift to Man, and says: And We
made your sleep for repose,.

The term /subat/is derived from /sabt/which originally means
'discontinue, rest' and then it was used for the 'suspension of work'
for the purpose of resting, and that the term 'Saturday' in the Arabic
vocabulary is called /yaum-us-sabt/ because it had been affected by the
custom of the Jews who stopped working on Saturday.

Thus, the term /subat/ narrowly refers to the stopping of most of Man's
physical and mental activities when he sleeps. The very temporary
stopping of activity causes refreshment and improvement for the tired
organs, strengthening the soul and the body, renewing one's pleasure,
removing any fatigue and uneasiness, and consequently, making Man ready
to start working again.

Though one-third of the human beings' lifetime is occupied by sleep and
they have always been entangled with the question of 'dreams', still
they wonder about the mysteries of sleep. Even yet, it is not exactly
known why that at a special moment the mind fails to work well, the
eyelids droop and all the limbs come to a peaceful state.

But, one thing is definitely known and that is: sleep is of great
importance to one's health, and that is why psychiatrists try to make
their patients' sleep normally and regularly, because it is impossible
to cure them without it.

Those who do not sleep enough are pale, withered, nervous, and dull. On
the contrary, those who sleep normally, when they rise they feel, in
themselves, much pleasure and vitality.

After a tranquil sleep, study progresses very quickly and mental
activity and physical endeavors are often more successful. These facts
show the important functional role of sleep in Man's life.

There are few tortures, for a person, that are as painful as compulsory
sleeplessness. Experiments have shown that Man's tolerance for lack of
sleep is very little and soon he loses his health and becomes sick.

The aforementioned statements about the importance of sleep mean, of
course., a balanced sleep, because, over sleeping, like gluttony, is one
of the graceless behaviors which causes various sicknesses.

It is interesting that there is not a certain time limit for the
natural length of sleep in all persons, but everyone should find the
amount of sleep that one needs regarding his physical and mental
activities and according to one's own experience.

And stranger still is when human beings are placed in a difficult
situation where they must stay awake for a long time. Their perseverance
for sleeplessness increases, temporarily, so that sometimes they
decrease their sleep to one or two hours, but it has often happened that
when the circumstances have changed, Man, both spiritually and bodily,
has demanded the recompense of that sleeplessness and has taken it
back.

There are, of course, a few rare individuals who are able to go without
continuous sleep, for months at a time. In contrast, there are some
people who fall asleep even when they are walking on the street or when
they are speaking with another person. Surely, this state is very
dangerous for them, especially if there would be no one to look after
them. Obviously, these kinds of people are sick and sooner or later they
will be faced with physical and spiritual difficulties.

In short, this wonderful characteristic, which appears in Man and is
called 'sleep', contains many mysteries and is perceived as a
'miracle''.

Although the above mentioned verse is about 'sleep', as a divine
blessing, it seems that death, and wakefulness could, also, symbolize
Resurrection, so the verse could be a hint to both of them.

Then, again, concerning sleep, it speaks about the blessing of 'night'
and says: "And We made the night as a covering".

Following immediately after that, it says: And We made the day for
(seeking) livelihood.

Contrary to the duelists (because of being uninformed about the secrets
of Creation, where they thought that the light of day is good and the
darkness of night is evil and they believed in a separate god, for both
of them, while thinking that the former originated from 'God' and the
latter from Satan) we should give a bit more thought to it, then we will
recognize that both of them are great blessings and are the origin of
other blessings, as well.

According to the above verses, the gloom of night is a cloth and
covering over the body of the Earth and over all living creatures
residing on it. Night, compulsorily, stops the exhausting activities of
the life and makes the gloom of darkness, which is actually peace,
calmness, and tranquillity, dominate over everything in order to give
the tired limbs a chance to recover and the gloomy spirit a chance to
revive, since a good and quiet sleep is more likely to be obtained in
the dark.

Besides this, when night comes, the sunshine disappears. If the sun
were to shine continuously, all plants and animals would die from its
heat, and the Earth could not be a dwelling place for them.

For the same reason, the Holy Qur'an has frequently emphasized on this
matter. Once, it says: Say, see you? If Allah were to make the Day
perpetual over you to the Day of Judgment, what god is there other than
Allah who can give you a Night in which you can rest?... (Sura Qasas,
No. 28, verse 72) . And after that it adds: It is out of His Mercy that
He has made for you Night and Day, that you may rest therein, and that
you may seek of His Grace..., (Sura Qasas No 28, verse 73) .

It is noteworthy that, in the Holy Qur'an, many great things have been
made oath to, once, but night' has been made oath to seven times, hich
illustrates the importance of the darkness of night, since we know that
an oath is made for important affairs.

Those who make the night bright with artificial light and sit up all
night long and sleep during the daytime, instead, become rather
afflicted and sickly.

People, in villages, who sleep soon, at night, and get up early in the
morning, lead healthier lives.

Night has other useful advantages, too. For instance, the period after
midnight and before dawn is the best time to pray and supplicate to
Allah and a very good occasion for self-perfection and devotional acts
as Sura Zariyat, No.51. verse 18, about the qualities of the Righteous,
says: And in the hours (wee hours of the morning) of early dawn, they
(were found) praying for forgiveness.

The light of the day, too, is a unique blessing. It produces movement,
such as, preparing Man for effort and endeavor, and causing the plants
and animals to grow under its rays. Then, the above sentence which says:
And We made the day for (seeking) livelihood, is truly so complete and
meaningful that it does not need any further explanation.

In conclusion, the duration of the day and night and the precise
regularity of their gradual changes, is one of the Signs of Allah in
Creation. Moreover, it is counted as a natural calendar for the
arrangement of Man's life timetable.

Then, from the Earth our attention is turned to the heavens and it
says: And We built above you seven firmaments.

The number 'seven', here, may be a multiplication figure which refers
to the numerous celestial spheres, groups of systems, galaxies and the
different firmaments, in the existing universe, which have a firm nature
and are created massive and strong. Or, it may be a figure of quantity
in the sense that what we see from the galaxies belongs to the first
sky, as Sura Saffat No 37, verse 6 states: We have indeed decked the
lower heaven with beauty (in) the stars', and beyond that there are six
more skies that are far from Man's reach.

It is also probable that the phrase /sab'an sidada/ 'seven firmaments'
refers to the several layers of the atmosphere surrounding the Earth
which, in spite of being apparently transparent, is so dense that it
protects Earth from the continually falling meteorites. As soon as one
of them enters Earth's atmosphere it becomes hot enough to burn, because
of its violent contact with the protecting layers and then it turns to
ash and comes down slowly over the land. If this layer of atmosphere did
not exist, our cities and farms would be exposed to the invasion of
these meteorites day and night.

Some scientists have calculated the denseness of the atmosphere,
surrounding the Earth, as being more than one hundred kilometers thick,
and equal to a steel ceiling ten meters thick! And this is only one of
the commentaries for the phrase /sab'an sidada/ 'seven firmaments'.

After a short description about the creation of the heavens, attention
is paid to the Sun, the great world-illuminating gift, and says: And We
made (therein) a blazing lamp.

The term /wahhaj/ is based on the term /wahaj/ which means 'light and
heat' issuing from fire. Therefore, the term with this sense 'brightly
burning' used for the Sun, points to a couple of great blessings that
are the origin of all material gifts of this world, that is 'light' and
'heat'.

The light of the Sun not only lights Man's surrounding environment and
the whole solar system, but also is very effective in the growth of
living creatures.

Its heat, in addition to the effect that it directly has on the lives
of human beings, animals and plants, is the main cause of the existence
of clouds, winds, and rainfall necessary for the irrigation of dry
lands.

Because of its ultraviolet rays, the Sun is very useful in destroying
microbes. If it were not, generations of living creatures would perish
in a short time.

The Sun constantly illuminates the whole world, free of charge, with
its warm, bright light and from an appropriate distance. It is neither
so hot and burning, nor so cold and dim; and it offers itself to all of
us.

If we compare the value of energy, produced by the Sun, with the price
of other sources of energy, it adds up to a very large sum. Let us
assume that we grew an apple tree with artificial light and energy. Each
apple would cost an extraordinary amount. But now, indeed, we receive
this worldly productive light, freely, from /siraj-an-wahhaj/ 'a blazing
lamp'.

The Sun is the star nearest the Earth, whose mean distance from it is
nearly 93,000,000 miles (about 150,000,000 kilometers) ; its diameter is
about 865,000 miles; its mass is about 322,000 times, and its volume
more than 1,300,000 times, that of the Earth, and its density is about
one-fourth that of the Earth. Its outer heat is about 6,000C.(10,000F) .
(The Kelivin temperature scale uses a degree of which the unit of
measurement equals the centigrade degree, but it is numbered from
absolute zero, which is -273.16 C.) . All of these are arranged, in such
a way. so that if they were a little more or a little less than what
they are, it would he impossible for life to exist on the Earth.

Following the description of the gifts of 'light' and 'heat', it speaks
of another important matter, about life, which closely relates to the
subject of sunshine and says: And We sent down from the clouds water in
abundance.

The term /musarat/ is the plural form of the word /mu'sar/ which is
based on the term /asr/ in the sense of 'pressure' and the term is used
with the meaning of 'clouds emitting or pressing out rain', as if to
press itself to pour water.

Some others have said that it means ' the clouds that are ready to
rain', because the form of the word used in Arabic texts denotes to
readiness for something'.

Some commentators have said that /mu'sarat/ is not an adjective for the
word 'clouds', it is an adjective for the word, 'winds' which press on
the clouds from every side in order for it to rain.

The term /thajjaj/ is based on /thajj/ which means 'to pour abundant
water, continuously' and also it is used, here, in the Arabic intensive
form. So, on the whole, the meaning of the verse is that: 'We sent down,
continuously, abundant water from the clouds emitting rain'.

Rain, by itself, has some benefits and merits when it falls: it makes
the air fresh, it washes the dirt away, it decreases the heat of the
weather; it even moderates the cold weather, it decreases the cause of
diseases and it brings Man spirit and joy. But the following verses
point to three other great benefits of rain; it says: That we may bring
forth thereby grain and plants".

And gardens of luxurious growth.

Raqib cites in his book, Mufradat, that the term /alfaf/ denotes that
the trees of this garden are so thick and entangled that they are joined
to each other.

In fact, in those two previous verses, all of the foodstuff that grows
on the land and which men and animals use have been pointed out, because
a great part of it is compiled of grains /habba!, the vegetables and
roots /nabata/ and, thirdly, fruits /jannat/.

It is true that in these two verses only three outstanding benefits of
rain are mentioned, but its benefits, undoubtedly, are not limited only
to these. Seventy percent of Man's bodyweight is made up of water; the
main origin of all living creatures, as the Qur'an says: ...We made from
water every living thing... (Sura Anbiya, No. 21, verse 30) . Therefore,
water acts as the essential property in the life of living reatures,
especially Man.

Not only Man's body, but also many factories are paralysed without
water, and a lot of manufactures would fold, too, without the
availability of water.

The beauty and the livelihood of nature is due to water, and the best
commercial and economical trade routes, of the world, arc waterways.


**Explanation:**

The Relation Between These Verses and the Resurrection:

Through the above eleven verses, the greatest divine gifts and the most
basic necessities of Man's life are pointed out, i.e. light, darkness,
heat, water, land, and plants.

The statement about this precise regularity, on the one hand, is a
clear proof of Allah's power over everything. Therefore, there would be
no doubt for anyone as to how Allah can bring the dead to life again; as
the Qur'an says, very clearly, for an answer to the rejecters of the
Hereafter: is not He Who created the heavens and the earth able to
create the like thereof?. Yes indeed! for He is the Creator Supreme, of
skill and knowledge (infinite) ." (Sura Yasin, No. 36, verse 81) .

On the other hand, this great and lofty establishment certainly has a
definite goal, which undoubtedly cannot be construed as the mere 'life
of this word' or being satisfied by simply eating, drinking, and
sleeping, but Allah's knowledge requires an aim higher than this goal
and, in another sense, the first life is an admonishment for the Next
Life, and is a stopover on Man's long journey, as Sura Mo'minun, No. 23,
verse 115 verifies: Did you then think that We had created you in jest
and that you would not be brought back to Us (for account) ?.

And, too, sleeping and wakefulness can be seen as a kind of death and
rebirth, and the dry and dead lands that are revived by falling rains
again and again, every year, are before our very eyes the incidents that
refer to the Resurrection. They illustrate the Hereafter and the life
after death. Sura Fatir No. 35, verse 9 attests to this idea. It, after
pointing to the revival of the dead lands by rain, says: ... even so
(will be) the Resurrection!.


