Foreword
========

Says Quran: (Allah affirms that there is no god but He; and so do the
angels, and those with knowledge, He is established in justice. (3: 19)
Such is the claim of the Quran. So when we come across the atheistic
people or those who seriously believe in the Theory of Evolution and
deny the existence of any Creator of this Universe and its paraphernalia
we attribute it to their lack of knowledge either inherent or acquired.
Again, says Quran:

Your God is one God. (16: 7) and Allah-there is no deity but He, Living
the Eternal. (2: 257)

This is the assertion of the last Book of Allah revealed to Muhammad
(S). But for an explanation of the verses of the Quran we must refer
either to Muhammad (S) himself to whom it was revealed or to those about
whom he did direct us to refer to. Said Muhammad (S):

I am the City of knowledge and Ali is the gate of it.

After Ali (A) we have a chain of his children and grand children
towards whom we must look for inspiration and guidance in all our
affairs. Now in an age when people have either denied the very existence
of One God or have lost faith in His attributes such as Omnipotence,
Omniscience etc., we present a conversation that took place in the 2nd
century of Islamic era between Hazrat Imam Jafar al-Sadiq {A), the sixth
in the series of the twelve Imams of the House of Muhammad (S), and a
philosopher-cum-physician from India who was a staunch votary of
atheism.

Needless to say that the intellectual caliber of the Imam was highest
in that age as he had his knowledge from Allah. What needs our close
attention is the fact that nearly 1200 years ago the mind of a man like
us could argue so forcefully that not many intellectual giants that
survived during this long period could have attained that standard.

However the counter arguments of the Imam (A) convinced the atheist
about the Existence of Allah, His Oneness and other attributes so much
so that he embraced Islam.

How true it is:

An Imam excels all other persons both in knowledge and piety. The
intellectual caliber of an Imam shall always remain the highest
irrespective of the age in which he survives. The reason being simple
that he is deputed by Allah to guide the people, and Allah can not
depute a person with lesser knowledge to guide those superior in
knowledge.

With this book in hand the Muslims in particular and the other non
atheistic people in general can help eradicate atheism from the surface
of the globe.

To achieve our goal we need not use force. We can do it peacefully with
the help of our 'aql (reason) and achieve splendid success. Regarding
'aql suffice it to quote an anecdote. This relates to our common
ancestor-Hazrat Adam (A).

The Anecdote

The Last Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (S) about whom says Quran:

And we sent thee to mankind at large, to announce and threaten. But
most of the people understand not. (34: 29) He (S) passed on'ilm
(knowledge) to his Vicegerent Ali who relates: Jibrael-al-Ameen
(Gabriel, the Trustworthy) called on Adam and said to him: "Allah had
commanded me that I leave it to your discretion to pick and choose one
thing out of the three and leave the remaining two." Adam (A) asked: "O
Jibrael ! What are those things?"

Jibrael said: "These are 'aql (Reason), haya (Modesty) and deen
(Faith). Adam (A) expressed: "I pick and choose 'aql (Reason). Jibrael
said to the other two (haya and deen): Both of you go back.

The two (haya and deen) replied: Allah has ordained us to adhere to
'aql wherever it may be. Jibrael, saying: Well you know your position
best, rose back to the firmament. Is it not representative of the
distinctive personal character of Adam (and Eve too)? We can certainly
say that it scuttles the theory of a Godless universe. And it does
retard the theory of the 'evolution' of man from a 'larva' for a
sensible person?

The people of the world today are almost in the grip of a 'Godless
cult' and there is an imminent danger of mankind at large due to the
serious challenge of atheism. Let the muslims in particular and
non-muslims in general turn to Islam as presented by Muhammad and
Ahlebait 'alaihim us Salaam' and live in peace here and gain salvation
in the hereafter.


Syed Farzande Raza
Chief Organiser
Majlisul Muslemeen
14.H, Rizvia Colony
Karachi 18, Pakistan 3rd Shaban, 1383
l0th December, 1963


**Preface**

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

Oh, Allah may Thy peace be upon Muhammad (S) and his descendants This
little book which I give to the public is the translation of
Hadith-e-halila, the tradition of the Myrobalan fruit. It has come down
to us from Hazrat Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) the sixth of the twelve
immaculate Imams of the house of the Prophet Muhammad (S). He (A) lived
in the middle of the second century of Islamic era. After the most
tragic massacre of the third Imam Husain (A) who fought against the
hostile forces of ungodly Omayyids for the protection of the faith of
Islam, and the holy principles, which his grand-father, the Prophet (S)
had laid down for the guidance and progress of man and fell a martyr to
the cause, at Karbala, the whole family of the Prophet especially the
Imams took to seclusion.

They preferred peacefully preaching Islam to taking any part
whatsoever, in the secular and tribal dissensions then rife in Arabia.
"In the midst of misery and unhappiness they followed truly and
faithfully the precepts of their ancestor and found consolation in
intellectual pursuits.

Their ardent love of knowledge, their passionate devotion to the cause
of humanity, their spirit looking upwards far above the literalness of
common interpretations of the law shows the spirituality and
expensiveness of Islam. The definition by Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) of
science or knowledge gives some idea of their faith in the progress of
man. "The enlightenment of the heart is its essence, truth, its
principal object; Inspiration, its guide; Reason, its acceptor; God its
Inspirer, and words of man, its utterer.

"While the Omayyids discouraged the peaceful pursuits of mind, the
children of Fatima (the Imams) with remarkable liberalism favoured
learning. [^1] As a matter of fact, whatever success the Moslems achieved
in the field of learning, science, or spiritualism, has had its
foundation in the teachings of these Imams.

None but these Imams were the authorised exponents of the Quran and the
Hadithes (traditions) of the Prophet. When the Prophet saw that his time
to leave this transient world had approached, he preached his last
sermon and said, I leave behind me two things for you, The Book of God
(Quran) and my descendants ('Itrat). If you shall hold fast to them you
shall not go astray after me; They (Quran and 'Itrat) shall not be
separated from each other, till they reach Hauz-i-Kauthar (fount of
Kauthar) unitedly. [^2]

It will not be without interest, I am sure, to read this Hadith which
shows the liberality of their teachings and proves the existence of One
God so vividly. As it is admitted on all hands that belief in God, Who
is the Creator of this universe and to whom every man is responsible for
his actions in this world, essential for the moral and material progress
of man, I hope this Hadith will supply him, much food for reflection,
and lead him to the right path. The arguments are so perfect, so simple
and logical.

Besides, there is absolutely nothing to injure the susceptibilities of
any man belonging to any caste or creed. It is equally edifying to the
Muslims as well as non-Muslims, as the God. preached in it is not the
God of only one nation, but is the, God of all worlds
(Rabb-ul-Aalamin).

Perhaps the modern reader will find some of the arguments forwarded by
the Imam in some contrast to the present day science, but it must be
understood that the Imam intended to teach "God, and not the science.
The Imam, as far as science was concerned, simply followed the
conceptions prevalent in the age to which he belonged.

Now I must admit that I have translated this Hadith from
"Tauhid-ul-Aimma by Molvi Syed Mohammed Haroon Saheb who has not only
rendered this work into Urdu from Arabic but translated and written many
other valuable works and thereby rendered a substantial service to the
cause of Islam.

I must not also forget to thank my learned friend Mr. Alam Khan , G. B.
V. C. for all the help he has given me in translating this Hadith and
for many other valuable suggestions And last but not the least, I have
to tender my most cordial thanks to Messrs. Mohammad Jafar Haji Sharif
Devjee and Ghulam Husein Saleh Hasan (Hami-e-Islam) of their most
generous pecuniary help for the publication of this book.

I cannot but appreciate their kind feelings towards me, their zealous
love for the diffusion of the teachings of the Imams, and the
unostentatious services to the cause of religion; and pray that they may
long be spared to the community.


Wali Muhammad C. Momin
25th April , 1918
Ahmedabad (Gujrat)
India


