Hadith Halilaorthe Tradition of the Myrobalan Fruit
===================================================

Mufaddal bin 'Umar al-Jau\`fi wrote a letter to Hazrat Imam Jafar
al-Sadiq (A) that some people held the No Allah theory and contested
among themselves with groundless arguments. He requested the Imam (A) to
refute these atheists, as he (the Imam) had done on previous occasions.
The Imam replied, In the name of the Most Merciful and the Most
Compassionate Allah. May He the Almighty give us the good sense of ever
remaining obedient to His will, drawing down upon us His pleasure and
mercy.

Your letter with reference to those evils that have crept into our
midst is in our hands You mention that these 'atheistical disputes' and
controversies have become a menace to our religion (Islam), and you
desire me to publish a book in condemnation and contradiction of them,
as I have done (for antagonists and opponents of Allah) before.

Let us offer our thanks to Allah-the Most High for all His blessings to
us, and for His Hujjat (proof) incomparable, and the justice of trial
with which he tests His favorite as well as His ordinary slaves. One of
the greatest and most important favors from Him is the establishment of
convincing proof-deep in the innermost heart of each creature that 'He
is'.

Thus He has secured the vow of His ma'arefat (knowledge of His being)
from all His creatures, and has sent (through His prophet) His sacred
book Quran, which contains efficacious remedies for all doubts and
suspicions. Allah has done all this for man. He has neither left him nor
any other thing dependent upon others save Him. He has directly proved
Himself.

He himself is indeed independent and the praised. By my life these men
in their ignorance are losers, when they deny the existence of Allah in
the face of all those perfect and clear proofs and signs which surround
them. The sky, the earth and the wonderful things pertaining to both,
evince beyond all doubts, the existence of some creator.

These men have opened for themselves a gate leading to a crime. They
seek their relief in insatiable, incessant worldly pursuits. Their
sensual desire has blighted the purity of their hearts. For their
oppression and tyranny, Allah has abandoned them. Satan has assumed
dominion over them. Thus Allah seals the hearts of the proud and the
arrogant.

It is a matter of great surprise that man seeing in himself perfect
creation, can still so unreasonably refute the theory of a perfect
Creator. The structure of the body, the perfection of its design and its
connection with some spiritual thing called the soul, reveal or manifest
its creator to be of extraordinary wisdom and intellect.

I vow by my life that these men have bestowed no thought upon the
question, or else they must have observed this distinct and vivid
perfection in creation, e.g. the design of the universe, and the
knowledge that these things once were not in existence, should have
called forth an unhesitating affirmation of a creator. There is not a
single thing that does not show signs of Allah Who created it.

I write to you an account of the arguments I had with an atheist
physician of India. He visited me frequently, always discussing his "No
Allah" theory and placing forth all his arguments in support of it. Once
while pounding halila (Myrobalan fruit), a new idea came to him. "This
Universe", said he suddenly, has existed for eternity before, and will
still exist for eternity.

One tree grows and another withers; one in born whilst the other dies;
and the link that binds them together existed in the past, and will
exist in the future. Your claim to the divine knowledge is a baseless
one, founded on no such actual proof as to justify the existence of
Allah. It can only be called a belief, a belief inherited from your
forefathers and traditions.

Proceeding with the same force, he went on to say: "The existence of
various things of the Universe whether real or not could only be
determined through the medium of the five senses. Eyes with which we
see, ears by which we hear, nose by which we smell and hands and feet
with which we touch and feel.

Continuing the chain of his arguments to the extent of his self-made
principles, he said, "Now I have never known Allah through any of the
above mentioned senses, and cannot therefore believe in Him. But I
request that you will let me hear those arguments with which you
convince others. When he reached thus far I said: "I prove His existence
by the inherent instinct of His being, which each man, whether an
affirmed atheist or not, has in him".

"How can you say so?" He asked. "The mind cannot know the existence of
any thing through any medium but that of the five senses. Have you seen
Allah, heard His voice, smelled Him, tasted Him with your tongue, or
touched Him with your hands or feet? How could one realize Him?" "Your
denial of Allah, then is, said I, "because, you have not felt Him with
the senses given to us for knowing objects, I too have not felt Him with
either of them. But my belief is as strong as your disbelief, both
cannot be right; do you admit this?"

"Most certainly" he replied. "Either you are mistaken or I am". "Very
well", said I, "If you are right, there is no danger for me in
threatening you with Allah's displeasure for your disbelief". "No", said
he, "You shall be in no danger."

"If I am right", asked I, "Do you not think that you will suffer the
punishment for your disbelief, and I shall receive a reward, for being
away from your opinions?" "Quite possibly" he replied.

"Will you tell me", I asked, "which of us is the wiser, granting the
possibility of both the situations?" "Oh", He replied. "Your belief is a
presumption, a groundless assertion, while mine is a truth, based upon
common sense. I do not perceive Him by my senses, therefore He does not
exist".

"When your senses", said I "could not perceive Allah, you disbelieved
Him, While I, on the contrary, believed in Him, because my senses failed
to discern Him. The very theory that made you disbelieve, compelled me
to believe in Him". "How is it possible?" he asked.

"Because", I replied, "things are 'murakkab' (compound, made of parts).
Every murakkab possesses shape and colour that attracts the senses.
Therefore, that which is felt or known by the senses, having shape and
colour, cannot be Allah. Your argument for disbelief is foolish, because
Allah cannot be like any of the things perceived by the senses, nor can
He be said to bear any resemblance to anything which has to undergo an
ordeal of change and decay. For, everything is under the one and the
same law-the law of transformation and decline. Allah, our creator
cannot be perceivable by the five senses you mention; for, He is not a
thing-which is murakkab or created. ……………If He was visible to the eye,
and perceivable to the senses, He would have resembled the things that
are visible and perceivable to the senses on account of their being
murakkab and created, and in that case He would no longer have remained
a creator.

"What nonsense you talk?" said he. "No, I cannot believe unless I
perceive by any of these five senses". Since he so persistently adhered
to this theory, the folly of which I strove to point out, I said, I
charge you then for the very defect you accused me of. Your claim is
without reason and proofs also. Your arguments are too on the same
lines, as, you thought, were mine; and for which you had such an
aversion".

How can I be held liable for the same defect as you?" he asked.

"You, in the beginning, replied I, "falsely reproached me with this
that my claim to the knowledge of Allah was purely traditional and had
no actual basis for the fact. That imputation is now applicable to you,
because you persist in the theory, that a thing not known through the
medium of the senses is not existent, though strong evidence proves it
otherwise. You disregard the arguments, and all messages from Allah
through the prophets and the favored ones of Allah tell me, 'have you
visited every corner of this world?'"

"Of course not, he said. I went on. Have you ever ascended or visited
this sky, which you behold with your eyes, or been in the depths of the
earth? Have you traversed the world, dived in every sea, and moved
through the atmosphere? To presumptuously deny the existence of an
Omniscient, Omnipotent Creator, you must have been to all these
places.

No, he said, "You know I have never. "Well", I said, How can you say
that He is not in those places where neither you nor your senses have
ever been? Perhaps, He may be living there. I cannot be certain" he
said. Perhaps a person of extraordinary intelligence may reside in one
of those places. As, I went on, "you have admitted the probability of a
creator, you will, I hope, be convinced to admit the certainty. From
flat denial you have come to doubt, from that perhaps to faith.

"This doubt, he said, "is the result of the question you put about the
places that my senses have not seen, but I am at a loss to understand
how a thing can be said to exist unless felt by them. "Well, I explain
this, and bring you to a belief through the medium of this halila.

Oh yes, he said. "Try. The halila will be very suitable for it is one
of the fruits of medical science, in which I am well versed. I take the
halila, I said, "because it is nearest to us. Had anything else been
there instead, it could also have proved Allah's existence. "Everything
murakkab is created. Creation shows a creator. That, which was not is,
and that which is, is destroyed by Allah. Allah made it and destroyed
it. Tell me do you see this halila?

"I do, he said. Can you see, I asked, "what is in its interior?

"No.

"Then there must not be a stone in this one, I said, "for you do not
see it with your eyes.

"How can I say that?"he replied; "but there may not be one.

"Nor, I persisted, "a kernel hidden under the shell nor color within?

"I know nothing, he replied, both may be absent, "I am sure, I said,
"you will at once admit that it can be had in India, for all Indian
physicians agree on this point. "They may be wrong in their opinion, he
said, "I do not admit it.

All right, said I. "but you at least believe that this fruit grows in
some part of the world. He said "This earth is like that and I have seen
that place where it grows, I said, Will you believe by the presence of
this halila that there are other halilas, which you do not see with your
eyes ?I asked, No, he replied obstinately. "This may be the only one of
its kind in the world, Seeing him thus willfully bent upon ignorance, I
asked him, what he thought the halila to be? Whether it was a product of
a tree or it had come into existence by itself?

I am not foolish to say that it has come into existence by itself. It
is emphatically the product of a tree Then, you admit, said I, the
existence of a tree which you have not seen Yes he said But add that the
halila tree like all other things has self-existed for all eternity. Can
you refute this belief of mine? Yes, I said, in connection with the
halila, have you seen the tree from which this one came? Do you now it
perfectly well? Yes, he answered, Did you see the halila before it came
into existence?

No, how could?

Then perhaps, said I it might have happened thus:

When you saw the tree first, it had no halilas. But next time you saw
it, it had. Will you therefore believe that the halilas came into
existence from the state of non-existence?"

Why not? I believe it, but I say, what went to make a halila was
already in the tree, which in due course of time got united and formed a
halila. Had you seen the seed from which the halila sprang up? I asked.
Yes I had, he replied.

Does it sound perfectly consistent to you to say said I that the roots,
branches, bark, leaves and all the fruits, which combined together,
weigh many tons, were lying concealed in so small a seed? "No", said he.
I cannot understand how all these things could be concealed in one seed.
Will you admit that they could not be present in the seed, but came into
existence afterwards?

Yes, he said. "But I do not say that they we created by some one, and
you cannot prove it to me. Why not? said I, if I show you a design or a
painting you will have to believe that it was done by some one. Yes, he
said.

Does it not strike you, that this halila is made upon a fixed
standard-special color, special size, special seed, special taste-some
portion of its kernel is soft, while the rest hard-one portion
coalescing into another has formed a compound-there is a layer over
layer, body over body, and color over color? It has a hard material
enveloped by a soft one. Its structure is composed of particles allied
together. Its yellow color has a whitish tinge. It has a skin to
preserve it from external influences. Roots to convey moisture. Leaves
that preserve it from the sun lest it be burnt and scorched to ashes, or
the cold, lest it be reduced to thinness and lose its vigor"?

Would it not have been better, asked he, to cover the seed with
leaves?

"Allah was the best judge, I replied, Had it been covered with leaves
as you suggest, the air without, which gives it strength and vigor would
not have reached it. It could not have been influenced by the cold which
makes it robust. The sun would have had no power to ripen it. It would
have gone rotten. These different influences proportionately divided,
held to bring the fruit to perfection designed by the powerful wisdom of
Allah- the Almighty.

"The seed in its rudimentary state, said I "was neither kernel nor
shell. It had neither color nor taste. It was only water. "Yes", he
said, this I know.

"If Allah, said I, "had not strengthened the drop of water, which was
no bigger than a mustard seed, suggested its shape, proportionately
divided its particles, how could that very small drop of water have
reached its present state of development? How could it have assumed its
present form, uncombined as it was with shell or particles? Presume some
development. But it would be in size and bulk and should only have
consisted in the increase of water. It could not have scientifically
assumed its present shape- it would have had no definite shape.


