Supplement 1
============

You prove to me, he said, "beyond all doubts, the existence of some one
who has created these things. Your arguments about the tree's growth,
its development, its mode of bearing fruit, the shape of that fruit,
have convinced me. But why make it a distinct creator? Why not say these
things have created themselves of their own accord!"

Because, replied I, the design points to a perfect intelligence. Does
it not? "Yes, it does", He admitted. "It is obvious". Then, I asked, "do
you think it consistent to say that perfect intelligence and wisdom came
into existence from non-existence?" "No", he replied.

"Do you not know", I asked, "that this halila is 'haadith', i.e. it did
not exist before, but came into existence afterwards? And that it also
perishes, and returns to non-existence.

"Yes, I do know this, he replied This halila may be haadith. But I did
not say that its creator was 'haadith', and that he could not create his
own being. It is possible that he may be 'haadith', or he may be
'Wajib-ul-wujud' (self-existing from all eternity)".

"A little while ago", said I, "you admitted that the creator could not
be 'haadith', but the 'halila' was 'haadith'. Tell me then, how the
fruit which is a created thing (haadith), created itself. When you
declare halila fruit to be a created thing, it necessarily follows that
you do not think it to be its own creator. If, however, you resume your
old standpoint of argument, persisting in saying the fruit to be its own
creator, you are admitting what at first you denied, You have possessed
consciousness of perfect intelligence, though the proper name and its
attributes are not known to you."

How is it, he asked, that I now admit what I first denied?

It is thus: I replied. When you admitted the existence of some wise and
perfect intelligence, you admitted Allah. But called it by the name of
'halila', instead of calling it Allah. If you had used but a little
discretion and reflection, you must have realized that the halila had no
power to create or design itself.

Have you other proofs besides this?" he asked, or this is all?

I have many, I replied. 'Will you tell me why this halila which you say
to have created itself, is so insignificant and powerless a thing that
it can not save itself from being plucked, squeezed and devoured?

Because it has only the power of creating itself he said.

If you are inclined to persist in your obstinacy, do so; but at least
assure me as to when this halila created itself-whether it did it before
it came into existence, or afterwards? If you say afterwards, your
assertion is absurd. Because it is impossible for a thing to create its
own self when it was already created.

The purpose of your assertion would be that the halila made itself
twice. It would mean that its first endeavours consisted in creating
itself, and when it was quite ready and created, it created itself
again. This is the most absurd and impossible theory-the acquisition of
what is already acquired (tahsil-e-hasil). If you say that it created
itself before it came into existence, it is really stupid. Because it
was absolutely nothing before it came into existence.

How is it possible for a non-existing thing to create another thing?
You consider my belief in an existing thing that creates another
non-existing thing as absurd. But you do not consider your own, as to
the non-existing thing having the power to create an already existing
thing, as absurd and stupid. Be yourself the judge, and tell me whose
theory is absurd and irrational.

"Yours", said he, "is the most correct.

"Then why do you not accept it? said I. "I do accept he replied. "I am
quite clear about the truth and veracity of the fact that the things,
including halila, are neither created by themselves nor depend on
themselves for their growth and functioning. But a doubt arises in my
mind that the tree may perhaps be the creator of the 'halila'; because
'halila' is the product of the tree. Well, asked I, who made the tree
then?

Another halila. This is all the same said I, "Rather fix a limit. Else
our arguments must go round and round in a circle, having no goal or
termination. If you want to come to any conclusion believe the creator
to be Allah, and terminate the chain of arguments. If you prefer your
own belief for the sake of not arriving at a final decision I will
question you once more upon it." "Do question me, said he.

Is it not right, I asked, "that the tree springs up from the halila,
after the halila becomes extinct? Yes, he replied.

"The tree lives about a hundred years after the death of halila, (which
you think is the creator of the tree). Tell me then, who preserves the
tree and makes it thick and strong? Who nourishes it, guards it and
provides the leaves? Surely you must say that it was He Who created it.
If you call the 'halila' the creator, and say that a dead thing manages
the above mentioned things, your words convey no meaning. Because the
words 'creator' and 'guardian' mean one and the same, and it is
impossible for a dead creator to be guardian. Moreover, the tree begins
to grow only when the halila begins to dissolve and annihilate itself.
When the tree attains full growth, the halila seed is dead. In this case
tell me who remains to guard, nourish and design the tree?

That I cannot say, said he.

Why don't you believe, I asked, that it is Allah, the Almighty? Surely
you can have no more doubts lingering in your mind. I have some, he
said. You have not yet given me convincing proofs of His existence.

If you will still persist in your absurd theory that existing things
must be known through the medium of five senses, let me tell you that
the senses can not know anything except through the mind's medium. The
mind is the true guide. It is the mind which brings all things into
close affinity. Your assertion is quite the reverse of this. You hold
that the mind has no power whatsoever to know anything without the
intermeddling of the senses-quite a wrong assertion.

Your argument is quite new, he said, Before I admit it, I must have
details. "Then I begin to give you some." I said. You must know that
when one sense or even if all the senses become useless, ears deafened,
eyes blinded, smelling power vanished, the mind alone regulates the
respective functions of the senses. The mind only guides one to perform
a particular thing or avoid it; and things done by its suggestion bring
about a very wholesome result.

"Your argument, he said, "seems a very strong one, but explains it to
me more distinctly and concisely. "Alright, asked I. "Do you know that
the mind survives the death of the senses?"

Yes, he replied. "But its feeling and knowledge of things vanish with
the senses. For instance, ears can hear but not so the mind; it is deaf
with the ears "Do you know'? Asked I, that when a mother gives birth to
a child, that child's senses have no power to act. The senses are quite
unfit to perform any function at that period of life.

Yes, I do know he replied. "Tell me then, said I which of the senses
suggested the child to cry for milk, and to be cheerful and jolly when
it sucked it? Which of the senses excited the birds of prey, and the
birds that feed on grain to supply their young ones with flesh and grain
respectively? Why does one feed on flesh, and the other smaller kind on
grain?

Again regarding 'water fowl'-why are they able to swim, on the surface
of the water, and those inhabiting the land drown and die when thrown
into water? When all the creatures have the same senses, how is it
possible for the water fowl to derive greater benefits than the land
fowl? Why do the birds of the air die, if kept in water for a short
time, and the fish, those inhabiting the sea, die if kept out of water
for a while? Do not these different characteristics of senses refute
your theory of their all-powerfulness;

and suggest a greater intellect, an intellect that has created these
species of birds and fish, intentionally ordained that one should live
on land and the other in water-that has created circumstances to suit
their necessities? If senses were consistently powerful they would have
shown a similarity of action in all the species.

Also have you not observed the ant which has never seen water, begins
to swim when thrown into it, and the strong and clever man who does not
know the art of swimming, sinks down to the bottom, and comes to the
surface a dead body? Now if the theory that all things are known by the
senses be correct, why does not the wise experienced stout man use his
senses in order to save his life as the ant does? Do you not also know
that the mind-the treasure house of wisdom-is present in a brute child
as well as in a human-child? That it is the mind that suggests the child
to cry for milk, the birds of grain to feed on grain, and the
carnivorous to prey upon flesh.

'I know only this said he, that the mind can only know things through
the senses.

You still adhere to your argument in favor of the senses, though once
you admitted that it is the mind that guides the senses. Very well; now
I shall prove to you in connection with these senses that they are
unable to know anything but external things. They can in no way know the
existence of invisible things such as the Almighty Allah and the soul.
It is for this reason that the Creator gifts us with a mind and
establishes through its medium His 'Hujjat' (proofs of His existence).

He has created the senses that they may observe external conditions and
argue in favor of Him. When the eye observed creation in all its parts,
it drew the attention of the mind to it. The eye saw the celestial sky
retained in a position without obvious support, their regularity of
motion, rotation, and revolution,-they neither lacked behind that they
come in closer proximity to us, nor proceeded further that they might
undergo any damage. Their distance from us remains unchanged and so
their condition. They do not get old or decayed though centuries of
successive nights and days have passed. Their corners or ends do not
fall down.

The motion of the seven planets also depends on rotation of the sky.
They change their places every day, every month, and every year. Some
are very rapid; some are very slow in their movement, but none too slow
in their movement, but none too slow. They all return to the same place
after performing their fixed duties with unswerving some of them take
their courses towards the North, and sometimes towards the South. They
remain obscure during day and visible at night. The appearances of the
Sun and the Moon at certain places at certain times as understood by
those men well-versed in the Science of Astronomy, the men endowed with
thinking power are surely not the results of any human experience or
will.

Nor do they think that the investigations, searches or researches of
any human being can produce a like phenomenon. Thus putting everything
to severe test and scrutiny the mind reasons, and concludes that there
must be some one Who has created this most wonderful Universe, Who his
preserved the skies in their natural position, prevented them from
falling down upon the Earth. Along with the skies he has created the
planets and the stars.

Again when the eye observed the earth to be convex, and informed the
mind of its observation, the mind felt that the upholder of this Earth
in its present form must be He who kept it in its fixed place and
prevented it from slipping into space, and that He must be the same, Who
retained the skies overhead in firm position.

The mind also felt that if there had been no upholder of these things,
the Earth with the weight of all it possesses such as mountains, trees,
seas, sands, etc would have easily crumbled down. The mind with the
eye's help decided that the creator of the Earth must be He Who created
the skies….. Then again the ear heard the noise of boisterous
whirl-winds, and that of soft and pleasant breezes. The eye saw that the
former uprooted mighty trees, demolished strongest buildings and swept
sand hills to the ground carrying them from one place to another. Though
the eye observed all these movements, it could see none who performed
them. The ear could hear no one.

Nor could any of the senses detect His presence. The eye could not see
the air because of its extent; hands could not hold it, because it was
not solid. The eye, the ear and the senses could know nothing without
the mind's assistance. It was the mind that said that there was some
one, Who controlled all these things. When the senses conveyed their
impressions to the mind, the mind sensibly thought that the wind did not
blow of its own accord.

It thought, if it blew of its own accord, it would blow on continuously
and would not pause. Because it is proved in science of natural
philosophy that a natural force does not stop, unless resisted by some
stronger force, Again it would not have demolished one thing and left
another unmolested, and pulled down one tree and not the next one- it
would have over one portion of land and not another.

Cogitating thus, the mind concluded that someone controlled the wind,
moved it or stopped it just as He pleased, sent or withdrew its currents
from whomsoever He liked again when the mind saw that the wind was
connected with the sky and its wonders, it unhesitatingly decided that
the creator of the wind is He Who has created and upheld the skies,
earth and all their wonders. Likewise when the eye, the ears and other
senses unitedly informed the mind of an earthquake, it reflected upon
the quaking of a mighty earth, with its mountains, seas and other great
appertainances, and upon the fact that the earth is one solid body
without fissures or disunited parts, yet one part shakes and the other
remains unaffected, demolishing buildings on one hand.

and not on the other; and as a result it concluded that the One Who
shook one portion of the Earth and saved the other is He Who moves the
wind and controls the air withholding them or not, according to His
pleasures. He is the designer and organizer of the skies and the earth
and all things pertaining to them. The mind guessed for certain that it
was quite impossible for the Earth to quake by itself. Because being
naturally firm it should never have shaken at all.


