Supplement 3
============

Then, let us think, said I, ''as to how this knowledge was acquired.
And let us use if it be correct to say that all people cannot acquire
it, though all are born in connection with the movements of the planets
and stars. I am ready to grant that only few people learn and master the
science. But the question is how did they learn or master it-specially
the knowledge which declares one star to be ill-omened and the other to
be auspicious? How have they fixed the time, hour and degrees, the slow
or rapid movements of the planets and the stars, their exact position
over or below the Earth; and their predictions which you mention? How
have they gathered them? I believe that any of the creatures inhabiting
this globe are so advanced as to penetrate the secrets of the visible
and invisible Universe.

You may not believe, said he. "But that they have done so, I am
positive about it.

"When you assert, said I, that all the Earth's inhabitants are born in
conjunction with the movements of the stars and planets, the wise man
(Hakim) who first discovered the science of astronomy must have been
born like-wise.

"Of course, he exclaimed, "he must be included in the category of the
human race. Then does not your reason guide you to the fact that these
planets and stars existed before the birth of that wise man, who, as you
say discovered the science of astronomy, and was born in conjunction
with the movements of the stars and planets?

"Indeed, said he, "the planets and stars must have existed prior to his
birth.

Tell me said I, how could the wise inventor of the science learn the
method of calculating the stars with- out a master to teach him? If you
say that he had a master, then that master must have existed before the
existence of the stars. And indeed must be He, Who established the rules
and regulations for those movements, on which you say the events of a
life are based, and from which the future of a new born child is
foretold. Taking this for granted, the wise man inventor of the science-
must have been the follower and pupil of that master, who had existed
before the stars, and had created them-the wise man-in conjunction with
the movements of certain of them.

Then He who established the science, was He who lived before the stars,
the Creator of them and the people born according to their movements.
Presupposing the age of the wise man to be ten times that of the Earth,
he must have had the same observation of the stars as we have now. They
must have twinkled over-head as they down-where lay the difference
between him and us? How did he know the exact calculation whilst we do
not? Had he special power to go nearer to this very high firmament, and
more closely study the secrets of the stars, their position and
movements; learn, which of them eclipse the Sun and the Moon; which are
consistent with the birth of children;

which are ill-omened and suspicious, rapid or slow, and many other
things, such as the length of time they are concealed under the Earth,
and the exact hours of their appearance and disappearance? How chances
it that a human being has so great a knowledge of things heavenly, since
deep reflection cannot give it to him and his senses cannot reach so
far? How did he invent the method of calculation by which is known the
movement of the Sun and Moon, and the knowledge--which among the seven
planets suspicious or ill-omened; the exact position of these
luminaries, and correct judgment as to which was rising or a setting
one? How could he-on the surface of the Earth-study that which was in
the heavens?

How could he see those stars which are made invisible by the Sun's
blinding luster? If you suggest that he flew up to the skies, my mind
still misgives me, for even then her could not master the science
without a teacher; w hen one cannot master an earthly science thus, how
can he master a science not of the Earth ?"

I do not even recollect, said he, "of hearing of a human being going up
to the skies. Perhaps, I suggested, the wise man may have done so, and
you may not be aware of it.

I would not accept its truth , he said, "from any source.

I agree with you there, I said, "but let us suppose the fact of the
wise man's ability to climb up to the skies. In that case we shall have
to believe that he performed incredible journeys, visited every star and
planet, staying with them as they set or rose till he had gained fullest
knowledge about those functions; and as some of the planets take as much
as thirty years to complete their rotation, he must necessarily have
stayed with them for the prescribed period however long it may have been
in order to fully collect all information. Let us take all this for
granted also, that he not only ascended to the skies, but he traveled in
company with each and every luminary, till he had become fully
acquainted with their habits.

Still however, his observations could not be called complete until he
had studied those stars under the Earth. In this he must take the same
amount of time, that he took t in observing the heavenly stars, for the
movements of the stars beneath the Earth cannot be said to be the same,
and to master the science to its present accuracy of calculation he must
miss no point of knowledge.

To know the period of time these stars remain invisible, whether by day
or by night, is very necessary; besides, the question must be settled
fully and for ever as there was only one wise man to do it. If there had
been more than one wise man, they must have differed in their
calculations. Now really does not strike you that it is only you who can
hold the idea of a wise man, who dived down into the depths of the seas,
and penetrated through the darkness of the Earth; who floated along the
shies, clinging to the stars and the planets and acquiring the knowledge
of their movement and doing the same to stars under the Earth!

I do not hold, said he the opinion that any man can ascend the skies,
or dive to the bottom of the seas, or penetrate the interior of the
Earth. As you don't hold this opinion, said I, tell me then how could
the wise man (whom you think to be inventor) learn the science of
Astronomy? How could he complete his researches in connection with it
when he came into existence long after the creation of the stars he knew
all about?

In face of your arguments he said, it does not seem prudent or wise to
say that this science was invented by a being of this Earth? Then, said
I, you admit that this science can only be known to one cognizant with
the ins and outs of heaven well as Earth? If I do so, he said, '.I must
admit Allah, who you say is the creator of heaven and earth.

Have you not told me, I asked, that the calculations based on Astronomy
are perfectly correct and the birth of children correspond to certain
movements of the stars?

"Yes" he replied, "I have told you so, and also I have no doubt of
this, but I have a doubt as to there being a creator" . That doubt will
be removed, said I; have you not said that no human being can scale up
to the skies, or travel in company with the movements of the Sun, moon
and stars -East, West or in any direction?

To scale up to the skies is impossible, he said. "Well I said, "what
other alternative have you beyond admitting that it was a heavenly
teacher who taught this science?"

If I say so; said he, that no teacher taught this science, I am absurd;
and if I say it was an earthly teacher, it would be an equally
irrational statement, for no human being ever by himself acquired
knowledge of heaven above, or of hell beneath; for no human being has
the power to pry into those things beyond the range of his eye's
observation. Even granting closeness of observation no inward knowledge
can be gained, for according to my belief nothing is real except what is
known through the medium of senses, and it is obvious that the senses
have no hand here. The eye can only perceive movements, and nothing
beyond that. The knowledge and calculation of the movements, the
differences between rapid and slow, the season of the disappearing and
the reappearing of the stars are beyond the scope of the senses.

If you wish to study the science of the heavens, asked I, would you
choose an earthly being or a heavenly being as your teacher? I would
choose a heavenly being, he replied, Because the stars hand in his
region, where earthly being cannot reach Alright. Now I hope you will
give yourself to profound thought, and clear up all doubts from your
mind.

"If all the people of the earth have their birth in conjunction with
the movements of the stars-either sinister or auspicious, it stands to
reason that the stars pre-existed the people of the earth, Don't you
think so?" Yes, I do, he replied.

Well then, said I, "your statement as to man having existed on earth,
has been contradicted by you yourself. You have admitted without the
least doubt, that the human race came into existence after the stars,
and if the stars pre-existed the human race, it necessarily follows that
the earth also pre-existed the human race.

"I do not say, he said, that the earth pre-existed them.

If the earth, said I, which the Almighty Allah created as a carpet for
men to walk on, did not pre-exist the race, these beings together with
the lower orders of life, would have had nothing to rest upon. It is not
reasonable to state that they lived in space, for they do not possess
wings. Of what good would wings have done, said he, when they had no
means of subsistence.

Bravo, said I, Do you now entertain doubts as to the pre-existence of
the earth as well as the stars?

No, said he, now I am fully convinced of the pre-existence of both.
I'll now, said I, dilate upon such subjects that exciting your
curiosity, may add to your store of knowledge. Your previous arguments,
he said are sufficient to remove my doubts.

You know I suppose, said I, that it is in the Sky, the Sun, Moon and
Stars perform their duties. Yes I do he replied.

"Would you not call it the basis and foundation of luminaries? Yes, I
would, he replied.


