Supplement 4
============

"In my opinion then, said I, "the stars which you say, are connected
with the birth of the human race were created after the skies, because
it is in the skies they perform their rotation-sometimes moving upwards
and sometimes downwards. "All proved so clearly, said he, that only an
insane man could deny it. The sky is the foundation of the luminaries,
and undoubtedly existed before them, for it is in that those said
luminaries move and perform their duties.

"Now, said I, "you have admitted the creator of the stars, according to
whose movements, human beings are born, to be the same as He, who
created the skies and the earth, for without the earth, there could be
no creation." Yes you are right, he said, I see no alternative but to
accept this as true.

Does not your reason further point out, said I, "that He Who created
the earth, the skies, Sun, Moon and other planets must be All-powerful
and Wise, for without the skies, the creatures of the earth must perish;
for the heavenly ladies are directly necessary for those upon the earth
to live? For instance, had there only been no Sun, nothing could ripen,
the poisonous effect of the air would not be nullified and everything
would die.

Now, said he. 'I would bear witness to the wisdom of Allah, Who made
all these things, for you have completely overthrown my doubts. I must
hold your theory that the teacher of the science of Astronomy, and the
inventor of the calculations appertaining to it, cannot be an inhabitant
of this earth, for that which he studies is in the skies, and the person
able to unravel the mysteries of the skies must be powerful enough to
pry beneath the earth.

It is beyond my comprehension all the same as to how a human being has
mastered this science and brought it to its present state of uniformity,
the logic of which no one denies. If I had not known the principles of
the science I would have from the very start, flatly denied the same,
and called the article a futile one.

"I will make it clear to you, said I, "by the means of halila you hold
in your hand, and the science of medicine which has been the profession
of your forefathers and is now yours. This halila, with medical science,
I will compare to the heavenly objects and their science. But do you
promise not only to acknowledge the truth, but do justice by it?

Yes, I do promise, he replied. Please go on.

Has there, asked I, "ever been a time when the human race was in
ignorance of knowledge ('ilm) and its benefits, in fact as senseless as
this halila?

"Why not? he replied, There must have been a time, when none was
acquainted with medical science and its advantages. Knowledge was
acquired. "How? When they were totally ignorant of science, how did they
acquire it?

"By experience and experiments, he said, "after considerable time.
Whence came the idea of experimenting I asked. "What made them think
such thing made into medicine was beneficial to the human body, when the
external form of these things appear hurtful, and some placed on the
tongue are so bitter as to cause pain and uneasiness And how came they
to the investigation of such medicinal plants that were totally unknown,
and not recognized by their senses, for to demand an unknown thing is
quite an impossibility and absurdity?

"Experience led to the investigation, he said, and invention of the
medical science.

"Well, said I, "tell me who invented it, or who described the nature
and effects of the herbs used, when some grow far west and some others
far east. Do you not sensibly feel that the person who did so, was one
who inhabited the places where they grew."

Yes, he said, and what a wise man he was, for he has drawn every other
man to his side to agree with his conclusions, If you wish to abide by
your promise to me, and give justice to the truth, tell me how that
man-the inventor came to know the nature of every medicinal plant. Let
us suppose he got himself acquainted with all the medicinal plants in
his village, or even the whole of Persia; but can you suppose that he
continued his researches and investigations allover the world and tasted
every fruit, leaf and root to test their qualities from the effects on
himself?

Can you suppose even with the help on other wise persons that he was
able to fully acquaint himself with the plants growing in Persia alone,
studying with his senses those plants that his senses did not recognize;
nothing their peculiarities and importance or non-importance of the
botany of Persia, how came they to know that such and such herb was
useless, unless the prescription. included the halila from India, gum
mastich from Rome,

musk from Tibet, cinnamon from China, willow from Turkey, opium from
Egypt, aloes from Yemen, salt peter from Armenia and various other
articles from different parts of the world, which mixed and pounded
together make a particular medicine. How could they know living in
Persia that individually these articles produce no effects?

How came they to know the places where these articles are produced,
when they are so different in kind and nature, and grow at so great a
distance from each other-of some plants roots alone are used, of others
the fruit, shell, essence, juice, gum or oil- some are used internally,
and others externally; again in different countries they hold different
names; the people of different countries are not always friendly to each
other they vary in opinions, manners and modes of life; one nation
desires to predominate over the other , they slaughter and pillage and
try to imprison one another: it is not always easy for a stranger to
carryon investigation? How was that knowledge gained?

Can you say that the person who invented the science went to every nook
and corner of the world, learnt every language, and traveled every
country? That he was able to investigate the medicines from east to west
quite fearlessly and safely, and that he never fell sick, did not under
go: any troubles but remained healthy and intact? That he made no
mistakes, was never misdirected found all the countries, remembered all
he learnt, remained always happy and finished all his researches with
regard to the origin and nature and effects of what he sought-despite
all differences of color quality and names? That he got correct
description of each and every tree, its origin, smell and taste, flowers
and fruits?

Can you really think the enterprise such as one individual may
undertake and accomplish when you consider that each and every medicine
has at least twenty different natures? Is it not impossible that he
learnt the science of medicine the secrets of the trees that demand
close observation and grow in so many different countries? Even granting
him the possibility how did he come by the knowledge that such and such
a plant could be used as a medicine for the senses do not hold the
innate ideas?

How did he separate the bitter, the sweet, the saltish and acrid
trees-one from another? If you say that he did so by inquiry and
converse with the people of different lands they grew in how came he to
inquire and converse about the things unknown to him? How came it to his
mind that he must ask these questions of a particular man? And how could
he arrive at a satisfactory conclusion despite so many social and
political barriers, and the difference of languages? Even granting these
things whence came the knowledge of advantages and disadvantages of
medicine? Why this affected a cure and this an injury-their nature their
sweet and bitter tastes the softness of one and the hardness of the
other?

If you answer, by pondering, I say it is impossible; because these
things are beyond the scope of the senses and cannot be comprehended by
thought. You cannot say either it was by personal test; for had he made
experiments upon himself he must have died from some poisonous effects
that he had not before known. And if you say that he traveled in all the
countries, lived with every class of people mastered their languages,
experimented upon them, killing some here and some there, yet still it
was impossible to know the exact nature of one medicine without killing
many people. And is it possible that these people would allow him to
continue his experiments upon them to take more lives.

Still let us say that by some miracle they listened to what he said,
and tolerated his deadly experiments. Well, where did he get the
opportunity and time for mixing the various things and knowing the
respective weights.

How did he learn the proportion necessary to mix one with another?
Never mind. Granted, this knowledge was also acquired. Whence came the
knowledge that an overdose would bring death to the person to whom it is
administered, whilst an under close would have no good effect.

Granting again that he succeeded in acquiring all this traveled in all
parts of the world and had the necessary long life to do so, how did he
acquire the knowledge of those thing not belonging to the vegetable
world? You are perhaps aware that some of the medicines unless mixed
with the bill of the gall bladders of certain beast and birds on earth
and sea, are inefficacious and not pure. As such is the case, his mode
of investigation must be similar to the one relating to the vegetable
world. He has no other alternative, but to investigate the birds and
beasts of the world, slay them and examine their gall bladders.

Well let him has finished his investigations with the birds and beasts
of this world, there remain now the animals of the sea. To know their
nature it was just as necessary to dive down into the seas and
investigate them also, as it was necessary for him to investigate the
vegetable world. It does not matter if you do not know all these things,
but you cannot deny the knowledge, that the animals of the sea live in
the sea, and that to thoroughly know them he must necessarily dive in
the sea and study them in that element. Tell me now can you reasonably
say that these things were known through experience and experiment "I am
completely at a loss to reply, he said.

"I will describe something more, said I, "which will convince you of
the truth. You are probably aware that the biles of the different
animals unless mixed with roots cannot form prescription." "Yes, he
said.

"Tell me, said I, How he fixed the exact weights of medicine to such a
nicety? As you are a physician you probably know only too well that you
put four hundred 'miskals' of a particular leaf or fruit, and one or two
or another in a compound prescription, some few 'miskals' sometimes less
sometimes more till the prescription reaches a satisfactory point. When
a particular dose of a particular medicine is given to a patient
suffering from diarrhea, it cures him of it, yet the same medicine in
large dose when given in a case of colic has quite an opposite effect,
and set up purging.

How came the physician by the knowledge of the effects of medicines?
How he knows that one medicine would affect the head and not the foot,
though it is easier for the medicine to descend than to rise, that if it
is given for the lower extremities, it will not affect the higher though
the head is near the mouth, and could be more easily affected? In the
same way particular medicines carried the affected part by means of
blood vessels are used for its different parts of the body.

First of all these internal medicines reach the stomach and from thence
by reason of their power are distributed to the different parts of the
body. How did that wise man discover that the effect meant for the brain
would not reach the hands, legs, loins, or abdomen, etc, or vice versa.
Was it really possible for his senses to have known all these things?

Why do medicines administered for one part of the body produce no
effect on the other parts? How did his senses know that a certain
medicine affected the ears and not the eyes? Why do different medicines
cure diseases in different parts? And how came senses, reason or
discernment to know the places of all those parts concealed as, they are
from external contemplation -blood vessels are hidden in muscles, and
covered up with skin, to which the medicines reach? The senses by
themselves cannot detect them.


