Supplement 5
============

What you say, said he, was already known to me but we physicians hold
the opinion, that the person who invented the science, performed
postmortem examinations, when the patient was not cured of his disease,
and thus examined the blood vessels passages and places and located the
traces of the medicines.

Do you not know, I asked, that the medicines taken internally circulate
with the blood throughout the body, and become mixed up with it? "Yes I
know it, he replied.

"Don't you know, I asked again, that when a person dies, his blood
thickness?

Yes it does, he replied.

Then, I asked, "How did the physician examine the medicine, when it was
clotted in the blood, for all trace was surely lost, and in such a state
could not be analyzed properly?"

I am at my wit's end now," he said. Again tell me, how the people were
able to now the beneficial effects of the roots and plants they had
investigated and their locations? How did they learn to analyze and mix
them together, ascertain their respective weights, and discover the need
of gall bladders and stones in certain medicines?

You have discussed the subject with such perfection, said he, that I
have neither the imagination nor thought nor wit to find a way of
properly answering your question. As these prescriptions have not
invented themselves, they must have been invented by some one else and
that same one else must have acquired a thorough knowledge of the
natures and qualities of the items he had laced in such order.

Will you kindly explain to me how the people were able to know those
medicines that were beneficial to health, and how they could investigate
these things in every part of the world? Since you wish me to explain it
to you, said I, I shall give you an illustration, and discuss it in such
a wax that you will easily learn who the inventor of medicine was, who
created the various kinds of plants and fruit? And who made the body and
blood vessels, which carry the medicine through it to its affected
parts.

If you will do so, he said, I shall be very glad indeed.

Supposing, said I, a certain man had planted a garden surrounded by a
wall to protect it from outside harm. Do you not think the owner would
know every tree planted therein and its position? After a time the trees
began to bear fruits, and all smallest vegetation also bloomed, In the
meantime you happened to go there, and desired the owner to bring you
certain fruits and vegetable pods. The owner went to do so. Were you not
in that case sure that he would go straight to the exact place, where
the desired fruits add pods grew, knowing perfectly well where they
were,-in a near or a distant part of the garden? You know he would not
waste time puzzling over their whereabouts Yes, he said; he would
undoubtedly find the places easily.

But if the owner, said I, "instead of going himself asked you to go
into the garden, and pluck the desired things for yourself, could you
have gone straight for them without looking earnestly here and there".

"I could not have done so, he said, without knowing the proper
places.

"Supposing, said I "you reached these places after some considerable
exertion and trouble. For instance you touched and examined each and
every tree till you found out the desired one, but if you failed to
detect that tree, you would be forced to return empty-handed.

I don't see how I could find out the whereabouts for a tree, of whose
position I had no knowledge, said he.

Seeing, said I how helpless your senses are in guiding you, surely your
mind tells you that he who planted this large garden which extends from
east to west, and north to south, must have taught that wise man, whom
you considered to have invented the science of medicine. Can you not
easily understand that the names of the medicine and the cities wherein
they could be found, were shown to the wise man by Him, and that He must
have been as well versed in the location of the vegetable world as the
owner himself (as the owner of that garden I instanced to you). It is
reasonable to say that He, who taught the exact whereabouts of the tree
that grew in the garden, was He who planted them; and He Who taught
their advantages, disadvantages, and weights and was also that Self-same
person.

"Your reasoning, said he, seems to be flawless.

If the creator of body of man, said I, with its nerves, veins and
intestines through which the medicines course from head to foot were not
the same person as the creator of this garden, would that creator have
know and made known to man the existence of those trees and herbs, their
proportion in medicine and their necessity to the well-being of man?
Would that creator know that such medicines were particularly beneficial
to certain diseases and had such and such effect on certain nerve?"

How could he know these things?" He said.

These things are not known through the medium of senses. So if man is
aware of them it must be through the teaching of Him, who created the
garden of the world, for He alone could know the effected and nature of
that which He created.

Then, said I "does it not follow that the vegetable and the animal
world would have one and the same creator? If there had existed two
creators, one for human beings and their ailments, and the other for the
vegetable world, the first would have no knowledge of medicines and the
diseases they cure, and the other similarly would have no knowledge of
the plants and trees by which medicines are made; but if the creator of
the animal, and vegetable world be one and the same, it would be easy
for him to know the medicine for the particular disease. He would be
fully aware of the nature of medicine and its exact weight and effect on
the body-whether it would affect a cure to the brain, feet or some other
part of the human body. For having created both the medicine and the
body he is cognizant of the science of both.

"You are really right, he said, "If there were two different creators,
each would have been ignorant of the science of the other.

"Then, said I. "He who taught the wise man, whom you consider to be the
inventor of this science, and established it is the creator of the
garden of the world. He created the human body. He informed the wise man
(who was prophet like Luqman or Dawood) the nature of all plants and
trees, their location and surroundings, attributes such as leaves and
veins, oily substances branches, bark and fruits. He taught him the use
and nature of medicine and the weight to be used.

He made all the beasts and birds of the world together with those gall
bladders which are also necessary to medicine. If the creator of birds
and beasts had been different from he, who created the man and the
vegetable world, he would never have known the effects of the gall
bladders, which should be mixed with vegetable medicine;

and which not; but as He was the creator of all, He knew their actions,
attributes and names, which knowledge He imparted to the wise prophet,
and this is how the wise man came to know the advantages and the
disadvantages of medicines belonging to the vegetable and animal
kingdom. In no other way could He have known all those things. In truth
he must have been some Prophet or Apostle taught by the most august
omnipotent glorious Allah of the Universe.

What you say is quite right, he said, Before your eloquence all
reasoning of the senses and so called experience pale into
insignificance. Since you have admitted so much, said I, Let us go a
step further, and with our senses reason whether it was advisable for
Him who planted the world's garden, and created the animal world for the
benefit of the human race, to scatter all these things in the land
belonging to some other person than himself If He did so, He could not
have carried any experiment of any sort upon His belongings except by
the other's permission. Don't you think so?

Yes, he replied. The earth, on which this garden is planted, must have
also been created by Him who created the garden, plants, trees and
animals.


