Supplement 6
============

You think the earth belongs to Him, said I, because of its close
connection with those other creations that belong to Him? Are you not
also aware, asked I, "that a garden of such magnificence, containing men
and animals along with its trees, and other creations, to be kept in
health must be irrigated, and refreshed with life-giving water?

"Yes, he replied. "None of these creations can live without water.

"Will you say, asked I, "that the creator of the garden with all that
is in it, is not the creator of water; that the existence of the garden
that he created depends upon the pleasure of He who created the water,
who may stop its supply when he chooses?

"It is impossible, he replied, "to believe in the existence of two
creators, one for the garden and one for the water. I am sure there is
one creator for the both, and it is the same who created the mountains
which are the sources of great rivers and flowing waters. If this
irrigation had been by other one, the garden and its contents must have
withered and died. He who created the garden must have created the water
first, knowing it was needed to keep the garden in the best condition,

"If there were no store of water asked I, "to flow to the garden, and
refresh it in case of emergency, do you not think it would have been
destroyed, for you may have heard that it has many times suffered
through want of water?

"Yes, he replied, "I am wondering now if there is any need of anyone to
manage these things. The law of nature may be, that water must ever flow
without cessation.

"You have admitted, said I, "that but for the ocean and its store of
water the garden might have become dry and barren. "Yes, he said.

Well, said I, I intend to convince you of the creator of the ocean
being the same creator as He of the earth; and that the ocean is really
a reservoir held in reserve into which the streams and rivers pour their
superfluous energy for time of need. And that in the ocean He has
created many good and profitable things.

Convince me of this, he said, ''as you have done already with regard to
other things. Are you not aware that all surplus water is collected by
the sea? Yes, he replied.

Have you ever known its quantity being increased through and abundance
of rain; or decrease through excessive heat or famine? I asked. No, he
replied.

"Does not your reason says, said I, "that the Allah who created the
garden was He who created the ocean, and that He fixed a limit to the
latter? The proof which stands in favor of my argument is that, were
those great mountains like waves which arise out of the sea, not
restrained from passing a certain limit they would have overwhelmed the
whole garden of the world. We see despite their fury and passions that
there is a fix limit, which reaching, their fury and passion become
spent.

"Yes , he said, "You are quite right. The wonder of the phenomena makes
your argument very strong.

"I will dwell further on the matter, said I, "and convince you of the
connection of the different creations one with another-a connection
which must prove to you that the Universe is the work of one omnipotent,
omniscient, and omnipresent Allah. You must be aware that many gardens
are not watered by rivers or streams. That many vegetables, trees and
plants growing in fore are supplied water by the rains which fall from
the sky, and all the wild beasts who inhabit these spots, depend on the
rain for water also.

"Certainly, he said.

"Well, do not your senses, which you claim to be the perfect means by
which we come to the knowledge of things, point out to you that the rain
clouds carry water to those places devoid of rivers and streams? If
these clouds were creation of some other than He, who created the
garden, that other might have stopped supplying water at any time, and
the owner of the garden must have been in perpetual anxieties as to the
welfare of his garden.

You are indeed right, he said, there is a perfect connection with each
and everything of the world. It would be absurd to say that the creator
of the garden, its contents and the store of water laid for its use, is
not the same as the creator of the sky and the clouds. He must be the
same to water his garden, at certain necessary moments lest His garden
die. I wish you to discuss a further, that I may clear my brain of any
lingering doubt and be thoroughly convinced of the truth.

"InshaAllah, with God's pleasure, I will convince you that the things
of this world are created by some wise creator. I will convince you
through this 'halila' and prove its connection with the things of the
garden and the skies.

"I can hardly imagine, said he, that you can remove all my doubts
through the medium of this 'halila'. "I will from it, said I, show you
the stability of creation, the atoms and ingredients, that go to make
perfect development, and from this halila's first connection with its
roots and branches prove the dependence one thing has on another, and
the close relation borne to celestial objects." "If you prove these
things, he said, "I can no longer doubt.

"You must know, said I, that the halila springs from the earth, fibers
run to one strong root that flings up a stem. The stem has branches, and
the branches twigs and the twigs are studded with pearl- like buds from
which leaves emerge, and all these things from a canopy to shelter the
whole buds, flowers, fruits, from the severity of the cold or heat.

"No doubt can linger in my mind, he said, "the halila with its
perfection, and connection, with the place where it grew, its roots and
leaves, witnesses with me that there is only one creator; that He has no
partner (sharik). For his creations are related to each other and are in
harmony one with another.

If I further prove to you, said I, the wisdom and necessity of these
creations, and the dependence of each on the other will you bear witness
to the existence, and wisdom (hikmat) of God?

"I would not hesitate to do so, he said. Listen to me, I said Do you
know that the halila is dependent on the earth, and the earth on the
effects of the heat and cold on weather, the weather on the wind, the
wind on the clouds, the clouds on the rain, the rain on the season the
season on the movements of the Sun and Moon, the Sun and Moon on the
revolution of the sky, and the sky on that atmosphere between the heaven
and the earth? Surely this dependence and connection of creations are
themselves proofs of the wonderful wisdom and skill of God. Their
connection is so close to each other that not one can be dispensed with,
even (if) one for a moment became out of order, the whole creation-earth
and plant would be destroyed.

"What you say is correct, he said, But the creation you missed
mentioning, may not have so intimate a connection with the universe.
What creation is that? I asked.

"It is man you have not mentioned. He replied.

"Don't you know, I said, that these things are most closely connected
with man? God has created all these things for his benefit. "Can you
prove it to my satisfaction" He asked.

"Why not', I replied. I will prove it to you so thoroughly, that you
will afterwards bear testimony to the fact that the world and every
thing in it is for the use and benefit of man.

Tell me, how? he asked. "He has created the sky I said, "overhead as a
proof for him, had it been lower or just up to his head he would have
suffered. The sun would have scorched him to death. The stars He created
as guides to him when he traveled at night by sea or land, others serve
him for astronomical calculations and to prove the senses inaptness to
know every thing.

They are living witnesses of the existence of great almighty God, who
taught man this science. For such science could never be known through
the medium of senses, and untaught must have always remain unknown: "Oh
Magnificent (Azim) and Mighty (Jabbar) one, how marvelous are these
creations of yours, He has created for lamps the Sun and lustrous moon.
They float in the sky with marvelous rapidity. He lights them
accordingly. Their appearance and disappearance cause the seasons.

On them rest the calculations of the years; months and days, founded
for man use and benefit. He works during day, and rests at night. Had
the days and nights remained in one condition, the day never to become
night, nor the night to become day, the people could not have made
head-way in their affairs. He the most wise and skilful Creator created
the clear and the shining day for work, and the dark night for the rest
and repose. He arranged the heat and cold- two contrary effects, yet
both necessary.

If there had been all heat or cold, nothing could have lived. The
gardens would perish with the beings in it, for all these things are
connected with the air that floats in the space.

The coldness checks excessive perspiration, and the heat nullifies the
harmful effects of the food on the body, besides actively assisting in
its development- when the body gets dried, moisture is produce by it;
when moist, the heat absorbs the moisture. In the same way the clouds
absorb or give out; you see they rain in proportionate quantity to the
need of the world. If they did not, the whole world runs risk of total
destruction. God sends rain regularly to the earth inhabited by the Sons
of Adam -the carpet on which they walk, or cradle wherein they sleep.
God has kept the world upright for him -the mountains are the weights,
and form the mountains the rivers flow to water the world- without these
streams of water the earth must have remained dry and the people in a
poor condition.

He has created the seas, over which men voyage. In these seas are
creatures some of which give food to man, and ornaments by which he
adorns himself. The combination of the whole world and the uniformity of
design throughout plainly indicate one creator of the whole. For nowhere
exists the Contrast and difference of opinion that must necessarily
arise, in the case of another creator. The sky has produced things for
man's benefit the earth likewise. There are vegetables, fresh grapes,
grain, dates, green gardens, fruits and pastures skillfully devised for
man's use and pleasure. The beasts and many other purposes are created
by God for him.

They are necessary for his upkeep and well-being. You must bear in mind
that there are two distinct species of life in the world. One of
generation, the other of production. One is made to eat; the other to be
eaten both (kinds of) creatures necessarily being the same. Because He
who constructed the human body also knows the correct food for it.

He gave the appetite that asks the food, the stomach that digests, and
supplies the tissues and replenishes the blood. He arranged those
intestines through which waste and effect matter passes. Had the creator
of man been other than 1 creator of his food. He would not have created
appetite that wants the food of that other creature nor would the other
creature allow his creation e so eaten.

"You have by your eloquence", he said, "made me unhesitatingly declare
that the creator of all the things is one and the same. He is the only
one wise, merciful, omnipotent and omniscient God,


