Notes 
======

Nasikh ul-Tawarikh by Mirza Abbas Quli Khan, published by Kitab
forooshi-e Islami, Tehran, 1346 (Iranian calender) is acknowledged to be
the most comprehensive and accurate collection of information pertaining
to the life of Zaynab bint Ali [a.s.] 

The exact date of her birth is uncertain; however the most widely
accepted dates are the first of Sha'ban or the fifth of Jamadi ul-Awwal
of the fifth or sixth year A.H., or the ninth of Ramadan in the ninth
year A.H. p.45-6 ibid. p.68 ibid. Zaynab is thought to mean 'she who
weeps excessively', and other linguistic sources state that it once
meant a good looking or smelling tree. The name might also possibly be a
compound of the two Arabic words, zayn (beauty) and ab (father). 

Not only is the date of her death uncertain but so is the place: she is
variously thought to be buried (most popularly) in Damascus, but also in
Medina and Cairo. There are two explanations given as to how she came to
be buried in Damascus: one being that some time after their return Yazid
once again sent his forces to attack them, this time at Medina, and she
and other members of her family were taken as prisoners of war to
Damascus where she died; another being that because of a famine that
swept through Medina, her husband temporarily moved his family to a
village near Damascus, and it was there while praying in a garden that
Zaynab [a.s.] was accidentally but fatally struck by a gardener's spade,
or fell victim to a serious illness from which she never recovered. The
anniversary of her death is observed on the following dates: 11th or
21st of Jamadi uth-thani, the 24th of Safar, or the 16th of
Dhu'l-Hijjah. 


