Ziyarat 
========

The following ziyarat (verbal salutation) for Bibi Zaynab [a.s.] is
traditionally recited to obtain divine blessing while visiting her
shrine (in this case, in Damascus, Syria).

It can also be recited at any other time in remembrance of the example
of courage and submission that she presented to the world, particularly
on the acknowledged days of her birth, death, and during the month of
Muharram. 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت سلطان الأنبياء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the leader of the Prophets.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت صاحب الحوض واللواء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the owner of the (Heavenly) Pond and
the Standard.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت من عرج به إلى السماء ووصل إلى مقام قاب قوسين أو
أدنى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him who was taken to the skies and who
reached the position of the length of two arrows or even closer.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت نبي الهدى وسيد الورى ومنقذ العباد من الردى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the Prophet of right guidance, the
master of (all) human beings, and the savior of the servants (of Allah)
from being destroyed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت صاحب الخلق العظيم والآيات والذكر الحكيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the one who has conformed (himself) to
sublime morality, enjoyed the broad honor, and owned the (Heavenly)
Signs and the Wise Remembrance of Allah (i.e. the Holy Quran).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت صاحب المقام المحمود والحوض المورود واللواء المشهود
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the owner of the Lofty Position, the
Pond from which people shall drink (on the Resurrection Day), and the
Standard, which shall be witnessed by everybody.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت منهج دين الإسلام وصاحب القبلة والقرآن وعلم الصدق
والحق والإحسان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the Path of Islam and the one given the
qiblah and the Quran, and the example of honesty, right, and
benevolence.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت صفوة الأنبياء وعلم الأتقياء ومشهور الذكر في الأرض
والسماء، ورحمة الله وبركاته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O daughter of the
choice of the Prophets, the example of the pious ones, and the well
known in both the earth and the heavens.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت خير خلق الله، وسيد خلقه وأول العدد قبل إيجاد أرضه
وسماواته، وآخر الأبد بعد فناء الدنيا وأهلها، ورحمة الله وبركاته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O daughter of the
best of

Allah's creation, the master of His creatures, the foremost created
individual before the existence of (Allah's) earth and heavens, the last
of the existent ones (who shall endure) after the extinction of this
world and its beings, and the one whose soul is a copy of the Divinity
and whose heart is the treasury of the Eternal, Subsistent God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت إمام الأتقياء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the leader of the God-fearing ones.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت عماد الأصفياء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the support of the choice ones.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت يعسوب الدين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the leader of the Religion.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت أمير المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the commander of the faithful ones.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت قائد البررة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the leader of the pious ones.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت قامع الكفرة والفجرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the preventer of the infidels and the
wantons.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت وارث النبيين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the inheritor of the Prophets.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت خليفة سيد المرسلين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the successor of the Apostles' chief.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت النبأ العظيم على اليقين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the Great News (as it is certainly
proved).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت من حساب الناس عليه، والكوثر في يديه، والنص يوم
الغدير عليه ورحمة الله وبركاته
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O daughter of the one
to whom the mission of settling accounts with people (on the
Resurrection Day) is given, between whose hands the Heavenly Pond (of
al-Kawthar) is put, and whom is intended by the (Prophet's) Statement of
the Ghadir Day.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت من قاد زمام ناقتها جبرائيل، وشاركها في مصابها
إسرافيل، وغضب بسببها الربُّ الجليل، وبكى لمصابها إبراهيم الخليل، ونوحٌ
وموسى الكليم في كربلاء، ورحمة الله وبركاته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the lady whose she-camel was driven by
(Archangel) Gabriel, and whose misfortune (of Imam al-Husayn's being
slain in Karbala) was shared by (Archangel) Israfil, and due to whose
anger the All-exalted Lord was angry, and for whose misfortune of
Karbala, (the Prophets) Abraham the Friend of Allah, Noah, and Moses the
Spoken by Allah wept.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت البدور السواطع
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the shining full moons.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت زمزم والصفا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Well Zamzam and Safa (of the landmarks
of Mecca)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت مكة ومنى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Mecca and Mina –a height in Mecca-.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت من حُمل على البراق في الهواء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him whom was carried by Buraq to the
heavens.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت من حمل الزكاة بأطراف الرداء وبذله على الفقراء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him who carried the zakat (almsgiving)
by the margins of his dress to give it to the paupers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت من أسرى به الله من المسجد الحرام إلى المسجد الأقصى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him whom was taken by night from the
Inviolable Masjid to the Farthest Masjid.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت محمدٍ المصطفى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Muhammad al-Mustafa (the Selected by
God)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت علي المرتضى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Ali al-Murtada (the Pleased one)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت فاطمة الزهراء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Fatimah al-Zahraa (the Resplendent).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت خديجة الكبرى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Khadijah al-Kubra (the Grand)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ وعلى جدك المختار
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you and upon your grandfather, Muhammad al-Mukhtar (the
Chosen.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ وعلى أبيك حيدر الكرار
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you and upon your father, Haydar al-Karrar (the
Attacking.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ وعلى السادات الأطهار الأخيار وهم حجج الله على الأقطار
ساداتُ الأرض والسماء من ولد أخيك الحسين، الشهيد العطشان الظمآن، وهو
أبو التسعة الأطهار، وهم حجج الله من طرق الشرق والغرب من الليل والنهار،
الذين حبهم فرضٌ على أعناق كل الخلائق
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you and upon the pure, choice masters who are the
Arguments of Allah on lands, the chiefs of the earth and the heavens
your nephews from your brother Hussain the Martyr and thirsty, the
father of the nine Alat-har (leaders) who are arguments of the God of
the East-West routes of night and day, and love for whom is a
prescription that is incumbent upon all creatures.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت ولي الله الأعظم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the glorified, holy servant of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا بنت ولي الله المكرم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of dignified, holy servant of Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا أخت ولي الله المعظم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O sister of dignified, holy servant of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكِ يا أم المصائب زينب ورحمةُ الله وبركاته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O mother of
misfortunes; Zaynab.


