Womanhood 
==========

Zaynab [as.] grew into a fine statured young woman. Of her physical
appearance little is known. 

When the tragedy of Karbala befell her in her mid-fifties she was forced
to go out uncovered. It was then that some people remarked that she
appeared as a 'shining sun' and a 'piece of the moon'. 

In her character she reflected the best attributes of those who raised
her. In sobriety and serenity she was likened to Umm ul-Mu'minin
Khadija, her grandmother [a.s.]; in chastity and modesty to her mother
Fatima Zahra [a.s.]; in eloquence to her father Ali [a.s.]; in
forbearance and patience to her brother Imam Hasan [a.s.]; and in
bravery and tranquility of the heart to Imam Husayn [a.s.]. Her face
reflected her father's awe and her grandfather's reverence. 

When the time came for marriage, she was married in a simple ceremony to
her first cousin, Abdullah ibn Ja'far Tayyar. Abdullah had been brought
up under the direct care of the Prophet [s.a.w.]. After his death, Imam
Ali [a.s.] became his supporter and guardian until he came of age. He
grew up to be a handsome youth with pleasing manners and was known for
his sincere hospitality to guests and selfless generosity to the poor
and needy. 

Together this young couple had five children, of whom four were sons,
Ali, Aun, Muhammad, and Abbas, and one daughter, Umm Kulthum. 

In Medina it was Zaynab's practise to hold regular meetings for women in
which she shared her knowledge and taught them the precepts of the Deen
of Islam as laid out in the Holy Qur'an. Her gatherings were well and
regularly attended. She was able to impart the teachings with such
clarity and eloquence that she became known as Fasihah (skillfully
fluent) and Balighah (intensely eloquent). 

In the thirty-seventh year A.H. (after Hijrah), Imam Ali [a.s.] moved to
Kufa to finally take up his rightful position as khalifah. He was
accompanied by his daughter Zaynab [a.s.] and her husband. 

Her reputation as an inspiring teacher among the women had preceded her.
There too women would throng to her daily sittings where they all
benefited from her erudition, wisdom and scholarship in the exegesis of
the Qur'an. 

The depth and certainty of her knowledge earned her the name given to
her by her nephew, Imam Ali Zayn ul-Abidin [a.s.], of '*Alimah Ghayr
Mu'allamah*, she who has knowledge without being taught. 

Zaynab [a.s.] was also nicknamed Zahidah (abstemious) and 'Abidah
(devoted) because of her abstemiousness and piety. She found little of
interest in worldly adornments, always preferring the bliss and comfort
of the Next World over that of this world. She used to say that for her
the life of this world was as a resting place to relieve fatigue along a
journey. Humble and of high morals, her main concern was to strive to
please Allah and in doing so she avoided anything which was the least
bit doubtful. 


