Assassination 
==============

On the night before Friday the 19th of Ramadan in the fortieth year
after hijrah, Imam Ali [a.s.] went to the central mosque for prayers.
Shortly after the adhan (call to prayer), Zaynab [a.s.] heard a
heart-rending cry. Soon the cries came nearer to her house and she
realised that they were bringing her the news of her father's
assassination. Ibn Muljim had struck Imam Ali [a.s.] a fatal blow while
he was in the defenceless state of sajdah (devotional prostration).
Mortally wounded, he was carried back home on the shoulders of his
followers. 

There was to be no recovery from this wound. On the twenty-first night
of Ramadan Imam Ali [a.s.] died, leaving his two sons and daughter to
witness and face his enemies' misguided lust for power and revenge. 

After his father's soul was released, Imam Hasan [a.s.] said, "Tonight
such a great man has died with whose good conduct no one in the past or
the future can compare. He fought holy wars side by side with the Holy
Prophet, and made his life a shield for him. The Prophet used to make
him a standard-bearer of the army while the angels Jibra'il walked on
his right and Mika'il on his left. He never came back from any war
without victory. At the time of his death he left nothing save seven
hundred dirhams with which he had intended to provide the people of his
house a servant." 

Zaynab [a.s.] was submerged in grief at the brutal loss of her dear
father. Together with her husband she returned to Medina. 

Some ten years later Zaynab [a.s.] was once again stricken with a
grievous loss, that of her brother Imam Hasan [a.s.]. He too fell victim
to the schemes of the power-hungry Bani Umayya. 

Mu'awiya was intent on converting the caliphate into a hereditary
kingship so as to retain the seat of power within his clan. To achieve
this it was necessary that he secure allegiance of the people for his
son Yazid. This proved to be impossible as long as Imam Hasan [a.s.] was
alive. Therefore he successfully eliminated him through an ingenious
intrigue in which the hand that dealt Imam Hasan [a.s.] the deadly
poison was none other than the Imam's wife. 

The rights of leadership now passed into the hands of Imam Husayn
[a.s.], but the Bani Umayya would not leave him in peace. Within six
years of Husayn's brother's death, Mu'awiya started to openly call upon
people to swear allegiance to his son Yazid, and people met his desire
willingly or unwillingly. Imam Husayn [a.s.] numbered among the five men
who alone refused to pledge themselves to Yazid. 

During the four years left to his life after securing allegiance for his
son, Mu'awiya was unable to dissuade Imam Husayn [a.s.] from his firm
opposition to such a system of rule. If the caliphate was to be based on
heredity, then none other than the Prophet's grandson and nearest
surviving kin was more suitable. And if the right to rule was to be
given on the basis of piety and learning, then to whom else other than
Husayn [a.s.] - proven to be possessed of untainted wisdom, complete
knowledge of Islamic law, piety and devotion of the highest degree -
could this position be rightfully apportioned. 

In the month of Rajab in the sixtieth year after Hijrah, the Bani Hashim
were confronted with the caliphate of Yazid. Yazid did not have the
forbearance of his father, and was not content to let Husayn [a.s.] stay
in Medina in peace. The day after his father's death he wrote to Walid
ibn 'Utba ibn Abu Sufyan, then governor of Medina, asking him to pursue
Imam Husayn [a.s.], Abdullah ibn Umar, and Abdullah ibn Zubayr, and
compel them to swear allegiance to him.

Again Imam Husayn [a.s.] refused. He decided to leave Medina, and, at
the behest of other oppressed people, to go to Kufa where, he had been
led to believe, there were many who wished to combat the tyrannical rule
of the transgressing Bani Umayya and see to it that pure enlightened
leadership of Muslims prevailed instead. 


