Introduction
============

Feminism has radically altered Western culture in the latter half of the
twentieth century. Perhaps no other social movement has wrought such
profound changes in social mores and attitudes. Sexual revolution and
liberation meant that sexual relations should be freed of the
constraints associated with traditional Christian virtue.

The gay rights movement extended the demand for freedom regarding sexual
relations to homosexuality. Moral censorship was relaxed in print media,
cinema and television, and pornography burgeoned. General standards of
taste in speech and behavior devolved in response to the dictates of
prints, films and broadcasts. Family ties were weakened and the divorce
rate soared. In Scandinavia it is estimated that roughly half of all
infants are born to unwed mothers.

It was a bewilderingly abrupt relaxation of the restraints of
centuries... The sudden sexual revolution was not just the lifting of
censorship. Landlords and hostellers, long forbidden by law to
accommodate unwed couples, could now be told not to ask personal
questions....The courts were left facing stubborn new problems regarding
marital or quasi-marital responsibilities and titles to property. Deeper
dislocations of a social kind are being wrought by the weakening of the
family.[^1]

At the same time, women became an increasingly visible force in the
workplace, the academy and the political arena, the most outspoken among
who have been feminists.

The changes mentioned are not solely the work of feminists. The
anti-establishment attitudes among the youth of the 1960's and the
popularity enjoyed by the left contributed to these changes and also to
support for feminism itself.

Nevertheless, feminist thought has been a major force in the social
upheaval in the West since the sixties that continues to exert its
influence, and among the explicit goals feminists have advocated have
been the abolition of the family and traditional gender roles, to which
ends they have championed homosexuality and promiscuity.

Feminists have managed to set standards for the use of 'nonÂ­sexist
language' in most universities and publishing houses, the most visible
result of which has been an explosion of the population of feminine
pronouns.

They have also managed to enforce their own preferences in areas as
diverse as script writing, advertising and public employment practices.
They have introduced a popular jargon in terms of which important social
issues are debated, and they have begun to export their ideology abroad.

Feminism began to establish itself in areas outside the West through is
use by colonial powers to undermine local culture in the areas under
their control, and although it has met with some resistance,
particularly among Muslims, there continues to be a great deal of
confusion about what feminism is, about its goals, history and branches.

In what follows a brief introduction to feminism and its history is
presented, with particular attention to philosophical and theological
issues relevant to Islam. There follows a comparison between feminist
and Islamic doctrines in which their utter incompatibility is
elucidated. Finally, some observations are drawn with regard to the
Islamic women's movement.

[^1]: W. v. Quine, Quiddities (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1987), 207-208.


