A Brief History Of Feminism
===========================

Feminism Distinguished From Other Women's Movements
---------------------------------------------------

Women have been oppressed ever since the invention of human sin, and for
nearly as long they have been engaged in the attempt to free themselves
from oppression. The attempts made to end the injustices done to women,
particularly when these injustices are institutionalized, may be called
women's movements.

In this sense, Islam may be considered a women's movement, because it
includes a divinely ordained program for the eradication of injustice
done to women. Western women, however, usually fail to recognize Islam
as a women's movement, and they restrict the term 'women's movement' to
the products of Western culture designed to change the status of women
in society.

The industrial revolution of the nineteenth century and the gradual
process of urbanization brought women together in the labor force
outside the framework of the family, whereas in agrarian society, women
worked with family members. At the same time, women were excluded from
politics.

The rights of man proclaimed by the French Revolution were limited to
males. During the Enlightenment, women began to demand 'emancipation',
freedom from dependency on men, educational opportunity and political
rights.

Feminists would go on to make more radical claims, including among the
most prominent of these: legalized abortion on demand, free love or
sexual liberation, complete equality with men and the abolition of
differentiation of the roles of the sexes. Feminism is often defined as
a movement seeking full equality of rights with men, but it is important
to emphasize that the equality of rights sought by feminists goes far
beyond equality under the law.

Feminism aims at the eradication of any difference in social roles based
on gender difference, and this is what distinguishes it from other
women's movements.[^1] Nevertheless, the feminist movement includes
within its ranks writers and activists who differ on many fundamental
issues in philosophy, politics and morals.

What unites them is the social ideal of the elimination of traditional
gender roles. Feminism may thus be defined as a branch of the women's
movement that aims at the elimination of traditional gender roles.
However, confusion exists about the use of the term 'feminism', for
there are writers who fail to distinguish feminism from the more general
women's movement.

The focus of attention in what follows will be on feminist philosophy
(including political philosophy) and feminist theology, however, among
the important feminist writings there are also works on psychoanalysis,
jurisprudence and literary criticism.

Feminism And Socialism
----------------------

Perhaps the first use of the term 'feminism' was in the early nineteenth
century by the socialist, Charles Fourier (1772-­1837). The followers of
another early socialist, Henri de Saint-Simon (1760-1825), introduced
the androgyny principle, according to which there was a mixed male and
female being at the beginning of history.

(Muslims will find it amusing to learn that Saint-Simon's disciples went
to Turkey to seek the female savior after having lost hope of finding a
truly free woman in Europe!) Socialist feminists advocated the abolition
of any division of labor along sex specific lines, and called for quotas
whereby half of all the positions in every field of employment are to be
filled by women.

With the domination of Marxism among the various forms of socialism,
socialist feminism also came to be dominated by Marxist feminism, first
elaborated in 1844 by Engels in Der Ursprung der Familie (The Origen of
the Family).

In this work Engels demands the abolition of the family, uniform
integration of men and women into the labor force and the communal
raising of children in order to achieve equality among all people and an
end to the domination of one person over another.

Although socialism has lost popularity in recent years and Marxism, in
particular, seems on the verge of extinction, a political left continues
to survive, even in America, especially in academia. As the academic
left has also welcomed feminism, so too, Marxist ideas continue to find
expression in the writings of important feminist leaders.

Perhaps the most notable lesson feminists have learned from Marxists is
their polemical style. Articles on feminism, even those printed in such
reputable works as the Encyclopedia of Ethics and the Routledge
Encyclopedia of Philosophy do not merely describe the work of feminists;
they actively advocate the abolition of traditional gender roles for the
sake of the liberation of women.

Like Marxists, feminists have also adopted an ideologically charged
rhetoric with which to declaim their analyses and polemics. Often the
language used is directly inspired by Marxist terminology, even when
Marxism is itself explicitly rejected.

More orthodox Marxist and socialist feminists argue that the oppression
of women has its roots in the class system, and that the system must be
overturned in order to liberate women. Feminist critics of Marxist
feminism have argued that men exploit the labor of women through
housework regardless of the class system, so that the class analysis is
insufficient and must be supplemented by an analysis of exploitation
based on gender.

Feminist Philosophy
-------------------

Certainly the most famous of feminist philosophers of the twentieth
century was Simone de Beauvoir (1908-1986). In 1949 she published Le
Deuxième Sexe (The Second Sex) in which she elaborated an
existentialist/Marxist analysis of the relations between men and women.
As existentialist thought emphasizes the radical freedom of the
individual to arbitrarily choose his essence, de Beauvoir makes the
dramatic claim that one's gender is also a matter choice. To the extent
that biology would seem to indicate otherwise, she finds biology
degrading.

Biology gives men a freedom from reproductive processes that women lack,
so she sees femininity as an obstacle to being truly human. Later
feminists have criticized de Beauvoir for her disparagement of female
anatomy and for advocating that women take men's roles in society.

Nevertheless, it is generally acknowledged that her work set out what
would become major themes of later feminist writing: the difference
between sex and gender (biological and social sexual characteristics),
concern with autobiography seen as a political statement, and the need
to draw upon various disciplines in the analysis of gender roles.

While de Beauvoir's feminism has much in common with the existentialism
of Jean-Paul Sartre, more recent feminists have drawn from the
philosophies of Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida to apply the methods
of genealogical analysis and deconstruction to issues pertaining to
gender, including women's roles in society, women's psychology, and the
political oppression of women.

Feminists, however, have not merely made use of philosophical trends for
their own purposes; they have also elaborated positions in virtually all
the major areas of philosophy. Hence, there are feminist readings of the
history of philosophy, feminist philosophy of science, feminist
epistemology, feminist social and political philosophy, feminist ethics
and even feminist ontology. The Society for Women in Philosophy was
founded in 1972 whose journal, Hypatia, publishes articles on feminist
philosophy.

In the history of philosophy, feminists have concerned themselves with
two major projects. First, a number of works have been written that aim
to disclose bias against women or gender stereotypes in the writings of
Western philosophers from Plato and Aristotle to John Rawls. Descartes
has been a particular target of these sorts of critique.[^2]

Second, there has been an attempt to emphasize the importance of women
philosophers throughout history. A major accomplishment in this program
was the publication of Mary Ellen Waith's three-volume A History of
Women Philosophers.[^3]

Feminist philosophy of science and epistemology has for the most part
sought to refute claims to the objectivity of science and knowledge, and
to identify gender bias in the works of scientists and philosophers.

Modeled on the Marxist idea that culture is a superstructure that
reflects class interests, feminist 'standpoint theories' advocates the
idea that a specifically feminine view of the world is possible when
science is practiced from a woman's perspective.[^4]

A current topic of debate in feminist philosophy of science and
epistemology is whether emphasis on the uniqueness of the female
perspective implies relativism or a denial of objective truth.

Feminist approaches to ethics place a strong emphasis on politics. They
are more concerned with power than goodness, and often provide criticism
of the ways in which traditional ethics contributes to the subordination
and oppression of women.

Allison Jagger, for example, suggests that feminist ethics should
provide guides to action that will subvert the subordination of
women.[^5]

Lesbian feminists have proposed a feminist ethics based onthe
proposition that women cannot enter a relationship with men without
becoming victims of subjugation, and that lesbian communities should
construct their own ethics on the basis of a quest for freedom and
self-identity rather than the good, and choice rather than duty.[^6]

Lesbians have played an important role in the feminist movement, and
although not all feminists are advocates of lesbianism, feminists
generally condone lesbianism as an implication of the attack on
traditional gender roles.[^7]

Feminists have also been critical of those who have proposed a
particularly feminine ethics. For example, the renowned moral
psychologist, Carol Gilligan, has proposed that an ethics of care is
more suitable to explain the moral development of girls than the ethics
of justice used by her mentor, Lawrence Kohlberg, to explain the moral
development of boys.[^8]

Feminists respond that Gilligan places too much emphasis on the virtue
of caring for women because this may serve to support rather than
undermine established gender differentiation.[^9] Likewise, feminists
reject the feminine ethics proposed by ethicists who focus on the moral
insights to be gained through an examination of maternal relationships.

Feminists argue that by giving primacy to women's roles as mothers,
feminine ethics fails to encourage women to gain the traits necessary to
overturn patriarchy and gender bias.

An important part of the feminist polemic is the insistence that
traditional gender roles based on sexual differences is wrong, that
patriarchy is a form of oppression and subjugation of women, that women
have been unjustly marginalized and ignored, that women's rights have
been violated.

So, there is a moral demand in feminism for the subversion of
patriarchal social arrangements, for the rewriting of history, for the
critique of every element of culture dominated by a male perspective,
including (to mention but a few) art, psychology, theology and ethics
itself.

Feminist Political Theory
-------------------------

Feminist political thought begins with Marxism. According to Marx and
Engels, it is the class system that lies at the source of all
oppression, and the family is a social institution reflective of that
oppressive system. The call for the abolition of the family is
inseparable from the call for the abolition of the capitalist system and
its replacement by communism.

While some feminists have endorsed a more or less orthodox Marxist view
of the family, others have sought to place gender roles at the
foundation of their political thought. Instead of seeing the family as a
reflection of the underlying capitalist system of production, they view
capitalism as a result of the oppressive nature of patriarchy.

Kate Millet, an activist in the 'Women's Liberation Movement' of the
late 1960's, accordingly claimed that the most entrenched oppressive
structure in human society is not capitalism, but male dominance.

The development of feminism is often divided into three waves, each of
which is associated with a characteristic type of political demand. The
first wave is said to include the emancipation and socialist movements
of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

In addition to Engels' The Origin of the Family (1884) and Mill's The
Subjection of Women (1869), the writings and speeches of the Russian
born American anarchist, Emma Goldman (1869-1940), are included among
the major philosophical statements of feminist thought in this period,
which is sometimes extended to include de Beauvoir's work, as well.

Feminism is thus foremost a social and political movement, and it is not
surprising to find that its core philosophical expressions take the form
of social-political philosophy.

The feminism of the 1960's and 70's is called 'second wave'. It is
characterized by the radicalization of the movement. While first-wave
feminists called for an end to legal discriminations against women so
that there would be no legal difference between the status of men and
women, second-wave feminists came to view the concepts of male and
female social roles to be bound up with patriarchy and called for the
elimination of both.

The third-wave feminism of the 1980's and 90's is marked by a rejection
of any sort of essentialism. Earlier feminists had made general
pronouncements about women, their exploitation and how they should go
about liberation. Third-wave feminists argued that a natural implication
of the rejection of traditional ideas about gender is the realization of
the diversity of feminine types among women of different races, classes,
nationalities and sexual orientations.

Third-wave feminists promote a vision of liberation in which there is a
wide ranging plurality rather than any single ideal of the liberated
woman. Liberation is seen as diversity in the options available for
sexual relations and gender roles.

Another division of types of feminism is fourfold: liberal, radical,
socialist and postmodernist. Liberal feminism has its roots in the
writings of Mary Wollstonecraft (1757-1797) and John Stuart Mill
(1806-1873) who demanded equal rights for women.

In the 1960's liberal feminists in the United States fought for women's
rights to abortion on demand, support for working mothers, the universal
availability of childcare centers, and greater representation in
government, business and the academy.

This led to calls for 'affirmative action', legal measures to promote
the hiring of women and minorities in order to redress past injustices
done to them. While liberal feminists emphasize the common humanity of
men and women as a basis for equality of rights, radical feminists
celebrate the differences between the experiences of men and women.

They argue that women's experiences have been suppressed and that as a
result all aspects of culture, from literature and science to politics
and law, betray the biases of and in favor of male sensibilities.
Socialist feminism has been discussed already, and post-modernist
feminism seems to be another term for third wave feminism.

Feminist Theology
-----------------

Feminist theology began to establish itself in the 1970's.During that
decade the journal Concilium was launched to promote feminist theology,
the first conferences were held to discuss feminist theology in the
U.S., the World Council of Churches held a conference in Berlin on
sexism, and Mary Daly published Beyond God the Father.[^10]

Like liberation theology, to which it is closely linked both
historically and theoretically, feminist theology draws upon and
criticizes Marxist thought. Religion is interpreted in such a way that
its primary function is seen as liberation, liberation of the poor in
liberation theology and of women in feminist theology. Feminist theology
may be divided into moderate and radical tendencies.

The moderate tendencies advocate reinterpretations of the established
religions to purge them of what are considered sexist or androcentric
elements. The radical tendencies advocate a rejection of patriarchal
religious thought in favor of the worship of one or more goddesses or
even witchcraft.

One of the areas of scholarship to which moderate feminists have devoted
their attention is the history of the church. Feminists such as
Elisabeth Schlssler Fiorenza argue that the early Christians were
egalitarians, but that as the Church hierarchy developed, bias against
women became institutionalized, and infected many subsequent theological
discussions.[^11]

The method employed by Schlssler Fiorenza is broadly sociological, and
draws upon liberation theology. The conclusions reached are relatively
moderate: the feminist critique is to lead to Church reform.[^12]

Feminists who focus on psychoanalytic methods draw more radical
conclusions. Following C. G. Jung, feminists such as Christa Mulack hold
that the unconscious, which is associated with the feminine, is primary,
and that male dominated religion has suppressed the feminine in favor of
the male. On this view, the Hebrew prophets are seen as rebels against
"the Great Goddess".

Feminist theologians who concentrate on psychology tend to reject
equality feminism in favor of a feminism in which the feminine is
paramount, or gynocentric feminism. They also tend to reject
Christianity rather than call for its reform. While the majority of
feminist theologians appear to be comparatively moderate, the radicals
constitute a very influential minority.

The most famous feminist theologian, a radical advocate of gynocentric
feminism sometimes referred to as the 'foster mother of feminist
theology', is the former Catholic nun, Mary Daly. She was the first
American woman to earn a doctorate in Catholic theology at the
University of Fribourg (in 1963).

Her first major work, The Church and the Second Sex,[^13] echoes many of
the ideas of Simone de Beauvoir, but applies them to Church history and
theology. She calls for Church reform and a reinterpretation of
Christianity along the lines of equality feminism. Her most famous work,
however, is Beyond God the Father.[^14]

In this work Daly argues that the Christian concept of God is
irredeemably androcentric, and she coins the often-quoted slogan of
feminist theology, "If God is male, then the male is God."[^15] The male
dominance in Christian thought is further demanded by Trinitarian
doctrine, according to which the male Christ is 'God the Son', the
second person of the Trinity, and the first person of the Trinity is
'God the Father'.

Instead, Daly proposes that God be considered in a non-personal manner
as the ground of all being, as taught by Paul Tillich. Daly's next major
work, Gyn/Ecology,[^16] makes a complete break from Christianity with
the rejection of God in favor of the Goddess and the glorification of
witchcraft as the esoteric knowledge of an earlier matriarchal culture.
She also reasserts her advocacy of lesbianism and rejection of the
complementarity of the masculine and the feminine. This was followed by
the publication of an even more radical work, Pure Lust,[^17] in which
lust is turned into a virtue through which 'complete empowerment' is to
be achieved.

Perhaps the most famous French feminist who has written on theology is
Luce Irigaray. She writes from a postmodernist perspective critical of
equality feminism. Her ideal is not a society in which gender
differences are eliminated, but one in which a new femininity emerges
from the experiences of women freed from male domination.

Liberation has theological implications. Like Mary Daly, she opposes
Christianity for its masculine conception of God, particularly as
expressed in the concept of the Trinity. Although she argues that women
need religion and divinity, the idea of God presented in the revealed
religions is rejected.

Respect for God is possible as long as no one realizes that he is a mask
concealing the fact that men have taken sole possession of the divine,
of identity, and of kinship. Once we give this whole issue the attention
and serious consideration it deserves, however, it becomes obvious that
God is being used by men to oppress women and that; therefore, God must
be questioned and not simply neutered in the current pseudo liberal
way.[^18]

She claims that only a "God in the feminine gender" can maintain women's
freedom and fulfillment "as individuals and as members of a
community."[^19]

While most feminist theologians do not advocate the goddess theologies
suggested by Daly and Irigaray, they are moderate only in comparison to
extreme views such as these. So-called moderate feminist theologians
accept much of the general orientation of feminism: the rejection of
gender complementarity, the acceptance of 'non-traditional families'
consisting of homosexual partners with or without children and unwed
mothers with children, and a hermeneutic based on the attempt to uncover
gender bias.

They advocate the rewriting of religious texts in such a way that all
masculine references to God are replaced by neuter or masculine and
feminine references, so that where the Bible refers to God as "our
Father", the feminists replace this by "our Mother and Father".

While this may seem superficial, moderate feminist theologians tend to
interpret the basic message of Christianity as a call to struggle for
liberation, particularly, the liberation of women from male domination,
which entails the dismantling of the traditional family.

[^1]: The Duden German dictionary defines feminism as a "direction
within the women's movement that strives for a new self-understanding by
women and the abolition of the traditional separation of roles." Duden
1, 20th ed. (Mannheim: 1991), p. 267. Cited in and corroborated with
other references to leading feminists in Germany in Manfred Hauke, God
or Goddess? (San Francisco: 1995), p. 20-21. This article is deeply
indebted to Hauke's book, and all the references to German feminists as
well as much other material is taken from Hauke's citations or
summarized from his discussions.

[^2]: See A. Nye, Philosophy and Feminism: At the Border (New
York:1995).

[^3]: Mary Ellen Waith, A History of Women Philosophers 3
vols.(Dordrecht: 1987-1991).

[^4]: See Sandra Harding, Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thinking from
Women's Lives (Ithaca: 1991).

[^5]: Allison Jagger, "Feminist Ethics", in L. Becker and C. Becker,
eds., The Encyclopedia of Ethics(New York: Garland, 1992).

[^6]: Sarah Lucia Hoagland, Lesbian Ethics (Palo Alto: Institute of
Lesbian Studies, 1988).

[^7]: See Christa Mulack, Natirlich Weiblich (Stuttgart: 1990).

[^8]: Carol Gilligan, In a Different voice: Psychological Theory and
Women's Development (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1982).

[^9]: Shiela Mullett, "Shifting Perspectives: A New Approach to Ethics",
in L. Code, S. Mullett, C. Overall, eds., Feminist Perspectives:
Philosophical Essays on Method and Morals (Toronto: University of
Toronto, 1988).

[^10]: Mary Daly, Beyond God the Father: Toward a Philosophy of Women's
Liberation (Boston: 1973).

[^11]: See Elisabeth Schlssler Fiorenza, In Memory of Her: A Feminist
Theological Reconstruction of Christian Origins (New York: 1983).

[^12]: Other moderate Christian feminists are Elisabeth Grossman,
Rosemary Reuther, Catharina Halkes and Elisabeth Moltman-Wendel.

[^13]: (New York: 1968).

[^14]: Mary Daly (1973).

[^15]: Daly (1973), 19.

[^16]: Mary Daly, Gyn/Ecology: The Meta-ethics of Radical
Feminism(Boston: 1978).

[^17]: Mary Daly, Pure Lust: Elemental Feminist Philosophy (Boston:
1984).

[^18]: Luce Irigaray, Sexes and Genealogies, tr. Gillian C. Gill (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1993), v.

[^19]: Irigaray (1993), 72.


