The Islamic Opposition to Feminism
==================================

Although Islam and feminism are not completely without common ground,
the values and principles of Islam and feminism are generally contrary.
Both condemn the oppression of women. Both insist that women may own
their own property and dispose of it as they wish. In theology, both
reject the symbol of 'Father' for God.

However, the feminist view that patriarchy is equivalent to the
oppression of women is not compatible with Islam. The feminist idea that
traditional gender roles are to be eliminated is opposed by the Islamic
idea that the primary role of woman (after that of servant of God) is
that of wife and mother.

Theologically, while feminists view the divine as 'Mother and Father' or
as goddess, Islam considers the parent metaphor inappropriate for
divinity and categorically denies the existence of gods and goddesses.

The Conflicting Ideals Of Islam And Feminism
--------------------------------------------

While feminism rejects any sort of complementarity of the sexes, Islam
emphasizes it through the accentuation of different social roles for men
and women. Feminism is critical of the institution of marriage because
it leads to the subordination of women, while Islam strongly recommends
marriage for both men and women, and the marriage institution in Islam
is one in which husbands and wives have clearly distinct
responsibilities and duties. The leadership role for men is taken for
granted in Islam, while feminists consider it oppression.

Traditional Islamic thought has celebrated the hierarchical structure of
the universe as a pointer toward the divine, and has seen echoes of this
in the relationship of mind and body, spirit and psyche, king and
subject, master and slave, and man and woman. This does not mean that
Islam condones all such relationships as found in traditional societies,
but it does mean that relationships of subordination and hierarchy are
not for that very reason to be considered evil, as feminists hold they
are.

According to Elisabeth Moltmann-Wendel, the "crux of patriarchal
theology" is "the dominance implied in the relationship between mind and
body: will over the unconscious, history over nature, man over
woman."[^1]

Rosemary Reuther displays the same attitude: "Sexual symbolism is
foundational to the perception of order and relationship that has been
built up in cultures. The psychic organization of consciousness, the
dualistic view of the self and the world, the hierarchical concept of
society, the relation of humanity and nature, and of God and
creation-all these relationships have been modeled on sexual
dualism."[^2]

As Hauke points out, "The implicit supposition here is that
subordination and inferiority are identical and that they signify
'division' and 'rape'."[^3]

Islam is the obedient subordination of man to God. In his submission to
God, however, man is not oppressed by God, but perfected. While
feminists consider the condition of women to be better when they have
more choices, because they hold that the good is the free expression and
satisfaction of free ranging desire, the good in Islam is viewed as the
annihilation of the self with its desires in divinity.

This divine encounter is approached through the attainment of virtue and
the conquest of the illicit desires of the self.

Complementarity, the Family and Sexuality
-----------------------------------------

Europeans have condemned Islam for its acceptance of human sexuality and
sensuality and for its repression of the same. When Victorian morals
dominated Europe, Islam was seen as a naughty religion offering its
believers promises of sensual delight in the afterlife.

When European morals changed and Freudian ideas had been popularized,
Islam was condemned for the limitations it places on sexual relations.
In feminist writing, both attitudes are expressed. To a certain extent,
this may be due to different ideas about sexuality current among
feminists.

Some feminists, for example, consider prostitution a legitimate form of
labor, and prefer the term 'sexual workerâ€™, while other feminists
consider prostitution and the 'sex industry' as manifestations of the
degradation of women at the hands of the patriarchic system.

Some feminists call for changes in Islamic societies so that women may
be given more sexual license, while others call for greater restrictions
to be placed upon men.

Islam clearly recognizes and accepts human sexuality. Sexual pleasure in
itself is not considered evil, as it is in some Christian texts.
Nevertheless, Islam places strict constraints on sexual behavior. These
constraints differ for men and women. Men are permitted to have more
than one wife simultaneously, while women are not permitted to have more
than one husband at any one time.

It must be admitted that Muslim men sometimes abuse this and other
permissions granted them by Islamic law to do injustice to women.
Feminists conclude from this that Islamic law is oppressive to women.
However, in the context of the laws governing sexual relations in other
societies, whether liberal, communist or Christian, some men also take
advantage of the opportunities they find there to oppress women.

Should we then conclude that all laws governing sexual relations are
oppressive to women? Even if a society were constructed in which there
were absolutely no laws governing sexual relations, some men would still
oppress women, probably even more than they do in Muslim societies. The
problem would seem to reside not in the law, but in the morals of those
who would abuse it for selfish purposes.

With all the freedoms and rights granted to women in the US, the claim
that women are better off than they were earlier is dubious. Statistics
show that more women live in poverty than before. Divorce has been made
easy, and custody of children is normally awarded to mothers, while the
support that could be provided by other family members has been
undermined with the erosion of the family.

Islamic law functions to preserve the family structure through
patriarchal hierarchy in which a base line of duties toward women is
clearly drawn. Furthermore, there is considerable room for women to
maneuver within the framework of Islamic family law to prevent their
husbands from arbitrarily divorcing them or remarrying.

This seems far better for women than the Western customs in which the
average duration of marriage is five years and in which it is common for
men to keep mistresses.

The Role Of Women In Islam
--------------------------

The most important and most emphasized role for women mentioned in
Islamic sources is that of wife and mother, but the role of woman in
Islam is by no means limited to this. Women may be entrepreneurs, as was
Khadijah, the first wife of Muhammad (s) and the first convert to Islam.

They may also take a strong political stand even leading to martyrdom,
as did Fatimah, the daughter of Muhammad (s), wife of Imam 'Ali and
mother of Imams Hasan and Husayn, peace be with all of them.

Some positions, however, such as leading prayers for men, are considered
inappropriate for women.

Westerners often assume that because social relations between men and
women are restricted in Islamic societies in ways that seem strange to
them, that Muslim women are not socially and politically active. The
following anecdote reported by W. Morgan Shuster regarding events in
Tehran in 1911provides some indication of how mistaken this assumption
is.

With the dark days when doubts came to be whispered as to whether the
Medjlis would stand firm [against Russian threats], the Persian women,
in their zeal for liberty and their ardent love for their country . . .
supplied the answer. Out from their walled courtyards and harems marched
three hundred of that weak sex, with the flush of undying determination
in their cheeks. They were clad in their plain black robes with the
white nets of their veils dropped over their faces. Many held pistols
under their skirts or in the folds of their sleeves. Straight to the
Medjlis they went, and, gathered there, demanded of the President that
he admit them all. What the grave deputies of the Land of the Lion and
the Sun may have thought at this strange visitation is not recorded. The
President consented to receive a delegation of them. In his
reception-hall they confronted him, and lest he and his colleagues
should doubt their meaning, these cloistered Persian mothers, wives and
daughters exhibited threateningly their revolvers, tore aside their
veils, and confessed their decision to kill their own husbands and sons,
and leave behind their own dead bodies, if the deputies wavered in their
duty to uphold the liberty and dignity of the Persian people and
nation.[^4]

This is not an isolated incident. Women in Muslim societies are and
always have been active in social and political affairs, even if they
have rarely taken publicly visible leadership roles. A careful reading
of the Qur'an shows that this is no historical accident.

God directly addresses women through the revelation of the Qur'an by
assuring them that their deeds will not go unrewarded and by offering as
exemplars women who have courageously taken positions in unfavorable
social conditions, not however, to secure their own rights or interests,
but in obedience to God.

Thus Mary, peace be with her, is rebuked by her people for having the
child Jesus out of wedlock. She agreed to have the child when visited by
the angel out of obedience to God. In response to the taunts directed
against her, Mary offers no excuses but points to the child prophet, who
miraculously speaks to them.[^5] The wife of Pharaoh refuses to obey her
husband and king in his idolatry because of her acceptance of the
message of the prophet Moses.[^6]

The primary roles accorded to women in Islam are those of wife and
mother, and it is precisely these roles with which feminists are most
uncomfortable. Feminists are concerned with 'liberating' women from
expectations that they should marry and have children.

They see progress for women in terms of employment opportunities,
income, opportunities to experiment with non-traditional sexual
relations and political power. Although Islam does not bar women from
wealth and power, it places greater emphasis on marriage and the family.

It seems that this accords with the interests of the vast majority of
the women of the world. Although they are not averse to wealth and
power, their primary concerns tend to center around marriage and the
family. Islam dignifies these primary concerns while feminism tends to
undermine them.

Of course, the most important role for woman in Islam is no different
than that assigned to men-servant of God. It is as servants of God that
Muslim women and men take on the roles of mothers and fathers and wives
and husbands, buyers and sellers, teachers and pupils, workers and
employers, etc.

[^1]: Elisabeth Moltmann-Wendel, "Werkstatt Ohne Angst" Forum Religion
3!1987, 34. Cited in Hauke (1995), 95.

[^2]: Rosemary Reuther, New Woman-New Earth (New York: 1975), 3. Cited
in Hauke (1995), 96.

[^3]: Hauke (1995), 96.

[^4]: W. Morgan Shuster, The Strangling of Persia (Washington, D.C.:
Mage Publishers, 1987), 197-198.

[^5]: (19:27-30).

[^6]: (66:11).


