Conclusion: The Islamic Struggle Against Feminism
=================================================

The brief points made above, though sketchy, should be sufficient to
show that the incompatibility of Islam with feminism is profound. It is
not just a disagreement about how Islamic law is to be interpreted or
what sort of rights should be accorded to women.

Islam and feminism have contradictory views on the most fundamental
issues in metaphysics, ethics, social and political philosophy and
theology.

Muslim women have also argued that feminism is an ideology relevant only
to the lives of Western affluent women, and that even for them it has
only resulted in making them into quasi men or sex objects. They have
also pointed out that while Muslim women see their own most important
roles to be mother and wife feminist ideology belittles the importance
of these roles in its combat against gender stereotypes.

The most obvious marker of the struggle against feminism by Muslim women
is Hijab (the canons of modesty in Islamic dress). While feminists have
taken the scarf to be a symbol of their subjugation to men in Muslim
societies, the faithful take it to be a symbol of respect and modesty.

The Prohibition By Islam Of The Oppression Of Women
---------------------------------------------------

No prohibition is given greater emphasis in Islam than that against
injustice. In the Qur'an, particular attention is drawn to various areas
in which there is a potential for injustice against women, but in
general it is social acceptability and moral conscience to which appeal
is made in order to discern what is just from what is oppression.

The laws of Islam set outer limits, but that does not mean that whatever
falls within the perimeters is condoned. With respect to worship, for
example, the law specifies the outward conditions for correct prayer,
fasting and ritual purity, but one may offer formally correct prayer in
ways considered repugnant (makruh) even with respect to external form.
It is rather trite to mention, additionally, that validity of external
form is no guarantee of interior soundness (ihsan).

According to a hadith related by both Shi'i and Sunni sources, on his
last pilgrimage, the Prophet (s) said, "O people! Fear Allah regarding
women, for you have taken them in trust from Allah." Since what is taken
in trust must be properly cared for, some scholars have allowed that the
legal religious authorities may intervene even when there has been no
explicit violation of Islamic precepts in case of mistreatment of a wife
by her husband.[^1]

The Misuse Of Islam For The Oppression Of Women
-----------------------------------------------

Islam has been and continues to be misused as an instrument for the
oppression of women. This happens in various ways. Sometimes men take
advantage of the position of women in Muslim societies to deny women
opportunities that should be protected were Islam properly practiced.
The dictates of Islam against injustice to women are simply ignored, and
Islam itself is falsely used as an excuse for this.

An example of this is the way the Taliban in Afghanistan misuse precepts
of sexual segregation to deny women educational opportunities and access
to health and other facilities. Another way women are oppressed in Islam
is when the letter of the law is observed but its spirit is violated.
Instances of this are too many to even begin giving examples. These are
issues that need to be addressed by men and women in Muslim societies
today.

Because of the abuses that exist, feminists argue that Islamic law
should be changed, but there are other ways to fight abuse. More
attention needs to be paid to the spirit of Islamic teaching. Islamic
law should not be seen as a framework within which one can get away with
whatever one likes with impunity.

Muslims need to be just as careful about the need to mold themselves
according to the ideals taught by Islam as they are careful about
conformity to its legal injunctions. The feminists seem to share the
same blindness as those who use Islamic law as a pretext to oppress
women, neither can see beyond the law to Islamic values and ideals.

The issue is addressed in some detail by Shahid Mutahhari who recognizes
the problem and describes it as follows:

These cruelties are the outcome and an offshoot of a wrong conception of
Islam, which, according to them, says: "A woman must bear such cruelties
like a terminal cancer patient." This has created an impression of Islam
that is more harmful than any of the evil propaganda against our
faith.[^2]

Shahid Mutahhari calls for the organization of Islamic women's movements
in order to oppose the injustices done to women in Muslim society:

In our country we are in need of a women's movement, but we need a pure
Islamic movement and not a dark and gloomy European movement.[^3]

Muslim Women's Movements
------------------------

Struggles for the elimination of oppression to women based on an
acceptance of Islam may be termed Islamic women's movements. In the
modern period, Islamic women's movements arose as a reaction against
feminism, although they concerned themselves primarily with the
improvement of the conditions of women in Muslim societies.

It is not always clear whether organizations and individuals base their
struggle for the improvement of the conditions of women on Islam or on a
feminist ideology disguised as acceptance of Islam. Nor is this a black
and white distinction.

It appears that a considerable number of Muslim women influenced by
feminist ideas sincerely believe that the proper interpretation of Islam
is one that calls for absolute equality (i.e., identity) of rights for
men and women and the elimination of all distinctions based on sex found
in Islamic law as traditionally interpreted.

On the other hand, other Muslim women may sincerely but incorrectly
believe that there are no valid arguments within Islamic jurisprudence
for reform of the traditional interpretation of the law. So, among
Muslim women's movements, as opposed to explicitly secularist feminist
movements, we will find some to be firmly grounded on an attempt to be
guided by God's final revelation as taught by His chosen Prophet,
Muhammad (s), while others will attempt to manipulate the teachings of
Islam for their own agendas, whether these are feminist or
traditionalist agendas, and there will be much gray area between pure
faith and hypocrisy, as there always is in matters of religion.

Feminists have taken note of the great popular support for Islam among
women in Muslim countries. Some have responded by calling the Muslim
women foolish or duped. This seems to be the attitude of Leila Ahmed.
She claims that women are attracted to the moral ideals of Islam and are
unaware that the legal ramifications of Islamic law put women at a
disadvantage. This is an incredible hypothesis, to say the least.

It is hard to imagine a Muslim woman who has not heard that Islam has
different rules of inheritance for sons and daughters, let alone one who
is unaware of sex based differences in the marriage laws.

Some feminists have admitted that the Islamic movement has actually
improved the status of women, regardless of whether improvement is
judged by feminist or other standards. Haleh Afshar admits that the
revival of Islam after the victory of the Islamic Revolution has been
"almost literally a GodÂ­send" in the context of which Iranian women have
fought "against their political, legal and economic
marginalization....Throughout, their arguments have been anchored in the
teachings of Islam, the Koranic laws and the traditions and practices of
the Prophet of Allah."[^4]

Afshar's attitude appears to be that if Islamic rhetoric can be used to
win feminist objectives, this can justify compromises with Islam. Ziba
Mir-Hosseini seems to agree:

I argue that, contrary to what the early literature contends, and what
remains implicit in the later wave, the impact of the revolution on
women has been emancipatory, in the sense that it has paved the way for
the emergence of a popular feminist consciousness.[^5]

Mir-Hosseini, like Afshar, seems to think that it may be worthwhile
making compromises with Islam in order to achieve feminist objectives.
She refers to all women's movements as feminist, regardless of whether
they are based on feminist ideology or Islam, although she offers the
following conclusion about the indigenous 'feminism' she sees emerging
in Iran:

This process has inadvertently been nurturing an indigenous 'feminism'
which is as much rooted in Iranian family structures as it is in the
interaction of Islamic and Western ideals of womanhood. It could emerge
only after challenging and rejecting the state-sponsored and
Western-inspired 'feminism' of the Pahlavis, as well as the
liberal-leftist feminism of 1970's women's liberation, and yet in the
process assimilating some of the features of both.[^6]

We can only pray that Muslim women's movements comprising both Muslim
women and Muslim men will continue to be advance in their struggle
against injustice and will continue to provide an alternative to
feminism so that the family is strengthened rather than undermined in
loving obedience to the Most Merciful of the Merciful.

[^1]: Murtaza Mutahhari, The Rights of Women in Islam (Tehran: WOFIS,
1991), 314, 309-312.

[^2]: Mutahhari (1991), 306.

[^3]: Mutahhari (1991), 66.

[^4]: Haleh Afshar, "Women and the Politics of Fundamentalism in Iran,"
in Haleh Afshar, ed., Women and Politics in the Third World (London:
Routledge, 1996), 126.

[^5]: Ziba Mir-Hosseini, "Women and Politics in Post-Khomeini Iran," in
Afshar (1996), 143.

[^6]: Ziba Mir-Hosseini (1996), 163.


