Chapter 6: Testifying & Judging
===============================

**Fatma:** In all Qur’an verses regarding testimony or witnessing the
mention of a “one man, two women” policy is only regarding transactions.
All other related verses are general and state two witnesses with no
references of gender made.[^1] The prolonged verse on testimony is
directed at transactions of business affairs. Why is the ratio scaled,
and would this be the case for all witnessing or testifying?

***And get two witnesses, out of your own men, and if there are not two
men, then a man and two women, such as you choose, for witnesses, so
that if one of them forgets the other can remind her. (2:282)***

In addition to that, there seems to be an exception to the ratio where
the testimony of women is equal to that of men, in fact, it rebuts and
overrides the testimony of a husband accusing his wife of adultery,
hence vindicating her.

***For those who launch a charge against their spouses, and have no
support or evidence but their own, their solitary evidence can be
received if they bear witness four times with an oath by God that they
are telling the truth; but it would avert the punishment from the wife
if she bears witness four times with an oath by God that her husband is
telling a lie. (24:6-8)***

**Sayyid:** Although the Qur’anic references you cite do not mention the
ratio of witnesses, most of them are mainly governed and restricted to
the legislated verse in 2:228 that mentions the ratio.

Nonetheless, there are some cases or issues that require the expertise,
knowledge, and experiences to which only women can testify. A woman’s
testimony or witnessing is not always or necessarily in the ratio of
“one man-two women” in all cases.

When it comes to women’s issues such as menstruation, pregnancy, marital
consummation, or childbirth, Muslim scholars or judges will, in most
cases, agree that a woman’s testimony takes precedence over that of a
man.

Concerning the verse on transactions, generally in the past, women were
not as familiar with contracts and negotiations as men. Business was a
man’s profession. Men were more informed and experienced in commercial
trade, transactions, loaning, and so forth. In general, men knew more
about business than women, hence the ratio of two women as testifiers
was mainly based on a woman’s inexperience in transactions, not on her
ability, intelligence, or lack of trust.

***“And get two witnesses out of your men.” (5:106)***

The Qur’an is strict when securing transactions, one man is not
sufficient for a transaction to be binding; it requires two men. Again,
it is not gender based. Imam Sadiq said, “A

person who wishes to engage in business, should learn its rules and
laws, and if he makes any transaction without learning them, he may
suffer because of entering into a void or doubtful transaction.” [^2]

Regarding your second point, the verse that could refute the husband
accusing his wife of adultery is not related to testifying or
witnessing. It serves as a means of self-defense.

**Fatma:** Based on your explanations that women in the past were
inexperienced in business dealings. Yet, in our time, women are
graduating with degrees in business and becoming very prominent in the
field. Would this rule still apply to those women whose profession is
business?

**Sayyid:** Islamic injunctions conform to the standards of society, not
to the exceptions. Agreeing with your point that women are becoming
professional businesswomen, be that as it may, Islamic rules cannot be
overturned simply because some women are becoming experts in certain
fields.

Muslim judges are extremely cautious when investigating, examining, and
interrogating witnesses. Given a scenario in which a professional
businesswoman was the testifier in a business dispute, then the Muslim
judge may consider her testimony by examining her credentials,
experience, knowledge, and credibility in the matter, just as he would
if she were a man, furthermore, because she is an expert in the field,
her testimony may be tantamount to that of a man. Yet, scholars would
not alter the rules of ratio in witnessing, although they may consider
exceptional cases.

**Fatma:** But the general clause of “one man-two women” would still
stand as an obstacle for those women whose expertise would have to be
contested in order to prove their legitimacy, as opposed to men who
initially do not have to validate the extent of their expertise or
knowledge.

**Sayyid:** In Islam there are numerous subjects governing litigation
such as commercial laws, criminal laws, civil laws, family laws, and so
forth. Defining the religious formality of each area would not only
divert us from the main issue, but would require writing several books
on the subject. To answer your question accurately, to a certain extent
this may be the case in some instances and for others it may not apply.
It all depends on the case and the circumstances surrounding it.

Most importantly, when it comes to witnessing or testifying, regardless
of the gender or suit, the parties that are involved in the hearing
would be thoroughly scrutinized; therefore, the testifiers will be
contested in order to prove their legitimacy.

If the judge proved that the testifiers were incompetent or unreliable,
irrespective of whether the testifiers were several men, or the judge
suspected uncertainty, then the judge would disregard all of their
testimonies. Again, it is not merely gender based; credibility also
plays a significant role.

**Fatma:** It seems that most of the injunctions, exclusions, and
guidelines for women in Islam appear to encircle their dispositions
—their physiological and psychological states. Islamic scholars attempt
to justify the logic of the rules or guidelines as being based on a
woman’s nature, in particular with the injunctions on witnessing or
judging matters.

Islamic scholars claim most of a woman’s judgments are governed by her
emotions, such as a female’s fluctuating mental and emotional states
before or during menstruation and stages of pre-and post-natal
pregnancy, as justification to the status quo on witnessing or
exclusions to judge. Since you have clarified that testimony is heavily
dependent upon the case and credibility of the individual, not
necessarily gender in all cases, could you then elaborate upon the
subject of women judges in Islam and the claim of emotionalism?

**Sayyid:** Let me share with you a story. Years ago, when I lived with
my parents and siblings, one night we heard an intruder in one of the
back rooms. When we went to investigate, we found a young man in the
process of stealing our television. We caught him and wanted to call the
police when he began to sob and cry that if we turned him in he would be
sent to prison.

Upon hearing his weeping, pleading, and apologies, my mother who had
witnessed the whole incident felt compassion and sympathy for him. She
appealed to us not to call the authorities and to release him. Although,
my brothers also felt sympathy for him, they knew that his actions had
consequences for which he should be accountable.

The story is not related to our discussion; nonetheless, the incident
demonstrates well the sensitive qualities of women, in general.
Emotional qualities of women are not a mark of perceptual incompetence
or limitation of intelligence. In fact, the emotionalism of women is
complimentary and an integral feature of her well being. It is also
essential for the contentment of the family and social welfare.

As I mentioned, the emotional features of a woman is by no means a
deficiency in her creation, but in some instances, and in some women,
her emotionalism may be too overwhelming to contain, or it may become
difficult to manage. Take, for example, acts of atrocities, violent
murders, or combats of warfare.

These are very serious matters; even some men are not capable of
handling or judging them. Again, in most instances, it would be very
difficult for women to deal with these issues. Scholars state that men
are usually better than women at handling these situations. Therefore,
in some areas of judiciaries, male judges would be better suited to
administer to such matters.

Regarding women being judges, there are female Muslim judges presiding
over cases. Women in Islam are not exempt from becoming judges in
certain courts.

**Fatma:** An ‘Alim is one of the highest levels of Islamic leadership
and a Mujtahid is an Islamic research scholar. Could a Muslim woman ever
become a ‘Alim or Mujtahid, and could you support your response with any
sources from the Qur’an or traditions of the Prophet?

**Sayyid:** “Seeking knowledge is incumbent upon every Muslim, male and
female,” said the Prophet. Note how the Prophet solidifies the tradition
by stating the genders individually. A ‘Alim is someone who has reached
a high level of Islamic study, and becoming a ‘Alim is acquiring
knowledge. Knowledge is limitless and never gender based.

Ijtihad is the highest religious degree in Islamic study. When a person
reaches the level of Ijtihad, then that person is referred to as a
Mujtahid. A Mujtahid is one who is capable of deducing commandments and
religious injunctions from their original sources such as the Qur’an and
traditions of the Prophet. Many Muslim women have reached the level of
Ijtihad.

There are many prominent Muslim women Mujtihads who are professors in
Islamic seminaries, educating collegians on Islam, and authoring books
on Islamic jurisprudence, as well.

A female Mujtihad is not something unprecedented. The daughter of the
Prophet, Fatima was one of the most knowledgeable person concerning
Islam. She taught others about Islam. Notable companions of the Prophet
used to consult Fatima on religious matters. Fatima’s daughter, Zaynab
also taught in the city of Kufa. Zaynab, like Fatima, was well known as
a distinguished religious scholar.

[^1]: Qur’an, 65:2, 5:106, and 4:15.

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi, Mu’aMalat.


