Chapter 9: Inheritance
======================

***“God directs you in regard to your children’s inheritance: to the
male, a portion equal to that of two females.” (4:11)***

**Fatma:** In Islam, is the distribution ratio of inheritance only
applicable to children?

**Sayyid:** The area of inheritance, like most of the subjects we have
covered, is once again governed and administered according to the case;
therefore, the distribution ratio is not applied to every case of
inheritance.

There are many factors that need to be considered before an inheritance
may be distributed. In all cases, it depends on who the deceased was,
and on who are the nearest living relatives, such as if the deceased
left a wife, children, parents, sisters, brothers, or no descendants.
After establishing the line of descendants, then the proper portions may
be distributed.

Hypothetically, if the parents died and left behind only daughters, then
the distribution would be in equal shares among them. In the case where
an only child survives a deceased father, and there was no surviving
wife or parents of the deceased, then that child, irrespective of
gender, inherits everything of the deceased father’s estate; no other
relative may claim rights to the inheritance. Therefore, the laws of
inheritance are not all governed by the fact that males may receive a
portion double to that of females.

There are other areas in which a woman’s portion is equal to that of a
man’s. A mother, in most cases, is entitled to the same share of her
son’s inheritance (one-sixth), as is the father.

Specifically, regarding the verse which you cited[^1], if the children
were of both genders and the estate was their parents’, then the ratio
would apply. The son receives two-thirds and the daughter acquires
one-third of the inheritance.

**Fatma:** Why is it that, within the immediate family, sons acquire
more of their parents’ inheritance than daughters?

**Sayyid:** The basis of distribution is not a reflection of gender
preference but on the fundamental Islamic injunction that men are
financial responsible for maintaining the family; therefore, monetary
compensation is the main reason as to why the inheritance ratio was set.

Sons are financially responsible for their living mother and dependent
siblings; hence, sons, as a means to provide financial sustenance for
the family, could use the assets of the deceased father. It is a type of
savings account that gives sons the responsibility of being the
distributor and maintainer of the family.

Sons, unlike daughters, have the responsibility to maintain and
financially support their immediate families. Muslim women, whether they
are daughters, sisters, wives, or mothers, are free from financially
supporting themselves and others.

What they earn and receive is theirs to keep. They are not obligated to
maintain or support anyone. Muslim women are entitled to inherit as a
daughter, mother, wife, and sister; consequently, they may, in certain
cases, become financially stronger than men.

**Fatma:** Could property be transferred to any person during the life
of the testator?

**Sayyid:** The testator can transfer ownership of his or her estate
during his lifetime to anyone. Meaning, the testator can legally change
entitlement of ownership from his name to the name of the other party.
Hypothetically, the testator may transfer all of his assets during his
lifetime and leave nothing for inheritance.

**Fatma:** Could the testator will one-third of his or her inheritance
to any person?

**Sayyid:** In a written will, the testator may allocate one-third of
the inheritance to any person, institute, or organization he or she
chooses.

**Fatma:** Parents these days are more ready and willing to distribute
their inheritance among their sons and daughters evenly. Would this be
considered a transgression of Qur’anic doctrine?

**Sayyid:** If parents document a written will (to be executed after
their deaths) stating an even distribution of inheritance between their
sons and daughters, then it would be a transgression of Qur’anic
injunctions. In the several verses regarding distribution of
inheritance, the Qur’an forewarns those who do not adhere to the
commandments:

***These are settled portions ordained by Allah. (4:11)***

***Thus is it ordained by Allah. (4:12)***

***Those are limits set by Allah; those who obey Allah and His Messenger
and transgress His limits will be admitted to a fire, to abide therein:
And they shall have a humiliating punishment. (4:14)***

However, parents are permitted, during their lifetime, to legally
transfer ownership of their property, assets, or funds to certain
children, which may be deliverance to some parents who have flagrantly
disobedient children. Suppose parents had an unrighteous son and a
righteous daughter.

Presumably, parents would fear that if the disobedient son inherited
their estate that he might abuse or dispose of the inheritance
unlawfully, as opposed to the daughter who had tended to her parents,
assisted and honored them, and would preserve and maintain their assets
rightfully. As an option, parents may legally transfer ownership of some
or all of their property to any one of their children during their
lifetime, even if that child is their daughter.

**Fatma:** Some Islamic literature claims that because a woman is
exempted from war, it entitles her to less inheritance, is this
accurate?

**Sayyid:** That would not be considered a valid justification.

**Fatma:** Are there any other issues regarding Muslim women that would
be important to elucidate here?

**Sayyid:** The issues regarding Muslim women are endless. However, the
most important is that Muslim women should educate themselves concerning
their religious rights. Muslim women have the right to be informed of
their choices and opportunities that Islam provides for them. By knowing
their rights they can secure their future.

[^1]: Qur’an 4:11


