Introduction by Fatma Saleh
===========================

***In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

The issue of women in Islam had always been a subject that offended and
fascinated me. As a woman, born Muslim, I had been, in the past, not
convinced and argumentative of my faith. I ascribed Islam as
domineering, circumscribed, and prejudice towards women. I, like many
other Muslim women (and non-Muslims) had based my religious convictions
on the practices of culture rather than the core of faith, which had
left me inimical about Islam.

I often echoed the tauntingly and haunting words of a Muslim woman I
encountered briefly, “Thank God I found Islam before I found Muslims.”
Not only had I found “Muslims” before I found Islam, but the constructed
animosity of my faith was also formulated on the adverse writings,
teachings, and dogmatic matters that shackled Muslim women.

Thus, I lived most of my life distant with preconceived and misconceived
ideas about Islam and Muslim women, until I began to discursively
question and ponder various subjects that I perceived as disturbing and
complex. Hence, my research began on women and their rights in Islam.

Faithfully, I had maintained that God in His ultimate wisdom was just.
So, -if God was a just God- then why was the share of inheritance not
equal among the genders in Islam? Why was a Muslim woman’s testimony
worth only half of a man? Did God really intend to limit the livelihood
of Muslim women while allowing Muslim men more freedom? Was there really
such a thing as rights for Muslim women? How does Islam regard the
disposition of women? Would a just God ever be unfair to His creations?

Seeking the unalloyed truth, I interrogated the issues. Beneath the
distorted images, misconstrued and omitted writings, the rights of women
in Islam lay hidden. Undoubtedly, Muslim women had profound rights in
Islam. But, like most eras of civilization, when men were fully
empowered, they deemed to obstruct, deny, or strip women of rights,
regardless of their religion, class, or ethnicity.

One of the most fundamental rights given to women in Islam was absolute
freedom to educate themselves and Muslim women have either not taken
advantage of this right, and in some cases, been denied the opportunity.
Ignorance about Islam has been a major opponent for Muslim women.

Mostly, I focused my attention on Qur’anic verses, traditions of the
Prophet, and some ambiguous Shari’a rulings (code of law based on the
Qur’an) that related to women. Some of my findings on Muslim women were
either unfounded or misrepresented, or needed an analytical explanation.
I began to discover that simply reading the Qur’anic verses or shari’an
laws at face value was an incomplete evaluation of their intended
purpose, and that many of the injunctions were collocated by other
related rulings.

For example, in the law of Hodud and Qesas (the law of talion and
physical punishment) a woman is valued half of a man in terms of her
death dues. The law apparently signifies a woman’s life is worth less
than that of a man’s. But, one must recognize the law was based and
dependent on the gender that was financially responsible for the
livelihood of the family.

If a woman were murdered and she had been the responsible party in
sustaining her family then her death due would be based according to a
man’s caliber. Islamic writings that are misleading or taken out of
context continue to characterize the image that shadows Muslim women.

In my research, I began unfolding many of the misconceptions I had
accumulated. Islam was not only a reverence about God, but also an
institutionalized system that governed a community, both men and women
alike, to function concordantly as a unit.

Yet, there remained many issues that needed defining and many rulings
that needed to be discussed. I, an average Muslim woman was unaware of
all the Islamic rights that pertained to Muslim women.

Muslim women had substantial political, social, and economic rights. The
subject of women in Islam needed to be discussed, explained, and written
about. Throughout my independent studying, I tallied numerous inquiries
and commentaries on the subject of women in Islam. I was fortunate to
come across a scholar whose knowledge on Islam was not only profound,
but also contemporary.

I had known Sayyid Moustafa Al-Qazwini three years prior to my proposed
offer to write a book on women’s rights in Islam. I had attended his
lectures, attentively listened to his interpretative views on Islam, and
discussed Islamic matters with him. Sayyid Moustafa is a talented
orator, but above all, he has a unique ability to discursively reason
Islamic doctrines. He is a scholar with insight and sees beyond the
technicalities of practicing Islamic rituals.

I wanted an opportunity to explore the subject of women in Islam from a
woman’s perspective with the expertise of a Muslim scholar. When I
approached Sayyid Moustafa on writing a book about Muslim women he
welcomed the proposal. For over a year I had put forth my inquiries and
Sayyid Moustafa responded with the answers.

Throughout our numerous interviews and correspondences we discussed and
debated Qur’anic verses, traditions of the Prophet, and rights of women
in marriage, divorce, testimony, and many other related issues –the
matters were endless- regarding Muslim women. With his knowledge on
Islam, and citing various sources, he was able to manifest by
interpreting and clarifying the issues regarding women in Islam. The end
result came about as a book entitled **“A New Perspective – Women in
Islam”.**

The degree of the subjects covered in this book is limited, but they are
based upon the consensus of Muslim scholars and other reliable sources.
However, the covered subjects, and others that were not, still remain to
be explored in depth. One of the ways to strengthen Muslim women is
through education, inquiries, and dialogue.

My motivation to write this book was not to inform only Muslim women
about their rights, but also non-Muslims. A doctor once asked me, “Is
there such a thing as rights for Muslim women?” My answer to him was, “
Most definitely.

What has been fortunate for Muslim women has been that their rights were
divinely given to them. Muslim women never had to struggle for their
rights, their struggle has been in securing them.”

Fatma Saleh  
 The Month of Ramadan 1421/ November 2000  
 Los Angeles, CA-USA


