Chapter 2: Matrimonial Rights, Adolescence, Mahr
================================================

Matrimonial Rights
------------------

***“And women shall have rights similar to the rights upon them in a
just and equitable manner; but men have a degree over them.” (2:228)***

**Fatma:** This verse is perhaps one of the most controversial and
misrepresented verses regarding the relationship between a husband and a
wife. Does the verse only pertain to rights within a marriage or does it
also extend into the whole of society as well? Secondly, could you
expound the entirety of this verse and cite some examples?

**Sayyid:** The verse, which you quoted, may not be a suitable
translation. Sometimes it can be difficult to translate the precise
meaning of an Arabic word into English. There are many Arabic words that
cannot be translated from their original meaning or meanings into any
language.

Transcribers have to search for alternative words in an attempt to most
accurately define a particular Arabic term. In some instances the
precise meaning of the word can be lost, misrepresented, or
misinterpreted. Let me attempt to translate that verse:

***And the rights of the wives —in relation to their husbands— are equal
[just/enabled] to their obligations —toward their husbands— but men in
their obligations - toward their wives - stand a step further: Wa
lahunna methullathi ‘al ayhinna bil-ma’uruf: walir-rijaali ‘alayhin-na
darajah. (2:228)***

Regarding your first question, Muslim scholars (fuqaha) comment that
this verse only pertains to family affairs, not to the relationships of
men and women in society or outside the boundaries of family life.

In regards to society, the Qur’an states that Muslim men and women share
life’s moral and social responsibilities equally and jointly. In
addition, they are equal in front of the law and in all religious
obligations[^1] and punishments.[^2]

In addition to the verse mentioned, there is another verse in the Qur’an
that is conjointly related, and thus, it is important to explain them
both simultaneously.

***Men are the supporters and sustainers of women according to what
Allah has given [or enabled] advantages of one over the other and
because they support them from their means. Therefore the righteous
women are truly devout ones: Ar-rijaalu qaw-waamuuna ‘alan-***

***nisaa-‘i bima faz-zalallaahu ba’-za hum ‘alaa ba ‘zinwwa bimaa
‘anfaquu min’amwaalihim. Fas-Saalihaatu qaanitaatun. (4:34)***

The Qur’an has decreed,

***“Men in their obligations — toward their wives — stand a step
further: walir-rijaali ‘alayhin-na darajah.” (2:228)***

The “**step further”** of which the Qur’an speaks is not a position of
greater rank or nobility. The **“step”** the Qur’an makes reference to
is the obligatory duty given to the man in the care of the woman; it is
not a degree of superiority. Allah ordained men with the responsibility
to preserve and solely sustain women. This is supported by the verse
that states,

***“Men are the supporters and sustainers of women: ar-rijaalu
qaw-waamuuna ‘alan-nisaa-‘i.” (4:34)***

The “**step further”** is in no way a form of dominance or preference.

The Qur’an reminds us that men and women were created from the same
essence.

***“[Allah] created you all out of one living entity: khalaqakum
min-nafsinw-waahida.” (4:1)***

The Qur’an consistently makes reference to equity, parity, and
equilibrium among the genders. It disposes of genders and makes no
distinction whatsoever between the superiority or inferiority of men and
women. On the contrary, it is the piety of a person that distinguishes
him or her by ranks or degrees, not gender or lineage.

***“The most honored of you [male or female] in the sight of Allah is he
who is most righteous of you: in-na ‘akramakum ‘indal-laahi ‘atqaakum.”
(49:13)***

Islam does not represent favoritism or show partiality in the interest
of men. Precedence is given toward the general welfare of society, not
genders. It is equilibrium of interest between both genders that
benefits all members of society.

The totality of society always supersedes one sector of society. The
rights and responsibilities of a woman are equally proportioned to those
of a man, but they are not necessarily identical. Equality and
identicalness are two different issues**.**

***“Certainly we sent Our Messengers with clear proofs and sent down
with them the Book and the Balance, so that humankind may conduct itself
with equity.” (57:25)***

Women and men are symmetrically balanced when it comes to their
relationship with Allah. On the other hand, the symmetrical balance
differentiates when it comes to men and women’s roles and
responsibilities, not only toward themselves and each other, but also to
society as a whole. It is never implied that one gender surpasses the
other; in essence, both genders must be in an equal pace with one
another, each recognizing the importance of its unbiased contribution.

Women and men in Islam are complementary to each other. According to a
tradition of the Prophet, “Men and women are siblings of one
another.”[^3]

The Qur’an mandates that the husband exclusively shoulders the
responsibility of maintaining his wife financially, and that he
safeguards the interest of the family. In Islam, the wife is not
obligated to pay for her living expenses, and it is incumbent upon the
husband to maintain her according to his means.

If the husband is wealthy, then he must provide for his wife an affluent
lifestyle or, on the other hand, if the husband is poor, then the wife
forestalls a less than moderate way of living.[^4]

Referring to the two verses (2:228 & 4:34), assuredly, they have
defended the honor and integrity of women. When a Muslim woman marries,
she has the privilege of never working outside the home. She does not
have to contend with raising children, managing a home, and contributing
additional income to support the family.

Islam has acknowledged the noble responsibility and tasks that a woman
must endure in raising a family. Therefore, Islam has freed her from the
additional undertaking of providing for the family financially. In fact,
she is not obligated for any of the domestic affairs.

**Fatma:** Are you implying that there is no such concept as a
“homemaker” in Islam?

**Sayyid:** There is no such term as “homemaker” in Islam. A woman in
Islam is not compelled to cook, clean, launder, or perform any other
domestic duties. If the wife chooses to do the work, it would be
considered noble and thoughtful; otherwise, she is not obligated to do
so.

Besides, she can also request monetary compensation for any of the work,
even that of nursing her own child. Nonetheless, Islam does not want to
undermine the importance or the need of the wife to assist with the
household duties. To be considered a homemaker is prestigious, if not
the noblest of all roles for a woman. Not to deter from the subject, it
is important to note some very important traditions from the Prophet
regarding domestic duties.

How much reward is there for a woman’s housework? Um-Salamah (wife of
the Prophet) asked the Prophet. The Prophet replied, any woman who in
the way of improving the order of the house, takes something from
somewhere and places it somewhere else would enjoy the grace of Allah
and whoever attracts the blessings of Allah would not be tormented by
Allah’s anger. [^5]

The Prophet said, “O women! Whosoever among you is busy in arranging the
domestic affairs, Allah willing, she will get the reward of Islam’s
soldiers and mujahedeen[^6].”[^7]

Sequentially, in reference to the two verses, they have not only
sanctified the prestige of women, but have underwritten a fostered
relationship for raising and caring for children by assuring that the
mother would be home and exempted from toilsome domestic work. She is
then able to dedicate all her time, thoughts, and love toward nurturing
the family.

Some people have taken these two verses and adversely interpreted them
as a form of male dominance, or as a form of superiority over women,
even defining the verses as the wife being compelled to submit herself
to her husband’s will unconditionally.

These interpretations are entirely contrary to the foundations and
principles of Islam. Islam, by no manner or mean, would allow any form
of superiority. Islam adamantly opposes tyranny, oppression,
dictatorship, abuse, or the infringement of rights. The Qur’an
specifically states,

***“Treat them [wife] in a just manner: wa lahunna methullathi ‘al
ayhinna bil-ma’ruuf,” (2:228)***

and

***“Live with them on a footing of kindness and equity: wa
‘aashiruuhun-na bil-ma’-ruuf.” (4:19)***

These verses, among many others found in the Qur’an, and hundreds of
noted traditions of the Prophet, constitute the basis of marriage.

***“And the rights of the wives — in relation to their husband — are
equal to their obligations — toward their husbands.” (2:228)***

This verse affirms that the husband is neither an authoritative partner
who cannot be questioned, nor one who is to be favored with absolute
obedience. Allah has enunciated in this verse entitlements for wives
similar to those of husbands.

To clarify, the matrimonial rights are conditional, and are dependent
upon a reciprocal compliance in which each partner has a set of
responsibilities or duties that must be fulfilled. If one or both
partners fail to perform his or her duties, then, subsequently, an
injunction and verdict may be implemented.

**Fatma:** Later, I would like you to explain these conditions, but in
continuance of 4:34, the Qur’an mentions two things that need
clarifying. One is the word **“fadallah,”** which has been translated as
**“given or enabled advantages of one over the other,”** and the other
is **“truly devout: qaanitaat.”** What do they mean exactly?

**Sayyid:** The word **“fadallah”** may mean given, enabled, preferred,
or distinguished in responsibilities and duties, depending on the
context of the sentence. In reference to this particular verse, it is
best to use the word enabled, given, or distinguished, but not
preferred.

**“Fadallah”** is interpreted as distinguishing men from women
concerning the undertakings and responsibilities of supporting,
sustaining, and taking full care of the family. It does not signify that
men are preferred or greater in excellence than women.

In fact, upon studying the Qur’an and traditions of the Prophet, one may
conclude that admiration, leniency, and preference are sometimes given
more to women. There are extraordinary traditions by the Prophet that
summarize the eminence of women. Once a man came to the Prophet asking:

O Messenger of Allah, who among the people is the most worthy of my good
companionship? The Prophet said, your mother. The man said, then who is
next? The Prophet said, your mother. The man asked for the third time,
then who is next? The Prophet said, your mother. The man further asked,
then who is next? Only then, the Prophet said, your father.[^8]

Also, the Prophet said, “Heaven lies beneath the feet of mothers.” [^9]

Allah would not permit any form of injustice or deficiency among His
creations. Allah bestowed unique and distinguishable features upon each
individual mentally, physically, and spiritually.

***“And wish not for the things in which God hath bestowed His gifts
freely on some of you than others.” (4:32)***

This verse denotes that every man and woman is created with notable
qualities.

**Fatma:** Why did Islam choose men to be the caretakers of women?

**Sayyid:** Scholars cite many explanations. However, primarily scholars
focus on the biological fact that men are physically stronger than
women; therefore, men are more apt to exert themselves for the
livelihood of their families. Hence, men become the caretakers of women.
In addition, the nature of a man’s psychological development is
audacious and chivalrous.

Addressing the word **“qaanitaat,”** some scholars have transcribed the
word as meaning obedient, yet it has many other meanings in Arabic. For
example, it can mean truly devoted, or lifting of hands during prayer,
or listening, or submitting, and perhaps it could give meaning of
obedience, but again obedience toward the husband is only limited within
the religious perimeter.

That is to say, if the husband makes a request of his wife, and that
request is indoctrinated or practiced by Islam, and if it were within
her ability, then the wife should cooperate and adhere to the request.
On the other hand, if the husband makes a request of his wife which is
religiously unlawful, or inappropriate, or not within her ability, then
she is not obligated to obey his request.

**Fatma:** In the archives of Islamic literature, there are some
traditions regarding women that I find to be degrading and highly
reprehensible. I would like your comment on one particular tradition of
the Prophet and its veracity.

It is not right that any human being should prostrate to another being,
and if it were right for any human being to prostrate to another human
being I would have ordered the woman to prostrate to her husband due to
the greatness of his rights upon her. By Him in whose Hands my soul, if
from his foot to the crown of his head there was a wound pouring forth
with puss and she came and licked that then she would still not have
fulfilled his rights.[^10]

**Sayyid:** Keep in mind when we discussed the authenticity of some
traditions in the chapter “Seeking Clarity,” I explained that not all
traditions of the Prophet are authentic. Then, in the beginning of this
chapter, I also discussed that not all Arabic terms can be translated
properly. However, I am familiar with the first half of the tradition,
but I cannot verify the authenticity of the second half (“licking the
puss…”).

This tradition is allegorical, in the sense that if a woman were
fortunate enough to marry a pious man with exceptional qualities, one
who treated her extraordinary well, and fulfilled her physical and
emotional needs, then, respectfully, she would treat him in the same
manner.

**Fatma:** How do you explain the following tradition from Imam Ali, who
not only happened to be one of the rightful rulers of Islam,[^11] but
also shared one of the closest ties to the Prophet?[^12]

O, you people! Women are deficient in faith, deficient in shares, and
deficient in intelligence. As regards to the deficiency in their faith,
it is their abstention from prayers and fasting during their menstrual
period.

As regards to deficiency in their intelligence, it is because the
evidence of two women is equal to that of one man. As for the deficiency
of their shares, that is because of their share in inheritance being
half of men. So, beware of the evils of women. Be on your guard even
from those of them who are good. Do not obey them even in good things so
that they may not attract you to evils.[^13]

**Sayyid:** Imam Ali was not suggesting or confirming that Allah
insufficiently created women. There is no deficiency in the creation of
women.

***“We have indeed created man in the best of molds.” (95:4)***

The concluded examples that Imam Ali draws on are metaphoric and the
tradition is missing a fundamental part which was the incident that
infused the words. Imam Ali was indirectly addressing one woman who
caused a great deal of damage to the Islamic community in the Battle of
Camel. However, this subject would deter us from our topic. For further
details, one can refer to other resources.[^14]

**Fatma**:

***“And the rights of the wives —in relation to their husbands— are
equal to their obligations —toward their husbands.” (2:228)***

You briefly touched upon this verse and, interestingly, mentioned the
words “conditional” and “reciprocal compliance.” Can you elaborate on
this matter?

**Sayyid:** When it comes to the rights of men and women, the Qur’an
always speaks about mutuality, cooperation, and respect. These are the
fundamental principals in any matrimonial relationship.

***“Wa lahunna methullathi ‘al ayhinna bil-ma’ruuf” is translated as
“And the rights of the wives —in relation to their husbands— are equal
to their obligations toward their husbands.” (2:228)***

This verse is the basis by which the foundation of matrimonial
relationships must thrive. Allah notes that in the same way men have
rights over women, women also have rights over men.

**Fatma:** What are those rights that a husband has upon his wife?

**Sayyid:** It is extremely important to mention both the husband’s
rights upon the wife, and the wife’s rights upon the husband in order to
compare and comprehend the very delicate issue of Islamic matrimonial
rights. Keeping in mind that the relationship of husband and wife is
based on mutuality, cooperation, and respect, there are indoctrinated
rights which husbands have upon their wives, and Muslim scholars
(fuqaha) note them as the following:

1) Haq al-ta’a: which means the right of compliance from the wife. The
compliances are that the husband can require his wife to comply with her
religious and moral duties. Furthermore, she is not to leave the house
without his permission, if it encroaches upon his right for
“tamkeem”(see below \#2).

2) Tamkeem: which means that the wife makes herself physically available
to her husband provided that she is physically and psychologically well.
Alternatively, some scholars refer to it as haqq istimta’a —the right of
physical and emotional enjoyment.

3) Haq al-maiyah: which means that the wife spends time with her
husband; a form of companionship.

The wife’s rights upon her husband are as follows:

1) Nafaqa: which means that the husband is required to financially cover
all the living expenditures of his wife. This is a very broad term, and
it involves a stupendous list of miscellaneous items needed for living,
such as shelter, clothing, home fixtures, and money.

2) Haq al-irwa al-jinsi: which means physical gratification. This right
not only discusses the act of intimacy, but also entails the romantic
and playful gestures made by the husband to his wife.

3) Muthajia: which means to be in bed with one’s wife. It does not
necessarily mean being intimate with her, but coming home, being next to
her, sleeping in the same house, in the same bed (mandated: wajib) at
least one night out of every four. Although it is highly recommended to
be with one’s wife every night.

4) The Qur’an words it beautifully,

***“Live with them [women] on a footing of kindness and equity: wa
‘aashiruuhun-na bil-ma ‘ruuf,” which means a peaceful coexistence
between the couples. (4:19)***

This verse inevitably touches upon every aspect of a woman’s life
—physical, psychological, emotional, financial, and spiritual.

It is important to note that the rights stated are conditional and not
absolute.

**Fatma:** Fascinating. Although it may be too complex to extensively
detail each right you mentioned, I believe that it is important to
briefly explain them. In addition, you indicate that these rights are
governed by reciprocal compliances, and if broken, then subsequently an
injunction and verdict would be issued. Could you clarify the
circumstances regarding the potential injunctions and how the verdicts
could be implemented?

**Sayyid:** Muslim scholars use the Arabic terms nushuuz and shiqaaqa
whenever there is a predicament or an abiding breach of matrimonial
rights. Consequently, there are two classifications of discordance or
incompliance.

1) Nashiz pertains to the sole partner who has neglected or disregarded
the matrimonial responsibilities.

2) Shiqaaq pertains to partners that are disagreeing simultaneously or
behaving evasively toward their obligatory duties.

When any of the classifications are in violation, then subsequently a
judgment would be rendered.

**Fatma:** How is nushuuz defined?

**Sayyid:** Nushuuz involves the physical, financial, emotional, or
moral obligations required of each partner. Nushuuz can be defined as
disobeying, abuse, mistreatment, desertion, disagreements, or conflicts
being perpetrated by the husband or wife.

The Qur’an has described some of the natures of nushuuz. In addition,
the decree that attempts to solve or direct certain circumstances has
also been rendered.

***As for those women whose recalcitrance and offensiveness
[nushuuzahun] you have reason to fear, admonish them, and refrain from
any contact with them, and wathrebuhun***[^15] ***them if this becomes
unavoidable and fair to prevent very serious harm caused by them against
themselves or others; but if they want to keep you company, do not try
in any way to be unfair or harmful to them. (4:34)***

***If a wife feels cruelty or desertion [nushuuzan] on her husband’s
part, there is no blame on them if they arrange an amicable settlement
between themselves; and such a settlement is best. (4:128)***

**Fatma:** Would the judgments differ depending on the classification of
discordance, and if so, how would they be enforced?

**Sayyid:** Without a doubt the judgments are contingent upon the
situation. Earlier, I mentioned that these rights are reciprocal and
conditional. For example, if the husband fails to fulfill his
obligations, then an Islamic judge can render the wife with sanctions to
withhold some of the rights that her husband can request of her.

**Fatma:** Could you state some circumstantial examples of the sanctions
that the wife can enforce?

**Sayyid:** Suppose the husband is not fulfilling his obligations, or
that he is engaging in religiously unlawful or damaging practices which
are having a negative effect on the family such as, drinking alcohol,
gambling, or abusing his wife physically or emotionally.

If after much dissuasion from the wife the husband continues his
activities, then the wife may implement one of the injunctions by
refusing to share her bed with him, for example. If the activities
continue, the wife may then seek assistance by presenting her case to
the Islamic judiciary system. Upon studying the case, the judge may
issue a variety of inflictions.

The judge may frighten the husband with physical punishment, penalize
him financially, or threaten to separate him from his wife.

**Fatma:** What are the injunctions when the wife is nashuza, not
complying with her duties?

**Sayyid:** If the wife were noncompliant with her duties or engaging in
religiously unlawful or damaging practices, then the husband may
exercise the same injunctions that the wife has upon her husband if he
is in defiance. The only difference is that the husband does not have to
resort to the courts immediately for assistance.

To begin, the husband is to admonish the wife or seek professional
assistance. If the problem continues, the husband may then refuse to
share the matrimonial bed with her. After every endeavor has been made
and exhausted, and the husband still fears the recalcitrance and
offensiveness of his wife, and if it will end the serious harm caused by
her to herself, or the

Family, then he may apply a very delicate verdict —to tap the wife
lightly. One must keep in mind, however, that the wife is within her
rights to implement the same punishment upon her husband. I will discuss
this matter in detail later.[^16]

**Fatma:** Most definitely these issues need to be discussed in detail.
Returning to the term scholars use “haq-al-ta’a,” meaning the husband’s
right of compliance from the wife, compliance has an extent of varying
definitions. By what means and to what degree is compliance required?

**Sayyid:** When Islamic scholars discuss the rights that husbands have
upon their wives they use the term haq-al-ta’a, which means the right of
compliance from the wife, but again compliance is not absolute; it is
conditional. It is compliance in the sense of adhering to all the
commands set by Allah; women should conform to all the decrees Allah has
prescribed.

When a husband requests of his wife something which Allah has already
intended or prescribed, then a wife should comply. Secondly, the husband
has the final decision in family affairs. This applies to many areas,
such as how many children they will have, where they will live,
activities of the wife, and others. Yet, again, compliance is
conditional.

**Fatma:** Hypothetically, if the husband does not practice his own
religious duties, and he requests his wife to practice hijab[^17] when
she herself wishes not to, could he rightly do so? If so, is there not a
verse from the Qur’an that adamantly states,

***“There is no compulsion in religion.” (2:256)***

**Sayyid:** When the Qur’an speaks about **“no compulsion in religion”**
it is referring to people who have not accepted Islam as their religion.
Islam is not a forced or compulsory religion; one may forsake it any
time one wishes. However, once one claims to be a Muslim then that
person has independently chosen the religion of Islam.

The root meaning of Islam is tasleem, to surrender. When people refer to
themselves as Muslims then, in essence, they have surrendered to the
teachings and practices of Islam.

True Muslims are constantly implementing every aspect and guideline of
the Qur’an and traditions of the Prophet throughout their daily lives.
Such guidelines and traditions infiltrate many areas of a Muslim’s life,
such as the manner of greeting one another, conducting business,
education, family affairs, political or social events, even the
etiquette upon entering someone’s home.

Hijab is a commandment not to be demanded by a husband, but by Allah. A
husband is within his right to ask his wife to practice wearing hijab
because he is asking of her something that Allah has already requested.
If the husband requests of his wife an action or deed that is religious
or appropriate, then she should comply.

Even if he does not fully practice his religious duties like praying,
fasting, or paying alms, he is still within the religious guidelines to
request his wife to adhere to hers. As long as the husband is not
commanding her to do religiously unlawful or irrational tasks, then she
should cooperate.

Conversely, the husband should never order his wife not to wear hijab.
The husband, on no account, should make his wife do anything contrary to
the ordinances of Islam. The wife is not compelled to listen to her
husband when he demands of her something that is contrary to the
commandments of Allah, even if he threatens her with divorce.

**Fatma:** I would assume, that due to financial reasons, the husband
limits the number of children he will have, but may he also limit the
activities of his wife?

**Sayyid:** Your assumption is not entirely correct. In general, both
issues are contingent upon the situation. If the husband displays a
sense of financial maturity by maintaining a suitable lifestyle for his
family, then the husband will essentially have the final word in
limiting the number of children they will bring into this world.

Islam has placed a huge burden on the father of children. The father is
solely and completely responsible for financially maintaining his
children until they are capable of supporting themselves. Furthermore,
if the father has adult daughters and they remain in his home, then he
is obligated to continue supporting them.

Perhaps, it may seem unfair for a mother to have to bear and raise
children for many years. Most certainly, the mother undergoes incredible
difficulties physically and emotionally in raising children, but one
must remember that within a few years the children will become adults.
The mother’s allotted task will cease, but the father’s financial duty
remains.

In contrast, an area of dispute or disagreement would be if the father
could not provide the basic or adequate lifestyle for his children such
as, tuition for their education, health care coverage, or good housing,
etc. In such a case, if the husband still insisted on having more
children then the wife is within all of her rights to not adhere to his
wishes.

Another area of conditional compliance is deciding where the married
couple will live. If the wife does not specify in her marriage contract
where she wants to live, then the husband is at liberty to choose the
city or country of residence. Taking into account that the husband will
be the sole financial supporter of the family, his decision, in most
cases, will be based on financial security, an ethical society, and
perhaps being adjacent to family members.

If the wife refuses in the matter of location, then her objection must
be based on a sound predicament. For example, if the husband wishes to
live by the beach and the wife objects, and she bases her objection on
the environment influencing the children in a negative manner, she can
request postponing the relocation until the children have independently
moved on with their lives. Her objection would prevail.

With respect to limiting the wife’s activities, this is also
conditional. If the wife needs to educate herself religiously, then the
husband cannot prevent her from doing so. In addition, if the wife wants
to make her pilgrimage to the hajj[^18] with her own money, and she has
secured her safety, then the husband cannot refuse her permission.

**Fatma:** I have read in numerous sources that the wife must seek
permission of the husband before leaving her home. Is this accurate?

**Sayyid:** Again, it depends on the circumstances. Ordinarily, this law
is rarely exercised; only when it is necessary may it be used. If the
husband is content with his wife’s activities, then there may be no need
to seek his permission. If the wife senses that her husband harbors a
concern or an objection, then she should try to avoid the behavior or
resolve the matter with her husband.

In most cases, this rule does not mean every time the wife steps outside
the home she has to notify her husband and seek his permission, unless
there are what Muslim scholars regard as muftadha, meaning an
illegitimate intention, corruption, or consequential quandary. These are
areas in which the husband may fully implement his right to restrict his
wife’s outside activities.

For instance, the wife has a set of friends with disreputable character
and she wishes to spend time associating with them. If the husband does
not approve, then it is within his right to forbid his wife from
associating with such people. Or, perchance, she leaves the house or the
children carelessly, or perhaps the husband begins to justifiably

suspect his wife of immoral actions. These are just a few examples in
which the husband is within his right to limit his wife’s activity.
However, it is important to note that a wife may stipulate in her
marriage contract that she will not be prevented from going out of her
home on suitable occasions or for her economical or social needs,
provided that the action does not infringe on the rights of her husband
or children.

**Fatma:** Can the wife implement the same ruling thereby restricting
the activities of her husband?

**Sayyid:** It all depends on the circumstances. If the husband’s
activities are having a harmful effect upon the livelihood of the
family, and she is unable to change his actions, then the wife should
seek assistance from community leaders, imams,[^19] or Islamic courts in
an attempt to reform her husband.

**Fatma:** In most cases a marriage is based on the three fundamental
principles you mentioned earlier: mutuality, cooperation, and respect.
Why is it then necessary to establish a law that mentions the wife
seeking permission to leave the house?

Would you not agree, in general, a wife who honors her husband would try
to avoid situations that might displease her husband or bring about
illegitimate situations?

**Sayyid:** Most certainly. A wife who loves and respects her husband
would automatically avoid displeasing him, but nonetheless, it is
important to note the situations in case of disagreement.

To illustrate, there are customary laws, laws that are perceived as
common, such as driving cautiously through a school zone where one would
instinctively slow down without the need to read the posted speed limit.
Although there are posted laws that specifically state the speed limit,
drivers commonly slow down.

The only time the law would be enforced is if it were broken. Similarly,
the wife (before leaving the home) knows what situations would be
contrary to her husband’s wishes and would instinctively avoid them. If
necessary, the rule may be again elucidated.

**Fatma:** If a Muslim woman wants to make her hajj pilgrimage, why is
it necessary that she seek written permission from her husband, and why
does she need a chaperone (muharam) to travel with her?

**Sayyid:** For the sake of clarity, the husband’s written consent for
the wife to fulfill her hajj or to travel is only a legal formality
imposed by certain Muslim countries. Islam never mentions that one must
have a written consent for the wife to travel. However, it requires that
the husband voluntarily consent and approve of her travel or activities.

The reason why a woman may need a chaperone with her when she travels is
to protect her from the iniquitous acts prevalent in some societies.
Islam is not a religion that dominates or inhibits women; on the
contrary, Islam is a religion that wants to protect women by preventing
transgression or encroachment from immoral societies. Islam has taken
the precautionary measure of safeguarding her journey by providing her
with a male chaperone.

**Fatma:** Are the laws of travel found in the Qur’an or traditions of
the Prophet?

**Sayyid:** The guidelines for a woman traveling may be found in
numerous traditions of the Prophet.[^20]

**Fatma:** Some scholars state that the husband may execute his right to
prevent his wife from visiting her family. Is this accurate?

**Sayyid:** If it infringes on his legitimate right, such as
companionship with his wife then, yes. However, the husband should
always remember that his wife is a human being with feelings and a
tendency for a social life. Visiting her family is essential in catering
to her emotional needs.

**Fatma:** What happens in situations when the husband forbids his wife
from leaving the home without justifying the reason? How can a wife
protect herself from a husband who pompously abuses his right in an
ill-manner?

**Sayyid:** The situation mentioned is usually caused by an argument in
which the couple was quarrelling. Typically, if the husband were a
religious man, he would not act in an unfashionable manner because he
would break one of the covenants.[^21]

On the other hand, if the husband inscrutably misuses his right, and the
wife feels that he is treating her unjustly then this would be grounds
for arbitration. The Qur’an gives an objective account of how to address
the problem.

***“If ye fear a breach between them twain, appoint two arbiters, one
from his family and one from hers; if they wish for peace, Allah will
cause for their reconciliation.” (4:35)***

Again, the husband is in no way left free to pursue his self-willed
desire. If he were a man of faith and honor, he would not violate the
laws of Islam. The husband must always remember that the wife also has a
set of rules that govern, protect, and guide her. The wife is entitled,
at any time, to withhold or enforce her rights whenever any form of
injustice is being perpetrated against her.

**Fatma:** There is a well-known tradition that requires all Muslims to
obtain an education. You made a reference that the husband cannot
prevent his wife from leaving the home when it relates to accessing a
religious education.

What would be the case if the marriage contract were not conditioned,
and the wife wanted to pursue her college degree, or even, wished to
work in her field of study? Could her husband prevent her, and if she
did, without his approval, would it be considered a transgression?

**Sayyid:** The husband should do his best to accommodate his wife’s
aspirations and needs. The wife should not pursue her studies or work
without her husband’s consent.

**Fatma**: The Qur’an provides reasons why wives must comply with their
husbands wishes;

***“Allah has given or enabled advantages of one over the other and
because they support them from their means.” (4:34)***

Is the Qur’an justifying that the reasons why the wife should comply
with her husband’s wishes is because the husband is more capable of
physically, psychologically, and financially supporting her? If so, is
this not a form of preference or subordination?

To underline again, is the Qur’an justifying compliance based on
financial support? Moreover, are not the responsibilities that the wife
undertakes an equitable balance of diverse responsibilities?

**Sayyid:** Once again, iterating what the Qur’an mentions,

***“Live with them [women] on a footing of kindness and equity: wa
‘aashiruuhun-na bil-ma ‘ruuf,” (4:19)***

And

***“To treat them [wife] in a just manner; wa lahunna mislullazi ‘al
ayhinna bil-ma’ruuf.” (2:228)***

These verses are the epitome of regulations that govern the manner in
which women are to be treated. Islam is based on mu’amalla, the good
treatment of others, and on akhlaq, excellent manners. If women are
treated in a well and justified manner, then certainly it leaves no room
for preference, injustice, and especially subordination.

There are numerous traditions that address the manner in which a husband
should treat his wife. I will cite a few.

A man once asked Imam Sadiq[^22] about the rights of a wife over her
husband. The Imam replied, “He should fulfill all of her fundamental
necessities and must not terrify her by becoming angry time and again.
If after he fulfills her

needs, he is kind, and affectionate toward her, then I swear by Allah,
he has fulfilled his wife’s rights.” [^23] The Prophet said, “The most
perfect believers are the best in conduct and best of you are those who
are best to their families.” [^24]

There is much more to a marriage than just sustenance. Islam has
recognized the basis of a successful marriage, which is mutual
cooperation, respect, love, trust, understanding, tolerance, and
patience. Islam regards the institution of marriage as a continuation of
humanity, fulfilling and safeguarding psychological, emotional, and
physical desires, based upon faith and virtue. “No foundation of Islam
is as beloved and as mighty as the foundation and institution of
marriage,” said the Prophet.[^25]

***“And of His signs is that He created your mates from yourselves that
you might find in them rest, and He put between you affection and
compassion.” (30:21)***

***“They (women) are raiment for you, and you are a raiment for them.”
(2:187)***

***“It is He who has created you from a single person and made its mate
of like nature in order that he might dwell with her in love.”
(7:189)***

Regarding your last point, without undermining the responsibilities of
women, Islam has burdened men with more obligations, such as sustaining
and supporting the family. With that point considered, complying with
the requests of the husband is not intended as a form of balance for
sustenance. The Qur’an has described its reasoning best;

***“And as for the believing men and believing women, they are guardians
of each other.” (9:71)***

**Fatma:** Earlier you mentioned the rights that couples have upon each
other. Starting with the wife, could you describe some of the precepts
of her matrimonial rights?

**Sayyid:** One of the most monumental rights and greatest endowments
ever given to women in Islam is financial independence, nifiqa. The
husband is completely responsible for the livelihood of his wife and
children. There are two major cornerstones that govern the rules and
expectations of one’s livelihood.

***“Let the man of means spend according to his means and the man whose
resources are restricted, let him spend according to what Allah has
given him.” (65:7)***

Nafiqa translates as “living expenditure” in Arabic. It is a very broad
term and it covers a variety of itemized means of inventorial
sustenance, such as clothing, housing, furniture, and spending money.
There are collections of books that pertain to this matter; they detail
the necessary provisions the husband must provide for his family.

Some of the books are meticulous and go as far as specifying what is to
be stored in the pantry, for instance, cooking oil, sugar, flour, and
the recommended food items that should be served on Muslim holidays.

**Fatma:** Does the financial dependence only pertain to husbands
maintaining their wives?

**Sayyid:** Women in Islam whether married, unmarried, divorced, or
widowed are never obligated to work for their livelihood. If she is
single or divorced, her father secures her provisions. If her father is
deceased, then her brother provides for her. If she is widowed then her
husband’s estate or her son will maintain her.

If this is insufficient, then her father, brother, or paternal uncles
will support her. This does not mean that a Muslim woman cannot seek
employment or that she is not to pursue her career ambitions. This is a
choice, the prerogative of every Muslim woman.

If she wishes to exercise her religious right of financial dependence,
then she is within her right to do so. On the other hand, if she proves
to be a responsible individual and wishes to support herself, then that
would also be acceptable.

**Fatma:** Why has Islam given women this level of ease in financial
matters?

**Sayyid:** Islam looks upon women as worthy of honor and respect. Islam
has preserved the dignity of women by liberating them from the
exceedingly great tasks of physically laboring or mentally exhausting
themselves in order to survive. Yet, its true intention and purpose is
to enable them to pursue the most important job —to raise an upright,
moral, and respectable family.

Generally, women and men expect and desire one day to be married and
raise a family. When a woman decides to do so, and on becoming a mother,
then she may undergo extraordinary physiological and psychological
changes — things over which she has no control. Islam has been
considerate of a woman’s disposition and has given her the tremendous
relief of not adding to her burden by providing and securing her means
of livelihood.

It is not insinuated that women are mentally or physical incapable of
supporting themselves. Some women have proven to be capable of toiling
as much as some men, and, in addition, have demonstrated leadership
qualities.

Nevertheless, the uniqueness of a woman’s disposition has placed her in
a particular standing. In most cases, women are bound by their
physiological structure, which not only limits them physically, but also
affects them emotionally.

Women, in general, have two qualities by which Allah distinguishes them
from men. First, they are essential for the creation and propagation of
the human race. Second, they have comparatively delicate bodies and
sensitive perceptions. These distinctions place them in a unique
position which requires special guidelines concerning their lives.

Islam generally does not “personalize.” Islamic laws or injunctions
mainly are based on the welfare of society. Islam advocates that men are
better fit to work outside the home while women are better suited to
tend to the family.

Islam does not mandate or force anyone to abide by the guidelines
completely; there is a choice in the matter. If both partners mutually
agree on their lifestyle, then they are within their rights to live
their lives as they deem fit, as long as it does not contradict the
rules of Islam.

**Fatma:** You made an interesting point regarding having a choice about
the recommended guidelines, this matter must be elaborated on later.
Returning to the rights that a wife has upon her husband, too often
Muslim women are informed of their conjugal responsibilities toward
their husbands. Could you state the manner of intimacy that the wife can
expect from her husband?

**Sayyid:** There is a famous saying in Islam, “There is no shyness when
asking a question about faith.” This means that every subject is open
for dialogue. There is not one issue that is barred from discussion, no
matter how private, objective, or controversial the topic may be.

Islam is very sensitive and extremely responsive to the physical and
emotional needs of women. One of the major rights a woman has upon her
husband is called haqirwail jinse in Arabic —the physical fulfillment
and playful

actions before intimacy. Muslim scholars have gone into great details
about the intimacy and mannerism of haqirwail jinse. I will list some
traditions made by the Prophet.

In the same manner that a wife is to make herself available for her
husband, the husband is to make himself available for his wife. It is
forbidden for a man to abandon his wife physically for more than four
months.[^26]

Even if he is traveling, he must cut short his trip and return home,
unless he is physically restrained from leaving, for example, by being
imprisoned. Additionally, if the wife strongly desires intimacy, and her
husband has abandoned fulfilling his duties, then he would be committing
a transgression.

**Fatma:** Correct me if what I read is wrong. If a wife refuses
intimacy with her husband because she has a headache, or she is tired,
or not in the mood, then the angels will curse her.

**Sayyid:** Regardless of whether she is in pain from her head, back, or
any point in her body, I challenge anyone to cite a credible tradition
which states that if a wife were in physical pain and denied her husband
intimacy then the angels would curse her. If she were truly in pain, and
not pretending, it would be inconsiderate for the husband to approach
her.

The conjugal right is a requirement and obligation of both partners. If
the wife were to deny her husband on account that she was simply lazy or
not in the mood then she would not be fulfilling her matrimonial
commitment. On the same account, if the husband denied his wife intimacy
he would not be fulfilling his duties as well.

Returning to our original conversation, there is an Arabic term called
muda’abah. It describes the way a mother plays with her child —
lovingly, teasingly, and endearingly. This term is also used when
referring to the relationship between the husband and wife. It is highly
recommended that the husband display his emotions toward his wife by
behaving affectionately.

There is a tradition from Imam Sadiq that has a significant meaning.
“One of you who approaches his wife and finishes with her and she is not
fully satisfied and then she exits from beneath him, that if she finds a
slave she would hold to him.”[^27] The significance of this tradition is
to enlighten the husband about the importance of fulfilling his wife’s
needs before parting from her.

**Fatma:** Why is a slave used as a reference?

**Sayyid:** Before, during, and after the time of the Prophet, slavery
existed. Although, slavery was in the process of being abolished by
Islam, it still existed for a short while after the time of the Prophet.
Slaves did not have the same rights or prestige as free individuals. For
this reason, slaves were viewed as second-class citizens.

The reference to a slave is to make a point that when married couples
are at their most intimate time together, and the husband has completely
satisfied himself and has left his wife not satisfied, then, in essence,
he has left her in a vulnerable state in which she may attempt to
satisfy herself with another man, even an inferior man, like the example
of a slave given in the tradition.

Imam Sadiq said, “When a husband is being intimate with his spouse, he
should not come to her like a bird— hit and run. He should prolong until
she fulfills her needs.” [^28]

The Prophet once said, “When a man approaches his wife he should not
hasten until she is satisfied because women have needs.”[^29]

The Prophet said, “If a man has a collection of women and he does not
have physical contact and if one of the wives commits adultery then the
[greater] sin is placed on the man because he did not fulfill his
duties.”[^30]

Another expected right that a wife has upon her husband is that he be
well groomed. Meaning that his body is clean, his facial hairs trimmed
accordingly, he smells pleasant, his attire is neat, and so forth. There
is a tradition from Imam Rida[^31] on the account of the Prophet that
states, “Women of the Bani Israel deviated from the path of chastity
because their men were not bothered about cleanliness and their good
looks. What you expect of your wife, she expects from you.”[^32]

The Prophet said, “You men must make yourselves tidy and be prepared for
your wives, as you would like them to be prepared for you.”[^33]

Once a man was relaying an incident to another man that he had with Imam
Ali. He said:

I saw Imam Ali who had dyed his hair. I asked if indeed he had dyed his
hair. Imam Ali stated, “Yes. Adornment of a man for the sake of his wife
helps her keep her chastity. Women who deviate from the path of chastity
do so due to the carelessness and faults of their husbands. Do you like
to see your wife untidy?” The man replied, “No.” Imam Ali then added,
“She thinks just the same as you do.”[^34]

Now, the third right that a wife can ask of her husband is muthaja’ah, a
form of companionship and close association. Meaning, the husband spends
nights with his wife, not necessarily being intimate with her, but being
together in the same bed.

Lastly, as the Qur’an beautifully states,

***“Live with them [women] on a footing of kindness and equity: wa
‘aashiruuhun-na bil-ma ‘ruuf.” (4:19)***

This verse is self-explanatory and firmly covers every facet of treating
a woman.

**Fatma:** Tamkeem, or haqq istimata’a, is the wife making herself
available for her husband. These are rights the husband could request of
his wife. Could you clarify their particulars?

**Sayyid:** One of the essential behaviors of a wife in marriage is
tamkeem or haqq istimta’a. This is when the wife makes herself
physically available to and pleasantly charming for her husband.

There are exceptions to this rule, such as when the wife is
menstruating, post-childbirth, illness, hajj performance, and
obligatorily fasts and prayers. Otherwise, the wife should make herself
physically and emotionally available to her husband.

Once a woman came to the Prophet to complain about her husband. After
she expressed her complaint, the Prophet concluded that she was, in
part, responsible. He said, “Maybe you are one of the delayers.” She
asked, “Who are the delayers?” The Prophet replied, “The delayer is the
wife whose husband is inviting her to be with him and she keeps on
delaying him until he tires and falls asleep.”[^35]

This anecdote has profound meaning. Sometimes women can be so caught up
with domestic duties, careers, or social affairs that when their
husbands want their companionship they keep putting them aside.
Although, some of these undertakings may be considered important;
nevertheless, they do not measure up to the relationship one must
establish and ensure with one’s partner. Remember, marriage is a
partnered tie.

Similarly, the recommendations listed for the husband’s right in tamkeem
are equivalent to the wife’s right in haq al-irwa al-jinsi. The wife
should only beautify herself for her husband, for instance showering,
using make-up, perfume, wearing jewelry, and dressing attractively. Even
if her husband were blind or deaf, his sense of smell and touch may
still be highly developed.

Continuing with the last and final right (that is truly the pivotal
point of a firm relationship) is haqq al-maiya, a form of companionship
and friendship. The husband may request of his wife to accompany him, or
to be home upon his arrival, or to spend evenings together.

These are the only rights a husband and wife may impose upon each other.
For some couples these rights may be deemed impractical, or rarely
practiced, or even unnecessary to mention, while for others they are the
focal point on which couples base their relationship.

Islam does not impose on couples complete adherence to all of the rights
verbatim. It mentions them in case of disparities, disagreements, or as
guidance to either advise, direct, recommend, or to solve certain
problems. Every individual is within his or her right, before his or her
marriage contract, to accept or reject any of the rights.

**Fatma:** You mentioned previously that a woman has a choice concerning
the recommended guidelines. Are you stating that the rights mentioned
are optional?

**Sayyid:** Upon contracting the marriage, the rights that were just
mentioned are automatically presumed. Couples do not necessarily have to
go through each and every single right and agree upon them; they are
already fixed as a platform for either securing their rights in marriage
or enforcing them. Interestingly though, if one or both partners chooses
to modify or relinquish certain marital rights, upon agreement of the
other partner, then they are within their domain to do so.

**Fatma:** My assumption was that Qur’anic laws always superseded
changes or modifications done by any person.

**Sayyid:** Indeed, Qur’anic laws may never be modified or relinquished;
however, rights may be. In Islam, there are two differentiating rules of
procedures and conduct. One is called hukom and the other is called
haqq.

Hukom is a judgment — a divine injunction, an order set by Allah. No one
may alter, modify, relinquish, or postpone it in any way. Take, for
example, practicing hijab, no one should ever argue that, in this day
and age, or that because a woman lives in this area of the world that
she should not practice hijab, or that her husband does not want her to
observe it.

Observing hijab is not up to an individual simply because he or she does
not see a reason for it. Hijab is mandatory; it is an injunction ordered
by Allah. No person could ever override such a law, just like the
prayers, fast, alms giving, performing the hajj, not drinking or
gambling, and so forth. These are all injunctions; laws that are
mandated for every Muslim to follow.

Haqq, within the domain of marital rights and responsibilities, is also
considered as an obligatory rule that maybe altered, relinquished,
modified, or conditioned, provided that both parties agree and that the
changes do not contradict Islamic laws (shariah). Here is where the
Qur’an has been generous. The Qur’an has given people liberty to live
their lives as they see fit.

The marital rights listed are not unbreakable; they may be modified.
Islamic law (shariah) allows couples to place clauses, stipulate terms,
or renounce any part of their marital contract granted that the parties
mutually agree, and that the changes do not contradict the laws of
Islam.

Allah wants people to live a life based on mutuality within the
prescribed rules (hukom). Allah does not want to dictate to people how
they are to live their lives entirely. Allah wants married couples to
agree on what best defines a respectable lifestyle. Mutual agreement,
cooperation, and shared interests are what build healthy and lifelong
relationships.

It is highly recommended that, before marriage, couples are in agreement
regarding matters they consider important and relevant. If couples come
to an acceptable agreement, and it is within the boundaries of Islamic
law, then there is no need to refer to the marital rights that were
mentioned. Islamic scholars only refer to the matrimonial rights when
couples had presumably accepted the rights, and then one spouse (or
both) defies them.

To illustrate, there have been cases where some wives, especially
elderly women, place a clause in their marital contract that waives
conjugal relations with the husband. If the man agrees, then the
contract would be in order. Although it may be unusual, she is within
her right to place this condition provided that the man agrees.

Perhaps her intentions for marriage are not personal. Perhaps the
marriage was more of a business contract, a social entitlement, or as a
form of security. She is within her right to place such and any
conditions, again, provided that the modifications are jointly agreed
upon and do not contradict (binding) Islamic laws.

As another example, a man who wishes to marry may propose conditions to
the wife. He may say to her, “I will marry you provided you agree this
will be your moderate home, your economical car, and the amount of money
you will receive each month.” If she agrees, then the contract would be
in order, even if he were able to provide for her a better lifestyle and
chooses not to, perhaps for personal reasons.

For example, he may fear that she may abandon him one day, or that she
may use the money or provisions for her relatives. He has the right to
exercise conservativeness or caution in his spending.

**Fatma:** Did you not mention that there was a major cornerstone
governing the rules of one’s livelihood?

***“Let the man of means spend according to his means and the man whose
resources are restricted, let him spend according to what Allah has
given him.”(65:7)***

Is this verse not an injunction (hukom)? Would not this verse protect a
woman from a man who is miserly?

**Sayyid:** The verse you cited was for a particular injunction
mentioned in the chapter entitled **“Divorce”** in the Qur’an, that
orders the husband to maintain sustaining his former wife who is nursing
his child. However, the verse may also be applied to other areas of
one’s life, for example, marital expenditures.

This verse is an injunction, but the verse also pertains to marriages in
which there are no changes, no stipulations, no conditions, and no
modifications. This verse is related to the typical marital contract in
which no stipulations are contracted; hence, the prescribed typical
rights would then be assumed.

If we refer to the previously mentioned example of the man who planned
on marrying yet had placed conditions prior to the marital contract, he
had in fact given the woman the option to marry with conditions or to
not marry him.

He was not imposing the restrictions after the fact of the marriage
contract; he stated them prior. A woman is in no way obligated to marry
such a man. She is entitled to either accept such conditions or refuse
the proposed offer.

**Fatma:** At the time of contracting the marriage, the rights of each
partner are already presumed, even if the partners are ignorant of their
expectant rights (haqq), correct?

**Sayyid:** Correct. Upon completing the prescribed marital contract,
all the rights (huqoq) are automatically accepted, regardless of whether
one (or both) of the partners was unaware of the specifics.

**Fatma:** If the couple decides, they can add or delete rights (huqoq),
correct?

**Sayyid:** Only if the changes are within religious boundaries and each
person agrees. As long as it is not forbidden religiously, then they can
add or delete whatever they wish.

**Fatma:** The Qur’an has already stipulated that a man of means must
provide accordingly. How then do scholars distinguish between verses
that are obligatory or binding (hukom) and those that are permitted to
be altered (haqq)?

**Sayyid:** Primarily, the way in which scholars differentiate between
obligatory injunctions (hukom), such as prayers, fasts, or alms giving
and some rights (haqq) that can be modified is when they are based on
social contracts, such as marriages, divorces, or business agreements.

Take, for example, the verse

***“Men are the supporters and sustainers of women.” (4:34)***

The verse mandates husbands to bear the responsibility of financially
supporting and maintaining their wives. However, the verse is not
compulsory (hukom); it is a right (haqq). If, for example, a wealthy
woman opted to sustain her husband, she may. Islam would not forbid her
from supporting her husband financially.

**Fatma:** Could a woman contract that her husband may not marry a
second wife?

**Sayyid:** She is within her right to implement such a rule, provided
the husband agrees.

**Fatma:** But you mentioned that the stipulation must not conflict with
religious doctrine; yet, Islam allows the man to marry up to four women.

**Sayyid:** The key word is allowed, meaning it is permitted. It is
important to note that marrying a second wife is not obligatory (wajib),
it is permissible (mubah). There is a difference between obligatory
issuances and permissible acts. If polygamy were obligatory then she
would not be entitled to impose such restrictions.

When a wife stipulates in her marriage contract that she does not want
her husband to marry another wife, essentially she is stating “as long
as you are married to me, you may not practice this permissible act,
and, if you wish to, then you must divorce me before you act upon this
matter.” She does not state that he may not marry another woman.

She is not avowing that it is forbidden (haram) for him to do so; it is
allowed (halal). He may marry another woman, but her marital contract
specifically states that if he wants to marry another woman then he must
divorce her first.

**Fatma:** When couples modify their marriage contract, must it be
documented with an imam (Islamic scholar) or Islamic court?

**Sayyid:** It is highly recommended that couples rightfully document
the modifications and obtain two just witnesses. The document would
serve as a reminder and security if any future problems occur.

**Fatma:** According to some traditions, marriage is considered as
fulfilling half of one’s religion. These traditions give the impression
that marriage is mandatory for all Muslims. Is it?

**Sayyid:** Marriage in Islam is regarded as a dogmatic practice, not an
obligatory order. Islam considers the institution of marriage as a form
of protecting and securing the well-being of an individual, such as
morally, emotionally,

physically, and spiritually. Therefore, it becomes a mandatory issuance.
The Prophet said, “Whoever marries protects half of his religion.”[^36]
Hence, in order to ensure and protect one’s chastity, it becomes
incumbent upon a Muslim to marry. Although for some people who do not
marry, it would not be considered a sin.

**Fatma:** Does marriage require witnesses?

**Sayyid:** In the school of Ahlul Bayt, witnesses are recommended but
not mandatory. If a couple recites the formula of marriage between
themselves, with no witnesses, then their marriage will be valid. Unlike
divorce, which requires witnesses and places obstacles, marriage does
not. Islam encourages and facilitates couples to marry.

**Fatma:** Must the marriage formula be recited in Arabic?

**Sayyid:** Most contemporary scholars prefer that the marriage formula
be recited in Arabic, but if it is impossible then any other language
would suffice.

**Fatma:** When a Muslim woman marries, she is entitled to keep her
maiden name. She is not required to replace her father’s name with her
husband’s name, correct?

**Sayyid:** If the wife wishes, she can keep her maiden name and
maintain her independent identity.

**Fatma:** It is well known that a Muslim woman cannot marry a
non-Muslim, yet there are opposing arguments regarding a Muslim man
marrying a Christian or Jewish woman. Those that are in favor of such
marriages refer to the verse which states,

***“Lawful unto you in marriage are not only chaste women who are
believers, but chaste women among the People of the Book: wal muhsanato
minal mo-minati wal muhsanato minal lazina utul kitaba min qab-likum.”
(5:5)***

Can a Muslim man marry a Christian or Jewish woman without her
conversion to Islam?

**Sayyid:** The verse, which you quoted, is related to events which were
occurring during the time of the Prophet. When Islam became prevalent
and popular in Arabia, some Muslim men became proud of their religious
heritage. As a consequence, some of these men wanted to marry only women
who were born Muslim.

They gave no opportunity to the faithful, converted Muslim women who
descended from the Jewish or Christian faiths. Islam wanted Muslim men
to marry women who were not only born Muslim, but also faithful women
who had newly converted to Islam from previously divine scriptures.

Islam is a continuation and completion of the three monotheistic
religions. Islam believes in the original texts of the Torah and Bible,
and considers the followers of Prophet Moses and Prophet Jesus as
“People of the Book.”

Since one of the principles of marriage is firm family values and shared
interests, today’s contemporary scholars of Ahlul Bayt, as a mandatory
precaution, state that it is not recommended for a Muslim man to
permanently marry a Jewish or Christian woman.

The reason for this is to avoid conflicts in religious matters and to
provide a lifestyle that may be compatibly shared, in particular, when
it comes to raising children. It is for the benefit and serenity of not
only the couples, but also for the children that parents be mutually
involved in the same religion.

Adolescence
-----------

**Fatma:** When a girl reaches the end of her ninth year in the Islamic
(Lunar) calendar, she becomes responsible for fulfilling her religious
duties independently (mukalif). Is this age also considered lawful for
marriage?

**Sayyid:** According to some scholars, a girl who reaches the end of
her ninth year in the Islamic calendar (hijra) becomes responsible for
her religious duties, such as prayers and fasts. There are also some
scholars that state a  
 girl’s religious responsibility commences upon menstruation.
Nevertheless, the consensus of contemporary scholars is that
menstruation is the primary criterion for marriage, not necessarily
one’s age, as being the main factor.

Despite this consensus, in our time and age, I would not recommend
marriage before mental and physical maturity, and a demonstration of
one’s ability to bear the task of being a full partner in the family.

**Fatma:** How does Islam justify a “young age” for marriage when, in
most cases, adolescent girls are immature and incapable of managing the
tremendous responsibilities of a marriage?

**Sayyid:** One must understand that Islam knows no race or culture, and
it is not bonded to time. Islam is a religion sent for all time and
humankind. Although there may be many girls in the world who are young
and too immature for marriage, there are also many adolescent (ages
13-19) girls who may be ready for marriage. It would be prejudicial to
state that all adolescent girls are too immature for marriage.

In most cases, if we compare the maturity level of adolescent girls in
Western societies to those of Eastern societies, one would tend to find
that the readiness and ability levels of the Eastern girls for marriage
surpass that of the Western girls.

**Fatma:** Islam is a religion that demands of its adherents physical
rituals[^37] that require psychological and spiritual conceptualization.
Considering that, in general, most young adolescent girls are not mature
enough to comprehend the religious undertakings mandated of them, how
then does Islam explain the equivalence level of religious
responsibilities of young girls to that of adult women, since both are
required to implement their religious duties?

**Sayyid:** It would be unfair to state that the religious expectancy
levels of young girls and adult women are equivalent. The Qur’an gives,
through parables, numerous examples of degrees in accountability and
affirms that people will not be judged in the same manner.

***“Allah does not impose upon a soul a duty but to the extent of its
ability.” (2:286)***

When girls begin to change physically, mentally, and emotionally, it is
an introductory stage toward womanhood. It is during this phase that
Islam also introduces itself. The development of the spirit is the
foundation that makes a person become a rightful human being.

**Fatma:** In Islam, when a girl reaches physical, mental, and social
maturity, she is entitled to manage and dispose of her property or
commercial enterprises as she pleases, correct?

**Sayyid:** Considering that she is fully mature in all the areas you
mentioned, correct.

**Fatma:** Taking into consideration that Islam has recognized her as a
responsible person, then why is it necessary for her to seek the
permission of her father to marry (for the first time)?

**Sayyid:** Marriage should not be impetuously decided upon. It requires
mature thought and keen perception. There is the famous saying “Love is
blind.” Marriage should never be based solely on love, and,
unfortunately, it is the mere romantic emotion that drives the immature
adult into making unwise decisions.

In general, when young women are emotionally involved with a man, their
sense of perception is somewhat distorted. It is during this critical
time that the father who raised her, cared for her, and loved her all
those years, responsibly analyzes if that particular man is well-suited
for his daughter. Generally, fathers want what is best for their
daughters.

If the groom was a man who feared and obeyed Allah, and he was able to
provide for his daughter a comfortable lifestyle, then there would be
absolutely no objection to the marriage. In fact, most fathers would
give their blessings from the beginning of the religious courting.

Some women may take offense to this particular ruling, but one should
not view it in a negative or demeaning manner. This is a form of
protection. This ruling protects the girl from being taken advantage of
and from making an irrational decision.

Let us presume that you have a twenty-year-old daughter and she was in
love with a man who drank and was consistently in and out of work. Would
you give your blessings or would you state your opposition to such a
marriage? Even though your daughter is twenty years old, would you agree
that she is making an appropriate decision? Age is not the only
criterion for marriage; maturity counts as well.

**Fatma:** Permission of the father for marriage is religiously required
for a young woman who marries for the first time. Is there a certain age
limit to this ruling? What would be the case if the woman were
thirty-something? Would she still be required to obtain her father’s
permission?

**Sayyid:** Scholars of Islam state that, as an obligatory precaution
and as a gesture of respect for the father, the woman should seek her
father’s approval.

**Fatma:** According to some schools of thought, the father or
grandfather are permitted to contract a marriage for a minor, whether
male or female. Then, upon puberty (baleigh) that contract becomes
binding unless one of the parties opposes the marriage. A traditional
story has been told:

A young girl came before the Prophet perplexed and anxious. She
exclaimed, “O Messenger of Allah, from the hand of this father…” “But
what has your father done to you?” the Prophet asked. “He has given me
in marriage before consulting me in the matter,” she said.

“Now that he has done it, agree and be his wife,” said the Prophet. “How
can I be a wife to a man I do not like?” asked the woman. “If you do not
like him, that is the end of the matter. You have full authority. Go and
make the choice of a man whom you would like to marry,” said the
Prophet.[^38]

All the varying schools of thought agree that a marriage contract is
only valid when both parties consent, but my inquiry is to understand
why Islam allows the father or grandfather to contract a marriage prior
to the maturity of the girl or boy when their approval is a prerequisite
for the marriage contract to be binding?

**Sayyid:** In the early days of Islam, it was customary for some
individuals to marry at a young age. Parents used to arrange marriages
for their children. This was the tradition. Islam encourages parents to
seek the best suitor for their children, but it forbids parents to
exercise a marital contract in which one or both parties oppose.

**Fatma:** What happens in cases when the father unjustifiably rejects
his daughter’s suitor and she decides to elope. Would her marriage be
void (batal)?

**Sayyid:** In order to answer that question correctly, unjustifiably
must be clarified.

If the suitor were a man of good faith, a practicing Muslim, compatible
with the moral and religious standing of her family, and was capable of
sustaining her then there would be no basis for the father’s objection.
If  
 the daughter eloped, then her marriage would be in order. At the same
time, Islam advises that the woman continue to seek her father’s
blessings.

Mahr
----

**Fatma:** Is a mahr mandatory in marriage?

**Sayyid:** A marriage would not be valid without stipulating a mahr.
Some people assume that the mahr is a form of buying a bride; it is not.
The mahr is a gift. Traditionally, it has been money, but it is not
necessary that it be money. It could be anything from an extravagant
gift, sending one’s wife for her hajj pilgrimage, or presenting one’s
wife with a Qur’an.

**Fatma:** Traditionally it has been money; therefore, there were
monetary reasons for the mahr. What is Islam’s position regarding the
mahr?

**Sayyid:** A monetary mahr can be a form of financially securing a
woman with provisions. In the past, and even in contemporary times, many
women have struggled for financial security. A monetary mahr may become
a means of providing financial security for a woman who may in the
future require assistance in which to live. Also, it may establish an
opportunity to market the money to gain economic strength.

**Fatma:** What happens in cases where the mahr amount had not been
settled? Would the wife then be entitled to a mahr appropriate for her
socio-economic status (mehr-i-mithl)?

**Sayyid:** The mahr would be considered equivalent to that of her
peers. Presuming one daughter’s mahr was $10,000 then it would be
expected that the other daughter’s mahr to be the same.

**Fatma:** What happens if a wife dies and the husband still has not
paid the mahr in full? Would the husband be required to pay into the
deceased wife’s estate in order for her living parents and children to
inherit from her?

**Sayyid:** If the wife died, and the husband had yet to pay the full
mahr, then he would have to pay his deceased wife’s estate.

**Fatma:** How would the wife ensure her mahr if the husband died and he
had not paid the mahr in full?

**Sayyid:** If the mahr had not been paid in full then it would be
considered as a loan or as a debt the husband owed his wife. The wife,
at anytime throughout the time of her marriage, may request her husband
to pay the mahr. If the husband died before paying the full amount of
the mahr, then the wife’s mahr would be considered a debt. It would need
to be paid off from his estate before anyone could claim inheritance
from his will.

**Fatma:** Consider the scenario that a couple agreed on a mahr in the
sum of $10,000. At the time of marriage, the husband gave his wife
$3,000 with a promise to pay her the remaining $7,000 in the future.
Would the remainder of the mahr in the future be paid according to the
exact amount ($7,000), or would it depend on a variety of circumstances,
such as the cost of living, the currency of the country, or the
financial status of the husband at the time of payment?

**Sayyid:** The remaining balance of the mahr would be equivalent to the
present value of what would have been considered equivalent had it been
paid off at the past market value. In other words, if the value of
$7,000 ten years ago is presently worth $14,000, then the husband would
be required to pay the cost of the current market.

Husbands must understand that if the mahr is money, and if it has not
been paid in full, then it is considered a loan that must be paid. It is
a promissory note to pay the full amount, and husbands must take into
consideration that if they delay paying the remainder of the mahr, then
they run the risk of the mahr increasing to the current market value.

Islam does not force men to settle on an exorbitant sum for the mahr.
Men should offer according to their capabilities. The mahr does not have
to be money. It could be anything that has value, whether it be a
sentimental  
 gift or Currency  
**  
 Fatma:** Therefore, the currency of the country or the financial status
of the husband cannot be used in modifying the remaining balance of the
mahr, correct?

**Sayyid:** If the husband were unable to pay the remaining mahr, then
the general rule of debt would apply.

***“If the debtor is in difficulty, grant him time till it is easy for
him to repay. But if you remit it by way of charity, that is best for
you if you only knew.” (2:280)***

[^1]: Qur’an, 9:71.

[^2]: Qur’an, 24:2.

[^3]: Al-Hadith An-Nabawi, Mawsu’at Atraaf, v. 3, p. 55 & 266.

[^4]: Qur’an, 65:7.

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, v. 5, p.113.

[^6]: Struggling for the cause of Allah.

[^7]: Nuhjul Fasaahah

[^8]: Wasail Al-Sh’iah, v. 3, p. 6.

[^9]: Al-Nisa’i, Ibn Majah, & Ahmad.

[^10]: Ahmad

[^11]: Imam Ali, the first of the twelve infallible successors to the
Prophet.

[^12]: Imam Ali, first cousin to the Prophet & son-in-law (married to
Fatima).

[^13]: Nahjul Balagha, v. 1, sermon 80.

[^14]: Tarikh Al-Tabari & Ibn Al-Althueer.

[^15]: Defined by the Prophet as a light tap.

[^16]: See chapter “Disciplinary Action.”

[^17]: Statutory Islamic dress for women; covering of the body & hair.

[^18]: Hajj is a pilgrimage Muslims must undertake, if permitted, once
in their lifetime to the house of Allah called the Kabah, located in
Mecca, Hijaz.

[^19]: Religious scholars/leaders of Islam.

[^20]: Ibn Abbas.

[^21]: Qur’an, 4:19 & 2:228.

[^22]: Imam Ja’far Assadiq was the sixth Imam of Ahlul Bayt and
successor to the Prophet.

[^23]: Usul al-Kafi.

[^24]: Bihar Al-Anwar, v. 103, p. 224.

[^25]: Mustradrak Al-Wasel, v. 2, p. 531.

[^26]: Al-Tahtheeb, v. 7.

[^27]: Man La Yuhthoral Al-Faqeeh, v. 3, p. 364.

[^28]: Usul al-Kafi, v. 5.

[^29]: Usul al-Kafi, v. 5.

[^30]: Usul al-Kafi, v. 5.

[^31]: Ali Rida is the eighth Imam in the twelve descendents of Ahl
al-Bayt.

[^32]: Bihar Al-Anwar, v. 76, p. 102.

[^33]: Mustadrak Al-Wasel, v. 2, p. 559.

[^34]: Wasail Al-Sh’iah, v. 14, p. 183.

[^35]: Usual, Al-Kafi, v. 5.

[^36]: Wasail Al-Sh’iah, v. 5.

[^37]: e.g., five daily prayers, fasting, ritual cleansing baths, and
others.

[^38]: The Rights of Women in Islam, Murtaza Mutahheri.


