Chapter 3: Divorce, Divorce and Mahr, Proprietorship
====================================================

Divorce
-------

**Fatma:** Why has the authority for divorce been inherently willed to
the husband in Islam?

**Sayyid:** Divorce in Islam is considered one of the most detestable
actions in the sight of Allah. Imam Sadiq quoted the Prophet as saying,
“Get married, but do not divorce, because a divorce would tremble the
‘Arsh [empyrean] of Allah.”[^1]

Unlike some religions, divorce in Islam is permissible, but its
procedure is strictly observed. Finalizing a divorce in Islam is not as
simple as some people may perceive. It is a long and extensive process.

The husband may have been automatically willed as the final executor of
the divorce decree, but the process for divorce is difficult and
conditional. The reason for this is that divorce has consequences and
repercussions, not only upon the married couple, but also upon the
children, and, unavoidably, the immediate relatives and society.

Scholars have a variety of justifications as to why divorce has been
determined as the man’s right. Their reasons are not as some people may
believe, such as that men are somehow superior to women or that men are
the caretakers of women. Most scholars conclude that the main reasons
are the result of a woman’s psychological structure and of the man’s
obligation to provide her with financial sustenance.

Women, in general, are more apt to react emotionally to sensitive
situations or tragedies. This is not to imply that men do not react to
dramatic events. They certainly do. Nevertheless, in general, men are a
bit calmer and cautiously attentive when handling uncertainties.

**Fatma:** Is Islam insinuating that women, in general, are
psychologically weak and not up to par in handling uncertainties
rationally?

**Sayyid:** If women were unable to handle uncertainties rationally then
Allah would not have gifted women with becoming mothers, which entails
the great psychological and physiological challenge of bearing and
raising children.

In general, when scholars state that women are quicker to react
emotionally to uncertainties, they are referring to the personal
conflicts that arise within a marriage. When referring to the personal
relationship of couples, the wife, in general, has a tendency to be more
influenced by her emotions.[^2]

A serious action, such as divorce should never be based on fluctuating
emotions. Divorce in Islam is a very serious matter. It is not something
to be approached lightly. The origin of divorce should, on no account,
be swayed by one’s temporary feelings.

**Fatma:** Emotion is a profound reason as to why some couples get
divorced. Is Islam asserting that there is no room for emotional
factors?

**Sayyid:** It depends on the type of emotions to which you are
referring. If the reasons for divorce were based on temporary
dissatisfaction with one’s spouse, then that would not be suitable
grounds for divorce.

***“If you take a dislike to them it may be that you dislike a thing and
Allah brings about through it a great deal of good.” (4:19)***

Whether the divorce is from the husband or wife, especially if children
are involved, the divorce initially would be refused. The case would be
studied extensively before a judgment could be finalized. In most cases,
divorces that are not based on fluctuating emotional circumstances may
be resolved with time or through counseling.

Islam condemns men and women who exercise their right for divorce on any
excuse except those based on legitimate grounds and in absolutely
vulnerable conditions. The grounds for divorce cannot be frivolous; they
must be based on genuine, rational, and logical justifications.

The Prophet once said, “Gabriel so much commended the cause of the woman
and so counseled me as to give me the impression that except in the
clear case of adultery, the wife does not deserve to be divorced.” [^3]

**Fatma:** Could you elucidate and expound upon the economic reasons
scholars cite as to why the husband has been granted entitlement of
divorce?

**Sayyid:** Generally, men must have the financial means to marry. Most
men put a substantial amount of their savings toward marrying in order
to provide a wedding, a home, and eventually sustaining a family. Hence,
scholars determine that when husbands control divorce rights, they will
cautiously weigh all the factors before deciding to divorce. Otherwise
men may lose some provisions and remarrying can be costly.

Furthermore, a wife’s financial loss might not be as great as a
husband’s. In Islam, the wife is never required to work or provide for
herself financially. It is her husband’s responsibility, and this in
itself, beside the psychological make-up of a woman, is the reason the
Islamic law (shar’i) recommends that divorce rights remain with the
husband.

**Fatma:** Critics generally state that Ahlul Bayt jurists describe
marriage contracts as binding and insoluble for women. Is there any
accuracy to such a statement?

**Sayyid:** The statement is contradictory to the laws of Islam. Women
in Islam are not considered as commodities or servants of any person
—not to her father, husband, grandfather, uncle, or brother. She is an
independent person, capable of maintaining her own identity, assets, and
choices.

It is important to note that in the marriage contract the husband is
commonly granted the divorce right; however, the husband may transfer
his divorce right to be exercised by the wife as a stipulated clause in
the marital agreement.

**Fatma:** Do you mean to state that entitlement of divorce can be a
stipulated clause in the marital contract?

**Sayyid:** Undoubtedly, it may be a stipulated clause in the marital
contract. There are four categories of divorce to consider. Couples have
the deciding factor on which clause they wish to use in their marital
contract, should an unavoidable divorce occur:

1) The right of divorce is inherently given to the husband, unless it is
proven that the husband has become psychologically incompetent. In this
case, the Islamic judge (al-hakim al-shar’i) would determine the
divorce.

2) The husband relinquishes his inherited divorce right and grants his
wife the right of divorce.

3) Couples relinquish divorce procedures to the Islamic courts or an
Islamic scholar/leader (imam).

4) Right of divorce is equally given to both —the husband and wife.

Let us discuss the third clause. To be absolutely and entirely dependent
upon an Islamic judge, who has no prior knowledge or is unfamiliar with
the individuality of each couple, their lives, or affairs, and the fact
that this individual is charged with the authority of issuing a decision
that will ultimately alter one’s life, is somewhat unthinkable. Divorce
is a personal matter in which only the parties involved can make the
rightful decision that best suits their lives.

Similarly, the fourth clause, the right of divorce to be equally
controlled by both parties, can be difficult to settle. Presuming one
partner is set on divorce, and the other is set against it, then the
marriage or divorce is at a standstill because both are equal in the
decision-making. Contracting this type of divorce is not advisable.

This leaves the two remaining clauses as options: either the inherited
right remains with the husband, or the husband grants his divorce right
to the wife. As mentioned and discussed earlier, Islamic law (shar’i)
would not advocate that the divorce right is given solely to the wife.
This leaves us with the last option, the right for divorce to remain
with the husband (with mutual counseling and consultation with the
wife). [^4]

**Fatma:** If Islamic laws do not favor entitling the wife with divorce
rights, then how would Islam protect women from husbands that use
religion as an excuse to justify their [husbands’] dubious conduct?

**Sayyid:** Islam does not mandate that the husband must take full
custody of the divorce right. The wife, upon her marital contract, can
be consulted and informed of her rights and choices. Then, the decision
is left up to the couple to decide what is best for them.

One must remember that even though the husband has the inherit right of
divorce it is still conditional, as mentioned before. Although the right
for divorce may be in his control the wife still has the opportunity to
divorce her husband.

**Fatma:** How would the wife have an opportunity to divorce her husband
if the divorce right were within the husband’s possession?

**Sayyid:** If the husband had the power of divorce, still there are
ways in which a woman may petition for divorce. They are called khul’a,
mubarat, and hakim shari divorces, and they all require assistance from
an Islamic judge or Islamic leader (imam) for the divorce to be issued.

Khul’a (divestiture) divorce is a term applied to a wife who has
developed an aversion toward her husband and despises him to the point
of refusing him conjugal rights. For this particular divorce, the wife
would have to forfeit her mahr, and perhaps pay an additional amount
that may exceed her mahr, for her independence.

Mubarat divorce is when a wife and husband have developed a mutual
aversion toward one another. Therefore, in order for the wife’s
autonomy, she would have to furnish the husband with some of her assets.
The difference between this and a khul’a divorce is that the value does
not exceed the mahr because it was a mutual dislike.

Al-hakim al-shar’i is a divorce conducted by an Islamic judge or imam
with or without the consent of the husband. This particular divorce is
exercised in cases where the wife, having no authority to divorce,
requests and claims a legitimate reason to divorce but the husband
refuses to grant the divorce.

When a husband refuses to grant a divorce, and the wife’s claim for
divorce is justified, then the Islamic courts or imam may intervene. The
Islamic court or imam may summon the husband and order him to divorce
her, or they may finalize the divorce with or without his consent. This
type of divorce is termed hakim al-shar’i.

Assuming the wife does not have the power of divorce and that she wishes
for separation then her claim for a divorce must be warranted. Scholars
have specific criteria for such cases. Additionally, there are certain
cases in which a marriage may be automatically annulled without
declaration or legal procedures. They are as follows:

1. Annulment: If the husband concealed his insanity before the marriage
contract.

2. Annulment: If the husband concealed a communicable or a burdening
disease before the marital contract.

3. Annulment: If the husband concealed castration before the marital
contract.

4. Annulment: If the husband apostatizes (abandons his faith). The
moment a husband apostatizes, the marriage dissolves instantaneously.

5. Divorce Procedures: If the husband becomes insane during the
marriage.

6. Divorce Procedures: If the husband physically abuses or is violent
toward his wife.

7. Divorce Procedures: If the husband no longer supports his wife
financially.

8. Divorce Procedures: If the husband abandons his wife physically
because of long-term imprisonment, he is missing, or he has deserted
her.

9. Divorce Procedures: If the husband becomes physically contagious.

10. Divorce Procedures: If the husband becomes castrated during
marriage, and the consequences become unbearable for the wife.

There is one criterion on which scholars differ —impotence. Some
scholars state that if the husband knew of his impotence before marriage
and purposely withheld this information from the bride then that would
constitute

grounds for a justifiable divorce or annulment. Additionally, if the
wife kept silent about the matter and years later voiced her complaint
and based the grounds for divorce upon his impotence, then the husband
must divorce her.

Other scholars argue that if the husband were capable of being intimate
once with his wife and later became impotent then this alone would not
be grounds for divorce. These scholars recommend that the couple try to
seek medical and psychological care for the problem rather than
resorting to a divorce. Yet, if it were completely unbearable (auser and
harraj) for the wife then scholars would grant a divorce.

**Fatma:** What is the procedure for divorce?

**Sayyid:** The Qur’an expresses how divorce is to be respectably
handled:

***Either take them back on equitable terms or part with them on
equitable terms. (65:2)***

***If you fear a breach between them twain, appoint two arbiters, one
from his family and the other from hers; if they wish for peace, Allah
will cause their reconciliation. (4:35)***

Every divorce is conditional and highly dependent upon the situation.
The Qur’an details the procedures for common divorce cases:

***And when you divorce women and they reach their prescribed time, then
either retain them in good fellowship or set them free with liberality,
and do not retain them for injury, so that you exceed the limits, and
whoever does this, he indeed is unjust to his own soul. (2:231)***

***And when you have divorced women and they have ended their term then
do not prevent them from marrying their husbands when they agree among
themselves in a lawful manner. (2:232)***

***There is no blame on you if you divorce women when you have not
touched them or appointed for them a portion, and make provisions for
them. (2:236)***

***And for the divorced women provisions must be made according to
usage. (2:241)***

***And the divorced women should keep themselves in waiting for three
courses; and it is not lawful for them that they should conceal what
Allah has created in their wombs. (2:228)***

Regardless of which partner has the entitlement of divorce, when a
divorce is initiated there are procedures that must be followed by both
partners in order for the divorce to be religiously binding.

There are two classes of divorce, revocable (rejie) and irrevocable
(ba’aen). Revocable (rejie) divorces can be likened to a three-month
counseling period (iddah) in which the couple may reconcile within that
time without renewing their marriage contract.

On the other hand, irrevocable divorces dissolve the marriage instantly.
However, there still remains a three-month recuperation period (iddah)
for the woman. If the couple decides to reconcile then they must
contract a new marriage.

**Fatma:** Do revocable and irrevocable divorces vary in their
procedures?

**Sayyid:** Absolutely. The procedure for most revocable divorces is as
follows:

The wife must be post-childbirth bleeding (nifas), or clean of her
menses, or waiting the end of her menses if a conjugal relation had
taken place.

(This means that, if the wife were menstruating, or has post-childbirth
bleeding, then the couple must wait until the wife’s cycle ceases before
pronouncing the divorce decree. Or, if the couple had a conjugal
relation then they must wait until the passing of the wife’s next
menstrual cycle before divorce procedures can begin.)

1) Intention to divorce must be announced or a representative (wakil) is
sent on behalf of the initiator.

2) Two just witnesses (adil) are required as observers of the intended
divorce or a congregational hearing is held.

There are no specific phrases vocalized during divorce procedures.
However, it is preferred that the husband or wife enunciates the words
in Arabic. If it were impossible then any other language would suffice.
They may either utter the words “I divorce you” before witnesses, or the
appointed representative may pronounce divorce on their behalf. Then a
waiting period (iddah) of three menstrual cycles or three months (if the
wife’s menses were abnormal) must be adhered to.

During the waiting period (iddah) in a revocable divorce, the husband is
required to maintain his wife’s living expense. He is not to annoy her
or restrict her provisions. The wife is to remain with the husband, in
the same home, and she does not have to observe hijab before him at
home. The husband has no right to send her out of the home.

***“And turn them not out of their houses, nor shall they themselves
leave.” (65:1)***

Once the wife has fully completed her third menstrual cycle, or the
three-month duration has elapsed, she is divorced. If she is pregnant
then the waiting period and financial sustenance continues until she
delivers the child.

**Fatma:** How are irrevocable divorces handled?

**Sayyid:** Some of the most common examples of irrevocable divorces are
khul’a, mubarat, and hakim al-shar’i (Islamic judge) divorces.[^5]

Irrevocable divorces dissolve the marriage instantly upon its utterance;
it is a final judgment. However, the wife is still required to observe
the waiting period, but the husband is not required to sustain her
during the waiting period.

Furthermore, the couple may no longer live together and she would have
to observe hijab before him. If the couple wishes to return as husband
and wife they would have to contract a new marriage.

**Fatma:** Regarding the waiting period, in cases where the marriage was
not consummated then there would not be a waiting period for the wife,
correct?

**Sayyid:** Some marriages dissolve before consummation and the Qur’an
answers your question regarding the waiting period.

***“When you marry believing women, and then divorce them before you
have touched them, no period of Iddah [waiting] have you to count in
respect of them: So give them a present and set them free in a handsome
manner.” (33:49)***

**Fatma:** Why has the Qur’an given much attention to the three-month
period of a woman’s menstruation for a divorce to be finalized?

**Sayyid:** There are two reasons, one in which a famous quote explains
well, “Time mends a broken heart.” Second, a waiting period secures the
welfare and lineage of the unborn child.

The three-month period (for revocable divorce) stands as an obstacle for
the couple before the final sentencing; it acts as an opportunity for
reflection and reconciliation. This allows couples to heavily
contemplate their decision. It provides time for them to miss one
another and to work out their differences.

The purpose for the woman’s waiting period in an irrevocable divorce is
to give her time for psychological recuperation before engaging in a new
relationship.

Islam goes to extraordinary care when it comes to safeguarding the
rights of the innocent, namely, the unborn child. Islam mandates that
while the wife is in the three-month waiting period of a revocable
divorce, the husband is required to support her as he had previously.

If the wife is pregnant then the husband must continue to support her as
before until she delivers the child. Likewise, in an irrevocable divorce
if the wife is known to be pregnant then the ex-husband continues to
sustain her until she delivers the child.

Lastly, if the couple divorce and they agree that the mother will nurse
the child, then the ex-husband must continue to financially support his
former wife and child up to the weaning age of two years old, or up to
whichever age the parents decide upon.

***Let the women live in the same style as you live, according to your
means: annoy them not so as to restrict them. And if they carry life in
their wombs, then spend on them until they deliver their burden: and if
they suckle your offspring give them recompense: and take mutual counsel
together, according to what is just and reasonable. (65:6)***

**Fatma:** As far as husbands are concerned, if the right of divorce is
in his control, then technically he would not be required to meet a list
of criteria or require assistance from the courts to obtain a divorce,
correct?

**Sayyid:** Technically, whoever has the right to divorce would not be
required to meet a list of criteria as long as they claim a legitimate
excuse for separation. Although, when divorce is sought, there are
procedures that must be followed, regardless of which party has
authority.

**Fatma:** Granting that the wife had the power of divorce, would she be
limited to certain circumstances or reasons for initiating the divorce?

**Sayyid:** Granted that the wife had power of divorce, and assuming
that her marriage was a typical contract with no changes or clauses
(such as mentioned in the chapter “Matrimonial Rights”), then the wife
would be limited to only those “marital rights,” and in addition, to the
divorce/annulment criteria mentioned earlier, which, if they were
violated, would provide legitimate reasons for a divorce proceeding.

However, the wife has means of securing her wishes. She does have
options, as long as they do not transgress the laws of Islam. Let us
assume that a wife does not have the divorce right, there are still ways
she can ensure her needs.

She can stipulate in the marital contract, upon approval from the
husband, certain criteria to which the husband must adhere, and,
consequently, if the stipulations are broken then the wife will have the
choice of continuing with the marriage or dissolving it.

**Fatma:** Could you give some examples?

**Sayyid:** For example, a woman may state in her marital contract that
she does not want her husband to exercise his permissible right to marry
another woman while he is married to her. If he does marry then she may
act upon her right to divorce him, even though the husband has the
divorce right. She may be entitled to be his executor (wakil) for
initiating her own divorce through an Islamic judge.

There are a variety of stipulations; it all depends on the lifestyle and
aspirations of the woman. It is up to each woman to decide what is best
for her. Some women note in their marital contract that they want to
remain living in their homeland or continue their education and work.

Islam has given her rights and options to live her life as she pleases,
if it does not go against the injunctions of Islamic laws (shariah) and
the husband agrees beforehand.

**Fatma:** Considering that the wife may safeguard her interests by
including certain stipulations in the marital contract, then what would
be the point in having or not having the divorce right to be placed in
her control?

**Sayyid:** The difference would be expedience. If the wife has control
of the divorce right then the divorce may be done promptly. She will not
have to seek the courts or an imam to carry out the divorce provided
that she has knowledge of divorce procedures and implementation.

On the other hand, if the wife does not have the power of divorce, she
then requires the assistance of the Islamic courts or imam to process
her divorce; this will entail a longer duration.

**Fatma:** When a woman petitions for a divorce, would it be considered
as irrevocable even if the divorce right was hers?

**Sayyid:** No, it would not be considered irrevocable unless the
divorce right was not hers, and she had initiated the divorce, and the
husband refused, then the divorce would be considered irrevocable
because she would need hakim al-sharia to process the divorce.

**Fatma:** If the husband has the divorce right and the wife requests a
divorce because she no longer cares for him, to the extent that she
despises him emotionally and physically, but the husband adamantly
refuses to grant a divorce, would it be possible for her to divorce him?

**Sayyid:** Based on the premise that the wife absolutely despises her
husband emotionally and physically, and the situation becomes
intolerable and unbearable (ause’r and haraj), then it would not be
impossible. In this particular situation, the wife will need assistance
from the courts or a qualified scholar to ratify the case.

In such cases the wife will most likely have to relinquish her mahr, in
addition to paying a compensation for her independence. This form of
divorce is called khul’a, and it is irrevocable.

It is for reasons like these that women should take extra precaution
when contracting their marriage. Muslim women should be well informed of
their rights and choices.

**Fatma:** There are some schools of thought that require the husband
pronounce the formula of divorce at intervals, once every month during
the waiting period. Does this ruling also apply to the Ahlul Bayt school
of thought?

**Sayyid:** According to the Ahlul Bayt school of thought, this would
not apply. (See Qur’an, 2:229)

**Fatma:** If a husband petitioned for a divorce that was revocable, and
during the waiting period he cohabitated with his wife, would the
divorce declaration be absolved automatically without any expression?

**Sayyid:** If it were within the waiting period of iddah, and it is
considered a revocable divorce, then cohabitating would absolve the
divorce declaration without any need for formal vocalizations.

Assuming that the husband initiates the divorce, he may prevent it from
being finalized. Either the husband may verbally announce or gesture
that he no longer wishes to continue with the divorce (this may be done
publicly, or privately with the wife), or if the couple cohabitates,
then this would automatically dissolve the divorce without a

verbal remark. However, in an irrevocable divorce the couple should not
have any form of a conjugal relation until they contract a new marriage.

**Fatma:** Witnesses are not required if the husband or wife choose to
stop divorce procedures, correct?

**Sayyid:** Correct. It may be done privately without any witnessing,
although it would serve best for both partners that they make a public
statement about their reconciliation.

Islam tries to prevent divorce by placing obstacles. When it comes to
marriage, there are no impediments. Islam encourages marriage and tries
to discourage divorce.

**Fatma:** What are the suggestive messages behind these powerful verses
regarding marriage?

***A divorce is only permissible twice: after that the parties should
either hold together on equitable terms or separate with kindness.
(2:229)***

***If a husband divorces his wife irrevocably he cannot after that
remarry her until after she has married another husband and he has
divorced her. (2:230)***

**Sayyid:** These verses stand as a reminder to the husband that the
wife is not a mere object to be toyed with. If he cannot appreciate her
then perhaps another man may. It is also an opportunity for the woman to
discover that the next husband may be better than her previous husband.

**Fatma:** The Qur’an states,

***“How can you take it [mahr] back, when you have intimated with each
other, and they [wives] have taken from you a strong pledge.” (4:21)***

What does the **“strong pledge”** denote?

**Sayyid:** The **“strong pledge”** is in reference not only to the
mahr, but also, to the promise to ensure and secure the matrimonial
rights and obligations in the marital contract. This verse is directed
to the husband who refuses to pay the wife her promised mahr, or has
neglected fulfilling the wife’s matrimonial rights.

**Fatma:**

***“If a wife fears cruelty or desertion on her husband’s part, there is
no blame on them if they arrange an amicable settlement between
themselves.” (4:128)***

Would this verse be in regards to mubarat (mutual dislike) divorces?

**Sayyid:** This verse is regarding divorce in general.

**Fatma:** According to some scholars, the time of probation (iddah)
commences when the formula of divorce is pronounced, whether the wife
knows of it or not. Does Islam allow the husband to divorce his wife
without her being informed?

**Sayyid:** It is almost impossible to practically implement this ruling
(fatwa). Divorce is considered a joint process. In almost all cases of
divorce, the Islamic judge or imam would insist on meeting with the wife
to obtain her consent. Besides, the Qur’an advises the person who has
initiated divorce to leave the other spouse amicably.

**Fatma:** Is arbitration mandatory for divorce to be finalized or is it
only a recommendation? (4:35)

**Sayyid:** Arbitration is extremely critical as a recommended
precaution in an attempt to dissuade divorce proceedings. Even though
arbitration is not an injunction, its recommended advice acts as a form
of a religious obligation.

**Fatma:** Is it necessary that the two just witnesses (adils) be
familiar with and involved in the divorce case?

**Sayyid:** The witnesses serve only as notarized spectators of the
divorce. If needed they may be called upon as testifiers to attest to
the order of the divorce. It is not necessary for the witnesses to be a
party to the divorce case.

**Fatma:** Generally, when a man wants to divorce his wife, the imam
(religious leader) is someone with whom he is familiar. How can a woman
ensure that the imam is impartial, competent, and adhering to all the
proceedings required for a rightful divorce?

**Sayyid:** The wife has the right to choose an imam or judge that she
trusts to be competent and fair. The wife also has the right to reject
an imam or judge if it is proven that he may be prejudicial or impartial
in the divorce case.

In conventional divorces, the imam or an Islamic court would not pursue
the divorce without consulting the wife. In addition, there are some
Muslim countries that require the husband or wife to first petition the
Islamic court for a divorce.

Also to note, if the wife has placed conditions or modified her marital
contract and the husband is not adhering to the modifications, then it
will be her responsibility to secure her rights by informing the imam or
the Islamic court of her contract before the divorce is finalized.
Otherwise, the imam or Islamic judge will presume the norm of a Muslim
marriage and finalize the divorce accordingly.

**Fatma:** If a husband went missing would the wife be required to have
a waiting period before seeking a divorce?

**Sayyid:** It depends on the circumstances and on the woman.
Traditional scholars set a length of time, but contemporary scholars,
based on technical advancements would not make such rulings.

Before the age of technology people had to physically travel the land in
search of lost people. These days it is much easier to determine the
fate of a person. With vast telecommunication systems, mechanical
machines, and other resources available for investigators, it may not be
necessary to delay, suspend, or prolong the wait for the response of a
lost person.

However, if a husband abandons his wife with no provisions, no
guardianship, and her life becomes disarrayed and completely intolerable
(ause’r & haraj), and with no hope, then the Muslim judge or imam may
promptly render a divorce decree.

**Fatma**: Why would some scholars set a length of time before the wife
could initiate divorce procedures when the husband is not permitted to
leave his wife for more than four months without seeking her permission?

**Sayyid:** Traditional scholars that state lengths of time are
referring to husbands who are missing, not husbands who have
independently abandoned or deserted their wives. However, it all depends
on the wife. Every woman is different. Some women may patiently wait for
their husband’s return while others cannot. It depends on the woman and
her circumstances.

If the wife finds her life unbearable without a husband, then she would
have to take her case before the Islamic court or imam and they would
closely examine her case. They may make a variety of inquires. Has the
wife been left without provisions? Are her in-laws prepared to support
her? They may summon and question witnesses on her behalf and on his.

They may advise her to wait patiently for some specific period of time
or grant her an immediate divorce. It all depends on the circumstances
and the woman. There is not just one direct form of solving these
matters. They are personal and are dealt with accordingly, case by case.

There are two main factors that Muslim judges or an imam would greatly
consider before granting a divorce. One issue is the sanctity of the
family, in particular if there were children involved, and secondly, the
well-

being of the woman; after all, she is a human being with needs. After
all things have been considered, and if the judge or imam based his
conclusion on legitimate reasons, then divorce may be rendered.

Divorce and Mahr
----------------

**Fatma:** If the wife bases her reason for divorce on one of the
criteria in the afore-mentioned annulment or divorce proceedings, will
she have to relinquish some or all of her mahr?

**Sayyid:** The wife is entitled to keep the full mahr unless the
marriage was not consummated. If the marriage was not consummated, then
she is entitled to half of the mahr and must return the other portion to
the ex-husband.

It is important to note that if the marriage did not fit one of the
criteria (such as unconsummated marriages) and the marriage had
commenced, then the marriage would be considered a standard or typical
marriage.

Then if the husband issued a divorce he cannot, under any circumstances,
take back any part of the mahr. The mahr is a gift to the wife
irrespective whether of the marriage continues or later dissolves. If
the husband has not paid the mahr in full, then he will still be held
liable for the remaining balance, despite the reasons for divorce.

**Fatma:** Regarding the verse that states,

***“It is not lawful for you that you should take women as heritage
against their will and do not straiten them in order that you may take
part of what you have given them, unless they are guilty of manifest
indecency.” (4:19)***

Would this verse not give exceptions to the mahr?

**Sayyid:** Withholding payment of the mahr because the wife committed
adultery may sometimes be highly contingent upon the severity of
circumstances that led to the affair. Not to lessen or ignore the
immoral action of adultery, but sometimes people are faced with
extraordinary circumstances that require in-depth analyses of the
situation before a final judgment may be rendered.

Islam states that in cases where adultery has been religiously judged
then, as a reluctant means of reprisal, the husband, as a last resort,
may withhold the remaining mahr; still it is not recommended.

Proprietorship
--------------

**Fatma:** What is Islam’s position regarding the division of
matrimonial assets?

**Sayyid:** Generally, each person reclaims whatever he or she brought
into the marriage. The division of assets, therefore, should be done
according to what each partner contributed to the relationship. For
instance, in some

Eastern countries, the wife traditionally furnishes the home. If she
divorces, she has rights to all the furnishings she supplied.

**Fatma:** Could the wife claim remuneration in exchange for the years
of service she provided for her husband, such as housecleaning, cooking,
and rearing the children?

**Sayyid:** During the marriage the wife, at any time, may request to be
compensated for the work she provides domestically, including rearing
the children. However, to claim remuneration without prior agreement in
the marital contract, and then to attempt to claim recompense during
divorce would be difficult. However, Islam recommends

that the husband bestow a gift to the ex-wife in order to ease her
living conditions after the divorce, even if he had paid her the full
mahr. Upon divorce, Islam advises the husband to compensate the former
wife in some manner.

**Fatma:** What transpires in instances when a wife, in a standard
marriage, for years had completely sacrificed her life, had saved and
been conservative in expenditures, assisted and toiled in domestic
duties, all for the sake of freeing her husband from the allotted task
so that he may pursue his career and become financially successful? Does
not Islam recognize or acknowledge that the wife played an important
role in supporting her husband’s success? In addition, would Islam not
pay an indemnity for such sacrifices?

**Sayyid:** It would be premature to give one direct response to the
scenario you described. Such cases require an extensive investigation
into exactly what was brought, accomplished, or sacrificed from the
start of the marriage until its dissolution. The Islamic judge would
have to investigate a variety of issues, for instance who worked and for
how long, what did each partner contribute or sacrifice, who physically
labored, or how were the finances handled. It all varies and it is a
case-by-case ruling.

Sometimes there are cases in which the wife assists her husband as an
assistant or secretary at his office or business. The wife may request
payment for such services either during or after the dissolution of the
marriage.

If the wife has claimed compensation for the years she was his secretary
or assistant, then she will be entitled to reimbursement according to
what the husband would have paid for a hired secretary or assistant.
However, if it is proven that the wife was a complete partner in the
business, then, without a doubt, she will be entitled to her share of
the company.

[^1]: Makarin Al-Akhaq, .225.

[^2]: Islamic scholars cite some emotional factors, such as childbirth &
menstruation.

[^3]: Irshad Al-Muhtaj & Huquq Al-Azway.

[^4]: Qur’an, 2:33. \*Although this verse pertains to weaning, it could
be correspondent to other aspects of marital life.

[^5]: For more information on irrevocable divorce refer to books on
Islamic laws, chapters on divorce.


