Saudi Arabia
============

![](/sites/default/files/saudia.png)

**Places to Visit:**  
 Makkah  
 Madina  
 Jeddah  
 Taif  
 Abwa  
 Badr  
 Uhud  
 Arafat  
 Mina

Makkah al-Mukarramah
--------------------

1. Masjid al-Haraam

• The Holy Ka'aba. The House of Allah and the birth place of Imam Ali b.
Abi Taalib [a]

• Hajar al-Aswad (The Black Stone)

• Maqam Ibrahim

• Hijr Ismail. This was the location of the house of Prophet Ismael [a].
He and his mother are buried here. He denied access to anyone because he
did not like it to be walked on. Other prophets are buried in this place
also. According to Imam Baqir [a], the place between Rukn and Maqam is
full of graves of the Prophets. According to Imam Sadiq [a], seventy
prophets are buried between Rukn al-Aiman and Hajar al-Aswad

• Well of Zamzam

• Mizabe Rahmah: the golden trough (water channel) between Rukn Iraqi
and Rukn Shami

• Shadharwan

• Mustajar: This is just before Rukn Yamani whilst walking from Rukn
Shami to Rukn Yamani. It has also been defined as the area between the
Black Stone (*hajar al-aswad*) and the door of the Ka'aba

• Mutaawadh or Multazam: The place between Rukn Yamani and the Black
Stone (*hajar al-aswad*)

• Hatwim. According to the book *"Adabul Haramain*", this is the place
between the door of the Ka'aba and Hajar al-Aswad. It is called Hatwim
"the smasher" because it smashes major and minor sins of one who seeks
forgiveness here. It is said that this is the place where Adam [a] was
forgiven. According to the book ""Umra & Ziyarat", this is the place
where Prophet Ismail, his mother and many other prophets are buried. See
*Hijr Ismail* above.

• Rukn al-Aiman (the right-hand side corner of the Ka'aba).This is
opposite the Black Stone behind the House. The Prophet [s] said
"Whenever I come at this point, I find Jibril is already there before
me." Imam al-Sadiq [a] said: "Rukn al-Aiman is our gate to Paradise". He
also said: "In this place is one of the doors of Paradise that has never
been closed since it was opened. There is a river from Paradise in which
deeds of the servants are dropped." Also called Rukn al-Junubi. It comes
before the Black Stone corner.

• Rukn Shami/Gharbi. This is the corner of the Ka'aba that comes after
Hijr Ismail

• Rukn al-Sharqi. This is the corner where Hajar al-Aswad rests.

• Rukn al-Shimali / Iraqi. This is corner that comes after the Ka'aba's
door before one reaches Hijr Ismail.

• Mount Safa. When going to Safa for *Sa'y*, use the same door that the
Prophet [s] used, which is *Bab as-Safa*, opposite the Black Stone.

• Mount Marwa

2. Jannat al-Mualla (Cemetery in Makkah)

Also known as Al-Hajun. The Prophet [s] used to visit it frequently. It
is the 2nd holiest graveyard after Baqi. Those buried here include:  
 • Abd Manaf: Great, great-grandfather of the Holy Prophet [s]

• Grave of Hashim: Great-grandfather of the Holy Prophet [s]

• Grave of Abdul Muttalib: Grandfather of the Holy Prophet [s]

• Grave of Amina: Mother of the Holy Prophet [s]

• According to another source, Amina is buried in Abwa (between Makkah
and Madina) - where the 7th Imam [a] was born

• Grave of Abu Talib: Father of First Imam Ali [a]

• Grave of Khadija: First wife of the Holy Prophet [s] and mother of
Sayyida Fatima [a]

• Qasim: son of the Holy Prophet [s] who died in his infancy

Amongst the famous scholars buried in the graveyard of Hajun are:  
 • Marhum Agha Mirza Muhammad al-Istrabadi - author of *Rijal al-Kabir
wa Ayat al-Ahkam*

• Sayyid Mir Muhammad Mu'min al-Istrabadi author of *Al-Ruj'a*. He lived
near Makkah

• Sayyid al-Shahid Mir Zeinul Abideen al-Husseini al-Kashani. He was
martyred in Makkah and buried in a grave he had chosen himself in the
graveyard of Mu'alla. He was amongst those who laid the foundation of
the House after it was demolished.

• Sheikh Muhammad son of the author of *Al-Maalim*. His grave lies near
the grave of Khadija [a]

• Ibn Sheikh Muhammad - buried beside his father. Used to take a lot of
care in matters concerning *Ihtiyat* (caution) and fear of Allah

3. Jabal Nur. The mount on which the Cave of Hira is found  
 4. Cave (*ghar*) of Hira

The cave where the Holy Prophet [s] used to meditate frequently during
the first forty years of his life. This is also the place he received
the first revelation  
 5  
 Cave of Thaur

The cave where the Holy Prophet [s] hid from his enemies when migrating
to Madina  
 6  
 Birth Place of the Holy Prophet [s]

Situated near "Suq Lail". Presently a library by the name of "Maktaba
Makkah al-Mukarramah"  
 7  
 The house of Khadija [a] and birth place of Fatima [a]

This is where the Prophet [s] lived until he migrated. It is where
Khadija [a] died and where Fatima [a] was born. It is also the place
where the Meccans had planned to kill the Prophet [s] on the night of
*Hijrat* and Imam Ali [a] slept in his place. It is a place where
Jibrail used to descend with revelations from Allah  
 8  
 House of Ibrahim [a], the son of the Holy Prophet [s] who died in
infancy  
 9  
 House of Abu Talib [a], father of Imam Ali [a]  
 10  
 Masjid Jin  
 11  
 Masjid Bilal  
 12  
 Mount Abu Qubais

Near this is the place where the Prophet [s] performed the miracle of
splitting the moon in two  
 13  
 Saraf

About two farsakhs from Makkah. Maimuna, wife of the Prophet [s], is
buried here  
 14  
 Feel

Near Makkah. Abdullah b. Ismail b. Badhee's grave is at "*Feel*". He was
amongst the companions of the 5th, 6th, 7th and 8th Imams, peace be upon
them  
 15  
 Fakh

Another place for *ziyarat* is the graveyard of the Martyrs of Fakh.
Fakh is the name of a place which used to be Miqat-e-Swibyaan. In this
place, about a hundred people from the descendants of Fatima [a] lost
their lives in the hands of the puppets of Musa al-Hadi al-Abbasi.
Muhadith al-Qumi quotes the 9th Imam al-Jawad [a] as having said that
after Taf there had been no other fatal and destructive battle like the
one of Fakh. Du'bal also mentions Fakh in one of his poems  
 16

Madina al-Munawwarah
--------------------

1  
 Masjid al-Nabawi

• Shrine of Holy Prophet of Islam, peace be upon him & his Household

• Grave of Sayyida Fatima al-Zahra [a]. Daughter of the Prophet [s] and
wife of Imam Ali [a]. According to some historians she is buried in
Jannatul Baqi

• Room (*hujra*) of Sayyida Fatima al-Zahra, peace be upon her

• Pulpit (*minbar*) of the Holy Prophet [s]

• Prayer niche (*mihrab*) of the Holy Prophet [s]

• The *Rawda*

• The door (*bab*) of Archangel Jibrail [a]

• *Maqam* of Archangel Jibrail [a]

• Pillar of Abu Lubaba

2  
 Jannatul Baqi

• Graves of Imam Hasan (2nd Imam), Imam Zaynul Abidin (4th Imam), Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (5th Imam), and Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (6th Imam), peace
be upon them

• Grave of Sayyida Fatima [a]. Daughter of the Prophet [s] and wife of
Imam Ali [a]. Location of her grave is unknown. According to some
historians she was buried in her own room (now inside Masjid Nabawi)
next to the Holy Prophet [s]'s *darih*

• Grave of Abbas b. Abdul Muttalib [r]: Uncle of the Holy Prophet [s]
and Imam Ali [a]

• Grave of Fatima bint. Asad [a]: Mother of Imam Ali [a]

• Grave of Ja'far al-Tayyar [a] - brother of Imam Ali, peace be upon
him.

• Graves of Safiya and Aatika [r]: Aunts of the Holy Prophet [s]

• Grave of Ummul Baneen [a]: Wife of Imam Ali [a] and mother of Hadrat
Abbas [a] ( - Safiya, Aatika & Ummul Baneen)

• Grave of Ibrahim [a]: son of the Holy Prophet [s]

• Grave of Haleema [r]: Nursing mother of the Holy Prophet [s]

• Graves of the Holy Prophet's [s] wives (*ummahat al-mu'minin*)

• Graves of various companions (*as-haab*) of the Holy Prophet [s]

3  
 Masjid Quba

First mosque of Islam. The Prophet [s] spent more than 20 nights here
(after migrating) praying *qasr* while waiting for Imam Ali [a]. It is
mentioned in the Qur'an as the mosque founded on piety and devoutness  
 4  
 Imam Ali [a]'s house

Behind Masjid Quba is Imam Ali [a]'s house  
 5  
 Well of the Prophet [s]

Infront of Masjid Quba, is a sweet-water well that is now closed. The
Prophet [s]'s ring fell into this well hence the name *Bi'ru al-Khatam*
(*khatam* = ring). It is also called *Bi'ru Tufla* because at first its
water was salty but when the Holy Prophet [s] spat into it, it changed
to sweet refreshing water  
 6  
 Mashrabat Umm Ibrahim

Joined to Masjid Quba is "*Mashrabat Ummu Ibrahim*". This is the room of
the Prophet [s]'s wife Mariah Qibtwiyya (Umm Ibrahim). The Prophet [s]
used to live and pray here  
 7  
 Masjid Fadhikh

It is situated in the eastern part of Masjid Quba. It is named after a
palm tree that used to be at the place. It is also called Masjid Nakhl.
Here is where the sun was brought back for Imam Ali's to pray *Asr*
which he missed because the Prophet [s] was sleeping on his laps  
 8  
 Masjid Qiblatayn (i.e. the mosque of two *qiblas*)

The mosque where the Holy Prophet [s] was commanded to change his
*qibla* from Masjid al-Aqsa (Jerusalem) to the Holy Ka'aba (Makkah)  
 9  
 Sab'a Masajid (lit. '*The place of 7 mosques*'). There are now only
five mosques - Masjid Ali , Masjid Fatima , Masjid Fath , Masjid Salman
al-Farsi , & Masjid Umar.

Masjid Fath (lit. "mosque of victory") is at the top of a mountain. This
is named after the Muslims victory in the Battle of Khandaq when Imam
Ali [a] killed Amr b. Abd Wudd and the Prophet [s] prayed here for the
Muslims victory  
 10  
 Masjid Ummul Mu'minin Mariyah Qibtiya [a], wife of the Holy Prophet [s]
and mother of Ibrahim [a]. This could be one of the two demolished
mosques at *Sab'a Masajid* (No. 9 above)  
 11  
 Masjid Raj'atu-Shams - now destroyed  
 12  
 The houses of Imam Zaynul Abidin [a] and Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq [a]  
 13  
 Masjid Mubahala  
 14  
 Masjid Ghamamah. Also called Masjid Eid

The Holy Prophet [s] said his Eid prayers here  
 15  
 Well (*bir*) of Ali, peace be upon him  
 16  
 Masjid Shajarah

Also known as *Masjid Ali [a]*. This place is a *miqat* for those going
for *umra* from Madina to Makkah. The place is also known amongst the
locals as *Abar Ali*

Jeddah
------

Grave of Lady Hawa (Eve), peace be upon her. First woman on earth and
wife of Prophet Adam, peace be upon him. Jeddah is named after her. Its
the Arabic equivalent for "Grandmother"

Taif
----

1  
 Masjid Abdullah Ibn Abbas [r]  
 2  
 Grave of Abdullah Ibn Abbas [r]

Cousin and companion of Imam Ali [a]. Very often referred to by Imam Ali
[a] as "Ibn Abbas". See *Nahjul Balaagha*

Abwa
----

1  
 Birth place of the 7th Imam Musa al-Kadhim, peace be upon him  
 2  
 Grave of Amina, mother of the Holy Prophet, peace be upon him & his
Household

According to some historians, she is buried in Jannat al-Mu'alla
(Makkah)

Badr
----

1  
 Martyrs of Badr

Badr is a village between Makkah and Madina. 14 companions of the Holy
Prophet [s] were martyred here in the Battle of Badr  
 2  
 Masjid al-Arish

Nearby the *Martyrs of Badr* is Masjid al-Arish where the Prophet [s]
prayed during the battle

Uhud
----

1  
 Grave of Hamza [a], uncle of the Holy Prophet [s] who was martyred at
the Battle of Uhud  
 2  
 Graves of the other martyrs (*shuhada*) of Uhud

Arafat
------

1  
 Jabal Rahmah  
 2  
 Masjid Numrah

Mina
----

1  
 Masjid Kheef  
 2  
 Masjid Kauthar  
 3  
 The Three Jamaraat: Jamaraat al-Ula, Jamaraat al-Wusta, and Jamaraat
al-Uqba

**Related Article on the Web:**

History of the graveyard of Jannatul Baqi (Madina) & Jannatul Mualla
(Makkah)


