Iraq
====

![](/sites/default/files/iraq.png)

**Places to Visit:**

Najaf  
 Kufa  
 Karbala  
 Moosayab  
 Kadhmayn  
 Baghdad  
 Madain /Salman Pak  
 Samarra  
 Balad  
 Hillah  
 Basra

Najaf
-----

1  
 Mausoleum of 1st Imam Ali b. Abi Taalib, peace be upon him

There are 3 graves in one *darih*:  
 • Grave of Imam Ali [a]

• Grave of Prophet Adam [a] - 1st prophet and man on earth

• Grave of Prophet Nuh [a]

2  
 Wadi-us Salaam

• Tomb of Prophet Hud [a]

• Tomb of Prophet Saleh [a]

• Maqam of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq [a]

• Maqam of Saheb al-Asr, Imam Al-Mahdi [a]

• Mosalla of Imam Ali Zayn al-Abidin [a]

3  
 Tomb of Hadrat Kumayl - companion of Imam Ali [a]  
 4  
 Tomb of Rashid Hijri - companion of Imam Ali [a]  
 5  
 Masjid Hannana

This mosque is between Kufa and Najaf. The significance of this mosque
is that when Imam Hasan [a] and Imam Husayn [a] were carrying the
*janaza* of Imam Ali [a] from Kufa to Najaf, they passed near this
mosque, and as they were passing, the pillars of the mosque inclined
towards Imam Ali [a] as if paying its last respects. It is also believed
that some of the skin from Imam Husayn [a]'s head (that came off when
Khul Mal'un was disrespecting the head of Imam Husayn [a] with a knife)
is buried here.  
 6  
 Grave of Sayyid al-Khui

Grand-mujtahid (*marja'*) to 450 million Muslims since 1970 (d. 8th
August 1992)

Kufa
----

1  
 Masjid Kufa

• Mehrab-e-Ibadat. The place where Imam Ali [a] was martyred

• Court room of Imam Ali [a]

• Mausoleum of Muslim ibn Aqil [a], cousin and ambassador of Imam Husayn
[a] to Kufa

• Mausoleum of Mukhtar, the avenger of Imam Husayn [a]'s massacre

• Mausoleum of Hani ibn Urwa, companion of Imam Husayn [a] who was
killed by Ubaydullah Ibn Ziyad for sheltering and supporting Muslim ibn
Aqil

• Mosalla of several prophets

• Tanoor. The place from where the deluge (toofan) of Prophet Nuh [a]
began

2  
 House of Imam Ali, peace be upon him  
 3  
 Mausoleum of Sayyida Khadijatul Sughra daughter of Imam Ali [a] -
outside Masjid Kufa  
 4  
 Mausoleum of Prophet Yunus [a] - near the river  
 5  
 Masjid Sahla. Recommended to be in this mosque at the maghrib time of a
Wednesday i.e. at the end of a Tuesday

• Mosalla of 6th Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq [a]

• Mosalla of Prophet Ibrahim [a]

• Mosalla of Prophet Idris [a]

• Mosalla of Prophet Khidr [a]. Also called Maqam al-Saleheen

• Maqam of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq [a]

6  
 Kooba of Ebrahim ibn Hasan al-Muthanna ibn Imam Hasan [a]  
 7  
 Mausoleum of Maytham al-Tammar, companion of Imam Ali [a]  
 8  
 Mosque of Zaid - near Masjid Sahla  
 9  
 Mosque of Sa'asa ibn Sauhan, companion of Imam Ali [a]

Karbala
-------

1  
 Mausoleum of 3rd Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him

There are 3 graves in one *darih*:  
 • Grave of Imam Husayn [a]

• Grave of Ali Akbar, son of Imam Husayn [a]

• Grave of Ali Asgher, son of Imam Husayn [a]

2  
 Mausoleum of Hadrat Abbas b. Ali [a]: Brother and Standard-bearer of
Imam Husayn [a]  
 3  
 Grave of Habib ibn Madhaher [a]  
 4  
*Ganj-e-Shohada* - graves of the rest of the martyrs of Karbala  
 5  
 Qatl-ghah  
 6  
 Grave of Ibrahim son of 7th Imam Musa al-Kadhim, peace be upon him  
 7  
*Til*-e-Zaynabiya  
 8  
 Khaimaghah  
 9  
 Garden of 6th Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, peace be upon him  
 10  
 Garden of 12th Imam Sahib al-Asr, Al-Mahdi, peace be upon him  
 11  
 Mausoleum of Hur (companion of Imam Husayn [a] in Karbala) - 3 miles
from Karbala  
 12  
 Mausoleum of Aun, son of Sayyida Zaynab [a]

6 miles from Karbala. One can visit this place as well as the mausoleum
of Tiflane Muslim while going back to Kadhmayn

Moosayab
--------

Location
--------

This place is on the way to Kadhmayn while going from Karbala.

Pilgrimage site
---------------

Mausoleum of the two sons of Muslim ibn Aqil [a]:-  
 • Muhammad ibn Muslim ibn Aqil [a], and

• Ibrahim ibn Muslim ibn Aqil [a]

They are also known as Tiflan-e-Muslim.

Kadhmayn
--------

1  
 Mausoleum of 7th and 9th Imams, Imam Musa al-Kadhim and Imam Muhammad
al-Jawad, peace be upon them  
 2  
 Grave of Shaykh al-Mufid  
 3  
 Grave of Sayyid Ismail Safrudin  
 4  
 Grave of Khwaja Nasirudin Tusi  
 5  
 Grave of Sayyid Murtada  
 6  
 Grave of Sayyid Razi

Baghdad
-------

Location
--------

Baghdad and Madain are very close to Kadhmayn.

Pilgrimage sites
----------------

1  
 The four representatives of the 12th Imam [a] during the minor
occultation (ghaybat al-sughra) are buried here i.e.  
 • Uthman b. Sayeed

• Muhammad b. Uthman

• Ali b. Muhammad Foor, and

• Husayn b. Rooh

The graves of Uthman & Husayn are easy to find whereas the other two are
inside the bazaar. One will need some guidance from the local people to
locate this place if one is going by bus.  
 2  
 Tomb of Qambar the slave of Imam Ali [a]  
 3  
 Tomb of Shaykh Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni, the compiler of Al-Kafi  
 4  
 Masjid Boorasa. This mosque is on the way to Baghdad from Kadhmayn

Madain/Salman Pak
-----------------

Pilgrimage sites
----------------

1  
 Tomb of Salman Farsi, companion of the Holy Prophet [s]  
 2  
 Tomb of Hudhaifa al-Yamani, companion of the Holy Prophet [s]  
 3  
 Tomb of Jabir b. Abdullah al-Ansari, companion of the Holy Prophet
[s]  
 4  
 Masjid Jum'a - near the tomb of Salman Farsi  
**Note:** On 26th March 1934, King Faisal I of Iraq supervised the
transfer of the remains of Hudhaifa al-Yamani and Jabir b. Abdullah
al-Ansari, the two trusted companions of the Holy Prophet [s] from their
resting places in Madain which were endangered with water from River
Tigris to a new site at Salman Pak near the resting place of Salman
Farsi.

Historic site
-------------

*Tak-e-Kisra*, the palace of Nausherwan - part of ancient Babylonian
civilization. When the Holy Prophet [s] was born in Makkah, this huge
edifice is said to have developed cracks on its walls.

Samarra
-------

### Location

Samarra is closer (and therefore easier to go to) from Kadhmayn than it
is from Karbala. Try and spend atleast one night in Samarra so as to
perform *ziyarat* and *a'amals* properly. Most people make a quick trip
to Samarra lasting only a few hours which is most unfortunate.

### Pilgrimage sites

1  
 Mausoleum of 10th and 11th Imams, Imam Ali al-Naqi and Imam Hasan
al-Askari, peace be upon them

The main *darih* has four graves:  
 • Grave of 10th Imam Ali al-Naqi, peace be upon him

• Grave of 11th Imam Hasan al-Askari, peace be upon him

• Grave of Sayyida Halima Khatoon [a] daughter of Imam Ali al-Naqi [a]
and sister of Imam Hasan al-Askari [a]. Her narration of the birth of
the 12th Imam [a] is reported extensively as she was a mid-wife to
Sayyida Nargis Khatoon the mother of the 12 Imam [a]

• Grave of Sayyida Nargis Khatoon [a], mother of the 12th Imam Al-Mahdi,
peace be upon him

2  
 Cellar (*sardab*) of 12th Imam Al-Mahdi, peace be upon him - where he
was last seen. Also called *Maqam Ghaybat* (i.e. the place of
occultation)  
 3  
 Masjid Jamia

### Historic sites

Mosque built during the time of Mutawakkil - at one time the largest
mosque in the world.

Balad
-----

### Location

This place lies between Kadhmayn and Samarra. One can visit it on the
way to Samarra or while returning to Kadhmayn.

### Pilgrimage site

Mausoleum of Muhammad ibn Imam Ali al-Naqi, peace be upon him.

Hillah
------

### Pilgrimage sites

1  
 Tomb of Hamza [a]  
 2  
 Tomb of Qasim b. Imam Musa al-Kadhim [a]  
 3  
 Tomb of Prophet Ayyub [a]  
 4  
 Tomb of Prophet Daniel [a]  
 5  
 Tomb of Prophet Dhul Kifl [a]. Known as "*Chifl*"  
 6  
 Maqam Sahib al-Zamaan [a]

Basra
-----

### Pilgrimage sites

Masjid Ali, peace be upon him

**Related Articles on the Web:**  
 History of the Mausoleum in Najaf  
 History of the Mausoleum in Karbala  
 History of the Mausoleum in Kadhmayn  
 History of the Mausoleum in Samarra


