Creation
========

The "Noor" (Light) is created
-----------------------------

**In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful**

** **  
 When Allah intended to create the creatures, He first created the
"Noor" (Light) of Muhammad. Al-Qastalani (in *Al Mawahibu'l-Ladunniyah,*
vol. 1, pp. 5, 9, 10*)* has quoted the Prophet's traditions to this
effect as transmitted through Jabir ibn 'Abdullah al-Ansari and 'Ali
(a.s.). The well-known historian al-Mas'udi (in his *Maruju 'dh-dhahab)*
quotes a lengthy tradition from 'Ali (a.s.) to the effect that when
Allah created, first of all, the Light of Muhammad, He said to it: "You
are My chosen one and the Trustee of My Light and Guidance.

It is because of you that I am going to create the earth and the skies,
lay down reward and punishment, and bring into being the Garden and the
Fire." Then the tradition goes on to speak about the Family of the
Prophet, about creation of the angels, of the souls, of the world, of
the covenant taken from the souls which combined the belief in the One
God with acceptance of Muhammad's Prophethood.  
    
 This is why Ibn 'Abbas narrates saying that the Prophet said: "I was
Prophet when Adam was between soul and body (i.e. when Adam's creation
was in its preliminary stages)" (at-Tabarani, *Al-Mu'jjam al-Kabir; Al
Khasa'is al-Kubra,* vol.1, p.4).  
    
 Muhammad's Light adorned the 'Arsh (Throne) of God. When eons later,
Adam was created, that Light was put in his forehead. It continued its
journey, generation after generation, through numerous prophets and
their successors till it came to Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.). From Ibrahim
(a.s.), it came to his eldest son, Prophet Isma'il (a.s.).  
    
 The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) said: "Verily Allah chose Isma'il from the
progeny of Ibrahim, and chose Banu Kinanah from the progeny of Isma'il,
and chose Quraish from the Banu Kinanah, and chose Banu Hashim from
Quraish, and chose me from Banu Hashim." At-Tirmidhi has narrated this
tradition from *Wathilah ibn al-Asqa'* and has said that this tradition
is sahih (correct).  
    
 Abul-Fida quotes in his *Tarikh* (History) a tradition wherein the
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) says: "Gabriel said to me: 'I looked at the earth
from the east to the west, but I did not find anyone superior to
Muhammad, and I looked at the Earth from the east to the west but did
not find any progeny superior to the progeny of Hashim."  
  

The Children of Isma'il (a.s.)
------------------------------

Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) had brought his eldest son Isma'il (a.s.) with
his mother Hajirah (Hagar, in Hebrew) from Kan'an to a barren valley
which was later known as Mecca. He used to visit them once a year. When
Isma'il was old enough to help him, Prophet Ibrahim built the House of
Allah known as the Ka'bah.  
    
 There was no water in the land when Isma'il and Hajirah were left
there. The well of Zamzam miraculously appeared for Isma'il. The tribe
of Jurhum, finding the well, sought the permission of Hajirah to settle
there. During the annual visit of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.), permission was
given to them, and ultimately Isma'il married in the same tribe. He
begot twelve sons; the eldest was called Qidar (Cedar, in Hebrew).  
    
 The Isma'ilites increased in number, thus fulfilling the promise of
Allah to Ibrahim to multiply Isma'il exceedingly. (See Genesis 21:13)  
    
 The Isma'ilites, by and by, spread all over Hijaz. They were not
organized and consequently had no power. About 200 years before Christ,
'Adnan from the children of Qidar arose to some fame. The genealogy of
'Adnan up to Qidar is not agreed upon. The Arabs have narrated various
genealogies. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.), in order to emphasize the Islamic
ideology that personal qualities, rather than genealogy, was the
criterion of excellence, and with a view not to entangle himself in such
unnecessary and useless arguments, ordered the Muslims thus:  
    
 "When my genealogy reaches 'Adnan, stop."  
    
 In the third century of the Christian Era (CE), there arose a leader
named Fahr in that family. He was son of Malik, son of Nadhar, son of
Kinanah, son of Khuzaymah, son of Mudrikah, son of Ilyas, son of Madhar,
son of Nazar, son of Ma'ad, son of 'Adnan.  
    
 Some people think that this Fahr was called Quraish, and that is why
his children came to be known as the Quraish.  
    
 In the 5th generation after Fahr, in the fifth century of the Christian
era, a very powerful personality appeared on the scene. He was Qusayi,
son of Kilab, son of Murrah, son of Lu'i, son of Ghalib, son of Fahr.  
    
 Many people say that it was not Fahr but Qusayi who was called Quraish.
The famous Muslim scholar, Shibli al-Nu'mani, writes: "Qusayi became so
famous and achieved such a high prestige that some people say that he
was the first man to be called Quraish, as Ibn Abdi Rabbih has written
in his book Al-'Iqdu'1-Farid, clearly saying that as Qusayi gathered all
the children of Isma'il from far and wide and made them leave the
nomadic way of life, settling them around the Ka'bah, he was called
Quraish (The Gatherer). Al-Tabari quotes caliph 'Abdul-Malik ibn Marwan
as saying that "Qusayi was Quraish, and that nobody was given this name
before him."  
    
 When Qusayi came of age, a man from the tribe of Khuza'ah named Hulail
was the trustee of the Ka'bah. Qusayi married his daughter and,
according to Hulail's will, got the trusteeship of the Ka'bah after
Hulail. Qusayi established many new institutions:  
    
 • He established Dar-un-Nadwah (Assembly House). It was there that
discussions were held to settle important matters like war and peace,
caravans assembled before going out, and marriages and other ceremonies
were conducted.

• He established the system of Siqayah (making arrangements to supply
water to the pilgrims during the *hajj* days) and Rifadah (to feed them
during those days).

• It appears from al-Tabari that this system was followed in Islam up to
his time, i.e. 500 years after Qusayi.

• He made arrangements for the pilgrims to stay at Mash'arul-Haram at
night and illuminated the valley with lamps, thus making their stay
comfortable.

• He rebuilt the Ka'bah and dug the first well at Mecca. Zamzam was
filled up long ago and nobody knew of its actual location.

   
 Arab historians unanimously say that he was generous, brave, and
sympathetic; his ideas were pure, his thinking clean, and his manners
very refined. His word was followed like a religion during his lifetime
and even after his death. People used to visit his grave at Hajun
(present day Jannatul Ma'alla). No wonder that he was the undisputed
chief of the tribe, which owed its strength and power to his leadership.
To him had converged all the responsibilities and privileges of the
tribe:  
    
 • The trustee of the Ka'bah (Hijabah),

• Chairman of Dar-un-Nadwah which he himself had established;

• He fed the pilgrims (Rifadah);

• He arranged to provide them with drinking water (Siqayah); The
standard-bearer of Quraish in wartime (Liwa), and

• The commander of the army (Qiyadah).

   
 These were the six privileges, which were looked upon with great
respect and before which all of Arabia bowed down. The most wonderful
aspect of his life is his selflessness. In all the accounts of his life,
there never appears any hint that by being the undisputed leader of the
tribe, he had gained anything for his own self.  
    
 Qusayi had five sons and a daughter: 'Abduddar was the eldest, then
Mughirah (known as 'Abd Munaf). Qusayi loved his eldest son very much,
and at the time of his death, he entrusted 'Abduddar with all the six
responsibilities mentioned above.  
    
 But 'Abduddar was not a very able man, whereas 'Abd Munaf was
acknowledged as a wise leader even during the life of his father, and
his words were dutifully obeyed by the whole tribe. Because of his
nobility and benevolence, he was commonly known as "generous." Thus, it
came to pass that 'Abduddar shared all his responsibilities with 'Abd
Munaf. And 'Abd Munaf virtually became the paramount chief of the
Quraish.  
    
 'Abd Munaf had six sons: Hashim, Muttalib, 'Abdush-Shams, and Nawfil
were the most famous among them.  
    
 There was no trouble while 'Abduddar and 'Abd Munaf were alive. After
their death, a dispute started between their children concerning the
distribution of the six responsibilities. A war had almost started
before it was agreed upon that Siqayah, Rifadah, and Qiyadah should go
to the children of 'Abdu Munaf, and Liwa' and Hijabah should remain with
the children of 'Abduddar, while the chairmanship of Dar-un-Nadwah
should be shared by both families.  
  

Hashim
------

Hashim's name will always shine in the history of Arabia and Islam, not
only because he was the great grandfather of the Holy Prophet, but in
his own right because of his tremendous achievements.  
    
 He may well be compared with any great leader of his time. He was the
most generous, the most prestigious, and the most respected leader of
the Quraish. He used to feed the pilgrims during *hajj* with royal
open-handedness. But the best testimonial to his benevolence is his
title "Hashim" whereby he came to be known. Once, there was a great
famine in Mecca. Hashim could not look silently at the sorry plight of
the Meccans.

He took all his wealth, went to Syria, purchased flour and dried bread,
brought it to Mecca and daily slaughtered his camels for gravy; the
bread and the biscuits were broken into the gravy and the whole tribe
was invited to partake of it. This continued till the famine was averted
and all the lives were saved. It was this extraordinary feat that earned
him the name "Hashim," the one who breaks (the bread). Hashim's real
name was 'Amr.  
    
 Hashim was the founder of the trade caravans of the Quraish. He
obtained an edict from the Byzantine emperor, which exempted Quraish
from all kinds of duties or taxes when entering or leaving the countries
under his domain. He obtained the same concession from the emperor of
Ethiopia. Thus, the Quraishites started taking their trade caravans in
winter to Yemen (which was under the Ethiopian rule) and in the summer
to Syria and beyond up to Ankara (under Byzantine rule).

But the trade routes were not safe; therefore, Hashim visited all the
dominant tribes between Yemen and Ankara and entered into agreements
with all of them. They agreed that they would not attack the trade
caravans of Quraish, and Hashim undertook on behalf of Quraish that
their trade caravans would bring all their necessities to their places
of abode and would buy and sell at reasonable prices. Thus, in spite of
all the looting and plundering that prevailed in Arabia then, the jade
caravans of Quraish were always safe.  
    
 It is to this achievement of Hashim that Allah refers in the Qur'an,
counting it as a great bounty of God upon Quraish:  
    
***For the security and safeguard enjoyed by the Quraish, their safety
during (their) journeys by winter and by summer, let them worship the
Lord of this House*** **no** ***provides them with food against hunger,
and with security against fear.*** **(Qur'an, Ch. 106)**  
    
 There was a pathetically pessimistic tradition in Quraish known as
*Ihtifad.* When a poor family could not feed itself, it would go out to
the desert and, entering a tent, remain there till death claimed all of
its members one by one. They thought that nobody would know of their
plight and, by thus starving to death, they would protect their honor.  
    
 It was Hashim who persuaded Quraish to actively combat the poverty
instead of succumbing to it. His scheme: He joined one rich person with
a poor one, provided that their dependents were equal in number. That
poor person was to help the rich one during the trade journey. Whatever
increase of capital accrued by way of profit would be shared equally by
both. Thus, there would be no need for *Ihtifad.*  
    
 This scheme was wholeheartedly accepted and put in effect by the tribe.
This wise suggestion not only removed poverty from the Quraish but also
created a feeling of brotherhood and unity among them.  
    
 These achievements were enough to justify a very long life. But our
wonder knows no bounds when we learn that Hashim. was only 25 years old
when death overtook him at Gaza, Palestine, in approximately 488 A.D.
His grave is preserved, and Gaza is also called "Ghazzah Hashim," i.e.
Hashim's Gaza.  
    
 Hashim was very handsome, and because of his looks and prestige, many
chiefs and even rulers wanted him to marry their daughters. But he
married Salma daughter of 'Amr (from the tribe of 'Adi Bani Najjar) of
Yathrib. She was the mother of Shaibatul-Hamd (commonly known as
'Abdul-Muttalib) who was in his infancy when Hashim died.  
  

'Abdul-Muttalib
---------------

Hashim had five sons: 'Abdul-Muttalib, Asad, Nadhlah, Saifi and Abu
Saifi. But the last three had no children; Asad had only a daughter,
Fatima bint Asad, mother of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib. Thus, it was only
through 'Abdul-Muttalib that the progeny of Hashim survived.  
    
 'Abdul-Muttalib was born at Yathrib (later named Medina) in his
maternal grandfather's house, and he was only a few months old when
Hashim died. After Hashim, his brother Muttalib succeeded him in all the
privileges mentioned earlier. After some time, Muttalib went to Yathrib
and brought his nephew to Mecca. When Muttalib entered Mecca with his
nephew behind him on his camel, some people said: "This is the slave of
Muttalib!" Muttalib said: "No! He is my nephew and son of my deceased
brother Hashim." But the name stuck, though today few people know that
the real name of 'Abdul-Muttalib was Shaibatul-Hamd.  
    
 Muttalib loved 'Abdul-Muttalib and looked after him very well. But
'Abdush-Shams and Nawfil were hostile towards him. At the death of
Muttalib, 'Abdul-Muttalib succeeded him in the two privileges held by
him, i.e. *Siqayah* and *Rifadah.*  
    
 In spite of the enmity of his own uncles, his personal virtues and
qualities of leadership earned him in later days the title of "Sayyidul
Batha" (the Chief of Mecca). He lived to the ripe age of 82. A carpet
was spread for him before the Ka'bah and nobody dared to put his foot on
it. In later days, this rule was broken only by the orphaned son of
'Abdullah (i.e. the Holy Prophet) who used to sit there and
'Abdul-Muttalib forbade Quraish from interfering with the child because,
he told them, "This child of mine is to have a special dignity."  
    
 It was 'Abdul-Muttalib who had forbidden his children from using
intoxicants. It was he who used to enter the cave of Hira during the
month of Ramadan to spend the month in remembrance of Allah and in
feeding the poor. Like his father and uncle, he used to feed and provide
water for the pilgrims during the *hajj* season. During whole year, even
the beasts and birds were fed from his house and, accordingly, he was
called "Mut'imut-tayr" (feeder of the birds).  
    
 Some of the systems originated by 'Abdul-Muttalib were later adopted in
Islam. He was the first person to make Nadhr and fulfill it, to give one
fifth (khums) of the treasure in the way of Allah, to forbid prohibited
degrees, to cut a thief s hand, to make intoxicants unlawful, to forbid
fornication and adultery, to discourage the system of killing the
daughters, to discourage the *tawaf* around the Ka'bah without clothes,
and to fix the compensation of manslaughter (killing someone by mistake
or unintentionally) at 100 camels. Islam adopted all these systems.

It is not possible to give the whole history of 'Abdul-Muttalib in this
short chapter, but two important events must be mentioned: the recovery
of Zamzam and the attempted attack on the Ka'bah by Abraha, the governor
of Ethiopia over Yemen.  
    
 Hundreds of years ago, Zamzam was filled up and nobody knew where it
was. (It is not the place here to give the details as to how and by whom
it was filled up). One day, 'Abdul-Muttalib was sleeping in Hatim of the
Ka'bah. Someone told him in a dream to dig the Taybah and get water. He
asked where Taybah was, but the vision vanished without any reply. The
same vision was repeated the second and the third day, but the names
were changed every time.

On the fourth day, he was told to dig Zamzam. 'Abdul-Muttalib asked
where Zamzam was. He was told the signs. 'Abdul-Muttalib, with his
eldest (and at that time the only) son, Harith, dug the place where
Zamzam is today. On the fourth day, the wall of the well appeared, and
after some more digging, the water-level was reached.  
    
 At this success, 'Abdul-Muttalib cried "Allahu Akbar!" and said: "This
is the well of Isma'il!" Quraishites gathered around him and started
arguing that since the original well was the property of Isma'il, the
recovered well, too, belonged to the whole tribe. 'Abdul-Muttalib
rejected their claim, saying that it was given especially to him by
Allah. The Quraishites wanted to fight and fill up the well then dig it
up again.  
    
 At last, they agreed to put their case before the wise woman of the
tribe of Sa'd in Syria. Every clan sent one man as its representative.
'Abdul-Muttalib, with his son and a few companions, were in the same
caravan. But he had his separate arrangements. In the middle of a
desert, the water which 'Abdul-Muttalib had was finished. The whole
group was suffering from acute thirst. The leaders of the other party
refused to give them any water. They were near their death.
'Abdul-Muttalib advised his group to dig some graves, so that when
anybody died, others would bury him. Thus only one person, the last one
to die, would remain unburied. They dug up their own graves. The
opposite party was enjoying the scene.  
    
 On the second day, 'Abdul-Muttalib exhorted his companions that it was
cowardice to succumb to death like that without making a last effort.
Thus, he rode his camel, and the camel arose. In doing so, its foot hit
the earth and Lo! A stream of cool sweet water appeared! 'Abdul-Muttalib
cried "Allahu Akbar!" His companions, too, cried "Allahu Akbar!" They
quenched their thirst, filled their water-skins, and then, 'Abdul
Muttalib invited the opposite group to fill their water-skins from that
fountain. His own companions objected, but he said, "If we do the same
as they had done, there would be no difference between us and them."  
    
 The whole caravan gathered around that fountain. They drank and filled
their water-skins. Then they said: "O 'Abdul­Muttalib! By Allah! Allah
has decided between you and us. He has given you victory. By Allah, we
will never dispute with you about Zamzam. The same Allah who has created
this fountain here in this desert for you has given Zamzam to you."  
    
 Zamzam became the personal property of 'Abdul-Muttalib. He dug the well
deeper. Two deer made of gold, some swords and coats of mail were found
buried therein. Again, the Quraish demanded a share in the treasure.
Again, 'Abdul-Muttalib refused. At last, the dispute was decided by lot
which gave the golden deer to the Ka'bah and the swords and the coats of
mail to 'Abdul Muttalib; the Quraish got nothing.  
    
 It was then that 'Abdul-Muttalili dedicated one-fifth of his own share
to the Ka'bah.


