Faith of the Ancestors of the Holy Prophet
==========================================

It is the accepted belief of the Shi'a Ithna-Asheris, the Hanafis, and
the Shafi'is that the ancestors of the Holy Prophet from 'Abdullah to
Qidar ibn Isma'il, and from there right up to Adam, were true believers.
They believed in the One and Only God and faithfully followed the Divine
religion of their times. From Qidar to 'Abdullah, all of them followed
the *Shari'ah* of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.), which was the religion
prescribed for them by God.  
    
 The famous Sunni scholar Imam Jalaluddin as-Suyuti has written nine
books on this subject and has proved beyond doubt that all the ancestors
of the Holy Prophet were true believers. Shaykh 'Abdul-Haqq Muhaddith
Dehlawi has written: "All the ancestors of the Holy Prophet from Adam up
to 'Abdullah were pure and clean from the uncleanness of disbelief and
paganism. It was not possible for Allah to put that Holy Light (of the
Holy Prophet) into dark and dirty places, i.e. the loin of a pagan man
or the womb of a pagan woman. Also, how could it be possible for Allah
to punish the ancestors of the Holy Prophet on the Day of judgement and
thus humiliate him in the eyes of the world?"  
    
 The Holy Prophet himself has said: "I was always being transferred from
the loins of the clean ones to the wombs of the clean ones."  
    
 'Allamah al-Majlisi has written that it is the unanimous belief of
Shi'a scholars that the father, mother and all ancestors of the Holy
Prophet followed the true religion, and his Light never entered into the
loin of any pagan man or the womb of any pagan woman. Also, the accepted
traditions say that all his ancestors were "Siddiqun" (Truthful Ones):
They were either prophets or successors of prophets.  
    
 After Isma'il, all his ancestors were successors of Isma'il (a.s.).
Other traditions specify that 'Abdul-Muttalib was a "Hujjat (Proof) of
Allah and that Abu Talib was his successor."  
    
 Amirul-Mu'minin 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) said: "By Allah, neither my
father ever worshipped the idols, nor my grandfather 'Abdul-Muttalib,
nor his father Hashim, nor his father 'Abd Munaf. They prayed facing
towards the Ka'bah and followed the religion of Ibrahim."  
    
 If you look again at the preceding life-sketches of some of the
ancestors of the Holy Prophet, you will find that many traditions
established by them are now included into the tenets of Islam. Qusayi
started the night-stay at Mash'arul-Haram during the *hajj,* and Allah
kept that system in Islam. Can anybody think that Allah would confirm a
religious rite established by a pagan?  
    
 Likewise, as we have seen the customs established by 'Abdul-Muttalib
were adopted in Islam. Could Allah glorify 'Abdul-Muttalib if he were a
pagan?  
    
 Also, read again the events of the discovery of Zamzam and the
appearance of the well in the desert. Read again the events of
'Amul-Fil, and see the firm conviction that Allah would surely save His
House. That statement, repeated several times, shows that
'Abdul-Muttalib knew what was going to happen. Why was he so sure? There
can only be one explanation: He was informed by Allah. And this, in
turn, proves the earlier statement that he was a "Hujjat" of Allah.  
    
 In all these events and narrations, he is always seen praying to Allah,
and there is no hint from any quarter that he ever prayed to the idols
of Quraish (to Hubal, Lat or 'Uzza). When he finds Zamzam, he exclaims
"Allahu Akbar!" When he emphasizes anything, he swears by the name of
Allah. When he stakes his claim, he says that Allah gave it to him. What
further proof is needed to show that it was a family of True
Believers?  
    
 The Holy Prophet said: "Jibril (Gabriel) said to me: 'I searched the
east and the west of the earth, but I did not find anyone superior to
Muhammad; and I searched the east and the west of the earth, but I did
not find the children of any father better than the children of
Hashim."  
    
 Also, the Holy Prophet said: "Verily, Allah chose Kinanah from the
children of Isma'il, and He selected Quraish from Kinanah and chose the
children of Hashim from the Quraish, and selected me from the children
of Hashim."  
  

'Abdullah
---------

When, at the discovery of Zamzam, 'Abdul-Muttalib encountered the enmity
of Quraish, he was quite worried because he had only one son to help
him. He, therefore, prayed to Allah, making a nadhr (vow) that if Allah
gave him ten sons to help him against his enemies, he would sacrifice
one of them to please Allah. His prayer was granted, and Allah gave him
twelve sons, out of whom five are famous in the Islamic history:
'Abdullah, Abu Talib, Hamza, 'Abbas and Abu Lahab. The other seven were:
Harith (already mentioned), Zubayr, Ghaydaq, Muqawwim, Dharar, Qutham.,
and Hijl (or Mughira). He had six daughters: 'Atikah, Umaymah, Baydha',
Barrah, Safiyyah, and Arwi.  
    
 When ten sons were born, 'Abdul-Muttalib decided to sacrifice one of
them according to his nadhr. Lot was cast and 'Abdullah's name came out.
'Abdullah was the dearest to him, but he did not flinch from the
decision of the fate. He took 'Abdullah's hands and started towards the
place where sacrifices were offered. His daughters started crying and
begged him to sacrifice ten camels in place of 'Abdullah. At first
'Abdul-Muttalib refused.

But when the pressure of the whole family (and in fact, the whole tribe)
mounted, he agreed to cast lot between 'Abdullah and ten camels. Again
the name of 'Abdullah came out. On the suggestion of the people, the
number of the camels was increased to twenty, again, the same result.
Repeatedly, the number was increased to thirty, forty, fifty, sixty,
seventy, eighty and ninety. But the result was always the same. At last
the lot was cast between 100 camels and 'Abdullah.

Now the lot came out for the camels. The family was jubilant, but 'Abdul
Muttalib was not satisfied. He said: "Ten times the name of 'Abdullah
has come out. It is not fair to ignore those lots just for one lot."
Three times more, he repeated the lot between Abdullah and 100 camels,
and every time the lot came out for the camels. Then he sacrificed the
camels and the life of 'Abdullah was saved.  
    
 It was to this incident that the Holy Prophet referred when he said: "I
am the son of the two sacrifices." He meant the sacrifices of Isma'iI
and 'Abdullah.  
    
 The name of the mother of 'Abdullah was Fatimah, daughter of 'Amr ibn
\`Aidh ibn 'Amr ibn Makhzum. She was also the mother of Abu Talib,
Zubayr, Baydha', Umaymah, Barra and 'Atikah.  
    
 A year before "the year of the elephant," 'Abdullah was married to
Aminah daughter of Wahb ibn 'Abd Munaf ibn Zuhrah ibn Kilab. In that
very gathering, 'Abdul-Muttalib married Hala, daughter of Wuhaib, i.e.
cousin of Aminah. Hala gave birth to Hamza, and Thawbiyah, the
slave-girl of Abu-Lahab, breast-fed him. She also gave her milk to the
Holy Prophet for some time. Thus, Hamza was the uncle of the Holy
Prophet and also his cousin as well as foster brother. Various
traditions put the age of 'Abdullah at the time of his marriage at 17,
24 or 27 years.  
    
 'Abdullah went with a trade caravan to Syria. While returning, he fell
ill and stayed at Yathrib (Medina). When 'Abdul-Muttalib sent Harith to
look after him and bring him back, he had already passed away. 'Abdullah
was buried in Yathrib. The Wahhabis walled up his grave and nobody was
allowed to visit it. Then, in the 1970s the Wahhabis dug up his body
together with those of 7 companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and buried
them somewhere else under the pretext of extending the Mosque.  
    
 'Abdullah had left some camels, goats, and a slave-girl, Ummu Ayman.
The Holy Prophet got it all as his inheritance.  
  


