Lesson Eight: The Shia (2)
==========================

In this lesson we shall discuss in brief some Shia theories in the
context of*kalaam* , of the sort that are common between Muslim
scholastic theologians.

During the discussion of the Mu’tazilte School, we have already
mentioned that they maintain that their beliefs are based on five
fundamentals, i.e. monotheism, justice, promise and threat, the middle
position and enjoining what is good and forbidding what is evil. We have
also said that what distinguishes these fundamentals from other ones
they uphold is the fact that they are unique to them, and thus set them
apart from other schools of thought. We should, therefore, not be
deluded that they represent the fundamentals of their faith and the rest
represent the branches.

Similarly, Shia scholars, and not their Imams (a.s.), stated the five
fundamentals of Shiism, namely, monotheism, justice, prophethood,
imamate, and resurrection.

It is widely recognized that these are the fundamentals of religion and
what comes next is of the branches. In this respect, a question begs for
an answer, i.e. if what is meant by the fundamentals of religion are
those that are sufficient to be upheld by man in order to be Muslim,
then would believing in monotheism and prophethood alone suffice? What
verifies this is the implication of the testimony of faith
(*ash-Shahadatain* ), [i.e. the two-part statement of: I bear witness
that there is no god but Allah, and that Mohammad is the Messenger of
Allah]. The second part of this declaration of faith relates to the
prophethood of our master Mohammad (s.a.w.), the Seal of Prophets, in
particular. As regards the prophethood of the other prophets, it is
outside the remit of the declaration of faith. And yet, the reality is
that what constitutes part of the fundamentals of religion and thereby
warrant believing in is the prophethood of all God’s prophets.

However, if fundamentals of religion imply, from an Islamic perspective,
those ones that are of belief and faith, to the exclusion of practical
acts of worship, there remain other matters that merit believing in,
such as the angels:

***“The Messenger believed in what had been revealed to him from his
Lord, as do the men of faith, each one (of them) believed in Allah, His
angels, His books, and His Messengers..” (2/285)***

Again, what sets the Divine Attribute of Justice apart from the other
Attributes, such as Omniscience, Omnipotence, Life, Hearing, etc. to
warrant a place among other articles of faith? If believing in God’s
Attributes is fundamental, it then follows that one has to believe in
all the Attributes. If it is not the case, no other Attribute should be
left out.

The crux of the matter is that the reasons for choosing these
fundamentals are that they are regarded as fundamentals worthy of
advocating in the view of Islam. On the other hand, they represent one
of the distinct features of the [Shia] School of Thought. However, Islam
has validated the fundamentals of monotheism, justice, and prophethood,
and thus upholding them is considered one of Islam’s goals. As for the
fundamental of justice, it is distinctively Shia.

That is, although Justice is not different from the other Attributes,
nor is it one of the objectives of the faith, yet it represents the
Shia’s special vision of Islam.

With Shia, two features characterize Justice, in that it falls within
the domain of the articles of the faith and clearly defines the
boundaries of their distinctive School of Thought.

Going back to the belief in the angels, which is predetermined in the
Holy Qur’an, why did it not feature among the five fundamentals? The
answer to this question is that those five fundamentals of belief fall
within the objectives of Islam, in that the Prophet (s.a.w.) called on
people to embrace them and that his noble mission was contingent on this
belief. As for believing in the angels and all necessities of religion,
such as prayer and fast, they are not among the goals of the Prophetic
Message. Nevertheless, they go hand in hand with it. In other words,
this belief is deemed a prerequisite to believing in prophethood, and
not among its aims.

Should we consider the fundamental of Imamate from social and political
perspectives, i.e. power and leadership, it is like Justice, i.e. it
does not come under the umbrella of matters of faith. However, if we
view it in moral terms, where the Imam is dubbed as “*Hujjat Ullah* –
the Proof of God” and “*Khalifat Ullah* – the Representative, or Caliph,
of God”, and the moral relationship between every Muslim and sensible
men at all times are considered a forgone conclusion, Imamate would
become part of the articles of faith.

Now, we give below*kalaam* doctrines relating to the Shia, in addition
to the five fundamentals:

1. Monotheism:
--------------

Which is one of the five fundamentals endorsed by both the Mu’tazilites
and the Ash’arites. It is worth noting that the monotheism in which the
Mutazilites believe, and which is unique to their School, is the Unity
of the Attributes that the Ash’arites rejected. As for the type of
monotheism in which the Ash’arites believe, it is the Unity of Actions,
which the Mu’tazilites refuted.

We have already mentioned that there is unanimity on both Unity of the
Essence and Unity of worship, and thus they do not feature in this
discussion.

In addition to Unity of the Essence and Unity of worship, the brand of
monotheism to which the Shia subscribe is the one, which consists of
Unity of the Attributes and Unity of the Actions. However, with them,
Unity of the Attributes is different from that advocated by the
Mu’tazilites. Similarly, their type of belief in the Unity of Actions is
unlike that upheld by the Ash’arites.

According to the Mu’tazilites, Unity of the Attributes means that the
Divine Essence is devoid of any Attribute. With the Shia, Unity of the
Attributes means that the Attributes are the very Essence, i.e. they are
indivisible.

For more details, you can consult the Shia works of philosophy
and*kalaam* (scholastic theology).

As held by the Shia, Unity of the Actions is different from that
espoused by the Ash’arites, as they deny the influence of any being,
apart from God, in that they say that the Originator of acts of worship
is God, and that man is not capable of commissioning his own actions and
embarking on them. This type of belief entails pure compulsion (*jabr*
). However, it has been disproved with sufficient evidence. Unity of
actions, as advocated by the Shia, means that the law of causality is
original. That is, each and every effect, which is dependent on a cause
that is close to it, is simultaneously existential by the Absolute Truth
(Thatul Haqq), [i.e. God]. The two are symmetrical not asymmetrical (or
contradictory).

2. Justice:
-----------

Both the Shia and the Mu’tazilites agree on the fundamental of Justice.
This means that God emanates, is merciful, gracious and causes
affliction in accordance with intrinsic merits. The world of beings
(creation), which is contingent upon emanation (*faydh* ), mercy,
affliction, grace, reward and punishment, has been based on a meticulous
system. The Asha’rite deny this fundamental and the system that goes
with it. They maintain that upholding Justice, in this sense, entails
the infringement upon the Thatul Haqq, or God, and this, they add, goes
against the grain of Him being the All-poweful (*Qahiryya mutlaqah* ).

3. Freewill and choice:
-----------------------

The Shia’s belief in this precept is more or less similar to that
espoused by the Mu’tazilites. According to the latter, freewill is akin
to*tafweedh* (delegation, or empowerment), i.e. man is left to his own
devices, that is, independent of the Divine Will. Obviously, this, as we
have already made clear, is impossible.

With the Shia, freewill means that God created man with freewill.
However, in his existence and other affairs – the domain of actions
included, man, as is the case with the other creation, is dependent upon
the Thatul Haqq, drawing on His Will and Providence.

Accordingly, freewill with the Shia is a middle position between the
compulsion of the Ash’arites and the empowerment of the Mu’tzilites.
This belief is contained in a famous*hadith* related from the Imams
(a.s.), “It is neither*jabr* (compulsion) nor*tafweedh* (delegation),
but a position between the two”. This tenet is a branch of the
fundamental of Justice.

4. Inherent good and repugnance:
--------------------------------

The Mu’tazilites are of the opinion that actions, in themselves, may be
good or bad (repugnant). Justice, for instance, is good in itself,
whereas injustice is repugnant in itself. Thus, a sensible person is the
one who embarks on actions that are good and keeps away from those that
are repugnant. And since God is Wise, His wisdom necessitates that He
commissions actions that are good; He is incapable of doing bad things.
Therefore, the requirements of good/repugnant things (actions) are
something and God’s Wisdom is something else. That is why it is said
that it is incumbent on God to carry out certain actions, whereas He is
incapable of doing some other things that are repugnant.

The Ash’arites are diametrically opposed to this idea, in that they
reject the intrinsic goodness or repugnance of things; they also reject
what is incumbent and not so on God.

Some Shia theologians were influenced by the Mu’tazilite line of
thinking and accepted their argument. Others got bogged down with the
intricacies of thought, and although accepted the case for inherent
goodness and repugnance of things, yet they did not consider it
applicable to the Divine.

5. Graciousness and opting for what is in the best interest of man:
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The Ash’arites and the Mu’tazilites engaged one another in debate about
God’s Grace, meaning that He always opts for what is in the best
interest of man (intikhabul aslah). That is, does this system have
prevalence in the universe? The Mu’tazilites maintain that Grace (*lutf*
), as an obligation or duty [towards man], is incumbent on God, whereas
the Ash’arites reject this assertion.

It goes without saying that the principle of Graciousness, or Kindness,
(*lutf* ) branches out from the two fundamentals of Justice and rational
good and repugnant (*alhusn wal qubh al ‘aqliyyain* ). Some Shia
scholastic theologians took this principle on board, and yet dismissed
the idea of “God is obligated to be gracious to His creation” as
manifestly wrong. They also have discussions about the claim, “God
always opts for what is in the best interest of man”, which we cannot
dwell on in this study.

6. Originality of the intellect, its independence and authoritativeness:
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Shia have said that the human mind is imaginative, authoritative and
independent more so than the Mu’tazilites. In the reports from the
Infallibles (a.s.), there are many references to the intellect being
described as the messenger within as opposed to the Prophet (s.a.w.)
being the manifest messenger. In Shia jurisprudence, reason, or
intellect, is one of the four principles, or tools, of deducing
religious rulings.

7. The aim behind God’s Actions:
--------------------------------

The Ash’arites deny this principle. They argue that “intents and
purposes” are the exclusive preserve of man, or similar creations. Allah
is far above (*munazzah* ) these things, because, they hasten to add
that, if it is like this, God would appear as though He were coerced to
do such actions.

The Shia subscribe to this Mu’tazilite doctrine, and yet they
differentiate between the objective of the action and the intent of the
doer. What is inconceivable is that God becomes an objective in Himself
in His Actions. As for the objective that relates to the created, it
does not detract, in any way, from the loftiness of [God’s] Essence, its
Perfection, and Independence.

8. Bada’, or change of mind, of the Divine Action is acceptable:
----------------------------------------------------------------

As it is acceptable for God to abrogate the laws, it is acceptable for
Him to change His Mind.

[However, when the word bada’ is used in relation to God, it means to
express. That is, there are certain commandments, which come into force
according to expediency for the time being only and thereafter the same
are abrogated or some new commandments take their place. When the word
bada’ is used in relation to man, it is said that after taking a
decision to do something, he decides to abandon it. This change of mind
is due to man’s inability to understand as to what is good for him or
may be it is due to his repenting of his past actions. Bada’, in this
sense is impossible in the case of God because He is free from ignorance
and defect. Thus, the Shia do not attribute this meaning of bada to
God].

For further reading on this topic, you may consult the books of
philosophy, such as the work, “*Kitabul Asfar al-Arba’a* – The
Four-volume Book”, by Sadrul Mata’aliheen.

9. Seeing God: The Mu’tazilites vehemently deny this question.
--------------------------------------------------------------

They believe that man reaches the stage of believing in God per se. And
this is a matter for man’s conscience and intellect, which are the only
two paths that lead to certitude in the existence of God, and the latter
is the highest point of faith. God cannot be physically seen in any
manner. The proof on this is this Qur’anic verse:

***“No vision can grasp Him, but His grasp is over all vision; He is
subtle well-aware”. (6/103).***

As regards the Ash’arites, they are adamant that God can be seen, but
only on the Day of Judgement. Their proof on this is contained in some
reports and Qur’anic verses, such as these ones:

***“Some faces, that Day, will beam (in brightness and beauty); -
Looking towards their Lord..” (75/22-23).***

As for the Shia, they maintain that it is absolutely impossible to see
God by way of physical eyesight, neither in this world nor in the next.
They further argue that the highest point of faith is not achieved only
through rational and conscious conviction. Rational certitude is the
knowledge of certainty (*ilmul yaqeen* ); above it in order is conscious
certainty (*al yaqeenul qalbi* ), which is the very, or absolute,
certitude (*ainul yaqeen* ); that is, perceiving God by heart. God
Almighty cannot be seen by physical vision; rather by the heart. Imam
Ali (a.s.) was asked, “Did you see your Lord? He replied: I do not
worship a Lord that I cannot see. Neither eyes nor vision can see Him.
The hearts see Him by virtue of the certainties of faith”. Some Imams
(a.s.) were asked, “Did the Messenger of God see his Lord in his
ascension to the seventh heaven (*Mi’raaj* )? They answered: Not with
the eye but by the heart”. The experts attribute this tenet to the Shia.

10. The belief of the godless:
------------------------------

In this issue, which has already been repeated on a number of occasions
in this study, the Shia agree with the opinion of the Ash’arites on it,
unlike the Kharijites who maintain that the godless is deemed unbeliever
(kafir) and the Mu’tazilites who came up with the idea of “the middle
position”.

11. The infallibility of the Prophets and the Imams:
----------------------------------------------------

Among the beliefs of the Shia, which are distinctly Shia, is their
belief that the Prophets and the Imams are infallible, i.e. they are
incapable of committing any vile deed, be it serious or petty.

12. Forgiveness and intercession:
---------------------------------

The Shia disagree with the Mu’tazilites in their rigid belief that if
the wrongdoer dies without repenting for his misdeeds, he is denied
forgiveness and intercession. The Mu’tazilites are also at odds with the
Ash’arites as regards random forgiveness.


