Lesson One: Scholastic Theology
===============================

The science of scholastic, or speculative, theology (*kalaam* ) is an
Islamic science. It is concerned with discussing Islamic beliefs, or
what should be upheld of such beliefs from an Islamic perspective.
Thus,*kalaam* seeks to explain the matters relating to these beliefs,
advancing the evidence in support thereof and defending the same.

Muslim scholars divide the body of Islamic teachings into three
categories:

**1. Beliefs:** This category deals with the questions and knowledge
that one has to be familiar with and subsequently believe in, such as
monotheism, the Attributes of the Creator, universal and exclusive
prophethood, etc. However, Islamic schools of thought differed as to
what constitutes the fundamentals of religion and thereby have to be
espoused as such.

**2. Ethics:** This category deals with the issues and teachings that
discuss the “status of man”, i.e. those questions relating to moral
qualities and spiritual characteristics, such as fairness, piety,
courage, integrity, wisdom, rectitude, truthfulness, trustworthiness,
etc.

**3. Laws:** This category takes care of matters relating to the
performance and mechanics of acts of worship, such as prayer, fast, hajj
(pilgrimage), jihad, enjoining good and forbidding evil, sale and hire,
marriage, divorce, inheritance, etc. This category is known by another
title, namely, jurisprudence.

According to such a division, Islamic teachings have become the main
thrust of Islam, to the exclusion of Islamic sciences that discuss the
preliminaries, such as humanities, logic, and to a certain extent
philosophy.

Also, according to this dissection, there has been a focus on the
relationship between Islamic teachings and man. That is, matters
relating to man’s intellect have been given the name “beliefs”, whereas
the title “ethics” has become synonymous with questions concerning man’s
morals and spiritual welfare. As for the issues relating to how man goes
about conducting his devotions, they have been given the name
“jurisprudence”.

As shall, God willing, be explained, although jurisprudence is
considered one science, from a juridical perspective, yet it consists of
a number of sub sciences.

However,*kalaam* (speculative or scholastic theology) is the science
that is concerned with Islamic beliefs or doctrines. It used to be
called “fundamentals of religion” or “unity and attributes”.

The origins of kalaam
---------------------

It is not possible to determine with absolute certainty when the science
of scholastic theology started. Yet, the middle of the second*Hijri*
(Islamic lunar calendar) century witnessed the beginning of the
controversy between Muslims over issues of a*kalaam* nature. Thus,
questions of freewill, predestination, and justice, were debated.
Perhaps, the first official seminary was that of al-Hassan al-Basri (d.
110 H.).

Two towering figures, who lived in the middle of the second century,
come to mind, especially when one talks about vehement defence of man’s
freewill. They are Ma’bad al-Juhni [d. 80/669] and Gheelan ad-Dimashqi

[of Damascus, d. 150/767]. On the other side of the ideological divide,
there were the proponents of the doctrine of predestination. The latter
were known as “*jabri’ites* ”, as opposed to the former, “qadri’ites”.

The differences between these two schools of thought had crept into
other issues relating to divinity, natural and social sciences, man and
resurrection. The qadri’ites were later known by the name,
“mu’tazilites” [lit. the separatists, founded by Wasil bin Ata’
(130/748), the student of al-Hassan al-Basri after he had turned his
back to his teacher] and the*jabri’ites* [from the Arabic root*jabr*
(necessity, compulsion)], “ash’ari’ites”, [i.e. named after the founder
of the School, Abul Hassan Ali bin Ismail al-Ash’ari (d. 324/935)].

The orientalists and their disciples are adamant that the beginning of
deductive work in the world of Islam started with that sort of debate.

Nevertheless, the truth is that deductive research in Islamic
fundamentals emanated from the Holy Qur’an. The prophetic traditions and
the sermons of Imam Ali (a.s.) used to provide the commentary on those
Qur’anic passages. It has to be noted, though, that that scholarship
varied in style and substance, pursuant to the calibre of Muslim
speculative theologians (mutakalimeen).

Researching or following?
-------------------------

The Holy Qur’an has secured the pillars of belief according to
reasoning. It has always aimed to make people reach conviction by way of
intellection or rational judgement. The Holy Book does not consider
worship in matters of belief sufficient. Therefore, fundamentals of
religion have to be examined through logic.

Questions such as the existence of God and His unity should be resolved
by way of rational judgement, so as the prophethood of Mohammad
(s.a.w.). This is how the science of the fundamentals of religion
emerged during the first century of the Islamic era.

The embracing of Islam by non-Arabs, the existence of different
ideologies and principles, and the co-existence of Muslims with the
followers of other religions, such as Jews, Christians, Magians, and
Sabians, had precipitated debate between Muslims. Those developments and
the interaction between all those peoples were instrumental in the
appearance of groups, such as atheists, thanks to the general climate of
freedom, especially at the time of the Abbasid caliphate. The latter did
not mind the proliferation of such trends, provided that holding such
views did not constitute any divergence from the ruling establishment’s
general guidelines. Philosophy, which called for freethinking and the
casting of doubt and false arguments, also came to the fore. All those
developments called for scrutiny in the fundamental structures of Islam,
with a view of consolidating them, hence the emergence of great
speculative theologians (mutakalimeen) in the second, third and fourth
centuries of the Islamic era.

The early issues
----------------

Perhaps, among the early issues, which became the bone of contention
between Muslims, was the question of predestination and freewill. This
was

quite natural, not least because it has a bearing on man’s destiny,
hence, the importance attached to it by any sensible person.

There might not be a single intellectually mature society whose members
do not engage in debate on these matters. Moreover, since the Holy
Qur’an discussed these issues in many verses, it has become the driving
force behind the dialogue on such questions between people.

Therefore, we should not go far in order to find a justification for the
appearance of this issue in the world of Islam. As for the orientalists,
they always seek to refute the originality of Islamic sciences and
thought, in any way possible, above all, by tracing such knowledge and
scholarship to domains outside the realm of Islam, especially,
Christianity. That is why, they try to attribute the science of*kalaam*
(speculative theology) to some other ideology, i.e. not Islamic. After
all, this is what they tried to do with even purely Arabic sciences,
such as grammar, metrics, rhetoric, figures of speech, and Islamic
gnosis, or mysticism (*Irfan* ).

The research in predestination and freewill also deals with the question
of decree and destiny (*qadha and qadr* ). Insofar as its relationship
with the human beings is concerned, it is called predestination and
freewill (*jabr and ikhtiyar* ). And as far as its link with God is
concerned, it is called decree and destiny. The research has been
extended to cover the issue of [Divine] Justice (*adl* ) for the obvious
correlation between predestination and injustice, on the one hand, and
freewill and justice, on the other.

Justice, however, led to the study of the “inbuilt good and repugnance”
(*husn and qubh* ) of the human actions; this in turn led to the study
of reason (aql) and intellectual independence.

As a result of discussing all these topics, yet another subject came to
the fore, viz. wisdom (*hikma* ), i.e. the wise intents and purposes of
the Divine. The research had gradually developed to cover other topics,
such as the unity of actions (*Tawheed afa’ali* ) and the unity of
attributes (*Tawheed sifati* ). This will be discussed later on.

These scholastic theology issues and research had branched out into a
plethora of subjects that have a philosophical dimension, such as the
studies in the essence and manifestations of things and the composition
of the body from inseparable parts. Scholastic theologians have
considered carrying out those studies as necessary, i.e. preparing the
ground for the discussions of the issues dealing with the fundamentals
of religion, especially creation and resurrection (*mabda’ and ma’ad* ).

Thus, a number of issues, which used to be the exclusive domain of
philosophy, had become part and parcel of the science of scholastic
theology, hence the spanning of topics between philosophy and*kalaam*
(speculative theology).

Reading speculative theology books, especially those written in the
seventh century of the Islamic era onward, you will discover that
most*kalaam* issues were the ones discussed by philosophers, Muslims in
particular.

Philosophy and*kalaam* had great impact on each other. One such
influence was that*kalaam* had introduced new subjects into philosophy.
For its part, philosophy had widened the horizons of*kalaam* , in that
discussing

philosophical questions within a speculative theology setting had become
necessary. Hopefully, we shall be able to expand on this subject by
giving examples later on.

Rational and traditional debate
-------------------------------

Despite the fact that the science of*kalaam* is a deductive and
analogous one, in the premises and principles it espouses to reaching
logical conclusions, it consists of two parts, i.e. rational (*aqli* )
and traditional (*naqli* ).

**Reason** comprises the questions that are the exclusive preserve of
reason, or intellect. Nevertheless, if tradition is resorted to in the
process, it can be considered as an extra piece of evidence on the
rational judgement. Issues of debate of this sort include monotheism,
prophethood, and some topics relating to resurrection, where you cannot
rely exclusively on tradition, i.e. the Holy Qur’an and Prophetic
tradition (*sunnah* ). You have to count on reason.

**Tradition** is concerned with issues pertaining to the fundamentals of
religion that one must believe and have faith in. However, since it is a
branch of prophethood, and not above it, it is sufficient to prove the
issues by way of divine revelation or authentic prophetic*hadith*
(tradition), such as those questions relating to imamate; according to
Shiite doctrine, imamate is among the fundamentals of religion. The same
goes for the majority of the topics that are relevant to the question of
resurrection.


