Lesson Two: Scholastic theology, a definition
=============================================

It suffices to say that scholastic theology is a science that is
concerned with studying the fundamentals of Islamic faith. In other
words, it aims to clearly segregate the matters that relate to the
fundamentals of religion, proving their veracity with demonstrative
proofs and responding to scepticism and baseless arguments levelled
against them.

In books that deal with logical and philosophical issues, there is a
reference to the fact that for each and every science there is a special
subject and that what sets any science apart from the other and makes it
different is the uniqueness of the subject it discusses.

Of course, this is true. The sciences whose topics have realistic unity
fit this description. However, there can be other sciences, whose topics
are numerous, yet subjective, provided that there is a common goal to be
served, which is the reason for such unity and subjectivity (*I’itibar*
)

Scholastic theology is of the second type, in that the unity of its
issues is not intrinsic and qualitative but a subjective one. Thus, it
is not essential to look for one subject for the science of*kalaam*
(scholastic theology).

As for the sciences, whose subject matter can demonstrate a fundamental
unity, there will not be a possibility of interlocking of their
ingredients, i.e. interdependent co-existence. On the other hand, for
sciences whose unities are subjective, there can be no harm if their
issues intersect another science the unity of whose subject matter is
central. This is the reason for the science of*kalaam* having something
in common with philosophy, psychology or sociology.

Some scholars tried to come up with a subject and a definition for the
science of*kalaam* , like those for philosophy. They advanced a number
of theories in this regard. This is wrong. Having a unity of subject
concerns the sciences that can demonstrate a natural unity of issues.
Conversely, any science that lacks this intrinsic unity, in other words,
it is subjective, there cannot be a single subject for it.

The name
--------

There had been a debate concerning the name given to this science, i.e.
why is it called*kalaam* ? When was it given this name? Some attributed
this name to the stature it gives the one who is familiar with it, in
that he grows in stature the more he is involved in debate, or speech
(*kalaam* ) and in reaching rational conclusions. Others say that the
name was derived from the introductory phrase “Debating, or speaking of,
this, or that issue..” scholastic theologians (mutakalimeen) used to
start their writings or deliberations with. A third party said that it
was named the science of*kalaam* because it involves “debating, talking
about, or discussing”, the issues the traditionists, or scholars of
tradition, (*ahlul hadith* ) prefer to keep “quiet” about. A fourth
group are of the opinion that the name can be traced back to the
discussion in the context of this science about “God’s speech -*kalaam*
”, which led to untold conflict and killings; that is why that period
was branded “the age of tribulation”, in that people of that time
overindulged in argument and polemics about religious fundamentals and
on whether God’s speech was eternal or created.

Schools of scholastic theology
------------------------------

As there was disagreement between Muslims on juridical issues and the
branches of religion, ending in the setting up of different schools of
thought, such as Jafari’ite, Zaidite, Hanafite, Shafi’ite, and
Hanbali’ite, there was disagreement between them over doctrinal matters.
Each group had adopted special principles. The most important
among*kalaam* (scholastic theology) schools of thought are Shiite,
Mu’atazilite, Ash’arite, and Murji’ite.

At this juncture, a question, tinged with regret, may be posed about the
disunity of Muslims over juridical and scholastic theology issues. Their
differences in*kalaam* have given rise to their disunity in Islamic
thought. Their differences over juridical matters have deprived them of
the ability to show a united front in action.

Although posing the question and expressing regret are legitimate, yet
the attention must be drawn to these two points:

1. The differences between Muslims over these issues are not so acute
that they may shake the foundations of their doctrinal unity and joint
programmes. The things they have in common are so many that they render
the issues they disagree over insignificant.

2. Ideological and theoretical differences in a society that still
demonstrate common ideological fundamentals are inevitable. So long as
the differences stem from the same premises and principles and are a
result of the different approaches to deduction, without compromising
the main objects and aims, such differences are beneficial, in that they
enhance research and scholarship. However, should these differences turn
into entrenched positions, bigotry, and irrational inclinations, and the
individual effort becomes obsessed with degrading others, without a real
attempt to reform the approach, it would lead to disastrous results. The
Shia (Shi’ite) school of thought makes it obligatory on the*mukallaf
[compos mentis: The person obligated to observe the precepts of
religion] to follow a living jurist (mujtahid). For their part, the
jurists must exert themselves, through scholarship, to arrive at
independent judgements, being vigilant as not to fall under the sway of
the legal opinions of bygone generations of jurists and great personas.
This ijtihad [lit. exertion: the process of arriving at judgements on
points of religious law, using reason and the principles of
jurisprudence “usul al-fiqh”]* and independent thinking would inevitably
cause difference in opinion. However, this particular issue is
responsible for giving the Shia jurisprudence the extra edge, survival,
and continuity. In its general outlines, difference is not a bad thing.
What is condemnable is that difference resulting from ill intentions and
evil ulterior motives of those who seek to sow discord among Muslims.
Questions such as exploring the history of Islamic thought and the
differences that came to the fore as a result of ill intentions and
prejudice, the differences of opinion that emanated from rational
thinking, and whether or not we should consider all issues of*kalaam* as
fundamental and juridical issues as peripheral are outside the scope of
these lessons. Before starting to discuss the schools of*kalaam* , we
have to allude to the fact that a group of Muslim scholars were
diametrically opposed to embarking on*kalaam* or rational study in the
questions of fundamentals of religion. They branded this type of
scholarship

an impermissible deed and a heresy, or innovation (*bida’a* ). This
group is known as “*ahlul hadith* ”, or the proponents (scholars)
of*hadith* (tradition). On top of the list of outstanding scholars of
this group was Ahmed bin Hanbal [d.245/833], the founder of the
Hambalite Sunni juridical school of thought. The Hanbalites are
archenemies of any sort of*kalaam* , be it Mu’tazilite or Asha’rite, let
alone Shiite. They are also known for their contraposition on philosophy
and logic. The Hanbalite, Ibn Taymiyyah [d.728/1327], the well-known
jurist passed a fatwa (edict) forbidding the involvement in scholastic
theology (*kalaam* ) and logic (mantiq). Jalaluddin as-Suyuti, another
member of*ahlul hadith* wrote a book entitled, “*Sawn al-Mantiq wal
kalaam an al-Mantiq wal kalaam* ”, i.e. the “preservation of logic and
speech from the encroachments of the sciences of logic and scholastic
theology”. Malik bin Anas [d.179/795], the founder of the Malikite
School of Thought, did not license any research into doctrinal issues.
As we have already mentioned, the most important schools of scholastic
theology are the Shiite, Mu’atazilite, Ash’arite, and Murji’ite. Some
scholars considered the Kahrijite, and the Ismaelite among the schools
of Islamic scholastic theology. However, we do not consider them as
such. The Kahrijites have espoused a special brand of beliefs in the
fundamentals of religion. Maybe, they were the first ones to do so. They
have talked about some beliefs in the context of imamate, deeming those
who reject it as*fasiq* (godless), whom they have branded unbeliever.
Yet, (a) they did not establish an ideological school capable of
deducing legal opinion; in other words, they did not set up an
ideological system in the world of Islam; and (b) in our opinion, as
Shia Muslims, their deviant ideological opinions have reached a
proportion that they are considered outside the pale of Islam. However,
this has made things palatable, in that the Khrijites have almost died
out, except for a tolerant faction of them, i.e. the Abadhi’ites. The
survival of the group is attributed to the broad-mindedness of its
members. As for the Batinites (secretive), i.e. the Ismaelites, they
have introduced so many unsavoury innovations into Islamic thought that
it can be said that they left Islam in a state of topsy-turvy. For this
reason, Muslims are not prepared to consider them as one of them any
more. Some forty years ago, the Group for Rapprochement between Islamic
Schools of Thought was established in Cairo, Egypt. The founding fathers
were Twelver and Zaidite Shia, Hanafi’ites, Shafi’ites, Malikites, and
Hanbalites. The Ismaelites tried very hard to be represented, but all
Muslims gave them the cold shoulder. However, despite their apparent
deviation from the right path, the Ismaelites, unlike the Kharijites –
who did not have a distinct school of thought, have a school of thought,
featuring scholastic theology and philosophy. Over the ages, famous
intellectuals had emerged from their ranks, leaving behind an
ideological heritage. Of late, the orientalists have shown keen interest
in their opinions and books. Among the towering figures of the
Ismaelites is Nassir Khisro al-Alawi, the Farsi famous poet (d. 841 H.).
His known books are, Jami’ul Hukmain (the Compendium of the Two Rules),
Wajhuddin (the Face of Religion), and Khawan (sic) Ikhwan (the
Brothers). Abu Hatim ar-Razi (d. 332 H.), the author of A’alamun
Nubbuwwah (The Beacons of Prophethood), is another great Ismaelite

figure. Another one is Abu Ya’qoub as-Sajistani (d. circa second half of
the fourth*Hijri* century), the author of Kashful Mahjoub (Unveiling the
Concealed); the Farsi translation of this book was printed some ten
years ago. Also, among other famous personalities of the Ismaelites is
Hamiduddin al-Kirmani, the student of Abu Ya’qoub as-Sajistani. He was a
prolific writer on the tenets of the Ismaelites. Abu Hanifa an-Nu’man
bin Tahbit, known as Judge Nu’man and widely known as well by Abu Hanifa
ash-Shii, i.e. the Ismaeli Shiite, [*to differentiate him from the
founder of the Sunni School of Thought, the Hanifi’ite* ]. He undertook
credible and good research in jurisprudence and*hadith* . His book,
Da’a’imul Islam (the Pillars of Islam) is in circulation.


