Lesson Five: The Mu’tazilites (3)
=================================

What has been discussed in the previous two lessons relate to the core
beliefs of the Mutazilite School of Thought. However, and as we have
already mentioned, they advanced many views and opinions and defended
them fervently. Some of those views relate to different disciplines,
such as divinity, physics (or natural sciences), sociology, and man.
Insofar as subjects of divinity, or metaphysics, are concerned, there
are those, which involve the public aspects, and those that deal with
the intimate aspects. It goes without saying that, in common with other
speculative theologians, the Mu’tazilites have aimed to deal with the
latter, which revolve around the core of religious beliefs. As regards
the discussion on public affairs, it is deemed as a prelude to the wider
issues of discussing metaphysics. The same applies to natural sciences.
That is, should theologians embark on any question in the domain of
physics, they do so as a lead up to proving a religious belief or
solving a problem relating to it. We give below a summary of those
views, starting with metaphysics.

The Divine
----------

**Unity of the Attributes.**

**Justice.**

**The Word, or speech, of God; is it created, i.e. is the Word a
characteristic of the Action, and not of the Essence?**

**God’s actions have aims, i.e. each and every action that emanates from
God has a purpose and serves an interest.**

**Forgiveness without repentance is not possible. This is one of the
fundamentals, i.e. promise and threat.**

**Asking man to do more than that in his power is inconceivable.**

**Man’s actions are not created by God in any form. God’s will has no
say in man’s own actions.**

**The universe has been brought into existence (haadith). This view is
diametrically opposed to what philosophers hold.**

**Physically seeing God, whether in this world or the hereafter, is
impossible.**

Natural science
---------------

**The body is composed of indivisible atoms.**

**Smell is caused by atoms, travelling in the atmosphere.**

**Flavour is nothing but particles that influence the taste of man.**

**Light consists of particles travelling in the atmosphere.**

**Interference of bodies is not inconceivable. This view is espoused by
some Mu’tazilites.**

**Impulsive motion is not inconceivable. This view too is held by some
Mu’taziltes.**

Man
---

**Man has freewill and choice and is not coerced. This idea relates to
the idea of creation of actions and the issue of Divine Justice.**

**Power, i.e. man has the power to decide, before embarking on any
activity, to go ahead with it or abandon it.**

**The believer is capable of turning into an unbeliever and vice
versa.**

**The godless is neither a believer nor an unbeliever.**

**Reason, or intellect, is capable of distinguishing certain matters
independent of any prior guidance from the sharia Law.**

**When tradition goes contrary to reason, the latter should take
precedence over tradition.**

**The Holy Qur’an can be interpreted by way of intellection.**

Social and political issues
---------------------------

**It is compulsory to uphold the duty of enjoining what is good and
forbidding what is evil, even if it requires taking to fighting with the
sword.**

**The succession to power of the Guided Caliphs in the order it took
place is sound.**

**Ali was more superior to those who preceded him to power. This view,
however, is espoused by some Mu’tazilites. The majority of them, except
Wasil bin Ata’, were of the opinion that Abu Bakr was more superior.
However, later generations maintain that Ali was more superior.**

**It is permissible to criticise the Companions [of the Prophet
(s.a.w.)], study and analyse their works.**

**Undertaking a comparative study of the political programmes of both
[the Guided Caliphs] Omar and Ali.**

The above list is by no means exhaustive. In some of those issues, the
Mu’tazilite views agree with those of the Ash’arites, the philosophers,
the Shiites, the Kharijites and the Murj’ites.

It is to be noted, though, that the Mu’tazilites had never fallen under
the influence of Greek thought, so much so that they had never espoused
any of its philosophical heritage that was in vogue at the pinnacle of
the Mu’tazilite ideological acumen. They even went further in writing
books, refuting the claims of philosophers. The struggle between
speculative theologians (mutakalimeen) and philosophers benefited both
the camps, in that the gulf between the two rivals was made very much
narrower, in spite of the fact that there remained some issues, on which
the two sides chose to differ.

The process of change and history
---------------------------------

Naturally, these issues did not come to the fore at one go and were not
advanced by a single person or a particular group. They were propagated
by several vanguards and espoused and developed steadily by others
through the passage of time.

Among those contentious issues was the question of compulsion and
empowerment, or delegation, (*jabr* and*tafweedh* ), which was the
oldest. The Mu’tazilites adopted the principle of delegation. The Holy
Qur’an discussed this question in many passages; this might have given
rise to mind provoking exercises.

On the one hand, the Holy Qur’an states unequivocally that man has
freewill and choice in whatever actions he takes and in his general
conduct, i.e. he is not coerced to do anything he is not willing to do.

And yet, there are many Qur’anic passages that state that everything is
subjected to the Will of God.

This is how the misunderstanding has happened, as those two sets of
Qur’anic verses look seemingly contradictory. Therefore, some took to
interpreting the first set to conclude that man has freewill over his
actions. Others chose to side with the second set of verses, i.e. those
concerning God’s will and decree and destiny (*qadha and qadar* ),
deducing that everything is in the hands of the Divine.

However, there is a third group, who maintain that there is no
contradiction between the two sets of verses.

This subject had been extensively discussed in Imam Ali’s words and
sermons. However, debating the subject was synonymous with the emergence
of Islam as a force to be reckoned with. On the other hand, Muslims
taking sides on, and splitting into factions over, this issue came into
being during the second half of the first century of the Islamic era.

It is said that the idea of man’s freewill was first put forward by
Ghelan ad-Dimashqi and Ma’bad aj-Juhni [during the Umayyad rule]. The
Umayyad wanted to disseminate the ideology of compulsion (*jabr* ) among
the wider general public for their political ends. Under the slogan, “We
believe in divine decree (qadha’), whether good or bad”, they used to
justify their unjust and imposed rule. For this reason they persecuted
the proponents of the doctrine of man’s freewill and freedom. Similarly,
they executed both Ghelan and Ma’bad. The followers of this school were
called the Qadri’ites [i.e. the believers in man’s freewill and choice].

As for the issue of*fisq* (godlessness), it was debated even before the
question of compulsion and freewill. Its first exponents were the
Kharijites, during the rule of Imam Ali (a.s.). However, they did not
debate it in a scientific and structured way, as was the case in the
discipline of*kalaam* (scholastic theology). This, though, was taken up
by the Mu’tazilites, who developed it, using*kalaam* techniques. The
result was the espousal of “the middle way, or position”, [i.e. the
godless is neither a believer nor an unbeliever; he is half way between
the two].

Discussing the question of decree and destiny had led to a host of other
issues. Divine Justice, rational good and repugnance, justifying Divine
Actions by way of intents and purposes, and the inconceivability of
requiring man to do what is beyond his power and reach, to name but a
few.

In the second half of the second century of the Islamic era (*Hijri* ),
a man called al-Jahm bin Safwan [d.127/745] circulated new ideas
concerning the Attributes of the Divine. The historians of sects and
factions (milel and nihel) allege that Unity of the Attributes, i.e.
God’s Attributes are His very Essence, which the Mu’tazilites deem the
bedrock of Monotheism, as well as the question of the dissimilarity
between God and His creation, i.e. (tanzih) [the principle of
elimination of “form and qualities of man” from the conception of the
Divine], was first advanced by al- Jahm bin Safwan; his followers were
later known by the Jahmi’ites. In the doctrine of empowerment
(*tafweedh* ), The Mu’tazilites followed in the footsteps of the
Qadri’ites. As regards monotheism and tanzih they chose to follow the
Jahmi’ites. As for bin Safwan himself, he was a*Jabri’ite* .

Thus, and as has been reported, the Mu’tazilites, in two of their
fundamental beliefs – monotheism and justice, followed two other groups.
That is, in monotheism, they adopted what the Jahmi’ites advocate, and
in justice, they emulated the Qadri’ites. It can, therefore, be said
that the Mu’tazila school of thought represents the development of the
views of the two groups into a distinct shape.

The founder of this school of theology, i.e. who turned it into a
distinct sect, was Wasil bin Ata’ al-Ghazzal [d. 130/748], who was a
disciple of Al-

Hassan al-Basri. He deserted his teacher after he gave an opinion on the
matter of the godless (*fasiq* ) before waiting for his teacher to reply
and left to set up his own seminary. That is why his disciples and the
followers of his school are called the deserters, or separatists, i.e.
Mu’tazilites. However, others are of the opinion that the name was first
given to a group of people who chose to take a neutral position
vis-à-vis the wars of al Jamal and Siffen, [which were fought during the
rule of Imam Ali], such as Sa’ad bin Abi Waqqas, Zaid bin Thabit, and
Abdulla bin Omar. At a later date, when the question of faith or
unbelief of the*fasiq* (godless) was raised by the Kharijites, a
question which divided Muslims into two camps, a third group took a
third way, preferring to stay neutral. In other words the approach
personalities such as bin Waqqas adopted in a political matter. This
theological group espoused in an ideological issue, hence the name,
Mu’tazilite (non-aligned).

The studies of Wasil bin Ata’ were confined to the issues of God’s
Attributes,*tafweedh* (man’s freewill), the middle way [of the godless],
promise and threat, and some other opinions on the differences of the
Prophet’s Companions (Sahaaba).

After his departure, Amr bin Ubaid, his brother-in-law and leading
disciple, developed his opinions. Among other prominent teachers of this
school were Abul Huthail al-Allaf (d. 235H.) and Ibrahim an-Nidham (d.
231H.). At the hands of the last two, the science of*kalaam*
(speculative theology) took a philosophical tone. Abul Huthail studied
the books of the philosophers and wrote critical essays of them.
An-Nidham came up with new and numerous theories in physics, among which
was the “atoms of bodies”.

Among other luminaries of the Mu’tazilites was Al-Jahidh, the famous man
of letters, writer, and author of the book, “Al-Bayan wat Tabyeen” (The
Declaration and Elucidation), who lived in the third century of the
Islamic era (i.e.*Hijri* ).

The Mu’tazilites were not on good terms with the rulers of the Umayyad
dynasty. In the early days of the Abbasid dynasty, they took a neutral
position. However, al-Ma’moun [d. 256/870], the famous Abbasid Caliph
took notice of their dogma and granted them protection; this had
continued during the rule of both al-Mu’tasim and al-Wathiq, who
succeeded him in the office of Caliphate. Those three caliphs were known
to be of a Mu’tazilite persuasion.

In those days,*kalaam* issues were hotly debated, so much so that debate
travelled far and wide in the Islamic world. The question of the Word,
or Speech, of God, i.e. is it of the domain of His Actions or His
Essence? Is it created or eternal, such as Omnipotence, Life, and
Omniscience? And is the Qur’an, which is the Word of God, created and
caused or not created and eternal?

The Mu’tazilites are of the opinion that the Word of God is created and
that the Qur’an is created and caused; they went even further in
declaring those who believe in the eternity of the Qur’an as
unbelievers. Others took the opposite view. Al-Ma’moun issued an order,
punishing any person who

maintained that the Qur’an is eternal. As a result many people were
imprisoned and tortured.

The Abbasid Caliphs al-Mu’tasim and al-Wathinq continued the policy of
their predecessor al-Ma’moun, in cracking down on dissent. Ahmad bin
Hanbal [d.245/833], the founder of the Hanbalite School of Thought was
the most famous of their prisoners. The Caliph al-Mutawakkil turned his
back to the Mu’tazilites and persecuted them. During those testing
times, a lot of blood was spilled and properties ransacked. Muslims dub
that period as “tribulation”.

That onslaught by al-Mutawakkil almost decimated the Mu’tazilites. The
arena was left for*Ahlus Sunnah* (The Sunnis) and*Ahlul Hadith* (the
People of the Tradition).

Nevertheless, even during the periods of their weakness, they managed to
produce outstanding ideologists, such as Abul Qassim al-Balkhi, also
known as al-Ka’bi (d. 217 H.), Abu Ali al-Jibba’i (d. 303 H.), his son,
Abu Hashim al-Jibba’i, Judge Abdul Jabbar al-Mu’tazili (d. 415 H.), Abul
Hassan al-Khayyat, who lived at the lifetime of as-Sahib bin Abbad,
az-Zamakhshari (d. 583 H.) and Abu Ja’far al-Iskafi.


