Lesson Seven: The Shia (1)
==========================

The turn now is for the discussion of*kalaam* (scholastic theology), as
advocated by the Shia. This science, which deals with rational judgement
and logic in the field of the fundamentals of Islamic beliefs, has a
unique and excellent place with the Shia. Above all,*kalaam* , in the
view of the Shia, has, on the one hand, a strong link with their
reported tradition (*ahaadith* ). On the other hand, it meshes with
their philosophy. As we have already mentioned,*kalaam* , in the view of
the Sunnis, is a phenomenon that contravenes*hadith* and*sunnah*
(Prophetic tradition). And yet, according to the Shia,*kalaam* does not
go contrary to*hadith* and*sunnah* only, but has a special place in both
of them.

The secret of this is that the traditions of the Shia, unlike those of
the Sunnis, comprise a number of*hadiths* that deal with logic,
metaphysics, and sociology, which have undergone critical study and
examination.

In the body of Sunni*hadiths* these subjects do not feature a lot.
Should you come across issues, such as decree and destiny, God’s Will
and His Attributes, man’s soul, and life after death, imamate,
caliphate, reckoning and the book [of good and bad deeds], you will not
find a detailed study that should go with any of those issues. When it
comes to the Shia*hadiths* , you will find, as a matter of course,
discussions and elucidations backed by ample evidence. It suffices to
compare the sections, pertaining to these subjects, in the six Sunni
authentic compendia of*hadith* with the corresponding ones in
al-Kulaini’s al-Kafi.

Consequently, in the Shia reported tradition,*kalaam* has been employed
to mean intellection, i.e. rational analysis. It is for this reason too
that the Shia did not split into two opposing schools, viz.*Ahlul
Hadith* (traditionists) and*Ahlul Kalaam* (speculative theologians) as
had been the case with the Sunnis.

Just to recap, according to Sunni sources, we have already mentioned
that the first issue of controversy, over one of the fundamental beliefs
of Muslims, was the question of the unbelief (kufr) of the*fasiq*
(godless) by the Kharijites. Second in order was the question of man’s
freewill and choice, which was advanced by Ma’bad al-Juhni and Ghelan
ad-Dimashqi, contrary to what the Umayyad rulers used to advocate. In
the first half of the first century of the Islamic era, the debate
erupted about the unity of the Attributes and the Essence, championed by
al-Jahm bin Safwan. The idea of man’s freewill, as espoused by Ma’bad
and Ghelan, was taken on board by Wasil bin Ata’ and Amr bin Obaid,
co-founders of the Mu’tazilite School; they also took up the idea of the
unity of the Essence and Attributes from al-Jahm. However, the idea of
“the middle way”, regarding the unbelief or belief of the godless was
their own child. This was the beginning of the Islamic science
of*kalaam* .

Indeed, this is one interpretation for the emergence of religious
rational discussions in Islam, which was advocated by the orientalists
and professors of Islamic thought in the East and the West.

Those people [i.e. the orientalists] had deliberately however,
overlooked the role of Imam Ali (a.s.) in bringing these serious
deductive and rational studies to the fore.

It is a known fact that raising such thought-provoking issues in the
domain of Islamic thought was done by Imam Ali in his sermons, appeals,
and letters. He was the first to talk about the Essence and the
Attributes, Eternity and Transience, simplicity and complexity, unity
and multiplicity, and other profound questions, the majority of which
can be found in Nahjul Balagha (Path of Eloquence), an anthology of Imam
Ali’s words, and other authentic Shia reports. Those discussions and
studies were characterized by the spiritual, which was completely alien
to the*kalaam* techniques of the Mu’tazilites and Ash’arites that were
the product of the thought prevalent in their own day and age.

Sunni historians recognize that Shia thought has been woven of a
philosophical fibre. In other words, their intellectual and rational
approach is based on deduction. Shia thought is dissimilar to the
Hanbilite thought, which unequivocally reject the use of reason and
evidence in reaching conviction in religious beliefs. It is also not
like the Ash’arite thought, which takes its cue from reason and makes it
subservient to the apparent meanings of expressions per se. And it is
contrary to the Mu’tazilite thought, which unleashes the rational
tendency, because it is based on argumentation that lack substance and
proof.

As a result, most of the Muslim philosophers were of Shia persuasion.
The heart of Islamic philosophy had and is still being kept pumping by
the efforts of Shia scholars who have been imbued with this spirit by
their Imams, especially the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.).

Shia philosophers did not approach philosophical argumentation with the
same methodology of*kalaam* , shuttling between demonstrative wisdom
(*himkah burhaniyya* ) and a dialectic one (*hikmah jadaliyya* ).
Rather, they succeeded in reinforcing the fundamental beliefs of Islam,
inspired by the Holy Qur’an and the emanations of the great Imams of
religion. That is why if we want to compile a list of Shia scholastic
theologians, meaning those expounders of Islamic Shia beliefs, we will
include in it a group of transmitters of*hadith* and philosophers. This
is so because Shia traditions (*hadith* ) and philosophy have served the
purpose of*kalaam* in a better way than the science of speculative
theology (*kalaam* ) itself.

However, if it is meant those scholars who fell under the sway of
Mu’tazilite and Ash’arite are speculative theologians, we should confine
the list to a very small number. And yet, we do not see any reason for
this.

Putting aside the statements of the great Imams (a.s.) on beliefs, which
are contained in their sermons, reports, and supplications, the first
among Shia scholars, who wrote a book on this subject was Ali bin Ismael
bin Maythem at-Tammar. Maythem at-Tammar himself was a companion of Imam
Ali (a.s) and was a great orator and communicator. His grandson Ali bin
Ismael lived during the lifetime of Amr bin Obaid and Abul Huthail
al-Allaf, who were among the first generation of Mu’tazilite scholastic
theologians in the first half of the second century of the Islamic era
(i.e.*Hijri* ).

Among the disciples of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) [148/765], there was
a group who earned the name, “scholastic theologians –*mutakalimmeen*
)”, such as Hisham bin al-Hakam [d. 198 H/812 CE], Hisham bin Salim,

Humran bin A’yen, Abu Ja’far al-Ahwal, known as Mu’min at-Taq, and Qais
bin Masir. In his monumental compendium of*hadith* , al-Kafi, al-Kulaini
reports on a debate that took place between this group and an opposing
one, with whose results Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) was joyful.

Those scholars were instructed by Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq during the first
half of the second century of the Islamic era. This is a clear proof
that the Imams (a.s.) not only took it upon themselves to engage
in*kalaam* , but brought up in their seminaries generations of scholars
in this discipline. Hisham bin al-Hakam, for example, excelled
in*kalaam* and not*hadith* or Qur’anic commentary. Even when he was of a
tender age, Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) used to give him a special treatment
over others of his companions and students. There is agreement between
observers that he earned this special treatment due to his outstanding
scholarship in*kalaam* .

In raising the station of Hisham, the scholastic theologian, over the
scholars of*hadith* and jurisprudence, Imam as-Sadiq wanted to stress
the importance and value of doctrinal studies and give preference
to*kalaam* over the other two subjects.

It is obvious that this type of conduct by the Imams (a.s.) played a
role in spreading*kalaam* and shaping Shia rational thinking into a
distinct*kalaam* and philosophical school.

Imam ar-Ridha (a.s.), [who was heir apparent to the Abbasid Caliph
al-Ma’moun, d. 220/833], used to take part in the polemic sessions
convened by al-Ma’moun for speculative theologians of different schools
of thought. The proceedings of those debates have been recorded in the
Shia books.

As the orientalists overlooked the ideological heritage of Imam Ali
(a.s.), they did the same thing with those historical facts that show
the Imams (a.s.) sparing no effort in initiating and promulgating
rational research into doctrinal issues. And this is both puzzling and
questionable.

Al-Fadhl bin Shathan an-Nashabouri, who was a companion of the Imams
ar-Ridha, al-Jawad, and al-Hadi (a.s.), was a jurist, traditionist
(*hadith* scholar), and scholastic theologian. He wrote several books
in*kalaam* .

The majority of members of the House of Banu Nawbakht were scholastic
theologians. Among them were al-Fadhl bin Abi Sahl, who was chief
librarian of*Baitul Hikmah* (the House of Wisdom) Library during the
rule of [Abbasid Caliph Haroun] ar-Rashid and was a reputed translator,
Ishaq bin Abi Sahl, his son, Ismael, the latter’s son, Ali and his
grandson, Abu Sahl – who is known in the Shia circles as*Sheikhul
Mutakalimmeen* (the teacher, or master, of speculative theologians),
al-Hassan bin Mousa, the nephew of Ismael bin Ali, and others of this
family of scholarship.

In the third century of the Islamic era, there emerged another luminary,
i.e. Ibn Qubba ar-Razi. In the beginning of the fifth century of the
Islamic era, a reference could be made to Abu Ali [Ahmad] bin Miskawaih
al-Hakim [d. 421/1030], [who was a member of a distinguished group of
thinkers who combined political careers with philosophical activity] and
also a famous physician and author of the work, “Taharatul A’raaq –
Purity of the Dispositions”.

Shia scholastic theologians are many. Among them is Khawaja Nasiruddin
at-Tusi [597/1201 – 672/1274], a well-known philosopher and
mathematician, the author of the work, “*Tajridul I’itiqaad* –
Uncovering the Belief”. Allama (Scholar) al-Hilli, a very well-known
jurist, the author of annotations on*Tajridul I’itiqaad* .

In his book*Tajridul I’itiqaad* , at-Tusi wrote an unrivalled and strong
defence of*kalaam* , so much so that speculative theologians, who
succeeded him, be they Sunni or Shia, followed in his footsteps. To him
goes the credit of introducing significant and qualitative change into
philosophy or wisdom (*hikmah* ), in that he moved it away from
argumentation to demonstrative proof. In later stages, though, this
change was made complete, i.e. the break was irreversible between the
old methodology and the new one. In fact all have become followers of
wisdom of the proof (*hikmah* *burhaniyya* ). On the other hand,*kalaam*
(scholastic theology) lost its independence in favour of philosophy.

After at-Tusi, Shia philosophers used to discuss*kalaam* issues in a
philosophical manner and context and achieved success in this regard
more than their predecessors among scholastic theologians
(*mutakalimmeen* ). Sadrul Muta’aliheen and Allama Sabzwari, who were
not considered among*mutakalimmeen* , reached the pinnacle of eloquence
and influence in this discipline.

As a matter of fact, if we consult the pristine sources of Islam, such
as the Qur’an, Nahjul Balagha (Peak of Eloquence) and the traditions of
the Prophet and his Pure Progeny, we would find out that this approach
is closer to these sources than the first, [i.e.*kalaam* methodology].


