Introduction
============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

A vital need in human society is fraternity and cordial relation between
individuals. The basic problem of the world today is not of bread and
butter but that of empathy in individuals as well as in society. How to
maintain relations with each other is a problem which is worrying the
countries of the world as well as the individuals.

As regards peaceful co-existence, neither any remedial measure can be
adopted nor any result achieved without writing and discussion in this
field. The flames of war are engulfing different parts of the world
every day, devastating human lives and rendering families helpless and
destitute. Even minor differences between persons of one town, quarter
or a family lead to such complications. To be exact, unless human
relations based on faith and nationality are not created, this problem
will remain unsolved and the disease incurable.

Islam, which is a divine heavenly code, can solve this problem by
bringing people together through faith in God, purification of the soul
and preservation of humanity. Islam is a comprehensive code of life
which, if really followed, may lead human society to the zenith of
glory. Islam wants to acquaint people with the fact that all human
beings are the offspring of the same parents and that there is no class
distinction between one and another: black and white, colour and skin
can never be criteria of greatness of one class over the other. Likewise
difference in languages and style of speech cannot upgrade any nation.

According to Islamic law, the only criterion of individual or collective
supremacy is faith and piety, knowledge and wisdom. The Holy Qur'an
clearly says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ
أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O people, We created you from a male and a female and made you into
clans and tribes so*** ***that you may know each other. Verily the most
honoured of you in the sight of Allah is the most pious of you . . .(
49:13)***

The Holy Qur'an further elaborates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَرْفَعِ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ أُوتُوا
الْعِلْمَ دَرَجَاتٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***. . . Allah raises in rank those of you who believe and who have been
given knowledge . . . (58:11)***

The Holy Prophet (S) [^1] said: ‘There is no superiority for an Arab
over a non-Arab except by piety’. If this fact is accepted by the people
it will bury deep differences and controversies and create feelings of
fraternity in them. This system will eradicate enmity at family,
international, universal and at all levels.

The aim of this discussion is to teach Muslims the principles of Islamic
sociology which could knit and benefit them in their mutual social
dealing and maintenance of cordial relations. Majority of people who
have friends and social contacts are unaware of the basic principles of
sociology, which then forces them to a life of isolation with no way
out.

Maintaining cordial relations and balance in every walk of life is a
vital subject itself. There are persons of an unusual lovely nature who
attract people wherever they move. However we also find another group of
unnoticed simple people. Why is there such a difference? The answer is
probably that since the creation and nature of people is different,
hence personalities make persons attractive or otherwise. However, while
disagreeing with this reply, the experts plead that courtesy, virtue and
personal qualities earn popularity or disaffection for them. It is not
just a question of nature.

Such people have a sensible approach and discharge mutual obligations
diligently, in order to gain affection and love from others.

[^1]: ‘S’ after the mention of the Prophet means peace be upon him and
his holy family, to be recited whenever the Prophet is mentioned.


