4. Fulfilment Of Promise
========================

As a natural instinct, man feels committed to discharge his obligations
towards others and fulfilment of promises. It is therefore obligatory on
the followers of every school of thought to fulfil their commitments and
condemn non-fulfilment of promises and breach to trust.

Man is bound to discharge obligations in social life because reliability
makes man dependable. In other words, it is one of the noble deeds to
honour commitments in every walk of life. Any commitment between two
parties must be honoured, no matter whether the contract is small or
free of legal bindings.

The Qur'an regards fulfilment of promises as a part of belief and one of
the qualities of the believers;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي صَلَاتِهِمْ
خَاشِعُونَ وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنِ اللَّغْوِ مُعْرِضُونَ وَالَّذِينَ
هُمْ لِلزَّكَاةِ فَاعِلُونَ وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِفُرُوجِهِمْ
حَافِظُونَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ أَزْوَاجِهِمْ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ
فَإِنَّهُمْ غَيْرُ مَلُومِينَ فَمَنِ ابْتَغَىٰ وَرَاءَ ذَٰلِكَ
فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْعَادُونَ وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِأَمَانَاتِهِمْ
وَعَهْدِهِمْ رَاعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The believers are successful, those who humble themselves in their
prayers, who refrain from vain talk . . . those who faithfully observe
their trusts and their covenants. (23:1-8)***

Another Qur'anic verse says;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُوفُونَ بِعَهْدِهِمْ إِذَا عَاهَدُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***. . . ( Righteous are) those who fulfil the contracts which they have
made . . . (2:177)***

The Holy Prophet (S) on one occasion said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من عامل الناس فلم يظلمهم وحدثهم فلم يكذبهم ووعدهم فلم يُخلفهم فهو ممن
كملت مرؤته وظهرت عدالته ووجبت أخوته
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who dealt with people and did not do injustice to them; and talked
with them and did not tell lies to them; and made a covenant with them
and did not break it, such a person is a perfect gentleman; and his
probity is known (and accepted) and his brotherhood is worth
seeking[^1].

The fifth Imam, Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثلاث لم يجعل الله عز وجل لإحد فيهن رخصة: اداء الأمانة إلى البر والفاجر
والوفاء بالعهد للبر والفاجر وبر الوالدين برين كانا أو فاجرين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There are three things in which Allah has not given any option to anyone
(i.e., they are compulsory, nobody can avoid them)

(a) Returning back the trust, whether the principle be pious or
debauched;

(b) fulfilling the promise, whether it was made to a good man or evil;
and

(c) being good to the parents, whether the parents be pious or not[^2].

Fulfilment of promises creates reliability and helps organise different
facets of life. Indifference and breach of trust leads to
disorganisation and even obstruction in functions. Anyone who deviates
from the right path, breaks a promise and dishonours his commitments,
only creates hatred and enmity in the hearts of others. Breach of trust
results in disorganization of society and if allowed to continue leads
the nation to doom and destruction.

Unfortunate are the persons who not only dishonour their obligations but
adopt the habit of breach of trust and cheating as an inherent part of
life. Their actions are a violation of all the moral and ethical codes
of life and are injurious to society.

[^1]: Biharu '1-Anwar, vol. 75.

[^2]: al-Usul al-Kafi\`, vol. 2.


