Separate Family System: Its Advantages and Disadvantages
========================================================

The Separate Family System does not suffer from the disadvantages
mentioned above of Joint Family System, nor does it have its
advantages.

To remain aloof from one's own relatives is likely to kill the finest
of human instincts. This system may breed selfishness and meanness.
Those who look upon mankind as if raised on a high pedestal feel that
the whole of mankind is akin to the limbs of one body - humanity; but
the Separate Family System turns brothers into strangers, who may meet
several times a day but do not care for one another.

**5.THE WISE SYSTEM OF ISLAMIC SOCIETY**

Now, let us look at the wise system of Islam. Here we find that Islam
has laid down a straightforward highway with such skill that a man walk
ing on it may enjoy the sweet smell of both these systems, and still not
be beset by the thorny problems of either. How?

Islam removed the basic cause of lethargy by decreeing that everyone is
responsible for the expenses of his own dependants: he has no right to
put the burden of his children, for example, on the shoulders of other
relatives. Thus, the evil effects of the Joint Family System were
avoided; at the same time, everyone was emphatically enjoined to "keep
the bond of relationship intact." This prevented the tendency to
selfishness and aloofness from one's own flesh and blood.

**6. DEPENDANTS**

In principle, the dependants (whose responsibility MUST be borne in any
case) was limited:

al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.)\* said: The ways to spend (one's) wealth
are twentyfour in all . . . Thus, the five ways in which spending money
is obligatory (wajib) are the expenses of the maintenance of his
dependants, of his children, his father and mother, his wife and his
slave. These are obligatory upon him whether he be hard-up or
affluent.

But if he is affluent and well-to-do, then he has been emphatically
enjoined to spend on other relatives also. The same hadith (tradition)
goes on to say

(a.s.) is the abbreviation of -Arabic phrase \`alayhi (or ha
/himu)'s-saldm (may peace be upon him/her/them). And the five strongly
recommended expenses are: Dedication of perpetual gift, doing good to
one's relatives, doing good to other believers, recommended charity and
emancipation of slaves.

This hadith is narrated in Wasa'il ash-Shi \`ah. There are numerous
ahadith (traditions) extolling the virtues of doing good to one's
relatives, which will be mentioned in appropriate chapters.

An interesting point to ponder over is that the Hindus, in spite of
their Joint Family System (or should it be said, \`because of it?')
never felt such intense love towards their relatives as was seen in the
Arabs in spite of their Separate Family System, and that Islam upheld
that love to a reasonable extent.

One cannot help but admire how Islam has interwoven the "family
sympathy" of the Joint Family System with the "legal orderliness" of the
Separate Family System. There is no escape from admitting that such a
beautiful as well as perfect family system was never adopted before
Islam. After all, what is the use of a joint family in which two Hindus
(even if they are father and son) are not allowed by their religious
customs to eat together? And what is the harm of a separate family if
the people are encouraged to eat in one another's house and thus
strengthen the bonds of love and relationship?

**7. SECLUSION OF WOMEN**

Islamic civilization, which is based upon the principle that women
should not mingle with men, emphasizes separate domestic arrangements.
With the influence of Hindu culture, Indian Muslims gradually adopted
the Joint Family System. As a result, that very important Islamic
principle has been sacrificed and it has, in its wake, disturbed many
other important aspects of Islamic society. The following ayah (verse)
needs careful study:

And say to the believing women that they should lower their eyes and
guard their modesty;

that they should not display their beauty and ornaments except what
(must ordinarily) appear thereof; that they should draw their veils over
their bosoms and not display their beauty except to their husbands, or
their fathers, or their husbands' fathers, or their sons or their
husbands' sons or their brothers or their brothers' sons, or their
sisters' sons, or their women or those whom their right hands possess,
or those male servants who are free of physical needs, or small children
who have no sense of the hidden things of sex;

and that they should not strike their feet in order to draw attention
to their hidden ornaments. And O' ye believers! turn ye all together
towards Allah, that ye may attain bliss. (Qur'an, 24: 31)

This list does not include the husband's brothers nor his nephews. A
Muslim woman must, therefore, keep aloof from them as well as from other
strangers.

But the Joint Family System does not allow adherence to this important
rule. And once a Muslim woman shows her beauty to the brother or nephew
of her husband, she has broken out of the secure boundary of the Islamic
commandment, and once the limit is crossed, there is no saying where
this "showing off" will end, or whether it will end at all.

Another ayah in the same surah clearly shows that one should not put
the burden of his domestic arrangement even on one's parents forever,
one must be self-reliant and self-supporting. The ayah is as follows
There is no blame upon . . . yourselves that ye eat ( without asking
permission) in your own houses or the houses of your fathers, or houses
of your mothers, or the houses of your brothers, or the houses of your
sisters,

or the houses of your fathers' brothers, or the houses of your fathers'
sisters, or the houses of your mothers' brothers or the houses of your
mothers' sisters, or in houses of which the keys are in your possession,
or in the house of a friend of yours . . . (Qur'an, 24: 61)

The ayah clearly mentions separate \`houses' for fathers, mothers,
brothers, sisters, uncles and aunts, etc. It shows that there is a
difference, in the eyes of Islam, between \`your house' and the \`houses
of your fathers' and \`houses of your brothers', for example The harmony
and unity which must be created by following this law is self-evident.
Eating in one another's houses is the surest way of creating love and
friendship.

Question: There was a Separate Family System in Arabia. Was it not
because of this that the Qur'an mentioned separate \`houses' for each
relative ?

Answer: Islam had not come to follow the Arabs or anybody else. It had
come to lead the whole mankind including the Arabs. There were hundreds
of customs - good and bad - in Arabia at the advent of Islam. Islam
eradicated all evil and defective customs and rites, and allowed only
those systems to continue which were desirable from its own point of
view.

If Islam had not liked the family system of the Arabs, it could easily
have changed it. But instead, the Qur'an mentions that system without
any hint of objection, thus endorsing it. We find many examples in the
lives of the Holy Prophet and hisAhlu'l-bayt (family members) which
prove that they had adopted Separate Family System in their lives.

There was famine in Mecca in 35 Amu'l fil (the year of the Elephant).
Abu Talib had many children and his means of livelihood were limited.
The Holy Prophet felt that Abu Talib was facing difficulties. He
suggested to \`Abbas (another of his uncles), who was wealthy, to share
the burden of Abu Talib. \`Abbas went with the Holy Prophet to Abu Talib
and it was decided that \`Ali should live with the Holy Prophet, Ja'far
with \`Abbas and \`Aqil was to remain with Abu Talib.

This fact proves that the domestic arrangement of the Holy Prophet was
separate from that of Abu Talib. There is no need to remind the readers
that the relationship between Abu Talib and the Holy Prophet was more
tender and loving than is between a father and his son.

This event, while confirming the Separate Family System, clearly shows
the other aspect of Islamic family code: "Keeping the bonds of
relationship strong."

During the last Ramadan of his life, Amir al-mu'minin, \`Ali ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.) used to break his fast one day at the house of al-Imam
al-Hasan (a.s.), next day at the house of al-Imam al-Husayn (a. s.), the
third day at the house of \`Abdullah ibn Ja'far, his son-in-law.

This fact, again, shows both aspects of the Islamic code: Separate
Family arrangements and "keeping the Bonds of Relationship strong."
These two examples are sufficient to guide Muslims in their daily life.
If any Muslim ventures to deviate from this straight path, he will no
longer remain on the path of Islam.

In short, Islam has brought for mankind a Family System which combines
the good features of both family systems mentioned earlier and has
weeded out the evil aspects of both. It has the legal
straight-forwardness of the Separate Family System as well as the
harmony and sympathy of the Joint Family System.

And it is only by following this Islamic code that mankind can obtain
peace of mind in this life and everlasting happiness in the life
hereafter.


