Part Three : Marital Affairs
============================

**20. MUTUAL RIGHTS OF HUSBAND AND WIFE**

. . . They ( wives) are your garment and you are their garment . . .
(Qur'an, 2:187) While the "family" is the foundation of civilization and
society, the relationship of husband and wife and defining their mutual
rights and duties is the foundation of family-life.

This is a very difficult problem; human beings have been trying to
unravel this knotty problem since the the beginning of humanity - and
the result is a never-ending conflict of theories and a mass of
irreconcilable views and opinions; and this confusing state of affairs
seems to worsen day by day.

In various places and at various times, the mutual duties of husband
and wife have been going up and down in cycles like a merry-go-round.
Space does not allow us to give here any detail; but history has clear
evidence to show that whenever the sphere of activities of women was
enlarged the only result was unmitigated disaster and a decayed
society.

Every so-called liberty brought a reaction of horrifying suppression;
and every unchecked excess resulted in suffocating restrictions.
Maintaining a balance between extremes is the law of nature and nature
does not hesitate in severely punishing those who break its laws.

Even now there is a war of ideas, a conflict of ideals, going on in
this subject between East and West - or, more correctly, between Islam
and the non-Islamic world. The real cause of the conflict is that the
anti-Islam forces are either unwilling or unable to decide what are the
"Natural" spheres of activities for man and woman, and what are the aims
and objects of a married life.

If these two points are clearly defined, then there is no danger of
anyone going astray.

**21. NATURAL SPHERES OF ACTIVITIES OF MAN AND WOMAN**

It is clear that, so far as the safety and development of the human
race is concerned, every human being has two important functions to
perform :

(1) Pro-creation, i. e., maintaining the population of human beings so
that human race is not faced with extinction; (2) To obtain the
necessities of life by participating in the struggle of economy.

On the other hand, we see that the Creator has divided the humanity
into two distinct groups: Male and Female. And, it is clear that,
physically and biologically man is equipped far better to deal with the
hustle and bustle of the struggle to earn livelihood, while woman is
prevented from it by her many physical differences. On the other hand,
the body of a woman is geared to pro-creation and child-rearing.

it requires no great philosophical mind to realize that the nature has
endowed each group with the ability to efficiently perform only one of
the two functions: the man, by nature, is unable to bear and rear a
child; likewise, the woman is not meant to bear the back-breaking burden
of earning her livelihood or to plunge into the conflicts of society.

**22. BENEFITS OF MARRIAGE**

The above discussion brings us to the benefits of marriage and the
philosophy of the matrimonial bond.

Marriage is one of the fundamental sociological institutions. Mankind,
since its very beginning, has kept to it without any disruption. Even
the so called \`uncivilized' tribes and primitive societies treat
marriage as a sacred bond. Such an institution must be based on the
foundation of the nature itself.

Philosophy of Marriage: Islam has based its matrimonial laws on the
correlation between masculinity and femininity. Obviously this comple
mentary system in man and woman - and it is the most intricate and
inter-related one, permeating their whole beings - was not created in
vain or without purpose. The male by his nature is attracted to the
female, and vice versa.

And this system has only one goal in sight: Procreation. Islamic
marriage is based on this reality, and all its matrimonial rules revolve
around this axis. On this foundation are based the Islamic laws
concerning chastity and conjugal rights, exclusive attachment of the
wife to her husband and the rules.of divorce and \`iddah (the
waiting-period after a woman has been widowed or divorced before she can
re-marry), legitimacy and parentage, custody of children and their
upbringing, inheritance and other related matters.

In short, marriage is the only legal and honourable way of satisfying
sexual desire, and the husband and wife by their union ensure the sur
vival of mankind. Although almost all the burden in this task falls on
the woman, the initial steps cannot be taken without the participation
of the man.

This is the philosophy of marriage. And it also shows the first and
primary benefit of matrimony. The Holy Prophet said:

Marry and procreate and increase your population . . . Second Benefit
of Marriage: The second benefit is that the husband and the wife jointly
(but with division or responsibilities) perform the tasks which they are
faced with in establishing a family. And each finds his or her
fulfilment in the other. As explained earlier, woman is not fit to earn
livelihood; man is not fit to manage domestic affairs.

Marriage binds them to make up each other's deficiencies, so that the
family may prosper.

The man will spend his energies in earning a livelihood for himself and
his family. The woman will manage the domestic life with that income.
Allah has reminded us of this very point in these words And marry those
among you who are single, and the virtuous ones among your slaves, male
and female: if they be in poverty, Allah will make them rich by His
Grace; for Allah is abundantly-giving, All-knowing. ( Qur'an, 24:32)

It is for this reason that al-Imam Ja'far as- Sadiq (a.s.) said: "The
sustenance is with women and dependants." Domestic science is the
natural preserve of women, and by their efficient management they can
make the money stretch far.

Modern non-Islamic societies have laid the foundation of matrimony on
only this cooperation between husband and wife, while in Islam it is a
secondary, not the primary, benefit. Marriage, according to present day
societies, is a co-operative venture, albeit much narrower in scope than
other such institutions, like a municipality or a club.

It is for this reason that modern laws do not pay any attention to the
rules of chastity etc. This inadequate foundation - cooperation in
life - has given rise to a vast multitude of social problems and has
created chaos in domestic life, because it is not in complete harmony
with realities of creation and nature.

Man is a social animal, no doubt. Everyone cooperates with everyone
else, dividing the labour and work according to one's aptitude. But this
factor requires cooperation between any two persons; it does not
specifically call for cooperation between a man and a woman. Therefore,
it is a weak foundation on which to build the edifice of matrimony.

If marriage were only a co-operative institution, there would be no
need of any special rule for matrimony; the general rules governing
associations and co-operative societies would be enough. It would negate
the virtues of chastity and fidelity, nullify the concept of legitimacy
and affinity, and abrogate the rules of inheritance - as some "advanced"
societies have done. If we accept this ultimate result of the modern
philosophy of marriage, we will have to accept that all this complicated
and inter-related system in the bodies of man and woman was created
without any purpose.

Now to return to our original topic. The basic philosophy and secondary
benefit of marriage have already been described. It was because of those
benefits that the Holy Prophet said: "The worst of your dead is the
unmarried one." Now, we may understand the meaning of the ayah:

They (wives) are your garment and you are their garment.

The garment serves three purposes: it beautifies, it covers the parts
of the body, and it protects from cold and heat. Allah says 0' Children
of Adam! We have bestowed upon you garment to cover your shame, The
Family Life of Islam Marital Affairs and to be an adornment to you. And
the garment of righteousness, that is the best . . . ( Qur'an, 7:26)

Husband and wife, by uniting together, cover the natural shortcomings
of each other, and this union protects them from hardships and diffi
culties which one faces by living alone; the sun of happiness and
prosperity shines on the horizon of life; and both, by their joint
efforts, discharge all the duties laid upon them by human nature.

**23. ISLAMIC BOUNDARY LINE**

Uptil now we have been looking at the natural boundary line between the
responsibilities of man and woman. Now, let us see how Islam - the
Natural Religion - has safe-guarded that boundary.

It was mentioned earlier that Islam wants to educate boys in such a way
that they develop into Men of Action; and to educate girls to make them
into the Rulers of the Home.

Nature demands that all individuals should have equal rights. But it
does not mean that every individual should be entrusted with every
responsibility and every duty. A weak person is not expected to perform
the tasks done by a strong one.

If we treat both equally, it.will be harmful to both. What is then the
meaning of this equality? It means that everyone should be given his or
her right without let or hindrance, and be put in his or her rightful
place. The words of Allah point to it . . . and they (women) have rights
similar to the rights against them, accroding to what is equitable; but
men have a degree (of advantage) over them; . . . (Qur'an, 2:228)

This verse ordains equality between the rights of both groups at the
same time when it shows the differences between the both.

Men and women equally share the Divine gifts of thinking and will,
which in their turn create free choice. She should, therefore, be free
in her thinking and will, and should have freedom to choose her own
course of action. In other words, she should be free to look after her
life's affairs - personal as well as social - except where there is a
genuine reason to the contrary. Islam gave her this freedom in full
measure. She may act independently in all matters in which a man is free
to act.

She gets her share in inheritance, she is the rightful owner of
whatever she may earn, she may deal with others in all types of
dealings, like trade, partnership and gift, she may acquire knowledge
and impart it to others, she may stake a claim, defend her rights, sue
and be sued without any need of seeking permisssion of her husband.

These few examples will show how she was given an independent
personality, unfettered in her will or action by men or their
guardianship. She thus got, by the Grace of Allah, what the world had
denied her since the beginning of humanity, and which was unheard of
before the advent of Islam.

But while sharing these basic qualities with men, she differs from them
in other ways. As a result of those differences, her body is compara
tively soft and elegant; and finer sentiments, like love,
tender -heartedness and inclination towards beauty and adornment, are
more pronounced in her than in man. On the other hand, the power of cool
reasoning is more prominent in men than in women. In short, a woman
lives a sentimental life; a man in comparison does not allow sentiments
to cloud his judgement.

It was for this reason that Islam differentiated between the duties and
responsibilities of both groups. The tasks demanding cool reasoning,
like rulership and judgeship have been reserved for men; also the
fighting side of jihad (holy war against the infidels) is man's
preserve, although women may attend the jihad for nursing and treating
the wounded soldiers.

The woman has been entrusted with bringing up of children and looking
after the domestic management. Man has been given responsibility of her
maintenance, for which he is compensated by a double share in
inheritance.

Thus, Islam was the first to release woman from her bondage by giving
her freedom of will and action. All the slogans of emancipation of
women, raised in modern times, are but an echo of the clarion call of
Islam. Non-Islamic societies in this matters are just following the lead
given by Islam. But the trouble is that they are not content with
following; they want to improve upon the master-piece of Islam -
forgetting that the principle laid down by Islam is a perfectly circular
ring; nothing can be added to or substracted from it without disturbing
the whole alignment. Yet, in spite of their keen desire to emancipate
woman, these societies have not succeeded in this endeavour.

Woman is still far behind in all those fields of activities which Islam
has reserved for man. The data show that the fields of rulership,
judgeship and military services (in the meaning of fighting) are still a
"man's world".

The following hadith (tradition) may give a general outline of the
above-mentioned Islamic principle

al-Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said:

Verily, Fatimah (a.s.) had taken the responsibility of the domestic
works, like ... grinding the flour, baking the bread and sweeping the
house; and \`Ali (a.s.) had taken the responsibility of all works
outside the door of the house, like bringing the fire-wood, and
obtaining food stuff, etc. (Bihar al-anwar, Vol.10)

According to this hadith the boundary between the responsibility of man
and woman is the wall of the house. Woman is Supreme in whatever happens
within four walls and man is Supreme in all matters outside those
walls.

Islam has liberated the woman from the turmoils and troubles of outside
world; so that she may concentrate on the burdensome duties of domestic
affairs.

Now, we come to the mutual rights and duties of husband and wife.

**24. THE RIGHTS OF THE HUSBAND**

Men are the protectors and maintainers of women, because Allah has
given the one more (strength) than the other, and because they (i.e.,
men) support them ( women) from their means. . . (Qur'an, 4:34)

This ayah covers in a nut-shell all the principles of domestic life. As
mentioned earlier woman is, by nature, the weaker sex. As such she
should not be expected to struggle for a livelihood; instead man should
provide for both. If \`home' is a kingdom, then husband is the King, and
wife his Prime Minister. This ayah points to these facts. Let us look
minutely at these phrases \` Allah has given the one more than the
other.": This phrase refers to the natural strength of man in comparison
to woman.

Man and Woman: Physical Differences It has been mentioned earlier that
there are certain important anatomical and physical differences betweeen
man and woman, which equip them for different roles in procreation. To
these major differences can be added other secondary ones involving
skeletal and muscular variations.

Reference to any physiology book will show that the regulation for the
maintenance of these differences is largely a chemical one: the harmones
(the name given to the chemicals which animals and human beings produce
to regulate procreative and other functions) produce physical and
functional differences. It can also be shown scientifically that these
harmones produce distinct emotional effects and they are agents which
cause emotional changes such as those seen in women before and after
child-birth.

It should be mentioned here that it is the harmones which produce the
marked general difference between man and woman, described earlier,
which make the latter more suited to the task of rearing young children,
and the former better able to withstand the rigours of competitive
existence.

Farid Wajdi Afandi quotes an authority to the effect that the
psychology of a woman is nearer to that of a child. A child will start
crying if confronted with an unpleasant situation; and will start
jumping and merry-making when happy. Just the same is the case with
woman who, in comparison to man, is more affected by such feeling.

Allah has made woman more sensitive than man because it is more in
keeping with the role for which she has been created, i.e., Motherhood.
Pointing to this fact Kenneth Walker writes in The Physiology of Sex
(published by Penguin Books)

In order that she may succeed in the world to which she rightly
belongs, woman has been equipped with a greater sensitiveness to
effective stimulus than has a man. She sees life through her feelings,
and emotionally reaches to many a truth to which a man, working
laboriously through the medium of his reason, remains permanently blind.
The fact that in the sphere of intellectual abstraction she is at a
disadvantage is no sign of inferiority,

for it is no exaggeration to say that a man's judgement is as often
warped as it is helped by this intellect. \`A woman judge,' it has been
said, \`Would always deliver her sentences in accordance with the
dictates of her heart.'

But, as Maranon has asked, \`What better method could there be of
judging the action of others than reason tempered with feeling?' It is
therefore no deprecation of a woman to state that she is more sensitive
in her emotions and less ruled by her intellect. We are merely stating a
difference, a difference which equips her for the special part for which
she is cast.

Perhaps because of this difference in perception, and the dominance of
feeling over intellect, the Qur'an treats evidence of two women as equal
to that of one man . . . And get two witnesses from your own men; and if
there are not two men, then a man and two women such as you choose for
witness, so that if one of them errs the other can remind her . . .
(Qur'an, 2:282) Anyhow, it was because of this natural weakness of the
"Fair Sex" that man has been made responsible to provide for her
necessities. Justice and mercy demand that her back should not be broken
by putting a heavy load upon her.

"Because they (men) support them (woman) from their means " makes this
point clear. It is painful to see that the non-Islamic societies have
compelled the weaker sex to carry a double load of responsibilities on
her shoulders, disguising this "tyranny" as "emancipation of women" and
"equality of sexes."

And what does this "emancipation" mean? Woman is still required to
carry on her natural responsibilities of child-bearing and
child-rearing. Man does not, and by nature cannot, share with her the
burden of pregnancy, nursing and suckling the infant, looking after the
children and all multifarious activities connected with "motherhood."

Woman has to bear this burden alone. But, in addition to these
full-time life-consuming responsibilities, man now tells her to help him
in the struggle of earning their livelihood! Thus, the stronger sex has
"liberated" the weaker sex to share his burden without himself sharing
her burden. Poor woman, she is still overwhelmed by the powerful slogans
of "liberation" and "emancipation" without realizing that it is nothing
but a clever device of man to overload her with his own duties. The
disaster - social, domestic and economic - wreaked by the entry of woman
in earning fields are too numerous to be listed here.

**2525. A WOMAN'S PLACE IS IN THE HOME**

However, man has been made guardian of woman, because of his strong
physical and intellectual powers and because he is responsible for
maintaining her. It is for this reason that the wife is obliged to obey
her husband.

The Holy Prophet has said The most honoured women before Allah are
those who are obedient to their husbands and remain within the
boundaries of their homes. If the women remain within their natural
boundry and, by obeying the husband, fulfil the duties imposed upon them
by the Creator, they would discharge their responsibilities, and surely
would deserve to be called, "The most honoured women."

I know the exponents of the equality of sexes will oppose this
straight-forward principle. But in the domestic affairs as in all
societies an authori tative leader is a MUST. No association or
institution can function without a leader; even sports clubs need a
President and a Secretary. Is it not strange that it is only the
domestic institution, the hub of all success and prosperity, which is
considered so unimportant as not to need any authority?

It has been explained above that a man has a natural ability to become
that leader, while a woman requires a man to bring out her natural
abilities. In the words of the poet Igbal: The virtue of man shines out
without any outside help; but the virtue of woman is dependent on an
\`other' (i.e., man) to bring it out.

Anthropologists tell us that the first stage of womanhood was when the
"family" was not an established institution. Woman, in that period, was
free from all bonds, and was absolutely her own master. But, in that
very stage, she was absolutely without any honour and had no respect.

sitution began to change. Coming within the circle of family the woman
lost her freedom and was obliged to submit to many restrictions. But, at
the same moment, she acquired a high prestige and honour which was
undreamt of before.

An interesting question has been asked by an author on this very
subject. He asks that if the advance of civilization and human
perfection only means that woman attains complete freedom and is not
obliged to obey her husband, then, why is it that primitive tribes are
not acknowledged as the guardians of highest civilization in the world,
as males in those tribes are content to sit idle and it is the woman who
is "free" to do all the jobs.

The "emancipation" has compelled many a woman in western countries to
shun marriage. In words of a western social worker, these women abhor
the fundamental factor of the civilization, that is \`matrimony '. They
have completely lost the urge and feelings which are naturally found in
the women of their age-group. Now they are neither man nor woman; they
have developed into a neutral "sex"! They are not \`man' because they
differ from man anatomically, and they are not "woman" because their
activities and feelings are opposite to that of a woman.

A person cannot embark in two boats at the same time. If a woman is
devoting her time in earning her livelihood, she is depriving her
children of their natural rights of "maternal love and care". In 1971,
the Sunday News (Dar-es-Salaam) carried an article under the heading IT
IS HARD ON THE MOTHER. The following paragraphs give a fair picture of
this deep-rooted problem "Take the example of a mother working in an
office. Her first worry before she takes up her appointment is about her
children.

"She must make sure that she has hired a suitable nursemaid for the
children, which is often a dream because these are becoming unbearably
expensive. But someone warm-hearted and generous, with a lot of love to
give in mothering the children in her absence: that is the kind of maid
servant she wants.

"A mother observes that parental love for a child is actually
irreplaceable and is vital to its development. A child has to grow with
it. "But, as we have seen, who will pay for the nursemaid or the
baby-sitter? The question is difficult enough for a working married
mother." Again he writes "But their main concern is their children. As
they have to give time to their job, they have to do the same to their
children.

"For example, a woman teacher is a mother of two children. Teaching
needs many hours of devotion and some extra hours of preparation at
home. "A woman teacher who is also a mother has to be very careful in
planning her time. Home preparation interferes with the time allocated
to chatting and playing with her children, since she has been away for
the whole day.

"Some children are naughty. They have to be taken care of with tender
toughness. And yet there are teaching lessons to be prepared. She
literally has to divide herself into two persons! "The majority of
mothers enjoy cooking, so they prefer doing it for themselves even if
they have cooks. After office hours, therefore, they pass by the market
to do proper grocery, and so to make a meal of their choice - to please
sweet teeth of their husbands.

"But the reality of their office or factory jobs means that they are
doubling, not to mention that some women do not necessarily love
cooking." Above the article, the following words were printed in bold
letters: "Children are becoming a problem for the modern working mother
in Africa."

In the end the writer dutifully suggested this interesting cure "The
question we pose here is: Does a Tanzania husband help in the cooking or
any other household chore which in the old days was meant for women?

"If a man and his wife are both career people, the dictates of
socialism demand that both of them must work equally in the household.
Since this is not the case, what it means is that socialism has not
reached home ... where it should have begun in the first place."

But the question is this If the parental love is irreplaceable then how
can a nursemaid provide that love and care? If the emancipation of women
and "socialism" mean that the woman has to do double duty (motherhood
and wage-earning) and also the husband has to do double duty
(wage-earning and cooking), then is it not far better and less
back-breaking to let both of them do their own natural single duty
without interfering with the other's responsibilities? This will have
the added benefit of reducing the number of juvenile delinquents . . .
because children will grow up under kind and understanding mother's
love.

We may sum it up with the following words of Kenneth Walker "Not only
in her physical but also in her psychological make up everything in a
woman is sacrificed to the function of motherhood. In the same way a man
is psychologically, as well as physically, specially equipped for the
task of seeking out the woman and protecting her and his family.

"(A woman's) aptitude for physical and intellectual exertion in the
primitive struggle for existence is less than that of man. Occasionaly
she may possess these more masculine faculties, and by her own exertions
succeed in establishing for herself a place in the world, but this is
not her natural role. Biologically speaking,

the woman who tights her own battles has moved out of the sphere for
which nature has equipped her and trespassed into another that does not
by right belong to her. The fact that she often succeeds in making good
in the new sphere into which she has wandered does not affect this
principle. Emotionally and physically she is dedicated to the career of
maternity, and it is on the man she was meant to rely not only for her
own support, but also for that of her children."

The Urdu poet, Iqbal, has pointed to this fact in these words If
western education means the death of \`motherhood' then such an
education, in the eyes of thinkers, is DEATH.

This subject has been dealt with at some length in order that readers
may fully understand the wisdom and virtue of the restrictions put up on
women of Islam. Thanks to these regulations, Muslim women have been
enjoying their lives quite peacefully and naturally for the last
fourteen centuries. They have remained safe and immune from the
degradations to which other women were subjected upto the end of the
last century. We are sure that by following the rules of Islam they will
remain safe from present day excesses as they saved themselves from the
shortcomings of the past.

**26. HUSBAND: METAPHORICAL LORD**

It was mentioned in Part Two that the parents are the metaphorical
Lords children. There is no exception to this rule, so far as boys are
concerned. But as for girls, after marriage the parents' Lordship comes
to an end and they come under the domain of the husbands.

of the A woman once asked the Holy Prophet: "O' Messenger of Allah,
whose right is the greatest on man?" The Holy Prophet said: "His
parents." Then she asked: "And whose right is the greatest on woman?" He
said: "Her husband."

Once some people told the Holy Prophet "We saw some people bow down
before some of their people." The Holy Prophet said: "If I were to allow
any person to bow down before anyone I would have ordered the woman to
bow down before her husband."

al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: Allah sent a message to the Holy
Prophet, "Tell Fatimah (a.s.) not to disobey \`Ali (a.s.) because if he
was ever displeased (with her) I would be displeased because of his
displeasure." It was because of this that the Holy Prophet said to
Fatimah (a.s.):

O' Fatimah, if a woman worshipped Allah seventy thousand years, but
died disobeying her husband (and the husband was not pleased with her),
she would be amongst the people of Hell.

**27. OBEDIENCE BASED ON LOVE**

We must remember that a rule, based on tyranny or injustice, can never
be stable. Therefore, the foundation of the husband's authority has been
laid not on fear or awe, but on love. Allah says:

And among His signs is this that He created for you mates from among
yourselves, that ye may dwell in tranquility with them, and He has put
love and mercy between you. Verily, in that are signs for those who
reflect. (Qur'an, 30:21)

In this ayah, two words, \`love' and \`mercy', have been used for the
matrimonial love. It points to the subtle difference between the love of
woman and man. Woman, generally speaking, loves her husband more
intensely. She gives her soul and body to the husband. The word, "love"
describes this aspect.

On the other hand, husband's love to his wife is tinted with the
natural superiority - there is no "giving up his self" to the wife.
Hence the word "mercy". Anyhow, this love and obedience are the prelude
to fulfil the two important duties mentioned earlier: Management of
domestic affairs, and procreation.

**28. DOMESTIC MANAGEMENT**

First of all, it is essential that the wife should consider the
earnings of her husband (however little or great that may be) better
than the whole world. Then she should try to keep the expenses of the
household within that limit. The Holy Prophet said:

There is no woman who is happy with the sustenance which Allah has
given to her husband and does not demand from him more than his
strength, but that Allah will give her seventy thousand clothes in
Paradise. For those who contravene this ethic, the Holy Prophet said:

There is no woman who demands from her husband beyond his strength, and
is not content with his livelihood - be it little or great - and is not
satisfied with the sustenance given her by Allah, and who will be among
those whose good deeds are not accepted, but her sins not pardoned, and
with whom Allah will remain displeased except that she repents.

It is a fact that many domestic chores very much try the patience. It
is for this reason that the Law-giver of Islam has promised eternal
bless ings in reward of such drudgery. The Holy Prophet said:

If, while cooking her food, tears come out from the eyes of the woman
because of smoke, Allah will write for her the reward of those warriors
(in the way of Allah) whose eyes shed tears from the fear of Allah. If
she has got someone to help her in domestic duties, and, thus, gets some
free time, she should not waste that time; instead, that precious time
should be spent in useful activities within the boundary of her home.
"The best activity of women is spinning; because for every thread she is
forgiven one sin and awarded one good deed."

Her attention has been drawn towards good house-keeping in the
following words: "Whosoever woman, in the house of her husband,
transfers a thing from one place to another, for a good purpose, Allah
looks at her (with mercy), and whosoever Allah looks at with mercy,
would never be punished."

**29. PROCREATION**

The progress of mankind, nay, its very existence depends upon this
important function; and almost all of its responsibilities are with the
woman.

When a woman is blessed with it, she is in fact discharging her duties
towards humanity. Islam has not overlooked the ever-present travail and
pain incurred in this important function. It has promised her great
reward and unlimited blessings in recompense for this difficult task.
The woman has to pass through four stages in this connection: (1)
Conception; (2) Delivery; (3) Suckling; and (4) Good rearing of the
children. According to the Holy Prophet, she gets eternal rewards in all
these stages:-

First stage: When a woman conceives, she (during her pregnancy) is
likened to one who is (continuously) fasting, praying, and doing jihad
by one's soul and wealth in the way of Allah.

Second stage: When she delivers, she gets so much reward that it cannot
even be imagined because of its greatness! Third stage: When she feeds
her infant, she gets the reward of emancipating a slave (from the
children of Prophet Isma'il-a.s.) at every suckling.

Fourth stage: Rearing the children - It has already been described in
the rights of children. The following extracts from a hadith must be
read carefully: The Holy Prophet said to her daughter Sayyidah Fatimah
(a.s.):

O' Fatimah, it is incumbent upon woman that she should not bring before
her husband, what he does not like; should guard herself as his trust;
should be sincere to him in his presence as well as in absence; should
cut (the injury of) her tongue (from him) ; should look after him when
he needs looking after;

should fulfil his requirements and should look after his condition;
because her looking towards her husband is an act of worship; and she
should not invite anyone to his food except with his permission; and she
should remain content with the sustenance given her by Allah; and she
should not leave her husband, and if she left him, then neither her
prayer, fast nor alms will be accepted (by Allah) until her husband
forgives her.


