Part Three : Marital Affairs 30. the Rights of the Wife
=======================================================

. . . and they (women) have rights similar to the rights against them,
accroding to what is equitable, but men have a degree (of advantage)
over them, and Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise. (Qur'an, 2:228)

This ayah explodes the myth of so-called "slavery of Muslim woman"
which is the target of the attacks of many an ignorant western orien
talist. It was essential, for the purpose of domestic well-being, to
install the man with effective authority over women. "Men have a degree
(of advantage) over them" points to this fact. Apart from this, both
sides have been accorded well-balanced rights. Each "half" has been
given all the necessary rights without any reservation.

As mentioned earlier, according to reason and according to the Islamic
shari\`ah, the husband is solely responsible for the livelihood of the
wife, and in view of this responsibility he has been given an authority
which in its turn is based upon love. It appears from above that all
that a woman needs for her peace of mind, spiritual well-being, and
material comfort, can be classified under two headings: (1) Sincere
love; and (2) Fair maintenance.

If one looks at the long list of the demands of advocates of Liberation
of Women, one will find that all those rights which are in conformity
with reason are within the circle of these two rights.

Islam has emphatically ordered husbands to let their wives enjoy their
rights without any hindrance. The Holy Prophet said: Any woman who makes
her husband suffer with her tongue ... will be the first to enter Hell;
and, likewise, the man if he treats her unjustly.

**31. LOVE AND GOOD GRACE**

al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

I am sure the more a man becomes good in this thing (i.e., Faith and
Islam), the more his love to (his) women increases. The ayah: "And He
has put Love and Mercy between you" shows that matrimonial love is the
Grace of Allah; and the stronger the faith in Allah, the greater this
grace of Allah upon the couple. It is for this reason, that al-Imam
Ja'far as-Sadiq said:

In the character of the prophets is the love of women. The Holy Prophet
accordingly, said Let it be known that the best of you is the one who is
best for his women. And I am the best for my women. Likewise, he said:

Allah may have mercy on His servant who does good between himself and
his wife; because, verily, Allah has given him authority upon her and
has made him her protector. According to the Islamic shari \`ah, it is
highly emphasized that a man should enter his home with smiling face.
The home may become paradise if this rule is followed consciously,

In the section 25 it was mentioned that the "most honoured woman" is
the one who is obedient to her husband. The above-mentioned ahadith show
that the "best man" is the one who treats his wife gently and with good
grace. In other words, these ahadith fully explain the ayah.

And women have rights similar to the rights upon them. (Qur'an,
2:228)

**32. RIGHT OF MAINTENANCE**

In many ayat in the Qur'an, Allah has exhorted man to treat his wife
gently. Apart from the above-mentioned ayat , another ayah says: . . .
And live with them (women) with kindness and equity . . . (Qur'an,
4:19)

"Good treatment" according to the ahadith means that the wife should be
provided, as far as possible, the same standard of living which she had
in the house of her parents; so that she does not face material
discomfort and mental depression. But if the husband, because of his
limited resources, is unable to provide that standard, he is not to be
blamed.

. . . On the wealthy according to his means; and on the poor according
to his means . . . (Qur'an, 2:236)

al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

The dependants of a man are his prisoners. And the most beloved servant
in presence of Allah is the one who is the best in treating his
prisoners.

Likewise, al-Imam Musa al-Kazim (a. s.) said: The dependants of a man
are his prisoners. So, if Allah bestows someone with His blessings, he
should increase the expenses on his prisoners; and if he did not do so,
then that blessing is likely to perish.

According to the shari \`ah, maintenance of the wife is in exchange for
her obedience. If she does not deny the husband his conjugal rights, she
is entitled to her meaintenance. If the husband, because of his
financial difficulties, defaults in its provision, he remains indebted
to that amount; and must repay soon after getting money etc. In short,
the maintenance of - the wife is based on a "give and take" basis, and
man has to pay it anyhow. al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "Cursed
is the man who neglects his dependants."

**33. FOREBEARANCE**

As was mentioned earlier, women's feelings dominate their intellect. If
a girl is not brought up properly according to Islamic ethics, she is
apt to become hot-tempered and sharp-tongued. On the other hand, a man
is not so dominated by emotions. Therefore, Islam has enjoined man to
have patience and forebearance in the face of woman's temper. A man must
be tolerant to his wife, keeping in view her natural weakness and
remembering that she by nature is governed by emotions.

Allah says . . . And live with them (women) on a footing of kindness
and equity; and even if ye take a dislike to them it may be that ye
dislike a thing and Allah created in it a great deal of good. (Qur'an,
4:19)

There is no denying that it is a very tough assignment and sometimes
needs a lot of patience. Allah says in the Qur'an And there are men who
say: "Our Lord! give us good in this world and good in the Hereafter,
and protect us from the torment of the Fire." (Qur'an, 2: 201)

Among several explanations of this ayah, Amir al-mu'minin, \`Ali (a.
s.) said: Good in this world means a good-natured wife, good in the
Hereafter means \`huru'l- 'in', and \`torment of the Fire' means a \`bad
natured wife.' (Tafsir Safi)

To say that a bad-natured, hot-tempered wife is the torment of the Fire
presents the reality in the best possible way. But we should always keep
these ahadith (traditions) in view: Verily, Ibrahim (a.s.) complained to
Allah against the temper of (his wife) Sarah. Then, Allah sent a message
to him telling him that "Verily, the likeness of woman is likeness of a
rib; if you straightened it, it would break; and if you left it as it is
you will benefit from it."

In short, many ayat of the Qur'an and many ahadith exhort the married
couple to stengthen the bond of mutual love and effection as long as
they are linked together in matrimonial bond, even if it means
self-denial and extraordinary patience. And it is by following this
principle that human beings may enjoy the peace in this world and
happiness in the life hereafter.

**34. MISUNDERSTANDINGS AND CONFLICTS**

Islam is aware that philosophical theories alone do not pave the road
to a better life. It is the practical laws and codes which bring the
peace in a household. Ethical sermons can be of no benefit to common man
if they are not firmly based on common-sense and are not within his easy
grasp.

The ideal of Islamic marriage is one in which both parties have mutual
love and respect and each consciously honours the rights of the other.

But this world is not made of only pious and understanding people.
There are many hardhearted men and women in this world; they do not care
for the damage done to Islamic society by their misbehaviour and their
flaunting the ideals of the Islamic shari \`ah. Therefore, it was
necessary to frame some rules to correct their behaviour.

Why Conflicts?

The main cause of the conflict is the negligence of one's duties
towards the other. This negligence can be either from the husband's
side, or from the wife's side, or from both sides.

Islam has laid down clear rules for each of these situations.


