When Wife Is At Fault
=====================

If the wife neglects her duties and gives trouble to the husband, then,
three cures have been prescribed step by step. Allah says in the Qur'an
. . . And as to those women on whose part ye fear disloyalty and
ill-conduct, admonish them, and (then) refuse to share their beds,

and (lastly) beat them. Then, if they return to obedience seek not
against them means (of annoyance); for Allah is Most High Great.
(Qur'an, 4:34)

First Step: First the husband should admonish the wife and advise her
to change her behaviour. In the beginning, advice and mutual discussion
may bear good fruits, while tough measure may create an undesirable
reaction.

Second Step: If this fails, then it means that the malady has taken a
deeper root. Therefore, the husband should leave her in her bed. This
silent protest may bring the wife to her senses; and the cause of
conflict may be removed.

Third Step: But, if her arrogance has reached the furthest limit, and
she is oblivious of admonition and that subtle protest, then the \`soft'
treat ment will not be of any use. In this extremity, the husband is
allowed to beat her. If good-manners fail to awake her gentle feelings,
the alternative is \`tough' dealing.

But that \`tough' dealing also must be tempered with tenderness.
al-Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said: "Verily, it is a stroke with a
tooth stick." The shar\`ah says that the blow should not be such as to
break a bone or to leave red marks or bruises, nor is he allowed to hit
her on her face, nor in another place several times.

If these cures remove the cause of complaint, the husband should at
once start gentle and fair dealing with her. The last sentence of the
above mentioned ayah points to this aspect: "Then, if they return to
obedience, seek not against them means (of annoyance)."

If, on the other hand, the husband is at fault and neglects his duties
towards his wife, then she, at first, should try to bring a
reconcilement with him.

And if a wife fears cruelty or negligence on her husband's part, there
is no blame on them if they arrange an amicable reconcilement between
themselves; and the reconcilement is best . . . ( Qur'an, 4:128)

If this method fails, then she has a right to put the matter before
Hakim ash-Shar\`i (the Qadi or mujtahid) who has every authority to
settle the dispute according to his discretion.

If both neglect their duties towards each other, then there is a need
of some helping hands to end the conflict. Therefore, Allah has
ordained: And if ye fear a breach between the two, then appoint two
arbiters, one from his family and the other from hers; if they wish for
reconcilement and peace, Allah will cause their reconciliation , for
Allah is Omniscient Allknowing. (Qur'an, 4:35)

This arbitration may be resorted to even in the first two situations
when only one party is at fault.

**35. SEPARATION**

Some discords become very complicated and defy all solutions, and
family-life becomes extremely intolerable. In such cases, only two
alternatives remain 1. to leave the couple in the same condition, which
in the words of the Qur'an is: "The torment of the Fire;"

2. to release them from the bond of marriage, so that each can find
another suitable lifepartner. Common sense prefers the second
alternative; and Islam has adopted the same.

Christianity prefers the first alternative, i. e., to compel the couple
to remain as man and wife even if they intensely hate each other. It is
based upon the following alleged words of Christ It hath been said,
Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of
divorcement. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife,
saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and
whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery: (Mathew,
5:31 -32).

Let human nature decide whether it is only the fornication which
pollutes the matrimonial atmosphere ? Does not hot temper or flaunting
each other's rights create equally intense discord?

Is not negligence in maintenance, disloyalty, desertion, or
disobedience enough to turn the home into a Hell?

It is necessary here to emphasize in so many words the wisdom of
divorce in many cases, as allowed by Islam. Suffice it to say that now
even the followers of those religions which do not allow divorce are
resorting to parliaments to establish "divorce" in their countries'
legal systems, sometimes in face of fierce opposition from their
churches and religions.

The Hindu religion does not recognize divorce; Hindus a few years ago
made divorce a part of their legal system through the "Hindu Code
Bill".

The Anglican church is opposed to divorce; Anglicans through an Act of
Parliament (of which all the Bishops are members) have allowed them
selves to be divorced by the courts. And here is an interesting
side-light. The sovereign is the Head of the Anglican church; and as
such is supposed to uphold the theory of illegality of divorce.

And the same sovereign, in his/her capacity of Head of State, signs the
Acts of Parliament legalizing divorce.

Why could not King Edward VIII marry a divorcee, while at the same time
hundreds of thousands of his subjects were getting divorce under his own
authority? Does it mean that Christians have two sets of rules: one for
great people, another for the common folk?

The Roman Catholic church also is fanatically opposed to divorce. But
compelled by the hard facts of life they have found a method to dissolve
the marriage, without calling it "divorce". If someone has the patience
of \`Job' (Ayyub) and the money of Qarun, he can obtain, after several
years' pleading, a decree from the Vatican, declaring that the marriage
was null and void from the very beginning.

Ingenious, is not it? The only difficulty is that it can be obtained by
wealthy tycoons only. "In recent years, Pope Paul VI has streamlined the
cumbersome process . . . that could drag a case out for as long as
twenty years. But despite the Vatican's attempts to limit legal fees,
costs at the Rota remained high, sometimes running into thousand of
dollars and making annulments available mainly to the prosperous."
(Time, November 13, 1972)

And if the marriage was not a marriage from the beginning, what is the
status of the children of that marriage? Are they also illegitimate?
Italy, under pressure from the Vatican, had resisted the popular demand
of legalizing the divorce. Now, there also, an Act has been passed and
has become Law.

As soon as the act became law thousands of people applied for divorce,
most of whom had been separated from their spouses for twenty or even
thirty years.

So much suffering can be caused to humanity by such doctrines. And not
only suffering but also encouragement for frustrated people to indulge
in sins. Can a couple, separated for twenty or thirty years, remain
chaste? Surely, they will find partners to satisfy their natural urges -
unlawfully, of course.

**36. TALAQ: KHUL\`: MUBARAT**

As separation is the result of irreconcilable discord, it may be of the
same three types which were mentioned in section 34.

1. Talaq: This is usually translated as 'divorce'. When the husband is
fed up with the misbehaviour of the wife and wants to dissolve the
marriage, it is called "talaq " in Islamic terminology.

O' Prophet, when ye do divorce women, divorce them at their prescribed
periods and count (accurately). .

. (Qur'an, 65:1)

2. Khul\`: If the wife is suffering from the ill-treatment of the
husband and wants to get free from him by offering some indemnity, it is
called "khul"'.

. . . If ye do indeed fear that they would be unable to keep the limits
ordained by Allah, then there is no blame on either of them if she gives
something for her freedom . . . ( Qur'an, 2;229)

And if they disagree (and must part) Allah will provide abundance for
all from His Allreaching bounty . . . (Qur'an, 4:130) Thus all three
ways of dissolving the marriage are allowed in Islam.

But in all these cases, marriage can be dissolved by the husband's
consent only. He has the authority to perform talaq, khul\` or
mubarat.

Again, advocates of the "equality of sexes" will frown on this
provision. Therefore, it is better to mention that in Western countries
where the woman has been given the right to divorce her husband, 80% of
the applications of divorce are lodged by wives. And, many is the
husband who only comes to know that his wife had divorced him when she
is already married to another man.

As has been mentioned earlier, the outlook of woman is dominated by
emotion; and if they are given the right to dissolve the marriage, they
3. Mubarat : If both are tired of each other, and want to dissolve the
marriage, it is called "Mubarat"

are more likely to think of divorce on the slightest of pretexts.

The Qur'an reproves the \`People of Book' that they believe in certain
parts of the Book and reject other parts. It is their tendency from the
very beginning. Faced with the difficulties created by Christian
doctrine, they turned towards Islam to borrow a leaf from its shari
\`ah, and adopted the principle of divorce. But the deep-rooted
prejudice against Islam prevented them from adopting it with all its
necessary details. Divorce was adopted, but details were ignored.
Result?

In California, 2,000 marriages were performed in one year; and within
same period 641 divorces were granted. In other words there was one
divorce against every three marriages. This abundance of divorce in
Christian societies may also be a reaction to the unreasonable restraint
of Christian churches.

**37. CONDITIONS OF DIVORCE**

Islam allowed in principle dissolution of marriage in all three
situations of discord; and thus satisfied human nature. But, at the same
time, it has imposed so many conditions that divorce becomes hard to
perform. For example, the husband must be adult and sane, should give
divorce by his own free will and intention; it must be done in approved
formular, before two men of approved probity; the wife must be free from
menses etc., and the couple should not have cohabited after her last
menses.

After divorce, a period of three months " \`iddah " was prescribed; may
be the parties feel remorse on separation and are ready to restore the
marriage ties again. If so, then the divorce may be revoked and the
marriage continues.

Another benefit of this rule is to make sure that the woman is not
pregnant from her previous husband.

Divorce: The most disliked permission Together with these conditions,
it has been emphasized that the divorce is very much disliked by Allah
and His Prophet. The Holy Prophet said:

The worst of all permitted things is divorce. The Holy Prophet also
said Gabriel advised me about (gentle dealings with) the women, so much
so that I thought that she should not be divorced except because of open
unchastity.

Here the Holy Prophet is saying the same thing which is attributed to
Christ in Mathew. But see the difference in language and then compare
the results of these two sayings. Injil put unnecessary burden on human
nature, and as a result,

its followers flauted its ruling and indulged in unbridled lawlessness.
Islam allowed divorce, but showed its displeasure with it, relying on
human feelings to keep its use to the minimum. The result is that in
Islamic society divorce is a rare thing; and a Muslim's domestic life is
so secured that non-Muslims cannot imagine it.


