Part Four : Relatives
=====================

**38. RIGHTS OF OTHER RELATIVES**

. . . And fear Allah, through Whom you demand your mutual (rights), and
(reverence) the (relations of) wombs (that bore you); for surely Allah
ever watches over you. ( Qur'an, 4:1 )

The right of those relatives who are not among the "dependants" is
called "silat ar-rahim" in Islamic language. Literally it means "to join
the womb". As the relatives are joined together through birth, this term
practically means "to do good to relatives".

It is here that Islamic ethics and the principle of mutual sympathy and
love bring out the beauty of Islam. In the first section we have
explained briefly the importance and virtues of this aspect of Islamic
ethics. The finer instincts of human nature do demand that relatives
behave with mutual sympathy and cooperation, and should deal gently with
the another.

Apart from the spiritual benefits, "silat arrahim" maintains the unity
of the family; the confidence that there are people who are always ready
to extend their helping hands in time of need, creates peace of mind and
contentment of heart.

on the other hand, "qat\` ar-rahim " (severing the relationship)
creates strife and conflict and the unity of the family is shattered. It
is common knowledge that disunity in the family always brings in its
wake disgrace and misfortune, and opens the door of need and poverty.

The Qur'an and ahadith have emphasized these aspects of "silat ar-rahim
", as will be seen in the following pages.

**39. THE VIRTUES OF 'S I\`LAT AR-RAHIM' ACCORDING TO QUR'AN AND
HADITH**

We have earlier mentioned this ayah (O' Prophet), tell them that
whatever (wealth) ye spend, it is (primarily) for the parents and
relatives . . . ( Qur'an, 2:215) Another ayah says

And remember We took a covenant from the Children of Israel that
worship none but Allah, and do good to your parents and relatives . . .
( Qur'an, 2:83)

These two ayat show that doing good to the relatives is next in
importance to the obedience of parents. The ayah mentioned at the
beginning of this section creates the same impression. al-Imam \`Ali ibn
Musa ar-Rida (a.s.) has commented on that ayah in these words

Verily, Allah ordered three things joined with three things . . . and
ordered to fear Him joined by "silat ar-rahim " - thus one who did not
\`join his relationship' did not fear Allah. Another ayah says:

Verily, Allah commands justice, the doing of good and giving to kith
and kin . ( Qur'an, 16:90)

A point to ponder: Helping relatives comes under both "Justice" and
"Doing good". Still Allah mentioned it separately; it shows how i
mportant this item is in the eyes of Allah. If anyone wants to find out,
in the light of the sayings of the true leaders of Islam, the material
benefits of \`joining the relationship', the following ahadith will
guide him 1. al-Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) said:

One who desires that his life be elongated and his sustenance be
increased, should join his relationship. There are many such ahadith
from ma\`sumin\* (a.s.):

2. The Holy Prophet said:

Verily (it happens that) a man joins his relationship while only three
years have remained from his life, so Allah increases his life to
thirty-three years; and verily (it happens) that a man severs his
relationship and thrity-three years have still remained from his life,
and Allah shortens that life to only three years.

al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) has described two incidents showing the
truth of this matter; but space does not permit their description
here.

3. al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said that the Holy Prophet said The
Holy Prophet, his daughter Fatimah and the twelve Holy Imams.

Joining relationship builds homes, increases lives and increases
prosperity, even if they be infidels.

4. The Holy Prophet said:

Some people go on an evil path and commit sins, but they behave gently
with their relatives and because of this silat ar-rahim their wealth is
increased and their lives elongated. How much reward would have been
theirs if they had been good people?

5. It is because of this, that Amir al-mu'minin \`Ali (a.s.) said:

Man is not given reward of any good work sooner than that of silat
ar-rahim. 6. So far as its reward in the life Hereafter is concerned,
the Holy Prophet has said: The reward of charity is ten times; and the
reward of lending is eighteen times; and the reward of doing good to a
believer is twenty times; and the reward of doing good to a relative is
twenty-four times.

7) Prophet Musa (a.s.) asked Allah what was

the reward of silat ar-rahim. Allah told him O' Musa! I postpone his
death (increase his life) ; and make easy for him the death pangs, and
the keepers of Paradise will call him to enter it from whichever gate he
wants.

The ahadith mentioned above tell us of some rewards of silat ar-rahim
which are given in this life and other which will be given in the life
Here after. So far as this world's rewards are concerned, they are given
to anyone who practises silat arrahim, even if he is an unbeliever.
These are as follows

a) His life is elongated;
b) His sustenance is increased;
c) His home and family prosper;
d) His death pangs are eased.

But the rewards of the life Hereafter depend upon Islam and true faith.
They are a) silat ar-rahim is complementary to the fear of Allah and
piety. Piety without silat ar-rahim is a thing incomplete.

b) All the gates of Paradise will be opened for the believer who
practises silat ar-rahim. On the other hand \`severing relationship'
keeps a man away from all these benefits. It is not possible to give
here all the ahadith in praise of \`joining relationship' nor the , ones
condemning \`severing relationship'. However, a few ayat and ahadith
concerning \`severing relationship' are given below to complete the
subject.

**40. THE EVILS OF SEVERING RELATIONSHIP**

Here are three ayat: Those who break. Allah's covenant after it is
ratified, and who cut asunder what Allah has ordered to be joined, and
do mischief on earth; these cause loss to themselves. (Qur'an, 2:27)

And those who break the covenant of Allah after having plighted their
word thereto, and cut asunder those things which Allah has commanded to
be joined, and work mischief in the land, on them is the curse, and for
them is the terrible home. (Qur'an, 13:25) Then, belike ye are, if ye
hold authority,

that ye make mischief in the land and break the ties of relationship?
Such are the men whom Allah has cursed, for He has made them deaf and
blinded their sight. (Qur'an, 47:22 -23)

Now some ahadith:

1. Amir al-mu'minin \`Ali (a.s.) said in one of his sermons: "I seek
protection of Allah from the sins which hasten death." \`Abdullah ibn
Kawwa said: "O' Amir al-mu'minin, is there any sin which hastens death?"
Amir al-mu'minin said: "Yes; and it is severance of relationships.

Verily, members of a family remain united and help each other, so Allah
gives them sustenance, though they be drinkers of liquor; and, verily,
members of a family separate from each other and one of them severs
relationship from another, so Allah deprives them (of their sustenance)
though they be pious."

2. al-Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) said:

"My father told me in his wasiyyah (will): \`O' my son, do not sit with
five persons, do not talk with them, nor accompany them in a path,' "I
said: \`May I be your ransom, O' father! who are those five?' "My father
said ., \` Do not keep the company of one who transgresses Allah's
commands, because he will sell you for a morsel or even less than that.'
"I said: \`O' father, and what is less than that?' He said. \`In
expectation of a morsel which he will not get.'

"I said: \`And who is the second?' "He said: \`Do not keep the company
of a miser, because he will cut you off from his wealth when you will
need it most.' "I said: \`And who is the third?' "He said: \`Do not keep
the company of a liar, because he is like a mirage, shows you the near
thing as distant, and the distant thing as near one.'

"I said: \`And who is the fourth?' "He said: \`Do not keep the company
of a fool, because he will want to benefit you but will only harm
you.'

"I said: \`O' father, and who is the fifth?' "He said: \`Do not keep
the company of one who severs relationships, because I have found him
cursed in three places in the Book of Allah.' " (These three places,
perhaps, are the same three ayat mentioned in the beginning of this
section.)

3. Salimah (the slave-girl of al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq [a.s.] ) said: "I
was near al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) at the time of his death;
presently he became unconscious; when he came to, he said \` Give Hasan
(Aftas) ibn \`Ali ibn \`Ali ibn Husayn ibn \`Ali ibn Abi Talib seventy
dinars, and give this one so much and that one so much.' "I said: \`You
are bequeathing to a man (Aftas) who had attacked you with a knife and
wanted to kill you?' The Imam said: \`Do you not want me to be among
those whom Allah has praised for "joining the relationship" and has said
for them Those who join together what Allah has commanded to be joined,
and fear their Lord and are afraid of the terrible reckoning. (Qur'an,
13:21) '

"Then he said: \`O' Salimah, verily Allah created Paradise and made its
scent pleasant and its scent reaches upto the distance of two thousand
years; but the person who disobeys the parent or the one who severs
relationship will not smell its scent.

Divine Law in Practice:

This bequest of the Imam for his relatives is the practical
interpretation of this saying of Allah: It is prescribed for you, when
death approaches any of you, if he leaves any goods, that he make a
bequest to parents and relatives, according to reasonable usage; this is
due from the God fearing. (Qur'an, 2:180) Though this \`Law' was
abrogated after the enforcement of succession laws, the eternal call of
"this is due from the God fearing" is exhorting the believers to
remember their relatives in their will.

We can find countless people who do good to their relatives; but such
example of doing good to a blood-thirsty relative is very rare in the
history of mankind; but it is these examples that demonstrate the true
spirit of Islamic ethics.

**41. CIRCLE OF SILAT AR-RAHIM**

Which of the relatives are within the circle of silat ar-rahim? Who are
the relatives with whom silat ar-rahim is obligatory?

It is . very difficult to draw a line to divide near and distant
relatives. A person having a broad outlook may widen the circle of his
relatives as much as he likes. Distance or nearness in this context
depends upon the angle of vision. In other words, we may call it a play
of vision. Ten miles is \`far' in comparison with five miles, but is
very near in comparison with hundred miles.

The following narrative will explain this matter very clearly.

\`Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan said:

"One we were with Mu'awiyah; many Quraishites including some of Banu
Hashim, were in that group. Mu'awiyah turned towards Banu Hashim and
said: \`O' Banu Hashim, on what ground do you pride yourselves against
us? Are we not (both Banu Hashim and Banu Umayyah) from the same father
and mother? And do we not share the same house and birth-place?'

"\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas replied: \`We pride ourselves against you
because of that thing by which you (Banu Umayyah) boast against the
whole tribe of Quraysh, and by which Quraysh boast against the ansar
(helpers of Medina), and because of which the Arabs boast against all
non-Arabs. We pride ourselves against you because of Muhammad (who was
from Banu Hashim) and his relationship which you cannot deny and (it is
a fact) from which you cannot escape.'

"Mu'awiyah could only say: \`O' Ibn \`Abbas, you have been given a very
sharp tongue.' " This talk shows that if we look at the fact that the
Holy Prophet was from Banu Hashim, then even Banu Umayyah will go out of
the circle of relationship; but if we compare that relationship with the
distance of ansar of Medina, then not only Banu Umayyah but the whole
tribe of Quraysh will be counted as the relatives of the Holy Prophet.

What we want to stress is the fact that no mathematician can solve this
problem by counting the notches in the family-tree. We have to adopt the
system which the Shari'ah has prescribed for such matters; and that is
"common usage". For this purpose, relatives should be divided into four
categories

1. Those who are within the prohibited degree ( mahram) ;

2. Those who are not within the prohibited degree, but are included in
the table of inheritance;

3. Those who are neither within the prohibited degree nor are included
in the table of inheritance; but their relationship is known and one
feels that they are one's relatives;

4. Those whose relationship is not known. There is no doubt that the
first and second categories are within the circle of silat ar-rahim; and
the fourth category is surely excluded from its sphere.

But what about the third category? The following two ahadith provide
the answer:

1. al-Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said that the Holy Prophet said I saw
a relation dangling with the\`arsh (The Throne of Allah), complaining
before Allah against one who had severed it. I asked Jibra'il (Gabriel)
: "How many generations above do they meet?" Jibra'i1 said: "Seven
generations."

2. The Holy Prophet said:

When I was taken to the heavens (in mi\`raj ) I saw a relation dangling
with the \`arsh complaining of a relative. I asked it: "How many
generations are between thee and him?" It said: "We meet in the fortieth
forefather."

Obviously the complaint of a relative removed seven or forty
generations can be reasonable only when both parties had the knowledge
of mutual relationship and still one of them neglected his duties of
silat ar-rahim. In other words, the criterion of silat ar-rahim's
obligation is the knowledge of relationship, not the distance of that
relationship.

**42. WAYS OF SILAT AR-RAHIM**

What are the ways of silat ar-rahim? What are its highest and lowest
grades? "To love and sympathize with the relatives and do good to them":
this is the shortest definition of silat ar-rahim. And all the \`ways'
of sympathy and good behaviour are the ways of silat ar-rahim.

It was mentioned in the \`Rights of Parents' that some of their rights
are of \`wealth' and others of soul and body. According to Islam, the
relatives also have some rights on one's wealth and some on one's soul
and body.

The Holy Prophet said:

Whoever goes to his relatives to do silat arrahim with his self and his
wealth, Allah gives him the reward of a hundred martyrs; and on every
step he is awarded forty thousand good deeds and forgiven forty thousand
bad deeds; and his rank is elevated forty thousand grades; and he is
treated as though he worshipped Allah hundred years with patience and
full attention.

When is monetary help compulsory? It is compulsory (wajib) when the
person concerned has some wealth left after meeting the necessary
expenses of himself and his dependants, and the relative is in need of
such help.

Notwithstanding the conditions mentioned above, a Muslim MUST help his
relatives as much as possible even when monetary help is not wajib. The
Family Life of Islam The Holy Prophet said.:

Join your relationship even if it is with a drink of water. On the
other hand, the obligation of love and sympathy is unconditional. To
deal with relatives with love, to demonstrate by one's actions and
behaviour that one shares their happiness and sorrow, to visit one
another's homes regularly, to observe the Islamic ethics in mutual
relationship - these are some facets of silat ar-rahim, which one can
instinctively feel and which cannot be justifiably codified in writing.
The Holy Prophet has drawn our attention to these small things by saying
Do silat ar-rahim even if it is by salam (salutation).

And now a hadith of the Holy Prophet on this very subject: "The best
way of silat ar-rahim is not to give any trouble to the relative." For
those who understand human nature, this hadith is a mine of wisdom.


**SUMMARY**

We may summarize this part in the following sentences:-

1. Islam has made it compulsory to do good to relatives; and \`severing
of relationship' is (like disobedience of parents) a capital sin whose
culprit is not likely to be forgiven.

2. silat ar-rahim means that a person should not give any trouble to
his relatives; should deal with them with love and Islamic ethics;
should participate in their sorrow and joy; and if possible, should help
them financially. 3. silat ar-rahim covers all relatives whose
relationship is known; it makes no difference whether they are within or
outside the prohibited degrees or within or outside the table of
inheritance.

A Reminder It was shown in Part One that Islam supports the Separate
Family System with the provision of silat ar-rahim. Now it should be
mentioned that the concept of relationship in Islam is so wide that even
the Joint Family System cannot compete with it.

It proves that \`love' and \`sympathy' have found their true meaning
only in the Islamic shari\`ah. Without Islam, these words were bodies
without soul. No other system can show such open -heartedness, nor can
any \`ism' bring forward such all-encompassing well-defined
family-code.

The Holy Prophet said: "I was sent to complete (fulfil) the noble
ethics." He fulfilled his task; his holy hands completed the boundaries
of Islamic ethics. It is one more proof that he was the Last Prophet and
his religion is the Last Religion.


**Part Five : Rights Of Neighbours**

**43. RIGHTS OF NEIGHBOURS**

And be good to the neighbour who is your relative and to the neighbour
who is not a relative . . . (Qur'an, 4:36) Islam has great respect for
the mutual rights and duties of neighbours. The Holy Prophet said:
Jibra'1 always used to advise me to be generous with neighbours, till I
thought that Allah was going to include the neighbours among the heirs
of a Muslim.

The rights of neighbourhood are not meant for Muslim neighbours only.
Of course, a Muslim neighbour has one more claim upon us - that of
Islamic brotherhood; but so far as the rights of neighbourship are
concerned, all are equal.

Explaining it, the Holy Prophet said:

Neighbours are of three kinds: (1) that one who has got one right upon
you; (2) that one who has got two rights upon you; (3) that one who has
got three rights upon you. The neighbour having three rights upon you is
the one who is also a Muslim and a relative. The neighbour having two
rights is the one who is either a non-Muslim or a non-relative Muslim.

The neighbour having one right is the one who is neither a Muslim nor a
relative. Still he has got all the claims of neighbourhoodrights upon
you.

Here are some more traditions which show the Islamic love towards the
neighbours: The Holy Prophet said That man is not from me who sleeps
contentedly while his neighbour sleeps hungry. al-Imam \`Ali ibn
al-Husayn (a. s.) said

These are your duties towards your neighbour:

Protect his interests when he is absent; show him respect when he is
present; help him when he is inflicted with any injustice.

Do not remain on the look-out to detect his faults; and if, by any
chance, you happen to know any undesirable thing about him, hide it from
others; and, at the same time, try to desist him from improper habits,
if there is any chance that he will listen to you. Never leave him alone
at any calamity. Forgive him, if he has done any wrong. In short, live
with him a noble life, based on the highest Islamic ethical code.


