Introduction
============

Menstruation is a natural process which takes place in woman's body
every month. Before explaining the laws of the *shari'ah* about
menstruation, it seems ap­propriate to discuss, in short, that why does
this take place?

Allah has created the woman such that she plays the major role in the
perpetuation of the human race. The primary reproductive organs of a
woman are her ovaries. When a girl is born, her ovaries already con­tain
about 400,000 immature eggs (which are known as ova). At puberty, the
eggs start maturing, usually one ovum each month. The maturing of the
ovum takes place roughly halfway between two menstrual cycles. After
maturing, it finds its way from the ovary to the fallopian tube and ends
up in the womb.

Meanwhile the womb (while preparing for the possi­ble arrival of a
fertilized egg) develops a thick, soft, velvety lining which is made up
mostly of blood vessels.

This thick, soft lining in the womb is called endometrium.

If an egg is fertilized, it will be embedded in en­dometrium and
continues its growth. But if no egg is fer­tilized, the endometrium
(i.e. the lining of the womb) is no longer needed and is shed or
discarded. This pro­cess of discarding the endometrium is known as
menstruation.

From this biological explanation it is clear that menstruation is
neither "the curse" on woman nor a result of the so‑called original sin
of Eve. Rather it is a very normal biological process that ensures the
perpetuation of the human race.

Of course, some women feel uncomfortable a few days before and during
menstruation. This discomfort is caused by some of the biological
changes which take place in the woman's body. Allah says, *They ask you
about menstruation. (O Muhammad), tell them that menstruation is a
discomfort for the women, (it is a period when they pass through
physical and emotional tension.)* (2:222)

In this part of the book I intend, by putting my trust in Allah, to
explain the Islamic laws *(shari'ah)* regarding the women who are in
their monthly periods. First the definition of menstruation, its signs
and its duration will be discussed; then comes the different categories
of women who are in menstruation; followed by four chapters on the laws
about the women in each category; and finally the acts which are
forbidden to a woman dur­ing her periods and the manner of *ghusl* are
explained.

2. Definition Of Hayz
---------------------

There are four possible causes for discharge of blood from women:

1. Menstruation.

2. Loss of virginity.

3. Post‑natal bleeding.

4. Internal injury.

As mentioned above, menstruation is different from the blood of group 2,
3, and 4. In the Islamic legal ter­minology, menstruation is known as
*hayz.* And a woman who is having her period is known as *haiz*.[^1]

According to Islamic laws, menstruation is the pro­cess of discarding
the endometrium which normally takes place once a month in women from
the day they attain puberty until they reach the age of menopause.
(Menopause = final cessation of menstruation.)

From the *shari'ah* point of view, a girl attains puberty at the age of
nine lunar years,[^2] and she reaches menopause at the age of fifty.
Imam Ja'far as‑Sddiq (upon whom be peace) said, "The age when a woman
ceases to have menstruation is fifty years."[^3]

So, if a girl sees blood before she becomes nine years old by lunar
calendar, that blood is not considered menstruation (even if it may be
regarded menstruation from the biological point of view). In the same
way, if a woman sees blood after the age of fifty that blood will not be
considered menstruation.

If a girl who does not know whether she has become nine years old sees
blood on herself, then that blood can­not be considered menstruation
even if it has all its three signs. (See below for the three signs of
menstruation.) On the other hand, if a woman who doubts whether or not
she has reached the age of menopause sees blood, then she should
consider it as menstruation.

If a woman who has reached the age of menopause (i.e., fifty years) sees
blood on herself with the three signs of menstruation or at the fixed
time of her mon­thly periods, then what should she do? For such a woman,
it is precautionarily wajib to act on precaution up to the age of sixty.
Any blood seen after the age of sixty will be considered *istihazah.*
(See part II for *istihazah.)*

"Acting on precaution" means to refrain from those things which are
forbidden to a *ha'iz* and perform those things which are required of a
woman in *istihazah.*

According to the *shari'ah,* it is possible for a preg­nant woman and a
nursing mother to have menstruation.

**The Signs:** If a woman is not sure about the nature of her discharge,
then she should look for the follow­ing three signs of the menstrual
blood: (a) warmth; (b) dark red or black colour; (c) pressure and slight
burning in the discharge. If these three signs are found together, then
it is menstruation.

These signs have been taken from a hadith of Im­am Ja'far as‑Sddiq
(peace be upon him). A woman came to him and asked, "What should a woman
do who sees blood on herself but does not know whether it is
menstruation or some other type (of blood)?" The Im­am said, "The blood
of menstruation is warm ...black (or dark‑coloured), and it has pressure
and burning sensation..." The woman said, "By Allah! If he had been a
woman, he could not have added anything further in this
(description)!"[^4]

3. Duration Of Hayz
-------------------

The beginning of menstruation is determined when blood leaves the uterus
and enters the vagina. It is necessary for the commencement of
menstruation that the blood should be seen outside the vagina.

In another hadith, Imam as‑Sadiq said, "The minimum duration of
menstruation is three days, and the maximum is ten days.”[^5]

By "three days" we mean three days and the two nights between the first
and the third day. For exam­ple, if blood starts on Monday morning and
stops on Wednesday evening, then it is menstruation. And by "ten days"
we mean ten days and the nine nights bet­ween the first and the tenth
day.

So, if a woman sees blood for less than three days, it is not considered
*hayz.* If the blood is seen for more than ten days, the ten days will
be counted as menstrua­tion and the blood seen after that will be
regarded as *istihazah.*

The same Imam said, "The minimum duration of purity (between two
menstrual cycles) must be (at least) ten days."[^6] So if a woman sees
blood during the ten days after her period had ended, it will not be
considered *hayz.*

Although it is normal to say that menstruation takes place once "a
month", but it should be clarified that menstrual cycles take place
every 28 days ‑ so, in the present context "a month" means a period of
28 days, not 29, 30 or 31 days.

4. Different Categories Of Ha'iz
--------------------------------

According to the *shari'ah,* all the women are not same as far as the
rules of menstruation are concerned. By taking into consideration the
difference in regulari­ty of time and days of monthly periods and their
ir­regularity, women can be divided into three main groups:

**1.** ***Mubtadi'ah:*** literally, a beginner; in the present context
it means a girl who sees menstruation for the first time.

**2.** ***Zatu 'l‑'adah:*** a woman who has menstruation regularly at a
fixed time or for a fixed number of days or both. If a woman has two
consequent periods with regularity in time of their occurance and
duration, then she is a *zatu 'l‑'adah = a* woman who has formed a
fix­ed pattern for her monthly periods.

On the other hand, if a *zatu 'l‑'adah* woman discovers that her fixed
pattern for menstruation has changed and this happens for two consequent
months, then she should follow the new pattern.

The *zatu 'l‑'adah* women can be of three types:

(a) a woman whose periods occur at a fixed time and for a fixed number
of days. For example, on 1st of every month and lasts for 7 days
con­tinuously or with a pause on the fourth day.

(b) a woman whose periods occur at a fixed time but not for a fixed
number of days. For exam­ple, on 1st of every month but sometimes for 4
days and at other times for 5 days.

(c) a woman whose periods occur for a fixed number of days but not at a
fixed time. For ex­ample, she has her periods for 4 days but not at a
fixed time, sometimes on 1st and sometimes on 4th of every month.

***3. Muztaribah:*** a woman who does not have her periods with
regularity. For example, a woman has her one period on the 1st of the
month for five days and her second on the 5th of the month for three
days and her third period on the 10th of the month for four days.
*Muztaribah* here means a woman who has an irregular pattern for her
monthly periods.

5. A Girl Entering Puberty
--------------------------

The girl who reaches the age of puberty and sees her menstruation for
the first time is known as *mub­tadi'ah = the* beginner.

If a *mubtadi'ah* sees blood with the three signs for more than three
and less than ten days, then it is menstruation.

But if a *mubtadi'ah* sees blood for more than ten days, then there are
a few possibilites:

1. The blood was with the three signs for some days and without them for
some other days, then the former is menstruation and the latter *is*
*istihazah.*

2. The blood had the three signs during the entire flow but with a
difference in intensity of colour, that is, some days it had black
colour and some other days it had red or dark red colour. In this case
the flow with black colour will be considered menstruation and the other
will be considered *istihazah.*

3. If the entire flow was without the three signs or the flow with the
three signs was less than three days, then the entire flow will be
considered *istihazah.*

4. If the blood had the three signs during the entire flow, then the
*mubtadi'ah* has to follow the number­pattern of the women in her
family, e.g., her mother, sister, etc. That is, if her mother's monthly
period comes for six days, then she should consider the six days as
menstruation and the remaining days as *istihazah.*

But if the women in a beginner's family differ in the number‑pattern of
their monthly periods, then during the first month she should observe
six or seven days as menstruation and act on precaution up to the tenth
day. In the subsequent months she should observe the first three days as
menstruation and act on precaution up to sixth or seventh day. This
alternate pattern should be continued until she forms a fixed pattern of
her own.

If a girl loses her virginity and blood is discharged so much that she
is uncertain whether the blood is from the loss of virginity or
menstruation or both, then she should examine herself "by inserting a
piece of cotton inside her vagina and leave it there for a while. Then
she should take it out gently ‑ if the blood has just stain­ed the
outside of the cotton, then it is from the loss of virginity; but if the
blood has penetrated into the cot­ton, then it is menstruation."[^7]

If she is unable to examine herself, then she should consider herself
whatever she was before losing virginity ‑ either she was pure from
menstruation or not.

6. General Rules About Zatu 'L‑\`Adah Women
-------------------------------------------

The *zatu 'I‑'adah* women in groups (a) and (b) have to observe the
rules of menstruation as soon as they see the blood. It makes no
difference whether it starts on the fixed day, or one or two days before
it or after it, even if it does not have all the three signs of
menstrual flow. Of course, if she discovers that it was not menstruation
(for example, the blood stopped on the second day), then she will have
to perform her *salat* (which she had missed during the two days) as
*qaza.*

The *zatu 'l-adah* women in group (c) have to observe the rules of
menstruation if the blood has all the three signs of menstrual flow
mentioned above. If the discharge does not have all the three signs,
then it will not be regarded as menstruation.

When a *zatu 'l‑'adah* woman sees blood many days before or after the
fixed time then if it has the three signs altogether, it is
menstruation; otherwise it will be regard­ed as *istihazah.*

with 3 signs = hayz.  
 without 3 signs = *istihazah*.

with 3 signs = hayz.  
 without 3 signs = *istihazah*.

But as mentioned above, if a *zatu 'I‑'adah* woman sees blood during the
fixed time, it is *hayz* even if it does not have the three signs.

with or without 3 signs = hayz.

If a *zatu 'I‑'adah* woman sees blood for three days and then it stops
for some days and again it comes for three more days ‑ then both flows
of blood and the pause between them will be considered *hayz* only if
(a) the total days of two flows and the pause between them is not more
than ten, and (b) all these days are in the fixed time and fixed number
of days of the woman's menses.

if total of 2 flows & the pause is ten or less + all these days are in  
 the fixed time = hayz.

In the following three cases also, the two flows of blood and the pause
between them will be counted as hayz:

i. If one of the flows started a day or two before the fixed time.

both flows and the pause = hayz.

ii. If both flows started outside the fixed time but both had the three
signs of menstrual flow.

with 3 signs ‑ hayz.  
 without 3 signs = *istihazah*.

iii. If one flow (which started outside the fixed time) had the three
signs while the other flow started in the fixed time.

with 3 signs = hayz.  
 without 3 signs = *istihazah*.

But if one flow or both did not have the three signs of menstruation and
none of them occured in the fixed time, then the flow with the three
signs is menstrua­tion and without them is *istihazah.*

If the total days of both flows is more than ten and the pause between
them is less than ten days, then the following procedure is to be
followed:

i. If one of the flows was in the fixed time without the other, the one
within the fixed time will be considered *hayz* and the other one
*istihazah.*

ii. In the case where none of the flows occurred in the fixed time, then

(a) if one had the three signs but not the other ‑ the one with the
signs will be *hayz* and the other *istihazah.*

(b) if both flows had the three signs, then the first will be considered
*hayz* and the other will be considered *istihazah.*

If the pause between the two flows of blood was ten days or more, then
in the following two cases they will be considered two separate
menstruations:

i. if both flows had the three signs:

with 3 signs = two separate hayz.  
 without 3 signs = two separate *istihazah*.

ii. if one was in the fixed time, while the other had the three signs.

If these blood flows occured outside the fixed time and without the
three signs, then both will be counted as *istihazah.*

If the blood stops before ten days and the woman is uncertain whether or
not it has stopped completely, then she should examine herself by
inserting a piece of cotton inside her vagina and leave it there for a
while. Then she should take it out gently ‑ if the cotton comes out dry,
she should consider herself pure and perform *ghuslu 'I‑hayz (unless*
the pause during menstrual flow is normal in her case).

While examining oneself, it is better "to stand upright leaning on a
wall, etc, and lift up one leg and then insert the cotton into the
vagina."[^8]

If such a woman (who is uncertain whether or not her period has stopped
completely) does not examine herself and performs *ghuslu 'I‑hayz,* then
her *ghusl is* valid only if the menstrual flow does not start again.

And if she is unable to examine herself, then she should consider
herself *ha'iz* until she is sure of her purity.

But if the cotton comes out stained with blood, the rules differ
slightly for the different categories of *ha'iz:*

If a *mubtadi'ah,* a *muztaribah* and a *zatu 'l-adah* who has her
periods for 10 days examine themselves and find that the cotton is
stained, then they should consider themselves as *ha’iz* up to ten days
or until the blood stops.

If a woman who has her periods regularly for less than ten days examines
herself during her fixed numbers of days and finds the cotton stained,
then she should consider herself *ha'iz.* If the same woman examines
herself outside her fixed numbers of days and finds the cotton stained,
she should consider herself as *ha'iz* for up to ten days or until she
finds herself pure.

If a *zatu 'l‑'adah* woman of group (c) sees blood for more than ten
days, then she should consider her fix­ed number of days as menstruation
(even if it is without the three signs); and the remaining days should
be con­sidered as *istihazah* (even if it is with the three signs).

But if both flows can be counted as one *hayz,* then she should do so.
For example, she saw her first flow according to her pattern for three
days, then blood stop­ped for four days and started again (with the
three signs) for three days (making a total of ten days) and then
con­tinued (without the three signs) afterwards ‑ then she would count
the first flow + intervening pause + se­cond flow of three days (with
the signs) as *hayz* and the remaining period as *istihazah.*

first flow + pause + second flow with 3 signs = 1 hayz.  
 later part of 2nd flow without 3 signs = *istihazah*.

7. The Forgetful Zatu 'L‑'Adah Women
------------------------------------

**1.** If a woman who has her periods on fixed number of days but not on
fixed time (group c) forgets the dura­tion of her menses, then she has
to act as follows:

She has the menstrual flow for three or more days, then all those days
will be considered as *hayz* if they are not more than ten.

But if they are more than ten, then the number of days which she
considers as the probable duration of her menses should be counted as
*hayz* and the remain­ing days will be counted as *istihazah.* And if
the "pro­bable duration of her menses" is more than seven days, then she
should act on precaution from the last probable day up to the tenth day.

2. A woman who has a fixed time for the occurance of her periods (group
b) forgets that fixed time:

If she has the menstrual flow for three or more days, then all those
days will be considered as *hayz* if they are not more than ten.

In the case the days are more than ten, and if she knows on the whole
that the bleeding has coincided with her fixed time ‑ then she should
act on precaution for the whole period of the flow even if the blood
does not have the three signs of menses.

But if she does not know even generally that the bleeding has coincided
with her fixed time, then there are two possibilities:

i. The blood flow had the three signs for some days and did not have the
three signs for some other days ‑ then the days with the three signs
will be considered as *hayz* if they are not more than ten, and the
other days will be considered as *istihazah.*

ii. The blood had the three signs during the entire flow or for more
than ten days, then six or seven days should be considered as *hayz* and
the remaining as *istihazah.* In this case it is precautionarily better
for her to act on precau­tion up to the tenth day.

3. A woman who has a fixed time for the occurance of her periods and a
fixed number of days for its dura­tion (group a) forgets her fixed time
or fixed number of days or both, then there are a few possibilities:

(a) She forgot the fixed time but remembers the fix­ed number of days:
If she has the menstrual flow for three or more days, then all those
days will be con­sidered *hayz* if they are not more than ten.

In case the bleeding continues for more than ten, and she knows on the
whole that the bleeding has coincided with the fixed time ‑ then she
should act on precaution for the whole period of the flow even if the
blood does not have the three signs of menses.

But if she does not know even generally that the bleeding has coincided
with the fixed time, then she should consider the fixed number of days
(which she remembers) as menstruation and the remaining days as
*istihazah.*

(b) She forgot her fixed number of days but remembers the fixed time of
occurance: The blood she sees at the fixed time ‑with or without the
three signs­will be considered menstruation if it is not for more than
ten days. If it comes for more than ten days, then she should consider
the probable number of days from the fixed time as menstruation and the
remaining days as *istihazah.* And in this case if the probable number
of days is more than seven, then she should act on precaution up to the
tenth day.

(c) She forgot both the fixed time and the fixed number of days of her
monthly periods:

i. if the blood has three signs and it came for not less than three and
not more than ten days, then all of it will be regarded as *hayz.* If it
ex­ceeds ten days, then the days she considers as the probable days of
her monthly period will be considered as *hayz* and the remaining days
as *istihazah.* Again in this case if the probable period is more than
seven, then it is better for her to act on precaution up to the tenth
day.

ii. if the blood is with the three signs for some days but without them
for some other days ‑the former will be menstruation and the latter
*istihazah.* Of course, if both these flows are not more than ten days,
then it is better for her to act on precaution on the days when the
blood is without the three signs.

iii. If the blood comes for ten days or more than ten days and the woman
knows on the whole that the bleeding has coincided with her fixed time
and number of days, then she should act on precaution for the entire
period ‑ even if the blood did not have the three signs.

8. The Muztaribah
-----------------

If a *muztaribah* sees blood with the three signs for more than three
and less than ten days, then it is menstruation.

But if a *muztaribah* sees blood for more than ten days, then there are
a few possibilites:

1. The blood had the three signs during the entire flow, then she should
consider six or seven days as menstruation and the remaining days as
*istihazah.*

2. The blood had the three signs during the entire flow but with a
difference in intensity of colour, that is, some days it had black
colour and some other days it had dark red colour. In this case the flow
with black col­our will be considered menstruation and the other will be
considered *istihazah* *‑ if* such dark colour was not less than three
and not more than ten days.

3. The blood was with the three signs for some days (but not less than
three and not more than ten days) and without the signs for some other
days, then the flow with the three signs is menstruation and without
them *is* *istihazah.*

4. If the entire flow was without the three signs or the flow with the
three signs was less than three days, then the entire flow will be
considered *istihazah.*

9. The Things Forbidden To The Ha'iz
------------------------------------

I have already mentioned that menstruation is neither a "curse on the
women" nor is it related to the so‑called original sin of Eve.

Menstruation is the flow of blood; and blood, ac­cording to the
*shari'ah, is* a *najis* (unclean) substance and so menstruation is also
considered *najis.* But the impurity of menstruation in no way prevents
a woman from liv­ing a normal life with her family and friends.

A person asked Imam ja'far as‑Sadiq (peace be upon him) about a woman
who gives water to a man while she is in her monthly period. The Imam
said, "One of the wives of the Prophet (upon whom be peace) was pouring
water on him and serving him drink while she was in her monthly period."
In another tradition, Im­am Muhammad al‑Baqir (peace be upon him)
narrates that the Prophet (upon whom be peace) said to one of his wives,
"Serve me a drink." She said, "I am in my monthly period." The Prophet
said, "Is your menstrua­tion in your hand?!"[^9] These two narrations
are suffi­cient to show that the impurity of menstruation does not
prevent a woman from living a normal life with her family and friends.

\*\*\*

On the other hand, there are certain acts of worship, etc., in Islam
which are so sacred that a Muslim, whether man or woman, cannot perform
them unless he or she has certain qualifications. It is only in relation
to these acts that the women who are in menstruation, just as the
*junub* men, are forbidden from performing them. Those acts are as
follows:

1. Touching the writings of the Qur'an, the names and attributes of
Allah, the names of the Prophet, the Imams and Fatimah (the daughter of
the Prophet). It is better not to touch names of other prophets too.

2. Reciting those verses of the Qur'an in which *sa­jdah* (prostration)
*is wajib,* i.e., verse 15 of chapter 32; verse 37 of chapter 41; verse
62 of chapter 53; and verse 19 of chapter 96. It is better not to recite
even a single verse from these chapters.

3. Staying or even entering in a mosque. One can pass through the
mosques[^10] (by entering from one door and leaving from the other)
except the Masjidu l‑Haram (the Sacred Mosque at Mecca), Masjidu 'n‑Nabi
(the Mosque of the Prophet at Medina), and the shrines of the Imams ‑ a
*ha'iz* woman cannot even pass through these places.

As she is not allowed to enter any mosque, naturally she cannot do
circumambulation *(tawaf)* of Ka'bah, nor can she observe
*i'tikaf.*[^11]

4. Putting something in a mosque ‑ even if she is standing outside. But
she may take out something from it ‑ provided she does not enter it.

5. A woman who is in her periods is excused from *salat* (prayers)
because she does not have an important qualification for *salat,* i.e.,
*taharat* (cleanliness). She does not even have to perform them later on
as *qaza.* Imam 'Ali Raza (peace be upon him) said, "When a woman has
her monthly period, she does not ...pray because she is in the state of
impurity (of blood), and Allah likes to be worshipped only by a pure
(tahir) person..."[^12]

6. Likewise a *ha'iz* woman is excused from fasting; but in this case,
she has to fast after the month of Ramadhdn as *qaza.* In his answer to
Abu Basir's ques­tion, Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq said, "Fasting is just for a
month in a year while salat is every day and night. That is why Allah
ordered that the fasts (missed by a *ha'iz* in Ramadan) be repaid as
*qaza*, while He did not order to perform *qaza* of the salats (missed
during *hayz). "* [^13]

It is *mustahab* for a *ha’iz* to change her sanitary napkin at the time
of every prayer, to do wudu', to sit on her *musalla* facing the
*qiblah* and to recite du'as; it is better to recite *tasbihat arba'ah.
(Tasbihat arba'ah* are as follows: *subhan Allahi; wa 'I‑hamdu li
'I‑lahi; wa la ilaha illa 'lahu; wa 'la‑lahu akbar.)*

It *is makruh* for a *ha’iz* to recite, to keep, to carry or to touch
the border of the pages of the Qur'an, or the blank space between the
lines.

At the end of this chapter I would like to present the following verses
from the Bible so that the reader may appreciate the laws of the
*shari'ah.* The Bible, in the Book of Leviticus, says,  
 "When a woman has a discharge, her discharge be­ing blood from her
body, she shall remain in her im­purity for seven days; whoever touches
her shall be unclean until evening. Anything that she lies on dur­ing
her impurity shall be unclean; and anything that she sits on shall be
unclean. Anyone who touches her bed­ding shall wash his clothes, bathe
in water, and remain unclean until evening; and anyone who touches any
ob­ject on which she has sat shall wash his clothes, bathe in water, and
remain unclean until evening. Be it the bedding or be it the object on
which she has sat, on touching it he shall be unclean until evening. And
if a man lies with her, her impurity is communicated to him; he shall be
unclean seven days, and any bedding on which he lies shall become
unclean.

"When she becomes clean of her discharge, she shall count off seven
days, and after that she shall be clean. On the eighth day she shall
take two turtledoves or two pigeons, and bring them to the priest at the
en­trance of the Tent of Meeting. The priest shall offer the one as a
sin offering and the other as a burnt offering; and the priest shall
make expiation on her behalf, for her unclean discharge, before the
Lord." (Lev. 15:19‑30)

Now surely you will appreciate the words of Allah which say, *Allah does
not desire to make any impediment for you; He only desires to purify
you, and that He may com­plete His blessings upon you; haply you will be
thankful (to Him).* (Qur'an 5:6)

10. Sex During Menstruation
---------------------------

By considering the discomfort of the women dur­ing the monthly periods,
Islam has forbidden both the husband and the wife from sexual
intercourse during the menstruation.

The Qur'an says, *They ask you about menstruation. (O Muhammad) tell
(them that) menstruation is a discomfort (for the women, it is a period
when they pass through physical and emotional tension. Therefore,) do
not establish sexual rela­tions with them during the menses, and (again
you are remind­ed that) do not approach them (sexually) until the blood
stops. Then when they have cleansed themselves, you (are permit­ted to)
go into them as Allah has commanded you (by placing sexual urge in your
nature).* (2:222)

Of course, playing with the other parts of her body (other than the
vagina and anus) is allowed. Again, it is precautionarily better not to
play with her body bet­ween the navel and knees.  
 If a man who is engaged in sexual intercourse with his wife discovers
that her period has began, then he should immediately withdraw himself
from her.

It is clear from the verse mentioned above *(until the blood stops)*
that once the blood has stopped, intercourse becomes lawful even if the
woman has not performed *ghuslu 'l‑hayz.* But on the basis of the
subsequent sentence *(then when they have cleansed themselves...),* most
of the *fuqaha'* (Islamic jurists) have ruled that it is
precau­tionarily better to refrain from intercourse until she per­forms
*ghusl* or, at least, washes her private parts.

'Ali bin Yaqtin asked Imam Musa al‑Kazim (peace be upon him) about a man
having intercourse with his wife whose period has stopped but she has
still not performed the *ghusl.* The Imam said, "There is no harm in it;
but (intercourse) after the *ghusl* is more preferable to me.\`[^14]

11. The Salat Before & After The Menses
---------------------------------------

Whenever a *mubtadi'ah,* a *muztaribah* or a forgetful *zatu 'l‑'adah*
woman sees blood, she should stop her *salat* ‑ of course, if she
discovers later on that it was not *hayz* (e.g., the blood stopped on
the second day), then she should perform *qaza* of the *salat* which she
had missed.

If the time for a particular *salat* has already begun and a woman fears
that by delaying the *salat* her period may start, then it *is wajib* on
her to perform that *salat* immediately.

If the time for a particular *salat* has already begun and the woman did
not pray until her period started, then she has to perform that *salat*
as *qaza* after the menstruation stops and she becomes clean.

If a woman's period starts while she is engaged in *salat,* her prayer
will be invalid.

If a woman who is engaged in *salat* doubts whether or not her period
has started, her doubt will have no effect on the *salat* unless she
discovers later on that her period had actually begun.

If a woman becomes pure from menstruation and has enough time to perform
*ghuslu 'I‑hayz* and pray, at least, one *rak'at* in time ‑ then it *is
wajib* on her to do so. In case she does not pray, then it will be
*wdjib* on her to perform its *qaza*.

For example, the time of *'asr* prayer was ending at 5:00 p.m. and a
woman became pure from her period at 4:00 p.m. In this case, she has
enough time to per­form *ghuslu 'l‑hayz* and pray *salat* of *'asr.* If
she does not do so, then it will be wajib for her to perform *salat* of
*\`asr* as *qaza*.

If a woman becomes pure from menstruation while she does not have enough
time to perform *ghusl* and pray at least one *rak'at* in time ‑ then it
is precautionarily obligatory for her to perform *tayammum* instead of
*ghusl,* and pray. But in this case if she does not do so, then it is
not wajib for her to perform that *salat* as *qaza*.

12. Ghusl U'l‑Hayz
------------------

When a woman becomes pure from menstruation, it is wdjib for her to
perform *ghusl.* Apart from sexual intercourse, all the acts forbidden
to her will remain so until she performs *ghusl u'I‑hayz.*

The manner of performing *ghuslu 'l‑hayz is* same as the method
explained in *Wudu' & Ghusl.* For conve­nience of the reader, the manner
of performing *ghusl* is also given here.

There are two methods of performing *ghusl: Ghusl tartibi* and *ghusl
irtimasi.*

**1.** *Ghusl Tartibi:* After removing the *najasat* from the body and
after *niyyat,* the body has to be washed in three stages: First, the
head and the neck; then the right side of the body from the shoulders to
the foot; and lastly, the left side of the body.

**2.** *Ghusl Irtimasi:* In this type of *ghusl,* after *niyyat,* the
whole body should be completely immersed in water at once, not
gradually. One has to make sure that all the parts of his body,
including the skin under the hair, has been washed.

However, *ghusl tartibi is* preferred to *ghusl irtimasi.*

For other details about the manner of performing *ghusl,* see pp*.*
16‑20 of *Wudu' & Ghusl.*

[^1]: To make the pronounciation easier for the readers, I have departed
from the standard transliteration method of writing as d; instead I have
used z. For example, instead of haid and hayd, I have written ha'iz and
hayz respectively.

[^2]: Nine years according to the Islamic (lunar) calendar would be
eight years and nine months according to the Gregorian (solar) calendar.

[^3]: al‑'Amili, Shaykh Muhammad bin Hasan al‑Hurr, Wasa'ilu 'sh‑Shi'ah,
(kitabu 't‑Taharah), (ed. 'Abdu 'r‑Ralum ash‑ShirdA) vol. 2, Tehran 1401
AH, p. 580.

[^4]: Ibid, p. 537.

[^5]: Ibid, p. 551.

[^6]: Ibid, p. 554.

[^7]: As explained by Imam Musa al‑Kazim (peace be upon him) to Khalaf
bin Hammad al‑Kufi. See al‑'Amili, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 535.

[^8]: As explained by imam as‑Sadiq. See al‑'Amili, op. cit., vol. 2, p.
562.

[^9]: al‑'Amili, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 595.

[^10]: It is necessary to clarify that mosque, i.e., masjid, is
different from the religious centres built by the Shi'ahs in the memory
of Imam Husayn (peace be upon him) which are usually known as
Husayniyyah, Imambargah or Imambara.

[^11]: I'tikaf means to fast and stay in a mosque for at least three
days with the intention of worshipping Allah.

[^12]: Ibid, p. 586.

[^13]: Ibid, p. 591.

[^14]: Ibid, p. 573.


