Istihazah - The Irregular Bleeding
==================================

1. Definition Of Istihazah
--------------------------

You have come across the word *istihazah* many times in the first part
of this book. In this part we shall ex­clusively discuss about
*istihazah.*

*Istahadah* is usually translated as "irregular menstruation". But this
translation is incorrect, because it may create a confusion with
*muztaribah = "a* woman whose menstrual pattern is irregular"; and also
because *istihazah* *is* not menstruation at all. In Islamic terminology
*istihazah* means any blood discharged from women which is not from
menstruation, loss of virginity, post­natal bleeding or internal injury.
The woman who has *istihazah* *is* known as *mustahazah.*

The signs: *Istihazah* usually has the following four signs:

1. it is cool,

2. yellow in colour,

3. thin in substance, and

4. it is discharged without pressure or burning sensation.

All these signs are opposite the signs of menstruation.

Although these are the signs which usually appear in *istihazah,*
sometimes it is quite possible for it to ap­pear without some or all of
them.

Unlike *hayz,* there is no minimum or maximum limit for the discharge of
*istihazah.* Neither is there any specific time in a woman's life‑time
during which it appears ‑it can come before a girl becomes nine years
old and after a woman has entered the age of menopause. Nor is there a
minimum duration between the occurance of two *istihazah.*

2. Three Types Of Istihazah
---------------------------

By considering the amount of blood in *istihazah,* it is divided into
three categories: *Qalilah, Mutawassitah* and *Kathirah.*

**1.** ***Qalilah*** ***= Slight Bleeding**:* The discharge which stains
the cotton but does not penetrate into it.

***2.*** ***Mutawassitah = Medium Bleeding:*** The discharge which
penetrates into the cotton but does not flow out from it.

***3.*** ***Kathirah = Profuse Bleeding:*** The discharge which
penetrates into the cotton and flows out from it.

In *istihazah* it is possible for the discharge to change from one level
to another; for example, in the beginn­ing it was *qalfiah* and then it
became *kathirah,* or vice verse.

It is obvious that if a *mustahazah* woman wants to follow the rules of
*istihazah,* she must examine herself to determine whether she *is
qallah, mutawassitah* or *kathirah.*

3. The Prayers Of The Mustahazah
--------------------------------

*Istihazah* is a *najasat* (impurity) which is different from *hayz.*
The woman in *istihazah* *is* not exempted from prayers. She has to
pray, but the validity of her prayers depends on fulfilling the acts
which are required of her.

In this chapter we shall explain the rules which a *mustahazah* has to
observe daily for her salats.

***The*** ***Qalilah:***

A woman with *istihazah* *qalilah* has to change the sanitary napkin or
towel and perform wudu' for each and every salat whether it is wajib or
mustahab.

In this and the subsequent cases, if the sanitary napkin has not become
najis, then it is not necessary to change it.

***The Mutawassitah:***

A woman with *istihazah* *mutawassitah* has to change the sanitary
napkin, perform wudu' for every salat and perform in addition a ghusl
before the dawn prayer.

If the medium bleeding of *istihazah* starts after the dawn prayer, then
on that day it is wajib on the *mustahazah* to perform a ghusl before
the noon prayer. And if it starts after the noon and afternoon prayers,
then it is wajib on her to do the ghusl before the even­ing prayer.

If the medium bleeding of *istihazah* starts after noon prayer (and
before afternoon prayer) or after evening prayer (and before night
prayer), then it is wajib on her to perform the ghusl before afternoon
or night prayer.

In the same way, if a woman sees *istihazah* *mutawassitah* before the
dawn prayer and does not per­form ghusl, then she has to do ghusl before
noon prayer and repeat her dawn prayer after the ghusl.

***The Kathirah:***

A *kathirah* has to change the sanitary napkin before every salat and
perform three ghusls ‑ the first before dawn prayer, second before noon
and afternoon prayers, and the third before evening and night prayers.
It is not wajib for a woman with *istihazah* *kathirah* to per­form
wudu' for every salat as the ghusl is sufficient.

If a woman sees *istihazah* *kathirah* after the dawn prayer, then on
that day she has to do two ghusls ‑one before noon prayer and the other
before evening prayer.

If she sees *istihazah* *kathirah* after afternoon prayer, then on that
day she will have to do one ghusl only before the evening prayer.

If she sees *istihazah* *kathtrah* between noon and after­noon prayers
or between evening and night prayers, then on that day she has to
perform the ghusl before afternoon or night prayers.

The *mustahazah* *kathirah* should combine the noon and afternoon
prayers after the second ghusl, and also the evening and night prayers
after the third ghusl. It means that if a woman performs ghusl before
noon prayer and does not combine the recitation of noon and afternoon
prayers, then she will have to do a separate ghusl for afternoon prayer
also. The same rule applies if she recites the evening and night prayers
separately.

4. Some General Rules
---------------------

It is wajib on the *mustahazah* to perform the prayer or prayers
immediately after the wudu or ghusl. Of course, she is permitted to
perform the mustahab acts before, or during, the prayer.

On the other hand, if the *istihazah* has stopped com­pletely and the
woman has already performed what was required of her, then it is not
wajib for her to perform her prayers immediately after the wudu or
ghusl.

It is also wajib on the *mustahazah* to prevent the blood from coming
out of the vagina during the prayer by placing a sanitary napkin over
it. If she does not take necessary precaution in this matter and the
blood comes out of vagina during the prayer, then she will have to
repeat her prayer. In this case of negligence, if she has medium or
profuse *istihazah,* then it is precautionarily wajib on her even to
repeat the ghusl or ghusls.

If the *istihazah* stops completely before the woman has performed the
wudu or ghusl which was required of her, then what is her duty in regard
to those acts?

It is wajib for her to perform the acts which were required of her
before she became pure. Likewise, if the blood stops during the wudu or
ghusl or salat, it is wa­jib on her to perform the wudu or ghusl or the
prayer again. Even if the blood stops after she has performed her
prayers but there still is enough time to do wudu or ghusl and pray,
then it is wajib for the woman to per­form those acts again.

If a *mustahazah* knows that the bleeding will stop at a time when she
will have enough time to perform her wudu or ghusl and pray (without
making them *qaza*), then it is wajib for her to delay her prayers until
she becomes pure. For example, the time of noon and after­noon prayers
ends at 5:00 p.m. and the woman has a feeling that her blood will stop
before 3:00 or 4:00 p.m. In this case she should delay her noon and
afternoon prayers, and perform the wudu or ghusl and pray after she has
become pure.

On the other hand, if her *istihazah* started after the time of prayers
while she had not yet prayed, then she will have to pray that salat
after performing the wudu or ghusl which is required of her. For
example, the time of noon prayer commenced at 12:30 p.m. and her
*istihazah* started at 3:00 p.m. In this case she had had enough time
from the commencement of noon prayer's time to perform her prayers
normally. If she did not do so, then she will have to follow the rules
of *istihazah* to perform that prayer.

If the discharge changes from one level to the other, then what should a
*mustahazah* do?  
 If it changes from a lower level to a higher level (e.g., from slight
to medium bleeding, or from medium to pro­fuse bleeding), then there are
two possibilities:

1. The change occured before performing the acts required of her, then
she should perform those acts according to the rules of the higher level
*istihazah*, and there is no need to repeat the previous acts of
worship.

2. The change occured while she was performing the acts which were
required of her, then she has to start those acts all over again
according to the rules of the higher level *istihazah*. This law applies
even if the change occurs dur­ing prayers.

If it changes from a higher level to a lower level (e.g., from profuse
to medium bleeding, or from medium to slight bleeding), then the
*mustahazah* will have to follow the rules of the higher level
*istihazah* for the first prayer and then follow the rules of the lower
level *istihazah* for the subsequent prayers. For example, a
*mustahazah* kathirah becomes *mustahazah* *qalilah* before noon, then
she will have to perform a ghusl and then pray noon and afternoon prayer
(according to the rules of kathirah) but for evening and night prayers
she just has to per­form separate *wudu's* (according to the rules of
qalfiah).

5. How The Mustahazah Should Fast?
----------------------------------

The *mustahazah* has to pray and fast like every other woman. The only
difference is that her acts of worship will not be valid unless she
observes the rules mentioned above.

In case of the women with medium *istihazah*, the validity of their
fasts is dependent upon the ghusl which they are required to perform
before the dawn prayer. (This rule is based on ihtiyat
mustahab‑precautionarily recommendation.)

The validity of the fasts of the women with profuse *istihazah* depends
on the ghusls which they are required to perform during the entire day.

6. Is Anything Forbidden To The Mustahazah?
-------------------------------------------

Among the acts forbidden to the ha'iz and junub, on­ly one is forbidden
for *mustahazah*: She is not permitted to touch the writings of the
Qur'an before w*udu* and ghusl. Rather even after the wudu and ghusl, it
is precautionarily wajib on her to refrain from touching the writings of
the Qur'an.

Of course, there is no harm if a *mustahazah* woman enters and stays
inside a mosque or reads those parts of the Qur'an which have wajib
sajdahs.

There is no restriction, whatsoever, on sexual inter­course for a
*mustahazah* with slight bleeding. As far as the *mustahazah* with
medium and profuse bleeding are concerned, sexual intercourse is lawful
only if they have performed the ghusl or ghusls which are required of
them. (This rule is based on precautionarily recommendation.)


