Glossary
========

**Wajib**‑obligatory, necessary, incumbent. An act which must be
performed. You will be rewarded for per­forming it and punished for
neglecting it, e.g., the daily prayers, the fasting of Ramadhan.

**Ihtiyat wajib**‑precuationarily obligatory. Its significance is the
same as that of *wajib* with the difference that in the rules where a
*mujtahid* says it is "precau­tionarily obligatory", you have the option
of leav­ing his *taqlid* (following) in that particular problem, and
following the rulings of the second‑best *mujtahid* in that problem.

**Mustabab,** Sunnat‑recommendable, desirable, better. The acts whose
neglect is not punished, but whose performance is rewarded, e.g., the
call of prayer *(adhan).*

**Ihtiyat mustabab**‑precautionarily recommended. Its significance is
the same as that of *mustahab.* When a *mujtahid* uses this term, he
means that there is no solid proof for that particular act being
mustahab, but his standards of precaution demand that it be considered
as *mustahab.*

**Ja'iz, Halal, Mubah**‑permitted**,** allowed, lawful, legal. The act
or the thing which is permitted and lawful. There is no reward for
performing it and no punish­ment for neglecting it, e.g., drinking tea.
*Mubdh is* mostly used for lawful things, not for permitted actions.

**Makruh**‑reprehensible, disliked. The acts whose per­formance is not
punished, but whose avoidance is rewarded, e.g., eating in the state of
*janabat.*

**Haram**‑forbidden, prohibited. It is necessary to abstain from the
acts which are *haram.* If someone performs a *haram* act, he will be
punished, e.g., eating pork.

**Junub‑**a man or a woman who has become *najis* (im­pure) because of
sexual intercourse or, in the former's case, because of discharge of
semen.

**Sajdah**‑prostration.

***Qaza***‑performing an act of worship which was miss­ed during its
proper time.

**Musalla**‑place or mattress of prayers.

**Rak'at**‑a bending of torso from an upright position in prayers.


