Introduction
============

Allah says in the Quoran:

"Blessed is He in whose hand is the kingdom (of the heavens and the
earth), and He has power over all things, Who created death and life
that He may try you, (to prove) which of you is best in deeds."[1;2]

What ever comes into existence, must transverse a path leading to death
[Lari, Sayyid Mutjtaba Musavi (1992)] , whether it be man, jinn, animal,
plant or the many other countless forms of life.

The Quoran warns repeatedly of the importance that believers fear Allah
[S.W.T] and the last Day. Believers, therefore are to respect death and
have faith that our passing is an opportunity to meet Allah [S.W.T.],
the Holy Prophet Mohammad [S.W.S] and the Holy Ahyl Bait [A.S.], on the
Day Of Judgement.

Death is an inevitable fact that is better prepared for, in order to
ease ones own suffering and the sufferings of family and friends. Allah
says in the Quoran:

"Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth.

The similitude of His light is as a niche wherein is a lamp. The lamp
is in a glass.

The glass is as it were a shining star. (This lamp is) kindled from a
blessed olive tree, an olive tree neither of the East nor the West,
whose oil would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched
it.

Light upon light, Allah guideth unto His light whom He will.

And Allah speaketh to mankind in allegories, for Allah is Knower of all
things".[24;35]

When the call comes from thy Lord, he/she should feel the blessings in
the opportunity to be released from the temporary life to an eternal
one, and rejoice to be reunited with loved ones, insh''Allah.

And Allah says in the Quoran:

"... and when their term comes cometh they cannot put (it) off an hour
nor (yet) advance (it).[16:61, 7:43, 10:49]

If your call is not due, a person should not feel disheartened in the
"delay" of death [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999)] as Allah [S.W.T.] has
given him / her an opening to increase his/ her good deeds, attend
responsibilities, worship Him [S.W.T.] and the time to repent. This is a
time that can be used to perform recommended acts in preparation for the
afterlife and the difficult times experienced in and after death.


