Chapter Fifteen : Dua Recited When the Deceased Has Been Lowered Into the Grave
===============================================================================

Recite Aayatul Kursi then:

**For a Male**

"Bislillaahi wa fee sabeelil-laahee wa a'laa millati rasoolillah.
Allaahum-mafth' lahoo fee qabrihee wa alh'iqhu bi-bayyih. Allaahumma in
kaanamuh'sinan fazid fee ih'saanihee wa in kaana musee-an faghfirlahoo
warh'amhoo wa tajaawaz a'nhu."

(In the name of Allah and in the path of Allah and on the faith of the
Holy Prophet. O Allah, open (the door of heaven) in his grave and make
him meet his condition. O Allah, if he was good and virtuous, increase
his virtues and if he was bad, forgive his sins, shower mercy on him and
ignore his mistakes.)

**For a Female**

"Bismillahi wa fee sabeelillaahi wa a'laa millati Rasoolillaah.
Allaahum-maftah' lahaa fee qabrihaa wa alh'iqhaa bi'bayyihaa allaahumma
in kaanat muh'sinatan fazid fee ih'saanihaa wa in kaanat musee-aa
faghfir lahaa warh'amhaa wa tajaawaz a'nhaa."

(In the name of Allah and in the path of Allah and on the faith of the
Holy Prophet. O Allah, open (the doors of heaven) in her grave and make
her meet her condition. O Allah, if she was good and virtuous, increase
her virtues, and if she was bad, forgive her sins, shower mercy on her
and ignore her mistakes." [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988), pg. 155-6]

**Seeking Pardon**

Along with reciting this continuously, one should seek pardon for
oneself also.

Imam Ali ibn al- Hussain Zayn Al-Abidin [A.S.] used to recite the
following when he used to lower the deceased into the grave:

**For a Male**

"Allaahuamma jaafil arz"a a'n janbayhi s'aa-I'd a'malahoo wa laqqihee
minka riz"waana." (O Allah! Make the earth give freedom on his both
sides and accept his record of deeds and grant him Your pleasure.)

**For a Female**

"Allaahumma jaafil arz"a a'n janbayhaa wa s'aa-I'd a'malahaa wa
laqqihaa minka riz"wanaa." (O Allah! Make the earth give freedom on her
both sides and accept her record of deeds and grant her Your pleasure.)
[Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988), pg. 156-7]

**Custom**

It is customary to show the face of the deceased to the close relatives
before the grave is covered. N.B. It is important thought that an
individual, who is Naa Mahram (legally allowed to marry the deceased)
and is a close relative, is not shown the face of the deceased and this
has to be announced. Only Mahram of the deceased can see his / her
face.


**Chapter Sixteen : Talqeen**

Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali [A.S.] said:

" He who sells his next life for his present life in this world, loses
both of them." [Qurar-ul-Hikam, pg. 274]

Before covering the grave with wooden planks or stone, the person
sitting in the grave with the deceased is to hold the right shoulder of
the deceased with his / her right hand and the left shoulder of the
deceased with his / her left hand. During the recitation of the Talqeen,
every time the name of the deceased is said, the person is to shake or
jerk the shoulders of the deceased, as if to wake him/ her up. The
recitation of Talqeen is to remind the deceased of the fundamentals of
the true religion.

A separate Talqeen is to be recited for the male and the female.

**Text for Recitation of Talqeen**

If the deceased is a male, recite the following:

"Ismaa'-ifham ismaa'- ifham ismaa'- ifham yaa (pronounce the name of
the deceased and his father [according to another source, his Mother]),
hal anta a'lal a;hdil lad'ee faaraqtanaa a'layhi min shahaadati allaa
ilaala illallaahu, wah'dahoo laa shareeka lahoo wa anna Muh'ammadan,
s'allallaahu a'layhi wa aalihee wa sallama, a'bduhoo wa Rasooluhoo wa
sayyidun Nabiyeena wa khaatamul mursaleena;

wa anna A'liyyan Ameerul Moo-mineena wa sayyidul was'iyyeena wa Imaamun
iftaraz"allaahu t'aa-a'tahoo a'lal a'alameena;

wa annal H'asana wal H'usayna wa a'liyyabnal H'usayna wa Muh'ammadabna
A'liyyin, wa Jaa'farabna Muh'ammadin wa Moosabna Jaa'farin wa A'liyyabna
Moosa wa Muh'ammadabna Aliyyin wa a'liyyibna Muh'ammadin wal H'asanabna
A'liyyin wal Qaaa-imal, H'ujjatul Mahdiyya, s'alawatullaahi a'layhim
a-immatul Moo-mineena wa h'ujajullaahi a'lal khalqi ajma-e'ena wa
a-immatuka a-immatu hudan abrar yaa (pronounce the name of the deceased
and his father [according to another source, his Mother]),

id'aa ataakal malakaanil muqarrabanni Rasoolayna min I'ndillahi
tabaraka wa ta-a'alaa wa sa-alaaka an rabbika wa a'n Nabiyyika wa a'n
deenika wa a'n Kitaabika wa a'n Qiblatika wa a'n a-Immatika falaa takhaf
wa laa tahzan wa qul fee jawaabihimaa allaahu jalla jalaajuhoo rabee wa
Muh'ammadun,

s'allallaahu a'layhi wa aalihee wa sallama Nabiyyaa wal Islammu deenee
wal Qur-aanu kitabee wal Kaa'-batu Qiblatee wa Ameerul Moo-mineena
a'liyyubnu abee t'aalibin Imaamee walh'asanubnu a'liyyil Mujtaba Imaamee
wal H'usaynubnu A'liyyish Shaheedu biKarbaalaa Immaamee wa A'liyyi-un
Zaynul A'abideena Imaamee wa Muh'ammadubnu A'liyyin Baaqiru I'lmin
Nabiyyeena Imaamee wa Jaa'farus' S'aadiqu Imaamee wa Moosal Kaaz'imu
Imaamee wa A'liyyur Riz'aa Imaamee wa Muh'ammadanul Jawaadu Imaamee wa
A'liyyuil Haadee Imaamee walH'asanaul A'skariyyu Imaamee wal H'ujjatul
Muntaz'aru Imaamee.

Haa-ulaaa-I s'alawaatullaahi a'layhim ajma-e'ena a-Immatee wa saadatee
wa qaadatee wa shufa'aa-ee bihim atawallaa wa min aa'-daaa-ihim
atabarraa-u fiddunyaa walaakhirati thummaa'-lam yaa fulaanabana fulaan
(pronounce the name of the deceased and his father [according to another
source,

his Mother]), annallaaha tabaaraka wa ta-a'alaa nia'-mar rabbu wa anna
Muh'ammadan s'allaallaahu a'layhi wa aalihee wa sallama ni'-mar Rasoolu
wa anna Ameeral Moo-mineena A'liyyabna abee t'aalibin wa awlaahul
a-immatal ah'ada a'shara nia'-mal a-immatu wa anna maajaaa-a bihee
Muh'ammadun s'allallaahu a'layhi wa aalihee wa sallama h'aqqun wa annal
mawta h'aqqun wa su'waalla Munkarin wa Nakeerin filqab-re h'aqqun
walbaa'tha h'aqqun wan nushoora h'aqqun was'siraata haqqun wal meezaana
h'aqqun wa tat'aa-iral kutubi h'aqqun wal jannata h'aqqun wan naara
haqqun wa annas saa-a'ta aatiyatun laa rayba feeha wa annallaaha
yabaa'-thu man filquboori.

Afahimta yaa (pronounce the name of the deceased and his father
[according to another source, his Mother]), thabbatakallaahu bilqawlith
thabiti hadaakaallahu ilaa s'iraat'im mustaqeemin.

A'rrafallaahu baynaka wa bayna awliyaa-ika fee mustaqarrin min
Rah'matihee. Allahumma jaafil arz"a a'n janbayhee was'-a'd birooh'ihee
ilayka wa laqqihee minka buhanna allahumma a'fwaka a'fwaka.

**Translation**

(Listen, understand, listen, understand. Listen, understand O
(pronounce the name of the deceased and his father [according to another
source, his Mother]).

Are you on the pledge on which you left us by way of testimony that
there is no god except Allah, the One, there being no partner for Him
and that Muhammad, Allah may send blessings on him and on his Progeny,
and also salutation, is His servant and His Messenger and the chief of
the Prophets and the last of the Messengers;

And that Ali is the commander of the faithful and chief of the
vicegerents and the Imam whose obedience Allah has made obligatory on
the worlds; And that Hassan and Hussain and Ali son of Hussain and
Muhammad son of Ali son of Hussain and Muhammad son of Ali, And Jafar
son of Muhammad and Moosa son of Jafar and Ali son of Moosa and Muhammad
son of Ali and Ali son of Muhammad and Hassan son of Ali and the
existing Guide, the Mahdi, Allah's blessings be on them are the Imams of
the Faithful;

And the pleas of Allah over the entire creation;

And your Imams, the Guides, the virtuous (pronounce the name of the
deceased and his father [according to another source, his Mother]) when
come to you the two angels of high position and messengers from Allah
the High, and Exalted, And question you about your Sustainer, and about
your Prophet; and about your religion, and about your Book;

And about your Qibla and about your Imams;

Then do not fear and do not grieve and say in their reply that Allah,
His Glory be Heightened is my Sustainer and Muhammad, Allah may send
blessings on him and his Progeny and also salutation, is my Prophet, and
Islam is my religion;

And the Quoran is my Book;

And Ka'aba is my Qibla;

And the Commander of the Faithful Ali son of Abu Talib is my Imam;

And Hussain son of Ali, the martyr of Kerbala is my Imam;

And Ali Zayn Al-Abidin is my Imam;

And Muhammad son of Ali, Baqir-e Ilme Nabiyeen is my Imam;

And Jafar Sadiq is my Imam;

and Moosa Kazim is my Imam;

and Ali Riza is my Imam;

And Muhammad-ul Jawad is my Imam;

And Ali-il Hadee is my Imam;

And Hassan-al Askari is my Imam;

And the Awaited Hujjat is my Imam.

All these, Allah's blessings be on them all, are my Imams and my
masters and my leaders and my intercessors. To them I bear love and from
their enemies I seek aloofness in this world and the Next one.

Then know O (pronounce the name of the deceased and his father
[according to another source, his Mother]) that Allah the High and the
Exalted is the Best Sustainer;

And that Muhammad, Allah may send blessings on him and his Progeny and
also salutation, is the best Messenger; and that Ameerul Momineen Ali
son of Abu Talib and his sons, the eleven Imams, are the best Imams;

And that whatever was bought by Muhammad, Allah may send blessings on
him and his Progeny and also salutation, is True;

And that death is true;

And the questioning by Munkar and Nakeer in the grave is true;

And Resurrection is true, and that Revival is true;

And Sirat is true, and the Scale is true;

And the coming down of Scriptures is true;

And Paradise is true;

And Hell is true;

And that Day of Judgement is to come, there being no doubt in it;

And that Allah would raise up those in the graves.

Did you comprehend O (pronounce the name of the deceased and his father
[according to another source, his Mother])

Allah may keep you firm in firm talk Allah may guide you towards the
Right Path.

Allah may create mutual knowledge between you and your friends in the
abode of His Mercy.

O Allah expand the earth from his two sides and take up his soul to
Yourself and grant him from Yourself a Plea. O Allah, Your
forgiveness;

Your forgiveness.


