Chapter One : Victory News Magazine
===================================

Quoting Some Traditions of the Imams (A.S.) About Death Ameerul
Momineen Ali [A.S.] said:

"Three types of Tidings to the Dying Person"

"When death is near, the Angel of Death gives three types of tiding to
the dying man according to his actions (during his lifetime). These are:
"The man who had done good deeds is informed of good news of Paradise,
he is our friend and a man of action.

The evil doer is informed of Hell; he is our enemy and irreligious.

"The man who has done both kinds of deeds, good as well as evil, is
informed vaguely. Such a man of faith will certainly be punished, but he
will not remain in Hell Fire for ever like our enemies."

"For the faithful, death is the cause of rejoicing, because it relieves
him from all worldly miseries and troubles, and takes him to a place of
extreme peace and comfort, where it brings bad news for the infidels
(non-believers). [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988).] Imam Hassan [A.S.]
said:

"Yes, get ready for your journey (towards Resurrection Day) and get
your provisions before your death arrival" Janada bin umaiyyah says I
visited Imam Hassan bin Ali bin Abu Talib during the ailment which
caused his death. I said: 'Oh Lord, why do you not get yourself
treated?'

He said, 'Oh Abdullah, with what may I treat death?'

I said, 'Indeed we are from Allah and toward Him shall we go back',
then he turned to me and said, 'By Allah, the Prophet of Allah [A.S] got
us committed that twelve Imams would be the owners of this matter
(Imamate) from the sons of Imam Ali [A.S.] and Fatimah [A.S.]. There is
none of us but that he would be poisoned or slain. And then he [A.S.]
admonished me'.

He said, "Yes, get ready for your journey (towards Resurrection Day)
and get your provisions before your death arrival. And know it that you
seek the world (material sources) and death is seeking you. Do not load
the worry of the Day which had not yet come, upon your present day. And
beware that you do not achieve and attain a wealth above your enemy but
you are a trustee of it (wealth) for an other person. And do know that
there is account in it's lawful and permitted, and in it's prohibited
lies punishment and retribution, and in it's paradox and doubtful there
is reproof.

"So, suppose the world as if it is a dead corpse (dirt). Take out of it
which is sufficient for you. So if it is halal (lawful and legal) you
have adopted piety and asceticism. And if it (sustenance) is (from)
prohibited there would be no load (upon you) since you took out of it
just as you took out of a dead copse. And if there is a reproof that
reproof is easy (soft one).

And work for your world as if you would live here forever and work for
your resurrection day and here after as if you have to die tomorrow. And
if you intend to achieve honour without a tribe and availing presence
and majesty without a rulership, then move out of the abjectness and
disgrace of committing sin forbidden by Allah, towards the honour of the
obedience of Allah. [Bihar ul Anwar Vol 44, pp 138/139 in "Fascinating
Discourses of (Fourteen Infallibles [A.S.])"]

Imam Hussain [A.S.] said:

"Who of you will hate to be transferred from the Prison to the Grand
Palace (Paradise)?"

Imam Hussain [A.S.], addressing his companions at Kerbala when they saw
him being not afraid of death, said:

"O' the descendants of the Nobles! Have patience. Death is nothing but
a bridge. Bearing the troubles and torments you will reach the vast
Paradise and never ending bounties. Who of you will hate to be
transferred from the prison to the grand palace (in Paradise)? Death for
your enemies is such as if one is taken from the palatial building to
the Prison of punishment. My father Ali (A.S.) has narrated this
tradition from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.S.)

The world's a prison for the faithful, and Paradise of the infidel.
Death is the bridge leading the faithful to paradise and the infidel to
Hell. Neither I speak a lie nor have I been told a lie.'" [Sayyid, Hadi
Husayn (1988).] Imam Zayn Al Abidin [A.S.] said:

"Death releases a Believer from a Dark and Stuffy Dungeon."

"The death of a faithful (Momin) may be described as if he has cast off
his dirty garments and has put on clean and tidy ones; and they, with
our love in their hearts, are called doers of good deeds. For a faithful
death is like his being released from a dark and stuffy dungeon and
entering a spacious and fertile garden; and for the infidel, going from
this world is like being taken to a jail. For the faithful, the world is
like a jail." [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988).]

Imam Muhammad Baqir [A.S.] said:

"Death is like Sleep" "Death is like sleep; The only difference is that
while sleep is of a short duration, death continues till the Day of
Resurrection." [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988)]

Imam Jafar As-Sadiq [A.S.] said:

"Death is Like a Sweet Fragrance" "For the faithful death is like a
sweet fragrance which bestows freshness and delight upon him and removes
all worldly vexation and dejection. The pain at death time is as if all
the parts of the body are being torn apart and nails are being hammered
thereinto. In death the torture is as if a delicate silken cloth has
been thrown on a thorny bush and dragged through it, and its fibres are
torn apart. But death for a faithful is not severe."

"Infidels are Recompensed for Their Good Deeds in this World"

"For the infidel who has done good in this world, God creates ease at
the time of death, and he does not suffer. Allah grants him recompense
for his good deeds in this world, but in the hereafter he is dealt with
severely." [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988)] "The Difficulties at the Time of
Death for a faithful"

The soul of a faithful leaves the body with difficulty. This is because
he may go purified from this world and so be saved from the chastisement
of the next world." [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988)]

Imam Musa Kazim [A.S.] said:

"Death Cleanses the Faithful"

"For the faithful the example of death is like a dirty cloth being
beaten on a stone slab, in order to clean it. Similarly, at the time of
the agony, the faithful is subjected to severity to purify him."
[Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988)]

Imam Ali al-Rida [A. S.] said:

"Love of the Ahle Bait Decreases Pain at Death Time"

"If the faithful avows his love for us (Ahle Bait) and freshens his
faith, then the pain at death time decreases." [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn
(1988)] Imam Muhammad Taqi [A.S.] said:

"Why One Dislikes Pangs of Death?"

"Some of the faithful dislike the pangs of death, because they are not
fully aware of the comfort after death. Just as children and the insane
dislike to take bitter medicine and make a wry face, though the
bitterness of the medicine is a forerunner of benefit (to health)."
[Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988)]

Imam Ali al-Naqi [A.S.] said:

"Death removes dirt from the soul" "Once I went to ask the welfare of
an ailing faithful, he was much afraid of death. I told him Death is
like dirt on the body or like dirty clothes, but when one goes to take
the bath and cleanses the dirt and filth, he feels fresh and relieved.
The agony at the time of death removes the dirt from the soul
completely." [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988)]

Imam Hassan al-Askari [A.S.] said:

"Death is Life Eternal"

"Once a man inquired of me as to what was the fact about death."

I replied: "For the faithful, death is life eternal, and for the
infidels, it is mortality. The faithful will always enjoy the pleasures
of Paradise, but the infidel will ever remain in the Hell, suffering its
torments (Hell Fire)." [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988)]


