Chapter Two : Ease Your Sufferings At Death
===========================================

**Recommended Acts**

Shaikh Sadooq quotes from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq [A.S.] that he said:

"If a person wishes his last moments should be easy, he should maintain
cordial relations with his kith and kin, and should be kind to his
parents. Who ever does so, death will be eased, and he will never fall
prey to misfortune in his lifetime. [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999).] Imam
Jafar as-Sadiq [A.S.] said:

"For a person who gives clothes to his brother believer during the
summer or in the winter, it is incumbent upon Allah to present the dress
of Paradise to him, make his end easy, and save him from the narrowness
of the grave." [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999).] Recitation and Duas /
Supplications Recitation of particular Surahs of the Quoran are
recommended to ease the suffering at death:

i) Surah

al-Mulk - it has been narrated by the Holy Prophet [S.W.S.] that he
strongly urged believers to recite Surah al-Mulk on a very regular basis
so that they may learn it by heart. It is narrated that this surah is of
great importance for the time of death, after death, in the grave and
during bazarkh. [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988), pg. 49]

ii) Surah al-Yaseen [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999), pg 32]

iii) Surah as-Saffat [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999), pg 32]

iv) Surah al-Mo'menoon every Friday

iv) Sheikh Kulaini relates from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq [A.S.] that he
said, If a person recites Surah az-Zilzal in the Supererogatory Prayers,
Allah [S.W.T.] will save him from earthquakes, lightening and the
calamities of the land and sky and during death will send him this surah
in the form of a handsome youth who will sit beside him and request the
Angel of Death to remove his spirit with ease.' [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas
(1999), pg 34] Supplications are also recommended to ease tribulations
during death:

"Laa ilaaha illallahul L'aleemul kareem Laa ilaaha illaahul a'leeul
az'eem. Subh'aanallahe rabbis samawaatis'sab-e' wa rabbil arz"eenas
sab-e' wa maa fihinna wa maa baina hunna wa maa fauqa hunna wa huwa
rabbul a'rshil az'eem wal h'amdo lillaahe rabbil a'alameen." [Qummi,
Shaikh Abbas (1999), pg 32]

Shaikh Kat'ami quotes the Holy Prophet [S.W.S] that he said a person
who recites the following supplication 10 times daily, Allah [S.W.T.]
will forgive 4 thousand major sins of his, after him refuge from one lac
calamities at the time of death, the squeeze in the grave and Qiyamat.
Allah [S.W.T.] will also save him from troubles and anxieties, from the
Satan and his army and will pay off his dues.

"aa'datto le kulle h'aulin laa ilaaha illa allaaho wa le kulle ghammin
wa hammin maa shaa allaaho wa lekulle ne'matin al h'amdo lillaahe wa
lekulle rukhaain ash-shukro lillaahe wa le kulle oo'joobatan subh'aan
allaahe wa le kulle d'anbin astaghfirullaaaha wa le kulle mus'eebatin
inna illaahe wa inna ilaihe raajeo'on wa le kulle z"aiqin h'asbiyallaaho
wale kulle qaz"aain wa qadrin tawakkalto a'laa allaahe wa le kulle
a'duwwin e'tas'amto billaahe wa le kulle t'aa'tin wa ma's'iyatin laa
h'awla wa laa quwwata illa billaahil a'liyyil a'z'eem." [Qummi, Shaikh
Abbas (1999), pg 33] Recite dua 7 times after morning and evening
prayers:

"Bisimllah ir Rahman ir Raheem. Laa h'awla wa laa quwata illa billaahil
a'liyyil a'z'eem." [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999).]

**Fasting**

Shaikh Sadooq narrates from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq [A.S.] that he said:

"For the person who fasts on the last day of the month of Rajab, Allah
will save him form the after effects of death." Fasting on the 24th
Rajab also holds special rewards [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999), pg 32]

**Namaz**

i) The best deed is to perform Namaz on time

ii) The Holy Prophet [S.W.S.] said that is a person recites four unit
(Rak'at) Namaz on the night of the 7th Rajab in a manner that in each
unit (Rak'at) after Surah al-Humd, recites thrice Surah at-Tawheed once,
Surah al-Falaq, and once Surah an-Naas. After finishing the Namaz, sends
"Salawat" on us and recites ten times "Tasbeehate Arba." [Qummi, Shaikh
Abbas (1999), pg 32]

iii) Recite 8 unit (Rak'at) Namaz of the night of 22nd Rajab after
Surah-al-Humd recite 7 times Aurah at-Tawheed. After ending Namaz,
recite 10 times "Salawat" and 10 times "Istighfar"[Qummi, Shaikh Abbas
(1999), pg 33]

iv) Recite dua in Namaz on Sunday's in the month of Zhul Qaadah:

"Rabana Laa tuzigh quloobana ba'da id' haday tuna wahablana milladunka
rah'ma. Innaka antal wahhaab." [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999).] N.B.
Istighfar: "Astagferullah Rabbi wa atoobo Ilayh"

v) Sayyed ibne Tawoos quotes the Holy Prophet [S.W.S.] as saying, "If a
person recites 4 units (Rak'at) Namaz in the month of Sha'baan, and in
each unit (Rak'at) after Surah al-Humd recites 50 times Surah
at-Tawheed, then during his death his spirit will be removed with ease,
his grave will become spacious and on the Day of Judgement when he comes
out of his grave, his face will be shining bright like the moon and
Kalmac Shadadat' will be on his lips." [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999).]

vi) Recite Tasbeehe Fatema [A.S.]


