Chapter Five : Steps in Administering the Bath
==============================================

1. Laws of Gender of the person administering the bath:

a) The person must be a male bathing the corpse of a male and a female
bathing the corpse of a female. The exception to this rule being if
there is no other person to administer the bath and that the private
parts of the body are concealed [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988), p124]

b) A husband is allowed to bathe his wife and she is allowed to bathe
him but it is Makrooh for both of them to look at the private parts of
the corpse [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988), p124].

c) A woman can administer the bath to the corpse of a male child up to
the age of three years concealing from view the private parts, and a man
can bathe the corpse of a female of the same age, concealing her private
parts. This is irrespective of there being someone of the same sex
available to bathe the child [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988), p124].

2. Preparation:

a) To administer the bath, it is recommended that it be in a private
room and that there is adequate light provided.

b) The deceased must be placed on a platform or plank rising above the
floor. A second board can also be utilised to ensure that cleanliness is
maintained.

c) Their head needs to be slightly higher than the rest of the body.

b) The body needs to be uncovered for washing except for the genital
area.

c) Place a tank/large dish at the base of the feet so that the water
can be collected there.

d) The administrator will be required to give three consecutive
purification baths to the deceased, following the same procedure each
time, but with new water on each occasion.

e) If the deceased is in a state of pollution due to the discharge of
semen (Junub) or in the state of mensis ( Haaiz), the Junub or Haaiz
bath need not be administered in addition to the three purification
baths.

**3. Niyyat**

The administrator must recite their Niyyat as an essential part of
their duty and it has to be said this way:

"for the pleasure of God as the ultimate end in view I administer bath
to this corpse with "plum-tree leaves" for first bath, for second bath
say "with camphorised water', for the third bath say. "with pure
water".

It is fine to think the niyyat and not pronounce the words if you are
not able.

If the plum-tree leaves or camphorised water are not available, the
niyyat should be as follows:

"for the pleasure of God as the ultimate end in view I administer bath
to this corpse with pure water instead of water with plum-tree leaves or
instead of camphorised water."

If there are more than one person administering the bath, then all
parties involved must say separate Niyyats. Separate Niyyats must be
formed for each bath. [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988), p129]

**4. Wuzu and Position**

The administrator must thrice wash his/her face, hands and elbows up to
the shoulders and needs to stand on the right hand side of the body.

**5. Remove any Objects**

The administrator needs to remove any objects, eg jewellery that may
inhibit the water form coming in contact with the skin.

**6. Removal of Excreta**

Press gently on the stomach of the deceased three times in a downward
motion to remove any excreta from the body. Wash the area, using gloves,
when excreta has been removed. [ special precautions should be adhered
to if the deceased was known to have died from AIDS ]

N.B. Please take note that you do not press the stomach of a pregnant
woman. According to one source, the stomach is to be pressed once only
prior to the three baths, and other sources narrate that the stomach is
pressed prior to the three baths, between bath one and two, and then
again between two and three.

**7. Genital Area**

With gloves on wash the genital area of the deceased thrice using
plum-tree leaf water.

**8. Wudu of the Deceased**

It is Mustahab (commendable) to administer wudu (ablution of the face
and forearms) for the deceased prior to the three purification baths.

**9. The Three Baths:**

The administrator will be required to give three consecutive
purification baths to the deceased, following the same procedure each
time, but with new water on each occasion.

a) The first bath is recommended that plum-tree leaves be immersed in
purified (unpolluted) water.
b) The second bath is recommended that camphor be added to purified
(unpolluted) water.
c) The third bath is recommended that pure water be used only.

N.B. If the plum-tree leaves or camphor are not available, it is
recommended that pure water be used on all occasions. If there is
limited water, Tayammum is recommended for the first and second baths,
and that pure water is used on the third bath.

Bath with Plum-Tree Water (Bath with Aab-I-Sidr)

The quantity of water should be six mashks (water-skins)

i) Niyyat: "for the pleasure of God as the ultimate end in view I
administer bath to this corpse with "plum-tree leaves"

ii) Start by pouring plumtree leaf water over the head and neck of the
deceased, being careful not to get the water in the nose or ears. The
head and neck should be washed three times.

iii) With the hand being in contact with the deceased body at all times
to ensure the water reaches all parts of the body, turn the body onto
it's left hand side to wash the right hand side three times, right down
to the feet.

iv) The deceased should then be laid on his/her right hand side and the
left hand side of the body should be washed thrice.

v) The deceased then is placed on their back.

N.B. If the body is damaged, please be careful not to dismember
limbs.

Bath with Camphorised Water (Bath with Aab-I-Kaafoor)

The stomach of the deceased should be pressed once again, in a
downwards motion, to remove any excreta that still may be remaining in
the body. The area needs to be washed and the administrator needs to
wuzu their own hands up to the elbows once again. After this he/she
needs to recite their Niyyat:

"For the pleasure of God as the ultimate end in view I administer bath
to this corpse with "camphorised water" The bath then is performed in
the same manner as the first bath.

Bath with Pure water (Bath with Aab-I-Khalis)

It is Mustahab (commendable) that the person administering the bath
should again wudu both his/her hands up to the elbows. Both the water
pourer and the administrator should then recite Niyyat once again:

"For the pleasure of God as the ultimate end in view I administer bath
to this corpse with "pure water" The bath then should be performed in
the same manner, as bath numbers one and two.

When completed the body must be wiped dry with a pac (free from
contaminants) cloth and so much so that all the water is soaked up so
the Kafan may not become wet. Some cotton should be placed on the arms
and the vulva of the deceased so that any impurity, which may come out,
may not spoil the Kafan. If the hair or the nails of the deceased should
become detached during the process of washing the body, these should
also be placed within the Kafan. [Qummi, Shaikh Abbas (1999)]

The administrator needs to Wuzu (ablution) his/her face and forearms
after bathing the deceased.

If the administrator of the bath also has the duty of shrouding the
deceased, they must also wash both their own feet up to their knees. The
"Do Nots"

Do not bathe the deceased in a seated position

Do not place the deceased between the feet of the administrator

Do not shave the head or remove any hair from the body of the
deceased

Do not cut the nails or scratch the skin from under the nails

Do not comb the hair

Do not move across the body of the deceased

Do not use hot water

Do not throw the bath water into the latrine

Do not press the stomach of a pregnant woman

Be careful not to dismember limb of a damaged body

It is improper to disclose any organic defect on the body of the
deceased to any other person.


