Chapter Six : Important Notes the Death of a Martyr
===================================================

It is not recommended to bathe or dress a Believing Muslim who has died
as a Martyr if he / she has died in the service and name of Allah
[S.W.T.]. After the funeral prayers have been recited, the deceased
should be buried in the clothes that he / she passed away in.

**Bathing of the Miscarried Embryo**

The bathing of a person who has not died a martyr is wajib irrespective
of if they are old, young, male or female. The only exception is a
miscarriage of an embryo of less than four months of age whereby he /
she should be wrapped in a cloth, funeral prayers offered and buried in
a grave. If the embryo that has been miscarried is over the age of four
months, then it is wajib to administer a bath on the child, dress him /
her in a Kafan, funeral prayers offered and buried in a grave.

**Very Badly Damaged Body**

If the deceased body has been so badly damaged that a bath or Tayammum
can not be administered, the pieces of the body should be wrapped in a
pac (free from contaminates) cloth, funeral prayers offered and the body
buried in a grave.

**Deceased in the State of Muhrim**

It is prohibited to bath a deceased person with camphor if they are
dressed in pilgrims dress (Ehram) and is in a state of Muhrim. Burning
incense or bringing any fragrant object near the body is also
prohibited.

Only after the circumambulation of the Ka'aba (The Tawaaf) of Hajj or
Umrah is performed, is the body washed with camphor and Hunoot
performed. [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988).]


**Chapter Seven : How to Administer Tayammum**

Tayammum to a deceased person is performed in the case where no or
limited water is available, where the deceased is in a state of
decomposition, where a bath is not possible, has severe burns, small pox
or any other condition where water can not be used.

**i) Niyyat**

If one Tayammum is only required in the place of the three baths then
Niyyat Maa Fizzimah is wajib as follows:

"For the pleasure of Allah as the ultimate end in the view I administer
one Tayammum to this corpse instead of all three baths."

It three Tayammums are required to be performed in the place of the
three purifying baths then the Niyyat Maa Fizzimah is required as
below:

"for the pleasure of Allah as the ultimate end in the view I administer
one Tayammum to this corpse for the bath with Aabi-Sidr (plum-tree
leaves)... for the second with aab-i-Kaafoor (camphorised water)... for
the third with aab-i-Khalis (pure water)."

If the Tayammums were not administered with Niyyat Maa Fizzimah, a
forth is required with the Niyyat Maa Fizzimah.[Sayyid, Hadi Husayn
(1988)]

**ii) Dust**

The administrator must strike his / her palms on the dust and smear the
dust in the forehead of the deceased down to the apex of the nose. Then
rubs his / her left palm on the right of the deceased from the wrist to
the fingertips. Then the right palm on the back of the left hand from
the wrist to the fingertips.

**ii) Hunoot**
(rubbing of crushed camphor on the deceased)

Crushed camphor must be rubbed on all seven sajda parts of the body
being the forehead, the two palms, two knees and the two big toes.

If there is sufficient camphor remaining after Hunoot, then all joints
can be rubbed and the remaining camphor placed on the chest of the
deceased. If there is not sufficient camphor for Hunoot and only enough
for the bath, then Hunoot ceases to become wajib.

The administrator needs to Wuzu (ablution) his/her face and forearms
after bathing the deceased.

If the administrator of the bath also has the duty of shrouding the
deceased, they must wash both their feet up to their knees.


