Chapter Eight : the Kafan
=========================

The Kafan is highly valued and a person is considered to be mindful of
death if he / she has prepared it prior to their death, which is
commendable. The cloth has to be of the finest quality and no expense
spared, for on the Day of Resurrection, the deceased will be proud of
the Kafan that they wear.

[Lari, Sayyid Mutjtaba Musavi (1992).] The money used to purchase the
Kafan must be, with no doubt, lawful money and is not to be used at the
time of pilgrimage or in daily prayers. The Kafan needs to be made from
white cotton cloth and the thread used needs to have the yarn taken out
from it. It also should be Pak ( free from impurities) There needs to be
sufficient quantities of cotton placed on the orifices so urine and
faeces so not to stain the cloth.

**Khak-e-Shifa**

It is optional that a little Khak-e-Shifa (dust from the grave of Imam
Hussain [ A.S.]) and camphor is placed within the Kafan. The name of the
deceased and the father [according to some the Mothers name as well is
mentioned here] of the deceased and the triple testimony of the Unity of
Allah, the Prophethood of Muhammad [pbuhahp] and of the Imamat ( and the
vice-gerency) of the Twelve Imams [A.S.] are written on all the wajib
and Mustahab pieces of the Kafan in the following way:

Yashhadu/Tashhadu (for female) an laa ilaaha illaallahoo wah'dahoo
laashareeka lahoo wa anna Muh'ammadan a'bduhoo wa rasooluhoo wa anna
a'liyyan walh'asana walh'usayna wa a'liyyan wa Muh'ammasan wa a'liyyan
wal-h'asana walh'ujjatul qaa-ima a;layhimus salam awliyaaa-ulaahu wa
aws'iyaa-u Rasoolillaahi wa a-Immatee wa annal Baa'-tha wath thawaaba
wal-I'qaaba h'aqq.

(So and so son/daughter of so and so bears witness that there is no
Allah but Allah He is the only Allah and has no partner and that
Muhammad [pbuhahp] is the servant and the Prophet of Allah [S.A.W] and
that Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib [A.S.] and Hassan ibn Ali [A.S.] and Hussain
ibn Ali [A.S.] and Ali ibn Al-Hussain [A.S.] and Muhammad al Baqir al
Baqir al Baqir [A.S.] and Jafar as Sadiq [A.S.] and Moussa al Qazim
[A.S.] and Ali ibn Moussa [A.S.] and Muhammad [A.S.] and Ali [A.S.] and
Hassan [A.S.]

and Hijjatul Qaimo [A.S.] are the Guides of Allah and the executers of
the Prophets of the Prophet's will and my Imams [A.S.]and that
resurrection and the reward and punishment are true. [Sayyid, Hadi
Husayn (1988).]

It is also optional for the names of forty Momins (true believers) and
their fathers to be written on a piece of cloth, after getting
permission from them, which along with the testimony of the deceased's
religious belief, act as witnesses to the fact that the deceased is a
true believer. The Momins need to see the name of the deceased, who is
the daughter / son of so and so is written on the cloth also.

NB: [There is a sheet manufactured in Yemen which is available for the
use of Kafans and the ready made Kafans with the Holy names already
printed on the cloth is available from Iran and Iraq]

**Wajib Three Pieces of Cloth for Kafan**

Whether the deceased is a male of a female, the following pieces of
Kafan are Wajib.

Lung (loin cloth) which should be large enough to cover from the loins
to the knees but preferably from the breasts to the feet.

Pairahan (Kafani), should be long enough to cover the body from the
shoulders to the ankles but preferably down to the feet.

Chaadar / Sar-ta-siri / Pot Ki Chaadar (shroud / sheet), should be wide
enough to cover the body all round and long enough to be fastened above
the head and below the feet.

Mustahab (commendable) Pieces of Cloth for Kafan / Mustahabaat - e -
Kafan For the Male person deceased:

Raan Paich which should be one or two spans in width and 1 yards in
length Ammama (Turban) about nine inches wide and three yards long so
that after at least one roll round the head the ends may be stretches on
to the breast.

For the Female person deceased:

Raan Paich Orhni (a big scarf)

Seena Band (a bodice) which should be wide enough to cover the breasts
and long enough to tie in a knot at the back Extra Chaadar (sheet)

Qasaaba (triangular kerchief) fastened round the head Therefore there
are altogether five pieces of cloth for the deceased male and eight
pieces of cloth for the deceased female. [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988).]

As in bathing a deceased person, it is wajib that the person dressing
the deceased in the Kafan, must get the permission of the heir of the
deceased.


