Chapter Nine : Dressing the Deceased in the Kafan
=================================================

Please note that when dressing the deceased in the Kafan, any hair,
nails or skin that has become detached from the body, must be placed
within the Kafan when it is closed, before the burial.

**For a Woman**

a) First of all you need to lay the Chadar (sheet) on a clean surface
and place the deceased at the top end, parallel with the length of the
sheet. The Chadar should be twice the length of the body, plus some
more, so that you may tie the top and bottom when finished. [Wajib]

b) Tie the bodice around the chest. [Optional]

c) Put the Lung (loin cloth) on from the waist to the knees (preferably
from the breasts to the feet.). The lung should be fastened so that the
knot lies on the back. [Wajib]

d) Hunoot should be administered for the pleasure of Allah whereby
crushed camphor should be rubbed on the forehead, both palms, both
knees, both the big toes, and on the apex of the nose.

e) Place the Ran Paich under the middle (waist) and tie firmly to
fasten the loin cloth so that the cotton placed on the private parts to
prevent staining, do not become displaced. [Optional]

f) Place the Pairahan (shroud) over from the shoulders to the feet.
[Wajib]

g) Place the Orhni (scarf) and Qasaba (triangular kerchief) on the
head. [Optional]

h) Flip the end of the Chadar up and over the feet so that it covers
the entire body and tie it loosely at the head and also at the feet. The
head tie is loose so that you may open it at the burial site and show
the blood relatives the face of the deceased. [Wajib]

**For a Man**

a) First of all you need to lay the Chadar(sheet) on a clean surface
and place the deceased at the top end, parallel with the length of the
sheet. The Chadar should be twice the length of the body, plus some
more, so that you may tie the top and bottom when finished. [Wajib]

b) Put the Lung (loin cloth) on from the waist to the knees. The lung
should be fastened so that the knot coincides with the navel. [Wajib]

c) Hunoot should be administered for the pleasure of Allah whereby
crushed camphor should be rubbed on the forehead, both palms, both
knees, both the big toes, and on the apex of the nose.

d) Place the Ran Paich under the middle (waist) and tie firmly to
fasten the loin cloth so that the cotton placed on the private parts to
prevent staining, do not become displaced. [Optional]

e) Place the Pairahan (shroud) over from the shoulders to the feet.
[Wajib]

f) Place the Ammama (turban) on the head. It should be wound around the
head, so that it's border on the right side, passes under the chin and
is spread on the left side of the breast, and the border on the left
side passes under the chin and is spread on the right side of the
breast. [Optional]

g) Flip the end of the Chaadar up and over the feet so that it covers
the entire body and tie it loosely at the head and also at the feet. The
head tie is loose so that you may open it at the burial site and show
the blood relatives the face of the deceased. [Wajib]

The Do Nots and Makroohaat (Undesirables) of Kafan

It is Makroohaat (undesirable) to do the following with regards to the
Kafan:

a) Do not cut the Kafan with steel or iron objects.

b) Do not add sleeves or tukma to the Kafan.

c) Try to select material that has adequate length and width so you do
not have to sew several pieces of cloth together to make up the
lengths.

d) Do not moisten thread, used on the Kafan, with spittle.

e) Do not perfume the Kafan.

f) Do not use silken cloth for the Kafan.

g) Do not wind the ends of the turban (for a man) so that the ends come
around the chin and onto the breast.


**Chapter Ten : The Funeral and Funeral Prayers (Namaz of Janaza )**

When Sighting a Coffin or Deceased Person for the First Time "Innaa
lillaahi wa inna ilayhi raaji-o'on allaahu akbar. Haad'aa maa
wa-a'danallaahu wa Rasooluhu wa s'adaqallaahu wa Rasooluh. Allaahumma
zadnaa eemaanan wa tasleemaa alh'amdu lillaahil lad'ee ta-a'zzaza
bilqudrati wa qaharal I'baada bilmawat."

(Verily to Allah we belong and to Him we must return. Allah is Supreme.
This is what Allah and His Prophet promised us. Allah and His Prophet
spoke the truth. O Allah! Strengthen our faith and resignation unto
Thee. All praise is due to Allah Who is strong because of His Might and
power and subdued the servants with death." [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988),
pg. 147]

**Virtues of Carrying and Walking Behind the Coffin**

It has been narrated by imam Jafar as-Sadiq [A.S.] that:

If a faithful believer walks behind the coffin of a deceased believer
and buries him / her, Allah [SWT] will send 70 angels to his / her grave
on the Day of Judgement. These angels will then accompany the
resurrected individual to the place of judgement and will at all times
be praying for forgiveness and salutations on the person. [Sayyid, Hadi
Husayn (1988), pg. 143]

For a person who carries the Bier on his / her shoulder, Allah [S.W.T.]
will forgive 25 major sins of the person.

**Dua of 40 Momins**

It is narrated from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq [A.S.] that Allah [S.W.T.] will
forgive the unseen sins of the deceased if 40 Momins recite the
following dua over the body of the deceased:

"Allahhumma laa naa'-lamu minhu/minhaa (for female) illa. Khayran wa
anta aa'-lamu bihee/bihaa (for female) minnaa."

(O Allah! We are only aware of the good deeds of this dead body but You
know much more about him / her than us.) [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988),
pg. 144]

**Duas to be Recited in Funeral Procession with the Coffin**

It has been narrated by the Holy Prophet of Islam [S.W.S.] that there
would not be an angel who is bought to tears and who will show kindness
when hearing the following dua:

"Allahu akbar haad'aa maa wa-a'danal-laahoo wa rasooluhoo wa
s'adaqqal-laahoo wa rasooluh. Allaahumma zid'naa eemaanan wa tasleemaa.
Alh'amdu lillaahil lad'ee ta-a'zzad'a bil-qudrati wa qaharal I'baada
bil-mawat."

(God is great! This is what had been promised to us by God and His
Prophet and Allah and His Prophet are true. O Allah elevate us in faith,
obedience and piety. All praise is for God Who dominates on account of
His Might and Who has subdued mankind with death.)[Sayyid, Hadi Husayn
(1988), pg. 145]

There are many blessings in accompanying the deceased in the funeral
procession. Refrain from talking about worldly issues while in
procession and recite the following:

"Ghafarallaahu lakum laa ilaaha illallaahu h'aqqun muh'ammadun
rasoolollaahi a'liyyun ameerul moo-mineena waliyullaahi fatimatuz
zahraa-u s'afwatullaah alh'asanu walh'usaynu sibt'aa rasoolilaahi wal
a-immatut' t'ahireena hujajullaah. Haad'aa maa wa-a'danaallaahu wa
s'adaqa rasooluhoo wa ballaghal mursaloon."

(May Allah pardon you. There is no deity but Allah, the Righteous,
Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah; Ali, the Commander of the faithfuls is
the friend of Allah, Fatimah tuz Zahra is the chosen one of Allah;
Hassan and Hussain are the grandsons of the Messenger of Allah; and pure
Imams are the indisputable proofs of Allah, this is what Allah has
promised and (also) promised by the Prophet of Allah. This is what is
verified by Allah and by His prophet and the Prophets have delivered the
same.) [Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988), pg. 146]

Recite the triple testimony and continually pray for forgiveness and
salvation for the deceased:

"Ashhadu an laa illaha illallaah Ashhadu anna muh'ammadan rasoolullaah
Ashhadu anna a'liyyan waliyyullaah."

(I bear witness that there is no god but Allah I bear witness that
Muhammad [S.W.S] is His Prophet I bear witness that Ali [A.S.] is friend
of Allah.)

[Sayyid, Hadi Husayn (1988), pg. 148]


