Chapter 1 : Chapter On Contingency of the Universe and Proof of the Existence of Its Creator H 209, Ch. 1, H 1
==============================================================================================================

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ya'qub has narrated from Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn
Hashim from his father, from al-Hassan ibn Ibrahim from Yunus ibn 'Abd
al-Rahman from Ali ibn Mansur who narrated the following.

"Hisham ibn al-Hakam has reported that in Egypt there lived a heretic
who had heard about Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) a great deal. He traveled
to Madina to debate the Imam but he missed to find the Imam therein.

He was told that the Imam has traveled to the city of Makkah. He then
left for Makkah and we were with the Imam (a.s.) when we came across him
during our performing Tawaf (the seven times walking around the Ka'bah).
The man's name was 'Abdul Malik also called abu 'Abdallah as his Kunyah
in Arabic. He touched Imam abu 'Abdallah's shoulder with his shoulder as
he walked along. The Imam asked him, "What is your name?" It is 'Abdul
Malik (meaning slave of the King).

" The man replied. "What is your Kunyah?" The Imam (a.s.) asked. "It is
abu 'Abdallah (meaning father of slave of Allah)." He replied. The Imam
then asked, "Who is this king whose slave you are?

Is he of the earthly kings or of the heavenly ones? Tell us about your
son. Is he a slave of the Lord of the heavens or a slave of the Lord of
the earth? Say whatever you may it will be against you."

Hisham has said that I asked him (the heretic man), "Why do you not
answer?" The man seemed to dislike my words. The Imam (a.s.) then told
him, "Meet us when we finish our Tawaf (walking around the Ka'bah)." The
heretic man came to the Imam (a.s) later and sat in front of the Imam
(a.s.) and we were all gathered around him.

The Imam (a.s.) then asked him, "Do you know that the earth has an
underside and an upperside?" The man replied, "Yes, I know it." The Imam
then asked, "Have you gone in the underside of the earth?" The man
replied, "No, I have not gone there."

The Imam (a.s.) then asked, "Do you know what is therein?" He said, "I
do not know but I guess there is nothing therein." The Imam (a.s.) then
said, "Guessing is weakness. Why do you not acquire certainty?" The Imam
(a.s.) then asked, "Have you climbed up into the sky?"

The man replied, "No, I have not done so." The Imam (a.s.) then asked,
"Do you know what is up there?" He replied, "No, I do not know." The
Imam (a.s.) said, "It is very strange. Without reaching the East or
West, without going under the earth or climbing up the sky and not even
have crossed anything to know what is behind you deny what is in them.
Does any man of reason deny what he does not know?"

The heretic man then said, "No one has ever come up with such
statements to me as you have." The Imam (a.s.) then said, "So you are
uncertain about Him. Perhaps He is or may be He does not exist." The
heretic man then said, "Perhaps He is." The Imam then said, "O man, one
who does not know has no authority over the one who knows.

O Egyptian brethren, listen carefully. We have no doubts in the
existence of Allah (God). Think about the sun, the moon, the day and the
nights follow each other and do not miss their turns or become confused.
They each have its place and do not have any choice.

If they had any other choice they would not come back again. If they
had a choice the day would not end with night and the night would not
end in the day. They are forced to continue, O Egyptian brethren, I
swear byAllah (God). The One who has forced them is stronger then them
and greater.

What people speak of and you guess it is (dahr) motionless time if it
was so, then when it would take them away it would not return them and
if time have returned them then why it is not taking them away?

These things, O Egyptian brethren, are compelled. Why the sky is up
high and why the earth is low? Why the sky does not fall down on earth?
Why the earth does not flow one layer over the other and the two do not
stick to each other and why those on it do not stick to it?"

The man then said, "God their Lord has made them to hold together."
Hisham has said, "He professed belief in God in the presence of Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.)." "Humran then said to the Imam, "May Allah take my
soul in service for your cause, if heretics profess belief in Allah
(God) before you it is because the unbelievers converted to faith
because of your father."

The man who had just professed belief in Allah requested Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) to allow him to become one of his students. The Imam
then asked Hisham to teach him. Hisham taught him well and he became a
teacher for the people in Syria and Egypt. His purification was very
well and the Imam (a.s.) became happy with him."

H 210, Ch. 1, h 2

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from Muhammad ibn Ali from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn abu Hashim
from Ahmad ibn Muhsin al-Maythami who said that I was with abu Mansur
al-Mutatbbib who said the following.

"One of my friends has said that he was with ibn abu al-'Awja' and
'Abdallah ibn al- Muqaffa' in the holy Mosque of Makkah and ibn
al-Muqaffa' said, "Do you see these creatures, pointing towards the
location where people walk seven times around the Kabah'?

Of all these no one deserves to be called a human being accept that
Shaikh sitting there, meaning thereby Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). The
rest is garble and beasts." Upon this ibn abu al-'Awja' said, "For what
reason do you call him a human being and not the rest?" Ibn alMuqaffa'
then replied, "Because I saw with him what I did not see with the
others."

Ibn abu al-"Awja' then said, "We must test your claim." Ibn al-Muqaffa'
then said, "I advise you not to do so lest you will lose whatever faith
you have. Ibn abu al-'Awja' then said, "I do not think that is what you
mean. I think you are afraid of failing to substantiate what you have
just said about this man." Ibn al-Muqaffa' then said, "If that is what
you think then go to him and protect yourself as much as you can.

Be strong as much as you can so you are not harnnessed and note all
points against and in your favor. Ibn abu al-'Awja' then left and ibn
al-Muqaffa' and I remained there. When ibn abu al-'Awja' returned he
said, "Woe is you, O ibn al- Muqaffa'.

This is not a human being even though he lives in this world. He is a
spiritual being but appears in the form of man whenever he wants the out
world and turns into a spiritual being whenever he wants the inner
world. That is the way he is." Ibn al-Muqaffa' then asked, "How does
that happen?" Ibn abu al-'Awja' then said, "I sat near him and when
everyone had gone he turned to me and said, "If it is the way they
(people walking around the Ka'bah) say, which is true then they are
saved and you are destroyed. If it is the way you say it is, which is
not so then you and they are all equal." I then asked, "May Allah be
kind to you.

What is it that we say and what is it that they say? We all say the
same thing." He said, "How can what you say be equal to what they say?
They say that they will have a return, a day of receiving their rewards
and penalties. They believe in a religion which says that in the heavens
is the Lord and that they are habitable while you say that they are in
ruins and there is nothing in them.

"Ibn abu al-'Awja' has said, "I then found the opportunity to speak and
I asked, "What then keeps this Lord, if it is true the way they say that
He exists, from appearing to His creatures and call them to His worship
so that no two people would oppose each other? Why is He hiding from
them and has only sent messengers? If He would have been in direct
contact with them it would have been more helpful to have faith in Him."
He then responded, "Woe is you, how someone who is already shown His
power within you is hiding from you?

He brought you up. You did not even exist. He made you grow when you
were so small. He gave you strength and power when you were so weak and
will make you weak again after being strong. He make you sick after
being healthy and can give you good health after suffering sickness. He
can make you happy after you experience anger and make you angry after
being happy. He can make you sad after your joy and give you joy after
sadness.

He can give love after your experiencing hatred and hatred after
enjoying love. He can give you determination after your uncertainty and
uncertainty after having determination. He can give you strong desires
after your experiencing dislike and dislike after having strong desires.
He can give you willingness after experiencing fear and concerns and
fear after having strong willingness.

He can give you hope after despair and despair after having a great
deal of hope. He can give you good remembrance of what you had no idea
and remove what you may have had as a belief." He kept reminding and
counting for me the effects of His power within my soul that I could not
deny and I begin to have a feeling that all that is between me and him
will all appear in the open."

From the same source the following is narrated from a number of our
people in a Marfu' manner as additional statements to the above
discourse of ibn abu al-'Awja' with Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). That abu
al-'Awja' came the next day to the meeting of the Imam and sat down
quietly. The Imam (a.s.) said to him, "Would you like to review the
issues we discussed yesterday?" He replied, "I did intend to do so, O
son of the messenger of Allah."

The Imam then said, "It is strange that one who does not believe in
Allah acknowledges the existence of the messenger of Allah." He replied,
"It is only the habit that made me say so." The 'Alim (the Imam) then
asked, "What is it that keeps you quite?" He replied, "It is your
excellence and awesome spiritual ability that hold my tongue back from
speaking.

I have seen many scholars and have debated many theologians but I never
experienced such an awesome feeling from them as I feel in your
presence." The Imam then said, " It may happen. I would like to open
this session with a question to you. The Imam turned to him and asked,
"Are you created or uncreated?" 'Abdul Karim ibn abu al-'Awja' answered,
" I am uncreated." The 'Alim then asked him, "Describe for us then, how
you might have been if you were created."

'Abdal Karim remained quiet and confused and began to scribble scrabble
with a piece of wood, saying, long, wide, deep, short, moving and
motionless all these are the qualities of His creatures." The 'Alim
(Imam) then said, "If you do not know anything other than these as the
qualities of the creation then consider yourself a creature because that
is what you find within yourself that take place and come into
existence."

'Abdal Karim then said, "You have asked me a question that no one
before had ever asked and no one ever would ask afterwards." Abu
'Abdallah then said, "It is fine. I noticed that you did not ask any
thing in the time past but how would you know that you will not ask any
thing in future? Besides, O 'Abdal Karim, what you said is against your
notion that from the beginning all things are equal. How then you made
them before and after?

The Imam then said, "O 'Abdal Karim let me explain it for you. Suppose
if you had a bag with you full of pearls and someone asked you, "Is
there a Dinar in your bag?" You then denied and said, "No, there is no
Dinar in my bag." The person then said, "Alright, then describe for me
the qualities of the Dinar but you had no knowledge of the qualities of
the Dinar.

Could you deny the existence of the Dinar that was from the bag but you
did not know about it?" he replied, "No, I would not deny." The Imam
then said, "The world is bigger, taller and wider than a bag. Perhaps in
the world there is a creature as such that you do not know in whose case
you would not be able to tell the qualities of the created from the
non-created." 'Abdal Karim remained quiet but some of his people agreed
to accept Islam and a few of them remained.

He came again to the meeting of the Imam on the third day and said, "I
like to reverse the question." The Imam replied, "Ask whatever you
like." He then asked, "What is the proof that bodies did not exist and
then they came into existence?" The Imam then said, "I have not seen
anything small or large that on adding to it something of the same size
would not make it bigger and in this there is a change and
transformation from the first condition. If it, however, would have been
eternal, there would have been no changing and transformation.

What may cease to exist or change it may come into existence and may
get destroyed, thus, with its existence after its none existence is
entering into the state of coming into being and as being eternal this
will take it into nothingness but the two qualities of being eternal and
nothingness and the qualities of a contingent and something without a
beginning in one thing do come together."

'Abdal Karim then said, "Suppose, I noticed that with a view to the two
conditions you mentioned you considered it a proof of their contingency.
If, however, things would remain small, despite the addition, then how
would you prove their contingency?" The 'Alim then said, "We speak of
this universe that is already there.

Were we to take it away and place another universe in its place
nothingness would have, certainly, been a stronger proof of its
contingency than its removal and its replacing with a different one. I,
however, will answer you according to your assumption. If things would
still remain small but it would certainly come into one's thinking that
whenever something like it added to another thing it then would be
bigger.

The fact that it can change is proof of its becoming temporal and in
its changing condition is proof of its contingency. There is nothing
beyond it for you, O 'Abdal Karim. 'Abdal Karim had nothing else to
say.

Next year he met the Imam (a.s.) in Makkah again and people from his
followers said that 'Abdal Karim has become a Muslim. The Imam told him
that 'Abdal Karim was blind in this matter and would not become a
Muslim. When he saw the 'Alim he said, "My master, my chief!" The 'Alim
then asked him, "What brings you here?" He then replied, "It is the
habits of the body and the traditions of the town to see what craziness
makes them shave and throw pebbles." The 'Alim said, "It seems that you
still live in your arrogance and misguidance, O 'Abdal Karim."

He began to speak but the Imam said, "Disputation during Hajj is not
permissible. The Imam freed his gown from the hand of the heretic man
and said, "If it is the way you say and it is not true, then we as well
as you are all saved. However, if it is the way we say and it is true we
are saved but you are destroyed." 'Abdal Karim then turned to his people
saying, "I feel pain in my heart. Take me back. They took him away and
he died.

H 211, Ch. 1, h 3

Muhammad ibn Ja'far al-Asadi has narrated from Muhammad ibn Esma'il
al-Barmaki al-Razi from al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan ibn Bard al-Daynuri from
Muhammad ibn Ali from Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah al-Khurasani the an
employee of Imam al-Rida (a.s.) who has said the following.

"An atheist man came to Imam abu al-Hassan (a.s.) while group of people
was present there. The Imam (a.s.) said to him, "Consider, if what you
say would be true which is not true, in such case, we all will be equal.
Our fasting, prayers, giving charity and belief will not harm us." The
man remained quite.

The Imam then said, "If what we say would be true, which, in fact, is
true then you will be the one facing your destruction and we will be
saved." The man then said, "Please help me learn where is He and how is
He?" The Imam then said, "What is the matter with you? What you say is
not right. He is the 'where' of 'where' but without 'where'. He is the
'how' of 'how' without 'how'. He can not be defined with 'how' and
'where' and can not be comprehended with the senses or compared with
anything."

The man then asked, "Tell me then when was He?" The Imam replied, "You
tell me, when He was not there so that I would tell when He was there?"
The man then asked, "What is the proof for His existence?"

The Imam said, "When I look at my body I find that I can not do any
addition or alteration to it such as width and breadth or remove its
sufferings and attract all its interests. I then come to understand that
for this establishment there must be a founder and then I acknowledge
His existence. Besides, I see all the orbiting planets and stars, the
creation of the clouds and driving of the winds, the paths of the sun,
the moon, the stars and other things of the marvelous clear signs I come
to believe that there is One who has designed and created all such
wonderful things"

H 212, Ch. 1, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Khaffaf or from
his father from Muhammad ibn Ishaq who has said the following.
"'Abdallah al-Daysani asked Hisham ibn al-Hakam, 'Do you have a God?'"
He replied, "Yes, I have a God." He then asked, "Is He powerful?" Hisham
then replied, "Yes, He is powerful and the most powerful One."

The man then asked, "Can He fit the whole world inside an egg without
any change in the size of either one?" Hisham then said, "Give me a
little time." The man said, "I give you one whole year and he left."
Hisham then went to see Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) for an Answer. After
asking permission that he was granted Hisham explained, "Al-Daysani
asked me a question today and I see no one except Allah and yourself to
answer it."

The Imam then asked, "What is the question?" Hisham restated the
question that al-Daysani had asked. The Imam then said, "O Hisham, how
many are your senses?" He replied, "They are five." The Imam then asked,
"Which one is the smallest?" He replied, "The seeing sense." The Imam
then asked, "How big is its size?" He replied, "It is about the size of
the pupil or smaller."

The Imam then said, "O Hisham, look in front of you and above you and
then tell me what you have seen." Hisham then replied, "I can see the
sky, the earth, the houses, the buildings, the land, the mountains and
the water canals." The Imam then said, "The One who has been able to fit
all that you can see in a pupil or even a smaller thing is also able to
fit the whole world in side an egg without any change in the size of any
one of them.

Hisham bowed down and kissed the feet, the hands and the head of the
Imam (a.s.) saying, "This is enough for me O descendant of the holy
Prophet and then left for his home. The next day al-Daysani met him and
said, "I have come just to say greetings to you and not for an answer to
my question" Hisham then said, "Even if you may have come for an answer
it is ready." Al-Daysani then left to meet Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and
after asking permission for a meeting which was granted he sat down and
said, "O Ja'far ibn Muhammad, "Guide me to my Lord."

The Imam then asked, "What is your name?" He then left without
answering the Imam and his people asked him, "Why did you not answer the
Imam?" He replied, "Were I to tell him that it is 'Abdallah he would
then ask that who is this Lord whose slave are you?" They then said,
"Return to him and ask him to guide you to your Lord without asking your
name." He then returned back to the Imam and asked, "O Ja'far ibn
Muhammad, "Guide me to my Lord but do not ask my name."

The Imam asked him to sit down. A young boy, son of the Imam was there
playing with an egg in his hand and the Imam asked, "Fetch me the egg O
young man. The boy gave the egg to the Imam who said, "O Daysani, this
is a secure castle. It has a thicker outer shell and inside of it there
is much finer shell inside of which there is liquid gold and flowing
silver.

The liquid gold does not mix with the flowing silver nor does the
flowing silver mix the liquid gold. Such is its condition no expert
comes out therefrom to find out what is beneficial to it to report back
all about it nor any corrupting agent enters therein so that its
problems would be reported. No one knows if it is created for a male or
a female. It will burst out with colors of a peacock. Do you think there
is someone to design and manage it?

Al-Daysani thought quietly and said, "I testify that there is no god
but Allah Who is the only Lord and has no partner. I testify that
Muhammad (s.a) is His servant and messenger and that you are the Imam
and an authority from Allah over his creatures and I repent because of
previous beliefs."

H 213, Ch. 1, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from 'Abbass ibn 'Amr
al-Faqimi from Hisham ibn al-Hakam in the narration about the atheist
who came to Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) and the Imam had explained to him
the following.

"You assume that there are two eternal and powerful powers (who control
the universe) or that both are weak or only one of them is weak and the
other is powerful. If they both are powerful why then neither one ever
makes an effort to remove the other one so only one would become in
control of the universe?

If you would assume that one is powerful and the other is weak then it
is proof that there is only one, as we believe because the weakness of
the other is so apparent. Besides, if you would say that they are two
then they either agree with each other in all matters or disagree in the
same way.

Since we see the creation works in an organized manner, the orbiting
objects continue to do so, the organization is one, the day, the night,
the sun and the moon all show that the organization is valid and
correct. The harmony in the matter shows that the organizer is One. If
your claim of two would involve you to believe that there must be a gap
in between to show two things and in that case, the gap will become a
third one and eternal.

Thus, it will involve you in three and this will involve to say what
you said about the two where you needed to have a gap and in this case
it will become five and so on indefinite in number and multiplicity."

Hisham has said that of the questions of the atheist from Imam abu
'Abdallah one was that what is the evidence of His existence? The Imam
(a.s.) answered, "The existence of the effects (activities) show that
someone has produced those effects and activities. Consider, when you
see a well constructed building you learn that there is someone, who has
built it even if you have not seen the builder with your own eyes." The
atheist then asked, "What is it then?" The Imam replied, "He is
something but different from all things.

I repeat my statement that speaks about Him as a thing. He is a thing
in the sense of the reality of things except that He does not have a
body and form. He does not have a feeling (like our sense of feeling) or
touching and He does not comprehend with the five senses (as we do).
Imaginations can not comprehend Him and the timeless (Dahr) times does
not reduce Him and the times do not change Him."

H 214, Ch. 1, h 6

Muhammad ibn Ya'qub has said that a number of our people have narrated
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi from his father, from Ali ibn
al-Ni'man, from ibn Maskan, from Dawud ibn Farqad from abu Sa'id
al-Zuhri from Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) who said the following. "For the
people of understanding as proof of the existence of the Allah it is
enough that He has created all things and has kept them full under His
control.

It is enough proof that He is the Most powerful king. It is enough
proof that His Majesty is manifest everywhere. That His light is the
Most bright that His testimony is the Most truthful. There is enough
proof of His existence in what the people speak and what the messengers
have brought and what he has revealed to people as proof of His Own
existence."


