Chapter 16 : Chapter On the Meanings of the Names of Allah and Their Derivatives H 309, Ch. 16, H 1
===================================================================================================

A group of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from al-Qasim ibn Yahya from his grandfather al-Hassan ibn Rashid from
'Abdallah ibn Sinan who has said the following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the interpretation of the verse of
the holy Quran, 'In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.'
The Imam replied, "The first letter B in the Arabic version signifies
Baha 'Ullah means beauty of Allah. The second letter S' signifies Sana
'Ullah means radiance of Allah. The third letter M signifies Majdullah
means the Grandeur of Allah or according to some other narrators,
Mujdullah means Kingdom of Allah.

Allah means; Lord of all things. And al-Rahman means the Beneficent to
all of His creatures in general. Al-Rahim means the Most Merciful to the
believers in particular."

H 310, Ch. 16, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from an-Nadr ibn Suwayd
from Hisham ibn al- Hakam who has said that he asked abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.), about the names of Allah and their derivations and roots.

"What is the root from which the word Allah is derived?" The Imam
replied, "O Hisham, the word Allah is derived from 'ilah, that is, the
One Who is worshipped and the One who is worshipped is supposed to be
worth worshipping. The name of Allah is different from His Own self.

Whoever worships the name not the meaning has become a heathen and has,
in fact, worshipped nothing. Whoever worships the name and its meaning
jointly, he becomes a polytheist because of worshipping two gods.

Whoever worships the meaning of the word Allah only he, in reality, has
worshipped the One Allah (God). O Hisham, did you grasp it?" Hisham
requested, "Kindly enlighten me more." The Imam added, "Allah has
ninety-nine names. If each name had a separate meaning then each meaning
would have been a god.

Allah is One only and all His names stand for just One reality and all
these names are other than Allah Himself. O Hisham, bread is the name of
something to eat. Water is the name of something to drink. Dress is the
name of something to wear on.

Fire is the name of something that burns. O Hisham, did you fully grasp
the point so you can defend your belief and contest successfully against
our opponents, who, along with Allah, the Exalted, the Great, except
things other than Him?" Hisham replied, "Yes, I did understand." The
Imam said, "O Hisham, may Allah benefit you thereby and grant you
steadfastness." Hisham (the narrator) says, "I swear by Allah, no one
has ever defeated me on the issue of the Oneness of Allah until now."

H 311, Ch. 16, h 3

A group of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Barqi from al- Qasim ibn Yahya from his grandfather al-Hassan ibn
Rashid from abul Hassan Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.), who was questioned about
the meaning of the word Allah. The Imam replied, "He (Allah) dominates
all things small or big."

H 312, Ch. , h

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ya'qub ibn Yazid
from al-'Abbass ibn Hilal who has said the following.

"I asked Imam al-Rida (a.s.), about the words of Allah, 'Allah is the
Light of the heavens and the earth'" (24:35). The Imam replied, "Allah
is the Guide for all that is in the heavens and the Guide for all that
is on the earth."

According to another Hadith narrated by al-Barqi,(the Imam said),
"Allah has guided everyone in the heavens and every one on the earth."

H 313, Ch. 16, h 4

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya from Fudayl ibn 'Uthman from ibn abu Ya'fur who has
said the following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), about the words of Allah, The Majestic,
the Glorious, 'He (Allah) is the first and the last.' (57:3) We have
understood His being the first but explain for us the meaning of His
being the last." The Imam said, "There is nothing in the universe, but
that is subject to annihilation, alteration, change, decay, transition
from one color to another, from one shape to another and from one
quality to another.

They increase, decrease and change from decrease to increase, except
He, Who is the Lord of the worlds. He alone is eternal and in one state.
He is the first, before every thing and the last eternally. His
attributes and names do not change as they do in the case of others. A
man at one time is dust, at other time flesh and blood, then turns into
decaying bones and finally becomes dust. A piece of date at one time is
raw, at another time ripe, mature and then it dries up. With every
change, the names and attributes also change. Allah, the Majestic, the
Glorious is different from all such things."

H 314, Ch. 16, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
ibn 'Udhaynah from Muhammad ibn Hakim from Maymun al-Ban who has said
the following.

"I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying to a question about Allah being
the first and the last." The Imam replied, "His being the first means
there was no first before Him and no beginning preceded Him at all. His
being the last means that He has no end because it is an attribute of
the created and He is eternal, the first and the last. He has always
been and He will always be without any beginning and any end. Nothing
new happens to Him and does not change from one state to another. He is
the Creator of all things."

H 315, Ch. 16, h 6

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah in a marfu' manner, has narrated from abu
Hashim al-Ja'fari who has said the following.

"I was in the company of abu Ja'far al-Thani, the 2nd (a.s.), when a
person asked him, "The names and attributes of the Lord, the Most Holy,
the Most High, mentioned in His book (the Holy Quran) are they He
Himself?"

The Imam replied, "Your question has two aspects. If you say that they
are His Own Self, meaning that He has plurality and multiplicity, then
Allah is far exalted from being as such. If you mean that names and
attributes of Allah had eternally been there, this also has a double
meaning. (Firstly) if you mean, that names and attributes have eternally
been in the knowledge of Allah and He eternally deserved them, it is
true and quite right.

If you mean that the letters, pictures, spellings and syllables of
names and attributes were eternal, then we seek refuge from Him against
such belief. Allah existed but there were no creatures. He created names
and attributes as a means between His Own-self and the creatures.
Through these means they pray to Him and ask Him for help and names are
the means to speak of Him.

Allah existed without being mentioned. The One mentioned through names
is Allah the eternal, Who will be there eternally. Names and attributes
are created their meaning and what they indicate is Allah, Who is far
above plurality and combination, which happens only to the moving
things. You can not say that Allah is compiled. He is a great deal or
very little. He His Own-self is eternal. What is other than the Only
One, it is divisible. Allah is not divisible.

Not even in one's imaginations He can be though of as more or less.
Every divisible or being thought of as less or more, in one's
imagination, is created which is the sign of the existence of the
Creator. When you say Allah has power you in reality say that He does
not become frustrated due to weakness. In this way you negate weakness
from Him and consider it other than Him.

The same is the meaning of your saying that He is all knowing. With
this, you negate ignorance from Him and have considered it other than
Him. When Allah will destroy all things the form, spelling and syllables
will all be destroyed. Allah is and will eternally be there."

The man then said, "Why do we call our Lord All-hearing? The Imam said,
"Because every thing that can be heard is not hidden from Him. We do not
ascribe to Him the hearing ability that exists in the heads. In the same
way we call Him All-seeing. It is because every thing that can be seen
like colors or individuals etc., are not hidden from Him. We do not call
Him Allseeing because of blinking eye.

In the same way we call Him Subtle because of His knowledge of delicate
things such as insects, etc., or even more delicate things. (It is
because of His knowledge of) that, wherefrom such things emerge and of
the intelligence, desires for reproduction, compassion for their
offspring, their guarding each other, their carrying food and drink to
their offspring in the mountains, wilderness, valleys and desolate
places.

From this we know that their Creator is Subtle but without the
condition of subtlety. Such conditions are for the creatures, who are
conditioned with conditions.

We also call our Lord powerful but not because of the aggressiveness
that the creatures display. If so, there a similarity would have existed
as well as degrees of decrease that would involve increases. Whatever
would decrease is not eternal and is weak. To our Lord, the Most Holy,
the Most High, no one is similar, no contrary, no resemblance, no
conditions, no end and no seeing of eyes.

It is unlawful for the hearts to analogize Him. It is unlawful for the
Awham (intuitive power) to limit Him. It is unlawful for one's
consciousness to contain Him. He is far Glorious and Majestic and above
coming within the reach of the means of His creatures or have the sings
of His servants. He is High and Great and far above such matters."

H 316, Ch. 16, h 7

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ibn Mahbub from
those he mentioned from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"A man said, Allahu Akbar (Allah is Greatest) in his presence." The
Imam asked, "Allah is Greatest than who?" The man replied, "Greatest
than everything." The Imam said, "You have considered Him limited." The
man asked, "Then, how should I say it?" The Imam replied, "Say, 'Allah
is Greatest beyond description.'"

H 317, Ch. 16, h 8

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Marwak ibn 'Ubayd from Jumay' ibn 'Umayr who has said the following.

"Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) asked me, 'What is Allah is Greatest?" I
replied, "Allah is Greatest of all things." The Imam further asked,
"Were there other things so Allah would be considered the greatest of
them?" I then asked, "What then is the meaning thereof?"' The Imam
replied, "Allah is far greater than all descriptions."

H 318, Ch. 16, h 9

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn 'Ubayd from
Yunus from Hisham ibn al-Hakam who has said the following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words Glorious is Allah." The
Imam said, "It means Distinction of Allah (His being free of all
shortcomings)."

H 319, Ch. 16, h 10

Ahmad ibn Mihran has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim ibn 'Abdallah
al-Hassani from Ali ibn Asbat. From Sulayman Mawla Tirbal from Hisham
al-Jawaliqi who has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
about the meaning of the words of Allah, the Majestic, the Glorious,
Glorious Allah (Qur'an, 12:108, 23:91, 28:68, 37:159, 52:43, 59:23). The
Imam replied, "They denote Allah's being above all things in
perfection."

H 320, Ch. 16, h 11

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad and Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa all of
them from abu Hashim al- Ja'fari who has said the following.

"I asked abu Ja'far al-Thani, the 2nd (a.s.), "What is the meaning of
the One?" The Imam replied, "It means the unanimity of all tongues in
speaking of Allah's Oneness. If you ask them as to who has created them,
they all say it is Allah, Who has created them."


**Chapter 17 : Chapter on Another Chapter (Related) to the Previous
Chapter**

Some additions concerning the different connotations of names (and
attributes) used both for Allah, the Creator and the created.

H 321, Ch. 17, h 1

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from al-Mukhtar ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Mukhtar al-Hamadani and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from 'Abdallah ibn
al-Hassan al-'Alawi both of them from al- Fath ibn Yazid al-Jurjani from
abu al-Hassan (a.s.) al-Thani or al-Thalith who has said the
following.

"I heard the Imam saying, 'He (Allah) is the Subtle, All-aware,
All-hearing, All-seeing, the One, the Self-sufficient, Who does not have
any children, is not any one's child and there is no one similar to
Him.

Had Allah been as those believing in similitude (al-Mushabbihah) say
there would have been no distinction between the Creator and the
created, the inventor and the invented but He is the Inventor.

There would have been no distinction between Allah and what He has
given body and form to bring into existence. In fact, nothing is similar
to Him and He is not similar to anything." I then said, "Yes, may Allah
take my soul in your service, but you just said, The One the
Selfsufficient, that no one is similar to Him. Allah is One and a man is
one. Are the two not similar in oneness?" The Imam replied, "O Fath, you
said something impossible.

May Allah grant you steadfastness. Similarity is in meaning. In the
case of names they are all the same. The names refer to the nominee.
When it is said a man it, at the same time, is a report about one body
and not two bodies.

In fact, man is not one thing. His parts, colors and the color of his
colors that consist of distinct parts, that are not equal. His blood is
different from his flesh. His nerves are different from his vines, his
hairs are different from his skin. The black things in him are different
from the white things therein. The same is true of all other creatures.
Human beings are one in name but not in meaning.

Allah, Great Whose Majesty is, is only One and no one other than Him is
one. There is no difference, imbalance, increase or decrease in Him.
Human beings are created, designed, compounded of different parts and
various substances. Only when combined becomes one."

I then said, "May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, and
grant you happiness, would you explain to me the meaning of your words
"Subtle and All-aware? Explain it as you just did with the One? I know
that His Subtlety or kindness is different from those of His creatures
but I like more clarity." The Imam said, "O Fath, we said He is Subtle
it is because of His knowledge of the delicate creatures, may Allah give
you success and steadfastness, so you should consider His creation.

Consider His design in delicate and not so delicate plants and other
creatures like animals, small and large such as flies and cricket and
smaller ones that even eyes can not. Because of their small size no one
knows which is male and which is female, which is new born and which is
old.

We find tremendously delicate things with signs of His Subtlety, in
their desire for reproduction, running away from death, collecting what
is good for them and what is in the depth of the oceans and on the barks
of trees, in the wilderness and desolate places.

We find more fastidiousness in such animals and their ability to
communicate with each other, and what their offspring understand from
them, their transporting food to their young and their colors, red along
with yellow, white along with red so fine that our eyes are not able to
catch for their very exquisite shape. Our eyes are not able to see them
and our hands are not able to touch them.

All these show that the Creator of all such marvelous creatures are
Subtle Who is kind to all the creatures we mentioned. He has done it
without instruments and means. Every designer and manufacturer builds
and manufactures some thing from something but Allah does it from
nothing."

H 322, Ch. 17, h 2

It is narrated from Ali ibn Muhammad, in a mursal manner, from abu
al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) who has said the following to one of his
followers.

"May Allah, bestow up on you knowledge of the good, notice that Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, is eternal. Eternity is that attribute
which guides the wise that there was nothing before Him in eternity nor
is there anything with Him eternal. That this attribute is a miraculous
one has come to light from the acknowledgement of the 'Ammah (common
people) that there is nothing before Allah, with and after Him.

At the same time, it invalidates the belief that there was something
before or with Him. Had there been something with Him eternal He would
not have been the Creator of that thing. If it was with Him how then He
could have been its creator? Had there been something before Him then
that thing might have been His creator because of its existing
earlier.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Exalted, has ascribed certain names to
Himself. He told His creatures when He created them, give them the
ability to worship Him and made them responsible, to call Him with those
names. He called Himself All-hearing, All-seeing, Allpowerful, Guarding,
Rationalizing, Manifest, Hidden, Subtle, All-aware, Powerful, Majestic,
Wise, All-knowing and with such other similar names.

When the animosity-mongers, who speak lies heard us mention such names
as that there is nothing similar to Him and nothing of the creatures is
like Him they began to speak out.

"When you (the Imams (a.s.) say that there is nothing like Him and no
one is similar to Him then how is it that you also have those beautiful
names for yourselves? This is proof that you are similar to Him or in
certain conditions and not in other conditions because of having all
those beautiful names." It is said to them that Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High, made it necessary for His servants to have certain names
from among His names with differences in their meanings.

The difference is because one name may have two different meanings. One
example is what people consider permissible and is widely used. This is
the way Allah has addressed people. He has spoken to them by means of
things that they understand so that they will have no excuse in their
misdeeds.

A man is sometimes called a dog, a bull, sweet, bitter and a loin. All
these are different from him and his conditions. The names were not used
in their original meaning because man is not a loin or a dog etc. Note
this carefully, may Allah grant you blessings.

Allah is called All-knowing. It is other than the created knowledge.
With His knowledge of things He knows things and uses it to preserve His
future commands and the process of whatever He creates of His creatures,
destroys what He destroys of His creatures and without such knowledge He
would have been weak and ignorant.

We see that people of knowledge among people are called knowledgeable
because of the created knowledge, which they did not have at one time.
Perhaps such knowledge may go away from them and they become ignorant.

Allah is called All-knowing because He is not ignorant of anything.
Thus, the Creator and created are both called as having knowledge but
the meaning is different as you may have noticed.

Our Lord is called All-hearing but it is not through the perforated
piece and with sound so He would hear with it but would not see with it,
which is the case with us. We do not see with what we hear but Allah has
told us that from Him nothing of the sounds is hidden. His hearing is
not in the way we are called as hearing people. We are called as hearing
but the meaning is different.

In the same way is seeing not that He sees through a hole as we do and
can not use it for other uses. Allah sees but not by looking to an
object. We also are called as seeing but the meaning is different.

Allah is called Standing but not in the sense of standing in an upright
position on the legs as is the case with the things but that He has said
He is preserving as in the saying of a man, "standing for our affairs."
Allah stands over every soul and what it gains. The word standing is
also in the usage of people.

Words like remaining and standing also mean to suffice as in the words
as you may say to a man, "Stand up over the affairs of so and so" which
means deal with them in a sufficient manner. We stand on our legs, thus,
the name is similar but the meaning is different.

The name, Subtle is not in the sense of fastidiousness or being
infinitesimal but it is in the rarity and hard to perceive nature of
things. As an example it may be said, "It has become very delicate for
me and that so and so is very delicate in his manners and dealings."
This means that it is profound for intelligence and difficult to find.

It has become bottomless and delicate so much that even imagination is
not able to reach it. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, is far Subtle
to be comprehended through definitions or be combined in an attribute or
in the way we are subtle, small and delicate. Names are the same but
different in meaning.

The name al-Khabir, meaning All-aware, is for One Who knows all things
completely but not by means of experience and learning lessons from the
past. Experience and learning from mistakes are of the means of learning
for people. Without them there would exist no knowledge. One without
experience and learning lessons is an ignorant person.

Allah is Allaware eternally of what He has created but well aware and
expert among people are those who ask questions and learn. Our names are
the same but they, again, are different in meaning. The name al-Zahir
meaning clear and conspicuous is not because of being over and on top of
all things or sitting on them at their peak but it is because of His
domination and having power over all things. An example of this is when
a person says, "I over came my enemies or that Allah gave me victory
over my enemies."

In this there is report of the failure and victory. Also there is
Allah's domination over all things. Another example is that His
existence is clear for those who want (to know) Him. Nothing is hidden
from Him and that He is the guardian of all that He has curved and
fashioned.

In such case whose existence can be clearer than Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High? You will not live without His creatures, no matter
wherever you may be. Only within your own self there is enough of His
creation. His existence by far is clearer than ours. He manifest all by
His Own-self and is Known by His own self. We are of the same name but
the meaning is different.

The name al-Batin, means hidden. This is not in the sense of being
inside of things by means of diving or so but is in the sense of His
dealing, having knowledge, preserving and regulating the inside of all
things. As one may say, "I tried to find the inside to learn and
discover the secrets." Hidden for us is what is unseen and covered. In
this case again our names are the same but different in meaning.

The name al-Qahir, means subduing. It is not in the sense of plotting,
using certain devices and speaking attractive words or cunning means. It
is not the way people subdue each other. The victorious among people may
become subdued and vice versa. For Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High
all the creatures have the garment of weakness on them.

Due to the absence of obstacles in what He wills about them, it only
takes less than a blinking of the eye to say it Be and it is, comes into
existence. Subduing in our case is how I mentioned and explained. Our
names are alike but the meaning is different.

Thus, is the case for all the names although we have not mentioned all
of them. For learning a lesson what we have mentioned for you is
sufficient. May Allah be your and our helper in the matters of guidance
and success."


