Chapter 20 : Chapter About Al-'arsh and Al-kursi H 335, Ch. 20, H 1
===================================================================

A number of our people have narrated from Ahamad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi,
in a marfu' manner, who has said the following.

"Jathaliq, a christian scholar, asked Imam Ali (a.s.) saying, 'Tell me
about Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. Does He carry the 'Arsh or
'Arsh carries Him?" Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, "Allah, the Most Holy, the
Most High, is the One Who carries and has lifted the 'Arsh, the heavens
and earth and all that is between them from banishment. 'Allah (God)
prevents the heavens and the earth from falling apart. If they do fall
apart, then, no one besides Him can restore them. He is All-forbearing
and All-forgiving.

(35:41)' He then asked, "Tell me about His words, 'The angels will be
around the heavens and on that day eight of them will carry the Throne
of your Lord above all the creatures (69:17).' "How has He said it. You
just said that He carries the heavens, earth and all that is between
them."

Asked the man. Amirul Mu'minin then said, "Allah, the Most High,
created al-'Arsh (the Throne) from four lights. From a red wherefrom the
redness became red, a green light from which the greenness became green,
a yellow light whereby the yellowness became yellow.

He created it from a white light wherefrom is white and it is knowledge
which Allah has made the carriers to carry and that is the light of His
greatness. With His greatness and His light He has given sight to the
hearts of believers. Because of His greatness and light the ignorant
ones have become His enemies.

Through His greatness and light all those in heavens and on earth, all
His creatures seek to reach Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, by
means of their various deeds and mixed religions. All that is carried
Allah carries them with the light of His greatness and power. They are
not able to do any benefit, or harm, death or life or resurrection.

All things are carried. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, preserves
them from banishment and has control over both of them (heavens and
earth).

He is the life of all things, the light of all things. Glorious is He,
the Most High, far above what they say about Him. He is far high above
them with Greatness."

He then said tell me about Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, where
is He? Amirul Mu'minin said, "He is here. He is there, above, below,
encompassing us and with us as He has said.

'There is not a single place wherein any secret counsel can take place
between any three people without God being the fourth, nor five people
without His being the sixth nor any gathering of more or less people,
wherever it may be, without His being with them . . .'

(58:7). The al-Kursi contains the heavens and the earth and all that is
between them and below the soil. If you would say anything loud, He
knows the secrets and hidden as mentioned in His words, "The heavens and
the earth are under His dominion (contained in His al-Kursi).

He does not experience fatigue in preserving them both. He is the High,
and the Greatest.' (2:255) Thus, those who carry al-'Arsh (the throne)
are the scholars whom Allah has made to carry His knowledge.

There is nothing that Allah has created in the heavens and the earth
that is out of these four that He has shown to those whom he chosen. He
showed them to His friend Ibrahim (s.a.). "Also, We showed (Abraham) the
kingdom of the heavens and the earth to strengthen his faith." (6:75)
How would the carriers of al-'Arsh (the Throne) carry Allah when with
life from Him their hearts receive life and with His light they found
guidance to know Him."

H 336, Ch. 20, h 2

Ahmad ibn Idris from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from Safwan ibn Yahya
who has said the following.

"Abu Qurrah, the narrator of Hadith asked for help to meet Imam Ali abu
al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.). I requested the Imam (a.s.) to meet him and he
agreed. Abu Qurrah asked the Imam about the lawful and unlawful matters
and then said, "Do you affirm that Allah is carried?" Imam abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) replied, "Every thing in an objective case is related to another
thing and is dependent. Being carried is the name for verbal defect.

On the other hand, carrier is in a subjective case and it verbally is a
word to convey praises and so is the expression of one who says, "Above,
below, upper and lower." Allah has said, 'For Him there are beautiful
names, thus, call Him through those names.' He (Allah) has not said
anywhere in His books that He is al-Mahmul (Being carried) He has, in
fact, said that He is the carrier in the sea and on land and the
preserver of the heavens and earth from banishment.

Al-Mahmul, (being carried) are things other than Allah. It is never
heard from any one who believed in Allah and His greatness saying in his
prayers Ya Mahmul, (O the one being carried,)." Abu Qurrah then said,
"He Himself has said, 'The angels will be around the heavens and on that
day eight of them will carry the Throne of your Lord above all the
creatures.' (69:17) Also He has said, "Those who carry the Throne
(al-'Arsh)."

Imam abu al-Hassan (a.s.) then said, "Al-'Arsh (the Throne) is not
Allah. Al-'Arsh is the name of knowledge and power. In al-'Arsh there is
everything. Besides, He has ascribed carrying to things other than His
Own-self. It is ascribed to a creature among His creatures. This is
because He has made His creatures to worship Him through carrying His
al-'Arsh (the Throne) and they are the carrier of His knowledge.

There is a creature, who speaks of His praise around His al-'Arsh (the
Throne) and act according to His knowledge and the angels write down the
deeds of His servants. He has made those on earth to worship Him in the
form of Tawaf (walking around) His house.

Allah has control over al-'Arsh (the Throne) as He has said, "Allah
carries al-'Arsh, those who carry it and those around it, preserves
them, keeps them together and is the guardian of all souls and above and
over all things." It is not permissible to say, "He is carried.

He is below." It would be the only expression that would not make any
sense. Thus, both the word and meaning would be destroyed." Abu Qurrah
than said, "Do you then consider a false Hadith the Hadith that says,
"When Allah becomes angry His anger becomes known to the angels who
carry al-'Arsh. They at such time feel the weight of His anger on their
shoulders.

They then bow down in prostration. When Allah's anger goes away it
becomes light and the angels return to their places." Imam abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) said, "Tell me about Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. From
the time He condemned Satan until today is He not angry with Satan? When
did He become happy with Satan? As you say He is still angry with Satan,
his friend and followers.

How would you dare speak of your Lord as under going changes from one
condition to another condition and that what happens to the creatures
happens to Him also. He is the Most Glorious, the Most High. He does not
banish with those who banish and does not change with those who change.
He is not replaced with those who are replaced. The creatures are under
His guardianship and they all are dependent on Him. He is
Self-sufficient and independent of others."

H 337, Ch. 20, h 3

Muhammad ibn Isma'il has narrated from Fadl ibn Shadhan from Hammad ibn
'Isa from Rabi'i ibn 'Abdallah from Fudayl ibn Yasar who has said the
following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, "His al-Kursi (the Throne) encompasses the heavens
and earth." He said, "O Fudayl everything is the al-Kursi (the Throne),
the heavens and earth everything is in al-Kursi."

H 338, Ch. 20, h 4

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
al-Hajjal form Tha'labah ibn Maymun from Zurarah ibn 'a'yun who has said
the following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'The heavens and the earth are
(contained in His al- Kursi) under His dominion . . .' (2:255) Do the
heavens and earth contain the al-Kursi or that the latter contains the
former?" He said that it is al-Kursi that contains the heavens and earth
and all things are contained in al-Kursi."

H 339, Ch. 20, h 5

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan
ibn Sa'id from Fudala ibn Ayyub from 'Abdallah ibn Bukayr from Zurara
ibn 'Ayun who has said the following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, 'The
heavens and the earth are (contained in His al-Kursi) under His
dominion.. . .' (2:255) Do the heavens and earth contain the al-Kursi or
that the latter contains the former?" He said that all things are
contained in al- Kursi."

H 340, Ch. 20, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from abu
Hamza from Imam abu 'abdallah (a.s.) who said the following.

"The carriers of al-'Arsh (the Throne), al-'Arsh and al-'Ilm
(knowledge) are eight. Four of these are from us and the rest are
whoever Allah will chose."

H 341, Ch. 20, h 7

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from ibn Mahbub
from 'Abd al- Rahman ibn Kathir from Dawud al-Ruqyy who has said the
following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, '. . . His
Throne existed on water . . . (11:8).'" The Imam asked, "What do they
say about it?" I said, "They say that al-'Arsh (the Throne) was on the
water and the Lord was on top of it." The Imam then said, "They have
said a lie. Whoever would think that way he has considered Allah as
being carried and has described Him with the qualities of the creatures
which involves that the thing that carries Him is stronger than Him."

I then asked, may Allah take my soul for your service, please explain
it to me." The Imam then said, "Allah made water to carry His religion
and His knowledge before there were the earth, the heavens, the Jinns,
the human beings, the sun and the moon. When Allah willed to create the
creatures He spread them before His-self and said to them, "Who is you
Lord? The first ones who spoke were the Holy Prophet and Amirul Mu'minin
Ali (a.s.) and the Imams (a.s.).

They all said, "You are our Lord." He then made them to carry the
religion and the knowledge. Then He spoke to the angels, "These are the
carriers of My religion and knowledge, My trustees in My people and they
are responsible (or questions will be asked about them).

Then Allah spoke to the children of Adam, "Acknowledge that Allah is
the Lord and acknowledge that these people are the authorities (of
Allah) among you and that obedience to them is obligatory. They said, "O
our Lord, we acknowledge." Allah then told the angels, "Bear witness to
this."

The angels said, "We bear witness so that they, tomorrow will not say,
'We were not aware of this or say that our forefathers have worshipped
idols before us and we were only their offspring. Will You then destroy
us just because what the followers of falsehood have done?" O Dawud, our
authority over them was strongly stressed up on at the time of the
covenant."


**Chapter 21 : Chapter on al-Ruh, the Spirit H 342, Ch. 21, h 1**

It is narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
'Isa from ibn abu 'Umayr from 'Udhayna from al-Ahwal who has said the
following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the spirit (Ruh) which was in
Adam as indicated in the Holy Quran, 'When it is properly shaped and I
have blown My Spirit into it (15:29).'" Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
replied, "This is a created spirit and the spirit in Jesus is
created."

H 343, Ch. 21, h 2

It is narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
'Isa from al- Hajjal from Tha'laba from Himran who has said the
following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, 'The spirit from Him'. Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
replied, "It is the spirit (Ruh) from Allah created in Adam and
Jesus."

H 344, Ch. 21, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Khalid from Qasin ibn 'Urwa from 'Abd al-Hamid al- Ta'i from
Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, 'I have blown My Spirit into it (15:29)'" The Imam
(a.s.) replied, "The spirit has motion like winds. It is called spirit
(Ruh) because the word is a derivative of Rih (wind).

This derivative is selected because the spirits are similar or are of
the genus of the Rih (wind). He has given His own possessive case
because He selected it from among the other spirits just as He has said
about a House from among the houses 'My house' and to a messenger from
among the messengers 'My friend' and so on. All such things are created,
invented, newly produced and are cherished by the Lord."

H 345, Ch. 21, h 4

It is narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid from his father from 'Abdallah ibn Bahr from abu Ayyub al-Khazzan
from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about what people narrate that Allah
created Adam in Hisown form." The Imam (a.s.) replied, "It is created
and newly invented form. Allah selected and chose it over the other
various forms and gave His-own possessive case just like He has done so
about Ka'bah and the spirit saying, 'My house' 'I have blown My spirit
in Him.'"


