Chapter 22 : Chapter On Comprehensive (ahadith) About the Oneness of Allah H 346, Ch. 22, H 1
=============================================================================================

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah and Muhammad ibn Yahya - both in a marfu'
manner- have narrated from Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Imam Amirul Mu'minin mobilized people against Mu'awiya for the second
time and when people came in multitudes he stood up to give a speech.
'All praise is due to Allah, the One, only One, the Self-sufficient, the
Single one Who did not cone into being from anything and was not created
from something that had come into being before. He is the power.

With His power He is distinct from others and the other things became
manifest through His power. There is no attribute that would reach Him
and He has no limit for a definition or an analogy. All the linguistic
beauty and expressions fall far short to express His attributes.

In speaking of Him all attributes prove to be misleading. The depth of
the schools of thoughts are perplexed and confused about the wonders of
His kingdom. All the comprehensive interpretations have remained far
short of establishing any footing in His knowledge. The barriers of the
unseen have curtained His treasured secrets.

The high flying ambitious intelligence with the ability to reach the
depth of very subtle matters lose their way at the very beginning of
their journey to Him. Most Holy is Allah. To Him not even the
far-reaching ambitions are able to reach. No deep diving intelligence is
able to comprehend Him.

Most High is He Who is not subject to the effects of any calculated
time or extended period or limited attributes. Glorious is He Who has no
beginning for His start, a destination to approach or an end to
diminish. Glorious is He Who is just the way He Himself has
introduced.

All those who speak of His praise can never praise fully and duly. He
designed a limit for everything at the time He created them. It is
because that there is no similarity between them and He and that because
He is not similar to any thing else. He is not absolved in anything so
that it could be said He is within anything and He is far from anything
so that it could be said He has nothing to do with them (the
creatures).

He has not distanced Himself from them so that it can be said where is
He? He is far Glorious (and above such associations). He has encompassed
all things through His knowledge. He has made their design firm and has
enumerated them for safe preservation. Even the unseen and hidden things
in the air, is not unnoticed to Him.

Nor things deeply hidden in the darkness of black nights, all things
high above in heavens and down to the lowest earth are not unnoticed to
Him. For everything there is a protector and a guard and everything
therein has limits within something and a limit for that limit.

He is the One, the only One, the self sufficient, Who is not subject to
the changes due to times. The creation of things never over burdens Him.
He only, when willing, commands it to exist (and it comes into
existence). He invented whatever He has created without any examples to
follow and without feeling of over burdened or exhaustion. All
manufacturers manufacture things from something.

Allah has not created whatever He has created from anything. Every
knowledgeable one learns after being ignorant. He has not being ignorant
and has not learned from any one. He has encompassed all things through
His knowledge before their coming into existence and their existence has
not increased any thing to His knowledge.

He knew them before their coming into existence just as He knows them
after their coming into existence. He did not bring them into existence
to strengthen His authority or for fear of banishment or reduction. He
did not bring them into existence as helpers against a competing
opponent, and a peer who would be of more (power) or a partner who would
show greatness.

He created them as creatures that required preservation and protection
as subdued servants. Glorious is He, Who does not become tired in the
creation of what He has created or the preservation of all that He has
formed into beings.

He does not undergo in this work any weakness or exhaustion. Whatever
He has created has deemed it sufficient. He knows what He has created
and created what He knew. It did not happen as a result of new thinking
that He found to be a correct one not because of some doubts that He may
have found in whatever that He had not yet created. It is due His
unchangeable decree, His firm knowledge and resolute command.

He is the One only Lord and is very special in His Oneness. He is pure
in His Glory and praise. He is the only one in Oneness, the Glory, in
Highness, in Oneness in praiseworthiness and in Glory and Gloriousness.
He is Far High above having children. He is far Holy and clean above
involvement in touching women and by far Majestic and Glorious above the
association of the partners.

In whatever He has created there is nothing to oppose Him nor there is
any thing in what He created to stand parallel to Him and no one shares
Him His kingdom. He the One and only the Self-sufficient, Who brings the
timeless time to an end, is the owner of the extended duration of
time.

He is the one Who is eternal with eternal Oneness before the beginning
of the times and after all the changes in the creation. He is the one
who never banishes or diminishes. Thus, I speak of my Lord. There is no
lord besides Allah. He is the Great and of un-matching greatness. He is
the Most Majestic and of unmatched Majesty. He is the Most Glorious and
of unmatched Glory. He is far above what the unjust think of Him to
be."

H 347, Ch. 22, h 2

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Salih ibn Hammad from al-Husayn ibn
Yazid from al- Hassan ibn Ali ibn abu Hamza from Ibrahim from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) Who has said the following.

"Allah, the Most Holy is Whose name, the Most High is Whose praise, the
Most Glorious are Whose attributes. He is the Most Sacred, the Most
Holy, the only One in oneness. He is eternal, the First and the Last,
the Manifest and the Hidden. There is no beginning for Him. He is the
Most Exalted in His highness.

The Highest in power, Exalted in authority, the greatest in kingdom,
the Most bountiful, His Highness is the Most High. He is the One whose
praise no one can complete, and can not bear the knowledge of His
Lordship. No one is able to limit Him because it is not possible to
reach Him with qualities."

H 348, Ch. 22, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from al-Mukhtar ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Mukhtar and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from 'Abdallah ibn al-Hassan
al-'Alawi all from al-Fath ibn Yazid al-Jurjani who has said the
following.

"A road on my way back from Makkah to Khuransan joined me with Imam abu
al-Hassan (a. s.) the 2nd who was going to Iraq and I heard him saying,
"Whoever observes piety before Allah he is protected and whoever obeys
Allah he is obeyed." I calmly walked to him and on reaching him I
offered my salutation and he responded likewise and said, "O fath
whoever pleases Allah is not worried about the anger of people.

Whoever causes the Creator to become angry with him he deserves that
Allah would cause to subject him to the anger of the people. One can
only speak of the attributes of the Creator the way he Himself has
spoken about Himself. How can a person speak of One from Whose
perceiving all the senses are frustrated and even the imagination is not
able to comprehend Him or ones sharp feelings would reach Him in any way
or manner or the eyes would limit Him in any manner.

He is far above the description of those who speak of His attributes
and the praise of those who speak of His praise. He is far in His
nearness and is near in His being far. He in His far-ness is near and is
far in His nearness. He is the condition of the conditions and no one
can say that He is in a condition or is somewhere. No one can about Him
where because He is far above the conditions and places."

H 349, Ch. 22, h 4

Muhaamd ibn abu 'Abdallah in marfu' manner has narrated from Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Once Imam Amirul Mu'minin addressed the people in the Mosque of Kufa
from the pulpit and a man called dhi'lab a very good orator and brave in
heart said, "O Amirul Mu'minin, have you seen your Lord?" The Imam
replied, "Fie upon you O Dhi'lab, how would I worship a Lord whom I
would not see?" The man said, "O Amirul Mu'minin how have you seen
Him?"

The Imam said, "Fie up on you O Dhi'lab, the eyes are not able to see
Him physically but it is the hearts that see Him through the truth of
the faith. O Dhi'lab, my Lord is subtle in subtleties but can not be
described by means of subtle matters. My Lord is great but can not be
described by means of greatness.

His greatness surpasses all greatness but he can not be described by
means of such greatness. He is Glorious in His Glory but He can not be
described in terms of thickness.

He is before everything and it can not be said that something was
before Him. He will be after all things but it can not be said that
there is something after Him. He willed the existence of things but not
by means of first thinking about it.

He comprehends things but not with a great deal of efforts. Things are
not mixed with Him and nor is He indifferent about them. He is clearly
manifest but not with contacts and changes. He shines but not in the
form of being found out with eye sight. He is far but not in the form of
distance. He is near but not in the form of nearness.

He is very fine but not in the form of physical fineness. He exists but
not after nothingness. He acts but not because of being forced. He
measures things but not by means of movement. He wills but not by means
of thinking. He hears but not with tools. He sees but not with
instruments.

He is not contained in place and held up in times. Attributes do not
limit Him and slumber does not seize Him. His Being was before the time
and His existence was before nothingness. He was before eternity. His
giving the sense awareness prove that He does not have the tools for
sensing. His giving substance to the substances is proof that Himself is
not a substance. The existence of a contrary to everything is proof that
there is nothing contrary to Him. His giving nearness to things is proof
that there is nothing similar to Him.

He has made the light contrary to the darkness, the wetness to the
dryness, the harshness to the softness, the coldness to the heat. He
combines their transgressing and separates their closeness. The
separation among things is evidence of the existence of the One Who
causes separation in them and their combinations is evidence of the
existence of the One Who combines them.

It is jus as Allah has said, "We have created everything in pairs so
that perhaps you may take heed (51:49)." He has made a distinction
between the before and after to show that there is no before and after
for Him. The instincts show that the One who created the instincts
Himself has no instinct. The time is evidence that there is no timing
for the One Who made the time.

Things are hidden from each other are evidence that nothing hides them
from their Creator. He was the Lord when there was nothing to enjoy His
Lordship. He was to be worshipped when there was no worshipper. He had
the knowledge when there was nothing to know. He was hearing when there
was nothing to hear."

H 350, Ch. 22, h 5

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Shabab
al-Sayarafi called Muhammad ibn al-Walid from Ali ibn Sayf from 'Amira
who has said that Isma'il ibn Qutayba said the following. "I and 'Isa
ibn al-Shalqan went to see Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). The Imam said 'It
is strange that a group of people ascribe to Amirul Mu'minin certain
things that he had never said. Amirul Mu'minin addressed people in Kufa
in the following words.

"All praise is due to Allah Who inspired His servants with His praise
and natured them in a way that would give them the desire to acknowledge
His Lordship.

It is He, Who guides people through His creation to His Own existence
and His creatures are evidence of His eternity. The fact that His
creatures are similar is evidence that there is nothing similar to Him.
His signs are evidence of His great power. His Own-self prohibits
acceptance of descriptions and so are His being seen with the eyes and
His being comprehended in the imaginations.

There is no time limit for His being in existence and there is no final
destination for Him. Awareness can not contain Him and coverings can not
cover Him. The curtain between Him and His creatures is His creating
them. It is because of being impossible for Him what is possible in the
essence of the creatures and because of what may be possible in their
case is impossible in His case.

It is also because of the difference between the Creator and the
created, the limited and the unlimited and the Lord and the worshippers.
He is One without being a unit of a particular kind. He is the Creator
but not terms of motion. He is seeing but not by means of tools. He is
hearing but not with distinguishing instruments. He observes but not by
means of touching. He is hidden but not with covering. He is clearly
manifest but not with lapse due to distance.

His eternity is beyond the reach of thinking and a stop for the aims of
the intelligence. His reality has worn out the ability of sight and His
Ownself has uprooted the (spreading) vines of imaginations. Whoever
tries to describe Allah has thought of Him as limited and whoever
considers Him limited he has enumerated Him and whoever enumerates Him
he has invalidated His eternity.

Whoever asks where is He, he has considered Him as having an end.
Whoever says on what is He, he has considered Him as distanced. Whoever
says wherein is He, he has considered Him contained in some thing."

H 351, Ch. 22, h 6

The above is narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from Salih ibn Hamza
from Fath ibn 'Abdallah Mawla Banu Hashim who has said the following.

"I wrote to abu Ibrahim (a.s.) asking him about the Oneness of Allah."
He wrote back to me in his own hand writing, "All praise is due to
Allah, Who inspires His servants with His praise." He mentioned in it
facts similar to those in the Hadith of Sahl ibn Ziyad (No. 5 above) to
his words that read, 'His essence has uprooted the (spreading) vines of
imaginations' with the following addition. "The first thing in His
religion is to know Him.

A perfect knowledge about Him is to know that He is One. A perfect
belief in His Oneness is to negate all attributes from Him. Every
attribute is evidence that it is different from what it is attributed
to. That everything to which an attribute is ascribed is evidence that
it is something other than the attribute. Both the attribute and to
whatever it is attributed are evidence that there are two things which
invalidate His being eternal.

Whoever attributes a quality to Allah he has considered Him limited.
Whoever considers Him limited he has enumerated Him and whoever
enumerates Him he has considered His eternity invalid. Whoever says how
is He, he has he has considered Him describable.

Whoever says in what is He, he has considered Him as contained. Whoever
says on what is He, he has become ignorant of Him. Whoever says where is
He, he has considered some place without Him. Whoever says what is He,
he has attributed certain qualities to Him. Whoever says up to what
limit is He, he has considered Him as having an end. He had knowledge
before there was anything to know.

He was the Creator before there was any creatures. He was the Lord
before there was a worshipper. Thus, is our Lord spoken of and it is
above the way others speak of Him."

H 352, Ch. 22, h 7

It is narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid from his father from Ahmad ibn al-Nadr and others whom he
mentioned from 'Amr ibn Thabit from a man whom he mentioned from abu
Ishaq al-Subay'i from Harith al-A'war who said the following.

"Amirul Mu'minin gave a speech in the afternoon and people liked it
very much because of the beautiful manner in which Allah, the Most Holy,
the Most High, is praised. Abu Ishaq has said that he asked al-Harith if
he has recorded that sermon." Al-Harith said, "I have recorded the
sermon in writing." He then dictated it to us from his book.

"All praise is due to Allah Who does not die Whose wonders do not end.
It is because everyday He has a task in the form of the invention of
something that did not exist. It is He Who has no children so that He
would share others in Majesty and He is not the child of others so that
He would be inherited and Himself banish. The imaginations can not
comprehend Him to figure Him out in some form of similitude.

The eyes have not perceived Him so that after changing position He
would also change. It is He for whose beginning there is no end nor
there is a final destination for His being the last. It is He before
Whom there is no time and is not preceded by any duration. He does not
become defective by reduction or addition. He does not become attributed
with direction or of what is He made of or with place.

It is He Who knows all the hidden matters and has surpassed all
intelligence what is evident in His creatures of plans and maintenance.
It is He about Whom the prophets were asked and they did not speak of
Him in terms of limits and parts. They spoke of His acts and showed
people His signs.

The intelligence of thinkers can not deny Him because the One who has
created the heavens and earth and all that is in them and between them
and is their Creator no one is able to stand up to His power. It is He,
Who is different from the creatures and there is nothing similar to Him.
It is He, Who has created the creatures for His worship and has given
them the ability to obey Him.

With the capabilities that He has placed in them and has removed all
their excuses He has placing His authority among them so that after
knowing the authority would perish whoever would like to perish and
after knowing the authority receive salvation whoever would like to
receive salvation. Benevolent is Allah to begin and to repeat.

Then, Allah, to Whom all praise is due, introduced praise for His
Own-self. He has finished the affairs of the world and the coming of the
next life with praise for His Own-self saying, "He has judged among them
with the truth" and All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds."

All praise is due to Allah, Who has dressed up with greatness but with
out a body, Who has put on the gown of Majesty and Glory which has no
similarity. It is He, Who has control over the Throne without losing
such authority. He is far Exalted above the creatures but without being
far from them or being in touch with them. He has no limit that would
end to a limit nor there is anything similar to Him to help know Him
better. All things are humble before His power and might. All things,
although great, are small before Him.

All things respect His Greatness, obey His authority and Majesty.
Glimpses of eyes are weak and exhausted in trying to comprehend Him. The
imaginations of the creatures fall far short off describing Him. He is
the first before all things and there was is no one before Him. He is
the last after all things and there is no after for Him. He has control
over all things with might.

He observes all places without moving thereto. No touching touches Him
and no sense senses Him. He is the Lord in the heavens and the Lord on
earth. He is All-wise and All-knowing. He has given firm shape and form
to His creatures the way He willed but not with following previous
examples and without experiencing any fatigue in the creation of the
things that He has created.

He began what He wanted to begin and invented what He wanted to invent
and the way He willed of the two great and heavy creatures, the man and
Jinn so that they would know Him through such evidence His Lordship and
established in them His obedience.

"We thank Him with all of His praise for all of His bounties. We ask
Him for His guidance to give us wisdom in our affairs. We seek His
refuge from the evil of our sinful deeds and ask Him to forgive our sins
that we may have committed before. We testify that there is no god but
Allah and that Muhammad (s.a.) is His servant and messengers.

He sent him with truth as a prophet, as a sign of His existence and a
guide to Him. (We) found guidance through him from straying and are
saved through him from ignorance. Whoever obeys Allah and His messenger
has indeed gained a great success and has earned a great reward.

Whoever disobeys Allah and His messengers has indeed suffered a clear
loss and is subjected to a painful punishment. Make sure to succeed in
obedience and listening, sincerity, good advice and proper support. Be
helpful to yourselves to keep on the straight path and shun the detested
matters.

Deal among yourselves with truth and cooperate thereby with me. Hold
back the unjust and feeble minded hands. Make others do good and prevent
them from committing unlawful deeds. Appreciate excellence of the
excelling people. May Allah protect you and us through guidance and make
you and us steadfast in piety. I ask Allah for forgiveness for myself
and for you."


