Chapter 25 : Chapter On the Issue That There Is Nothing in Heavens and Earth But That They Are in Seven H 380, Ch. 25, H 1
==========================================================================================================================

It is narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid from his father and Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn 'Isa from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id and Muhammad ibn Khalid altogether
from Fudala ibn Ayyub from Muhammad ibn 'Ammara from Hariz ibn 'Abdallah
and 'Abdallah ibn Maskan altogether from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who said
the following.

"There is nothing in the heavens and on earth without these seven
charateristics: the wish, the will, the measure, the decree, the
permission, the record and duration.Whoever thinks that he can do
without any one of these he has become a unbeliever."

From Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father from Muhammad ibn Hafs from
Muhammad ibn 'Ammara from Hariz ibn 'Abdallah and ibn Maskan a similar
Hadith is narrated.

H 381, Ch. 25, h 2

He has narrated it from his father from Muhammad ibn Khalid from
Zakariya ibn 'Imran from abu al-Hassan Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) who has
said the following.

There is nothing in heavens or on earth without seven: the decree, the
measure, the will, the wish, the record (book) the duration and the
permission. Whoever, would think something else he certainly has spoken
a lie against Allah or has rejected Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High.


**Chapter 26 : Chapter on Wish and Will H 382, Ch. 26, h 1**

It is narrated from Ali ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah from Ahmad ibn abu
'Abdallah from his father from Muhammad ibn Sulayman al-Daylami from Ali
ibn Ibrahim al-Hashimi who has said the following.

"I heard abu al-Hassan Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) saying, 'There can
nothing until Allah would wish it to be, will, measure and decree." I
asked what is the meaning of wish (Sha'a)? The Imam replied, "It is to
begin the act." I asked, "What is the meaning of measure (Qaddara)?

The Imam replied, "It is measuring the length and the width of
something." I asked what is the meaning of decree (Qada)? The Imam
replied, "When He decrees He lets it happen and this is when it becomes
unavoidable to happen."

H 383, Ch. 26, h 2

It is narrated from Ali ibn Ibrahim from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus
ibn 'Abd al- Rahman from Aban from abu Basir who has said the
following.

"asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about, "(Allah) Wished, Willed, Measured
and Decreed." The Imam said, "Yes." I asked, "Did He love?" The Imam
said, "No." I asked, "How is it that He wished, willed measured and
decreed but did not love?" The Imam said, "This is how it has come to
us."

H 384, Ch. 26, h 3

It is narrated from Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father from Aloi ibn
Ma'bad from Wasil ibn Sulayman from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan who has said the
following.

"I hear Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying, "Allah commanded but did not
want. He wanted but did not command. He commanded Satan to prostrate but
He did not want it. If He wanted Satan would have prostrated. He
prohibited Adam from eating of the tree and wanted him to eat. Had He
not wanted he would not have ate."

H 385, Ch. 26, h 4

It is narrated from Ali ibn Ibrahim from al-Mukhtar ibn Muhammad
al-Hamadani and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from 'Abdallah ibn al-Hassan
al-'Alawi altogether from al-Fath ibn Yazid al-Jurjani from abu
al-Hassan (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Allah has two wills and two wishes. He has a definite will and an
intended will. He prohibits but He wants it. He commands but He does not
want it.

Consider that He prohibited Adam and his spouse from eating of the tree
but He wanted them to eat. Had He not wanted their wish would not have
surpassed Allah's wish. He commanded Ibrahim to slaughter Ishaq but He
did not want it to happen. Had He wanted it the wish of Ibrahim would
not have surpassed the wish of Allah, the Most High."

H 386, Ch. 26, h 5

It is narrated from Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father from Ali ibn Ma'bad
from Durost ibn abu Mansur from Fudayl ibn Yasar who has said the
following.

"I heard Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying, 'He wanted and willed and
did not love and did not agree. He wanted something nor to happen except
in His knowledge and He willed in the same way but He did not love it to
be said, "The third of the three and He did not agree that His servants
become unbelievers."

H 387, Ch. 26, h 6

It is narrated from Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu
Nasr who has that Imam abul Hassan al-Rida has said the following.

"Allah said, 'O son of Adam through My wish you came into existence and
it is you who wish for yourself whatever you wish. Through My power you
fulfill your obligations and through My bounties you receive strength to
disobey Me. I made you made you to hear and see and be strong.

Whatever good you receive is from Allah and whatever evil afflicts you
is from your own-self. It is because I have priority to your good deeds
and you have priority to your bad deeds. This is because I Ahmad ibn
Muhammad not asked what I do but they are questioned ffor what they
do."


**Chapter 27 : Chapter on Test and Choice H 388, Ch. 27, h 1**

It is narrated from Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim from Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Yunus ibn 'Abd al-Rahman from Hamza ibn al-Tayyar from Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"There is no expansion or reduction but that Allah therein has a wish,
decree and testing."

H 389, Ch. 27, h 2

It is narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid from his father from Fudala ibn Ayyub from Hamza ibn Muhammad
al-Tayyar from abu 'Abdallah (a. s.) who has said the following.

" There is nothing in which there is expansion or reduction of the
matters that Allah has commanded or has prohibited except that Allah,
the Most Holy, the Most High, therein has a decree and a testing."


**Chapter 28 : Chapter on Fortunateness and Un-fortunateness H 390, Ch.
28, h 1**

It is narrated from Muhammad ibn Isma'il from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from
Saffron ibn Yahya from Mansur ibn Hazim from Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who has said the following.

"Allah created good fortune and bad fortune before He created the
creatures. Whoever Allah has created fortunate He never becomes angry
with him even though he may do bad deeds.

He to reach and nor do the deep diving intelligence is capable to
grasp. Most High is Allah. It is He who is not subject to the effects of
the numbered time or extended period or limited attributes. Glorious is
Allah, Who has no beginning that started or a destination that would
close or an end that would finish. Glorious is He Who is just as He Him
Self has introduced.

Those who speak of His attributes can never praise Him duly. He gave to
everything a limit at the time of its creation for their non- similarity
to Him and His none-similarity to them. For Him th of would dislike his
deeds but his own self. If he is an unfortunate He would never love him
even if he would do good deeds.

He would love his deeds but not his own self because of what he will
end up to. If Allah would love someone He will not dislike him and if He
would dislike someone He will not love him."

H 391, Ch. 28, h 2

It is narrated from Ali ibn Muhammad (in a marfu' manner) from shu'ayb
al-'aqaqufi from abu Basir who has said the following.

"I was in presence of Imam abu 'abdallah (a.s.) when a certain person
asked him saying, 'May Allah take my soul in service for your cause, O
great-great-great-great-grandson of the holy Prophet (s.a.), wherefrom
misfortune took hold of the people committing sins and so Allah in His
knowledge deemed it for them to suffer?" The Imam said, "It is the
judgment of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High and no one has the right
(to oppose it).

When passed such judgment He gave to the people of love the ability to
know Him and relieved them of the hardships of deeds by means of what
they are capable of and He gave the people of sins the ability to commit
sins due His early knowledge and denying them the power to accept from
Him,

thus, they agree with what is in His knowledge about them and they
remain unable to do things that would save them from His punishment. It
is because His knowledge is more preferred in the reality of judgment
and acknowledgement and this is what is meant by He wanted what He
wanted and it is His secret"

H 392, Ch. 28, h 3

It is narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid from his father from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd for Yahya ibn 'Imran
al-Halabi from Mu'alla ibn 'Uthman from Ali ibn Hanzala from Imam abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) Who has said the following.

The Imam said, "A fortunate person is made to walk on the path of the
unfortunate ones so much so that people would say, "How similar has he
become with them? In fact, he has become one of them. Then good fortune
helps him. Sometimes a unfortunate one is made to walk on the path of
the fortunate ones and people begins to say, "How similar has he become
with them? In fact, he has become one of them.

But misfortune takes hold of him. Whoever Allah has written to be of
the fortunate ones, even if very little time, such equal to the period
between two breast-feeding of a camel her young, would have been left
from his life in this world Allah will make it end in good fortune.


