Chapter 29 : Chapter On Good and Evil H 393, Ch. 29, H 1
========================================================

It is narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid from ibn Mahbub and Ali ibn al-Hakam from Mu'wiyah ibn Wahab from
Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

" Who sent it to Moses and revealed it in the Torah, "I Ahmad ibn
Muhammad the Lord Allah. There is no lord but I. I have created the
creatures and created the good and made to run through the hands of
those whom I love.

Fortunate are those through whose hands I have made the good to run. I
am Allah. There is no Lord other than I. I created the creatures and
created Evil and made it to run through the hands of whoever I wanted.
Unfortunate, therefore, are those through whose hands I have made Evil
to run.

H 394, Ch. 29, h 2

It is narrated from a number of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from Muhammad ibn Hakim from Muhammad ibn
Muslim who has said that he heard Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) say the
following.

"In some of the things that Allah has revealed through His books is, 'I
am Allah. There is no lord other than I. I created the Good and Evil.
Fortunate are those through whose hands I have made the Good to run and
unfortunate are those through whose hands I have made the Evil to run
and unfortunate are those who say, "How is this and how is that."

H 395, Ch. 29, h 3

It is narrated from Ali ibn Ibrahim from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Yunus
from Bakkar from Kardam, from Mufaddal ibn 'Umar and 'Abdul Mu'min al-
Ansari from Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, "I am Allah. There is
no lord other than I the creator of good and evil. Fortunate are those
through whose hands I made the Good to run and unfortunate are those
through whose hands I have made the Evil to run and unfortunate are
those who say, "How is this and how is that." Yunus has said, "It means
those who deny this fact instead of having proper understanding in
it."


**Chapter 30 : Chapter on Predestination, Fate and the Middle road in
between H 396, Ch. 30, h 1**

It is narrated from Ali ibn Muhammad from Sahl ibn Ziyad and Ishaq ibn
Muhammad and others (in a marfu' manner) who have said the following .

"Once in Kufa, after Amirul Mu'minin's return from Siffin a man came to
him and sat with his legs folded underneath in front of the Imam (a.s.)
and said, "O Amirul Mu'minin, tell us about our journey against the
people of Sham (Syria) was it because of Allah's determining it to be
so?"


**Chapter 31 : Chapter on Predestination, Fate and the Middle road in
between H 397, Ch. 31, h 1**

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad and Ishaq ibn
Muhammad and others, in a marfu' manner, who have said the following.

"Once in Kufa, after Amirul Mu'minin's return from Siffin, a man came
to him and sat with his legs folded underneath in front of the Imam
(a.s.) and said, "O Amirul Mu'minin, tell us about our journey against
the people of Sham (Syria).

Was it because of Allah's decree and determination or not?" Amir
al-Mu'minin said, "Yes, O Shaykh, every hill that you climbed and every
valley that you traversed was because of the decree and the
determination of Allah." The Shaykh then said, "Will my tiring efforts
be counted in the sight of Allah, O Amir al-Mu'minin?" The Imam said,
"Be patient, O Shaykh.

I swear to Allah that He will grant you a great reward for your journey
wherever you traveled, for your stay wherever you rested and for your
return when you were headed back. In none of these conditions that you
went through you were coerced or compelled."

The Shaykh then said, "How would we not be considered compelled or
coerced when all of our journey, rest and return were because if the
decree and determination of Allah?" The Imam said, "Do You think it was
all due to unavoidable decree and binding determination? Had it been so
all the reward, punishment, commandments, orders and warnings from Allah
would remain invalid and meaningless.

The promise and warnings would fall apart. No one could blame the
sinners and no one would praise the people of good deeds. The sinners
could have been more deserving than the people of good deeds and the
latter ones could have deserved more punishment. Such can only be the
belief of the idol worshippers, the enemies of the Beneficent and of the
party of Satan and determinist of this nation (Ummah) and her
Zoarastarians.

"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has obligated people on the basis
of their freedom and choice and has prohibited as a warning. He rewards
a great deal for very little of deeds. Disobedience to Him is not due to
His weakness or His defeat. Obedience to Him is not for compulsion and
coercion.

He has not given (the power to people) in the absolute sense. He has
not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them
without a purpose. He has not sent the messengers and the prophets to
warn and promise people just to play a joke. Such could only be the
belief of the unbelievers. Woe is for the unbelievers to suffer in the
fire."

The Shaykh then recited the following lines that he compose at the
spot. You are the Imam for whose obedience we do hope for Salvation a
day from the Beneficent, and forgiveness Explain you did our issue that
was vague May your Lord reward the good with good.

H 398, Ch. 31, h 2

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Ali al-Washsha' from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from abu Basir
from Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), who has said the following.

"Whoever would think that Allah orders people to commit sins he has
ascribed lies to Allah and whoever would think and say good and evil are
from Allah he would have ascribed lies to Allah. (See also Hadith No 6
below).

H 399, Ch. 31, h 3

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Ali al-Washsha' from abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) who has
said the following.

"I asked the Imam, 'Has Allah left all the matters to people?'" The
Imam said, "Allah is by far Exalted above such things." I then asked,
"Has He compelled them to commit sins?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah's
justice and His judgement is far above such things." The Imam further
said, "Allah has said, 'O son of Adam, I have more priority to your good
deeds than yourself and you are of more priority to your bad deeds than
I. You commit sins with the power that I have given to you."

H 400, Ch. 31, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Isma'il ibn Marrar
from Yunus ibn 'Abd al- Rahman who has said that abu al-Hassan al-Rida
(a.s.) said to me the following.

"O Yunus, do not say what pre-determinists say. The pre-determinists do
not say what people of paradise say nor what people of hell say or what
Satan says. The people of paradise say, "All praise is due to Allah for
His guiding us. We would have never been guided without Allah's guiding
us." The people of hell say, "Lord, our misfortune overwhelmed us and we
became lost" Satan said, "My Lord for your making me to rebel . . ."

H 401, Ch. 31, h 5

I then said, "I swear to Allah that I do not say what they say but I
only say that there will be nothing unless Allah would want, will,
measure and decree." The Imam (a.s.) said, "O Yunus, it is not that way,
there will be nothing unless Allah would want, will, measure and decree.
O 4."

H 402, Ch. 31, h 6

Through the above chain of narrators it is narrated from Yunus from
Sa'dan, in a marfu' manner, from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Allah has not granted any bounties to a person but that He holds him
justifiably responsible for it. He gives them bounties and gives them
power, which justifies His holding them responsible for their duties. He
gives smaller degrees of responsibilities to those who are of lesser
degrees of capabilities. One who has received bounties from Allah He has
provided ease for him, thus, the justification is what is for him to
what is against him.

Then it is for him to help the needy in optional ways. One on whom
Allah has bestowed favors, He has made him noble in his house and
beautiful in his form. This is enough justification for the duty of
praising Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, on his part of the deal
and that he must not boast over the others to hold back the rights of
the needy because of his respectability and beauty in his form."


**Chapter 32 : Chapter on Differences in Justifying Divine Authority
among People H 403, Ch. 32, h 1**

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ali
ibn Asbat from al- Husayn ibn Zayd from Durust ibn abu Mansur from
whoever he narrated from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), who has said, "There are
six things in which the people have no doing. They are knowing,
ignorance, consent, anger, sleeping and waking up."


**Chapter 33 : Chapter on Allah's Authorities and Means of
Justification of Accountability in People H 404, Ch. 33, h 1**

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from abu
Sha'ba al- Mahamili from Durust ibn abu Mansur from Burayd ibn Mu'awiya
from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"People do not owe to Allah to know. It is up to Allah to make them
know. Once Allah would make them know then people are responsible to
accept."

H 405, Ch. 33, h 2

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from al-Hajjal from Tha'laba ibn Maymun from 'Abd al-A'la ibn 'A'yun who
has said the following. "I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'If a person does
not know will he be held responsible?" The Imam (a.s.) said, "No, he
will not be held responsible."

H 406, Ch. 33, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
ibn Faddal from Dawud ibn Farqad from abu al-Hassan Zakariyya from abu
'Abdallah who has said the following.

"Whatever Allah has kept hidden from people they will not be held
responsible for it."

H 407, Ch. 33, h 4

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from Ali ibn al- Hakam from Aban al-Ahmar from Hamza ibn al-Tayyar from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The Imam (a.s.) said to me. 'Write it down. He dictated to me the
following. "It is of our Hadith that Allah will, justifiably, hold
people accountable for what He has given and made known to them. Allah
then sent His messengers to them and sent down books up on them in which
He has commanded and prohibited them.

He has commanded them to perform prayers and fast. The holy Prophet
(s.a.) remained sleeping until the time for prayer expired and Allah
said, "I make you sleep and wake you up. When you wake up then perform
the prayer so that they would learn if such thing would happen to them
what to do. It is not the way that they say, 'If one remains asleep (at
the time of prayer) one is destroyed.'

In the same way is fasting. I cause you to become ill and when I give
you good health then you will make up for the fast that you missed
during your illness." Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, "In the same way
if you would look at all things you will find that Allah has caused no
constrictions to anyone. You will not find anyone against whom Allah may
not have enough justification to hold him accountable with His wish
therein.

I do not say that they can do whatever they wish." The Imam (a.s.) then
said, "Allah guides and misleads." He further said, "People are not
ordered in what they are not capable for. For every thing that people
are ordered to do they have the capability for it and anything for which
they are not capable is removed and lifted up from them but there is not
much good in people."

He then recited from the Holy Quran: "People who are weak or sick and
those who do not have the means to take part in the fighting are exempt
from this duty . . ." (They are accountable for the duty) "Righteous
people shall not be blamed. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful."
(9:91) as well as "Those who come to you, (Muhammad), asking to be taken
to the battle . . ." (9:92) They are relieved of the duty because they
do not have the means."


**Chapter 34 : Chapter on The Issue that Guidance is from Allah, the
Most Holy, the Most High H 408, Ch. 34, h 1**

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Muhammad ibn Isma'il from Isma'il al-Sarraj from ibn Maskan from
Thabit in Sa'id who has said the following.

"Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) said, 'O Thabit, why would you bother about
people. Leave them alone and do not call anyone to accept your faith. I
swear by Allah that even if all the people in the heavens and earth
would come together to guide a person whom Allah wants not to guide they
will never be able to guide him.

If all the people in the heavens and earth would come together to
misguide a person whom Allah wants to guide, they will never be able to
misguide him. Leave the people alone. Let no one say, 'O my uncle, my
brother, the son of my uncle and my neighbor.' When Allah wants good for
a person He cleanses his spirit. He then would not hear any lawful thing
but that he knows it and no unlawful thing but that he dislikes it.
Then Allah places a word in his heart with which He organizes all his
affairs."

H 409, Ch. 34, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has narrated from his father from ibn abu
'Umayr from Muhammad ibn Humran from Sulayman ibn Khalid from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"When Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, wants good for a person He
places a point of light in his heart and opens the ears of his heart and
assigns an angel to support him. When He wants bad fortune for a person
He places a dark black spot in his heart, closes the ears of his heart
and assigns a Satan to mislead him.

The Imam (a.s.) then recited the following verse of the Holy Quran.
"Allah (God) will open the hearts of whomever He wants to guide to
Islam, but He will constrict the chest of one whom He has led astray, as
though he was climbing high up into the sky. . . ." (6:125)

H 410, Ch. 34, h 3

A number of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn
Faddal from Ali ibn 'Uqba from his father who has said the following.

"I heard abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying, 'Leave your affairs to Allah and
do not leave them to the people. Whatever would be for Allah it will be
for Him. Whatever would be for people it will not rise up to Allah. Do
not quarrel people about your faith because quarrelling sickens the
heart.

Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, said to His Prophet (s.a.)
"(Muhammad), you cannot guide whomever you love, but Allah (God) guides
whomever He wants and knows best those who seek guidance (28:56).
(Muhammad), do you force people to have faith?" (10:99).

Leave the people alone because people learn from people and you have
learned from the Holy Prophet (s.a.). I heard my father (a.s.) saying,
"When Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, writes for a person to enter
in this faith he will do so faster than the flight of a bird to its
nest."

H 411, Ch. 34, h 4

Abu Ali al-Ash'ari has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya from Muhammad ibn Marwan from Fudayl ibn Yasar the
following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Can we invite people to this faith?'"
The Imam Said, "No, do not invite them, O Fudayl. When Allah wants good
for a servant of His, He orders an angel, to grab him by his neck and
then enters him in this faith compelled or willing."

The end of the books on Intelligence, Knowledge and Oneness of Allah of
the book, al-Kafi, followed by the book, al-Hujja in the second volume
of the book, al-Kafi by al-Shaykh abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ya'qub
al-Kulayni (May Allah grant him blessings).


The End of Part 3


