Chapter 4 : Chapter On the Minimum Degree of Knowledge of the Existence of Allah H 224, Ch. 4, H 1
==================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn al- Hassan has narrated from 'Abdallah ibn al-Hassan
al-'Alawi and Ali ibn Ibrahim from al-Mukhtar ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Mukhtar al-Hmadini altogether from al- Fath ibn Yazid who has said
the following.

"I asked Imam abul Hassan (a.s.), "What is the minimum required degree
of knowledge about Allah?" The Imam said, "To acknowledge that there is
no other lord besides Him and that nothing is similar to and like Him
and that He is eternal, positively existing and not absence and that
nothing is like Him."

H 225, Ch. 4, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad, from Tahir ibn Hatam
when he was normal and wrote to the man (meaning thereby Imam abul
Hassan al-Rida (a.s.). "What is it that without which one's
acknowledgement of the existence of Allah can not be considered
sufficient?"

In answer the Imam (a.s.) replied, "That He is All-knowing, All-hearing
All-awareness and that He acts as He wills." Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) was
asked about the minimum required degree of knowledge about Allah without
which an acknowledgement would not be considered sufficient. The Imam
(a.s.) said, "There is nothing similar to or like Him. He is Allknowing,
All-hearing and All-awareness."

H 226, Ch. 4, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Yusuf ibn Baqqah from Sayf ibn 'Umayra from
Ibrahim ibn 'Umar who has said the following. Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
has said, "The issue about Allah is totally extraordinary. Notice that
He has presented to you His arguments in proof of His existence by means
of that much of facts about His own self that He has made known to
you."


**Chapter 5 : Chapter on Who is Worshipped H 227, Ch. 5, h 1**

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn 'Ubayd from
Hassan ibn Muhbub from ibn Ri'ab from more than one person from the
following form Imam abu 'Abdallah (a. s.). Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) has
said, "Whoever worships Allah with a degree of less than fifty percent
knowledge of His existence he has certainly denied His existence.

Whoever worships the names without their meaning he certainly has also
denied His existence. Whoever worships both the names and the meanings
he certainly has become a polytheist. Whoever worships the meaning, with
the understanding, that names only convey the attributes, which He
Himself has said are His.

Thus, they have firmly tied this up to their hearts and have spoken out
through their tongues in private and in public these are certainly of
the friends of 'Amirul al- Mu'minin (a.s.). According to another Hadith,
"They, certainly, are true believers."

H 228, Ch. 5, h 2

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd
from Hisham ibn al- Hakam who asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the
names of Allah and about the root or derivative forms of those names.
"What is the root word for Allah?"

The Imam replied, "The word Allah is derived from the word Elah (Lord)
which requires Ma'luh (some one whose Lord one has become). Note that
names are something other than whatever to which they apply.

O Hissham, whoever, worships the name without the fact for which the
name stands he has denied the existence of Allah and has not worshipped
any thing. Whoever worships the name and the meaning for which the name
stands he has worshipped two things. Whoever worships the meaning
without the name he is a monotheist. Did you understand it ) O Hisham?"
Hisham then asked, "Please explain further." The Imam then said, "Allah
has ninety nine names.

If names would have been the samething for which they stand every one
of them would have been a Lord. However, Allah is a meaning for which
these names stand and they all are something other than Him. O Hisham,
bread is the name for a certain kind of food, water is the name for a
certain kind of drink, cloth is the name for a certain kind of garment
and fire is the name for a thing that burns.

Did you understand, O Hisham, in a form of understanding that would
help you to defend our cause against our enemies and those who worship
things that are other than Allah?" I said, "Yes, I did receive such
understanding." The Imam then said, "May Allah grant you success in it
and keep you steadfast (in your belief).

Hisham has said, "I swear by Allah that since then no one has been able
to defeat me in an argumentation on the issue of the Oneness of Allah
and that has made me reach this position that I hold."

H 229, Ch. 5, h 3

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from 'Abbass al-Ma'ruf from 'Abd al-Rahman
ibn abu Najran who has the following. I wrote or said to Imam abu Ja'far
'Abdallah (a.s.), "May Allah take my soul in your service.

Do we worship the Beneficent, the Merciful, the One who is One only and
Self-sufficient?" The Imam then said, "Whoever worships the names
without the meaning for which they stand he has become a polytheist and
has denied the existence of Allah and has worshipped nothing.


You must worship Allah who is the One and only One, the
Self-sufficient, Who is the meaning for these names but not these names.
The names are attributes that He has said are of His attributes."


