Chapter 6 : Chapter On Being and Space (al-kawn Wa Al-makan) H 230, Ch. 6, H 1
==============================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Hassan ibn Mahbub
from Abu Hamzah who has said the following.

Nafi' ibn al-Azraq (ibn Qays al-Hanafi, Abu Rashid [d.65/685], the head
of al-Azariqah - one of the great sects of the Kharijites) asked Imam
abu Ja' far (a.s.). "Please tell me when did Allah come into existence?"
The Imam replied, "(Tell me) when did Allah not exist, so that I would
tell you when He came into existence.

Glory belongs to Him, Who existed and will exist eternally. The One
Self-sufficient, the Eternal, the Absolute, Who has not held for Himself
no female companion or any child."

H 231, Ch. 6, h 2

A group of our people from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Abu Nasr who has said the following. A man from Ma Wara'
Nahr Balkh (Transoxania) came to abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.), and said,
'I have a question for you. If your answer is the same as I already
know, I will accept you as my Imam (leader with divine authority).'"

Imam abul-Hassan (a.s.) replied, "Ask whatever you wish." The man said,
"Tell me when did your Lord come into existence, how has He been and on
what did He depend?"

Imam Abul-Hassan (a.s.), replied, "Allah, the Blessed, the Almighty, is
the space maker of space, Who Himself is not subject to the effects of
any space. He is the maker of How and Himself is not subject to How.

He is Self-sufficient with His own power." The man stood up and kissed
the head of the Imam (a.s.) and then said, "I testify that there is no
god except Allah and Muhammad (s.a.) is the Messenger of Allah and that
Imam Ali (a.s) is the successor of the Messenger of Allah and the
Guardian and protector of what the Messenger of Allah has brought from
Allah and that your forefathers are the leaders with divine authority
and that you are a successor to them."

H 232, Ch. 6, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from al-Husayn ibn
Sa'id from al-Qasim-ibn Muhammad from Ali ibn Abu Hamzah from abu Basir
who has said the following. "A man came to Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.)
saying, 'Tell me about your Lord.

When did He come into existence?'" The Imam (a.s.) replied, "Woe upon
you! Such question is asked only about a thing that did not exist. My
Lord, all Glory belongs to Him is and will be eternally. He lives and no
How question applies to Him. He did not have any coming into existence
and nor there was any being for His coming into being.

This does not apply to Him because He is not subject to the effects of
space. He was not in any thing or on any thing nor did He invent any
space for His own space.

He did not become stronger after making all things nor was weak before
giving being to the beings. He was not lonely before His inventing all
things. He is not similar to any thing that could be called a thing. He
was also not without Kingdom before the creation and nor will He be
without it after all things.

He lives eternally without life and the powerful king before His
invention of the things and He is an all powerful king after the
creation of all things. To His existence no How or Where question is
applicable. There is no limit for Him nor is He definable by analogy. He
does not become old due to eternal living. He doe not become alarmed
because of any thing but that all things are fearful of His
(disappointment). He lived without newly emerging life.

He is not a describable being or that could be limit with conditions or
that would have a space to depend on. He does not have a place so that
He can be considered as neighboring something. He is living and one can
know Him. He is the eternal King. He has the power and the kingdom. He
has created all that He wanted and when He decided by His will.

He can not be limited. He can not be divided or destroyed. He was
before everything but no How question would apply to Him. He will be the
last but no Where will apply to Him. All things will be destroyed except
He. The creation belongs to Him and His is the command.

He is the Holy Lord of the worlds. O inquirer, imaginations can not
encompass my Lord and He does not face any confusions or bewilderment.
Nothing is able to escape Him and nothing happens to Him. He can not be
held responsible for anything and He does not become regretful. Neither
slumber nor sleep overcomes Him. To Him belongs all that is in the
heavens and all that is in the earth and all that is between them and
under the soil.

H 233, Ch. 6, h 4

A group of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from his father in a marfu' manner has said the following.

"The Jews came to their chief Ra'sul-Jalut and said, 'This man, meaning
thereby Imam Ali (a. s.), is a scholar. Come with us to ask him
questions. They all came to Imam Ali (a.s.) but the Imam was in the
castle (Government building). They waited till the Imam (a.s.) came
out.

Ra'sul-Jalut, said, "We have come to you with a question." The Imam
said, "O Jew, ask whatever you like." He said, "I would like to ask you
about your Lord. When did He come into existence?" The Imam (a.s.)
replied, "(Allah) has always been without coming into being and without
being a subject to a How question. He is eternal without quantity and
quality. He was there without a Before.

He is before every before without being before and without a beginning
and end. The end falls short before Him and He Himself is the end of all
ends." Ra'sul-Jalut then said to his people, "Let us leave this place.
This man knows more than what is said he knows."

H 234, Ch. 6, h 5

It is narrated, through the same chain of narrators and source, from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid from his father from Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Abu Nasr from abu al-Hassan al- Muwsali from Imam abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.), who has said the following.

"One of the Jewish rabbis (hibr) came to Imam Ali (a.s.), and asked, 'O
Amir al-Mu'minin, when did your Lord come into existence?'" Imam Ali
(a.s.) replied, "Bereft of you be your mother! When has Allah not been
(in existence), so that it could be said when did He come into
existence. My Lord existed before any before without being before.

He is after every after, without being after. There is no finale
destination or end for Him. All ends fall short before Him. He is the
final destination of all goals." He further asked, "O Amir al-Mu'minin,
are you a prophet?" Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, "Hold it there. I am one of
the slaves of Muhammad,(s.a.) the Messenger of Allah."

It has also been narrated that someone asked Imam Ali (a.s.) this.

"Where was our Lord before the creation of the heavens and the earth?"
Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, "Where is a question about space. Allah has
been there before there was space."

H 235, Ch. 6, h 6

Ali ibn Muhammad from Sahl ibn Ziyad from 'Amr ibn 'Uthman from
Muhammad ibn Yahya from Muhammad ibn Suma'ah from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.),
who has said the following. "Ra'sul Jalut said to the Jews, 'The Muslims
consider Ali excelling everyone in polemics and the most learned. Let us
go to him. I will ask him certain questions and perhaps catch him in
errors.'" He went to the Imam (a.s.) and said, "O Amirul Mu'minin, I
have a question about a matter." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Ask about
whatever you like."

He then asked, "O Amirul Mu'minin, when did our Lord come into
existence?" Imam Ali replied, "O Jew, the question When applies to one
who did not exist and (then) came into being. Allah has exists without
coming into being, and without being in any becoming. Certainly, O Jew,
most certainly, O Jew, how can there be any before for He Who was before
the before.

He does not have any destination. He is not the end of any destination
and no destination ends up to Him. All destinations fall short before
Him and He is the goal of all destinations." The Jew then said, "I
testify that your religion is the true religion and any thing against it
is false."

H 236, Ch. 6, h 7

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated in a marfu' manner from Zurarah who has
said that I asked Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) this. "Did Allah exist when
there was nothing?" The Imam replied, "Certainly, Allah existed when
there was nothing." I further inquired, "Where did Allah exist?" The
Imam was leaning, he then sat up and said, "O Zurarah, you spoke of
impossible. You ask about space where there is no space."

H 237, Ch. 6, h 8

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad ibn
al-Walid from ibn Abu Nasr from Abul Hassan al-Muwsali who has narrated
the following from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.). "A rabbi hibr came to Imam Ali
(a.s.) and asked, 'O Amirul Mu'minin, when did your Lord come into
existence?'" Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, "Consider carefully.

The question When applies to one who did not exist (and then came into
being). When does not apply to the One Who is eternal. He was before the
before without before and after the after without an after. He is not
the end of some end so that His end would also end." He then asked, "Are
you a prophet?" Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, "Bereft of you be your mother!
I am a salve among the slaves of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.)."


**Chapter 7 : Chapter On The relationships (Nisbah) Of Allah H 238, Ch.
7, h 1**

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya from abu Ayyub from Muhammad ibn Muslim from abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following.

"The Jews asked the Messenger of Allah (s.a.), 'Describe for us the
genealogy- of your Lord.'" The Prophet waited for three days and gave no
reply. Then the following verses were revealed to him:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

(Muhammad), say, "He is the only God (112:1). God is Absolute (112:2).
He neither begets nor was He begotten (112:3). There is no one equal to
Him (112:4).

The same Hadith has been narrated by Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad from Ali ibn al-Hakam from abu Ayyub.

H 239, Ch. 7, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa and
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from ibn Mahbub from Hammad ibn 'Amr al-Nusaybi
who has said the following.

"I asked Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about the words of Allah, 'Say, 'He
is Allah, One . . .'" The Imam replied, "These verses define Allah's
relation to His creation. He is the One, Unique, Eternal, and Absolute.
He does not have shadow so one can hold Him but it is He who holds
things by their shadows.

He knows the unknown and is known to every ignorant person. He is only
One. He is not in His creatures and His creatures are not in Him. He
does not feel nor others can feel Him (physically). Eyes cannot see Him.
He is so High that is near and is so near that He is far. Although
disobeyed, yet He forgives. When obeyed, He is appreciative. His earth
does not contain Him, nor do His heavens bear Him.

He holds all things through His power and He is Everlasting and
Eternal. He does not forget or amuse Himself. He does not make any
mistakes or play. There is no lapse in His will. His judgment is
rewarding and His commands are effective. He does not have a child to
become His heir nor is He begotten so His power would be shared. And
there is no one like Him."

H 240, Ch. 7, h 3

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Husayn
ibn Sa'id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from 'Asim ibn Hamiyd who has said the
following. "I asked Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) about the Oneness of
Allah. The Imam replied, "Allah the Almighty, the Great, the Exalted
knew that in the latter times there will be people who would investigate
the issues very deeply in a hair splitting manner.

Therefore, Allah, the Glorious, has revealed chapter one hundred twelve
of the holy Quran that speak of the Oneness of Allah. He has also
revealed the verses of the chapter fifty seven of the holy Quran

In the Name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful

All that is in the heavens and the earth speak of the glory of God. He
is Majestic and All-wise (57:1). To Him belongs the Kingdom of the
heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes things to die. He has
power over all things (57:2). He is the First, the Last, the Manifest,
and the Unseen and He knows all things (57:3).

It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six days and then
established His Dominion over the Throne. He knows whatever enters into
the earth, what comes out of it, what descends from the sky, and what
ascends to it. He is with you wherever you may be and He is Well Aware
of what you do (57:4).

To Him belong the heavens and the earth and to Him all things return
(57:5). He causes night to enter into day and day into night. He knows
best what all hearts contain (57:6). Whoever would accept any thing
otherwise he is destroyed."

H 241, Ch. 7, h 4

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah in a marfu' manner has narrated from 'Abd
al-'Aziz ibn al- Muhtadi who has said the following.

"I asked Imam Ali al-Rida (a.s.) about the Oneness of Allah." He
replied, "Whoever recites Chapter 112 of the holy Quran:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

(Muhammad), say, "He is the only God (112:1). God is Absolute (112:2).
He neither begets nor was He begotten (112:3).
There is no one equal to Him (112:4). and also believes in it, he has
really acknowledged the Oneness of Allah." I asked, "How should I recite
it (the chapter 112)?" The Imam replied, "Recite it as the people do."
And then the Imam added, "Such is Allah, my Lord. Such is Allah, my
Lord."


