Chapter 9 : Chapter On the Invalidity of the Belief To See God (ru'yah of Allah) H 252, Ch. 9, H 1
==================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah has narrated from Ali ibn abu al-Qasim from
Ya'qub ibn Ishaq who wrote to Imam abu Muhammad al-'Askari and asked.

"How can a worshipper worship his Lord, Whom he does not see?"

The Imam wrote in reply, "O abu Yusuf, my Lord, my Master, and my
Benefactor and the Benefactor of my ancestors, is far exalted and is
above being seen."

I (Ya'qub ibn Ishaq) asked him, "Had the Messenger of Allah (s.a.) seen
his Lord?" The Imam replied in writing and signed, "Allah, the Most
Holy, the Most High, showed His Prophet, in his heart, the light of His
Greatness as much as He liked."

H 253, Ch. 9, h 2

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abdal Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya who has said that abu Qurrah (Musa ibn Tariq al-Yamani
al-Zabudi, d. 203/818), a narrator of Hadith, asked me to take him to
abul Hassan al-Rida (a.s.). I sought permission from the Imam (a.s.) and
an audience was granted.

He asked the Imam about what is lawful and unlawful and the rules in
Islamic laws. His questions came to Oneness of Allah (God).

Abu Qurrah said, "We (the narrators of Hadith) narrate that Allah, the
Almighty has divided His being seen al-Ru'yah and His al-kalam, speech
between the two prophets. He gave Musa (Moses) the opportunity to hear
His speech, and Muhammad (s.a.) the opportunity to see Him."

Imam abu al-Hassan (a.s.) said, "Who conveyed the message from Allah to
the two heavy communities; mankind and the Jinn that says: 'The eyes can
not comprehend Him.' (6:103) "They can not limit Him through their
knowledge." (20:110) 'There is nothing similar to Him.' (42:11) "Was it
not Muhammad (s.a.)?'" Asked the Imam (a.s.).

Abu Qurrah then replied, "Yes, He was Prophet Muhammad (s.a.). "

The Imam said, "How can a person who brought such messages to all
creatures and told them that he has brought such messages from Allah and
called them to Allah by His commands and said, "The eyes can not
comprehend Him." (6:103)

"They can not limit Him through their knowledge." (20:110) "There is
nothing similar to Him." (42:11), then he would say, "I saw Him with my
own eyes? I did limit Him in my knowledge and that He is similar to a
man? Should you not be ashamed of yourselves? Even the atheist have not
said that the Prophet first brought one thing from Allah and then
announced from Him other things contrary to the first."

Abu Qurrah then said, "Does Allah Himself not say, 'And indeed he (the
Prophet) saw him in another descent.?" (53: 13) Imam abu al-Hassan
(a.s.) said, "The other verses point out what the Prophet actually saw.
Allah has said, "His heart did not lie about what he saw" (53: 11) It
means that the heart of Muhammad did not belie what his eyes saw.

Therefore, Allah in the subsequent verse has said, "Indeed he saw of
the greatest signs of his Lord." (53:18) The signs of Allah are
different from Allah Himself. Allah has also said, "They can not limit
Him in their knowledge." (20:110) If the eyes could see Him, then people
might limit Him in their knowledge and He could be fully defined." Abu
Qurrah asked, "Do you disregard Hadith?"

Imam abu al-Hassan (a.s.) replied, "If Ahadith are contrary to Quran, I
disregard them. Besides, all Muslims believe that Allah cannot be
limited by knowledge, that eyes can not see Him and that nothing is
similar to Him."

H 254, Ch. 9, h 3

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Ali
ibn Sayf from Muhammad ibn 'Ubayd who has said the following.

"I wrote to abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) and asked him about the belief
in eye-witnessing Allah's self. Is it is possible to see Allah's self
with one's own eyes as is traditionally narrated in the affirmative by
the Sunni Muslims (al-'ammah) and the Shi'ah Muslims (al-khassah) who
are contrary. I requested him to explain the matter.

The Imam answered in his own handwriting. "All agree and there is no
dissension among the people that eye-witnessed knowledge of things is
certainly knowledge without doubt. It is the form of knowledge that does
not require logical proofs. If it is true that seeing Allah's self with
the eyes is possible then it becomes a necessity to acknowledge that
Allah becomes entirely known and defined through eye-witnessed
process.

Now, can eye-witnessed knowledge of Allah's self be considered faith or
not? If the knowledge of Him as such, i.e. eye-witnessed knowledge
(which according to Sunni Muslims will happen on the Day of
resurrection) be considered faith, then faith in Allah in this world,
which comes through non-eye-witnessed knowledge is not faith.

It is contrary to eye-witnessed knowledge and faith (contrary things do
not exist at the same time). Thus, there would be no one who would have
faith in Allah in this world because no one has seen Him, Majestic is
Whose name.

If the eye-witnessed knowledge and understanding would not be
considered faith then the noneye- witnessed faith and knowledge formed
and acquired must go away in the next life, but, in fact, it will not go
away on the Day of resurrection.

This is proof that Allah, the Majestic, the Glorious, can not be seen
because it will lead to (the kind of confusion) what we just
mentioned."

H 255, Ch. 9, h 4

It is narrated from the same narrator (Ahmad ibn Idris) from Ahmad ibn
Ishaq who has said the following.

"I wrote to Imam abul Hassan the 3rd and asked him about eye-witnessing
Allah's self and the differences among people about this issue. The Imam
(a.s.) answered in writing." "Eyewitnessing Allah's self is not possible
until there is air (light-carrier medium) that would let the light reach
the eye.

If air is remove from (space between) the viewer and the object, no
eye-witnessing will take place. In this is ground for similarity. When
the viewer and the object in view would have the same medium that make
eye-witnessing possible a similarity must exist therein. (When applying
this to the case of Allah) it is an analogy and similarity. The means
must have a connection with the source."

H 256, Ch. 9, h 5

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Ali ibn Ma'bad from
'Abdallah ibn Sinan from his father who has said the following.

"I met Imam abu Ja'far (a.s.) and at that time a man from the Khariji
group came to see the Imam (a.s.) and asked, 'O abu Ja'far, who do you
worship?'" The Imam replied, "I worship Allah, the Most High." He then
asked, "Have you seen Him?" The Imam then said, "Eyes can not see Him in
an eye-witnessing process but the hearts can see Him through the reality
of faith.

Allah can not be known by analogy or physical senses and He is not
similar to people. He is mentioned in the verses of revelation. He is
known from the signs. He does not do injustice in His judgments. Thus,
is Allah besides Him there is no Allah." The narrator has said, "The man
then left the Imam (a.s.) saying, "Allah knows best to who should He
entrust His message to mankind."

H 257, Ch. 9, h 6

A group of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from abu al-Hassan al-Muwsali from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said, "Once a rabbi (hibr) came to Imam Ali
(a.s.) and asked, 'O Amir al-mu'minin, have you seen your Lord when
worshipping Him?'"

Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, "This is not a proper question. I would not
have worshipped a Lord whom I could not see."

He then asked, "How did you see Him?"

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, "This is not a proper statement. Eyes can not see
Him in eye-witnessing process but hearts see Him in the realities of
faith."

H 258, Ch. 9, h 7

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya from 'Asim ibn Hamiyd who has said the following.

"I discussed with Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) about what he says to
eye-witnessing Allah's self.

The Imam said, "The light of the sun has a ratio equal to one
seventieth of the light of the Kursi (the throne). The same is the ratio
of the light of Kursi to al-'Arsh, the light of which is of the same
ration to that of al-Hijab the light of which is of the same ration to
the light of al- Satr. If they tell the truth let them fill their eyes
with the light of the sun without a curtain in between."

H 259, Ch. 9, h 8

Muhammad ibn Yahya and others have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
'Isa from ibn abu Nasr from abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) who has said
that the holy Prophet (s.a.) said, "When Jibril took me for a visit to
the heavens we reached a place where he had never sat food there before.
Then it was unveiled to him and Allah showed him of the light of His
greatness that which he loved."

On the words of Allah

" No mortal eyes can see Him, but He can see all eyes. He is All-kind
and All-aware. (6:103) H 260, Ch. 9, h 9

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa from
ibn abu Najran from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan from Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
who has said the following about the words of Allah.

"No mortal eyes can see Him, but He can see all eyes. He is All-kind
and All-aware." (6:103) It means within what is called al-Wahm which in
terms of the degrees of knowledge is less than fifty percent. Consider
the words of Allah in: "Clear proofs have certainly come to you from
your Lord.. . ." (6:104) It does not mean eye-witnessed knowledge.

Also consider, "Whosoever sees clearly, it is to his own gain." (ibid)
does not mean seeing with the eyes and in "Whosoever is blind, it is to
his own loss' (ibid ). Blindness does not mean deprivation of eye-sight.
It means within the range of Wahm (mentioned above).

As is commonly said, so and so is very keen-sighted in matters of
poetry, and so and so is very keen-sighted in religion and
jurisprudence. So and so has a keen eye for money, and so and so an eye
for clothes. Allah is far great and above being eye-witnessed by
people."

H 261, Ch. 9, h 10

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Abu Hashim
al-Ja'fari who has said the following.

"I asked Imam abul Hassan al-Rida (a.s.), about Allah if He can be
described (defined in words). The Imam (a.s.) said, "Have you not read
the Quran?" I replied, "Yes, I do read the Quran." He then said, "Have
you not read the words of Allah, the Most High, "No mortal eyes can see
Him, but He can see all eyes. He is All-kind and All-aware." (6:103)

I replied, "Yes, I have read them." The Imam (a.s.) said, "Do they know
the meaning of the eyes?" I replied, "Yes, they do." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "What is it?" I replied, " It means seeing with the eyes." Then
the Imam said, the Awham (mentioned above) of the heart is far greater
comprehensive in knowledge than eye-witnessing. It is not able to
comprehend Him but He comprehends all things."

H 262, Ch. 9, h 11

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah has narrated from the person whose name he
mentioned from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Dawud ibn al-Qasim abu Hashim
al-Ja'fari who has said the following.

"I mentioned the words of Allah , 'No mortal eyes can see Him, but He
can see all eyes. He is All-kind and All-aware.' (6:103) to Imam abu
Ja'far (a.s.). He said, "O abu Hashim, Awham (mentioned above) of hearts
are keener and sharper than the perceptions of the eyes.

Through the Awham of the heart you can perceive countries like Sind,
Hind (India) and other cities which you have never seen with your eyes.
How can your eyes see Him when the Awham of your heart cannot perceive
Him?"

H 263, Ch. 9, h 12

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from some of his people
from Hisham ibn al- Hakam who has said the following.

"Things can be perceived by two means:

(1) By the senses and (2) by the heart, intellect. Perceptions of the
senses are of three kinds:

(1) Perception in the form of penetration, (2) Perception in the form
of touching, and (3) Perception without penetration or touch. Perception
by means of sounds, smells and tastes are formed through penetration.
Perception through touching comes from the knowledge of shapes, such as
rectangular or triangular etc., and also softness, hardness, heat and
cold.

Perception without touch or penetration is that of sight which is
capable of perceiving things without touching or penetration, directly
or indirectly. Perception through sight needs a path and medium.

Its path is air and its medium is the light. If the path is continuous
between the viewer and the object and the medium then seeing takes place
such as colors and persons. If light falls on something without a path,
it will return reflecting what is behind (the observed), like an
observer looking into a mirror.

Light does not penetrate into the mirror, because it finds no path. So
it returns reflecting what lies behind the observed. It is similar to
looking into the clear water returns light that reflects what is at the
rear. This happens because there is no path for the penetration of
light.

Intellect dominates the air. It perceives all that is in the air and
forms his Wahm (intuitive form of perception). If the heart will not
find any thing in the air it comes back and reflects what is in the
air.

A person of reason should not force his heart against what is not in
the air of the issue of the Oneness of Allah, the Majestic, the
Glorious, otherwise, it will form his Wahm of what is there in the air
as mentioned about the eye-witnessing. Allah, the Most High is far and
above similarities with the creatures."


