Chapter 10 : Chapter On Prohibition On Attributing To Allah What He Himself Has Not Done So H 264, Ch. 10, H 1
==============================================================================================================

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from al-'Abbass ibn Ma'ruf from ibn abu
Najran from Hammad ibn 'Uthman from Abd al-Rahim ibn 'Utayk al-Qusayr
who has said the following.

"I wrote through 'Abdal Malik ibn 'a'yan to Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.).
"In Iraq there are people who attribute to Allah forms and lines. If you
consider it proper, may Allah take my soul in your service, please write
for me the correct belief in the issue of the Oneness of Allah."

The Imam wrote for me, "May Allah grant you blessings. You have asked
about the Oneness of Allah and the belief of the group before you.
Exalted is Allah, to Who nothing is similar. He is All-hearing and
All-seeing.

Allah is above what certain people attribute to Him and analogize Him
with His creatures and the lies of those who speak lies about Him. Note
that the true doctrine in the Oneness of Allah is what is revealed in
the Quran in about the attributes of Allah, the Almighty, the Exalted.
Keep away from the belief in Allah, the Most High, all ideas that amount
to ignoring His existence altogether and those that amount to
analogizing Him with the creatures.

Neither should His existence be negated nor should He be considered
similar to anything. He, Allah, the Most High exists. Exalted is He and
far above what is falsely attributed to Him. Do not exceed the limits of
the Quran lest you go astray after the clear presentation of Truth."

H 265, Ch. 10, h 2

Muhammad ibn Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from ibn abu
'Umayr from Ibrahim ibn 'Abd al-Hamid from abu Hamzah who has said that
Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn said to me, "O abu Hamzah, Allah cannot be
defined by the created things.

Our Lord is far above being described through the attributes. How can
the infinite be defined by the finite? ' No mortal eyes can see Him, but
He can see all eyes. He is All-kind and All-aware.'" (6:103) H 266, Ch.
10, h 3

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah has narrated from Muhammad ibn Isma'il from
al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan from Bakr ibn Salih from al-Hassan ibn Sa'id
from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al- Khazzaz and Muhammad ibn al-Husayn they
both have said the following.

"We met Imam abu abu al-Hassan al-Rida (a.s.) and stated to him that
Prophet Muhammad (s. a.) saw His Lord in the fashion of a full grown
young man of thirty years and added that Hisham ibn Salim and Sahib
al-Taq and al-Maythami say that He is hallow down to His navel and the
rest is solid.

The Imam bowed down to a prostrating position and then said, '(O Lord),
Glory belongs to you they have not recognized You nor have they
acknowledged Your Oneness thus, they attribute to You such things.

(O Lord, Glory belongs to You, had they recognized You they would have
attributed to You what you yourself have attributed to Yourself and they
would not have considered You similar to things other than You. O Lord,
I do not attribute to You anything other than what You have attributed
to Yourself and do not consider You similar to Your creatures. To You
belongs all good.

Do not place me among the unjust ones.' The Imam (a.s.) then turned to
us saying, "Whatever you may imagine (make Wahm of) consider Allah some
thing other than it." He continued, 'We, people of the family of the
Prophet (s.a.), are the middle type and the criteria.

Those who exceed can not catch up with us and those who follow can not
go ahead of us. O Muhammad, when the messenger of Allah looked at the
greatness of his Lord he was of the type of people as fully grown up as
thirty years old people.

O Muhammad, my Lord, the Majestic, the Glorious, is far greater than to
be of the qualities of the creatures." The narrator has said that I
said, "May the Lord take my soul for your service, who was the one with
his feet in the green?" The Imam said, "He was Prophet Muhammad (s.a.)
when looked at his Lord with his heart He placed him in the light like
that of the Hujub so he can see what is inside the Hujub. Of the light
of Allah some are green, red, white and others. O Muhammad whatever has
confirmation in the book and the Sunnah we affirm it."

H 267, Ch. 10, h 4

Ali ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn al-Hassan have narrated from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Ahmad ibn Bashir al-Barqi who has said that 'Abbass ibn 'Amir
al-Qasbani who has said that Harun ibn al-Juham from abu Hamza from Imam
Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) has reported the following. "Even if all those
in heavens and earth would gather together to speak of the greatness of
Allah they will not be able to do so."

H 268, Ch. 10, h 5

Sahl has narrated from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Hamdani who has said the
following. "I wrote to the man (Imam abu al-Hassan the 3rd (a.s.)
explaining, "Your followers in this city differ on the issue of the
Oneness of Allah. Some of them say that Allah has a body, and others say
that Allah has a form." The Imam replied in his own handwriting, "Glory
belongs to Allah, Who can not be defined nor described. There is nothing
similar to Him. He is Allhearing, All-knowing, or the Imam said
All-seeing."

H 269, Ch. 10, h 6

Sahl has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from Ibrahim from Muhammad ibn
Hakim who has said the following.

"Imam abu al-Hassan Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.) wrote to my father, 'Allah
is far High, Glorious and Great than that one can reach the essence of
His attribute. Speak of only those of His attributes of which He Himself
has spoken and refrain from attributes other than those ones.'"

H 270, Ch. 10, h 7

Sahl has narrated from al-Sindi ibn al-Rabi' from ibn abu 'Umayr from
Hafs, brother of Marazim from al-Mufaddal who has said the "I asked Imam
abu al-Hassan (a.s.) about certain matters of the attributes (of Allah)
and the Imam said, "Do not exceed what is in the holy Quran."

H 271, Ch. 10, h 8

Sahl has narrated from Muhammad ibn Ali al-Qasani (the right name is
Ali ibn Muhammad, one of the companions of Imam abu al-Hassan al-Hadi,
the tenth Imam (a.s.) who has said the following.

"I wrote to the Imam explaining that people before us had differences
on the issue of the Oneness of Allah." The Imam wrote, "Glory belongs to
Allah, Who can not be defined nor described. There is nothing similar to
Him. He is All-hearing, All-seeing."

H 272, Ch. 10, h 9

Sahl has narrated from Bishr ibn Bashshar al-Nayshaburi who has said
the following.

"I wrote to the man (Imam) explaining that people before us had
differences on the issue of the Oneness of Allah. There were people who
said that Allah had a body, others said He had a form." The Imam wrote
for me, "Glory belongs to Allah, Who can not be defined nor described.
There is nothing similar to Him. He is All-hearing, All-seeing."

H 273, Ch. 10, h 10

Sahl has said that I wrote to abu Muhammad al-Hassan al-'Askari (a.s.)
in 255 AH., "Our people (ashabuna) differ on the issue of the Oneness of
Allah. There are those who say he has a body and others say He has a
certain form. If you would consider to instruct me in this matter on
which I would rely without excess it would be a great favor to your
servant."

The Imam answered in his own handwriting, "You have asked about the
Oneness of Allah. It is not your duty to find Allah's self. Allah is
One, the Only One. He has no children and is not anyone's child. There
nothing similar to Him. He is the Creator and is not created. He, the
Most Holy, the Most High, creates whatever He wants of the bodies and
non-bodies.

He is not a body or a certain form. He gives form to whatever He wills
but Himself is not a form, Majestic is His praise and Holy are His names
and is far above being similar to other things. Only He, and not others,
is the One to Who no one is similar and He is all-hearing and
Allseeing."

H 274, Ch. 10, h 11

Muhammad ibn Isma'il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Hammad
ibn 'Isa from Rabi'i ibn 'Abdallah from al-Fudayl ibn Yasar, who has
said the following.

"I heard Imam abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) saying, 'Allah cannot be defined.
How can He be defined when He Himself has said in His book, "They have
not respected Allah the way He truly should have been respected." (6:91)
Therefore, He cannot be described in any way but that He is great and
above that.'"

H 275, Ch. 10, h 12

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad and others from
Muhammad ibn Sulayman from Ali ibn Ibrahim from 'Abdallah ibn Sinan from
abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the following. "Allah is Great and
High. People cannot describe Him nor can they reach the depth of His
Greatness. ' No mortal eyes can see Him, but He can see all eyes. He is
Allkind and All-aware.'" (6:103) He cannot be described by means of how
and where.

How can I describe Him by means of any condition? He Himself has
created the conditions and how and so it came into being. We came to
know conditions because of His designing them for us. How can I describe
Him by means of space? It is He, Who spaced the space so it became
space. I, thus, came to know space by means of what He has made it into
space.

How can I describe Him by means of positions when He Himself has given
position to positions so it came into position. I, thus, came to know
the position by means of what He has made to come into position. Allah,
the Holy, the Most High, is in every place but is out of everything. '
No mortal eyes can see Him, but He can see all eyes. He is All-kind and
All-aware.'" (6:103)


**Chapter 11 : Chapter On Prohibition on Considering Allah as having
Body (JISM) and Form (SURAH) H 276, Ch. 11, h 1**

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya from Ali ibn abu Hamzah, who has said the following.

"I stated before abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) that I have heard Hisham ibn
al-Hakam quoting you that Allah is a body of Self-subsisting nature and
is from light. He can very clearly be recognized and He bestows such
knowledge to whoever among His creatures He wills." The Imam said,
"Glorious is He, Whom no one knows how He is except He Himself.

There is no one similar to Him and He is All-hearing, All-seeing. He
cannot be limited, nor can He be felt or touched or moved. Eyes cannot
see Him nor any of the senses can comprehend Him. He cannot be contained
in anything, nor has He any body or form or figure or confine."

H 277, Ch. 11, h 2

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Hamzah ibn
Muhammad who has said the following.

"I wrote to Imam abu al-Hassan (al-Thalith 3rd (a.s.) asking about the
body and form (of Allah). He wrote in reply, 'Glorious is He similar to
Who there is nothing. He is not a body nor has He any form.'"

This Hadith has also been narrated by Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah
without giving the name of the person (from whom he has heard).

H 278, Ch. 11, h 3

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Muhammad
ibn Isma'il ibn Bazi' from Muhammad ibn Zayd who has said the
following.

"I went to Imam al-Rida (a.s.) to ask about the Oneness of Allah (God).
The Imam dictated to me thus, 'All praise belongs to Allah, Who is the
originator of all things. He is the inventor of all things, an invention
that came from His power and wisdom but not from a thing so it would
invalidate the invention and not from a cause so it would invalidate the
novelty.

He created whatever He wanted and howsoever He liked. He alone did all
this to manifest His Wisdom and the truth of His Providence.
Intelligence cannot comprehend Him, (Awham) imagination cannot reach
Him, eyes cannot see Him and measurements cannot confine Him. The power
of expression is unable to express Him in words.

All sights are exhausted from reaching Him and the power of describing
and defining have gone astray in its description and definition of
His-self. He is hidden without any veil and is concealed without any
covering. He is known without being seen; described without any form,
and praised without any body. There is no god, except Allah, the Great,
the Most High.'"

H 279, Ch. 11, h 4

Muhammad ibn Abu 'Abdallah has narrated from those he mentioned from
Ali ibn al-'Abbass from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu Nasr from Muhammad
ibn Hakim. He has said that I explained to abu Ibrahim (Musa al-Kazim
(a.s.), the words of Hisham ibn Salim al-Jawaliqi and the words of
Hisham ibn al-Hakam that say Allah is a body.

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah, the Most High, is not similar to any of
the things. What can be more blasphemous and scandalous than to describe
the Creator of all things by means of body, form, type of creation,
limitations, limbs and organs. Allah, the Most High, the Great, is far
above these things."

H 280, Ch. 11, h 5

Ali ibn Muhammad, in a marfu' manner, has narrated from Muhammad ibn
al-Faraj al- Rukhkhaji who has said the following.

"I wrote to Imam abu al-Hassan (a.s.), about the words of Hisham ibn
al-Hakam, about the body and the words of Hisham ibn Salim about the
form (of Allah). He wrote in reply, 'Remove from thyself the confusion
of the confounded people and seek refuge from Allah against Shaytan
(Satan). What the two Hishams have said is not correct.'"

H 281, Ch. 11, h 6

Muhammad ibn Abu 'Abdallah has narrated from Muhammad ibn Isma'il from
al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan from Bakr ibn Salih from al-Hassan ibn Sa'id
from 'Abdullah ibn al-Mughirah from Muhammad ibn Ziyad who has said the
following.

"I heard Yunus ibn Zabyan saying, 'I went to meet abu 'Abdallah (a.s.),
and said, "Hisham ibn al-Hakam has uttered monstrous words. I will
briefly mention a few words. He thinks Allah has a body because things
are of two types; (a) body and (b) the acts.

It is not possible for the Creator Himself to be just actions or
functions. But it is possible to consider Him as the agent." Abu
'Abdallah (a.s.) then said, 'That is not proper from him. Does he not
know that the body has limits and the form has limits and an end?
Whatever is subject to limitations is also subject to increase and
reduction and such things are created.'

I then asked, "What then I should say?" He replied, 'Allah is without
body and form. He is the giver of body to all bodies and the giver of
form to all forms. He can not be divided or limited. He does not grow or
decrease.

If it were as they say, then there would have been no difference
between the Creator and the created, the inventor and the invented. But
He is the Creator and the inventor. He has made the distinction and
differentiation between that to which He has given body, form and that
which He has invented. This is because nothing is similar to Him nor He
resembles anything.'"

H 282, Ch. 11, h 7

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah has narrated from Muhammad ibn Isma'il from
Ali ibn al-'Abbass from al-Hassan ibn 'Abd al-Rahman al-Hammani who has
said the following.

"I said to abu al-Hassan Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s.), 'Hisham ibn al-Hakam
claims that Allah is a body like unto Whom there is no one. He is
All-knowing, All-hearing, All-seeing, Allpowerful.

He speaks and reasons. His word, His power, His knowledge are all in
one. No one of them is created.'" The Imam said, "May Allah be his foe.
Does he not know that the body is limited, and that the speech is other
than what the speaker is? I seek refuge from Allah and I disclaim such
words. Allah does not have a body, form or any kind of limitations.
Allah has created everything. He creates things as and when He wills
without any word or planing in the mind or utterance of the tongue."

H 283, Ch. 11, h 8

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Iisa from Yunus from
Muhammad ibn Hakim who has said the following.

"I mentioned to abu al-Hassan al-Awwal (the first) (a.s.), the
statements of Hisham al- Jawaliqi and what he says about fully grown up
young man (see Hadith 3 Chapter on prohibited Attributes). I also
mentioned the statements of Hisham ibn al-Hakam in this matter." The
Imam said, "Allah, certainly, is not similar to any thing."


