Chapter 14 : Chapter On Will Power (iradah) It Is of the Attributes of Action (sifat Al-fi'l) and the Rest of the Attributes of Action H 292, Ch. 14, H 1
=========================================================================================================================================================

Muhammad ibn Yahya al-'Attar has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
'Isa al-Ash'ari from al-Husayn ibn Sa'id al-Ahwazi from an-Nadr ibn
Suwayd from 'Asim ibn Hamiyd who has said the following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Is Allah's will eternal?'"

He replied, Will is always with what is willed. Allah is eternally
All-knowing and Allpowerful and then He wills."

H 293, Ch. 14, h 2

Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah has narrated from Muhammad ibn Isma'il from
al-Husayn ibn al-Hassan from Bakr ibn Salih from Ali ibn Asbat from
al-Hassan ibn al-Jahm from Bukayr ibn A'yan who has said the
following.

"I asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), 'Are the knowledge and the will of Allah
different or the same?'"

He replied, "His knowledge is not the same as His will. Consider when
you say, 'If Allah wills, I will do this,' and you do not say, "If Allah
knows I will do this." Your own words, if Allah wills are proof that
Allah has not yet willed it. If He would will what He would do, it
happens exactly as He wills. His knowledge is before His will."

H 300, Ch. 14, h 3

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Jabbar from
Safwan ibn Yahya who has said the following.

"I asked abu al-Hassan (a.s.), 'Enlighten me about the will of Allah
and the will of His creatures.'"

He said, "The will of His creatures comes from what goes in their minds
and leads to action. Will of Allah, the Most High, is His inventing and
nothing else because Allah does not need to reflect, deliberate or
think. Such qualities do not exist with Him. They are the attributes of
His creation. Allah's will is His acts and nothing else.

He says to it: Be, and it comes into existence, without any words or
utterance of the tongue, any inclination and reflection. His will has no
conditions just as His self has no conditions."

H 301, Ch. 14, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from
'Umar ibn 'Udhaynah from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said the
following.

"Allah created His Will by Will itself. Then, He created all things by
His Will."

H 302, Ch. 14, h 5

A group of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Barqi
from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from al-Mashriqi Hamzah ibn al-Murtafi' from some
of our people who has said the following.

"I was in the presence of abu Ja'far (a.s.) when 'Amr ibn 'Ubayd said,
'May Allah take my soul in your service, what is the meaning of Allah's
words, "Whoever becomes subject to my anger he is destroyed." 20:84 What
is this anger?'

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) replied, "O 'Amr, His anger is His punishment. O
'Amr, whoever thinks Allah changes from one state to another, has
ascribed to Allah the attributes of His creatures. Nothing can provoke
Allah, the Sublime, to change Him."

H 303, Ch. 14, h 6

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-'Abbass ibn 'Amr
from Hisham ibn al- Hakam who has narrated the following in the debate
with the atheist who asked abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) (See Hadith Nos.225 - 6
and 297 -2).

"Does Allah become pleased and displeased?" Abu 'Abdallah (a.s.)
replied, "Yes, but not like that which is found in His creatures. In His
creatures the pleasure is a state (hal), which enters into him and
changes him from one state to another. The creatures are hollow, active
and compound with entrance in them. Nothing can enter into our Creator.
Because He is One, a single self, a single meaning.

His pleasure is His reward and His anger is His punishment without
anything entering in Him to motivate and change Him from one state to
another because these are of the attributes of His creatures who are
weak and needy."

H 304, Ch. 14, h 7

A group of our people has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from his father from ibn abu 'Umayr from ibn 'Udhaynah from Muhammad ibn
Muslim from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.) who has said, "The will is created."

**Summery Statements on the Attributes of His self**

Sifat al-Dhat and the Attributes of His Actions Sifat al-Fi'1

For every two attributes which you attribute to Allah (e.g. The
Creator, The Sustainer), of which each has its own separate being, (i.e.
The Creator achieves its being, as an attribute of Allah' through
something which Allah creates, and The Sustainer achieves its being, as
an attribute of Allah, through a created being which He sustains), these
attributes are attributes of (His) action.

(Because if two attributes are separate in being, obviously each of
them differs in their being with the thing with which they are
attributed, and therefore both the attribute and the attributed have
their own being.

Therefore, in order to distinguish an attribute of action from an
attribute of essence, it is always necessary to compare that attribute
with another one. If we perceives these two to be independent of each
other in being, then both of them are attributes of action).

The explanation (and proof) of this sentence is that you prove
(establish), in respect of His Being, what He intends to do and what He
does not intend, what pleases Him and what displeases Him, what He likes
and what He dislikes. If the intention had been the attribute of His
essence like the attribute of knowledge and power, His not intending
(for something) would have been its contradiction.

Similarly, if His liking for something had been the attribute of His
essence, His dislike (of something) would have been its contradiction.
Do you not see, we do not find in His Being anything which He does not
know and anything over which He has no power?

Such are the attributes of His essence (Self), which are everlasting.
We can never attribute to Allah power and (its opposite) weakness.
(Similarly, we can neither attribute to Him knowledge and [its opposite]
ignorance and stupidity, nor can we attribute to Him wisdom and 1 its
opposite] error. Nor can we attribute to Him honor and [its opposite]
disgrace). It is permissible to say, "He (Allah) loves him who obeys Him
and hates him who disobeys Him.

He favors him who obeys Him and is hostile to him who disobeys Him. And
verily, He is pleased and He is also displeased. It is also permissible
to say in the invocations: 'O my Allah, be pleased with me and do not be
angry at me. Favor me and do not be hostile to me.'"

But it is not permissible to say, "Allah has power to know and has no
power not to know. He has power to possess and has no power not to
possess. He has power to be powerful and wise, and has no power to be
otherwise, i.e. without power and wisdom. He has power to be generous
and has no power to be not generous. He has power to be forgiving and
has no power to be not forgiving."

It is also not permissible to say, "Allah intended to be the
Nourishing, the Everlasting, the Mighty, the Wise, the Possessor, the
all-knowing, the all- Powerful." Since these are the attributes of His
essence while intention is among His attributes of action.

"Do you not see that it is said; "Allah intended this and did not
intend that." Every Attribute of His essence negates its opposite in
respect of Him. He is called: "The Living, the Allknowing, the
All-hearing, the All-seeing, the All-mighty, the All-wise, the Rich, the
King, the Clement, the Just and the Generous." The opposite of knowledge
is ignorance.


The opposite of power is inability. The opposite of life is death. The
opposite of honor is humiliation. The opposite of wisdom is error. The
opposite of clemency is haste and ignorance. The opposite of justice is
oppression and tyranny. (So, by proving any of His essential attributes
its opposite is negated.)


**Chapter 15 : Chapter On the Coming into the Existence of the Names of
Allah H 305, Ch. 15, h 1**

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Salih ibn abu Hammad from al-Husayn
ibn Yazid from al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn abu Hamzah from Ibrahim ibn 'Umar
from abu 'Abdallah (a.s.), who has said the following.

"Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, created a name with letters that
had no sound. He created it with the word that would not be spoken. He
created it with a personality that had no body. It had a similarity that
is not described. He created it with color that is colorless. Diameters
were negated from it. Limitations were distanced away from it. The feel
of all Mutawahhim (intuitive sense) is curtained from it.

It is hidden but not covered. He placed it to be a perfect word
consisting of four parts together. No one of them is before the other.
From these He made public only three names because people desperately
needed them. One of them is kept out of public sight. This is the
protected and treasured name.

The names that became public is Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High.
He, the Most Glorious, for each of these made four subservient key
elements that formed twelve key elements. Then for each key element He
created thirty key elements to indicate an action ascribed to the four
key elements.

He, therefore, is Al-Rahman (The All compassionate); al-Rahim (The All
merciful); al-Malik (The King); al-Quddus (The Holy); al-Khaliq (The
Creator); al-Bari' (The Maker); al- Musawwir (The Fashioner); al-Hayy
(The Ever living); al-Qayyum (The Self-subsistent).

Neither slumber nor sleep seizes Him. Al-'Alim (The All-knowing);
al-Khabir (The Allaware); as-Sami' (The All-hearing); al-Basir (The
All-seeing); al-Hakim (The All-wise); al-'Aziz (The All-Majestic);
al-Jabbar (The All-compeller); al-Mutakabbir (The Allsublime); al-'Aliyy
(The Most High); al-'Azim (The All-Great); al-Muqtadir (The All-
Dominant); al-Qadir (The All-capable);

Al-Salam (The All peaceable); al-Mu'min (The Allprotector); al-Muhaymin
(The All-preserver); al-Munshi' (The All-inventor) al-Badi' (The
All-originator); al-Rafi' (The Exalter); al-Jalil (The Majestic);
al-Karim (The Generous); al- Raziq (The All-provider); al-Muhyi (The
Bestower of Life); al-Mumit (The Inflictor of death); al-Ba'ith (The
Resurrector); al-Warith (The Inheriter).

These names in addition to the (Asma' al-Husna) beautiful names make
them three hundred sixty names. Such is the ratio of these three names.
These three names are key element names. Only one name is kept out of
public sight, protected and treasured with these three names. Thus,
Allah has said, "Say, call Allah or al-Rahman. Call whichever you call.
For Him there are beautiful names. (17:110)

from each were . I by letter, nor expressed by word, nor manifested by
baby, nor indicated by similitude, nor emblazoned by colour. Negated
from Annit are all dimensions, removed from it all limits, inaccessible
is it to the sensations of every sensate being, and veiled is it without
any veil. Allah made it one all comprehensive Word, with four
constituents contiguous, immediate, without one being after the other.

Three out of the four were made manifest, since creation was most in
need of them, and one has been concealed, the ineffable, the occult
Name. Of the (three) Names that have been made manifest, their
manifestation is Allah'-the Hallowed, the Exalted. To each one of these
(three) Names, Allah, the Exalted, subordinated four 'Supports'. Thus,
they have all become twelve 'supports' in number.

Then Allah created thirty Names in respect of every support according
to (His different) actions. These names are: Al-Rahman (The
All-compassionate); ar-Rahim (The All-merciful); al-Malik (The Lord);
al-Quddus (The All-holy); al-Khiliq (The Creator); al-B&ri' ( The
Maker); al-Musawwir (The Fashioner);

al-.Hayy (The Ever living); al-Qayyam (The Selfsubsistent); 'Whom
slumber seize Him not, neither sleep'; al- !41im ( The All-knowing);
al-Khabur ( The All-aware); as- Sami ' ( The Allhearing); al-Basir (The
All-seeing); al-Hakim (The All-wise); al-\>lziz (The All-mighty);
al-Jabbar (The All-compeller); al-Mutakabbir (The All-sublime); al-Aliyy
(The All-high); al-!Azim (The All-glorious); al-Muqtadir ( The
All-omnipotent); al-Qddir ( The All-powerful); as-Saldm (The
All-peaceable);

al-Mu'min (The All-faithful); al-Muhaymin (The All-preserver);
al-Munshi' (The All-evolver) al-Badi' (The All-originator);ar-Rafi' (The
Exalter);al-Jalil (The Majestic);al-Karim (The Generous); ar-R§ziq (The
All-sustainer); al- MuRyi (The Bestower of Life); al-Mumit (The
Inflictor of death); al-Ba'ith (The Resurrector); al-W6rith (The
Inheriter).

"These names along with the other Beautiful and Good Names come to a
total of three hundred and sixty names. They all branch forth from the
original three which are the three supports. And that one ineffable
occult name became concealed through these three names.

This is what Allah, the Sublime, has said, 'Say, call upon Allah, or
call upon 'ar-Rahmdn' (the Compassionate); whichsoever you call upon, to
Him (alone) belongs the name most Beautiful. ' (al-Isrd', 17: 110)"

Al-'Allamah al-Majlisi has said the following about the above Hadith,
"Among its narrators, there are unknown people. The Hadith itself is not
clear. Its meaning is an indefinable secret. No one knows its
interpretation except Allah and those firmly rooted in knowledge.

Therefore, to remain silent in its interpretation and to confess
failure in understanding its meaning is most righteous, worthwhile and
suitable to precaution. (Mir'at al-'uqul, vol.2, p.24)

H 306, Ch. 15, h 2

Ahmad ibn Idris has narrated from al-Husayn ibn 'Abdallah from Muhammad
ibn 'Abdallah and Musa ibn 'Umar and al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn 'Uthman from
ibn Sinan who has said the following. "I asked abu al-Hassan al-Rida
(a.s.), 'Did Allah, the Majestic, the Glorious, know Himself before He
created the creation?'"

The Imam (a.s.) replied, "Yes, He knew Himself." I further asked, "Did
He see and hear His Own Self?" The Imam replied, "Allah did not need
such things because He did not ask or demand it. He is His Own self and
His Own self is He. His power is dominant and He does not need to name
His Own self. He chose His Own name for the sake of others so they can
call Him.

Until one is not called by means of his names he is not recognized. The
fist name He chose for His Own self was al-'Ali al-'Azim (the Most High,
the Great) because He is above all things. It then means that Allah and
His name al-'Ali al-'Azim is His. The Most High, He is above all
things.

H 307, Ch. 15, h 3

It is narrated through the same chain of narrators (as in the above
Hadith) from Muhammad ibn Sinan who has said the following.

"I asked the Imam, (perhaps abu al-Hassan al-Rida) about the name (of
Allah), 'What is it?' The Imam replied, "It is an attribute of the
attributes of (Allah)."

H 308, Ch. 15, h 4
Muhammad ibn abu 'Abdallah has narrated from Muhammad ibn Isma'il from
some of his people from Bakr ibn Salih from Ali ibn Salih from al-Hassan
ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid ibn Yazid from 'Abd al-A'la from abu 'Abdallah
(a.s.), who has said the following.

"The name of Allah is something other than Allah Himself. Every thing
that is called a thing is created except Allah. Whatever is expressed by
the tongue or is worked out by hands are all created. The word Allah is
one example of names and an end for naming. The end is different from
the thing for which it is. The end is describable is created.

The Maker of things is not describable by the limits of the fact behind
the name. He did not become, so His becoming a being would have been
recognized through the making of what is other than Him. He did not end
up where there was another's end. Do not ever move away from
understanding this rule. This is the true and pure believe in the
Oneness of Allah. Observe it, acknowledge it and understand it by the
permission of Allah.

Those who think they understand Allah by means of covering, form or
examples they become polytheists because his covering, form and example
are not Him. He is only One and One alone. How can one form a belief in
His Oneness by thinking that one may know Him through things other than
Him.

One comes to know Allah only by Allah His Own self. One who can not
know Him by His Own self he has not known Him. He only comes to know
some thing else. There is nothing between the Creator and the created.
All is the Creator of things but not from a thing that was there
already. Allah's names are His names but He is different from His Own
names and the names are other than Him."


