Fortitude the Bridge to Victory
===============================

The Shortest Road to Success
----------------------------

In the scheme of creation, every being that comes into existence
develops and grows in struggle and adversity right from the first day of
its life until the time when it attains to the apex of its perfection.
This is a law of nature that rules over all existents.

Every person is inclined to select the shortest route to success in life
and to get the fastest results from his efforts. But in any enterprise
one cannot shorten his route without patience and reach the desired
objective. There is no possibility of progress or development without
this moral virtue.

Anyone who desires to achieve success and lead a fruitful existence,
whether he is a man of ordinary talents or someone endowed with
exceptional creativity, will power, intelligence and genius, must
cultivate patience by drawing inspiration from the workings of the
system of creation.

With wisdom and a realistic outlook, he should view life in its vast and
resplendent panorama. A great work is never accomplished instantaneously
and spontaneously. A huge amount of energy and time is required to
implement big plans and to bring valuable undertakings to fruition. A
short-lived effort, however brilliant, will not result in lasting
success.

Yes, it is by self-reliance and endurance that one can remove all the
various kinds of obstacles from the path of progress and plow through
adversity and hardship, because victory is always associated with a
series of problems and impediments.

We observe some people achieve remarkable success in life, while there
are some who languish behind the caravan of life; the basic difference
between those who succeed and others who fail and lag behind lies in the
quality of their efforts and the extent of their steadfastness in the
face of life's adverse factors.

There are many people who, instead of thinking of a solution, come to a
standstill as soon as they encounter a small obstacle on their way,
although they possess real and remarkable abilities; or they act in a
haphazard manner without accomplishing with seriousness and
steadfastness any of the tasks that they undertake. Their morale is
always shaky and accompanied with a lack of confidence. Negligence and
default have become second nature with them. Such people never achieve
success in life.

Life is a relentless and intense struggle extending from the first
phases of life to its last moments. Patience and fortitude are the most
effective weapons in this unceasing battle.

Victory on this battlefield belongs to those who are courageous and
unflinching and who do not succumb to obstacles under any condition. No
matter how frequently they may stumble and fall, they rise up and
continue their endeavor and overcome difficulties with sagacity and
level headedness.

If our spiritual capacities be of a mediocre or even a poor quality and
should we be of quite ordinary intelligence, fortitude can strengthen
and complement our personality. The removal of one obstacle and the
solution of a problem prepare us further for facing new obstacles and
creates a measure of inner resilience.

Every small task that we accomplish adds to the momentum of the flywheel
of our activity, guides us towards bigger and worthier tasks, and gives
greater preparedness to our minds in combating problems and pursuing our
goals.

Dr. Marden describes the role of adversity in the development of man's
spiritual faculties in these words:

In the same way as the best and strongest tools are forged with the help
of the heat of a furnace, so also noble morals develop in the straits of
hardship. The greater the hardness and brilliance of a diamond, the more
is the friction required to grind it.

Kant, the German philosopher, says: "A pigeon in its flight considers
the air to be the only hindrance in its way; it imagines that had there
been no air it would have flown faster and with greater ease. Yet
without the air it would have been unable to fly in a vacuum and would
fall to the ground. Hence the same element that poses resistance to the
pigeon in its flight is basically that which makes flight at all
possible."

The effort to climb to an elevated station is greatly valuable: even if
one fails to reach his intended goal, such effort would make him
stronger. An encounter with great events may lead lethargic persons who
do not use their brains and have no aim in life to acquire unprecedented
abilities and success in life.

Often a young man faced with his father's death or the loss of wealth or
some other calamity, loses the crutches that he leaned upon and acquires
an unusual and remarkable vigor. Imprisonment has often revealed the
hidden fire that lay in many individuals. When God wishes to train a man
and raise him to a high station He sends him to the school of necessity
and need not to that of ease and good fortune.

Take two acorns each of which has been plucked from the same oak tree
and which are almost identical. Plant them in two separate places one on
a mountain slope and another in a dense forest. Then observe how their
roots grow. The oak that grows on the mountainside where it has to
withstand wind rain and storms runs its roots in all directions and
grows into a sturdy and shadowy tree. But the oak planted he oak in the
woods since it is situated under the shadow of other trees grows to be
lean and weak.

In the same way take two boys who are about similar and bring them up in
two different places. That is put one of them in an environment where he
is forced to face hard and difficult conditions right from his childhood
and is deprived of wealth or any kind of supports. Such a one should he
stumble and fall will get up again with a firmer determination like a
ball which bounces to a greater height the more forcefully it is hit
against the ground. The greater the obstacles he encounters the more
determined he will become. But the other child brought up in ease and
plenty and in the care of a team of nurses who got everything he desired
and had lots of money will be less resistant in the face of hardship and
will break down sooner.1

The Bounteous Source of Strength
--------------------------------

Every human being is innately endowed with the capacity to face
adversity. It is our duty to employ our resources for encountering
adverse conditions and bring our remarkable powers into action. Man's
latent inner powers comprise a bounteous source whose treasures are
never exhausted. In fact the more they are put to use the more profuse
their flow becomes.

Despair and despondency and the inability to resist hardship are not due
to any inborn lack of capacity. Rather it is the chain of despair and
faint heartedness which shackles the hands of some people and
neutralizes their power of resistance to problems: this kind of people
fall victim to a kind of paralyzing confusion and perplexity when faced
with any trivial difficulty.

Their spirit and morale can even be totally shattered in a single
encounter with some sudden tragedy which makes them lose their poise and
equilibrium. It is harder to remedy this weakness of character than any
other moral inadequacy.

Those who rely on the constancy of their efforts are closer to success
and advancement than those who depend on their personal talents and
abilities. No matter how much intelligence perspicacity and refined
positive effort they will not reach fruition.

The world's eminent thinkers didn't come from a particular social class.
Rather most of them grew up in difficult conditions and began their
climb in the midst of hardships. It was the pressure of hardship and
deprivation that gave the strength to survive in the face of various
kinds of enervating problems to those who have developed distinguished
and sublime personalities whose fame has spread far and wide and who
have even brought glory and honor to their societies. It was this factor
which gave them toughness and strength and enabled them to climb the
ladder of progress with a decisive will.

There is a story that once a Chinese student who had failed to make any
progress in his studies took all his books and threw them away out of
despair. At that moment he saw a poor woman filing away a piece of iron
with untiring tenacity in order to make a needle out of it. This scene
produced a great upheaval in his spirit and moved him strongly. It
taught him an important lesson: he decided to go back to his class and
continue his studies at all cost. He put this resolution into effect and
with the fortitude that he developed within himself he came to rank
amongst the famous scholars of his age and became one of the foremost
scientists of his era.

The Principles of Life
----------------------

Learning the principles of life is something which must be achieved by
their study and through reflecting about them so that one may equip
oneself adequately in the struggles of life and attune himself to life.
The wheels of life cannot be set into motion with immature fancies and
romantic imaginings and ideas. One should not make judgments about life
on the basis of frivolous notions. The pattern of problems keeps on
changing all the time and they take on a new face. One continually
confronts problems which have no precedent and life is nothing except
the endeavor to solve these complex problems and difficulties.

Those who are faced with intractable problems that appear to be
insoluble under existing conditions have only one alternative before
them in order to achieve their goal: to increase their efforts and
seriousness to remain steadfast and to make full use of the available
opportunities. When they proceed on their way with these qualities their
fortitude will ultimately yield its fruits and they will fully attain
their sought goal.

It often happens that the hardships which in the beginning cloud the
horizon of one's life with their dark and unfriendly countenance appear
altogether in a different light in the end. Felicity and success emerge
from the dark clouds of adversity that one once sought to escape like
flashes of lightning accompanied with beneficent rains that water the
fields of one's hopes and aspirations.

The Lessons of Failure
----------------------

The most brilliant kind of success is achieved by those who are able to
analyze the causes of their failure and defeat and derive the utmost
benefit from them. Examining the causes of a failure by itself leads one
to identify one's difficulties as well as their solution. It opens up in
front of one a hopeful and dynamic perspective in which the path to
victory is clearly visible. In this way, one can employ one's reserves
of thought and energy and alter the whole situation in a radical manner.

The best of one's efforts become manifest when one encounters an
obstacle or defeat in the pursuit of his aspirations. There are many
individuals who do not discover themselves until they have lost
everything.

Those who have inner substance do not give up their perseverance unless
they have extracted the elements of greatness from the depths of
hardship and defeat and who do not abandon their efforts until they are
triumphant. Every work that they begin is marked with vigor and energy
and their great personal qualities are cast in the very heart of
failure.

It is a mistake to be embarrassed by one's defeat. Obstacles are like
thorns that usually grow on the path of men of action. A total
bankruptcy occurs only when one takes the failure to make headway in
some task as a permanent defeat and loses all his confidence. The
feeling of personal inadequacy and weakness may bring a person to a
standstill and keep him from every kind of effort to make amends for his
defeat and frustration.

One of the first urges that manifest itself in a human being is the
desire to win and dominate. But if he should always stick to his
ordinary routine the will to struggle and endeavor becomes extinguished
in his spirit.

It is possible that some precious talents may lie dormant within a
person that develop and shine solely as a result of the abrasion of
adversity which gives them their burnish. In reality, most people remain
unaware of their inner talents and gifts due to the absence of encounter
with obstacles and defeats. As a result, they do not become aware of the
power that lies latent in the depths of their being.

Dale Carnegie writes:

*About twenty-five years ago one day a school teacher forcefully slapped
a boy twice in the face for being restless in the class and for
constantly chattering and jolting on his bench. The teacher slapped him
in front of the pupils and so humiliated him that the poor child went
home sobbing.*

*At that time he was no more than five years, but at that tender age he
concluded that the way he had been treated was absolutely unjust and
unfair. From that moment he came to have a strong feeling of hatred and
repulsion for injustice against which he struggled until the end of his
life.*

*His name was Clarence Darrow and perhaps he was the foremost lawyer and
undoubtedly the greatest criminal lawyer of his era. Countless times his
name and renown occupied the first pages of American newspapers. Even
now the elderly people of Ashtabula in the United States talk about his
first trial and the first case that was referred to him. He raised a
great clamour over the case although the dispute related to a number of
horse bridles all together worth merely five dollars. When asked why he
had raised such an uproar over a few horse bridles, he replied: "The
main thing is the defence*

*of truth, not the worth of something for which the trial is held." He
displayed such vigor and courage in the coarse of his trials and fought
in such a manner as if he were facing a tiger of Bengal and was forced
to defend himself. A defendant who had chosen him to fight the case had
paid him a fee of five dollars, but since the case was not settled he
took it to seven courts at his own expense, pursuing it diligently for
seven years until he was triumphant in the end. Darrow used to say that
he never accepted a case for money or personal prestige.* 2

All the remarkable accomplishments and the invaluable services rendered
to human society, which are today regarded as ordinary means of life,
were in the beginning considered impossible by most people. In the past
if someone were bold enough to regard them as possible, he would have
been considered a fool and ridiculed even in scientific circles. Today,
with all their value, people have forgotten their significance and they
do not amaze any onlooker.

But all these inventions and techniques were not discovered by men of
action in a short period. They were products of years of painful effort
and toil. In some cases, with utmost patience, they devoted their entire
lives to the solution of difficult and complex problems. It was with the
untiring efforts of those men of determination that these things entered
the world of reality and put on the garment of existence. Emerson says:

*Those who have been successful have all been in agreement over the fact
that there is a certain connection between cause and effect. In other
words, they believed that in the sphere of life events do not take place
by chance and fortuity; rather everything is subject to a law. There is
no missing or feeble link between the first and the last links of the
chain.* 3

The Means of Perfection
-----------------------

Steadfastness and struggle in the face of problems are the means of
achieving perfection and a prelude to prosperity. Difficulties play a
decisive and undeniable role in personal growth and development. Had
there been no tests and tribulations in life, piety, human merit and
worth would not have any value, and self-discipline and self-restraint
would have been irrelevant.

Similarly, if difficulties did not exist and were every effort to lead
to spontaneous success, there would not have been any motive for
struggle and advancement would have come to a standstill.

Accordingly, the pinch of difficulty and failure is not only not
harmful, it brings dormant capacities into action and completes man's
moral character and makeup, sometimes becoming even the biggest source
of his strength.

One should form a correct picture of life in his mind so that one is not
confounded and baffled by events or swept away by life's vicissitudes
like a piece of straw in a violent stream. Rather, he should prepare
himself like an expert swimmer who is able to swim as he chooses in the
shoreless sea of events, and confront all the various factors that
affect different aspects of life. If the barrier of obstacles does not
allow one to advance and the conditions become too complex, the path of
patience is always open, and the intelligent man takes this path under
unfavorable conditions.

There are many people who fall victim to unrealistic fancies and build
castles in the air. Their great expectations find a place only in the
world of imagination. Their ideas remain unfulfilled and never reach the
stage of realization through steady effort and patience. There is a
great distance that separates the world of imagination from the world of
action. Hence one should enter the active arena of life with a realistic
approach to its constructive elements, making patient effort to reach
the goal and without neglecting the effort to increase one's energy and
zeal. One author writes:

It is a waste of one's life to build castles in the air. Of course,
nothing is more enchanting than these fancies wherein one builds for
himself high castles in the boundless space of his imagination. But if
these wishes are to be transported from the world of imagination to the
world of reality, these castles should he built on the ground not in the
air.4

Most people do not make realistic judgments about themselves. Whenever
they face a defeat, they invent excuses to prove that they have not made
any mistakes. In such situations, instead of reproaching themselves they
hold others responsible for their failure. Only rarely do success and
advancement come to a capricious and unsteady person who, as it might
happen, is carried a long distance, like a wooden log driven by the
river's flood. But even such rare victories are followed by setbacks or
defeat. In many cases, such people, when viewing the progress made by
others, forget the hard work and toil undertaken by them in attaining
their goal and the perils and dangers faced by them.

A European man of arms who felt that his friend was being envious of him
said to him:

*If you are envious of my laurels, position, and rank, you can obtain
them more easily than I did. Come, let us go into the yard. I will shoot
twenty bullets at you from a distance of thirty strides. If none of them
hits you and*

*will decline my proposal. Very well. But remember that I did not get my
present rank and position without becoming the target of bullets a
thousand times, each time with death in front of my eyes.* 5

Some people learn only in the shadow of defeat. They discover what they
should do in order to be victorious and the things they must avoid. A
setback or loss does not upset them, for they have found out that a
sustained and steady effort is necessary to compensate for the past
setbacks. They learn that losses and setbacks must be made good for in
other ways, for the simplest and cheapest way to avoid them in the
future is to learn from one's past mistakes and failures. Similarly, one
can learn beneficial things from the study of the causes of others'
progress and success. A study of life and experience simplify many
difficulties.

The facts of history show that all kinds of arms and military
equipment-which are by themselves lifeless objects-fetch victory and
triumph in the hands of those who possess fortitude. Such men are
undefeatable; they preserve their initiative on the battlefield and
overpower the enemy, for often the difference between the winner and the
loser is no more than a few minutes of fortitude and resistance.

One of the essential and useful principles that contribute effectively
to man's progress and development is discipline and the quality of his
activity. This is a fundamental rule based on experience and insight.
The intelligent man is one who keeps his eyes and ears open to
opportunities. His mind is open to the right formulas and solutions, and
before every undertaking he gives sufficient forethought to its
potential for positive results.

The people who build their lives on deep foundations advance much more
rapidly and more confidently than those who act in a disorderly and
undisciplined manner. The absence of discipline and orderliness brings
great harm, a loss that cannot be easily compensated by anything.

Someone may devote long years of his life to a certain kind of work but
due to lack of sufficient insight and knowledge he makes no remarkable
progress despite years of toil. Another person may spend lesser time
doing similar work but every day that passes brings him closer to his
goal. He benefits from the fruits of his work and constantly adds to the
list of his successes.

In the same way, often one who makes undue haste either does not reach
his destination safely, or he prolongs his journey by taking the wrong
route. The harm of undue haste in making plans and decisions is not
lesser than the danger of negligence and weakness of will.

Ultimately, it is calculated action and correct thinking concerning the
solution of problems that determine an individual's capacity to make
progress. The same holds true in case of nations.

More than anything else society for its survival and edification needs
men of fortitude who are not deterred by difficulties and who combine in
themselves this characteristic with knowledge and science and employ
them in the path of reform. If scientific genius and political acumen
are not accompanied with patience and fortitude they will not yield any
noteworthy results.

The Noble Qur'an exhorts the Holy Prophet of Islam that in order to
achieve success he should never flag in his steadfastness at any stage
and that he should resist subversive elements:

***Be steadfast as you have been commanded, you and those who have
turned with you (to God). (Qur’an Surah Hud 11:12)***

***Be as steadfast (in pursuing your sacred purpose) as you have been
commanded to be, and do not follow the desires of the people. (Qur’an
Surah Shuaraa 42:15)***

In some verses God says to the great Prophet of Islam: "It is possible
to attain victory and relief in the midst of hardships. It is possible
to attain success as a result of adversity. Whenever you get relief
devote yourself to effort and endeavor and put your hope in the great
Lord."6 In these verses one is reminded that the flame of effort and
enterprise must never be allowed to go out. Rather following every
success and victory one must prepare oneself to welcome future
hardships. That is so because there is nothing like absolute ease in
this world and one should not expect to find it here.

Will Durant writes:

*Will which is unified desire is the characteristic form of growing
life; and its strength and stature increase only as life finds for it
new labors and new victories. If we wish to he strong we must first
choose our goal and plot our road; then we must cleave to whatever
betide. The way of caution here is to undertake at first only that which
we may rely upon ourselves to carry through; for every failure will
weaken us and every success will make us stronger. It is achievement
that makes achievement; by little conquests we gain strength and
confidence for larger ones; practice makes will.*

*But then one can be too cautious and by turning away from the beckoning
of great deeds remain forever small. Make sure that modest virtues shall
not content you; on the morning after your triumph having feasted for a
day, look about you for the next week and larger task. Face danger, and
seek responsibility. It is true that they may defeat you may even
destroy you; but the date of the one death which you must die is too
slight a chronological detail to distort) philosophy. If*they do not
kill you they will strengthen you and lift you nearer to greatness and
your goal. Make or break.* 7*

A study of the triumphant life of the Prophet of Islam his patience and
steadfastness for the sake of the triumph of truth and guidance of the
mankind, will not leave any need for an explanation in this regard. The
secret of the victory of Muslims in the early era of Islam was their
faith and unflagging resistance against dangerous enemies. The record of
these heroic efforts occupies a prominent place in the pages of world
history.8

Mere Adherence to Islam Does Not Lead to Victory
------------------------------------------------

In some of its verses the Noble Qur'an gives the good news of victory
and superior power to Muslims while reminding them that these advantages
will not come easily: the Divine good tidings will come true only when
the people act awaringly in accordance with their duties. Sincere faith
is fruitful when coupled with character. Hence those who separate faith
from works their hopes of success will never be fulfilled. It is action
and effort which rescue one from the valley of loss and failure.

***O believers, if you help God He will assist you and make your feet
steady. (Qur’an Surah Muhammad 47:7)***

During the Battle of Uhud the Muslims had to face a catastrophic setback
for disobeying the Prophet's orders by leaving their positions for the
sake of collecting the spoils of war. As a result of this unexpected
setback their morale was shaken for they imagined that it was sufficient
for them to be Muslims in order to overcome all hostile elements and
that they would never face defeat and failure. "Why should we have been
defeated and made to suffer at the hands of God's enemies. Why should
have our belongings been plundered by them"? they thought. Such thoughts
intensely demoralized them. In order to enlighten and console them and
make them abandon their unrealistic notions God shows them the way to
overcome their hardships:

***You shall surely be tried in your possessions and your selves, and
you shall hear from those who were given the Book before you, and from
those who are idolators, much hurt; but if you are patient and Godwary,
surely that is true constancy. (Qur’an Surah Ale Imran 3:186)***

In this verse hardship and the loss of life and property are considered
one of the aspects of Divine testing. Men of faith, like all other
people, are exposed to undesirable events in the course of this life.
This way God tests all His servants. However, the men of faith have such
fortitude in face of adversity that their fear and loss of morale are
changed into steadfastness and security. Faith leads them to overcome
fear and despair, making individuals used to sacrifice and fortitude and
thus purifying their hearts, spirits and feelings.

Rousseau says:

*Do you think any man can find true happiness elsewhere than in his
natural state; and when you try to spare him all suffering, are you not
taking him out of his natural state? Indeed I maintain that to enjoy
great happiness he must experience slight ills; such is his nature. Too
much bodily prosperity corrupts the morals. A man who knows no suffering
would he incapable of tenderness towards his fellow-creatures and
ignorant of the joys of pity; he would be hard hearted, unsocial, a very
monster among men ...*

*They (spoiled children) are used to find everything give way to them;
what a painful surprise to enter society and meet with opposition on
every side, to be crushed beneath the weight or a universe which they
expected to score at will.... Sharp experience teaches them that they
have realized neither their position nor their strength. As they cannot
do everything, they think they can do nothing. They are daunted by
unexpected obstacles,*

*degraded by the scorn of men; they become base, cowardly, and
deceitful, and fall as far below their true level as they formerly
soared above it.* 9

Patience does not mean waiting for fate to solve the problems or
surrendering to the tyranny of hardship. One must be careful to note
this point so that one correctly understands the role of Divine
ordainment in progress and prosperity or fall and misfortune. The Divine
law concerning victory is that it is to be attained by effort and
steadfastness. This is the indubitable duty associated with faith. God
announces the good news of victory that comes as a result of its
observance in these words:

***O believers be patient and vie you in patience, be steadfast, fear
God, haply so will you prosper. (Qur’an Surah Ale Imran 3:200)***

In this verse the people are reminded that they ought to be forbearing
and steadfast in the face of injustice, oppression, dictatorship, and
deviance and misguidance on others' part and strive collectively to
overcome the problems of their society. They should keep a vigilant eye
over their dangerous enemies and stop infiltration of the aliens firmly
and patiently. It is the duty of godly men to confront the aggressors
with power, fight the enemy, and to avoid every kind of disgrace and
abasement. They have the duty before God to observe piety and
God-fearing in all their activities so that their efforts attain
fruition. That is because it is only in the shadow of piety that one can
implement the Divine commands in the best possible manner never
forgetting one's duties under any condition whatsoever. External
pressures may at times make one deviate towards the right or the left,
but piety and sincerity of intention produce a balanced and desirable
harmony in his soul.

A European scholar writes:

*Tragedies and unpleasant incidents make a training ground of piety and
moral merit. hardships bring wisdom and awareness to the mind and
rectify one's sense of judgment. They also restrain a person from
hedonism, immorality, and sin. God, who governs the world of being with
His perfect wisdom and compassion, has sent these hardships and
difficulties into the world directing them especially at good and wise
men so that they may learn the way of attaining true ease and prosperity
and habituate themselves to patience, fortitude and forbearance in
hardships and so as to bring them to the gates of glory and pride.*

*No one is more unfortunate than him who has never faced adversity and
hardship. The real character of such a person who has not undergone any
test remains unknown. The merits which arc congenital and part of one's
nature have no value or worth before God. God rewards man only for
merits which, are acquired through effort and endeavor and are
manifested in action.10*

Two Potent Educate Factors
--------------------------

The latent capacities of every being develop and mature when assisted by
the various inner and outer agents in the course of its development. Man
is also not an exception to this rule, with the difference however that
the development of other creatures is confined to specific limits
whereas the stages of man's development and growth are unlimited and
unbounded. That is why he has a great need of basic and comprehensive
education for developing and reaching the station worthy of his
humanity. Hence several factors are responsible for his spiritual
growth.

Two factors play an important and fundamental role in the growth of
human faculties. One of them consists of the heavenly teachings of
God-sent prophets which, like a sun, shine on all the domains of the
human spirit and gradually liberate it from the darkness of unhealthy
traits and qualities, giving the soul its brilliance and burnish.

The second factor which can assist man in reaching this goal and
attaining the fulfillment worthy of him are the problems, hardships and
difficulties of life. Until man is not reformed and refined in the
shadow of the luminous heavenly teachings and the pressures of life and
unless his spirit is purged of the impurities of animal traits, his
spirit and will become subject to mundane things and he is swept away
like a piece of straw by the waves of material gain and surrenders to
everything except God. As long as his spirit remains confined in the
darkness and veils of carnal desires which hold his being in their
bondage, he cannot perceive the fruitful and critical role of hardship
in bringing him to true independence and fashioning his human
personality As a result the pressure of adversity produces a kind of
anxiety and despair in him.

The Qur'an says

***Surely man was created fretful when evil visits him, impatient
(Qur’an Surah Maarij 70:19-20)***

***As for man, whenever his Lord tries him, and honors him, and blesses
him then he says: My Lord has honored me. But when He tries him and
stints him his provision, then he says: My Lord has humiliated me.
(Qur’an Surah Ghashiya 89:15-16)***

These states pertain to the condition of an unrefined human being. But
when the human heart is revived with the religious urge, it attains the
inner freedom which is the goal of all heavenly teachings Then, he
becomes liberated from total reliance on fake materialistic values and
becomes the master of his world. It is a freedom and liberty that is
free from the traces of animal unruliness and free from all obstacles
and hurdles that hinder man from development, perfection, and sublimity.

Fake values do not tempt a righteous and developed human being and do
not overshadow his spirit and understanding. While explaining the
philosophy of life's hardships and afflictions, which is human
liberation, God says:

***That you may not grieve for what escapes you nor rejoice for what has
come to you. (Qur’an Surah Hadid 57:23)***

Thus when man liberates himself from the servitude of everything other
than God and does not submit to anything except the Truth, he finds a

wonderful and extraordinary power within himself One who is trained in
such a school of thought has a broad vision, an awakened heart and a
piercing insight.

The principle that one should forget that which is lost and gone and not
rejoice on attaining something has another educate result. It is that
when the feelings of sorrow and grief felt over some loss preoccupy
one's mind they make one's creative faculties and activities to become
stagnant On the other hand, rejoicing over some achievement dwarfs one's
efforts and goals making them limited and diverting attention from
things which are better and higher. As a result one fails to advance
further on the path of progress

and edification.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau says:

*The illusions of pride are the source of our greatest ills; but the
contemplation of human suffering keeps the wise humble He keeps to his
proper place and makes no attempt to depart from it; he does not waste
his strength in gelling what he cannot keep; and his whole strength
being devoted to the right employment of what he has, he is in reality
richer and more powerful in proportion as he desires less than we A man,
subject to death and change, shall I forge for myself lasting chains
upon this earth, where everything changes and disappears whence I myself
shall shortly vanish! Oh, Emile! my son! if I were to lose you, what
would be left of myself And yet I must learn to lose you, for who knows
when you may be taken away from me?*

*Would you live in wisdom and happiness, fix your heart on the beauty
that is eternal; let your desires be limited by your position; let your
duties take precedence of your wishes; extend the law of necessity into
the region of morals; learn to lose what may be taken from you; learn to
forsake all things al the command of virtue, to set yourself above the
chances of life, to detach your heart before it is torn in pieces, to be
brave in adversity so that you may never he wretched, to be steadfast in
duty that you will never be guilty of a crime Then you will be happy in
spite of fortune, and good in spite of your passions You will find a
pleasure that cannot be destroyed, even in the procession of the most
fragile things; you will possess them, they will not possess you, and
you will realize that the man who loses everything, only enjoys what he
knows how to resign.11*

In one of his aphorisms, Imam 'Ali ('a) gives this lesson to human
beings;

It is through severe adversity that one can attain through higher
stations and lasting peace.12

Emerson, the American philosopher, writes:

*The changes which break up at short intervals the prosperity of men
advertisements of a nature whose law is growth. Every soul is by this
intrinsic necessity of quitting its whole system of things, its friends
and home and laws and faith, as the shell fish crawls out of its
beautiful but stony ease, because it no longer admits of its growth, and
slowly forms a new house. In proportion to the vigor of individuals
these revolutions are frequent, until in some happier mind they are
incessant and all worldly relations hang very loosely about him,
becoming as it were a transparent fluid membrane through which the
living form is seen, and not, as in most*

*men, an indurate heterogeneous fabric of many dates and of no settled
character, in which the man is imprisoned* .

*Then there can be enlargement, and the man of today scarcely recognizes
the man of yesterday. And such should be the outward biography of man in
time, a putting off of dead circumstances day by day, as he renews his
raiment day by day. But to us, in our lapsed estate, resting, not
advancing, resisting, not cooperating with the divine expansion, this
growth comes by shocks. We cannot part with our friends. We cannot let
our angels go. We do not sec that they only go out that archangels may
come in.*

*We are idolaters of the old. We do not believe in the riches of the
soul, in its proper eternity and omnipresence. We do not believe there
is any force in to-day to rival or recreate that beautiful yesterday. We
linger in the ruins of the old tent where once one had bread and shelter
and organs, nor believe that the spirit can feed, cover, and nerve us
again. We cannot again find aught so dear, so sweet, so graceful. But we
sit and weep in vain. The voice Of the Almighty saith, "Up and onward
and for evermore!"*

*We cannot stay amid the ruins, neither will we rely on the new, and so
we walk ever with reverted eyes, like those monsters who look backwards.
And yet the compensations Or calamity are made apparent to the
understanding also, after long intervals or time. A fever, a mutilation,
a cruel disappointment), a loss Of wealth, a loss Of friends, seems at
the moment unpaid loss, and unpayable. But the sure years reveal the
deep remedial force that underlies all facts.*

*The death of a friend, wife, brother, lover, which seemed nothing but
privation, somewhat later assumes the aspect of a guide or genius; for
it commonly operates revolutions in our way of life, terminates an epoch
of infancy or of youth which was waiting to be closed, breaks up a
wonted occupation, or a household, or style of living, and allows the
formation of new ones more friendly to the growth of character.*

*It permits or constrains the formation of new acquaintances and the
reception of new influences that prove of the first importance to the
next years; and the man or woman who would have remained a sunny
garden-flower, with no room for its rests and too much sunshine for its
head, by the falling of the walls and the neglect of the gardener is
made the banyan of the forest, yielding shade and fruit to wide
neighborhoods of men.13*

In one of his letters to 'Uthman ibn Hunayf, Imam ''Ali ('a) likens
those who grow in the midst of hardship and adversity to the tough trees
that grow in dry mountains and those who live in comfort and ease to the
delicate plants of a garden:

Indeed, the tree of the desert that is used to its harsh and waterless
conditions has a tough fiber. The fire produced by its wood is stronger
and more intense and enduring. But the trees Of an orchard have a
delicate bark and weak fiber and are easily broken.14

In his exhortations, he declares:

Be careful not to abandon your activity whether you may feel energetic
or sluggish.15

Be diligent in your efforts even if your whole body's strength does not
assist you.16

One who neglects his responsibilities and the opportunity to fulfill
them will be helpless after the opportunity is lost.17

William John Reilly, the well-known American writer, says:

*Millions of people who ceased their efforts at the very dawn of success
to relax have perished in that state of rest and immobility. Most of our
thoughts are so spontaneous that we never get the chance to be aware of
that which goes on in our minds. If we restrain our thoughts for a
moment to see what we are doing, we would find that every day we take a
number of decisions. At the end of every week, we would have taken
several hundred decisions. But we do not notice that most of our
decisions were a result of inattention and neglect. That is, we allow
things to happen while we imagine that we have taken a decision,
whereas, in fact, we have been negligent.*

*It is wrong, especially, to keep on putting off matters. Indeed, when
we delay taking a decision we do actually take a decision. That is, we
decide not to act and take the necessary decision regarding a matter,
whereas postponing action is itself a kind of decision.*

*Delay and negligence are very easy; especially if you practically
deceive yourself by saying that you will do better in the future and
will be more successful. In this way you dope your mind and hypnotize it
on the pretext that the future will be better than the present
conditions and circumstances. You only deceive yourself by believing
that the future will be without problems and hindrances and that
hardships and difficulties are temporary and passing. But in fact all
good and relatively important tasks are faced with problems. This is no
magic in the future. It is the present success that is yours and present
opportunities are more valuable than past successes and the hopes and
promises of the future.* 18

A Superb Advantage
------------------

Faith is the unique element which can give such strength to the human
spirit and so expand the area of its activity as to prepare it to face
the hardest and most complex of problems without giving in or cowering.
The person imbued with faith knows that hardships, no matter how severe,
will not stand in front of his undefeatable spirit and will be overcome.

The strength to bear hardship and adversity saves man from certain
psychic illnesses. It is the power of faith which definitely increases a
person's capacity for forbearance without affecting his mental
equilibrium and his steadiness on the path to his goal. The Prophet of
Islam (S) considers this merit as one of the characteristics of godly
men:

The man of faith is like gold bullion. If placed in the furnace it grows
red hot and when it is weighed afterwards its weight is not diminished
in the least.19

'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

The spirit of a person possessing faith is more resistant than the
hardest stone.20

Mann, in the Principles of Psychology, writes:

When our efforts in attaining a goal meet an obstacle which is difficult
or impossible for us to overcome, it produces in us the feeling of
frustration. The obstacles causing frustration can be external objects
in our environment, other persons, our own personal inadequacies, or our
incapacity in resolving our inner conflicts. The degree of tolerance for
failure differs in individuals. The encounter with a certain degree of
failure can produce mental breakdown in some people, while others can
easily bear the same kind of failure.21 Some who have a low level of
resistance can lose their poise in confrontation with failure and do
something which may lake them further away from their goal.22

Concealing One's Weaknesses
---------------------------

Self-deception aimed to avoid action or inventing pretexts for the
inability to perform certain tasks due to a personal weakness have a
psychic cause. One who does not manifest stability and perseverance in
any matter leaves everything that he takes up incomplete or avoids
looking the problems of life in the face. He continually invents excuses
to conceal his spiritual inadequacy and deceives himself.

'Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

When faced with intense hardship, at times a man may be led to lie to
himself (and thus deceive himself in order to escape responsibility).23

Today, this matter has been scientifically proved. According to
psychologists:

When someone lacks the capacity to do a job, quits it and takes up
another job, he justifies it by saying, "I think I can serve my country
and a country man better in this profession." The truth is something
else. He changed his profession since he did not have the capacity for
that job. Men invent reasons to justify their actions and try to make
them appear proper and correct.

Untrue justification, like any other defensive action, is either a sign
of failure or an indication that one has not learnt the way to confront
problems. Persons with obvious shortcomings take recourse in unrealistic
reasoning. That which they must do is to recognize their defects and try
to remove them.

When we face a defeat, our unconscious preserves the feeling of
frustration and despair and prompts us to engage in unrealistic
reasoning. I he better thing to do is to admit one's despair and
deprivation and try to strengthen oneself for overcoming problems. We
should forget the defeat which was a result of lack of sufficient effort
and remember to use our experience of defeat for future occasions.

Escapism and fleeing difficulties and problems is a wrong remedy. This
trick works only for a short time, and the pain, sickness and weakness
soon return. While reacting in regard to a problem, one must ask oneself
the question: "Am I deceiving myself and others? Am I trying to justify
myself? What should I do in order to solve my problem by being honest to
myself?"

It is of course not sufficient to give expression to the problem. Rather
one should take effective steps and give one's time for its solution.
One should refrain from putting it off with excuses. Unrealistic
justification is undesirable for it is an unconscious effort at
deceiving oneself and others. One must face the reality distinguish the
true and the false and try to solve the difficulty.

One should not allow oneself to be overcome by despair and the
shattering loss of hope in the most critical and difficult
circumstances. 'Ali the Commander of the Faithful may peace be upon him
advises that one should not give up hope and try to escape problems in
the most difficult and complex of situations. He says:

*The hope of relief comes at the peak of adversely (that is one should
be optimistic and hopeful even at the peak of hardship and adversity)
and relief comes when the noose of adversely has reached its tightest
point.* 24

Fortitude in the face of hardship is one of the things taught by the
God-sent prophets for the training of the human spirit. Once one of the
prophets of God was told that an old woman was at death's door due to a
tragedy that had befallen her. Her only son who was a worthy and gifted
man had died.

The prophet was told that it behooved a prophet to attempt to console
her with kind words and try to pacify her grief by exhorting her. The
prophet went to see her. Entering her house he looked around and saw a
number of pigeons who had made their nest in a corner of the house.
"Have these pigeons hatched any chickens in your house?" he asked her.
"Yes they have" she replied. "Do all of them grow up to become old?" he
asked her. She replied "Sometimes I kill some of them and make use of
their meat." "Do you do that in front of their mother?" he asked. "Yes"
she replied.

The prophet said "Then do they stop being friendly towards you and
desert you?" "Never" she answered. Then the prophet said to her "O
woman! Be careful lest you should prove to be lesser than these pigeons
in your attitude towards God and His will. You kill their young ones in
front of their eyes yet they don't abandon your house and do not leave
you although what you do is only of benefit for yourself and there is no
benefit in it for them. But when God took away your son his death was
for his and your benefit."

On hearing these words there was a sudden change in the old woman and a
revolution occurred within her spirit. She fell in prostration before
God and began pleading for pardon. The burden of grief and sorrow was at
once lifted from her heart.

What power except the power of faith can help heal a wounded and
bereaved heart with a few words and give it undesirable comfort?

Steadiness in Friendship
------------------------

Steadiness in friendship and love is another virtue that should be
cultivated

by every Muslim. The Prophet of Islam has commanded his followers to be
steady in their relations of love and friendship with one another. In
one of his statements he says:

*Verily God loves Muslims to be steady in friendship and to be loyal to
their old friends taking care to observe the demands of friendship love
and loyalty.* 25

Dr. Aveburry says in this regard:

Much certainty of the happiness and purity of our lives depends on our
making a wise choice of our companions and friends. If badly chosen they
will inevitably drag us down if well they will raise us up ...

Yet how often we know merely the sight of those we call our friends or
the sound of their voices hut nothing whatever of their mind or soul.

We must moreover he as careful to keep friends as to make them And when
you have made a friend keep him. "Cherish an old friend" says an Eastern
proverb "visit him often for thorns and brushwood obstruct the road
which no one treads." The affections should not he mere "tents of a
night" Death indeed cannot sever friendship. "Friends" says Cicero
"though absent are still present; though in poverty they are rich;
though weak yet in enjoyment of health; and what is still more difficult
to assert though dead they are alive."

This seems a paradox yet is there not much truth in his explanation? "To
me indeed Scipio still lives and will always live; for I love the virtue
of that man and that worth is not yet extinguished Assuredly of all
things that either fortune or time has bestowed on me I have none which
I can compare with the friendship of Scipio."

If then we choose our friends for what they are not for what they have
and if we deserve so great a blessing then they will be always with us
preserved in absence and even after death in the amber of memory.26

### Endnotes

###

[^1]: Orison Swett Mardenm, The Victorious Attitude, pp. 59-61

[^2]: Dale Carnegie, Ramz e muwaffaqiyat dar zindagi, p. 35

[^3]: Ralph Waldo, Raz e Khushbakhti, p. 23

[^4]: Ralph Waldo, Raz e Khushbakhti, p. 7

[^5]: Samuel Smiles, Akhlaq e Samuel, vol. 2 p 185

[^6]: Will Durrant, The Mansions of Philosophy, p. 271

[^7]: Will Durrant, The Mansions of Philosophy, p. 271

[^8]: Rousseau, Emily, pp. 100-103

[^9]: Rousseau, Emily, pp. 100-103

[^10]: Amuel Smiles, Akhlaq e Samuel. vol. 2 p 209

[^11]: Rouseau, Emily, p. 547

[^12]: al Amidi, Ghurar al Hikam, p. 337

[^13]: Emerson, Compensation, The Social Philosophers, pp 445-6

[^14]: Nahj al Balaghah, p. 418

[^15]: Ghurar al Hikam, p. 480

[^16]: Ibid p. 483

[^17]: Ibid p. 653

[^18]: William John Reily, Twelve Ways for Straight Thinking, pp. 103-5

[^19]: Nahj al fasahah, p. 564

[^20]: al Majlisi, Bihar al Anwar, vol. 15 p 94

[^21]: Marguerite Malm and Herbert Sorenson, Psychology for Living, pp.
191

[^22]: Mann, The Principles of Psychology, p. 148

[^23]: Ghurar al Hikam, p. 537

[^24]: Nahj al Balaghah, p. 351 and 536

[^25]: Nahj al Fasahah, p. 152

[^26]: Lord Avebury, The Pleasure of Life, pp. 99, 105-6
