Foreward
========

For almost twelve uninterrupted centuries the Muslims ruled the world in
glory and splendour. Their rule was embedded in a rare sense of
egalitarianism the world had never witnessed before. The driving force
behind the just dispensation was their oven-warm, unalloyed faith in
divine unity and the inspiration they had drawn from the life and the
teachings of the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .
There was absolutely no chasm between their words and deeds. What they
professed, they implemented. The people they subjugated and ruled were
impressed even overawed, by the impregnable consistency of their
behaviour. The Muslim rulers were not autocratic because they strongly
believed that their power did not flow from the barrel of the gun, but
it emanated as a blessing of the omnipotent Lord. And it was on account
of the sincerity of the rulers in particular and the Muslim masses in
general, that the infidels and people belonging to other creeds, flocked
to the fold of Islam. In their heyday, the Muslims amply proved that
Islam had not spread at the point of the sword. What really gave it
wildfire popularity were its concept of justice and its absolute lack of
discrimination between human beings. During the Muslim centuries, the
notion of justice was stripped out of its conceptual garbs and was
presented to mankind as a fleshed-out reality. The people at large had
never experienced it before and so they were immediately attracted to
it.

But when the Muslim world fell prey to decadence by disowning the
intellectual tradition and the ceaseless struggle that had ensured its
success in the past, its inviolate unity broke into innumerable
splinters and the Muslims were humiliated in almost every field of human
activity. The Muslim community that had aspired to outdazzle the stars
and outsmart the universe turned into a rolling stone, unanchored and
unprotected. Its identity crumbled into the dust of uncertainty, the
violent winds of change upset its apple-cart and, unlike the progressive
nations of the world, well set on the road to growth and prosperity, it
skidded off the track and immersed itself in peripheral issues --- the
proverbial fate of all decadent communities.

As a result, we have embroiled ourselves in marginal disputes, allowing
plenty of opportunity to the world to pooh-pooh our drifting condition.
While the world at large is a gainer, the Muslims are the losers and the
loss is more pathetic than tragic: on the one hand, the people of the
world are cashing in on the fruits of our intellectual efforts and
unparalleled scientific investigations; and on the other hand, they have
made Islam and its followers the butt of their indiscriminate ridicule.
The Muslims are stuck in their narrow, unenlightened grooves and the
irony is compounded when we realise that they are not even adequately
aware of their crumbling condition. Some of them are reconciled to the
inevitability of their decline --- a dangerous condition as it
discourages any attempt at recovery and recuperation. Consequently,
disgrace and humiliation seems our immediate destiny.

We have strayed away from our real goal and are hopelessly trapped in
the cobwebs of irrelevance. The people who were supposed to lead the
world by breaking through the crust of stale ideas have become a hostage
to these ideas. Muslim community has lost its bounce and its élan to
spearhead a world whose moral fibre is in tatters because it is itself
morally shattered. Its cultural heritage is a heap of cinders; its
towering designs are a fuel of inaction and impracticality, its ideals
are a pile of ash. The Muslim community is splitting hair while the
wolves of capitalism are honking the world. There is no doubt that we do
not discriminate against people and treat them on the plane of equality,
but our present lack of vision has made us squint-eyed and as a result,
we are setting Muslims against one another. We are embarked upon a
dangerous course as we are measuring Muslims against un-Islamic
criteria, and those who do not come pat to these self-styled standards,
we chuck them out as non-Muslims. The reason is that we are locked in a
vicious circle of mental slavery, which has estranged us from the real
problems of life by shuttering us up in frivolous issues. And this has
become our second nature.

The blatant irony is that the western nations have taken over the
leading role, and the nation that was supposed to lead is now imprisoned
in its own false egoism. It has sacrificed its unity to self-fabricated
differences authenticated neither by history nor by the central message
of Islamic faith. While the western nations, on account of the inherent
compatibility between the Islamic teachings and modern scientific
investigations, are drawing closer to the religion of nature, the
Muslims are drifting away from their religion through spurious
self-incrimination. Superficial differences have split the Muslim Ummah
into vested groups who are engaged more in promoting group interests
rather than the interests of their faith. Insulated from the core
message of Islam, they thrive on mutual intolerance; their incremental
wrangles have edged out the substance of their faith.

*Istighathah* --- beseeching for help --- has grown into a highly
controversial issue. The Muslims have complicated it unnecessarily and
undesirably. It has diverted attention from the substance of Islam and
engaged the minds of the younger generation in an unpalatable debate. In
their opinion, it has become the measuring rod of faith. They dub those
who believe in it as disbelievers even though their hostile labelling
goes against the very grain of human nature, and since Islam is the
closest to human nature, their view clashes with the spirit of Islamic
faith. They are in fact flying in the face of reality. Islam, being a
religion of humanity, encourages mutual cooperation among human beings
as the progress and development of human society depends on this kind of
coordination. Therefore, to equate this kind of innocuous activity with
a breach of faith is nothing but perversity, it is to emphasise the
shell at the expense of the kernel; for them the husk matters more than
the grain, the wrapping more than the gift, the skin of the orange more
than the juice. Thus their attitude is symptomatic of a deeper
malaise --- their increasingly strident disaffiliation from the true
spirit of their faith.

Man by nature is not a hermit or a recluse. He is a social animal and
likes to huddle with other human beings in small settlements or large
towns. A feeling of security and cooperation motivates the fact of
living together as no man is an island. He loves to seek help from
others and to extend help to others. This is ingrained in his nature,
which cannot be changed by the petty intellectual squabbles of some
skewered zealots. Even a blunt-headed student of history and sociology
knows that interdependence and coordination are the basic facts of human
life. The newborn child cannot support himself; he needs someone to feed
him. A young man draws on the experiences of seasoned people to educate
himself and to discriminate between good and evil. In old age children
support their parents. Thus in every phase of life a person depends on
others and also serves as a prop for others and it is this fact of
interdependence, which sustains the fabric of society. During disease,
war, accidents and other natural calamities, human beings help and
console one another. The patient needs a doctor’s medicine, the student
needs knowledge from a teacher, the labourer seeks wages from his
employer, the neighbours expect help from each other, the child craves
milk from its mother and the old man seeks the support of his young
children. In short, all human beings need someone’s help in different
phases of their lives. The beauty of human culture lies in fortifying
mutual relations. It is beyond doubt that the true helper and supporter
is only Allah whose generosity knows no bounds and whose magnanimity is
limitless, but in our daily routine we help people and seek help from
them in scores of assorted matters. Thus the mutual help we extend to
each other is not a negation of divine unity but a fulfilment of the
divine command. To seek help from the prophets, the righteous and the
saints is not a violation of Islamic principles; on the contrary, it is
quite compatible with the teachings of Islam. We seek help from others
on the assumption that their power is only borrowed, as Allah alone
possesses absolute power. This division of power into "absolute" and
"relative" has prompted some mischievous minds to create unnecessary and
unwarranted complications in basic Islamic concepts, including the
concept of*istighathah* . Such an attitude tends to split the Muslim
community into groups and sects and therefore, needs to be discouraged
in the strongest possible terms.

Historically speaking, the proof of human gregariousness is found in the
most primitive communities. Centuries before the dawn of the era of
stone and metal when man still lived in jungles and caves, when the
invention of the wheel was a remote possibility, when the concept of
society and state was only an extra-conceptual fiction, and the notion
of kingship had only a nebulous existence, the only kind of awareness
that swept over human consciousness was the distinct reality of
cooperation among human beings. The tradition of human relations based
on a mutual sharing of the experiences of pain and pleasure, sorrow and
joy, agony and ecstasy wove them into an exceptional unity.
Chest-beating over the death of a fellow being still mirrored human
identity as a natural reaction, mutual help and assistance was still the
stirling currency of those dark times, sharing mutual pain and sorrow,
and calling one another for help in moments of duress and distress is
part of human nature. The same human tendency served as an incentive in
creating human settlements and living in groups. Man is born to share
the pain of others and those who are indifferent to it are hardly human.

Time is free from all kinds of chains and shackles; it keeps marching on
in complete defiance of happenings and surroundings. Settlements appear,
society takes shape, man sets out on his cultural life, rules and
regulations are framed, new interpretations of the divine revelation are
made, innovations and self-cooked explanations deface revelatory
teachings, and Islamic message is exposed to philosophical
hair-splitting. The chasm of difference and misunderstanding widens when
we try to wipe out the distinction between the real and the metaphorical
and rely on self-coined arguments and interpretations to hammer home the
truth of our own contentions. A literal translation of the universal
teachings of Islam by wrenching them from their context and without
relating them to the Qur'anic mode of narration and understanding,
sometimes jostles a person into those blind alleys of misguidance which
block all the return exits and blend every possibility of reinhaling
fresh air into the dust of doubt and suspicion.

The first effort to make a dent in the unity of Islam was made by the
British imperialists through the Qadiyani movement. They patronised a
number of other mischiefs to disillusion Muslims of the subcontinent.
This imperialist conspiracy to strip the starving Muslims of the last
drop of love for Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
continues unabated. Rajpal’s sacrilegious book on the Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* was part of the Mephistophelean design.

Dr Qadri’s book unravels new possibilities of speculation and research,
but at the same time it is marked by exceptional clarity in illuminating
the issue. He has discussed its various aspects by extensively drawing
on evidence from the Qur'an and the*sunnah* . An effort has been made to
stamp out the possible doubts in the minds of the reader on rational and
intellectual grounds and not through rhetorical bulldozing. This makes
Dr Qadri’s exposition an exercise in sanity and a compulsory reading for
all those Muslims whose minds are a swinging pendulum between clarity
and woolliness on the issue so painstakingly elaborated in the book.

Dr Qadri has resolved the complication relating to the issue of
"beseeching for help" by drawing a clear distinction between "absolute
power" and "derivative power". While Allah’s power is absolute, the
power of all other creatures, including the prophets, the saints and the
righteous is derivative as it derives from the power of Allah. By this
distinction Dr Qadri has totally eliminated the possibility of
disbelief, as it is only Allah’s prerogative to grant or reject an
appeal for help. His favourites can only beseech Him for help.
Similarly, a petitioner can only beseech one of His favourites for help
but he is convinced that the favourite lacks the power to grant his
petition, it has to be granted by Allah alone. Without this conviction,
he is automatically expelled from the fold of Islam.

The actual position is clearly and succinctly summed up in the words of
Dr Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri: "To hold the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* and the saints and pious people of Allah in
reverence and to beseech them for help is quite compatible with the
basic principles of Islamic faith. But sometimes the petitioners, while
addressing these favourites of Allah, employ words, which are reserved
only for Allah and, therefore, according to some religious scholars,
commit disbelief. This conclusion is based on a fundamental
misconception as these scholars fail to draw the vital distinction
between the literal and figurative sense of these words. They interpret
these modes of address or the vocative forms in a literal sense and thus
wring a perverse conclusion from them. It is an admitted fact that these
modes of address are used only for Allah in their absolute sense,
therefore, to use them for any other creature is obviously disbelief and
for a Muslim it is simply inconceivable. Thus a basic distinction must
be drawn between their literal and figurative meaning. The literal sense
applies to Allah alone and no creature, whether he is a prophet or a
saint, can arrogate to himself the exclusive divine prerogative.
Therefore, the petitioner is using the words only figuratively and it is
in this sense alone that they are generally interpreted. The allegation
of disbelief against these people is quite misplaced; it reflects rather
the twisted consciousness of those who hurl such malicious allegations
against them. The petitioners are, in fact, immune to disbelief."

Dr Qadri strikes a different note in an environment that is choked with
interpretative rigmarole. His approach is both conceptual and
contextual. He does not examine a concept in isolation but relates it to
its specific context. This is the reason his speeches and books enjoy a
hot-muffin popularity especially among Muslims who like to arrive at a
rational understanding of the fundamentals of their faith.*Istighathah*
and its legal aspect, is highly readable as it appeals to one’s critical
as well as aesthetic sense; and it should be read by Muslims of every
stripe to come to grips with a basic issue that is both delicate in
substance and tantalising in appeal. Dr Qadri deserves our most sincere
compliments for his scholarly and lucid exposition.

In the end I specifically appreciate the sincere and painstaking
endeavours of M. Farooq Rana (Minhajian) who assisted me in the
compilation of the book and helped me colour its mosaic with the tile of
meticulous care.

**Prof Iftikhar A. Sheikh**

**Jamadi al-Awwal, 1422 AH.**


