Chapter 5: Religious Leaders and Istighathah
============================================

It is an established fact that on account of the distinction Allāh has
conferred on His favourites and the blessings He has showered upon them,
it has been the practice of our religious leaders and scholars to rely
on them to resolve their worldly problems, attain salvation in the
Hereafter, make their graves and tombs the focus of their supplications
and seek help and assistance from the chosen people of Allāh who are
buried in them and seek their help for spiritual and inner benefits and
blessings. These acts, which shaped the conduct and mode of living of
the saints and the scholars in the past, are now the granite foundation
of the concepts and beliefs of Ahl-us-Sunnah wal-Jamā‘ah. Moreover, they
had not moulded their attitudes and deeds on a superficial, unconscious
or sentimental basis. A great deal of reflection and reasoning laced
these modes of conduct and were framed by comprehensive experimentation,
observation and practical orientation. Therefore, on the basis of
investigation, and not mere sentiment, it can be affirmed that their
statements were sound and authentic and on account of their immunity
from doubt and ambiguity, they furnish a cogent argument for all those
believers who are blessed with sufficient wisdom and intelligence to
appraise the depth and truth of these statements.

Religious scholars, enlightened saints and our spiritual leaders have
pronounced the tombs of these favourites of Allāh as inexhaustible
fountain-heads of light and blessing where our supplications are
acknowledged and robed as destinies. Reliance on these sanctified
persons opens the shuttered avenues of success. Their attention and
response unravels the tangles of the Hereafter and their spiritual help
serves as a source of salvation for our worries and all forms of
distress. To cap it all, their statements are consistent with the
criterion of experience and observation, which is the basis of the
modern inductive method of all scientific progress. Therefore, they
cannot be brushed under the carpet as mere hearsay and deserve our
positive response as they are grounded in facts and proved by
experience.

This world is inhabited by two sets of people. The first set of people
are those who are rebellious and disobedient, and on account of their
law-breaking tendencies, they form a coterie of persons who are
hell-bent to protect and promote the interests of the devil and are a
cause of constant torture for Allāh’s creatures. On the other hand, are
those who are good-natured, pure, and well-behaved and with a positive
outlook and are determined to promote the welfare of the people. Such
noble persons and untainted souls form their own fraternity and come
closer to one another through mutual interaction, following the
axiomatic principle that “birds of a feather flock together.” These
courageous, highly determined and spiritually motivated people, through
sheer hard work and concentration, leave behind indelible tales of
sincerity and honesty, patience and steadfastness, love and sacrifice
that the readers are simply stunned by their exceptional nature.

These holy personages have graced every period of human history.
Outwardly, they live on the sidelines but they are easily placed on
account of their habits and manners, their character and mode of
conversation. Their love and concern for the creatures of Allāh is so
gushing that it cannot be contained like the perfume of flowers. The
chain of their blessing is continuous, because it goes against the
divine grain that His creatures are deprived of the benefit and blessing
of His chosen people in any era of human history. Therefore, these
favoured servants of Allāh are not only a source of blessing for the
people in their manifest life but also benefit them after death; rather
their blessings acquire greater frequency and intensity when they are
transferred to another mode of existence after leaving this phenomenal
world. They bless the seekers of their help as effectively as they did
during their earthly sojourn. The one who seeks their help instinctively
knows that he has been helped by them.

The secrets of the worlds of purgatory, angels and divinity are revealed
to Allāh’s saints in a manner and style that is denied to the common run
of people. Their opinion is authentic in all human and non-human fields
of activity and it can neither be challenged nor any flaws found in its
inherent cogency. Therefore, it is quite rational, and a recognition of
human limitations, to believe in their opinions because their statements
are not based on any inanity or triviality but have been derived through
extraordinary observation and supported by the ballast of divine
sanction, as no one can deny that “what is heard cannot equal what is
seen.”

In the context of *istighāthah* and intermediation, we propose to cast a
cursory glance at the conduct, experiences and observations of these
righteous people who have provided glimmers of light and guidance to the
creatures of Allāh groping in the amorphous shades of darkness and
depression:

1. Imām Zayn-ul-‘Ābidīn
-----------------------

Imām Zayn-ul-‘Ābidīn supplicates to the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* for help and intercession in these words:

*O mercy of the worlds! You are the intercessor for the sinners. On
account of your infinite generosity, mercy and magnanimity, intercede
for us on the Day of Judgement.*

*O, who has come to all the worlds as a source of mercy, help
Zayn-ul-‘Ābidīn! Who is caught in trials and tribulations by the party
of the oppressors (and beseeches your help).*

2. Imām Mālik
-------------

Imām Mālik’s prominence as one of the four jurists of Islam is
well-established. Once Caliph Abū Ja‘far Mansūr visited Medina and he
asked Imām Mālik: ‘while supplicating, should I turn my face to the
prayer niche [and turn my back to the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* ] or should I turn my face to the Holy Prophet
[*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and turn my back to the prayer
niche]?’ On this interrogation, Imām Mālik replied: ‘(O caliph!) Why do
you turn your face from the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* , as he is the means for you and for your ancestor
Adam*(Peace Be Upon Him)* on the Day of Judgement? Rather you should
(pray and supplicate by) turning towards the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* and seek his intercession so that he intercedes for
you before Allāh on the Day of Judgement. Allāh has declared:

*(O beloved!) And if they had come to you, when they had wronged their
souls, and asked forgiveness of Allāh, and the Messenger also had asked
forgiveness for them, they (on the basis of this means and intercession)
would have surely found Allāh the Granter of repentance, extremely
Merciful.’* [1]

This incident has been narrated by Qādī ‘Iyād in his*ash-Shifā* (2:596)
with a sound chain of transmission. Besides, it has been related by a
number of other traditionists of impeccable credibility. Subkī
in*Shifā’-us-siqām fī ziyārat khayr-il-anām* , Samhūdī
in*Khulāsat-ul-wafā* , Qastallānī in*al-Mawāhib-ul-laduniyyah* , Ibn
Jamā‘ah in*Hidāyat-us-sālik* and Ibn Hajar Haythamī
in*al-Jawhar-ul-munazzam* .

3. Imām Qurtubī
---------------

He has mentioned*istighāthah* in the interpretation of the verse 64
of*sūrah* *an-Nisā’* in his*al-Jāmi‘ li-ahkām-il-Qur’ān* (5:265-6).

4. Qādī ‘Iyād
-------------

He has, in his book,*ash-Shifā* (2:596) narrated Imām Mālik’s statement
to the Caliph Abū Ja‘far Mansūr, which we have mentioned before. He also
narrated Adam’s intermediation through the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* with the help of sound and famous traditions
in*ash-Shifā* (1:227-8). In addition, in the chapters on “visiting the
Prophet’s grave,” “virtues and merits of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* ” and in many other chapters in his book he has
referred to the qualities and attributes of the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* .

5. Imām Subkī
-------------

He has discussed at length the question of*istighāthah* and
intermediation in his book*Shifā’-us-siqām fī ziyārat khayr-il-anām* and
has proved their relevance as vibrant concepts in Islam.

6. Imām Ibn Kathīr
------------------

Imām Ibn Kathīr has commented on verse 64 of*sūrah* *an-Nisā’* in his
book*Tafsīr-ul-Qur’ān al-‘azīm* (1:519-20) and raised the issue
of*istighāthah* . He has not levelled any objection against ‘Utbī’s
tradition in which a bedouin supplicates at the Prophet’s tomb for his
intercession. Imām Ibn Kathīr has related in*al-Bidāyah wan-nihāyah*
(5:167) the episode of the man who visits the Prophet’s grave and calls
him to pray for rain, and he has pronounced this tradition quite sound.
In addition, he has also related in the same book (5:30) that during the
battle of Yamāmah, the battle-cry of the Muslims was*yā Muhammadāh* (O
Muhammad! Help us).

7. Hāfiz ‘Asqalānī
------------------

He has in his books*al-Isābah fī tamyīz-is-sahābah* (3:484)
and*Fath-ul-bārī* (2:495-6) narrated the incident of the man who visited
the Prophet’s grave for rain through his means and called him for help.

8. Imām Qastallānī
------------------

The qualities and accomplishments of a special group of saints are
recorded in the traditions. The blessing of their supplication causes
rain and brings victory and triumph to the Muslims. Qastallānī’s views
about them are given below:

*When ordinary people fall into trouble, first of all, the Heralds
supplicate for them, then turn by turn the Nobility, Substitutes, the
righteous and the ministers (supplicate for them). If their supplication
is granted, well and good, otherwise, the saint of the highest rank —*
ghawth *(who is all the time engrossed in Allāh’s worship) — supplicates
for them, and before he winds it up, his prayer is granted. (This is
Allāh’s special blessing on them.)* [2]

9. Imām Ibn Hajar Haythamī
--------------------------

Ahmad Shihāb-ud-Dīn Ibn Hajar Haythamī Makkī, who possesses an eminent
position among experts on Islamic jurisprudence and tradition, has
proved on the basis of the experience and observation narrated by Abū
‘Abdullāh Qurayshī that Allāh’s favourites help people after death as
they help them during life and the value of their benefit is not in the
least reduced. Produced below is an incident attributed to Abū ‘Abdullāh
Qurayshī:

A severe drought had enveloped Egypt in its grip and the people’s
distress caused by hunger and thirst remained unrelieved in spite of
their prayers and supplications:

*So I journeyed towards Syria, when I reached near Allāh’s friend
(Ibrāhīm’s) tomb, he met me on the way. I said to him: ‘O Messenger of
Allāh! I have come as a guest. You should show your hospitality in the
form of a supplication for the natives of Egypt.’ He prayed for them, so
Allāh drove their famine away from them.* [3]

In this extraordinary reference, the description of the face-to-face
meeting with Ibrāhīm*(Peace Be Upon Him)* has been commented upon by
Imām Yāfi‘ī in these words:

*The statement made by Abū ‘Abdullāh Qurayshī that he had a face-to-face
meeting with the Friend is based on truth. Only an ignorant person can
deny it who is unaware of the mode of living and status of the saints
because these people observe the earth and the heavens and see the
prophets in their living condition.* [4]

10. Imām Nabhānī
----------------

He has written an irrefutable book*Shawāhid-ul-haqq fī al-istighāthah
bi-sayyid-il-khalq* and proved the validity of appeal to the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for help.

11. Imām Ālūsī
--------------

Commenting on the earlier verses of*sūrah* *an-Nāzi‘āt* , he explains in
these words the justification of reliance on Allāh’s favourites and
seeking help and support from them:

*(In the introductory sentences of this* sūrah, *) the separation of the
souls of pious persons from their bodies at the time of death is
described and Allāh has sworn by these different states of the souls.
These souls have to be wrenched out of the bodies because, on account of
their long and deep association with their bodies, they are disinclined
to leave them. The reason for this disinclination is that, in order to
earn virtues, the body acts as a means of transport, and it is on this
count that there is a greater possibility of adding to the score of
one’s virtues. Then these souls fly to the world of angels and reach the
sanctuary of purity, and on account of their force and nobility, they
blend with the elements that help decide the destinies of the creatures,
that is, they are included among the angels, or they acquire
administrative capability. That is why it is said: ‘when you are invaded
by troubles, you should seek help from the residents of the tombs, that
is, from the favourites of Allāh who are embodiments of virtue and
purity, and those who have left us.’ There is no doubt that a person who
visits their tombs, receives spiritual help by virtue of their
blessings, and on many occasions, the knots of difficulties unwind
through the mediation of honour and reverence they enjoy.* [5]

He adds:

*(In these verses) Allāh has sworn by these good-natured people, who
step into the field of virtue and sanctity and try to purify both the
inner and the outer self through worship, persistent practice and a
concerted confrontation with the evil and, as a result, are permeated
with immediate divine consciousness. (These verses may be applied to
these holy persons in the sense that) they control their own instinctive
cravings and concentrate all their energies on the world where holiness
prevails, and finally achieve perfection after passing through the
evolutionary phases so that they can guide those who are stuck up in
their flawed schedules and invest their lives with a sense of purpose
and direction.* [6]

12. Shāh ‘Abd-ul-Haqq Muhaddith Dihlawī
---------------------------------------

Shāh ‘Abd-ul-Haqq Muhaddith Dihlawī comments in his exegesis of Shaykh
‘Abd-ul-Qādir Jīlānī’s book*Futūh-ul-ghayb* that when the saints cross
into the area of divine knowledge and consciousness, which is immune to
the exigencies of mortality, they are blessed with a special power which
enables them to perform acts unmediated through external causes, and
they are transformed into embodiments of exceptional light and
cognizance as they have arrived from the mortal world into the the world
of immortality. In this way they achieve that level of perfection which
the common believers will receive in Paradise.

13. Shāh Walī Allāh Muhaddith Dihlawī
-------------------------------------

He was one of those great saints who, on account of his God-given vision
and divine knowledge, could see the inner reality with his naked eye and
then proclaimed it publicly. He has written a matchless
book*Fuyūd-ul-haramayn* based on observations. The gist of its ninth and
tenth chapters is as follows. He says:

“We called at Medina, and we clearly saw with our own eyes the soul of
the holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and on that day
this reality was revealed to us that the pure soul can also be seen like
the body and the secret of the life of prophets after death was also
disclosed to us.

“On the third day we called and sent salutations on the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* , and also visited the graves of Abū
Bakr as-Siddīq and ‘Umar Fārūq.

“Then we humbly submitted: we have called on you with great expectations
to receive your mercy and blessing. Have mercy on us.”

He adds:

“The holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* expressed
great joy and I felt that the sheet of his kindness had wrapped and
covered me. Then he embraced me, and appeared before me, disclosed many
secrets and personally informed me and briefly helped me and told me how
I could seek his help for my needs.”

14. Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī
------------------------------

Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī, commenting on the blessings of the holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* in his book*Nashr-ut-tīb*
, writes: ‘it was transparently reflected from the foreheads of his
ancestors. It was his universal light that persuaded Allāh to accept
Adam’s repentance; again it was his light that salvaged Nūh*(Peace Be
Upon Him)* from the tempestuous waves and transformed the glowing coals
of fire into the blossoms of flowers for Ibrāhīm*(Peace Be Upon Him)* .’

He has written a panegyric in which he besought the Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* for help in his trials and tribulations and
requested him to remove them. He stated:

*O, the intercessor of the people, help me. You are the one whom I can
trust in crisis.*

*I have no shelter except you. Help! My master, difficulties besieged
me.*

*O Ibn ‘Abdullāh, public is against me. Be my supporter, because you are
my helper.*

*I have no good deed or any submission. But I have your love in my
heart.*

*O Messenger of Allāh! I have only your door (to knock at the time of
necessity). The clouds of teething troubles never surround me.*

Moreover he wrote another panegyric in which he discussed the theme of
calling the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for help.

Besides, Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī, has named the thirty-eighth part of
his book as “intermediation through the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* at the time of supplication.” In this part, after
mentioning a tradition attributed to ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf, he writes, “It
proves that just as intermediation through someone’s supplication is
valid, similarly, reliance on someone in the supplication for
intermediation is also valid.” When during the period of ‘Uthmān bin
‘Affān, ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf asked a petitioner to utter the same
supplication which the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
has taught to the blind Companion, Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thānwī makes it
the basis of establishing the validity of intermediation after death. In
addition, he has proved the relevance of intermediation through someone
other than a prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him)* by ‘Umar’s intermediation
through ‘Abbās. Mawlānā Thānwī has also declared the act of
intermediation through the Prophet’s grave during the time of ‘Ā’ishah
as valid.[7] Finally, after reproducing ‘Utbī’s tradition in which a
bedouin had called on the Prophet’s grave for the repentance of his
sins, as we have explained in reference to the 64th verse of*sūrah*
*an-Nisā’* , he writes: ‘as it happened in the early days, and there is
no contradiction of it, it has acquired the status of a proof.’

15. Imām Ahmad bin Zaynī Dahlān
-------------------------------

A Makkan jurist of Muslim law, Ahmad bin Zaynī Dahlān in his
journal*Fitnat-ul-Wahhābiyyah* , has established the legality of
beseeching the prophets and saints for help, intermediation and
intercession, and he has cogently refuted the doubts and allegations of
those who are opposed to these perfectly legal acts.

16. Imām Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī
--------------------------------------

A well-known contemporary religious scholar posted at Makkah, Muhammad
bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī, in his book*Mafāhīm yajib an tusahhah* has
conducted well-documented research on the concept of*istighāthah* .

17. Shaykh Muhammad Hishām Kabbānī
----------------------------------

He is a famous contemporary religious scholar and he has written a
book,*Encyclopedia of Islamic Doctrine,* comprising seven volumes on the
beliefs of Ahl-us-Sunnah wal-Jamā‘ah. In the fourth volume of his book
he has justified the belief in*istighāthah* on the basis of a vast array
of historical and rational arguments.

A brief summary
---------------

These are a few of the observations, experiences and sayings, which span
centuries of human existence. They clearly prove that the graves and
tombs of the chosen people of Allāh are a steady source of divine
blessings and benefits for mankind. The discerning persons do not treat
these spots of the saints as worthless or as mere heaps of mud and
mortar; rather they believe that they are men of distinction and Allāh
has specially rewarded them for their piety and human service. Some of
these saints are looked upon as ultra-magnanimous. Therefore, no one
should entertain any doubt or reservation about their purity and
exceptional status.

A person, who himself is stripped of spiritual vision, has no right to
misguide people about these favourites of Allāh. He has no right to say
that these people are dead, lying inert and lifeless in their graves,
and therefore, lack the power and the energy to help anyone. His
statement is completely baseless and is justified neither by historical
precedent nor by rational argument.

An important point to be noted in this context is that only those
residents of the tombs deserve our reverence who had attained access to
the nearness and the pleasure of Allāh and whose pious acts and virtuous
deeds had made them popular during their lives. Only such persons are to
be implored for help. This point has been clarified by Shāh
‘Abd-ul-‘Azīz Muhaddith Dihlawī in unmistakable terms. He said:

*Help should be sought only from the famous saints.*

as the public opinion is the litmus test of the popularity or
unpopularity of a saint. He has also prescribed a method for discovering
the stature of a saint and for seeking help from him. This can be looked
up in*Fatāwā ‘Azīzī* .


