Chapter 6: Purging Disblelief in Muhammad
=========================================

Allāh has conferred infinite blessings on the followers of the Holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* . One of these blessings
is their impossibility to return to disbelief after embracing Islam. It
happened in the past that the followers of a particular prophet returned
to their earlier state of ignorance and disbelief after his death. But
this shall not happen to the followers of the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* . The Prophet of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* in the last days of his earthly sojourn had himself
declared that he had no fears that his followers will relapse into
disbelief after his death. As Muslims, we should reflect on his words.
The Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* who was sent to this
world to quash disbelief and all forms of impermissible innovation, who
is our primary source of guidance and who is our ultimate means of
salvation, is saying that he has no doubts lurking in his mind about our
steady and irreversible belief, while we are hurling allegations of
disbelief at one another to cater to our false sense of superiority or
to pamper our egotism based on prejudice and sheer stubbornness. What
could be more unfortunate than this mutual incrimination?

It is narrated in a tradition:

*‘Uqbah bin ‘Āmir has narrated: The Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household) one day went (to Uhud) and offered prayer for the natives
(martyrs) of Uhud as it is (generally) offered for the dead. Then he
returned to the pulpit and said: ‘I am your forerunner and I am a
witness on you. By Allāh! I am right now seeing the basin of my fountain
(* kawthar *), and I have been handed over the keys of the treasures of
the earth (or the keys of the earth). I swear on Allāh, I have no fears
that after me you will return to disbelief but I am apprehensive that
you will try to outdo each other in acquiring worldly goods.’* [1]

This is a statement made by the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* himself. He has sworn on Allāh about his followers that they
will not revert to disbelief. The Prophet’s words call for deep
reflection and serious soul-searching. We brush aside the Prophet’s
statement when we accuse one another of disbelief. This tradition has
been reproduced by Imām Muslim[2] and Imām Ahmad bin Hambal[3]. Repeated
references to this tradition by people of such calibre and prestige, and
our dogged defiance of its contents are nothing but harrowing
unawareness of the real spirit of our faith.

*Istighāthah* , which has been established as a valid act in Islam by
countless Qur’ānic injunctions and authentic and certified traditions
and which has been practised by the large majority of Muslims, is now
turned into a matter of dispute and controversy, and is now being used
as a convenient ploy to not only indulge in incriminating one another in
disbelief but also to give vent to our personal frustrations. If we care
to reflect on his words and statements, we will come to realise that to
insist on the illegality of beseeching for help, either as a doctrine or
in some of its actual applications, especially when its legality has
been conclusively established both by the Qur’ān and the*sunnah* , is
nothing but religious perversity. Tens of statements made by the Holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* are witness to the fact
that to call someone for help other than Allāh is quite consistent with
Qur’ānic commands and the Prophet’s statements.

As it is reported by ‘Amr bin Shu‘ayb that his grandfather says: we were
present in the company of the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* when messengers from Hawāzin tribe came and said, “O
Muhammad! We belong to the same origin and tribe, and the trouble we are
facing is not hidden from you, therefore, have mercy on us.” The holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* replied, “Opt one of the
two choices; either take away your property and wealth or have your
women freed.” They opted for their women and children. Then the
Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* added: as far
as my share and the share of ‘Abd-ul-Muttalib and his children (in the
spoils) is concerned, I have already given it to you. But when I have
performed the noon prayer, you should all stand up and say:

*Through the means of the Messenger of Allāh (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household) we seek help for our women and children from believers (or
Muslims).* [4]

The narrator says that when people had finished their prayer, they
repeated the same words as the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* had advised them. These words were uttered by the sacred
tongue of the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
himself and he uttered them in the form of a command. Therefore, this
tradition furnishes a cogent justification for the act of beseeching for
help.

Figurative relation between belief and disbelief
------------------------------------------------

To hold the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and the
saints and pious people of Allāh in reverence and to beseech them for
help is quite compatible with the basic principles of Islamic faith. But
sometimes the petitioners, while addressing these favourites of Allāh,
employ words, which are reserved only for Allāh and, therefore,
according to some religious scholars, commit disbelief. This conclusion
is based on a fundamental misconception as these scholars fail to draw
the vital distinction between the literal and figurative sense of these
words. They interpret these modes of address or the vocative forms in a
literal sense and thus wring a perverse conclusion from them. It is an
admitted fact that these modes of address are used only for Allāh in
their absolute sense, therefore, to use them for any other creature is
obviously disbelief and for a Muslim it is simply inconceivable. Thus a
basic distinction must be drawn between their literal and figurative
meaning. The literal sense applies to Allāh alone and no creature,
whether he is a prophet or a saint, can arrogate to himself this
exclusive divine prerogative. Therefore, the petitioner is using the
words only figuratively and it is in this sense alone that they are
generally interpreted. The allegation of disbelief against these people
is quite misplaced; it reflects rather the twisted consciousness of
those who hurl such malicious allegations against them. The petitioners
are, in fact, immune to disbelief. For instance:

1- O, the most reverend (Prophet) of all creatures! I have no one else
as my (helper) except you whose help should I seek at a time when I am
engulfed by troubles and calamities.

*2- There are five (friends) for me with which I extinguish the
intensity of a lethal epidemic. (These are:) the holy Prophet
Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , ‘Alī, both of his sons
(Hasan and Husayn) and Fātimah.*

3- All this is an expression of your mercy and magnanimity that I am
still surviving in the midst of trouble and turmoil.

4- I beg the charity of your magnanimous eye as there is no one except
you to bail me out in this hour of distress.

5- All people have some support to rely upon when they are down and out,
but I have no one else except you to turn to when I am in trouble.

Similarly, some Muslims in different situations, while addressing the
Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* use these words like
“O Messenger of Allāh! We have no other shelter except you.” If we
interpret these words in their literal sense, obviously we would like to
conclude that the person using them is committing disbelief. But the
fact is that a Muslim is not using them in their absolute sense. Any
Muslim who uses these words is fundamentally motivated by the belief
that the power of the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* is only derivative as it is contingent on divine will. He is
in fact saying through his mode of address: ‘after Allāh, the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* is my place of shelter,
and after Allāh, it is his support that can serve as a means of help and
salvation for a sinner like myself.’ Thus he is not equating the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* with Allāh Who is unique
and from Whose favour the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
derives his exceptional status among the creatures of Allāh. So he is
saying: ‘I have no one else except you among Allāh’s creatures and I
have no expectations from other creatures except you.’ Thus he is not
elevating the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* to the
level of divinity, he is only stressing his exceptional status among the
creatures. Though we normally do not use these ambiguous words during
intermediation or at the time of beseeching help from others, nor do we
encourage others to make use of them to pre-empt even the slightest
suspicion of disbelief, we also regard it as necessary to propose that a
person using these words figuratively and derivatively should not be
accused of disbelief in a fit of misplaced enthusiasm or an overplay of
religious sentiment.

It is more pertinent to realise that we should not entertain unnecessary
suspicions about the integrity of their faith; instead of making them
hostages of our crude sense of justice, we should display a reasonable
degree of open-mindedness to give them the benefit of doubt. Before
hurling at them the accusation of disbelief, we should try to probe into
their real intentions; before convicting them, we should presume them
innocent and refrain from equating their figurative expressions with
literal statements. We all know, and only a sense of perversion can
contradict this gut feeling, that these petitioners seeking help from
others believe in divine unity, which is quite consistent with the basic
postulates of Islamic faith and attested by the Messengership of the
Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* . They offer prayer
and pay*zakāt* . When they follow the basic tenets of Islam, not as an
eyewash but as a demonstration of commitment, then it will not be an act
of wisdom to drive them out of the fold of Islam simply because they use
a string of ‘undesirable’ expressions in their supplications in a
figurative sense. Truly speaking, they are “more sinned against than
sinning”[5] as the punishment seems to exceed their innocuous act. Anas
bin Māik has reported that the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* said:

*Anyone who prays like us and makes our* qiblah *as his* qiblah *and
eats our slaughtered meat, so he is a Muslim for whom Allāh and His
Messenger (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) are both responsible. So
do not break Allāh’s responsibility.* [6]

In view of this sound tradition, there is hardly any scope left to level
the allegation of infidelity against the Muslims who use these words
figuratively. This figurative application is sanctioned by the Qur’ān
and the*hadīth* and demonstrated by the practice of the Companions, not
sparingly but frequently and therefore, its reality cannot be denied.
And there is no harm to declare their application as a valid act if a
believer uses them figuratively. According to the correct Islamic
belief, a person who believes that Allāh alone is the Creator and the
Master, and He alone has empowered His creatures to perform different
acts, and He is absolutely independent of the leanings and cravings of
the living and the dead, that is, it is the exclusive divine privilege
to grant or reject the wish of a creature, no matter how highly placed
he is, such a person is a true believer and a true Muslim. This is
precisely what is meant by divinity and this is exactly what Islam
stands for. It is proved by Jibrīl’s dialogue with Maryam (Mary) in
which he had stressed his derivative power in relation to the absolute
power of Allāh. It meant that his act was not self-prompted but both
sanctioned and sanctified by the will of the Lord who is One and Unique.
The Qur’ān declares it in these words:

*So that I should bless you with a pure son.* [7]

When the chief of Allāh’s creatures of light can attribute these
figurative words to himself, and Allāh Himself is reinforcing them in
the Qur’ān, then if a creature of flesh and bone attributes them to the
holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , then what crime
has he committed or what sin has he perpetrated? What is urgently needed
is to understand the essence of the Qur’ān itself so that the Muslims
stop condemning one another, inflating one set of beliefs while
deflating others, and in the process giving a bad name to their faith.
This is the only way to preserve the integrity of our religion and to
retain the purity of our faith.

The last word
-------------

Here, summing up the discussion, we would like to rephrase the vital
point stated earlier that, in the present times, some people have cast
aside the basic difference between the literal and figurative meanings
in the interpretation of Qur’ānic verses. Moreover, their interpretation
is marked by imbalance and extremism, which blatantly violates the basic
principles of Qur’ānic exegesis. They prop up their interpretation on
the literal sense and are not willing to concede the figurative sense.
This is the reason that their interpretations are deflected from the
established and authentic consensus of the traditions and the early
religious leaders and scholars deeply charged with the true spirit of
their faith and make sheer opinion and speculation as the basis of their
conclusions. This is nothing but individualism gone haywire. They are
interjecting undesirable innovations into our religious fabric and
disfiguring its texture by their insensible and insensitive deviations
from certified and well-documented explanations. The other group that
has discarded the sobering crutches of balance has displayed such
extremism in its application and patronage of the figurative sense that
it appears to have lost all sense of balance, while balance is a sine
qua non of all sane interpretation. If we keep in view the Qur’ānic
sense of balance, the chasm between the two extremes can be abridged and
the Muslim community will be transformed once again into an indivisible
unity. This is the only way to preserve our faith and to perpetuate a
correct interpretation of the nature and essence of divine unity.


