Glossary
========

***athar:*** pl.*aathar* . lit. relating. Generally used for a*hadith*
related by one of the Companions, as distinguished from one of the
Prophet’s own.

***da‘if:*** an inaccurate narration which does not qualify to be
either*sahih* (sound) or*hasan* (fair), and hence cannot be used as a
basis of an Islamic opinion.

***din:*** an Arabic word for religion. It is more specifically used for
the religion and revealed books of the prophets and the messengers. It
is a comprehensive term covering not only religious rites and rituals
but also applies to all aspects of life and provides guidance in all of
its pursuits, while*madhab* (religion) is restricted to man’s spiritual
life and regulates its relationship with God alone.

***dinar:*** an ancient gold coin.

***du‘a’:*** lit. to call someone; making supplication to Allah.

***gharib:*** a*hadith* or version reported by one reliable or
unreliable narrator which differs in context with another*hadith* or
version reported by a group of reliable narrators. A*gharib* *hadith*
can be*sahih* (sound) or*da‘if* (weak).

***ghawth:*** lit. one to whom we can cry for help. A mediator; a title
given to a saint of the highest order.

***hadith:*** pl.*hadiths* or*ahadith* . The sayings, practice and
approved traditions of the Prophet Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* .

***Hafiz:*** lit. a guardian or protector. (1) one of the names of God,
al-Hafiz. (2) a governor, guardian of the Makkan temple. (3) one who has
committed the whole of the Qur’an to memory. (4) one who has committed
one hundred thousand*hadiths* to memory.

***hajj:*** the yearly pilgrimage of the Muslims to Makkah.

***hasan:*** a*hadith* , narrated by a reliable chain of transmission
though not approaching the grade of*sahih* (sound)*hadith* , but records
a complete chain of narrators up to the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* .

***Imam:*** one who leads people in prayers; an eminent Islamic scholar.

***‘Isa:*** name of Allah’s penultimate messenger, Jesus.

***Jibril*** *(Peace Be Upon Him)* ***:*** the archangel Gabriel who
brought the revelations of Allah to His messengers.

***jihad:*** the word*jihad* , in terms of the acquisition of a
desirable and commendable objective, carries a number of
meanings.*Jihad* is striving against the evils of the self, and it is
also the struggle waged for the propagation of Islam and the integrity
of Ummah. For example, to launch*jihad* through tongue and pen for the
improvement and development of the Islamic society; an armed struggle
against the exploitive forces is also*jihad* but this is ‘minor*jihad* ’
while a perpetual struggle against the evil wishes of one’s self is
‘major*jihad* ’.*Jihad* is one of the cardinal articles of Islam.

***kawthar:*** lit. abundance. A pond in Paradise.

***Maryam:*** the Prophet ‘Isa’s mother; Mary.

***mawdu‘:*** a*mawdu‘* tradition narrated by a liar, a narrator whose
act of lying in relating traditions has been proved.

***sahih:*** sound. A*hadith* with an unbroken chain of narrators
ranging from the Prophet Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
and approaching an era through reliable narrators without being*shadh*
(odd) or*mu‘allal* (faulty) in between the two cross relaters.

***shari‘ah:*** lit. road. It is a legal modality of a people based on
the revelation of their prophet/messenger. The last*shari‘ah* is that of
Islam that abrogates all previous*shari‘ahs* .

***sunnah:*** pl.*sunnahs* . lit. the path, way or a form, the customary
practice of a person or a group of people. It has come to refer almost
exclusively to the legal way or ways, orders, statements and acts of
worship, etc., of the Prophet Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* which have become the models to be followed by the Muslims.

***surah:*** a chapter of the holy Qur’an. There are 114 chapters in the
holy Qur’an.

***Ya‘qub*** *(Peace Be Upon Him)* ***:*** the prophet Jacob.

***Yusuf*** *(Peace Be Upon Him)* ***:*** the prophet Joseph.

***zakat:*** a yearly fixed percentage of wealth and property of the
Muslims liable to *zakat* to be paid to the poor and the needy of the
Muslim Community. It is obligatory, as it is one of the five
indispensable pillars of Islam.


