Chapter 1: Preliminaries
========================

Allah, to whom all honour belongs, is the Creator of the universe. He
has unlimited power and His sovereignty extends over everything, living
and non-living, earthly and ethereal. He is the only true Helper. While
all other aids are bound in the vicious chain of cause-and-effect, His
transcends these limitations. Whatever takes place in the universe, on
the earth and in the heavens, owes to the exercise of His will and
power. The world of becoming and the world of being dance to His tunes.
From Him alone emanate the eternal concepts of right and truth. He is
the One Who causes the brightness of the day to lapse into the darkness
of the night and then the brilliant sun to pop out of its murky folds
and the whole process occurs in imperceptible grades and shades that one
is simply stunned by its inviolate precision. While human calculation
fails or shows unpredictable variation, divine calculus remains steady
and varied and is immune to the "slings and arrows"[1] of
unpredictability. He is Unique in His self-orientation and in His
attributes. He has no partner and associate and, single-handedly, He
blesses billions of creatures with the gift of life, reclaims His
blessings in the flash of a second leaving the living creature a mere
bundle of bones and "a heap of broken images"[2] and administers
countless worlds stretching to inconceivable limits. Each particle in
the universe carries the stamp of His identity. No other object or
creature has the power to possess anything of his own free will because
his will is moulded by divine consent. Whatever he owns or possesses is
a divine gift and not a self-created achievement. An individual has no
right of possession even over his own body. Gain and loss, life and
death and resurrection after death are not in human control. Allah alone
is directly responsible for the act of living and the act of dying
because He controls each breath we inhale, each movement we make and
each step we take.

Human acts may be justified by purely human motives in terms of
cause-and-effect and, only to this extent, it is supported by Islamic
regulations and Qur’anic injunctions. On this level it is possible to
believe that a creature is himself responsible for his gain and loss and
it is through his personal efforts that he has attained certain
possessions or achieved a specific degree of excellence. But to hold him
responsible for gain and loss from the point of view of creation,
invention, disease or absolute power is incorrect. If we take a deeper
view we will realise that any attribution of gain and loss, life and
death, belonging and possession to the creatures is not real but
figurative. All such phenomena should actually be arrogated to only
Allah, as He alone deserves it. But, unfortunately, some people have a
chronic addiction to twist the Qur’anic verses and clamp on them an
interpretation that is tailored either to their preconceived notions or
reflects a kind of perverse self-indulgence. In order to put a
philosophical spin on their distorted derivations, they rely on
hair-splitting and logic chopping. But their interpretations are
inconsistent with the actual semantic tenor of the Qur’anic verses, and
these ‘mini-devils’, instead of drawing closer to the meaning of the
Qur’an, are drawn further apart and like “vacant shuttles weave the
wind.” But such people abound in the present times as extremism has
elbowed out moderation, vulgarity has edged out modesty and shame has
replaced decency. These people have eliminated the difference between
the literal and figurative meanings of the Qur’anic verses and discarded
the sobering influence of moderation. They consider it valid to base
their arguments on the real meanings of these verses. Therefore, they
are pathetically allergic to any metaphorical elaboration. This is the
reason they have turned their faces from the explanations and
interpretations offered by our forefathers. They are trying to create
purely opinionative explanations and giving rise to unpalatable
innovations and they are busy generating beliefs, which run counter to
the actual teachings of the Qur’an and the*sunnah* . If we cast an
impartial glance, we come across innumerable ignoramuses among the
masses who are victims of literal distortion and blow out of all
proportion the figurative dimension, throwing the element of moderation
to the winds. Their misplaced enthusiasm is as irritating as the
unwelcome prejudice of the others is unsettling. Though they are firmly
anchored to their faith in divine unity and other Islamic beliefs they
are treated as suspects and pariahs by those who regard figurative
interpretation as alien to the essence of Islam. But the fact is that
those who are in search of truth follow the path of balance and
moderation; they shun extremism in any shape and form. Therefore, if
they keep in mind the Qur’anic concept of balance, they can bridge the
chasm between the two extremes of literal and figurative interpretation
and reknit the Muslims into a more dynamic unity. It is this spirit of
moderation and creative reconciliation that can guarantee the security
of our faith and generate a sane and sensible response to divine unity.

Imam Ibn Taymiyyah is regarded a controversial figure as far as the
interpretation of Islamic beliefs is concerned. But this is flying in
the face of reality. In fact, his belief is rooted in balance. And if it
receives an objective and impartial interpretation from our contemporary
scholars, it can provide a link between the two extreme positions. The
present situation is that a group of people, on the basis of their
limited understanding of Islamic beliefs, is offering a self-concocted
version of the teachings of Imam Ibn Taymiyyah to seek endorsement for
their own flawed views, while others with correct Islamic belief, are
accusing him of un-Islamic beliefs which is, in fact, only a reflection
of their ignorance of facts. Thus, while the first group is guilty of
wilful falsification, the second group is handicapped by factual
limitation. But a correct understanding of Imam Ibn Taymiyyah’s views
can straighten out the hump in their understanding of Islamic beliefs
and draw them closer in the process.

Imam Ibn Taymiyyah’s view is the view held by all Muslims: "Allah is
One; He has no associate; He alone is to be worshipped. We should pray
only to Him and seek only His help. Anyone who regards non-God as the
source of help is automatically expelled from the fold of Islam, as it
is a negation of divine unity. Allah alone has the power to reward our
good deeds and condone our sins. Besides Him, no one on his own can
either enable someone to do good or avoid evil. To seek help from the
prophets or saints is justified only on the basis of its borrowed
status, as it has no independent existence. Its ultimate source is Allah
alone.” This is the correct Islamic belief and any deviation from it
amounts to entertaining false beliefs. Ibn Taymiyyah has discussed the
validity of*istighatah* and*tawassul* in detail in his book*Qa‘idah
jalilah fit-tawassul wal-wasilah* .

Once Imam Ibn Taymiyyah was questioned whether it was valid or invalid
to depend on the mediation of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* , he replied:

*"All praise for Allah! By the consensus of the Muslims it is quite
valid and proper to rely on the means of faith in the holy Prophet
(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household), his obedience, his remembrance,
his supplication and intercession, similarly his deeds and the deeds of
his followers, which they have performed in obedience to the Prophet’s
commands. And the Companions used to depend on his mediation during his
life on earth and after his death, they depended on the mediation of his
uncle, ‘Abbas as they used to rely on his mediation during his earthly
life."* [3]

Lexical research into the word istighathah
------------------------------------------

The etymological composition of the word*istighathah* is based on the
three letters:*ghayn, waw* and*tha* (*ghawth)* , which means
help.*Istighathah* means "to seek help". Imam Raghib Asfahani explains
its meaning in these words:

*Ghawth* means help and*ghayth* means rain, and*istighathah* means to
call someone for help or to request (Allah) for rain.[4]

The word*istighathah* has been used in the holy Qur’an in various
contexts. During the battle of Badr the Companions beseeched Allah’s
help which is explicitly referred to in *surah* *al-Anfal* :

*When you were beseeching your Lord (for help).* [5]

A follower of Musa (as) asked him for help and the help he extended to
him is also explained in the holy Qur’an in conjunction with the
word*istighathah* . Allah says in *surah* *al-Qasas* :

*So the person who was of his very community sought his help against
another person who was from among his foes.* [6]

The lexicologists believe that the words*istighathah* and *isti‘anat*
both mean “to seek help”. Imam Raghib Asfahani says:

*The meaning of "isti‘anat" is to seek help.* [7]

The word*isti‘anat* is also used in the holy Qur’an in a similar sense,
that is, to seek help. In *surah al-Fatihah* , the Qur’an declares while
grooming the followers in the etiquette of supplication:

*We seek help only from You.* [8]

Kinds of istighathah
--------------------

According to the interpretations of Arab lexicologists and exegetes, the
meaning of the word*istighathah* is to seek help. It expresses itself in
two forms:

Appeal by word (*istighathah bil-qawl* )

Appeal by deed (*istighathah bil-‘aml* )

If a person, trapped in difficulties, appeals for help through words
uttered by his tongue, it is called ‘appeal by word’, and if he appeals
for help on the basis of his present condition or situation, it is
called ‘appeal by deed’.

### 1. Appeal by word

###

The Qur’an enlists the example of appeal by word in reference to Musa’s
experience:

*And we directed Musa by inspiration (in the way) to strike his staff at
the rock when his people asked him for water.* [9]

Islam is the religion of nature (*din-ul-fitrah* ) and it is the
religion of all prophets, from Adam (as) to the last Prophet Muhammad
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* . The concept of divine unity
forms the matrix of their teachings. According to any *shari‘ah* ,
including the *shari‘ah* of Muhammad *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* , there is no real helper except Allah while in this verse,
his followers have appealed to Musa (as) for help. If it were a form of
disbelief, the miracle that accompanied it would not have materialised,
as there is no link between disbelief and a miracle because miracles
have divine sanction behind them. History is a witness that whenever the
prophets were asked to perform an act in violation of the divine unity,
they stamped out the appeal firmly in order to pre-empt all forms of
disbelief in future as any pussyfooting on this count could have
weakened faith and entrenched evil. Therefore, they strictly forbade
their followers to indulge in any such activity. On the other hand, in
the verse Allah Himself is empowering Musa (as) to perform the miracle
at the appeal of his followers. It means that the real helper is Allah
Himself and He is delegating His powers to Musa (as) to perform the
miraculous act. The verse also clearly illustrates the difference
between real and delegated power. While Allah’s power is real, as it is
self-activating, Musa’s power is delegated as it depends on, and draws
its nourishment from, the divine will.

### 2. Appeal by deed

###

To appeal for help through some specific act or on the basis of one’s
present plight and predicament without uttering a word is known as
appeal by deed. The Qur’an records the miracle that happened to Allah’s
beloved and venerable prophets to justify appeal by deed. Ya‘qub (as)
had lost his eyesight on account of excessive crying when his son Yusuf
(as) had been separated from him. When Yusuf (as) came to know about it,
he sent his shirt to his father through his brothers as an appeal for
assistance. He directed the brothers to touch the eyes of his father
with the shirt, which would help him regain his eyesight. As a result of
the act of touching, Ya‘qub (as) recovered his vision. Allah has
referred to this incident in the holy Qur’an in these words:

*Take this shirt of mine, then place it over my father’s face, (and) he
will recover his vision.* [10]

When his brothers touched the eyes of Ya‘qub (as) with the shirt, he
regained his eyesight through the divine will. The Qur’an says:

*So when the bearer of the good news came, he cast the shirt over
Ya‘qub’s face and forthwith he regained clear sight.* [11]

The auspicious act of Ya‘qub (as), through which he regained his vision,
was practically made possible with the assistance of Qur’anic example of
appeal by deed in which Yusuf’s shirt served as a means for the recovery
of eyesight by the divine will.

#### Link between intermediation and appeal for help

####

Both intermediation (*tawassul* ) and appeal for help (*istighathah* )
have a common focus of meaning. What differentiates them from each other
is the nature of the defining act. When the act relates to the
help-seeker, the act is known as appeal for help, and the virtual helper
whose help is being sought will act only as an agent or a means because
the real helper is Allah Himself. Thus Ya‘qub’s act serves as an appeal
for help and the shirt serves as a means to invoke help. On the other
hand, when Allah’s help is beseeched through direct prayer, He in this
case acts as the real helper because there is no greater source than the
source of divine assistance. Therefore, while intermediation is loaded
with indirect implications, appeal for direct help from Allah has a
palpitating immediacy about it and elicits a more prompt response. In
short, the Qur’anic verse clearly establishes the fact that appeal for
help by deed is proved by the practice of the prophets. (A detailed
discussion on the concept of intermediation is available in our
book*Islamic Concept of Intermediation* .)

#### Difference between appeal for help and supplication

####

To seek help in a state of trouble, grief and pain is called appeal for
help. When someone cries for help unconditionally, it is called
supplication as it precludes the condition of trouble, grief and pain.
The relation between supplication (*du‘a’* ) and appeal for help
(*istighathah* ), in fact, boils down to the relation between general
and particular. While supplication is unconditional, appeal is
conditional; it is spurred by some trouble or pain. Therefore, each
appeal is a form of prayer while each prayer is not a form of appeal for
help. And this is the basic distinction between appeal and prayer.

Use of the word du‘a’ in the holy Qur’an
----------------------------------------

The meaning of*da‘a, yad‘u* and*da‘watan* is to call and implore. The
root*da‘a* is used in various senses in the holy Qur’an. A few
significant aspects of the word*du‘a’* are explained below to illustrate
the way the Qur’an has conceptualised it in various contexts:

### 1. an-Nida’ (calling)

###

In the Holy Qur’an the word*du‘a’* is used in the sense of*nida’* , and
sometimes*nida’* and*du‘a’* are interchangeable. For instance, the
Qur’an says:

*And (to call) those infidels (towards guidance) is like the parable of
a person who shouts at an (animal) who can listen to nothing but calls
and cries.* [12]

### 2. at-Tasmiyyah (naming)

###

In the Arabic lexicon sometimes the word*du‘a’* is used in the sense of
naming or calling. Imam Raghib Asfahani has given a very apt example:

*I named my son Zayd.* [13]

Similarly, the holy Qur’an, stressing the dignity and reverence of the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , says:

*(O believers,) deem not the summons of the Prophet* *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* *among yourselves like the summons of one of you
(calling) another.* [14]

In this sacred verse, Allah Himself has laid stress on the special
respect to be accorded to the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* . He has commanded the believers not to address the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* by his name
Muhammad*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* . Whenever he is to be
called, he should be addressed by the special titles of Messenger of
Allah*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and Friend of Allah*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* . This is reinforced by the vocative
forms used in the holy Qur’an. Allah Himself has nowhere addressed him
by his first name: at no place in the Qur’an He has addressed him
directly as*ya Muhammad* (O Muhammad).

### 3. al-Istighathah (beseeching for help)

###

The word*du‘a’* has also been used in the Qur’an in the sense of begging
and beseeching for help as is declared by Allah:

*They implored that you should pray to your Lord for us.* [15]

### 4. al-Hath ‘ala al-qasd (persuasion)

###

The word*du‘a’* is sometimes used to persuade someone to do something or
to provoke someone. The Qur’an illustrates this meaning in the verse
given below:

*Yusuf (on hearing what the others were saying) submitted: O my Lord! I
love the prison far too much over what they call me (to do).* [16]

The word*du‘a’* is used in the sense of persuasion in*surah* *Yunus*
also:

*And Allah calls (people) to the home of peace (Paradise).* [17]

### 5. at-Talab (desiring)

###

The word*du‘a’* in the sense of desiring is frequently used in the
Arabic lexicon. The Qur’an offers the following example:

*And you will also find whatever you desire.* [18]

### 6. ad-Du‘a’ (supplication)

###

The word*du‘a’* is also sometimes used in the sense of supplication that
is sent to the Lord. The Qur’an records the prayer of His favoured ones
in the following terms:

*And their prayer will end (on these words) -- ‘all praise is for Allah
Who is the Nourisher of all the worlds’.* [19]

### 7. al-‘Ibadah (worship)

###

Worship of Allah is also called*du‘a’* as is stated by the holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* :

Du‘a’*is precisely a form of worship.* [20]

### 8. al-Khitab (address)

###

In addition to these meanings, the word*du‘a’* sometimes carries the
meaning of address or speech. At the occasion of the battle of Uhud,
when the Companions seemed to lose heart and were fighting in scattered
groups, and only a few of them were concentrated around him, the holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* called those who had
scattered away from him. The Qur’an has described his words in these
terms:

*When you were running away (in a state of disarray), and never cast a
backward glance, and the Messenger (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household), who (stood steadfast) among the group behind you, was
addressing you.* [21]

The word*yad‘ukum* of the verse, that is, he was addressing you, cannot
be interpreted in the sense of worship. This interpretation borders on
sheer disbelief, which is simply inconceivable for the true believer.

Self-fabricated division of du‘a’
---------------------------------

After discussing at length the eight recognised forms of*du‘a’* , we
will now focus on some of the irrelevant encroachments on its authentic
frame of reference. Some people, in order to declare appeal for help and
intermediation as invalid acts, have devised a self-concocted division
of*du‘a’* as their negation of appeal for help is not supported by any
argument from the Qur’an. All of their assumptions are based on
intellectual hair-splitting, which is in fact a product of their flawed
reasoning. In order to establish appeal for help as a form of disbelief,
they first dress it in the robes of*du‘a’* and then derive two
self-engineered kinds of*du‘a’* :

*1- Du‘a’as worship*

*2- Du‘a’as begging*

### 1. Du‘a’ as worship

###

The first kind of du‘a’ is worship and all kinds of Allah’s worship are
in fact different forms of supplication as stated by the holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* :

Du‘a’ *is the essence (kernel) of worship.* [22]

While, according to another tradition, du‘a’ is also equated with
worship:

Du‘a’ *is precisely a form of worship.* [23]

Since only worship of Allah is valid, therefore, they erroneously
conclude that, in conformity to this meaning, any du‘a’ attributed to
non-God is a form of worship, and therefore, by virtue of this
association, a form of disbelief.

### 2. Du‘a’ as begging

###

To beg someone, to acknowledge someone as the solver of your problem and
extend a begging hand to him is called du‘a’ as begging.

The objection raised by these people is that, since Allah Alone has the
power to solve problems, therefore, He Alone should be implored to solve
them. Since the person’s act of begging is an acknowledgement of his
creaturely status, therefore, beseeching non-God for help is an
acknowledgement of servitude to him and of being his creatures and thus
is a form of disbelief. According to them, the person indulging in this
act is a disbeliever.

Distinction as the purpose of division is absent
------------------------------------------------

This division, even from the viewpoint of this group, is irrelevant as a
proof to justify the inauthenticity of appeal for help. It is both
extraneous and unnecessary. They, in fact, have dissipated their
division by presenting it in a semantically identical garb as they have
merged du‘a’ as begging into du‘a’ as worship. What is the point in
creating such a division when according to them, both kinds of du‘a’ are
forms of disbelief? The fact is that this division is absolutely
unwarranted. The relevance of the division is proved only when it leads
to the formulation of a different set of rules and regulations. Since
they lack a separate identity, their division becomes superfluous. This
can be illustrated through a simple example.

The act of prostration is divided into two kinds:

1- Prostration as an act of worship.

2- Prostration as an act of reverence.

These two kinds of prostration are kept in two separate compartments:
prostration as an act of worship and prostration as an act of reverence
do not merge. While the first kind is inspirational, the second kind is
ceremonial; the first one is an expression of faith in divine unity, the
second is merely a ritualised representation of a ceremony, and the
twofold division reflects their differentiating features. Therefore, any
attempt at merging the two kinds is a negation of divine unity. In
addition, the two kinds are different in their regulatory aspect. If the
act of prostration is performed before a person with the intention of
worship, it clearly amounts to disbelief; if it is performed as an
expression of reverence, it will not constitute an act of disbelief,
though it may be declared a forbidden act. For example, if a Muslim
drinks, commits adultery, murders, etc., he commits a forbidden (haram)
act and is a sinner, violator, rashly extravagant, etc. But if he
considers his act as lawful (halal), he is committing disbelief. He is
negating Islam and will be declared an apostate. It means every
forbidden act is not disbelief, but to consider some forbidden act as
lawful is disbelief.

Let us take another example. A word has three kinds: noun, verb and
letter. All the three are mutually incompatible and any attempt at their
merger amounts to linguistic absurdity.

### Du‘a’ is not merely an act of worship

###

The contention that the word du‘a’ is used only in two senses is not
practically tenable because its eight different applications have
already been discussed. If we interpret du‘a’ as simply an act of
worship, and the act of begging for help is also merged into the act of
worship, then the entire society will be pushed down into the quagmire
of disbelief and (God forbid) even the prophets will not be immune to
this downward slide. Therefore, it should be clearly recognised that
du‘a’ (calling) is not synonymous with worship in all contexts. If we do
not acknowledge this difference between their contextual meanings, it
will amount to opening Pandora’s box of disbelief, as no one will remain
untainted by its rampant proliferation. The Qur’anic verse itself is a
witness to the fact that the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* himself also called non-God for help, and the Qur’an itself
is according permission to call one another for help. If, as a
supposition, we interpret da‘a, yad‘u, tad‘u, nad‘u as worship or as an
act of beseeching help in every context of situation indiscriminately,
which is regarded by some people as an auxiliary form of worship, then
it will be quite problematic to offer a sound explanation of the
following Qur’anic verses:

*1- And, O my people, what is this that I call you to the (path of)
salvation and you call me to hell?* [24]

*2- He said: O my Lord! I call my people night and day (to the right
religion) but my call only increased their flight (from the religion).*
[25]

*3- And Allah calls (people) to the home of peace (Paradise).* [26]

*4- Call (the adopted sons) by the names of their fathers: that is just
in the sight of God.* [27]

*5- Then, let him call (for help) his comrades. We shall also, call
(our) soldiers soon.* [28]

*6- Then they will call on them, and they will not listen to them.* [29]

*7- When we shall call together all factions of human beings with their
leaders.* [30]

*8- And if you call them to guidance.* [31]

Surah al-Fatihah and the concepts of isti‘anat and istighathah
--------------------------------------------------------------

Surah al-Fatihah not only conceptualises a number of Islamic beliefs in
their quintessential form, but it also attractively presents the concept
of appeal for help. It is stated:

*(O Allah!) We worship only You and we seek help only from You.* [32]

It is this Qur’anic verse that lays the foundation of appeal for help
and assistance where worship and help are mentioned one after the other.
The first part of the holy verse ¾ iyyaka na‘budu ¾ consists of the
concept of Islamic worship, and the second part ¾ iyyaka nasta‘inu ¾
explains the concept of help and assistance. It is this verse whose
superficial understanding has prompted some individuals to level
allegations of disbelief against the entire Muslim community.

In fact, a superficial study of the verse has induced in them the
baseless idea that both of its parts comprise semantically identical
words. The first part mentions worship, which is exclusively reserved
for Allah, while the second part refers to help and assistance. The use
of identical words generally reflects an identical reality, and if one
looks at this relationship superficially, one is likely to be deceived
by the surface resemblance and may draw an incorrect inference. These
people are the victims of a similar deception. They ignore the
contextual implications of these words and equate appeal for help and
assistance with the act of worship.

But if we dispassionately analyse the Qur’anic verse, we come to an
entirely different conclusion. Though the repetition of similar words
cannot be denied, the interpolation of the letter waw (and) between the
two parts of the Qur’anic verse is not to be ignored either as it
reflects a much deeper and more significant reality. If the injunction
relating to help and worship were identical, Allah would never have
inserted the letter waw between the two parts. The addition of waw
points towards a clear-cut differentiation between the apparently
similar expressions. This difference in meaning leads to the formulation
of a different injunction for each one of them. If the appeal for help
in iyyaka nasta‘inu were equated with the worship of God, the Qur’an
would not have disassociated it from iyyaka na‘budu through the
conjunction of separation i.e. waw. The use of the separative particle
clearly indicates that the two parts of the holy verse reflect two
different types of reality. If they were meant to portray identical
reality, the two parts would not have been delinked by placing waw
between them.

The Qur’an is an inimitable model of verbal condensation and precision
and is, therefore, immune to the fallacies and distortions coined by
logicians and philosophers. Each word in the Qur’an carries a precise
and specific denotation and none of its letters can be declared
irrelevant and superfluous as it discards all forms of waste and
superfluity. If God had meant to forge a semantic coalescence between
the two parts of the verse, He would never have differentiated them
semantically through the addition of the particle of separation. The
Qur’an contains scores of examples to endorse this dissimilarity. Where
the difference is not intended, there the distinction is made
conspicuous by the absence of any delinking element. Surah al-Fatihah,
especially its first four verses, furnishes a clear proof of
distinction:

*All praise is only for Allah Who is the Sustainer of all the worlds. He
is extremely Kind and Merciful. He is the Lord of the Day of Judgement.
(O Allah,) we worship only You and we seek help only from You.* [33]

An examination of these four verses reveals that, after a description of
His extraordinary nature, four of His attributes are consecutively
mentioned. Since they are not mutually exclusive and are specifically
designed to create a cumulative impression so that each attribute
reinforces the other, the separative waw is nowhere inserted between
them. But, in the following verses, where difference is intended, the
linguistic particle waw, is inserted to indicate the difference. Thus,
it proves that du‘a’ and appeal for help and assistance are two
different realities and, therefore, deserve different treatment and
reception, and any attempt to expunge their semantic difference is an
explicit violation of the inherent purpose of the Revelation. An
exclusive reliance on flawed human reasoning spawns various forms of
disbelief and those who are trapped in philosophical nuances and
innuendoes drift far away from their real destiny. They not only create
doubts in the minds of others but also become hostages to infinite
confusion and fuzziness.


