Chapter 2: The Meaning of Appeal to the Prophet(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) for Help
=============================================================================================

According to sound Islamic belief, the ultimate focus of beseeching help
and assistance through the prophets and saints is Allāh Himself because
He is the only true helper and supporter and has the real power to
relieve a difficult situation and mitigate an intractable exigency. He
Himself has repeatedly stressed upon the people to implore Him for help
and relief whenever they face an ugly predicament or are driven into a
tight corner. Thus, if anyone sets aside this fundamental Qur’ānic
teaching and regards someone else except Allāh as the source of gain and
loss, he is surely guilty of disbelief, because it virtually amounts to
imploring non-God for help and assistance. He is a disbeliever whether
his request is conditioned by natural causes or is engineered by
supernatural factors. On the other hand, if he believes in Allāh as the
true helper and then turns to some other person for assistance, he is
not committing disbelief because his action is religiously sanctioned.
For example, if he consults a doctor for treatment or seeks the
assistance of a saint for supplication or some kind of spiritual
healing, he is operating within the well-recognised and widely accepted
parameters of Islamic faith. His act conforms to approved standards and
is compatible with the traditionally hallowed practice of the virtuous
people. Allāh has on many occasions in the Qur’ān stressed upon the
believers to help one another. He says:

*And help one another in (acts of) righteousness and piety, and do not
help one another in (the acts of) sin and oppression.* [1]

In the Qur’ānic verse Allāh is enjoining upon the community of Muslims
to help and cooperate with one another. This cooperation is predicated
on the fact of discrepancy between its members, as it is inconceivable
without the presence of inequality among them. Thus it is possible only
when there are two classes among the believers: the affluent and the
non-affluent. The latter are supposed to ask for the help of the former
who are expected to extend this help to them. It is obvious that this
principle applies indiscriminately in material as well as spiritual
matters; it also applies equally in natural and supernatural conditions
because Allāh has made it collectively binding and nobody can claim
exception, because a Qur’ānic injunction cannot be limited by*khabar
wāhid* (a single saying) or analogical reasoning. Therefore, if anyone
tries to restrict it conditionally or by the logic of compromise and
expediency, he is undoubtedly indulging in an act that clashes with the
divine intention. The injunction for mutual cooperation is one of the
basic components of Islamic teaching and is supported by a number of
Qur’ānic verses and traditions. It proves without reservation that the
person whose help is being craved must assist the person who is craving
his help; he should respond to the appeal for help and try to alleviate
the suffering of his fellow beings.

The Qur’ān has furnished in different contexts a number of
justifications for beseeching the prophets and saints for help. It is as
valid to beseech the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
for help as the act of a Qibtī who beseeched Mūsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)*
for help against the excesses of a tyrant. In response to his appeal,
Mūsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* extended help to him and relieved his misery.
Who could be a greater source for the validation of this act than the
prophets themselves whose primary mission was to disseminate the message
of divine unity throughout the world! Allāh has not pronounced anyone of
them, Qibtī and the prophet, as a disbeliever on account of this act of
beseeching help from others. Allāh says:

*So the person who was of his very community sought his help against
another person who was from among his foes.* [2]

The Qur’ān has also described at various junctures that the believers
from former communities beseeched their prophets and saints for help. It
is similarly applicable to the followers of the holy Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* and is clearly reflected in the practice of
the Companions. A number of traditions support the validity of this act.
These traditions focus on extending help to the needy and alleviating
the problems of the less fortunate.

Istighāthah - In the light of traditions and the practice of the Companions
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

To support someone in his hour of trouble and to commiserate with him in
his moment of agony is to fortify the relationship steeped in love. The
message of Islam is the message of peace and security and the life of
the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* is permeated
with the perfume of love. Even when he is stoned by the ruffians of
Tā’if, only the flowers of prayer blossom on his lips; there is not a
squeak of complaint against them. He condones the acts of those who are
after his blood because his faith is essentially the interpretation of
love. Who could be a greater means of redemption than the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* himself who alleviated the pain of
others and helped them — in the fulfilment of their needs! On the Day of
Judgement, when people will face their greatest calamity and become
self-obsessive, they will rally round the prophets and saints to beseech
their help and intercession, but all will express their inability to
help them on that day, and finally they will beseech the holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for help and rely on his
mediation for their salvation, and Allāh will end their torture for the
sake of the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .
According to the tradition the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* said: ‘people will beseech Adam*(Peace Be Upon Him)* for
help, then Mūsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* and finally himself.’ If this is
permissible on the Day of Judgement, this should be equally permissible
during our stay in this world. This reflects the kind-heartedness and
benevolence of the prophets that the believers can depend on them as a
means of approach to the infinite mercy of Allāh, whether we are on the
earth or in the Hereafter.

The text of the tradition is as follows:

*Narrated by ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Umar that the Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household) said, “A person constantly begs from other people till he
on the Day of Judgement has no flesh on his face.” He added, “The sun
will come closer to the people on the Day of Judgement. It will be so
close that half of one’s ear will be drenched in sweat. In this
condition, people will first seek the mediation of Adam(Peace Be Upon
Him), then of Mūsā (Peace Be Upon Him)* *and finally of Muhammad (Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household).” And ‘Abdullāh* - *the sub-narrator* -
*added, “Layth narrated to me that Ibn Abū Ja‘far had narrated: He [the
Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)] will intercede with Allāh
to judge amongst the people. Then he will leave here until he will hold
the arc of the gate of Paradise. On that day, Allāh will make him ascend
the glorious station and all the people present there will sing his
praises.* [3]

The tradition has, thus, furnished a justification not only of the word
*istighāthah* but also of its popular usage. The noteworthy point is
that when it is valid to beseech the prophets and the saints for help in
the Hereafter and also to seek the help of the living in this phenomenal
world, it is simply meaningless and absurd to deny its relevance during
the purgatorial existence.

A number of traditions attest to the fact that the Companions beseeched
the holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for help and
assistance and sought the solution of their problems through his
mediation by stressing their penury, disease, suffering, need, debt and
humility. This act was based on their underlying conviction that the
holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* served only as an
intermediary in their gain and loss and the real operating force behind
all these phenomena is only Allāh Himself. No one, not even His beloved
Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , can encroach upon His
exclusive terrain.

Given below are a few traditions in which the Companions beseeched the
holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for help:

Abū Hurayrah’s appeal for help
------------------------------

Abū Hurayrah had a weak retentive power and therefore, could not easily
remember the commands of the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* . He beseeched the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* for help who permanently cured his tendency to
forgetfulness. This is the reason that he proved to be the most prolific
narrator of traditions. Abū Hurayrah relates it in his own words:

*I said: ‘O Messenger of Allāh! I listen to many of your traditions and
then I forget them.’ The Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)
said: ‘spread your sheet.’ So I spread it. Abū Hurayrah says: ‘then the
Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* *picked up something
(from the air) with his hands and put it in (the sheet). Then said:
“join it to yourself,” so I joined it, and afterwards my memory never
slipped.’* [4]

The tradition indicates that the Companions beseeched the holy Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for help in every difficult
situation. Who could be a greater supporter of the concept of divine
unity than the Companions themselves! And who could be a stauncher
claimant of the oneness of Allāh than the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* himself! But, in spite of it, Abū Hurayrah beseeched
the holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for help and
succour and instead of turning down his request he solved his problem
forever. The reason is that anyone who believes in divine unity, knows
that the only real helper is Allāh, while the prophets, the saints and
other pious people whose help is being sought, act only as
intermediaries. Their power of mediation derives from Allāh’s blessing
Who has conferred on them this power to ease the problems of the
believers. The act of mediation is, therefore, divinely sanctioned, and
does not amount to a trespass of divinity.

Abū Hurayrah beseeched the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* for help who fulfilled his need. He never told him to pray
to Allāh directly and to remain steadfast in his belief in divine unity.
On the contrary, he picked up a fistful of something invisible from the
air and put it in his sheet and commanded to rub it on to his chest.
Thus Allāh acknowledged this act of mediation as valid and fulfilled Abū
Hurayrah’s need.

Every sensible person who believes in divine unity knows that
supplication is made only to Allāh for the fulfilment of needs whose
power spans all the worlds. The petitioner believes that the person he
is beseeching to mediate and intercede on his behalf is closer to Allāh
Who responds more sensitively and urgently to his appeal for help.
Therefore, the appeal processed through him stands a greater chance of
immediate acceptance. The petitioner knows that his power to help is
only derivative because the real helper is Allāh Himself and this is
what is clearly reflected in Abū Hurayrah’s tradition.

Qatādah bin an-Nu‘mān’s appeal for help
---------------------------------------

Qatāda bin an-Nu‘mān lost his eye during the battle of Badr. The eyeball
was dislocated and dangled from his face. Keeping in view the severity
of pain, a few Companions advised him to have the optic vein cut off to
alleviate the pain. Before acting on the advice of the Companions,
Qatādah decided to bring it to the notice of the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* . When he called on the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* and related to him his story, he did not allow
him to have his eye operated; rather, he placed the eyeball back at its
original place with his hand, which restored his eyesight. Qatādah used
to say that the vision of his lost eye was in no way weaker than the
original one; it was even better than before. This tradition bearing on
the validity of *istighāthah* has been recorded in these words:

*It is related by Qatādah bin an-Nu‘mān that his eye was lost during the
battle of Badr and the eyeball slid on to his face. The other Companions
wanted to cut it off. But when they consulted the Messenger of Allāh
(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household), he disallowed it. Then he prayed
for him and placed the eyeball back at its original place. So Qatādah’s
eye was restored in a manner that it was impossible to say which eye had
been damaged.* [5]

Abscess–stricken Companion’s appeal for help
--------------------------------------------

It is narrated in the books on tradition that struma appeared on the
hand of a Companion, which made it impossible for him to hold the bridle
of a horse or the handle of a sword. He called on the holy Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and beseeched him to cure his
disease. So Allāh, Who is the real Helper, cured him through the
Prophet’s hand. This tradition is related in these words:

*I called on the holy Messenger (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household). I
had struma on my hand. I said: ‘O prophet of Allāh! I have a struma (on
my hand) which makes it painful for me to hold the bridle of a horse and
the sword.’ The holy Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) said:
‘come close to me.’ So I moved closer (to him). Then he opened that
struma and blew his breath on my hand and placed his hand over the
struma and kept on pressing it and when he lifted his hand, the effect
of that (struma) had completely vanished.* [6]

A blind Companion’s appeal for help
-----------------------------------

Restoration of the blind people’s eyesight was not only a miracle
performed by ‘Īsā *(Peace Be Upon Him)* , it was performed by the holy
Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* as well. It is narrated
that a blind Companion called on the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* and beseeched his help for the restoration of his eyesight.
The Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , instead of
discouraging him or condemning it as a form of disbelief, stressed upon
him to supplicate through him. This kind of supplication in itself is a
composite of mediation and appeal for help, and if it is offered even
today with the same intensity of sincerity, it is a patent medicine for
the ailing mankind. Narrated by ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf:

*That a blind man called on the Holy Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household) and said to him: ‘(O Messenger of Allāh,) pray to Allāh to
give me solace.’ The Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) said:
‘if you wish, I will stall it and this is better (for you), and if you
wish, I pray.’ He said: ‘you should pray (for me) to Him.’ So he asked
him to perform the ablution: ‘perform the ablution thoroughly well and
then offer two cycles of optional prayer and beseech Allāh with this
supplication: “O Allāh, I appeal to You, and submit to You through the
mediation of the merciful Prophet Muhammad (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household). O Muhammad, through your mediation I submit myself to My
Lord to have my need granted. O Allāh, acknowledge his intercession in
my favour.”* [7]

Ibn Mājah, Hākim and Dhahabī have declared it a sound ( *sahīh* )
tradition while Tirmidhī graded it *hasan* (fair) *sahīh* (sound)
*gharīb* (unfamiliar).

You must have noticed that the introductory sentence of the supplication
in the tradition is offering the holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* as an intermediary before Allāh while its second
sentence, in which the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
is being directly addressed, is furnishing not only a justification for
seeking the help of Allāh’s favourites but also issuing it as a form of
command. If, seeking help through other creatures except Allāh were an
invalid act, the holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
would not have issued it in the form of a command. When the greatest
supporter of divine unity himself commanded that the believers should
beseech his help, who are we to mislead the Muslims by calling them
disbelievers when they are following in the Prophet’s footsteps! Those
who disacknowledge the validity of this act in a fit of misplaced
enthusiasm to purify Islam are actually indulging in an un-Islamic act
because their efforts are in conflict with the true Islamic beliefs and
the practice of the holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
.

Similarly, another tradition narrated by Imām Hākim is couched in
different words. In this tradition, ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf says that he was
present in the Prophet’s company. A blind person called on the Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and complained about the loss of
his eyesight. He added: ‘O Messenger of Allāh, there is no one to guide
me and I am in great trouble.’ On hearing his complaint, the Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said: ‘bring an earthen pot for
ablution, then perform the ablution and offer two cycles of optional
prayer. Then say:

*O Allāh, I appeal to You, and submit to You through the mediation of
Your merciful Prophet Muhammad (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household). O
Muhammad, through your mediation I submit myself to your Lord that He
should give light to my eyes. O Allāh, acknowledge his intercession in
my favour and accept my supplication also in my favour.*

‘Uthmān bin Hunayf said:

*I swear by Allāh that we had neither left the company nor had we
carried on a long conversation that the man entered (with his sight
fully restored) and it seemed as if he had never been blind.* [8]

In addition, a number of other traditionists of great repute have
recorded this sound tradition and their names are given below:

1- Nasā’ī,*‘Amal-ul-yawm wal-laylah* (p.418\#660).

2- Bukhārī,*at-Tārīkh-ul-kabīr* [6:209-10(3/2/209-10)].

3- Ahmad bin Hambal,*Musnad* (4:138).

4- Bayhaqī,*Dalā’il-un-nubuwwah* (6:166-7).

5- Ibn-us-Sunnī,*‘Amal-ul-yawm wal-laylah* (p.202\#622).

6- Mundhirī,*at-Targhīb wat-tarhīb* (1:473-4).

7- Subkī,*Shifā’-us-siqām fī ziyārat khayr-il-anām* (pp.123-4).

8- Ibn Kathīr,*al-Bidāyah wan-nihāyah* (4:559).

9- Suyūtī,*al-Khasā’is-ul-kubrā* (2:201).

10- Qastallānī,*al-Mawāhib-ul-laduniyyah* (4:594).

11- Zurqānī,*Commentary* (12:221-2).

Mahmūd Sa‘īd Mamdūh has also expressed his views in his book
*Raf‘-ul-minārah* (p.123):

*“All these chains are sound which have been certified by persons who
have committed the traditions to memory. Among these are also included
Imām Tirmidhī, Tabarānī, Ibn Khuzaymah, Hākim and Dhahabī.”*

This sacred tradition clearly indicates that the creature is imploring
Allāh Who alone can help him and provide relief to him. He alone has the
power to transform non-existence into existence, non-entity into entity.
But the point to be noted here is that the words of the supplication are
being taught by the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
himself in which God’s attention and help are being invoked for its
acceptance through his own mediation. It may be further noted that it is
not only his person that is being relied upon for the acknowledgement of
the supplication, but also the quality of his mercy that he has been
vested with through Allāh’s kindness. Thus the prayer boils down to the
fact that the petitioner is saying: ‘O Allāh, I appeal to You through
the mediation of the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
whom You have Yourself vested with infinite mercy that You should
restore my lost eyesight and return light to my eyes which they have
lost.’

Since the supplication was processed through the Prophet’s mediation,
the Lord’s mercy gushed forth instantly as it is against the divine will
that some petitioner should invoke His mercy through the mediation of
the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and his
petition should not be granted. In this case the grant of the
supplication was neither delayed nor was the phenomenon of
cause-and-effect allowed to interfere in its acceptance. It was the
blessing of the Prophet’s mediation, which returned the eyesight
instantly as if it had never been lost.

Companions’ appeal for rain
---------------------------

The books on tradition are riddled with the proofs of beseeching the
holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for help and its
confirmation by the practice of the Companions. An unbroken chain of
authentic traditions proves that whenever the Companions faced a problem
or a calamity, they came rushing to the holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* to beseech his help. They supplicated before Allāh
through his mediation and beseeched his help for the fulfilment of their
needs. As a result, Allāh waived the calamity dangling over their heads.
Anas bin Mālik has related:

*The holy Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) was delivering
his sermon on a Friday that a man went up to him and said: ‘O Messenger
of Allāh! There is extreme scarcity of rain. So pray to Allāh that He
should bless us with rain.’ The Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household) prayed for it and before we reached our homes, the rain had
started which continued down to the next Friday. (Anas) says that (the
next Friday) the same person or someone else stood up and said: ‘O
Messenger of Allāh! Pray to Allāh that He should push this (rain) away
from us.’ The Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) prayed: ‘O
Allāh, it should be around us and not over us.’ So I saw that the clouds
had rolled away to our right and left and started pouring down rain and
the rain ceased over the residents of Medina* *.* [9]

That a person entered the mosque through the door in front of the pulpit
and the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* was
delivering the sermon while standing. So that person took a position
right in front of him. Then he said: ‘O Messenger of Allāh, the cattle
have died and the paths are disconnected. So pray to Allāh that He
should send rain on us.’ The Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* raised both of his hands and addressed (Allāh): ‘O
Allāh, send us rain; O Allāh, send us rain; O Allāh, send us rain.’ Anas
said: ‘By God! We could see neither a cloud in the sky, nor even a
fragment of a cloud, and there was neither a house nor any other
building between us and the mountain. Then a piece of cloud, that was
the size of a shield, appeared from behind the hill. It started floating
in the sky and then it spread out, and it started raining. By God! For
six days we did not see the sun in the sky. Then the next Friday a
person entered through the same door while the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* was delivering the sermon in the standing
posture. He positioned himself in front of him and said: “O Messenger of
Allāh, the cattle have died and the paths are disconnected, so pray to
Allāh that he should stop the rain.”’ Anas relates that the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* again raised his hands and
addressed (Allāh): ‘O Allāh, (the rain) may fall around us, and not on
us; O Allāh, (the rain) may fall on the hills, hillocks, valleys and the
places where the trees grow.’ Anas says that the rain stopped and we
came out (of the mosque) and we were walking in the sunshine. Sharīk
said, ‘I asked Anas: was it the same person who had come before?’ He
said, ‘I don’t know.’[10]

*Once during the time of the holy Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household) famine gripped Medina. The Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household) was delivering the Friday sermon to us that a person stood up
and said, ‘O Messenger of Allāh, the horses and the goats have died. So
pray to Allāh that He may send us rain.’ The holy Prophet(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household) raised his holy hands and prayed. Anas relates
that (at that time) the sky was as (transparent as) cutglass. (But on
account of the Prophet’s prayer,) the breeze blew instantly and the
clouds came over. Then they grew quite dense and then the sky opened its
mouth wide (that is, it started raining in torrents). We came out from
there and (drenched in rain and) almost drowning in water, we reached
our homes. The rain did not stop till the next Friday. The same day the
same person or someone else stood up and said, ‘O Messenger of Allāh,
the houses have collapsed, so pray to Allāh that this may stop.’ He
smiled and then prayed (to Allāh) that rain may fall around us, and not
on us. So I saw that the clouds had rolled away from Medina (and Medina
appeared) as if it was crowned by the sky.*

*In another tradition, Anas relates that Allāh shows to the people the
blessing of His Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) and the
acceptance of his supplications.* [11]

The proof of appeal for help by the practice of the Companions and the
Prophet’s encouragement of their practice establishes the fact that it
is not tainted with even a spot of disbelief. It is impossible that a
Companion should commit disbelief, and it is still impossible that the
Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* should condone his
disbelief. In this case the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* is encouraging them in their act, which speaks volumes for
its validity.

Amīr Hamzah - the remover of troubles
-------------------------------------

‘Abdullāh bin Mas‘ūd says that the holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* cried so bitterly over the martyrdom of his uncle Hamzah
in the battle of Uhud as he had never cried before. He says that he
placed his coffin in the direction of *qiblah* and burst into tears
until he started hiccupping. Then he addressed Hamzah and said:

*O Hamzah! O the uncle of the Messenger of Allāh! O Allāh’s lion! O lion
of the Messenger of Allāh! O Hamzah! O doer of good deeds! O remover of
troubles! O protector of the radiant face of the Messenger of Allāh!*
[12]

The use of the collocation *yā kāshif al-kurubāt* (O remover of
troubles) in this tradition for a dead man deserves our special
attention. The articulation of these words not only validates the act of
beseeching the help of the saints, but it also validates the act of help
by the saints in response to the petitioner’s appeal. It also indicates
that it is quite consistent with true Islamic belief that the person
whose help is being sought should also help the petitioner. That is why
he addressed Amīr Hamzah as the ‘remover of troubles.’ Here the status
of Hamzah as helper is only derivative because the real helper is Allāh
Himself. The fact that the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* declared Amīr Hamzah as a helper and addressed him after his
death by the word “ *yā* ” (O) clearly indicates that the classification
of helper into real and derivative is quite legal; otherwise it would
have been incompatible with the Prophet’s act.

Yā Muhammadāh- Battle-cry of the Companions
-------------------------------------------

Imām Ibn Kathīr says that on the occasion of the battle of Yamāmah, *yā
Muhammadāh* (O Muhammad, help us) was the battle-cry of the Muslims. He
adds that during the war, Khālid bin al-Walīd picked up the flag, and
passing through the army positions, set out towards the mountain of
Musaylimah, the Liar. He waited there for him to turn up so that he
could kill him. Then he returned and, standing between the two armies,
he shouted:

*I am the son of al-Walīd. I am the son of ‘Āmir and Zayd.*

Ibn Kathīr further adds:

*Then he raised the battle-cry current among the Muslims, which was ‘*
yā Muhammadāh’ *(O Muhammad, help us).* [13]

In this tradition the Muslims are relying on the Prophet’s means and
calling him for help, and the Muslims who are committing this act are
the Companions. Thus to call the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* for help and rely on his means was a practice of the
Companions.

****Appeal to the holy Prophet** *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
**for forgiveness****

Allāh has honoured the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* with the highest status among His creatures. Appeal to him
and intermediation through his person was valid during his earthly
existence and it is equally valid after his death. The two phases of his
existence do not modify in any sense the quality of appeal to and
intermediation through him and there is no legal and rational argument
that militates against their validity after his death.

We should not also brush aside the fact that the correct belief does not
elevate the intermediaries to the level of Allāh’s partners. They
essentially remain His creatures, and it is in fact a deep realisation
of their creaturely status that has prompted the Creator to raise them
to the superlative degree of excellence among His creatures. Therefore,
how can those, who claim to be the humble servants of the Lord, ever
aspire to be His partners or rivals? Thus they are neither Allāh’s
partners nor His equals. Allāh has no rival or partner. He is unique in
every respect, both in terms of His personality and the attributes that
define His personality. No prophet or saint, dead or alive, can be His
partner because He alone has the power to grant or turn down our
petitions. Thus in all forms of appeal for help and intermediation, the
intermediary himself acts as a humble servant of the Lord and he relies
on the divine mercy as much as the petitioner does. In no sense
whatsoever he treats himself as His equal. As a matter of fact, his help
is being sought because his status as an intermediary owes to the divine
favour. Allāh says:

*(O beloved!) And if they had come to you, when they had wronged their
souls, and asked forgiveness of Allāh, and the Messenger also had asked
forgiveness for them, they (on the basis of this means and intercession)
would have surely found Allāh the Granter of repentance, extremely
Merciful.* [14]

To restrict the efficacy and operational range of this verse to the
earthly existence of the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* , as some people believe, is to indulge in exegetical
misapplication and reflects their unawareness and lack of understanding.
Both the exegetes and the traditionists consider intermediation through
and appeal to the holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
as valid acts whether they were done in his earthly existence or after
his death.

Ibn Kathīr comments on the Qur’ānic verse:

*(In this Qur’ānic verse) Allāh is exhorting the sinners and evildoers
that when they commit sins and errors they should call on the Messenger
of Allāh(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) and ask forgiveness from
Allāh. They should also request the Messenger of Allāh(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household) to pray for them. When they do so, Allāh will turn to
them and show mercy to them and He will forgive them. That is why He
used the words* la-wajadullāha tawwāb-ar-rahīmā *(they (on the basis of
this means and intercession) would have surely found Allāh the Granter
of repentance, extremely Merciful). Many have stated this tradition. One
of them is Abū Mansūr as-Sabbāgh who writes the famous narration in his
book that, according to ‘Utbī, once he was sitting beside the Prophet’s
grave when a bedouin came and he said: ‘Peace be on you, O Allāh’s
Messenger! I have heard that Allāh says, “(O beloved!) And if they had
come to you, when they had wronged their souls, and asked forgiveness of
Allāh, and the Messenger also had asked forgiveness for them, they (on
the basis of this means and intercession) would have surely found Allāh
the Granter of repentance, extremely Merciful.” I have come to you,
asking forgiveness for my sins and I make you as intercessor before my
Lord and I have come to you for this purpose.’ Then he recited these
verses: ‘O, the most exalted among the buried people who improved the
worth of the plains and the hillocks! May I sacrifice my life for this
grave which is made radiant by you, (the Prophet,) the one who is (an
embodiment of) mercy and forgiveness.’ Then the bedouin went away and I
fell asleep. In my dream I saw the Holy Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household). He said to me: ‘O ‘Utbī, the bedouin is right, go and
give him the good news that Allāh has forgiven his sins.’* [15]

We come to learn from the words *jā’ūka fastaghfarullāha* of the
Qur’ānic verse that sinners and wrong-doers should ask Allāh’s
forgiveness through the means of the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* while the words *wastaghfara lahum-ur-rasūlu*
furnish a proof of his intercession. In *lawajadullāha tawwāb-ar-rahīmā*
the proof of intermediation is embedded in a precondition: seek
forgiveness through the means of the Messenger *(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* and it is clear when the Messenger *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* asked forgiveness for his follower, the act of
intermediation turned into an act of intercession and through
intercession the grant of forgiveness itself becomes a means of
forgiveness.

Some people treat means and intercession as two different things.
Therefore, it should be noted that when the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* is elevated to the office of intercession, he can
claim it as his right while this very act serves as a means in favour of
his follower.

The happening of the bedouin has been recorded by the following:

1- Bayhaqī in*Shu‘ab-ul-īmān* (3:495-6\#4178).

2- Ibn Qudāmah in*al-Mughnī* (3:557).

3- Nawawī in*al-Adhkār* (pp. 92-3).

4- Ibn ‘Asākir in*Tahdhīb tārīkh Dimashq al-kabīr* popularly known
as*Tārīkh/Tahdhīb Ibn ‘Asākir* as quoted by Subkī in*Shifā’-us-siqām fī
ziyārat khayr-il-anām* (pp. 46-7).

5- Ibn Hajar Haythamī in*al-Jawhar-ul-munazzam* (p.51).

Besides, all scholars of repute have described in their books, in
chapters on ‘visiting the tomb of the holy Messenger *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* ’ or ‘the rituals of *hajj* ,’ ‘Utbī’s tradition
that the villager visited the tomb of the Messenger *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* to ask for forgiveness.

In addition, Imām Qurtubī in his famous exegesis *al-Jāmi* ‘
*li-ahkām-il-Qur’ān* (5:265-6) has related another happening similar to
‘Utbī’s tradition. He says:

*“Abū Sādiq has reported it from ‘Alī. A villager came to see us three
days after the burial of the Holy Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household). He placed himself near the Prophet’s grave, sprinkled its
earth over his body and said: ‘O Messenger of Allāh, you said and we
have heard from you. You received commands from Allāh and we received
commands from you, and one of these divine commands is wa law annahum
idh zalamū anfusahum. It is true that I have wronged myself, therefore,
you should pray for my forgiveness.’ (In response to the villager’s act
of imploring) he was called out from the grave: ‘there is no doubt that
you have been forgiven.’”*

Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī has reproduced these two occurrences in
his book*Mafāhīm yajib an tusahhah* (pp.157-8) and then offered a
sizzling review which is quite relevant to our context. He writes, “This
episode has been reproduced by Imām Nawawī in the sixth chapter of his
famous book*al-Īdāh* , Abū al-Faraj bin Qudāmah in his
book*ash-Sharh-ul-kabīr* and Mansūr bin Yūnus al-Buhūtī in his
book*Kashshāf-ul-qinā‘* which is a popular book in Hambalī school of
thought.”

Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī expresses in his review an ambivalent
attitude towards the traditions. He said: ‘I cannot positively certify
their authenticity, but in spite of their lack of certainty, most of the
traditionists have relied on their credibility. We may only ask if these
heavy weights (traditionists and exegetes) have reproduced disbelief and
infidelity, or they have reproduced something that tempts people towards
idolatry or worship of the graves? If (may God forbid) this happens,
then it would become almost impossible to sort out the genuine books
from the spurious ones, leading to unmanageable chaos and confusion.’

****Appeal to the Prophet** *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
**for rain during ‘Umar’s tenure****

Mālik ad-Dār has related:

The people were gripped by famine during the tenure of ‘Umar (bin
al-Khattāb). Then a Companion walked up to the Prophet’s grave and said,
“O Messenger of Allāh, please ask for rain (from Allāh) for your
Community who is in dire straits.” Then the Companion saw the Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* in a dream. The Prophet *(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* said to him, “Go over to ‘Umar, give him
my regards and tell him that the rain will come to you. And tell ‘Umar
that he should be on his toes, he should be on his toes, (he should
remain alert).” Then the Companion went over to see ‘Umar and passed on
to him the tidings. On hearing this, ‘Umar broke into a spurt of crying.
He said, “O Allāh, I exert myself to the full until I am completely
exhausted.” [16]

Ibn Taymiyyah has endorsed its authenticity in his book
*Iqtidā’-us-sirāt-il-mustaqīm mukhālifat ashāb-il-jahīm* (p.373). Ibn
Kathīr has confirmed the soundness of its chain of transmission in
*al-Bidāyah wan-nihāyah* (5:167). Ibn Abī Khaythamah narrated it with
the same chain of transmission as quoted by ‘Asqalānī in *al-Isābah fī
tamyīz-is-sahābah* (3:484), while the latter writes in *Fath-ul-bārī*
(2:495-6): “Ibn Abī Shaybah transmitted it with a sound chain of
transmission and Sayf bin ‘Umar Tamīmī has recorded it in
*al-Futūh-ul-kabīr* that the dreamer was a Companion known as Bilāl bin
al-Hārith al-Muzanī.” Qastallānī has remarked in
*al-Mawāhib-ul-laduniyyah* (4:276) that Ibn Abī Shaybah has narrated it
with a sound chain of transmission while Zurqānī has supported
Qastallānī in his *Commentary* (11:150-1).

It is quite surprising that some people have tried to dub even this
soundly transmitted tradition as weak and, therefore, lacking the sinews
to face a rigorously probing analysis, though this is far from the
truth, they have marshalled in their favour the following objections:

### First objection:

###

One of its narrators is A‘mash who is a double-crossing impostor
(***mudallis*** ).

### Reply:

###

Though A‘mash is an impostor, his tradition is popular for two reasons
whether its soundness is proved or not:

1. A‘mash is regarded as a second-grade impostor, and this is a class of
impostors from whom our religious leaders recorded traditions in their
authentic books. Therefore, it is proved that this tradition narrated by
A‘mash is accepted.

2. If we accept this tradition only on the basis of its transmission by
A‘mash, as is the practice in the case of third-grade or even
lower-grade impostors, even then the tradition by A‘mash is likely to
retain its popularity as he has copied it from Abū Sālih Dhakawān
Sammān. Imām Dhahabī comments: ‘when A‘mash begins a tradition with the
word***‘an*** (from; through) there is a possibility of imposture and
deception. But if he relates it from his elders like Ibrāhīm, Ibn Abī
Wā’il, Abū Sālih Sammān, etc., then it is presumed to possess sound
linkage (***ittisāl*** ).’ [17]

In addition, Imām Dhahabī has also described him as trustworthy
(*thiqah* ).

### Second objection:

###

Albānī in his book***at-Tawassul, ahkāmuhū wa anwa‘uhū*** observes, “I
do not acknowledge it authentic because the credibility and memory of
Mālik ad-Dār is not known and these are the two basic criteria for any
authentic narrator of traditions. Ibn Abī Hātim Rāzī in***Kitāb-ul-jarh
wat-ta‘dīl*** [8:213(4/1/213)], while discussing Mālik ad-Dār, has not
mentioned any narrator except Abū Sālih who has accepted any tradition
from him, which shows that he is unknown. It is also supported by the
fact that Ibn Abī Hātim Rāzī, who himself was a leading figure of Islam
and a memoriser of traditions, has not mentioned anyone of them who has
pronounced him trustworthy (***thiqah*** ). Similarly Mundhirī has
remarked that he does not know him while Haythamī in
his***Majma‘-uz-zawā’id*** , has supported his observation…”

### Reply:

###

This objection is refuted by the biographical details which Ibn Sa‘d has
furnished while discussing him among the second-grade Medinan
Successors: ‘Mālik ad-Dār was a slave freed by ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb. He
reported traditions from Abū Bakr as-Siddīq and ‘Umar, and Abū Sālih
Sammān reported traditions from him. He was known.’[18]

In addition, this objection is also cancelled by Khalīlī’s (d.446 AH)
comment on Māik ad-Dār: ‘Mālik ad-Dār’s trustworthiness and reliability
is generally accepted and the group of Successors has eulogised
him.’[19]

Besides, the biographical sketch provided by ‘Asqalānī also serves to
neutralise this objection:

“Mālik bin ‘Iyād, a slave freed by ‘Umar, was known as Mālik ad-Dār. He
had seen the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and
heard traditions from Abū Bakr. He has taken traditions from Abū Bakr
as-Siddīq ‘Umar Fārūq , Mu‘ādh and Abū ‘Ubaydah, and Abū Sammān and the
two sons of this (Mālik ad-Dār) -‘Awn and ‘Abdullāh- have taken
traditions from him.

“And Imām Bukhārī in*at-Tārīkh-ul-kabīr* [7:304-5 (4/1/304-5)], through
reference to Abū Sālih, has acknowledged a tradition from him that ‘Umar
is reported to have said during the period of famine: ‘I do not shirk
responsibility but I may be made more humble.’

“Ibn Abī Khaythamah has reproduced a long tradition along with these
words (which we are discussing), and I have copied a tradition narrated
by ‘Abd-ur-Rahmān bin Sa‘īd bin Yarbū‘ Makhzūmī with reference to Mālik
ad-Dār, in*Fawā’id Dāwūd bin ‘Umar* and*ad-Dabī* compiled by Baghawī.
Mālik ad-Dār said that one day ‘Umar called him. He had a gold wallet in
his hand, which had four hundred dinars in it. He commanded him to take
it to Abū ‘Ubaydah, and then he narrated the remaining part of the
happening.

“Ibn Sa‘d has placed Mālik ad-Dār in the first group of Successors among
the natives of Medina and has averred that he has taken traditions from
Abū Bakr as-Siddīq and ‘Umar, and he was known. Abū ‘Ubaydah has
asserted that ‘Umar had appointed him the guardian of his family. When
‘Uthmān was elevated to the office of the caliph, he appointed him as
the minister of finance, and that is how he came to be known as Mālik
ad-Dār (the master of the house).

“Ismā‘īl Qādī has reported it from ‘Alī bin Madīnī that Mālik ad-Dār was
the treasurer of ‘Umar.”[20]

Ibn Hibbān has attested to the trustworthiness and credibility of Mālik
ad-Dār in*Kitāb-uth-thiqāt* (5:384).[21]

Now if Mundhirī and Haythamī insist that they do not know Mālik ad-Dār,
it means that they have not asserted anything about his credibility or
lack of credibility. However there are traditionists of great repute
like Imām Bukhārī, Ibn Sa‘d, ‘Alī bin Madīnī, Ibn Hibbān and ‘Asqalānī
who know him. ‘Asqalānī has even mentioned him in*Tahdhīb-ut-tahdhīb*
(7:226; 8:217).

It is shocking to learn that Albānī gives weight to the opinion of those
who do not know Mālik ad-Dār and prefers them to those who know him.
Albānī has discarded the traditions of Mālik bin ‘Iyād who was popularly
known by the title “ad-Dār” while the great Companions appointed him as
their minister because they relied on his trustworthiness. He was even
given the portfolio of finance minister — an office that requires
honesty, integrity and a huge sense of responsibility. On the contrary,
Albānī gives credence to the traditions of those who enjoyed a much
lower status than Mālik ad-Dār. The following examples support my
contention:

1.He has pronounced Yahyā bin ‘Uryān Harawī as ***hasan*** (fair) in
***Silsilat-ul-ahādīth-is-sahīhah*** (1:49). His argument is based on
the statement made by Khatīb Baghdādī in ***Tārīkh Baghdad*** (14:161)
in which he declares Yahyā bin ‘Uryān Harawī as a traditionist of
Baghdad.

This statement is quite transparent. Khatīb Baghdādī has argued neither
in favour of nor against Yahyā bin ‘Uryān Harawī. His stance is neutral,
as he has not tried to establish the stature of his narrations. He has
not labelled them as authentic or inauthentic. In spite of his posture
of neutrality, it is quite surprising that Albānī has called him fair
(*hasan* ).

2.Abū Sa‘īd Ghifārī has also been pronounced a fair narrator in
***Silsilat-ul-ahādīth-is-sahīhah*** (2:298). After stating that he is
no longer unknown because two narrators have acknowledged traditions
from him, he writes, “So he is a Successor. A group of those who have
committed the traditions to memory have verified the authenticity of his
narrations. Therefore, ‘Irāqī has declared the narrations attributed to
him as authentic ( ***isnāduhū jayyid*** ), and there is no harm in it.
This gave me a sense of satisfaction and I felt deeply contented.”

The question is why has he tried to discriminate between Abū Sa‘īd
Ghifārī and Mālik ad-Dār?

3.Sālih bin Khawwāt has also been pronounced credible in
***Silsilat-ul-ahādīth-is-sahīhah*** (2:436) because a group of people
has relied on his traditions, and Ibn Hibbān has mentioned him in
***Kitāb-uth-thiqāt*** .

While, according to our research, ‘Asqalānī has described him as an
acceptable narrator in*Taqrīb-ut-tahdhīb* (1:359) and has also stated
that he belonged to the eighth category of Successors. If an
eighth-grade narrator is being described as credible, what justification
is there to pronounce a first-grade Successor as incredible? The
discrimination seems to be rooted more in prejudice than reason.

Therefore, the silence of Ibn Abī Hātim Rāzī is hardly an argument
against the unknown stature of Mālik ad-Dār because his silence is based
on lack of evidence about the narrator. Thus the absence of evidence and
reasoning does not reflect the unknowingness of the narrator, which his
silence neither explains nor indicates towards any definite
interpretation. On the contrary, it opposes any attempt to establish the
unknowingness of the narrator. There are a number of narrators about
whom Ibn Abī Hātim Rāzī has remained silent though other scholars have
argued about them and the books on tradition and related issues are
riddled with similar examples.

### Third objection:

###

There is a suspicion of discontinuance between Abū Sālih Dhakawān Sammān
and Mālik ad-Dār.

### Reply:

###

This suspicion is a fallacy, as it has no basis in reality. In its
rejection, it is sufficient to say that Abū Sālih like Mālik ad-Dār was
a native of Medina and he has reported traditions from the Companions.
Therefore, he is not an impostor and a fraud. It may also be noted that
only contemporaneity is an adequate guarantee for the connection of
transmission as Imām Muslim has mentioned the consensus on it in the
Preamble ( ***muqaddimah*** ) of his ***as-Sahīh*** .

### Fourth objection:

###

There is no justification for the soundness of this tradition because it
entirely depends upon a person whose name has not been spelled out. Only
in the tradition narrated by Sayf bin ‘Umar Tamīmī, he has been named
Bilāl and Sayf has declared him as a weak narrator.

### Reply:

###

This objection is also groundless, because justification does not depend
on Bilāl but on ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb’s act. He did not prevent Bilāl
from performing his act; on the contrary, he acknowledged it. He rather
himself cried and said: ‘my Creator, I do not shirk responsibility but I
may be made more humble.’ Therefore the person visiting the grave,
whether he is a Companion or a Successor, does not affect the soundness
of the tradition.

The gist of the discussion is that the tradition related by Mālik ad-Dār
is sound, as I have stated in the earlier part of my exposition.
Muhammad bin ‘Alawī al-Mālikī writes:

*“All those people who have made reference to this tradition or narrated
it or reproduced it in their books have never labelled it disbelief or
infidelity. They have not questioned the substance of the tradition and
it has been mentioned by a scholarly person of high level like Ibn Hajar
‘Asqalānī who has confirmed it as a soundly transmitted tradition.
Therefore his confirmation needs no apology in view of his highly
distinguished stature among the hadīth-scholars.”* [22]

This tradition establishes the following principles:

Visiting graves with the intention of mediation and seeking help.

It is valid to visit the grave of a pious dead person during the period
of one’s trials and tribulations to seek help from him because if this
act were invalid, ‘Umar would surely have forbidden that person to do
so.

1- The Prophet’s appearance in the dream of the person who visited his
grave and to give him good tidings, argues in favour of the fact that it
is quite valid to seek help from non-Allāh and the dead because if it
were invalid, it would have been impossible for the Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* not to have forbidden that person to do so.

2- Validation of the mode of address “O Messenger of Allāh (*yā rasūl
Allāh* )” even after the Messenger’s death.

Call for help and the act of intermediation dates back to the early
ages.

3- The holy personality of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* is a fountain of guidance even after his death.

4- The head of the state is responsible for administrative matters. The
Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , in spite of being
the chief of prophets, did not break the state channel and, as a visible
demonstration of his sense of discipline, he commanded the man visiting
his grave to see the head of the state.

The man visiting the grave implored his help through the instrumentality
of the Ummah. This shows the Prophet’s immeasurable love for the
Community of his followers.

Justification for making the Ummah as a source for seeking his help.

5- Justification for making non-prophet a means of help in the presence
of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

6- Anyone who strengthens his link with the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* is rewarded by his sight and is showered with
his blessings.

7- The Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , even after
his death, is aware of the weakness of his Ummah or anyone of its rulers
and he issues different commands for removing these flaws.

To seek guidance from Allāh’s favourites.

The acknowledgement of the Prophet’s commands by the Companions after
his death as just and truthful.

Imposition of commands received in dreams on others.

When intermediation was discussed in the presence of ‘Umar bin
al-Khattāb, he did not forbid it; rather he cried and responded to it
acknowledging it as valid.

8-‘Umar bin al-Khattāb’s love for the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* that he incessantly cried as someone mentioned the
Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

****Appeal to the Prophet** *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
**during ‘Uthmān’s tenure****

The famous tradition narrated by ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf with reference to
the Prophet’s life was discussed in detail in which a blind man
submitted his petition to the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* and his eyesight was restored through his means. Now we
would like to explain that this mode was not confined to his life on
earth alone, but the Companions relied on it even after his death. It is
clear from Tabarānī’s tradition that a person visited ‘Uthmān bin ‘Affān
on a personal errand. ‘Uthmān bin ‘Affān not only was indifferent to him
but also turned a deaf ear to his need. That person met ‘Uthmān bin
Hunayf and lodged his complaint against it. ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf said to
him: ‘fetch an earthen pot and perform the ablution, then go to the
mosque and offer two cycles of prayer and say:

*O Allāh, I beseech you and submit myself to you through the mediation
of our Prophet Muhammad (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household), a
merciful Prophet. O Muhammad! I submit to my Lord through your means so
that He should fulfil my need.*

And then mention your need.’ The man went away and he did as he was told
to do. Later when he arrived at ‘Uthmān bin ‘Affān’s door, the porter
caught him by his hand and took him to ‘Uthmān bin ‘Affān who made him
sit beside him on the mat and asked him: ‘what is your need?’ He
mentioned the need and the caliph fulfilled his need and said to him:
‘why haven’t you mentioned your need so far?’ He told him further: ‘do
come to me whenever you have a problem?’ When the man left his place, he
met ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf and said to him: ‘May God bless you! He neither
gave any thought to my need nor turned his attention to me until you
recommended me to him.’ ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf replied:

*By God! I did not talk to him, but once I was in the company of the
Messenger of Allāh (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) that a blind
man came over to see him and complained to him about the loss of his
eyesight. The Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) asked him to
be patient, but he said: ‘O Messenger of Allāh! I don’t have any guide
and I am in great trouble.’ The Prophet(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household) said: ‘fetch an earthen pot and perform the ablution, then
offer two cycles of prayer and implore Allāh with these praying words.’
Then (‘Uthmān) bin Hunayf said: ‘By God! We had neither gone out far
away from the meeting nor had the conversation among us stretched out
that the man came to us as if he had never been blind.’* [23]

‘Uthmān bin Hunayf taught him the supplication that had been used as the
source of the Prophet’s help and succour after his death. The point to
be noted is that the person was under the illusion that his need had
been fulfilled on account of ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf’s recommendation to the
caliph. So ‘Uthmān bin Hunayf instantly shed his illusion and related to
him the tradition he had heard from the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* and had himself put to test to prove that his need was
fulfilled because he had relied on the means of the Prophet *(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* by calling on him and seeking his help. He
swore by God and convinced him that he had not recommended him to the
caliph but it had all happened through the blessing of the Prophet’s
mediation.

Ibn Taymiyyah’s endorsement
---------------------------

Ibn Taymiyyah has related a story in the perspective of this tradition
that Ibn Abī Dunyā has narrated a tradition in his book *Mujābī
ad-du‘ā’* that a person came over to see ‘Abd-ul-Malik bin Sa‘īd bin
Abjar. ‘Abd-ul-Malik pressed his belly and told him that he was
suffering from an incurable disease. The man asked him: ‘what is it?’
‘Abd-ul-Malik replied that it was a kind of ulcer that grows inside the
belly and ultimately kills the man. It is said that the patient turned
round and then he said:

*Allāh! Allāh! Allāh is my Lord. I regard no one as His rival or
partner. O Allāh! I beseech You and submit myself to You through the
mediation of Your Prophet Muhammad (Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household), the merciful Prophet. O Muhammad! Through your means I
submit myself to your and my Lord that He should take mercy on me in my
state of illness.*

It is said that ‘Abd-ul-Malik pressed his belly again and said: ‘you are
cured, you are no longer suffering from any disease.’ Ibn Taymiyyah
after recording the whole incident in his book, comments:

*I say that this and other forms of supplication have been taken over
from our predecessors.* [24]

The noteworthy point is that Ibn Taymiyyah has also endorsed it that (1)
it is an act of our predecessors, and (2) it is quite valid to recover
from disease through this act.

Proof of ritualistic assignment
-------------------------------

The two traditions also make it clear that the practice of ritualistic
assignment by the saintly people to others is a valid act because this
has been the practice of Allāh’s favourites in the past. The Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* had not asked ‘Uthmān bin
Hunayf, though, to pass it to other people.

**The Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* wields authority
even after his death**

Some people, on account of their ignorance and paucity of knowledge,
express the view that the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* after his death wields no authority and he can neither hear
us nor can he pray for us. May Allāh guard the believers against such a
perverse view! No Muslim with sound belief can ever conceive such a
possibility. Appeal to and intermediation through the Holy Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* are established facts supported
by evidence from the Qur’ān and the *sunnah* and they are a proof of his
stature and distinction. Those who do not believe in calling him or
intermediation through the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* after his death do not understand his exceptional status.

It is part of the belief of Ahl-us-Sunnah wal-Jamā‘ah that a dead person
can hear, possesses awareness, benefits from the virtuous deeds of the
living and is disturbed by their wicked deeds. The point that clamours
for attention is that this belief has been established through the
experience of an ordinary man. When an ordinary person can exercise such
power, how can we possibly deny it to the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* who is the most superior person among Allāh’s
creatures? Various authentic traditions testify to the reality that the
Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* is alive even after his
death. It sounds like a paradox to perverse ears but in his case it is
as true as the daily sunrise. He returns our greetings, the affairs of
the Ummah are reported to him, he asks forgiveness from Allāh over the
evil deeds of the Ummah and praises and glorifies Him over her good
deeds. It is stated in a number of traditions that once Marwān saw Abū
Ayyūb al-Ansārī lying down over the Prophet’s grave and asked him what
he was doing. Abū Ayyūb al-Ansārī gave a faith-freshening reply. The
tradition is recorded below:

*It is attributed to Dāwūd bin Abī Sālih. He says: ‘one day Marwān came
and he saw that a man was lying down with his mouth turned close to the
Prophet’s grave. Then he (Marwān) said to him, “Do you know what are you
doing?” When he moved towards him, he saw that it was Abū Ayyūb
al-Ansārī. (In reply) he said, “Yes, (I know) I have come to the
Messenger of Allāh(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) and not to a
stone. I have heard it from the Messenger of God (Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household) not to cry over religion when its guardian is competent.
Yes, shed tears over religion when its guardian is incompetent.’* [25]

Hākim declared that it fulfils the requirements of authentic traditions
as demanded by Bukhārī and Muslim, while Dhahabī has also called it
*sahīh* (sound).

****Appeal to the Prophet** *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* **on
the Day of Judgement****

On the Day of Judgement the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* will act as a means of forgiveness for the believers. The
Qur’ān states:

*O our Lord! Bless us with all that you have promised us through your
messengers and do not humiliate us on the Day of Judgement. Surely You
do not go back on Your Word.* [26]

In the light of this verse, the divine promise made to all the prophets
is here acting as a means. All the rewards promised to other prophets
carry special significance for the followers of the Holy Prophet *(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* through his means. On the Day of
Judgement, grilled by the unbearable heat, the entire mankind will rally
round the prophets but each prophet will tell them to move on to some
other prophet until the whole mankind will rally round the Holy Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* . The following is an
agreed-upon tradition:

*The Holy Prophet(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) said: ‘when it is
the Day of Judgement, people, out of nervousness, will call on one
another. First of all, they will call on Adam (Peace Be Upon Him) and
request him to intercede on their behalf before Allāh but he will turn
down their request by saying that today it is beyond his power to help
them out and he will advise them to call on Ibrāhīm (Peace Be Upon Him)
because he is the Friend of Allāh. So people will call on Ibrāhīm (Peace
Be Upon Him) who will also excuse himself by saying that he is not in a
position to help them, therefore, they should go to Mūsā(Peace Be Upon
Him) because he is Allāh’s interlocutor. They will go to Mūsā (Peace Be
Upon Him) and he will also express his inability to help them and advise
them to see ‘Īsā (Peace Be Upon Him) because he is the soul created by
Allāh and His word. They will go to ‘Īsā (Peace Be Upon Him) and he will
also tell them that he is not able to help them, therefore, they should
go to Muhammad (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) (because he is the
beloved of God). So all human beings will rally round me and I will tell
them: ‘yes, (today) I hold the office of intercession.’ I will seek
permission from my Lord and I will be granted the permission. Then He
will inspire me to praise and glorify Him with such praises, which I
cannot describe at this time. (In short,) I will praise and glorify
Allāh with those praises and prostrate myself before Him. Then I will be
told: ‘O Muhammad, raise your radiant head, speak and you will be heard,
demand and you will be blessed with it, and intercede (on behalf of your
people), your intercession will be granted.’ So I will implore: ‘O Lord!
My Ummah, my Ummah!’ God shall command: ‘go and take him out of the
Hell, whosoever is left with faith even as small as the grain of
barley.’ So I will go and do so (I will take all such people out of
Hell). Then I will return and praise and glorify Him with those praises
and I will prostrate myself before Him. So I will be commanded: ‘O
Muhammad, raise your radiant head, speak and you will be heard, beg and
you will be blessed with it, intercede (on behalf of your people) and
your intercession will be granted.’ I will implore: ‘O Lord! My Ummah,
my Ummah!’ I will be commanded: ‘go and take him out of Hell too,
whosoever is left with faith even as small as the tiny grain of rye.’ So
I will go and do so. Then I will return and praise and glorify Him with
the same praises and I will again prostrate myself before Him. So I will
be commanded, ‘O Muhammad, raise your radiant head, speak and you will
be heard, beg and you will be blessed with it and intercede (on behalf
of your people), your intercession will be granted.’ I will implore: ‘O
Lord! My Ummah, my Ummah!’ I will be commanded: ‘go and take him out (of
Hell) whosoever is left with the tiniest faith, even smaller than a
grain of rye. Take such a person out of Hell.’ Accordingly I will go and
do so (I will take them out of Hell). (Hasan has added a few more words
to the tradition narrated by Anas. The holy Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household) said:) ‘I will return the fourth time, and I will
praise and glorify the Lord in the same way, then I will prostrate
myself before Him. So I will be commanded: ‘O Muhammad, raise your
radiant head, and speak, you will be heard, beg and you will be blessed
with it, and intercede (on behalf of your people), your intercession
will be granted.’ At that time I will implore the Lord that I should be
allowed to take out a person from Hell who has recited* lā ilāha
illallāhu *(there is no deity except Allāh) even once in his life (from
the core of his heart). The Lord will reply, I swear by My honour,
glory, greatness and supremity that I will liberate a person from the
fire of Hell who has even once recited lā ilāha illallāhu (there is no
deity except Allāh).* [27]

This tradition has proved, without any particle of doubt, that on the
Day of Resurrection the process of judgement and accountability will be
initiated through the mediation of the Prophet’s prayer, praise and
glorification of the Lord. And on account of the Prophet’s mediation,
the process of accountability will start with his Ummah so that they do
not have to stay longer than necessary in the scorching heat of the Day
of Resurrection. The Qur’ān has also explained in the context of the Day
of Judgement:

*(It will be the day) when Allāh will disgrace neither His Prophet nor
the people who embraced faith along with him. (On that day) their light
(of faith) will keep sprinting ahead of them and on their right side.*
[28]

The Qur’ānic verse spells out in unmistakable terms that Allāh will not
humiliate the followers of the Last Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* through the means of his blessing; on the other hand, He
will allow them to enter Paradise, with all the glory and splendour
associated with such an occasion. A visible proof of the divine
concession will be the enveloping light to which they will be entitled
through the means of Allāh’s Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* .

Mutual relation between appeal for help, intermediation and intercession
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Another point worth noting in the context of *istighāthah* is that when
we call someone for help, it also seems to support the relevance of the
related concepts of intermediation and intercession. The following
Qur’ānic verse clearly links the three concepts by explaining their
mutually reinforcing role:

*(O beloved!) And if they had come to you, when they had wronged their
souls, and asked forgiveness of Allāh, and the Messenger also had asked
forgiveness for them, they (on the basis of this means and intercession)
would have surely found Allāh the Granter of repentance, extremely
Merciful.* [29]

This Qur’ānic verse clearly argues in favour of intermediation. It means
when people have committed sin, and they seek the mediation of the holy
Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* in their supplication to
Allāh and the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* also prays
for their forgiveness, then they will find Allāh Compassionate and
Merciful. *Fastaghfarullāh* argues for intercession. When Allāh condoned
their sin through the intercession of the Messenger *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* , it means that intercession is validated by the
Qur’ānic text. And the third concept of *istighāthah* is in fact a proof
of seeking someone’s assistance. When a man returns to the holy Prophet
*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for the forgiveness of his sins,
it clearly means that he is asking for his intercession: “O Messenger of
Allāh, I am a sinner. Have mercy on me and intercede for me before Allāh
so that He may condone my sins.” This desire of the sinner, in fact,
amounts to *istighāthah* (seeking help from others) while the Prophet’s
readiness to implore Allāh for the forgiveness of his sins is
intercession.

Seek his help today
-------------------

The gist of the discussion is that it is a futile exercise to prove
arguments against appeal to the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* for help and to establish authentic traditions as weak and
invalid through self-concocted strategies According to the Prophet’s own
statement, the benefit of his blessings is still a tangible reality as
it was during his earthly life; his death has not changed this reality.
And it is further reinforced by the tradition with an impeccable chain
of transmission that on the Day of Judgement, the process of
accountability will be initiated on his recommendation.

Let’s briefly speculate on the Day of Judgement. The heat and warmth
will be at its climax. The people will face deep distress. The Lord will
be present in His chair. The Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* will also honour the gathering with his presence and all the
prophets will accompany him. The earlier believers and the later ones
will also form part of the audience. In this scenario, when these
people, presuming Adam *(Peace Be Upon Him)* as the first ancestor, will
call on him and request him to help them out of their trouble, but he
will send them on to Ibrāhīm *(Peace Be Upon Him)* , who will refer them
to Mūsā *(Peace Be Upon Him)* , who will direct them to see ‘Īsā *(Peace
Be Upon Him)* and finally he will send all of them to the Prophet
Muhammad *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , the intercessor of
mankind. During the whole process, none of the honoured prophets will
say: ‘what disbelief are you perpetrating and what have you come to us
for? Allāh Himself is there, why don’t you go to Him?’ On the other
hand, they will despatch them willingly and expectantly to the Holy
Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* so that he may intercede
on their behalf before God. Thus we come to realise that appeal for help
and intermediation is a continuous process, uninterrupted by the
exigencies of space and time and unaffected by the laws of physical
existence, and on the Day of Judgement a consensus among the prophets
will emerge on the conceptual and practical relevance of *istighāthah* .
The subtle point to note is that when the first personality in the world
of humanity committed error, he offered to the Lord the mediation of the
Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* and as a result his
error was condoned. The Prophet’s mediation relieved him of the agony he
had been suffering from as a consequence of his error. Similarly on the
Day of Judgement when life on earth will come to an end and the people
will experience the agony of waiting in uncertain anticipation of the
process of accountability, they will call the holy Prophet *(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* for help and will be liberated from their
torture only through the means of the Holy Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* . It is now transparent from these examples that the
first man in the world of humanity was relieved of his agony through the
mediation of the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , and
the world is drawing to a close and mankind is passing through the
torture of waiting in a superheated environment, they will also be
relieved of their ordeal through the means of the Prophet *(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* . Fortunate are the people who even today
hold on to this belief and will also witness this scenario on the Day of
Judgement.

All these traditions and proofs reinforce the reality of*istighāthah*
and intermediation and endorse them as valid religious concepts, and not
as figments of the frenzied imagination. If, in spite of these
irrefutable indicators, someone still tries to refute them, he is living
in a world of fantasy and self-fabrication because they remain
unsupported both by argument and precedent.


