Chapter 3: Justification of Istighathah After Death
===================================================

Some people, in spite of their awareness of the injunctions of Qur’ān
and*sunnah* and the practice of the Companions, believe that it is
possible to help one another in the earthly world and therefore, it is
valid to seek and extend help, but after death the creature has no
control over his body, so how can help be sought from him? Since it is
beyond his control to help others, seeking help from him is a form of
disbelief.

This pig-headedness needs a twofold elaboration. First of all, it is an
established fact that the creature, whether he is alive or resting in
his grave, has absolutely no control over his body in both cases. These
powers are only conferred on him by Allāh, which we exercise during our
worldly existence to handle a variety of matters. It, in fact, is
Allāh’s blessing on the creature and, if Allāh decides to withdraw it
from him during his earthly life, he will be deprived even of the
capacity to pull a straw. So, just as in this world of cause-and-effect,
Allāh has absolute control over all the powers of the creature, and yet
it is not a kind of disbelief to seek help from him, similarly Allāh
does not condemn it as disbelief if someone seeks help from another
creature after death. Just as in life it is disbelief to regard the
creature as the real helper but his help can be derivatively invoked,
similarly it is quite valid to regard the prophets and saints, as
derivative helpers after death and to beseech them for help. Disbelief
whether it is associated with a living person or a dead person remains
disbelief. But to seek help from someone in his derivative capacity
whether he is dead or alive is quite valid and does not amount to
disbelief. Islam does not believe in double standards that an act is a
form of belief if you perform it in a mosque and it turns into disbelief
if you perform it in a temple. Islamic injunctions and the consequences
that follow from them display a consistent pattern. Thus, if we treat a
medical expert as the true helper and seek his assistance, it will be
considered a form of disbelief. On the other hand, if we regard Allāh as
the true helper and seek the help of a virtuous person as a form of
treatment, it is quite valid and is in no way inconsistent with
Islamic*sharī‘ah* .

The real purpose of a man’s life is to be included among the favourites
of God and to acquire as much knowledge of the divine springs of Power
as is consistent with human limitations. Therefore, to realise this
purpose, human beings rely on the saints and the virtuous people because
they not only themselves have cultivated divine consciousness but also
develop it in those who are closely associated with them. This is the
reason we find Ibrāhīm*(Peace Be Upon Him)* praying to God to include
him among His favourites so that he could persuade his followers to
pursue a similar goal:

*O my Lord! Make me perfect in knowledge and conduct and include me
among those whom You have rewarded with Your nearness.* [1]

Here, the word*hukman* means the acme of human capacity for knowledge
and conduct. Qādī Thanā’ullāh Pānīpatī says:

*That is, to bring knowledge and conduct to such a climactic point that
one develops the complete ability to represent the sublime office of
divinity and to provide unflawed guidance and political leadership to
humanity.* [2]

Imām Rāzī writes:

*“When acquisition of knowledge as the meaning of hukman has been
established, it is equally established at the same time that he (the
Prophet Ibrāhīm) prayed to Allāh for the kind of knowledge that
guaranteed his total absorption in the divine qualities and attributes,
a knowledge whose purity serves as a self-adjusting filter to drive out
all impurities.”*

He further comments:

*And this knowledge proves that the divine knowledge or consciousness
develops in the heart of a creature by Allāh’s will and Ibrāhīm’s
supplication* - *and include me among those whom You have rewarded with
Your nearness* - *is a pointer to the fact that for a creature to be
saintly or virtuous is exclusively the outcome of Allāh’s will.* [3]

Therefore, the acquisition of divine knowledge is made possible only by
means of the virtuous and pious people. To be associated with them and
to acquire divine knowledge through their mediation has been the
practice of the prophets. And any creature who desires the favour of
Allāh through the means of the pious and the saintly people, never feels
frustrated and his prayer is invariably granted, and he is included
among the virtuous people. Then he attains divine consciousness as is
declared by Allāh:

*And surely (even) in the Hereafter, they will be in the ranks of the
righteous.* [4]

There is irrefutable evidence of reliance on these righteous people for
the fulfilment of their needs and the relief of their pains and
troubles. In its support, the Qur’ānic verse in which Allāh is
commanding the believers to associate themselves with the righteous is
quite sufficient and conclusive. Allāh says:

*O believers! Fear Allāh, and remain in (the company of) the truthful.*
[5]

In this verse, Allāh, on the one hand, is instructing the believers in
the uniqueness and immutability of His Power; on the other hand, He is
enjoining upon them to adopt the company of the truthful in order to
elevate themselves to a position which the truthful have already
attained. At another place, Allāh says:

*And follow the path of the (person) who turned towards Us.* [6]

Similarly, the prophet Yūsuf’s supplication is also recorded in the holy
Qur’ān:

*Take my soul at death as a Muslim and unite me with the righteous.* [7]

The holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* himself prayed
to Allāh using similar wo*rds.* [8]

Some people might object to the authenticity of the tradition, picking
out flaws in its chain of transmission or coming out with some other
frivolous remarks, but no believer can deny the credibility of the
supplication by Yūsuf*(Peace Be Upon Him)* as it is recorded in the holy
Qur’ān which is nothing but absolute truth. Thus it is established that
it has been the practice of the prophets to mediate their supplications
through the virtuous and the righteous. The recording of these forms of
supplication in the Qur’ān is most probably intended to persuade the
believers to follow the practice of the prophets.

Ibn-ul-Firāsī narrates that Firāsī said to the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* : ‘O Messenger of Allāh! Shall I beg you for
something?’ He replied:

*No, and if you can’t help begging, then you should beseech the pious
and the righteous (for help).* [9]

Some people believe that the supplication of the pious and the virtuous
is granted during their lifetime, but after death they cannot help
anyone, as they themselves are helpless. They believe that the righteous
are a source of help but only during their earthly existence, and it is
disbelief to rely on them for help after their death.

The supporters of this view are victims of a grave misunderstanding
because the reality is just the reverse. It is true as the green of the
grass and the blue of the sky that Allāh is the only source of blessing
and no creature can arrogate this exclusively divine prerogative to
himself. If he does so, he is committing unabashed disbelief. Therefore,
to think that the supplication is mediated through one of His favourites
in his life and He turns a cold shoulder to his supplication when he is
dead smacks of a self-contradiction, as it tends to identify the saint
with Allāh as the source of help. The fact is that God Alone has the
power to fulfil the needs of the creatures through the mediation of the
saints whether they are dead or alive.

Those who object to making saints and the pious as means of help and
assistance after death are obviously in the wrong groove. They are only
fumbling in the dark and smashing their cluttered heads against the
slippery walls of an unlighted tunnel, which leads into an even darker
dungeon. Their objections are grounded in the misconception that
reliance on the saints and the pious for the acquisition of Allāh’s
blessing is contingent on their manifest life while Allāh’s dispensing
of His blessings to His creatures through the saints and the pious is
absolutely unrelated to the fact of their being dead or alive. The
traditions and the quotes of the Companions that follow are purported to
eliminate the doubts raised by these deniers. A wide spectrum of
evidence is marshalled to prove the fact that it is not only valid to
rely on the saints and the pious for help after their death but it has
also been the practice of the prophets and Allāh’s favourites. These are
the people who can truly guide us and lead us to our salvation. Ibn
Taymiyyah sums up the controversy at the end of his
book*al-‘Aqīdat-ul-wāsitiyyah* :

*Ahl-us-Sunnah wal-Jamā‘ah are aligned (cling) to the faith of Islam,
guarding themselves gingerly against all forms of doctoring. This
includes the truthful, the martyrs and the pious (according to their
grades). It also includes the people who are the source of guidance and
the minaret of light. These are the people who have achieved distinction
on the basis of a consistently virtuous mode of living. The Substitutes
and the Imāms of* dīn *also belong to this category who rallied the
Muslims to (the path of) their guidance. This is the group who received
divine patronage to remain (truthful) and it was about this group that
the holy Prophet(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) had said: ‘a group
of my Community, who have been divinely guided to stick to the path of
truth, will not cease to exist till the Day of Judgement, and those who
oppose them or degrade them will never be able to do them any harm.’*
[10]

The second point revolves around the objection that the dead lack the
capacity for help. This conclusion is also based on perverse reasoning.
Allāh Himself has referred to the purgatorial life of His favourites at
various places in the Qur’ān. There is no difference of opinion among
the followers of any ideology or religion about the life of the martyrs.
What luxuries must grace the purgatorial life of the Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* whose most lowly follower is guaranteed not
only life till the Day of Judgement if he dies a martyr but who also
receives all the requisite divine blessings! Therefore, by regarding the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* as a derivative helper,
it is quite valid to seek his help and assistance after his death as it
was valid during his earthly existence. Rather, his purgatorial life is
as active and dynamic as his other life because his followers are
sending salutations on him in a spirit of matchless devotion and angels
have been appointed to convey these messages of sincerity and deep
attachment to the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* . This
symphony of sound and voice, which his followers play every second and
every minute is a living proof of the blessings Allāh has conferred on
him even in his purgatorial life.

If the acts of intercession, beseeching the Prophet’s help and his
mediation were acts of disbelief, then they should be indiscriminately
pronounced as forms of disbelief everywhere; they should apply equally
to his earthly existence, purgatorial life and his life in the
Hereafter, because disbelief is condemned by Allāh in every colour and
hue. But the facts point in the opposite direction: Islamic teachings
unambiguously reveal that the Companions beseeched the Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* for help and relied on his mediation at
various occasions in their life and besought him for help and they will
also seek his help and intercession even on the Day of Judgement, and as
a result of this reliance on his means and appeal for help, the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* will reward his followers
by interceding before Allāh for their salvation. Thus, when it is valid
during the earthly life and after-life of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* how can it be declared invalid and a form of
disbelief during his purgatorial life?

### Proof of purgatorial life

###

The teachings of Qur’ān and*sunnah* prove the reality of life after
death or life in the grave as clearly as they depict the reality of
resurrection of the dead on the Day of Judgement. Allāh says in the holy
Qur’ān:

*How can you reject the faith in Allāh? Seeing that you were without
life, (and) He gave you life; then He will cause you to die and will
again bring you to life; then again to Him will you return.* [11]

The Qur’ānic verse makes an explicit reference to two kinds of death,
two kinds of life and finally the return of all mankind to Allāh on the
Day of Judgement. In the light of the holy verse, the first kind of
death was our state of non-existence when we had not stepped into the
world of existence. The life that followed this state is our life on
earth. Then death will overreach us and people will accordingly perform
our funeral rites and bury us. The life that will follow is called the
purgatorial life, which is given to man in the grave or in his capacity
as a dead person. The angels interrogate him and open a window in the
grave leading either to Paradise or Hell. After the second life, we will
be returned to God Almighty on the Day of Resurrection. Thus the
purgatorial life spans the arrival of the angels in the grave for
interrogation and the divine breath blown into the dead bodies for their
resurrection. This relates to the purgatorial life of an ordinary human
being whether he is a believer or a non-believer.

Now let us examine another verse about the life of the martyrs:

*And say not of those who are slain in the way of Allāh that they are
dead, (they are not dead) but they are living though you are not
conscious (of their life).* [12]

The same theme is expressed in different words:

*And those who are slain in the way of Allāh, do not (even) think of
them as dead. But they live in the presence of their Lord, they find
their sustenance (in the blessings of Paradise).* [13]

The followers of all religious sects believe in the life of the martyrs.
However, besides the Qur’ānic verses, a number of traditions draw our
attention to the fact that there is life after death even for the
non-believers and infidels and they are endowed with the capacity to
respond to the words of the living. For example, after the battle of
Badr, the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* himself called
the slain infidels by their names and asked them:

Surely, we found the promise of our Lord absolutely true. (O infidels
and non-believers!) Did you also find the promise of your lord true?

At this juncture ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb said to the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* : ‘O Prophet! You are addressing bodies which
have no soul in them.’ To make it clear, the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* addressed the Companions:

*I swear by the Power Who has in His control the life of Muhammad! The
words I am speaking to these (infidels and non-believers), they far
excel you in their power to listen to them.* [14]

This agreed-upon tradition attests not only to the purgatorial life
after death of the infidels and non-believers, but it also attests to
their power of listening which excels even that of the Companions.

Similarly, the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* taught
every person passing by a graveyard of the Muslims to address the
residents of the grave by the particle “y*ā* (O)” and send salutations
on them. This is the reason that Muslims teach their children to
say*as-salāmu ‘alaykum yā ahl-al-qubūr* (O residents of graves, peace be
on you) whenever they pass by a graveyard.

When the life of the infidels and non-believers, the life of the
ordinary believers, and the life of the martyrs and the saints have been
confirmed by the Qur’ān and the*sunnah* , how is it possible to deny the
life of the prophets, particularly the life of the holy Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* ? Especially, when he himself has
repeatedly and explicitly declared:

*Allāh has declared it forbidden for the earth to eat the bodies of the
prophets. So the prophets are living and they regularly receive their
sustenance.* [15]

This*sahīh* (sound) tradition conclusively proves that the absolute and
incomparable power of Allāh keeps the prophets alive in their graves.
Another tradition records that the affairs of the Ummah are regularly
presented to the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* who
expresses his gratitude to Allāh for their good deeds and prays to Allāh
to forgive their misdeeds. The words of the tradition are as follows:

Your deeds are presented to me. If they are good, I express my gratitude
to Allāh, and if the deeds are not good, then I pray to Allāh for your
forgiveness. [16]

The Lord, who has the power to give life and sustenance to the whole
mankind both in this world and the Hereafter, also has the power to keep
the prophets alive in the graves and give them sustenance. The unnatural
and unscientific Greek philosophical discussions, which have percolated
into Islamic literature, are no match to the natural and immutable
principles of Islam. The injunctions of Islam clearly explain different
kinds of life and the modes of addressing people in their purgatorial
life and declare categorically that the prophets, martyrs, saints and
ordinary Muslims, even infidels and non-believers, are alive in their
graves. As far as the martyrs are concerned, the Qur’ān itself is a
witness that they regularly receive their sustenance. Therefore, those
who acknowledge appeal for help and intermediation in the earthly
existence as valid but treat it as invalid, even as a form of disbelief
after death, should remember that death is the taste of a moment, which
passes away. According to Iqbāl, death is “a message of awakening behind
the smokescreen of dream.”

Purgatorial life is a midway house between the earthly life and the life
after death, which will be conferred on people on the Day of Judgement.
Just as it is valid to beseech the help of a person during his earthly
life and during his life after death, it is also an equally valid act to
beseech his help and to rely on his means in his purgatorial life. This
does not border on disbelief, because in all the three kinds of life,
earthly, eternal and purgatorial, Allāh is the real Helper and the
creature whose help is being sought is the derivative helper. This is in
consonance with the Islamic teaching and does not even remotely smack of
disbelief. To treat the creature as the real helper in all the three
categories of life is tantamount to disbelief. It should be noted that
the cause of disbelief is not located in the categories of life but in
the division of real and derivative.

### The life and capacity of the soul

###

After a logical and categorical proof of the reality of the purgatorial
life of human soul, it is sheer irrational stubbornness to deny the
reality of seeking help from others after their death. To beseech help
and assistance from the souls of the prophets and the saints is as
justified as to seek help from living persons or the angels. When we
seek help from a living being we are, in fact, seeking help from his
soul. The human body is the dressing of the real man - soul. After
death, when the soul is liberated from the material constraints of the
body and, on account of its freedom from impurities of the flesh, then,
like the angels, even more than them, it has the power to perform
non-material acts. The soul is independent of the rules and regulations
of the phenomenal world because her world - the world of command - is
different from the cause-and-effect world of the body. Allāh highlights
this reality in the holy Qur’ān:

And these (infidels) ask you questions about the soul. Tell them that
the soul is by the command of my Lord.[17]

The souls are blessed with a greater capacity of action and performance
in their purgatorial life than they had enjoyed in conjunction with
their bodies. They live in the world of command and can come more easily
to the assistance of those who implore them for help. If beseeching the
prophets and saints for help is confined only to a string of sensations
and observations, it will be in conflict with the spirit of faith and
merely an expression of philosophical speculation. Old philosophical
reflections cannot lead us to the secrets of faith because they operate
within entirely rational grooves and hopelessly lack the spiritual
apprehension. The unfolding of the secrets of faith requires love and
deep emotional concern. It is not just to scratch the surface but to
delve into the abyss. It may be noted that the prophets and the saints
pray to Allāh for the petitioners, and in response to their
supplication, Allāh fulfils the need of the concerned person. The
problem is that those who deny life to the residents of the graves
believe that the dead are not in a position to pray. But the true
Islamic belief is that they are alive and recognise their visitors in
proportion to their consciousness and understanding. The soul’s
awareness grows even more acute after it has been separated from the
body, and by jettisoning its physical inhibitions, it is made even more
powerful.

Another way to understand the meaning of seeking help from others is
that the power whose help is being sought is Allāh. But the petitioner
says that he covets Allāh’s help through the mediation of the holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* for the fulfilment of his
need. He implores Allāh through His favourites. He says to Allāh: ‘I am
from among the favourites of these saints, therefore, show special mercy
to me as I am very close to them and love them immensely.’ Thus Allāh
condones his sins for the sake of the holy prophets and also on account
of his close association with the saints and fulfils his need.

The people who gather to offer the funeral prayer of a person pray for
his forgiveness by Allāh on a similar basis. They, in fact, serve as a
means of forgiveness for the dead person and also act as his helpers.

### The dead as a source of benefit for the living

###

The final shot fired by these deniers of seeking help from the saints
and the pious is that the dead cannot benefit the living because they
lack the power even to shoo away a fly sitting on their body. How is it
possible that a dead person, shorn of physical power, can help the
living and that the living turn to him for help?

This hypothetical objection is actually based on their unawareness of
the Prophet’s traditions and teachings of the religious leaders. As we
have already explained, the people who die and leave this worldly life,
do not in fact die, but enter another life (purgatorial life). Though
they are dead in our eyes, they are not actually dead, only their mode
of life has changed as they have been transferred from one kind of
existence to another kind of existence.

This can be explained by another example. Suppose there are two tube
lights in a room. One of them is white and the other is blue. The light
of the white tube is spreading all around while the blue tube is off.
Now what will happen if the off-button of the white tube is pressed and
precisely at that moment the on-button of the blue tube is also pressed?
The room is the same, all the things in it are in their proper place,
its doors, windows and curtains, etc., are also intact, but there is a
change in the inner ambience of the room, that is, in the earlier state,
everything appeared in the white light in its original colour, and now
everything in the room appears to wear a different complexion on account
of the colour radiated by the blue tube. Now the question is: ‘has the
colour of everything in the room really changed? Has the material
composition of the objects changed?’ The answer is in the negative.
Every object is present in its original state. The difference lies only
in our perception. The same applies to the dead people. When the light
of their worldly life is put out, we think they are dead, while, in
reality, the tube light of their purgatorial life is put on. Just as the
saints and the pious are relied upon during their earthly life - while
the real source of help is Allāh - similarly, they can be relied upon as
a means of help to fulfil our needs and to seek the nearness of Allāh
even when they have left this material world.

Suyūtī has copied in his book*Sharh-us-sudūr bi-sharh hāl-il-mawtā
wal-qubūr* (pp.257-9) fifteen traditions bearing on this theme, and
furnishing a proof of the reality of purgatorial life, he has affirmed
that the dead can benefit the living.

Ibn-ul-Qayyim has written an exhaustive book on “the soul” which is the
most authentic book on this subject. At one place he has reported from
‘Abdullāh bin Mubārak that Abū Ayyūb al-Ansārī said:

*The deeds of the living are presented to the dead. If they see virtuous
(deeds), they are pleased and rejoiced, and if they see (evil) deeds,
they say: ‘O Allāh! Return them.’* [18]

Narrating another tradition, Ibn-ul-Qayyim writes:

“‘Ibād bin ‘Ibād called on Ibrāhīm bin Sālih and at that time Ibrāhīm
bin Sālih was the ruler of Palestine. ‘Ibād bin ‘Ibād said to him: give
me some advice. Ibrāhīm bin Sālih said:

What should I advise you? May God make you a pious man! I have received
the news that the deeds of the living are presented to their dead
relatives. Now you just reflect on your deeds which are presented to the
Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

After relating this, Ibrāhīm bin Sālih cried so bitterly that his beard
became wet.”[19]

In addition, there are many other traditions which prove that the deeds
of the living are presented to the dead. Therefore, people, who are the
victims of doubt, should study them to correct their faith which,
according to Ibn Taymiyyah, is the faith of Ahl-us-Sunnah wal-Jamā‘ah as
has already been explained, which leads one to the straight path and
brings one increasingly closer to the pleasure of the Lord. Exclusive
reliance on reason can prove disastrous as reason is a deceptive
chameleon and puts on a variety of guises to deceive its own followers;
it is totally undependable and those who rely on it for true
enlightenment, can never be blessed with guidance as misguidance is
their destiny. According to Iqbāl:

Move beyond reason because this light is only the candle on the way; it
is not the destination.

### Love of the friends of Allāh is an integral part of faith

###

We seek help from the prophets, the righteous and the saints and offer
them as a means of access to Allāh on account of our limitless love and
devotion for them. The choice of means is justified only by the presence
of love. It is also an established fact that to love those who are near
and dear to Allāh is in itself a virtuous act and this is obviously an
argument, which cannot be rebutted by any other argument, no matter how
subtle or elaborate or tantalising it may be.

#### 1. Love of Allāh’s favourites is a virtuous deed

####

The petitioner is acting for himself because he loves those whom Allāh
loves. He is in fact saying: ‘O Lord, I love Your friend, the holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , and I love the orthodox
Caliphs, the Companions, the Successors and their followers, the saints
and the righteous. I offer this love to You as means so that You grant
my prayer and fulfil my need.’ It means love of Allāh’s favoured ones
becomes a means of the supplication’s acceptance. There is no doubt that
love of Allāh’s favourites is not only the fulfilment of a divine
command but is also a great virtuous deed. It is narrated by Abū
Hurayrah:

*Allāh’s Messenger (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) said: when
Allāh loves some person, He sends for Jibrīl and commands him: verily, I
love such and such person; you should also love him, so Jibrīl loves him
as well. Then Jibrīl proclaims in the heavens that Allāh loves such and
such person; you should also love him. Then the residents of the heavens
love him as well. Then his love is sent down to the earth (the world).*
[20]

First of all, Allāh elevated His Own obedient servant to the status of
His beloved, then He commanded Jibrīl and all other angels that they
should love His servant. The angels, following the divine command, also
made him their beloved. In this all the heavenly creatures shared the
divine love for His beloved servant. But the matter does not end here.
Allāh descended this love for His servant down on this earth and then
created a niche for the love and popularity of His servant in every
heart and every creature fell in love with him. It follows that to love
those who are loved by Allāh is a divine command. From this point of
view this act of loving is in itself a virtuous act in which Allāh is
not only Himself included but He has also included His angels as well as
the creatures of the earth. When this act is endorsed not only by the
practice of the prophets but also a popular act performed by the
creatures of the earth and the heavens, then what could be a better
virtuous act in favour of the petitioner.

#### 2. Reciprocal nearness of lover and beloved on the Day of Judgement

####

True love is that virtuous act which draws the lover increasingly closer
to the beloved. It is narrated by Anas bin Mālik:

*A person called on the Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)
and said to him: ‘O Messenger of Allāh, when is the Hour (the Day of
Judgement)?’ The Holy Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
*stood up for prayer. After performing the prayer he said: ‘where is the
person who had asked about the Hour?’ That person replied: ‘O Messenger
of Allāh, I am here.’ He said: ‘what preparation have you made for that
(Hour)?’ He submitted: ‘O Messenger of Allāh, I have offered neither
many prayers nor kept many fasts, but I know that much that I love Allāh
and His Messenger (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household).’ On hearing
this, Allāh’s Messenger (Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) commented
that (on the Day of Judgement) a person will be with him whom he loves
and you will be judged along with him. It is reported that, after
accepting Islam, this made the Muslims happier than anything else had
made them in the past.* [21]

This tradition proves that whereas prayer, fast,*zakāt* and*hajj* are
virtuous acts and their performance entitles a man to a set of rewards,
similarly love is also an act of virtue, which results in nearness to
his beloved. The words of the tradition themselves endorse love as a
virtuous act. When the Holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* asked the petitioner: ‘what preparation have you made for
the Day of Judgement?’ He replied: ‘O Messenger of Allāh! My acts do not
include big-ticket deeds like prayer and fast, but the act of loving
Allāh and His Messenger*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* is one of
my deeds.’ The Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* replied
that as each act has a reward, similarly the act of loving has also a
reward. A person will be judged along with the man he loves and you will
be judged on the Day of Judgement along with the man you love.’ It means
that this man, simply on account of his love for the Holy Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* , will be judged with him. He will be in
the Prophet’s company and this is a promise made by the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* himself and this is Allāh’s promise as
well. Besides, this promise is not restrictive; it has a general
application; it applies to the Companions, the Successors, their
followers, even the entire Muslim community.

Love of Allāh’s Messenger*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* is an
act, which not only earns the lover a number of blessings through the
agency of his beloved on this earth but also brings him closer to his
beloved in the next world. Since the word*hubb* (love) here is used in a
generic sense, it equally applies to all forms and grades of love. Its
litmus test is sincerity as insincere love is a travesty of true love
and, therefore, not only repulsively hideous but also morally revolting.
This comment is vindicated by the words of Anas bin Mālik that after
accepting Islam, he had never found the Muslims happier than he found
them on hearing this explanation.

This tradition conclusively proves that the love of Allāh’s favoured
people serves as a means for divine blessings. And when the servant
prays to Allāh, he, in fact, is saying: ‘my Master, the love I have for
Your beloved Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* , and the
love I have for the Companions, the Successors and the righteous on
account of You, I offer this act of love as mediation to You and request
You to grant my such and such need for their sake.’ The servant’s love
for Allāh’s favoured ones is an act that enjoys Allāh’s blessings and
this very act becomes a means for the servant.

#### 3. Love for Allāh’s lovers is the cause of divine love

####

The servant, following the divine commands, performs all kinds of
worship: he offers prayer, keeps fast, performs*hajj* and pays*zakāt* .
In short, he fulfils all his obligations. These acts have twofold
significance: on the one hand, he is implementing the divine commands;
on the other hand, he earns the reward for these acts. The range and
scope of these rewards include a place in Paradise for him. But the
highest and the most cherished prize is the pleasure of Allāh. To secure
this prize, he spends every moment of his life in divine love. And he
does not restrict his remembrance of Allāh only to a specific schedule
or timetable but it straddles his entire life. No matter where he is, or
what he is doing, he never forgets the Lord. The focus of his love or
enmity is Allāh alone. The following tradition is about such lovers of
Allāh:

It is narrated by Mu‘ādh bin Jabal that he heard the Messenger of
Allāh*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* saying:

*Allāh the Exalted and Almighty said: ‘My love has been made obligatory
for those two persons who love each other on My count and spend time
together for My sake, and see each other for My sake and give money to
each other generously for My sake.’* [22]

Now a petitioner loves the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* , members of the Prophet’s family, the Companions, the
saints and the righteous people simply because the basis of his love is
the love of Allāh. By loving these people, he himself in return is loved
by Allāh. Thus all these forms are various links in the chain of love,
which is ultimately the love of Allāh, and these expressions and acts of
love eventually draw him closer to Allāh and he acquires a favoured
status. Thus the petitioner’s act of love is regarded by Allāh as a
virtuous as well as a favourite act and it is graded higher than other
virtuous acts mainly because in this act the Lord Himself is one of the
participants and it is uncertain whether the other acts will find divine
acceptance or not. But love of the saints and the favourites of Allāh is
an act, which transforms the petitioner into Allāh’s beloved. In this
way its acceptance is guaranteed.

#### 4. Love for the sake of Allāh results in higher grades

####

Love of the servants of Allāh brings one not only nearer to Him but also
helps one in securing higher grades.

It is narrated by ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb that the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon
Him and His Household)* said:

*Among Allāh’s servants there are some who are neither prophets nor
martyrs but on the Day of Judgement the prophets and the martyrs will
envy their grades. The Companions asked: ‘O Messenger of Allāh, tell us,
who are those people?’ He replied: ‘those are the people who love one
another on Allāh’s count. They are neither related to one another nor do
they have any property to exchange. I swear on Allāh that they will have
faces of light, they will be on pulpits of light. They will not have any
fear when others will be afraid, they will not have any grief when
others will be aggrieved.’ Then he recited the verse: Beware! No doubt,
there is no fear for the friends of Allāh nor shall they be sad and
sorrowful. [Qur’ān (* Yūnus, *Jonah) 10:62.]* [23]

The tradition has clearly established the fact that people who love one
another simply because they love Allāh deserve high rewards and grades
on the Day of Judgement and they will receive these precious gifts
through the mediation of Allāh’s favourites because their love of these
intimate friends is based fundamentally on their love of Allāh from
which basic source it draws its strength and influence.

#### 5. Love of Allāh’s friends is the cause of Allāh’s love

####

Love of holy men and saints is an act which earns the servant not only
the love of Allāh but also draws him closer to Him.

It is reported by Abū Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allāh*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said:

*If two persons love each other on Allāh’s count, and if one of them is
in the east and the other in the west, Allāh will bring them together on
the Day of Resurrection and He will say: ‘this is the man you loved on
my count.’* [24]

It is now established that intermediation through the prophets, the holy
persons and the saints and to seek help from them is quite valid whether
it is by invoking their name in prayer, or by physical presence in their
companionship or through expressions of love for them. These acts
of*istighāathah* and intermediation are correct and legally permissible.


