Chapter 4: Smoothing out the Wrinkles
=====================================

Though beseeching the prophets, the saints and the martyrs for help and
assistance is quite appropriate and is proved both by Qur’ān and
the*sunnah* , some of its denigrators have castigated it as an act of
disbelief on the basis of self-concocted reasons. In this chapter we
propose to review these objections one by one and rebut them on the
basis of proofs furnished by the Qur’ān and the traditions.

First objection: Appeal for help is in itself an act of worship
---------------------------------------------------------------

In order to declare appeal for help to someone other than Allāh as a
form of disbelief, they, first of all, identify it with worship. Since
it is an act of disbelief to worship anyone except Allāh, therefore, to
appeal to someone except Allāh for help and assistance is a kind of
disbelief. They put forward a battery of arguments to prove their
contention:

*Rather, who is the one who grants the supplication of a person in
distress when he calls Him and relieves the trouble?[1]*

*And those whom these (polytheists) worship besides Allāh can create
nothing and have themselves been created. (They) are dead, lifeless, and
they do not know (even this much) as when (people) will be raised up.
[2]*

*And those you invoke besides Him, their power is even lesser than the
skin of a date-stone. Even if you invoke them, they will not be able to
listen to your call, and if (as a supposition) they do listen, they
cannot answer your call and on the Day of Judgement they will deny your
partnership, and will not tell you any news like the One Who is
acquainted with all things. [3]*

*And who is more astray than the one who invokes, besides God, such
(gods) as will not answer him to the Day of Judgement and who in fact
are unconscious of their call. [4]*

*That (person) calls on such deities, besides God, as can neither hurt
nor profit him.[5]*

*Nor worship besides Allāh any (idols): such will neither profit you nor
hurt you. Then if you did so, you will certainly be among those who do
wrong. And if God hurts you, there is none except Him who can remove
it.[6]*

*He worships him whose hurt is nearer than his profit.[7]*

They rely on these Qur’ānic verses and assert that anyone who invokes
any other person besides Allāh should be condemned. They argue on this
basis that invoking help and seeking assistance is reserved only for
Allāh. Therefore, any appeal for help to anyone else besides him is a
form of disbelief. This kind of reasoning is actually based on
misconception and perverse logic. In the following pages an attempt is
made to pick out flaws in this mode of reasoning and to present a sound
and clear picture of the true position.

Each appeal for help is not an act of worship
---------------------------------------------

In these Qur’ānic verses the word*du‘ā’* has been used in the sense of
worship. But the holy Qur’ān does not interpret the word*du‘ā’* as
worship in all contexts, otherwise minds which have gone astray will not
refrain from casting stones even on the prophets and will marshal
assorted evidence in a futile effort to prove their point of view. Allāh
says in the holy Qur’ān:

*Say: Come! Let us call (together) our sons and your sons. [8]*

*Then (after a little while) a (girl) out of the two came to him who was
walking with modesty. She said: ‘my father is calling you to remunerate
you for the (labour) you have done for us by feeding water (to) our
(goats).’[9]*

*Then (after slaughtering them), put a portion of them on every hill and
call to them, they will come to you with speed.[10]*

*When we shall call together all factions of human beings with their
leaders.[11]*

The comments made by ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Abbās on this Qur’ānic verse are as
follows:

*Here the leader or Imām means the person whose invitation the people
have followed, whether this invitation leads them to evil or guidance.*
[12]

It means that each community will gather around its leader whose
commands it followed during its earthly sojourn and Allāh will call them
by this specific label: ‘O followers of such and such leader, your fate
will be decided along with him.’

In short, if we interpret the word*du‘ā’* in these verses as worship, we
are more likely to open the window of disbelief rather than close it.
Therefore it seems logical to conclude that if the word*du‘ā’* is linked
with an infidel or a non-believer, it will mean an act of worship,
otherwise its meaning will change with the change of context. In the
verses cited against the justification of appeal for help as arguments
the word*du‘ā’* is directed at the infidels, therefore, in these
situations it will mean an act of worship, but they do not
disacknowledge the validity of appeal for help because the favourites of
Allāh whose help is being sought are not entitled to be worshipped.

Second objection: Appeal for help is a form of disbelief in supernatural matters
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This objection is based on a particular division. Mattes are generally
divided into two categories on the basis of causes:

Ordinary matters

Extraordinary matters

According to this division, it is valid to seek the help of others in
ordinary matters because they fall under natural causes but it is
invalid in extraordinary matters because they fall under supernatural
causes and therefore is a form of disbelief. Matters of cause-and-effect
are generally handled on this level, but if this pattern is discarded
and appeal is made through other causes, it is called appeal for help
through supernatural causes, and if reliance is made only on
cause-and-effect, it is called appeal for help through natural causes.
The means for help adopted in this case are generally compatible with
the matters for whom help is being implored. It should be kept in mind
that in their opinion it is appeal for help through natural causes to
cooperate with one another in worldly matters, and therefore it is a
valid act as Allāh says:

*And help one another in (acts of) righteousness and piety.* [13]

Though they treat appeal for help through natural causes in ordinary
matters as a valid act, they deny its validity in extraordinary matters.

Intellectual settlement of the objection
----------------------------------------

**First point** : The division into appeal for help through natural and
supernatural causes (relating to ordinary and extraordinary matters)
declares the latter as an invalid act, while the holy Qur’ān makes no
reference to this distinction tending to justify one and condemn the
other. This is a self-fabricated division and is the result of specious
logic and flawed reasoning. No Qur’ānic verse can be cited to support
this division.

We should also keep in mind that extraordinary matters are engineered by
factors which can be explained by some level of reasoning. But, with the
exception of*kun fayakūn* (be! and it is) no event is motivated by
supernatural causes. Since the causes of some phenomena are not
apparently known to us, we tend to explain them through supernatural
causes.

**Second point** : The verse in*sūrah* *al-Fātihah* , which is regarded
as the fundamental link in their reasoning, makes no mention of the
causes under which this division has been forged, while the words*iyyāka
nasta’īnu* (we seek help only from You) are being used in the absolute
sense. The rule is that the absolute has a continuous sway in its area
of application, that is, the absolute cannot tolerate any fluctuation in
its range of reference. This is what fundamentally differentiates the
absolute from the relative, the real from the contingent, the
categorical from the conditional. Therefore we cannot clamp on it
self-invented meanings. We cannot say: ‘O Allāh! We seek Your help only
in extraordinary or supernatural matters because no one else except You
can help us in these matters. As far as ordinary or worldly matters are
concerned, we have no need to seek Your help because there are countless
other sources which could be tapped for the acquisition of help.’ A
division on these lines is nothing but a reflection of their lack of
knowledge and stupidity and is a one-way ticket to disbelief. Thus their
own perverse reasoning boomerangs on them; they themselves are guilty of
the disbelief of which they have accused others.

**Third point** : All division and classification presuppose
differentiation. But the question is that in the case of*iyyāka
nasta‘īnu* there is no need for such differentiation as the absolute is
categorical and indivisible. Any effort to divide it is
self-frustrating. They have divided it despite the glaringly obvious
fact that it is both unjustified and unwarranted. Besides, it clearly
reveals that their own thesis is marked by an inherent contradiction as
they justify appeal for help through natural causes while denying it
through supernatural causes. It is, in fact, nothing but a highly
distorted reflection of their own squint-eyed vision. The division can
be vindicated only if we think of the dichotomy in terms of real help
and derivative help, which in reality, amounts to no division. If all
help derives from the absolute, then the power of the derivative source
of help is only contingent, and it acquires substance only through the
willingness of the real helper. Thus the only sensible way is in terms
of real and derivative and not whether one kind of appeal for help is
justified and the other is unjustified.

In the words of *iyyāka nasta‘īnu* the creature is imploring Allāh. He
is, in fact, saying: ‘O Allāh! No matter which external source we tap
for the relief of our immediate need, we do not regard this source of
relief and help as the real helper. We treat only You as the true and
real Helper because, if Your support and willingness is lacking and if
Your consent is missing, no one else has the power to help us out of our
trouble.’ This is the unwavering core of our faith whether we are
recovering through the medicine of a doctor or through the supplication
of a saint; we do not consider them the real helpers. Therefore in any
case and under all circumstances, Allāh alone is our real Helper because
the assistance of all others is predicative, that is, it is predicated
only on Allāh’s pleasure and willingness. For us both the medicine and
the supplication, the doctor and the saint, are only means and this is
their only significance because Allāh alone is the real Helper.

**Fourth point** : In some cases, however, it appeals to our common
sense to uphold the division between natural causes and supernatural
causes, and its relevance is found only in terms of their application
and not on the basis of their inherent differentiation. Some acts are
resolved by natural means while a supernatural solution has to be
explored for other acts. The causes are present in both cases. The only
difference is that in the case of natural acts, the causes are visible
while in the case of supernatural acts the causes are generally
invisible. The natural causes may be called external and material while
the supernatural causes may be called internal and spiritual, and this
classification sounds more appropriate. Though material causes are
discarded in the case of supernatural acts, their presence, however,
cannot be denied. It means that acts are not supernatural in the
absolute sense. The only difference is that the causes of natural acts
are external which are visible to the common man or perceivable by him,
while the causes of supernatural acts, on account of their non-material
complexion, are not visible to the common eye.

When the prophets, the saints, the pious people or any other individual
is implored for help within the scope of the world of cause-and-effect,
the words used as a means of help will possess real meaning but even in
this case the real helper will be Allāh alone. But when help is being
implored in a world beyond cause-and-effect, the words used for help
will have only derivative value because even in this situation the real
helper is Allāh alone, that is, in both cases, the real meaning is
lacking. The only difference is that the use of words in the natural
context was based on fact while in the supernatural context, the
entertainment of real meaning was objectionable, therefore, the word
itself was shorn of real meaning. In short, both in terms of semantics
and faith, the word real is exclusively reserved for Allāh.

Division between real and derivative is inevitable
--------------------------------------------------

A group, who denies the relevance of beseeching help from any quarter
besides Allāh, however, believes that it is valid in natural matters,
while there is no need to stress its real and derivative components. Now
we would like to ask these people that if appeal for help through
natural means and the division between the real and the derivative is
disacknowledged, then who will be the real helper in natural matters? Is
the real helper the doctor who is prescribing medical treatment for the
patient or Allāh? If the answer is that even in worldly affairs the real
helper is Allāh, then why should we retain the distinction between the
natural and the supernatural means or sources of help? Why should it be
allowed through the operation of natural causes and declared a kind of
disbelief when it operates through supernatural causes? How is it
possible to resolve the contradiction between belief in Allāh as the
true helper and seeking help from others besides Allāh, without
acknowledging the distinction between the real and the derivative? The
Qur’ān says:

*And our Lord is infinitely Merciful and His help alone is sought
against the (vexing) words (O non-believers,) you utter.* [14]

On the other hand, if the answer is that in ordinary matters the true
helper is not Allāh but man, it creates duality, which is a negation of
belief that the helper in ordinary matters is the creature but the
helper in extraordinary matters is the Creator. On the basis of this
duality, if we admit the creature as the true helper, it will amount to
the same kind of disbelief as was practised by the infidels of Makkah
that in ordinary affairs they relied on men as helpers and in other
affairs beseeched Allāh for help. If it is admitted that Allāh is also
the Helper in worldly affairs, then how is it correct to seek the help
of someone who is not-God.

The conclusive argument is that Allāh is the only Helper even in
ordinary matters, and help from the creatures is implored only in the
derivative sense, not in the real sense - then the question arises if
beseeching others for help besides Allāh in ordinary matters is valid
where it is only derivative, then how can it be declared invalid in
extraordinary matters where its derivative status is established beyond
doubt. The contradiction is simply incomprehensible.

Justification of help from derivative source in supernatural matters
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Reliance on the derivative source of help in supernatural matters is
justified in the sense that, though apparently, the source is other than
God, actually it is God whose help is being coveted. In addition, the
word help is used in its derivative sense at many places in the Holy
Qur’ān. The frequency with which it is used is amazing. In the following
pages, a few examples from the Qur’ān will be given to wash out the
misconception in the minds of the believers and to bring home to them
the dire consequences if the distinction between the real and the
derivative is blotted out:

### Allegation of disbelief against Jibrīl(Peace Be Upon Him)?

###

When Jibrīl*(Peace Be Upon Him)* , with Allāh’s consent, appeared before
Maryam (Mary) in the shape of a human being to convey to her the news of
the birth of ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* , he said:

*I have only been sent by your Lord. (I have come because) I should
bless you with a pure son.* [15]

In this Qur’ānic verse the statement by Jibrīl*(Peace Be Upon Him)*
borders on the supernatural because the birth of a son without marital
consummation is impossible in the world of cause-and-effect, and, to
convey the news of the birth of a son to a chaste, unmarried woman is a
graphic Qur’ānic illustration of help in supernatural matters, which is
simply inconceivable without the interpolation of material causes.

The point to be noted is that if a person beseeches a saint or one of
Allāh’s favourites for help only as a means, some of our ignorant
friends instantly clamp on him the allegation of disbelief, while if
some non-God - Jibrīl*(Peace Be Upon Him)* - says, “I bless you with a
pure son,” and Allāh Himself mentions it in the holy Qur’ān, why don’t
they call it disbelief because both situations are substantially
identical? In the case of beseeching help the petitioner is essentially
a human being and remains so under all the circumstances, but the
statement “I bless you with a pure son” is an encroachment on the divine
powers if it is not interpreted derivatively; if it is interpreted in
the real sense, then the angel acquires the status of God which is
nothing but disbelief. To bless someone with a child is a divine act and
the duty of a creature is only to seek His blessing. If a person’s act
of beseeching help from non-Allāh is an act of disbelief, then the
statement by a non-Allāh that “I bless you with a pure son” amounts to
even a higher form of disbelief. The question is that Jibrīl*(Peace Be
Upon Him)* did not commit disbelief despite his statement apparently
bordering on disbelief; rather his statement proved truthful. Then how
could we vindicate his statement that apparently seemed to defy the
powers of divinity, as nobody has dared call him (may God forbid) a
disbeliever?

Though the statement, “I bless you with a pure son,” apparently belongs
to Jibrīl *(Peace Be Upon Him)* , but the “son” actually refers to the
son Allāh is about to bless her with, and the angel is only a cause, a
means for the act which is, in essence, divine. Thus the Qur’ānic verse
(19:19) embodies only an act of help which is really an act of
intermediation only and is a superb example of derivative help furnished
by the Qur’ān itself.

Some people raise objection against the translation of the verse. They
opine that the subject of the verb*li-ahaba* (I should bless) is Allāh
Himself and Jibrīl*(Peace Be Upon Him)* said it reportedly. While in
another recitation of the verse the verb is*li-yahaba* (He (Allāh)
should bless).

The deniers accept these two translations because they cater to their
temperament and pamper their mood. And they reject the preferred one
that is in the holy Qur’ān and recited accordingly. So what hindrance
remains there to accept the preponderant recitation and meaning of the
verse that has also been narrated by the exegetes of great repute? The
same meaning that we narrated is printed in the translation of the holy
Qur’ān in Urdu published by Shāh Fahad Qur’ān Karīm Complex, Saudi
Arabia.

### Allegation of disbelief against ‘Īsā(Peace Be Upon Him)?

###

When ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* articulated the divine truth publicly and
tried to invite the members of his community to divine unity and
dissuade them from committing disbelief, he showed a number of miracles
to them. His invitation has been phrased in the holy Qur’ān in these
words:

*Surely, I have come to you, with a sign from your Lord that I make for
you, out of clay, the (figure of a) bird, and breathe into it and it
becomes instantly a flying bird by God’s leave. And I heal those born
blind, and the lepers, and I quicken the dead by God’s leave, and I
declare to you (all) that you eat, and that you store in your houses.
Surely in that there is a sign for you if you are believers.* [16]

This Qur’ānic verse relates five miracles performed by ‘Īsā*(Peace Be
Upon Him)* :

to make a flying bird out of clay

to heal a person who is born blind

to heal leprosy

to quicken the dead

to reveal news from the unseen

Allāh had blessed ‘Īsā *(Peace Be Upon Him)* with five miracles which he
used to openly declare his faith and which have been endorsed by God
Himself in the Holy Qur’ān. In this Qur’ānic verse, ‘Īsā *(Peace Be Upon
Him)* says: ‘I have come to you, with a sign from your Lord that I make
for you, out of clay, the (figure of a) bird.’ The word *akhluqu* (I
create) has been used instead of the word *aj‘alu* (I make). A little
reflection will show you that the whole debate revolves around the
distinction between real and derivative, the power that is
self-generated and the power that is generated by the other’s will, the
non-contingent and the contingent.

In this Qur’ānic verse, the real helper is not ‘Īsā *(Peace Be Upon
Him)* , but Allāh Himself. The debate is, in fact, verbal because the
words have been used not in their essential meaning, but only in their
borrowed sense. Though the mode of address is vocative, the real Helper
is Allāh Himself and what the Prophet *(Peace Be Upon Him)* is
performing has the divine sanction behind it. This is a fine example of
the verbal distinction between the real and the non-real furnished by
the Qur’ān.

One can say that the entire episode relates to the miracle performed by
‘Īsā *(Peace Be Upon Him)* and a miracle is irrelevant to a discussion
of appeal for help. The simple answer is that “the miracle is the
healing of the sick and not the arrogation of divine powers to himself.”
The fact is that the supernatural acts performed by the Prophet *(Peace
Be Upon Him)* possess only a derivative meaning because both disease and
its recovery are from Allāh. When it is an immutable fact that Allāh
alone heals a leper and a person who is born blind, then why did Īsā
*(Peace Be Upon Him)* say, “I heal.” In principle, he should have said
that ‘though I cast my hand over a leper and a blind person, I do not
heal them; it is, in fact, Allāh who heals them.’ It would not have
reduced the impact of the miracle in any sense but he only derivatively
arrogated it to himself.

The fourth statement he made was “And I quicken the dead, by God’s
leave.” This is really an extreme case. He is not saying: ‘you bring a
dead person, then I shall pray to Allāh and He, on account of my prayer,
shall bring him to life.’ But he said, “I bring the dead to life by
God’s leave.” It means that the use of words and the specific mode of
address are only derivatively attributed to the creature, and not in the
real sense. It is quite valid in the case of ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)*
because it is being used only in a reflective sense through the
words*bi-idhn Allāh* (by God’s leave) he is declaring only Allāh as the
true Helper.

The fifth statement made by him says, “And I declare to you (all) that
you eat, and that you store in your houses.” He does not say that he is
doing so because he has been informed by God; on the other hand, he
says, “I give you the news.” These words clearly embody an aspect of
knowledge of the unseen because information about what someone has eaten
falls within the realm of the unseen and is known to Allāh alone.
‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* does not say, “God informs me,” though the
fact is that it is Allāh Who is informing him but he has not expressed
it in his words and has only derivatively attributed it to himself which
clearly reveals that the knowledge of the unseen can be derivatively
claimed by non-Allāh, and it is valid otherwise a Messenger of Allāh
would never have committed such an act.

The statement publicly made by ‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* must border on
disbelief in the eyes of our modern scholars who do not tire of
trumpeting their faith in divine unity. Such a mode of thinking will not
even exempt the prophets from the stigma of disbelief. No sane believer
will subscribe to their distorted point of view because to accuse the
prophets of disbelief is in itself a kind of disbelief. Therefore, this
trend of speculation may prove hazardous for the entire world of Islam
as it will not even spare the prophets who devoted their lives to win
Allāh’s pleasure and favour.

### Allegation of disbelief against Allāh?

###

The specific verse of*sūrah* *Āl ‘Imrān* records the words uttered by
‘Īsā*(Peace Be Upon Him)* , “I bring the dead to life by God’s leave and
I breathe life into the figures of birds made out of clay, etc,” but in
the following verse, Allāh Himself is supporting his words:

*And when you, by My leave, made (the figure) like that of a bird out of
kneaded clay.* [17]

Allāh has not declared: ‘O ‘Īsā! I made for you birds of clay and
brought them to life, for you I gave sight to the persons born blind and
healed the lepers.’ Allāh could have done so for the sake of His
favourites because He knew that nothing could shake them in their belief
in Him.

It is an admitted fact that breathing life into something and making it
alive is exclusively an act of the Creator of the universe. But for ‘Īsā
*(Peace Be Upon Him)* He Himself declared:

*Then you breathed into it, so (the figure) became a bird by My leave,
and when you healed the persons born blind and the lepers by My leave,
and when you by My leave made the dead (alive by) taking them out (of
their graves and) made them (stand up).* [18]

The verse makes it clear that these words are only derivatively applied
to non-Allāh and this mode of application is valid. These words were
uttered by Allāh Himself and were also used by the prophets though there
was no compulsion for them to make use of such words. Their derivative
use in the Holy Qur’ān by Allāh is not only the greatest justification
of their delegated meaning but is also an attestation of their validity.

This discussion also furnishes a specific code for internal and external
causes, that is, in supernatural causes, even though the words are
directly attributed to the creature, the real driving force behind these
words is Allāh Himself because He is the only real Helper and supporter.

Third objection: Beseeching someone other than God for help smacks of his invisible power
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Beseeching someone other than God is a form of disbelief because to seek
help from a remote distance falls under supernatural causes, and this is
the third reason in their armoury of arguments. Since the person whose
help is being implored appears to be at an invisible distance, we invest
him with supernatural power, which is only Allāh’s prerogative. Through
this act, we also invest him with absolute power. Since only Allāh
possesses absolute power, it is a form of disbelief to invest not-God
with such power. This, in fact, amounts to creating partners for Allāh,
which is a glaring negation of divine unity and therefore, in conflict
with the most fundamental article of our faith which proclaims divine
indivisibility.

Rebuttal of the self-concocted belief
-------------------------------------

Self-concocted theories make the confusion worse confounded and
therefore, ask for their instant elimination. This is entirely wrong
that such persons possess power of the unseen. It is, in fact, a kind of
spiritual quality, which Allāh confers on His chosen creatures. To call
this spiritual power, which Allāh Himself has given to His special
people, absolute is to create discord among the believers. Besides, even
the non-believers seem to possess this kind of power and this does not
transform them into godheads. If the non-believers can claim this
virtue, why should the believers be deprived of its benefit who have a
greater claim on Allāh’s favours. The reference to internet, which is
the latest symbol of modern scientific progress, seems to be the most
appropriate way to illustrate our point. In this scientific world of
material progress, where the human concept of a global village has now
become a reality, distances have shrunk in the computer world. The
internet has reduced the world to the level of a grain of rye. The state
of progress allows man to sit in a closed room and to be in touch with
the latest developments in the outside world. The question arises: ‘do
the internet and the computers linked with it possess the power of the
unseen?’ This reveals the fundamental contradiction in their line of
reasoning. They do not label the computers and their mode of work as a
form of disbelief, but it is difficult for them to swallow the
operations of the spiritual power, which Allāh has given to His
favourite people, and they dub it unashamedly as a form of disbelief. If
the outcome of scientific progress has made the impossible as possible
and given birth to instant communication where an event happening in one
corner of the world is instantly splashed across the whole world, and it
does not clash with the concept of divine unity, then how can an
expression and manifestation of spiritual causes be tagged as a kind of
disbelief. If the inventions of the disbelievers and the infidels, and
the invisible powers they seem to project, do not amount to disbelief,
then why should the spiritual powers enjoyed through divine consent by
the prophets, the pious and the saints be equated with disbelief. This,
in fact, is the highest form of perversion. We do not denigrate the
modern inventions and the power with which they have invested mankind,
but they are no match for the spiritual power and enlightenment with
which Allāh has blessed His own favourites; the prophets, the saints and
the righteous. This spiritual power has been expressed by Shaykh
‘Abd-ul-Qādir Jīlānī in these words:

*I see all the countries of Allāh simultaneously as if they are like a
grain of rye on my palm (in my eye).* [19]

Some people suffer from the doubt that when we call someone from a
distance, it means that the one who is being called knows who the caller
is, that is, he, in fact, knows the caller very well. On this basis, he
seems to possess knowledge of the unseen, and since knowledge of the
unseen also implies absolute power, therefore, on account of these two
ingredients, it is a kind of disbelief as well as an illegal act. The
answer to this perverse reasoning is quite simple. In this age of
scientific progress, both these aspects are present in the human
knowledge derived from modern inventions, while Qur’ān, the Word of God,
has already anticipated and confirmed it, but being divine in origin, it
is free from all pollution. The Qur’ān carries information about remote
knowledge and the power over acts and phenomena. Sulaymān *(Peace Be
Upon Him)* said during the dialogue with his courtiers:

*You chiefs! Which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me
in submission.* [20]

The throne of queen Balqīs was at a distance of 900 miles from
Sulaymān’s court which none of the courtiers had seen. In spite of it,
none of them asked him: ‘O Prophet, the throne is at a distance of
hundreds of miles, placed behind an invisible curtain and you are
demanding that it should be brought to you immediately. Do you entertain
the belief on our behalf that we, sitting here, possess knowledge of
remote objects?’

Can creatures have remote knowledge?
------------------------------------

If Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon Him)* had believed that his courtiers had no
knowledge of the location of the throne placed at a distance of 900
miles and of carrying it over such a vast distance, he would never have
asked who would bring it. On the contrary, he would have implored Allāh:
‘O Allāh! Send to me the throne of queen Balqīs because You are the only
one who possesses absolute power.’

In short, we learn from the Qur’ān that knowledge of distant objects
does not constitute disbelief. Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon Him)* did not
commit disbelief because he was exercising the invisible powers
delegated to him by Allāh Himself. Similarly, if the present-day Muslims
adopt the belief that ‘Alī Hujwīrī, ‘Abd-ul-Qādir Jīlānī, Sultān Bāhū
and the other saints and virtuous people know us and possess the
God-given power to help us out of our problems, they cannot be guilty of
perpetrating an act of disbelief and are not out of the fold of Islam.
Just as it was not disbelief in the case of Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon
Him)* , similarly, it is absolutely valid in their case, because the
saints are as divinely inspired as were the courtiers of Sulaymān*(Peace
Be Upon Him)* , more particularly Āsif bin Barakhyā. In both cases,
these special people are blessed by Allāh to possess these powers, and
the exercise of these powers is divinely sanctioned. When Allāh alone
has the absolute power, His laws are eternal and cannot be modified by
the vagaries of time and space or selectively applied on the basis of
individual fluctuation or change in circumstances. If they were applied
in the past, they can be applied even now. If they did not constitute
disbelief during the time of Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon Him)* , how can
they do so in the modern times? Human power wavers but God’s power is
absolute.

### ‘Umar Fārūq’s inspiration

###

The unknown is revealed to the chosen people of Allāh whom He has
invested with special spiritual powers. It was a proof of these
spiritual benefits that the Companions directly groomed by the holy
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* himself could issue
instructions directly to their commanders in the battlefield over a
distance of thousands of miles without using material means. Once, the
Islamic army was arrayed in battle against their enemies under the
command of Sāriyah bin Jabal. The enemy made a clever tactical move and
the Islamic forces were completely besieged by them. Precisely at that
time, ‘Umar Fārūq was delivering the Friday sermon from the pulpit at
Medina. On account of his spiritual concentration, the battle scenario
was right before his eyes. During the sermon, he proclaimed loudly:

*O Sāriyah! Go behind the mountain!* [21]

After saying this, he resumed delivering the sermon. He was performing
two acts simultaneously: he was delivering the Friday sermon at the
Prophet’s Mosque, and at the same time he was directly issuing
instructions to his commander at the battlefield. He neither possessed
the radar system nor the mobile phone, which could inform him about the
events at the battlefield. It was a miracle of the spiritual power Allāh
had blessed him with, which helped his inner eye to survey all that was
happening at such a vast distance. Sāriyah bin Jabal actually received
the message from ‘Umar Fārūq and immediately led his force behind the
mountain and achieved victory over the enemy. The enemy attack fizzled
out, and when the Islamic forces hit back, the enemy was trounced.

### Difference between spiritual inspiration and knowledge of the unseen

###

Another misconception needs to be removed which tends to confuse
inspiration with invisible knowledge. The two phenomena are, in fact,
poles apart. As opposed to knowledge of the unseen, divine inspiration
is a kind of revelation; it means to unravel something that is
concealed; it is a curtain-raiser as it lifts the curtain on something
that is hidden, and it applies only to the creatures. Allāh transcends
these reservations as He embodies in Himself the knowledge of the
unseen. Since nothing is hidden from Him, the question of raising the
curtain or lifting the veil does not arise in His case. It is the
prerogative of the saints of Allāh, which He Himself has awarded to
them. It is by virtue of this power that the secrets of hidden things
are revealed to them and this knowledge does not amount to disbelief
because it comes about in exercise of the power conferred on them by
Allāh Himself. The curtain is raised on hidden things for the saints and
Allāh lifts their veils and this strikes the saints with the force of
revelation. Here the two powers merge: the direct and original power of
Allāh and the indirect and reflected power of the saint, but the merger
cannot be willed by the saint as it can be sanctioned by Allāh alone.
This is what the concept of divine unity boils down to. The allegation
of disbelief can be justified only if we arrogate the attributes of
Allāh to not-Allāh. There is nothing in the depths of the earth and the
immensities of the heavens that is hidden to Allāh. He knows everything
that is unknown to His creatures, and He knows all that is revealed to
them too. The Lord says:

*Surely, there is nothing on the earth and in the heavens that is hidden
to Allāh!* [22]

This Qur’ānic verse expressly states that to attribute inspiration to
Allāh who is the source of all inspiration is to limit the divine powers
and to confine knowledge of the unseen within narrow grooves, which
certainly violates the concept of divine unity because*kashf* means to
unravel what is hidden while nothing is hidden to Allāh. Since things
are concealed to human beings, Allāh conferred on His chosen people, as
a mark of their distinction, the power of inspiration, which revealed to
them the near and distant objects. [For a detailed study of the unseen,
please refer to our Urdu book*‘Aqīdah ‘ilm ghayb* (Doctrine of the
Knowledge of the Unseen).]

The Prophet’s question is an argument for the power of the questioned
---------------------------------------------------------------------

In the event related in the holy Qur’ān, Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon Him)*
had conveyed his wish to the courtiers to bring to him the throne of
queen Balqīs, and qualified it by the condition “before they come to me
in submission.” Queen Balqīs and a number of other people along with her
had already set out to visit Sulaymān’s court with a view to embracing
Islam, but he was insisting that the throne must be brought to him
before their arrival.

If Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon Him)* had not possessed the belief in the
knowledge of distant things for not-Allāh and the requisite power to
transform this knowledge into reality, he would never have asked such a
question. The courtiers would also have spoken out: ‘O Prophet! How is
it possible for the creatures to perform such an act? You turn to Allāh
and beseech Him for help as He alone has the power over this
supernatural matter.’ But none of the courtiers dared ask the question,
but in response to the question, one of the jinns stood up and said:

*I can bring it to you before you rise from your place and indeed I am
powerful (to bring) it (and) I am trustworthy.* [23]

It may also be noted here, how can something that is valid for the
jinns, turn into an article of disbelief for the favourite people of
Allāh who constantly bow before Him. Disbelief is actually predicated on
those attributes and qualities specifically associated with Allāh and
are not available to others. It will be disbelief only if they attribute
to themselves these specific divine qualities which is obviously
inconceivable for a true believer because it is equivalent to a negation
of their faith.

Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon Him)* did not accept the offer made by that
jinn. Then one among the men stood up who possessed knowledge of the
Book. He was among the knowledgeable and the spiritualists. He said to
Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon Him)* while standing:

*I can bring it to you before your eye returns to you (this is, in the
twinkling of an eye), then when (Sulaymān) found that (throne) placed
before him, he said: ‘this is by the grace of my Lord.’* [24]

The denigrators say that Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon Him)* was the person
who brought the throne. While the celebrated and well-known view is that
it was his writer or minister who brought the throne to Sulaymān*(Peace
Be Upon Him)* and his name was Āsif bin Barakhyā.

Imām Qurtubī writes:

*Most exegetes agree upon it that surely the person who had the
knowledge of the Book was Āsif bin Barakhyā, and he was truthful. He
knew Allāh’s* ism-ul-a‘zam *(exalted name) that whenever he was asked
for something he gave through it and whenever he was called he answered
through it. And ‘Ā’ishah narrated: the Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household) said, “* Ism-ul-a‘zam *of Almighty Allāh through which
Āsif bin Barakhyā prayd is* yā hayy *(O, the Living!)* yā qayyūm *(O,
the Self-Subsistent!).”* [25]

Imām Ibn Kathīr, while commenting on the verse (27:40) writes:

*Ibn ‘Abbās said, “And he was Āsif, the writer of Sulaymān (Peace Be
Upon Him).” And similarly Muhammad bin Ishāq narrated through Yazīd bin
Rūmān, “Certainly he was Āsif bin Barakhyā, and he was truthful and
knew* ism-ul-a‘zam *.” And Qatādah said, “He was a believer from human
beings and his name was Āsif.” Similarly, Abū Sālih, Dahhāk, and Qatādah
said that he was a human being. Qatādah added that he belonged to Banī
Israel. Mujāhid said, “His name was Ustūm.” And Qatādah said in another
tradition that his name was Balīkhā. And Zuhayr bin Muhammad said, “He
was a man from human being and called Dhū an-Nūr.” And ‘Abdullāh bin
Lahī‘ah supposes that he was Khadir (Peace Be Upon Him) but this
(assumption) is extremely unfamiliar.* [26]

Ibn Kathīr mentioned the topic in his*al-Bidāyah wan-nihāyah* (1:472)
and said:

*“The well-known fact is that he was Āsif bin Barakhyā and he was the
cousin of Sulaymān (Peace Be Upon Him)* . *And it is also said that he
was a jinn believer as it is said about him that he knew ism-ul-a‘zam.
And it is said that he was a scholarly man from Banī Israel and it is
also said that he was Sulaymān (Peace Be Upon Him)* , *but this is
extremely unfamiliar. And Suhaylī weakened this statement because it is
not according to the context.”*

Ibn ‘Abbās narrated the same point in*Tanwīr-ul-miqbās* (p.318).[27]

The Qur’ānic verse furnishes a contrastive study of two kinds of
creatures: on the one hand are the jinns who pride in their
extraordinary power, on the basis of which he expresses his sense of
determination to bring to him the throne placed at a distance of
hundreds of miles before the rising of the council; and on the other
hand is being described the glory and nature of the man of Allāh who
possesses the power to perform this job in the blinking of an eye. In
this situation, Sulaymān*(Peace Be Upon Him)* speaks up:

*So that He should test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful, and
whosoever expressed gratitude (to Allāh), so he offers gratitude for his
personal benefit, and whosoever was ungrateful, then my Lord is
All-Transcending, Merciful.* [28]

Their goony explanation of the unseen sometimes takes on a different
configuration. They say that it is not valid to demand from a creature
the performance of an act which is beyond his creaturely status. In
order to justify their contention they suggest that to demand from the
prophets, the saints and the pious something, which is not in their
control and which is only in Allāh’s control is an expression of
disbelief. The answer to this question has already been provided at
length. The fact is that this mode of reasoning is based on a
misunderstanding of the meaning of the word*istighāthah* . No Muslim,
when he is beseeching the prophets and the saints for help, believes in
his heart that our helpers (the prophets and the saints) will help us on
their own, but we believe that they will serve only as a means of
fulfilling our needs before Allāh, as has been explained in the case of
the blind Companion and the request for rain. The Companions in these
traditions had based their appeal for help on the absolute power of
Allāh and mediated it through the qualities and attributes of the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* . And as a result, the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* who was, better groomed
in the secrets of divine unity, did not discourage them by saying that
in this way they were committing disbelief but prayed for them and,
Allāh in response to his supplication, fulfilled their needs. If
beseeching help from not-Allāh had been disbelief, then,

**first,** the Companions would never have implored the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* to perform this act,

**second,** the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* would
have discouraged them by telling them it was disbelief, and would have
forbidden them to press him with such imploring,

**third,** Allāh would have forbidden His beloved to help them and
protected him against committing disbelief.

The Companions, beseeching the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* for help, the act of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* and Allāh’s approval of the act - all these three factors
collectively prove that*istighāthah* is not only valid, but is a
practice of the Companions and popular with Allāh. Demand for miracles
also falls in this category. When the non-believers and the infidels
demanded from the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* a
miraculous expression of his power, he did not call it disbelief.
Instead, he performed the required miracles with his hand (splitting the
moon etc). If these supernatural acts had been disbelief, how could the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* have possibly perpetrated
them? When the act of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
does not amount to disbelief (even to think of it expels one from the
fold of Islam), then how can the act of Ummah, in conformity to the
practice of the Companions, be declared a form of*shirk* (polytheism).

The Muslims only expect mediation for help from the saints and the
prophets, and not their help because Allāh is the only true Helper. They
can only recommend us to Allāh, they can’t help themselves. When they do
help, it is only with divine sanction behind it and God has given power
to His favourites over supplication and recommendation, though this
power is only derivatively used, as Allāh says in the holy Qur’ān:

*Pure is He Who has created couples of everything which the earth causes
to grow.* [29]

Allāh Himself in the Qur’ān has attributed the growth of grass to the
earth although to cause the grass to grow is not in earth’s power
because in this act of growth it serves only as an instrument and a
means. This Qur’ānic verse proves that there is no harm in referring to
the means or instrument of mediation as subject because it cannot lead
to any misunderstanding or confusion as both the Qur’ān and the
traditions contain countless references to the difference between real
and derivative power. Statements made by the Muslims in this sense are
as devoid of disbelief as are the holy Qur’ān and the traditions of the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* .

Fourth objection: There is no helper except Allāh
-------------------------------------------------

They make the Qur’ānic verses which negate the attainment of power and
victory through not-Allāh as the basis of their negation of seeking help
through any person other than Allāh. It is said that all power and
victory flow from Allāh alone and to transfer what belongs only to Allāh
to someone else is nothing but disbelief as Allāh has repeatedly
declared in the holy Qur’ān:

*And except Allāh you have neither a friend nor a helper.[30]*

*And they shall not find any friend or helper besides Allāh.[31]*

*And He is the Protector, worthy of all praise.[32]*

*For you there shall be neither any friend nor any helper to guard you
against Allāh.[33]*

*And Allāh is sufficient (as) Protector and Allāh is sufficient (as)
Helper.[34]*

*And (in reality) there is no help from any (other) place except from
Allāh.[35]*

*And grant me victory and power from Your Own side to aid me.[36]*

*And your Lord is sufficient to guide and help you.[37]*

In all the Qur’ānic verses they give preference to the figurative
meaning over the real meaning, and basing their argument on the
figurative meaning they assert that in these verses the words*walī*
(friend),*sultān* (power),*hādī* (guide) and*nasīr* (helper) have been
used for Allāh, and to ascribe these attributes to anyone besides Allāh
is to commit disbelief.

Fallacious reasoning
--------------------

If a few words are expressly related to Allāh in the Qur’ān, it does not
imply that they cannot be related to anyone else as such a relation will
amount to disbelief. A battery of examples can be produced to support
this view. So, in the Qur’ān where the words*walī* and*nasīr* have been
used for Allāh, there Allāh has used these words figuratively for His
servants. In order to short-circuit the debate, we will base our
argument on the verses in which the words*walī* and*nasīr* are used,
while in addition to these, a number of other divine qualities have been
jointly used for Allāh and His creature. The Qur'ān states:

*And raise for us from You one who will protect, and raise for us from
You one who will help.[38]*

*Indeed, your (helper) friend is only Allāh and His Messenger and (with
them) are the believers.[39]*

*And if you back up each other against the Messenger (if you both behave
in a manner that annoys the Prophet) then (remember that) Allāh is his
Protector (Helper) and Jibrīl and the righteous believers and after that
even the angels will assist him.[40]*

*And the men who believe and the women who believe are each other’s
protectors and helpers.[41]*

These Qur’ānic verses make it clear as daylight that*walī* ,*nasīr* and
other similar words which portray the attributes of Allāh, are used not
only for His creatures with identical semantic shade but is also the
divine practice and to equate Allāh’s practice with disbelief is a
deviation from the cardinal principles of Islamic teaching and Islam
does not permit it.

### Fifth objection: Begging and beseeching help from Allāh alone is valid

###

To negate the validity of beseeching others than Allāh for help is based
on a fallacious deduction from a tradition narrated by ‘Abdullāh bin
‘Abbās as an argument in their favour in which it is enjoined upon the
believers to beg only Allāh for help. The words of the tradition are as
follows:

*When you beg you should beg it from Allāh alone, and when you ask for
help, you should ask it from Allāh alone, and note that even if the
entire Ummah collectively wishes to benefit you, it cannot do so against
what is predestined. (Similarly) if the entire Ummah collectively wishes
to harm you, it cannot succeed against what is predestined (because) the
pens (of the writer of fate) have been taken away and the writings have
dried up.* [42]

We will elaborate in the following pages that to conclude from this
tradition that begging and beseeching Allāh for help is valid and
begging and beseeching not-Allāh for help is invalid, sounds perverse.

Begging for help is Allāh’s command
-----------------------------------

This false reasoning is a complete negation of all that is fundamental
to Islam and is a clumsy attempt to impose the principles of some alien
faith on the simple and straight tenets of Islamic faith. This kind of
reasoning betrays a glaring unawareness of the Qur’ān and the*sunnah* ,
lack of understanding of the purpose of revelation of the Qur’ān, and a
superficial study of Islamic teachings. Its primary motive is to accuse
the collective Muslim Ummah of disbelief and infidelity. The actual
position is that the purpose of the tradition is not to dissuade people
from seeking help from others except Allāh, as it appears at first
glance; but its real purpose is to deflect the attention of the creature
from the causes and direct it to the Creator of those causes so that the
creature, embroiled in the convolutions of causes, may not lose sight of
the real Helper. So the actual meaning of this tradition, in the light
of Islamic teachings, may be summed up in these words: ‘O man! When you
beg and beseech anyone of Allāh’s creatures for help and assistance, you
should have complete faith in the glory and power of Allāh, and beg for
help regarding Allāh as the real Helper lest these secondary causes
should divert your attention from the Creator and become the stumbling
blocks for you.’ The Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* ,
endorsing the contents of the tradition said that there is no help
against Allāh’s will but it does not negate the act of beseeching
someone’s help to persuade Allāh to fulfil one’s need. There is a huge
difference between acts, which are incompatible with Allāh’s will and
those, which are compatible with His will. The last words of the
tradition (the pens have been taken away and the writings have dried up)
clearly point out that beseeching not-Allāh for help against God’s will
is forbidden but it, in no way forbids the act of begging and beseeching
help from others because seeking the help of others has been endorsed by
Allāh Himself. For example:

*So you should ask people of knowledge if you yourselves do not know
(about something).* [43]

In this Qur’ānic verse the believers are being urged to ask those who
possess knowledge. A large number of other traditions support the
contents of this verse that the words ‘when you beg you should beg it
from Allāh alone,’ do not forbid the act of seeking help from others
absolutely. On the contrary, it means that the believers should not beg
the rulers and the affluent, out of sheer greed, to help them
financially or socially. They should beseech Allāh’s blessings alone. To
infer from this tradition that it is invalid to beseech the help of
others than Allāh is an unfair inference. These words do not argue
against beseeching the help of others than Allāh. On the contrary, a
large number of traditions clearly suggest that the Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* himself prompted the Companions to beg from
him and then responded to them. (The details with examples have already
been given in the earlier pages.) If begging help from others is
regarded as disbelief, then a large number of routine affairs which form
the basis of practical life will be declared forbidden, for example, a
student asking a teacher for explanation, a patient soliciting treatment
from a doctor, a needy person begging help from a person of means and a
creditor demanding his money back from someone who has borrowed it from
him.

Ask for some more
-----------------

One of the fortunate Companions, Rabī‘ah bin Ka‘b, one evening called on
the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* . He filled water for
his ablution and helped him perform the ablution. Pleased with his
solicitude, the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said to
him: ‘ask for anything you want.’ Overwhelmed by such a big offer, the
Companion asked for his eternal companionship, which the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* readily agreed to. Rabī‘ah bin Ka‘b
relates in his own words:

*I spent a night with the holy Prophet(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household) (and towards the tail-end of the night) I brought water for
his ablution and toilet. He said: ‘ask (for) whatever you want.’ I said:
‘I want your (eternal) companionship in Paradise.’ He said: ‘anything
else?’ I said: ‘this is sufficient.’ He said: ‘then help me with plenty
of prostration.’* [44]

In this tradition the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)*
himself commanded the Companion to beg from him. If begging for help
from not-Allāh were forbidden, the greatest champion of divine unity
would never have done it. In the last words of the tradition, the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* himself begged him to
help him with greater frequency of prostrations. This proves that
begging help from someone other than Allāh is quite consistent with the
Prophet’s practice and anyone who levels allegations of disbelief
against him is himself violating his belief in divine unity. Such
religious concepts are in fact a product of ignorance about the
universal message of Islam.

Beseeching help from others is Islamic command
----------------------------------------------

It is Allāh’s command to seek help from Him through His favourite
servants for the fulfilment of needs and the relief of worries and
problems, which constantly nag one’s mind and cannot be resolved by
ordinary means or by one’s personal efforts. A few examples from the
Qur’ān and the Prophet’s traditions are given below:

**1.** The Qur’ān says:

*And seek (Allāh’s) help through patience and prayer.* [45]

Here it is Allāh’s command to seek help and support by means of the
virtuous acts of patience and prayer. These acts are only the means
because it is Allāh alone who can help us out of our troubles and
tribulations. But the act of begging for help through these means is
being issued as a divine command.

**2.** Similarly, here is another verse from the Qur’ān in which Allāh
commands to seek help for fighting equipment and for the preparation
of*jihād* :

*And (O Muslims!), to (fight) them you should keep ready the force (of
weapons and other instruments of war) as much as possible and (a large
number of) tied horses.* [46]

**3.** In addition, the Qur’ān is a witness to the help which Dhū
al-Qarnayn sought from his nation to fight the enemy:

*You should help me with the might of your arm, (that is, with labour
and rigorous, hard work).* [47]

**4.** Similarly, it is narrated by ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Abbās that Allāh’s
Messenger*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* said:

*Undoubtedly, there are some of Allāh’s angels on the earth who are in
addition to the guardian angels. They note down each leaf that falls
down from a tree. If anyone of you is being tortured in the jungle, you
should cry, ‘O servants of Allāh, help me.’* [48]

Here, the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* instructs the
Muslims to seek angels’ help. He is advising us not to delink ourselves
from those who not only believe in Allāh but also practice their belief.
In case there is no human figure to come to your rescue, you should call
angels for help. They will fulfil your need. This universe is not a
meaningless vacuum as many atheists in their ignorance tend to assume;
it is filled with flights of angels though they remain invisible to the
naked eye and whenever human beings under duress invoke the help of
Allāh, the angels practically demonstrate the merciful presence of Allāh
by meeting human exigencies. Thus the words*falyunād a‘īnū ‘ibād Allāh*
are a clear proof that to call someone for help is permissible.

**5.** *Salāt-ul-khawf* (fear prayer) also implies seeking help from
others for the elimination of fear.

**6.** In a number of his sayings, the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* has urged the believers to help one another:

*Anyone who is busy in fulfilling the need of his brother, Allāh Himself
fulfils his need.* [49]

**7.** The same theme is stressed in another tradition:

*And Allāh is busy in helping His creature as long as he is busy helping
his brother.* [50]

**8.** Imām Hākim has recorded a tradition in his*al-Mustadrak* (4:270)
in which the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* has
commanded the believers to help one another and to relieve the needs of
others and then he has also stressed the importance of this noble act:

*If anyone of you goes out with his brother to help him, it is better
than the two months’ seclusion in my mosque.* [51]

**9.** Allāh has created a special class of creatures to help the people
in fulfilling their needs, relieving their problems and helping them in
every possible way. The holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* said:

*Allāh has created a class of creatures for the fulfilment of people’s
needs so that people turn to them for (the fulfilment of) their needs.
These creatures are immune to Allāh’s punishment.* [52]

In this tradition, the Prophet’s words that ‘people should turn to them
for the fulfilment of their needs’ deserve special attention. The
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* is himself recommending
the people’s act of seeking help from others. Therefore, those who call
it disbelief appallingly lack an understanding of their own religion.

**10.** Another tradition related to this theme is as follows:

*Allāh has blessed His servants with (a large reservoir of) His
blessings. These servants are engaged in fulfilling the needs of the
people until they are weary of them. And when they wear out, (the same
duty) is assigned from them to others.* [53]

**11.** ‘Abdullāh bin Mas‘ūd has narrated that the Prophet*(Peace Be
Upon Him and His Household)* said:

*When you lose your means of transport in a jungle, you should call: ‘O
creatures of Allāh! Help me, recover my transport! O creatures of Allāh!
Help me, recover my transport!’ There are many of Allāh’s creatures on
this earth. They will help you recover it.* [54]

Mahmūd Sa‘īd Mamdūh writes in*Raf‘-ul-minārah* (p.225):

*“The tradition, being narrated from different quarters, transformed
itself from a weak tradition into a sound one which the Muslims have
invariably followed.”*

The traditions prove that it is quite compatible both with the will of
Allāh and the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* to seek
help from other creatures and to help others in their hour of trouble
and distress whenever they beseech you for help. So when Allāh and the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* have approved it, who are
we to disapprove it, and to label it as a form of disbelief and condemn
it. The point to be noted here is that these verses and traditions are
not only a justification for beseeching help from others; they are in
the nature of commands and therefore, like other commands, they should
be strictly followed by all the believers. Those who not only disregard
them but also condemn them as self-fabricated innovations are
automatically out of the fold of Islam.

Sixth objection: Negation of beseeching the holy Prophet(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household) for help
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

During the earthly life of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* a hypocrite used to torture the Muslims and spared no
opportunity to tease them. Abū Bakr said to the Companions: ‘let’s
collectively beseech the holy Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* for help and assistance against this hypocrite.’ When the
Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* heard this, he said:

*Appeal for help is not made to me and appeal for help is made only to
Allāh.* [55]

Some people have misinterpreted this tradition as a negation of
beseeching help from anyone except Allāh on account of their ignorance
and unawareness of its background. Basing their conclusion on a
misunder-standing of its meaning, they believe that beseeching help from
not-Allāh is disbelief because the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His
Household)* himself has condemned it as an un-Islamic act.

Correct meaning of the tradition
--------------------------------

If we only confine ourselves to this tradition and its decontextualised
meaning, then we will have to discard a large number of other verses and
traditions in which both Allāh and the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and
His Household)* have stressed the need and relevance of seeking the help
of others in trouble and distress. Besides, to focus exclusively on this
tradition and to sweep all other traditions under the carpet will
violate the basic principles of interpretation and inference. It is an
established legal principle that any tradition negating what is affirmed
by other traditions must be placed in perspective because a final
inference is drawn only through a coordination and collation of their
meaning and substance to abrogate the discordant elements. The same
principle must be followed here to bring out the correct meaning of this
tradition.

The tradition means to affirm the reality of divine unity as part of
true faith. That is, it seems to suggest that the real Helper is Allāh
alone and the creature is only a means in seeking help from Allāh.

The tradition does not argue in favour of seeking help only from the
living, as is erroneously supposed by some people. On the contrary, it
does not discriminate between the living and the dead and stresses the
fact that it is forbidden to beseech anyone for help except Allāh as we
have already discussed in the early pages. Imām Ibn Taymiyyah has also
mentioned it in his*Fatāwā* (1:110) and has made it clear that some
people draw wrong conclusions from the divine injunctions and the
sayings of the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him and His Household)* when other
contexts seem to refute their conclusions. The hypocrite’s torment and
Abū Bakr’s beseeching the Prophet’s help against him fall into this
category. If this tradition is not explained away, it will throw a
negative light on other Qur’ānic verses and traditions as well as the
acts of the Companions. It is recorded at various places in books of
tradition that the Companions requested the Prophet*(Peace Be Upon Him
and His Household)* to supplicate for them, offered prayer for rain
through his mediation and they excelled all the other followers in
beseeching his help in a variety of situations. ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Umar’s
statement is recorded that at many occasions when he looked at the
Prophet’s face, he used to remember Abū Tālib’s verse which means that
whenever he prayed for rain, the rain water started flowing from the
gutters before he came down the pulpit. The verse is as follows:

*And that handsome (person), by means of whose radiant face, rain is
implored, and who is the guardian of orphans and the support of widows.*
[56]

The fact that ‘Abdullāh bin ‘Umar hummed out this verse on many
occasions shows the Companions’ intensity of love for the Prophet*(Peace
Be Upon Him and His Household)* . Whenever they were in trouble or faced
a calamity, they were involuntarily drawn towards him to beseech his
help. When the conduct of the Companions is belying the content of this
different tradition, and it is also in consonance with the teachings of
the Qur’ān and the*sunnah* , then how can we agree with the explanations
and interpretations of these ignorant friends as confirmations of divine
unity, which in fact border on disbelief. The Qur’ānic concept of divine
unity does not permit it that we should focus only on one exceptional
tradition and accuse the entire Ummah of disbelief, while casting aside
all other Qur’ānic verses and traditions which attest to the reality of
beseeching help from others as a valid act and which is explicitly urged
by both the Qur’ān and the*sunnah.*


