PREFACE
=======

**In the Name of Allah The Beneficent, the Merciful**

*Almighty the Prudent says in His holy Book: ...Nay he has brought them
the truth. And should the truth follow their low desires, surely the
heavens and the earth and all those who are therein would have
perished... (230:70,71)... And Allah the Exulted is true.*

The subject of our discussion is the origin of rights. Before entering
into discussion of the subject matter it is essential to explain the
meaning of right and its usage.

Right, justice and its synonyms are the most sacrosanct words which
enjoy highest sanctity and special elegance of meaning in all the human
societies. One can hardly come across a person who would like to
introduce himself as the supporter of falsehood and oppression and
oppression and opposed to justice and the right. The most tyrant persons
and governments proclaim to be true and just in order to deceive the
people. They want to cover the ugliness of their aggressive tyrant deeds
under the beautiful mantle of justice and truth. The affinity of these
two meanings becomes clearer when justice is defined as dispensation of
right to the rightful.

The search for truth and justice is considered as the mother of all
social values. The precept of virtue of right and justice is an evident
rational dictum. Inclination and ambition for these are considered as a
part of man s lofty temperament. So is the precept of vices of
oppression and fallacy an evident rational dictum. Dislike for these is
also a part of human nature.

Islamic culture also attaches significant importance to these terms.
These have repeatedly been referred to in the Holy Qur'an and the
sayings of the holy Prophet (S.A.) and the members of his household
(A.S.) which indicate the importance of this matter in the system of
Islamic values.

Let us however, impress upon the fact that the word right has various
usages but all of these do not relate to our subject matter. For
instance, the word right means permanent being, or the statement
according to facts or a promise about something which would certainly
happen, etc.

Therefore, truth in relation to Almighty Allah also does not relate to
our subject matter. If the search for justice and right is part of human
nature it cannot be related to acquaintance and worship of Allah and the
existence of one cannot be derived from the other. Some have tried to do
so to arrive to such conclusions but they have only confused between its
ethical meanings and philosophical conception.

The other point is that the limitations for usage of right in legal
discussions is much narrower than its expanded use in ethical and
religious discourses, discussions are held on the rights of Allah over
man and even the rights of man over Allah. But as far as the legal
concept is concerned it exclusively relates to the relationship between
man and man. On the other hand, the word rights is used in at least two
different meanings as far as its usage by the lawyers is concerned. The
one relates to reservations and privileges granted to individuals or
groups of persons which should be honored by others and should not be
violated or encroached upon by any one. The other meaning is the code of
laws whose observance is obligatory.

These may provide privileges for certain persons or prescribe
obligations for others. These can also be laws describing conditions
regarding the correctness of agreements and contracts. The word rights
the correctness of agreements and contracts. The word rights in the
second sense is very much similar to the term social laws.

However, these two meanings are not entirely alienated to each other,
because all legal laws are connected in one way or the other with the
right of individuals or the society. If it grants a right to somebody it
necessitates and obligation for the opposite side. In case it provides
obligations for all it would mean provision of reciprocal duties for
all. As a result of this every one will have a reciprocal right on the
other. As a matter of tact, such general laws are dissolved into minor
laws each of which guarantee a special right or obligation.

To put this in one sentence, it can be said that rights and duties are
interrelated and the enactment of one necessitates the provision of the
other.

Similarly, the enactment of laws such as those providing details and
conditions for entering into agreements and contracts and similar other
laws provide both rights and duties accruing from such agreements and
contracts.


