PRESENTATION OF THE ISSUE
=========================

As mentioned earlier the search for ones rights is a lofty sacrosanct
human value so much so that it is considered to be the mother of all
other social values. But the word right by itself does not represent
anything or a deed in particular. It cannot precisely specify its
meanings. For instance, the meaning of justice can be specified only
when a right is stipulated in advance so that its restoration to its
owner is considered as the applicability of justice.

In other words the concepts of rights of rights and justice are not
substantial concepts which could be obtained by the realization of its
instances and may not need rational considerations and comparisons. A
particular move or action cannot always be considered as illustrative of
right and justice nor can another type of move or deed can always be
considered as unjust and oppressive. In certain given circumstances,
even beating, injuring and killing may be considered as a case of right
and justice. For example, if it was a case of reprisal or legal
punishment. Hence the legality or illegality of such actions depends on
the fact whether it was done as a reprisal or punishment or committed as
and original act without the other party which is beaten, wounded or
killed, having committed a crime. So long as such considerations and
comparisons are not made, the outward act cannot be defined as right and
justified or illegal and cruel.

Hence, the most fundamental issues of the philosophy of rights is as to
what is the origin of rights? What is the basis determining the rights
and obligations of persons in varied conditions?

In other words what is the source of segregating the titles of rightful
and the wrong. Just and unjust? What considerations and distinctions
should be carried out to distinguish between these titles?tles?

Some may say that instances of right and justice can be recognized
through wisdom and natural instinct. Every wise person knows that
snatching a piece of bread from a hungry orphan child is cruelty and its
restitution a justice. On the whole depriving an owner of his property.
Whatever it may be, or aggression on any ones life and honor is cruel
and unjust, but consumption from ones own property and protection of
ones own life and dignity is rightful and just.

But such replies are the outcome of simplicity and lack of
in-depth-thinking of scientific and philosophical issues. Anyone who has
that least acquaintance with legal matters can quote many instances
wherein identification of right and wrong would not be as simple as
that. In many a cases, even the most talented judges of the world get
confused while they are required to deliver their judgment. There are
abundant instances wherein distinguished legislators of the mankind
cannot express a decisive opinion or expressly identify between the
right and the wrong.

Therefore, if there are clear, definite and specific instances of right
and just for the common man, undoubtedly there are many ambiguous and
doubtful cases wherein it is not every specific rules and complex
formulae. It is about these rules and formulae that we have to endeavor
and find them out.


