A BASIC DIFFERENCE
==================

Having dealt with superficial and simplistic views, we come across a
deep-rooted difference between the lawyers. The question is whether
right and justice have a real essence of their own which needs to be
discovered and identified, or such matters are subject to conditions and
agreements, for instance, situations which do not have any real essence
and rational basis. On the contrary they are dependent on agreement. In
cases where there are supportive and overall agreements it is considered
that human wisdom and conscience would realize them. In case where such
overall agreements do not exist, there is a need for enacted laws so
that peoples right and duties are determined through them.

Such a tendency existed since long amongst the Sophists who believed
that right and justice, as well as all other moral and legal matters
were subject to public opinion. Their most well known aim is that man is
the standard of everything. From the writings related to Plato it
appears that the major portion of Socrates discourses with Sophists
related to moral and legal subjects.

But this tendency declined with the flourishing of the philosophies of
Plato and Aristotle. They could not get any renowned supporter for many
a centuries. It was only after the renaissance and particularly during
the days of Hume, the famous septic British philosopher that this way of
thinking came to surface with fresh prestige and dignity. Gradually the
number of people contributing to this philosophy increased. Presently
the historical and positivist schools of law, which have attained
significant reputation in international legal circles, are more or less,
fed through this source.

In reply to those who contribute to this tendency, it may be said that
if rights did not have rational and realistic base, the relationship of
contradictory and antithetical laws with the welfare and well being of
the people should have been uniform, whether people liked these laws or
adopted laws other than these. Innumerable experiences in addition to
ones reason and wisdom indicate that many of the enacted laws have been
to the disadvantage of society. Legislators have realized their mistakes
after sometime and resorted to set them right. This is the best witness
to the fact that irrespective of people’s inclination and despite
lawmakers’ views, real interests and essence do exist which may
occasionally be in line with enacted laws and at times opposed to it.

But this summary reply is not sufficient to remove all doubts which
arise in this regard. It is necessary that at least the most important
of such doubts should be examined and dealt with.


