REASON FOR DEVIATION
====================

Probably for us, the Muslims, who have been brought up in the
environment of Islamic culture, it may be rather. Astonishing that a
group of eminent law experts deny the reality of essence for right and
justice and opine that they are subject to peopleâ€™s views and taste.
This tendency is in vague in contemporary legal circles of the world and
has registered considerable numbers of supporters.

It may however be noted that, like other deviated ideas in different
branches of philosophy and learning, this view did not come to surface
extemporaneously nor did it spread or expand merely by chance. There are
two reasons for this. Firstly, some invisible hands may have propounded
and propagated certain psychological, sociological as well as legal and
economic theories with a view to achieve their political and colonial
motives. Secondly, Certain doubts might have been raised for which
convincing replies could not be fond due to weak philosophical
foundations. As these doubts and suspicions piled up, they caused a
tendency for theories, doctrines and schools which were of a deviated
nature. Let it not be forgotten that most f the deviated thoughts came
in vogue only when philosophy and meta-physics became weak and the place
of deep thinking rationalism was taken by superficial sentimentalism.
However, what popularized this deviated tendency in lego-moral
philosophy is the presence of a number of doubts and suspicions mooted
by emporiums and positivism etc. and found appropriate social grounds
for their acceptance.

A detailed examination of such doubts and suspicions and a description
of statements and all pervasive disputes in regard to them cannot be
discussed in this short paper. Therefore, I would only deal briefly with
the most important doubts and provide replies to them. Thereafter we
shall explain the acceptable views in regard to the origin of rights.


