INVESTIGATION OF DOUBTS
=======================

(1) One of the doubts is as follow: There have been and still exist
different system of laws. Each of these has been more or less effective
in the realization of the objective which is the maintenance of law and
order in the society and relative security of peoples demand. Every
society prefers its own system of laws. If people’s views and
understanding undergo a change, the laws ruling the society are also
altered. This has been witnessed in different countries of the world.
These changes have also taken place even in legal systems which are
divine and based on religion. This change takes place by nullification.
If laws had a stable rational base such changes and alterations could
not be justified.

In reply it must be said that:

**Firstly:** The legal system should not be considered as a totally
independent system. Nor should its objective be considered as the
maintenance of order and relative security of peoples demand. On the
contrary, the legal system should be recognized as part of a
comprehensive and value-oriented system; its object being the creation
of a means for the realization of ultimate aim through a complete value
oriented system.

In other words, social relations are only one of the many aspects of
human life. The provision and regularization of these relations are a
means to provide utmost possible perfection and eternal bliss to the
largest possible number of people belonging to the society. Therefore,
privilege laws should be enacted in such a manner that they are
commensurate with the general objective of the value oriented moral
system or at least it is not in contradiction with it. This is a fact
which has been neglected in man-made legal systems resulting in
separation of laws from religion and ethics.

Secondly: The claim that various legal systems are similar as far as the
realization of approximate legal objectives is concerned is unrealistic
and exaggerated. As mentioned earlier many a times the law makers
themselves have realized their mistakes and worked to set them right. It
is because the alteration of laws is not only due to change in views and
peoples understanding.

Thirdly: Rational and realistic base for laws does not mean that all
legal norms have stable and ever-lasting infrastructure. May be the
change in certain realities and external conditions may result in
alteration in some judicial laws. The nullification of divine laws in
certain cases is one such instance. However, the question of the
existence of a rational base for laws should not be mixed up with its
permanency.

(2)The other doubt is that a legal system comes to realization when the
people of a society or at least some active and effective groups and
sections of the society recognize the system. Till such recognition is
achieved, it remains an idea in peoples mind or a few lines jotted on a
paper. Therefore, the basis of laws is public opinion and their
acceptance by people; even if these are imposed on them by an individual
or group of persons in the beginning. However, the wishes of people and
the views of individual and groups cannot be neglected and the laws are
based on reality of essence independent of people’s views and
understanding.

In reply it may be said that there is no doubt that the working of a
legal system is based on its acceptance in the society. If the people as
a whole, or their majority or their active and effective groups are
opposed to a legal system and resist it strongly, the system can never
be put into effect. However, the question is whether a legal system can
be called just or oppressive without taking into consideration its
acceptance or non-acceptance by the people? Can it be said that a people
have accepted a just system and another people have submitted to an
oppressive one? Can it be said that system recognized by the people
shall be just and that justice and tyranny are nothing but their
acceptance or rejection by the people? Those who view right and justice
as independent of people’s opinion and acceptance believe that a given
legal system can be just even if people do not accept it. And naturally
another given system, contrary to the first, shall be oppressive
irrespective of its acceptance or otherwise by the people. The above
statement cannot contradict and nullify such a view.

(3) The other doubt is that legal laws are dictatorial and their essence
is command and prohibition even if these are expressed in informative
terms. This is evident from description of rights bearing the essence of
privileges or from description of enacted laws such as terms and
conditions. It is obvious that dictated version could neither be
verified nor denied. In such cases one cannot give consideration to
facts. We have only to consider the wish of dictator based on negligence
and permissiveness. In any case such commands have no other facts behind
them except the wishes of the dictator.

In reply is to be said that we don not deny the dictatorial nature of
legal terminology nor do we deny the dictatorial nature of informative
compositions and also accept Th. possibility of presentation of
dictatorial compositions in the form of informative text. However, the
question is that if such wordy and literary debates are set aside, one
can say without any doubt that a particular law is in conformity with
peoples interest and if enforced their real interests will be served.
Similarly, conversely it can also be said that a particular law is
against people’s interest. Our purpose in saying that laws are in
conformity with or against people’s rights in nothing but what has been
said above. If possibilities of such a comparison were denied it would
only mean to dispute and refute the self-evident.

It becomes clear from the above that the existence of description by
using dictatorial terminology and words of command and injunction relate
only to a particular style of description which is selected to add to
the stress laid on such commands. It also has the aspect of psychology
and does not indicate any sign of dictatorship in its nature.

(4) The other doubt is contractual substances and legal subjects consist
of matters like ownership and companionship etc., which have no reality
into consideration for legal methods which include such substances.
These are termed as correct if they are in conformity with provision and
called incorrect, if not.

In reply it may be said that the above-mentioned matters are, although
subject to credibility and contract and that there is no specific
factuality in regard to them but it cannot be argued that these have
been supposed and

stated in an exaggerated manner. On the contrary, these are like
mathematical and algebraically formulae which relate to the effects,
fractions and sub-fractions of different factors and are taken into
consideration as signs and symbols for particular behaviors and their
effects; and that those behaviors and effects so formed on them bear a
mark of identicalness and factuality. For instance, the term
companionship is a symbol to indicate the state of the total behavior of
two spouses in their family life which is identified by certain
limitations and restrictions.

Therefore, though legal terms are not by themselves indicative of any
ocular realities yet they are not entirely alien to such factuality's.
We may, therefore, describe the relationship of these matters with facts
sating that the state of the actual relationship of mankind are the base
and the infrastructure of such matters. In other words it can be said
that legal and value matters are like two-faced coins, one side of which
is indicative of their value and the other indicative of their
factuality.

However, the motive leading to the acceptance of such matters or to
consider them as borrowed from substantial and philosophical context is
to facilitate their understanding like the motive in all other rational
credibility's. For once it can also be like a motive which leads to the
usage of alphabets and brief signs in mathematical formulae. Therefore,
we should not be tempted by the outward credence of legal methods; nor
should we neglect the facts hidden behind them. While facts of physics
and chemistry are related in the language of mathematics and through
algebraically signs, these cannot be considered as devoid of correctness
only because of these signs being contractual.

It may be recalled that in case of companionship and other credibility's
accruing from contracts and agreements, acceptance of both the sides and
three decision to observe particular types of behavior as well as the
expression of this acceptance and decision form parts of a specific
social expedience formula. Though all these are factual and
non-contractual meters, the use of a particular word or the writing of a
specified sentence or the performance of a particular action during the
implementation of the contract may be forged and contractual matter, but
the credence of this condition, in its own turn, is subject to real
expedience and substance.

It is therefore, concluded that the creditability of legal substances
cannot be considered as a reason for the absence of virtues and vices in
the substance. Nor can it be said that there is no connection between
the legal laws and the virtue and vices of the substance.

(5) The other doubt is that legal methods, while conferring a right of
someone emphatically or implicitly, confirm a duty for the opposite
side. Therefore, all legal laws should be considered as containing the
essence of must or obligation and the synonyms thereof. On the hand we
know that such matters, for instance value essence, is different from
real essence because real essence speaks of external affairs, and have
descriptive aspect as against the matters of value essence which have
instructive and obligatory aspect.

In view of these two prefaces, it becomes clear that legal laws cannot
be considered as bearing realities and they cannot be derived from
descriptive

affairs. For instance, if the aim that man is born free and has the
potential to select and adopt is taken into consideration, we cannot
conclude that man must live free and the right of freedom for every man
is intact. This is because one of the conditions for correct reasoning
and deduction is that the result should not contain an essence in excess
of the essences which form the axioms. Whereas descriptive passages o
not contain terms like must but the instructive context for instance
legal norms do consist such an essence.

It is, therefore, concluded that legal passages do not contain ocular
realities, neither these are dried from descriptive happenings nor do
they contain realities. Hence, legal laws cannot be considered as
authenticated by ocular realities.

In order to clarify the reply to this doubt, two points should be kept
in mind:

Firstly, it is not the external things which are meant to be the essence
of realities on which depend legal laws. On the other hand it means the
qualities which wisdom differentiates in things and persons and the
relationship between them. This includes the relationship of passion and
impression between the voluntary deeds of a man and the results accruing
from them-whether material, worldly and social or spiritual, moral and
otherworldly. Such a relationship is reality of essence; though it may
not be related to external things. In other words the logical and
metaphysical facts described with special philosophical essence are
realities of essence. Therefore, the proposition that it is necessary to
observe rules and limitations to maintain order in the society has of
essence because the observance of limitations and rules is the cause for
the maintenance of order and the existence of cause is necessary for the
fulfillment of the effect-this necessity is iterated as analogical
necessity in philosophical terms and considered as a reality of essence.
It is because social order cannot be achieved in the ocular external
world without the preservation and observance of laws. This proposition
enjoys as much of reality of essence as mathematical and natural
propositions. For instance the necessity of water for the growth of
trees or the need to raise to the power of two the side of the square to
find out its area.

The other point is that logical propositions contain unpronounced parts
in addition to pronounced portions. This indicates the relative
condition and is known as the essence of proposition in logical
terminology. The unpronounced essence may be called as its aspect. It
can even be treated as and essential element of the proposition. For
instance it may be said that existence of living beings is feasible in
celestial bodies. In fact the essence of feasible described the
condition of relativity between the living beings and existence in
celestial spheres and now it has taken an independent essence and become
the predicate of the proposition.

Taking into consideration these two points, it becomes clear that legal
propositions are in fact descriptive of the relationship of the
causality between the various types of mans voluntary actions and the
realization of the objectives of rights. Their soundness depends on the
discovery of the complete formula of causation and the exact
identification of its components, conditions and restrictions. But the
discovery of such a

complete formula is very difficult in consideration of multiplicity of
factors and their variations and different types of restrictions,
interests, mischiefs and shortcomings in all instances. This also
results in creating many different points of views. If, however, one
takes into consideration the necessity to contain the legal system
within the whole value-oriented system also paying attention to moral
objective, the difficulties inherent therein shall become obvious.
Finally, one comes to the conclusion that human wisdom is so limited and
his experiences so imperfect that these cannot present a perfect legal
system which can work to achieve eternal bliss and complete perfection.
That is why the need for revelation and Divine law becomes obvious.

And now the problem regarding the deduction of the word must from the
word to be will be solved in view of the second point. The propositions
known as descriptive propositions consisting of the relation of
causation shall guarantee analogical necessity which form the essence of
the proposition and this is the essence of the guaranteed necessity in
introducing analogy and appears in the form of must and obligation
Neglect of these logical subtleties has made some others feel that the
deduction of value oriented and legal laws from descriptive propositions
is not possible. However, it must be considered that the deduction of
the need of effect depends on the realization of all the components of
the total cause contrary to the existence of each of the cause factors
which are essential for the realization of the effect.

If in the preliminaries of analogy only one part of the total cause is
included then the need for effect cannot be deduced from them. The
sophistication obtained in the deduction of moral and legal propositions
from scientific ones is due to the placement of a part of the cause
instead of the total cause. The examination of these matters is not
within the domain of this short paper.


