WHAT IS THE EXPEDIENCY?
=======================

From what has been mentioned above in short, we understand that legal
laws can be evaluated on the basis of their being harmonious and in the
same direction with actual virtues and vices. In other words it may be
said that legal laws should be based on truth and justice and not
subjected to capricious desires and tastes of peoples or groups of
people. And should the truth follow their low desires, surely the
heavens and the earth and all those who are therein would have
perished...***(23:71)***

This has herby become clear that legal and value oriented matters are
like symbols so bring out the combination of effect and impression which
take place in the sphere of voluntary actions and social relations of
human beings and indicates the direction of movement towards the
objective of laws and the final target of value system. It also becomes
known that the real duty of the lawmaker is to give thought to the
different complex relationship between actions in relation to the legal
objectives as well as to the objectives of morality and religion. He
should declare necessary any work of any nature required to be
undertaken in order to achieve these objectives and which are within the
framework of legal and value oriented subjects. He is also required to
prohibit any action of any nature which is contradictory to these
objectives.

All said and done, the other question which arises is that what is the
objective of real interest and sedition? Do these not finally turn to
people’s gain or loss and liking and disliking? Is not the basic purpose
of laws a matter of value which is to be fixed in accordance with the
desire and the liking of people? It is then that social behavior, under
the shadow of their desirability and the means to achieve the desired
objectives, becomes legalized. In case the reply to these questions is
positive, one has to accept it necessarily that laws and generally the
value system and also subjects like right and justice do not have any
existence independent of peoples wishes and desires.

A detailed reply to these questions is subject to discussions on matters
like: essence of values, the relationship of values with reality, the
specification of the object of laws and its relationship with the good
and bad of the individual and the society and difference between
interest and expediency as well as similar other things. Each of these
needs a detailed discussion and all these cannot be included in this
paper. We are, therefore, compelled to discuss each subject as much as
essential and required. The same has also been the trend followed by us
in the subjects dealt with so far.

The first point to be taken into consideration is that the value of
voluntary works is different from the value of their aims and
objectives. That is to say the worthiness of action which is considered
in relation to morality and laws means the desirability of the means and
tools but the worthiness of objectives means their intrinsic and
original desirability. Also the necessity which is related to the
performance of good and beneficial deeds is analogical necessity and
meant to achieve the result as far as preferentiality and causality are
concerned as against the necessity related to the object itself and
specially the ultimate object which is the achievement of bliss and real
perfection. It is also indicative of the truth that every human

being is personally desirous of his well being and perfection. This
personal desirability is the basic motive required for the performance
of any voluntary deed. Without in no voluntary action can be performed.

The next point is that though the essence of bliss is segregated from
mans achievement of the greatest, most stable and highest joys, the
achievement of pleasure does not necessarily lead to perfection.
However, divine wisdom has created inclination for pleasures in human
nature which are achieved by the fulfillment of his needs. The
fulfillment of needs is essential for the continuation of the life of
the individual and the mankind and also for the attainment of the means
of perfection-basically speaking the achievement of perfection is
considered as one of the spiritual needs of the human being. Hence, mans
innate and natural instincts are in fact psychological incentives for a
move towards the security of life and perfection. In this way, the
achievement of ultimate perfection will be combined with perfect
pleasure (the real bliss). They shall have therein what they desire.
(25:16) And therein shall be what their souls yearn after anf (wherein)
the eyes shall delight. (43:71) According to Holy Qur’an, bliss belongs
to those who shall enter divine grace in the eternal world and awaited
with eternal Paradise. And as to those who are made happy they shall be
in the garden, abiding in it. (11:108)

Therefore, the meanings of true bliss and ultimate perfection are the
same. Though there may not be any agreement or relationship between
them.

The third point is that there is a reason for difference in determining
the meaning of bliss and ultimate perfection and in identifying the path
to achieve it. One such reason is the negligence of eternal life and
differences in the efflorescence of the capabilities and rational
growth. Here we cannot discuss this in great detail. However, the
difference in peoples attachment for some specific pleasures or their
preference of any joy over another cannot be considered as the reason
for the non-existence of perfection or the absence of real inclination
for certain desires. On the contrary, perfection is a philosophical
essence which gets segregated for instance due to extremity of existence
and its achievement brings pleasure and satisfaction. All that may lead
man to ultimate perfection and eternal bliss, whatever the stages in
between, shall be treated as possessing real good and value. Any of
these actions which part of public relationship shall be considered as
aimed at social which part of public relationship shall be considered as
aimed at social welfare which is the objectives so close to laws.
Consequently, just as eternal bliss and perfection are realistic and
essence oriented and independent of propels or groups desires and
capriciousness, the good and the corrupt which are also derived from the
means to achieve this ultimate objective are real, essential and
independent of desires and likings.


