WELFARE OF INDIVIDUALS AND SOCIETY:
===================================

Man has a variety of needs and requirements and the total fulfillment of
all of them is not possible in this materialistic world which is the
house of contradictions and hindrances. Many a times there is the need
to sacrifice some of these for the sake of others. This is the stage
when the question of selection comes to surface. Wisdom demands that the
lower and the lesser requirement is sacrificed for the sake of higher
one. However, all the human beings do not follow this principle. It may
be due to feeble realization and identification or it may be due to
being used to or attached with some of the enjoyments that the people
prefer their lower and lesser requirements. It is in case of such people
that it is said that they act against their interests.

Therefore, a prudent action is one which fulfils the more important
requirements and achieves higher perfection. In reasoning. This is also
true in regard to the clash between individual and group interests. That
is to say that social life demands that certain individual interests be
sacrificed for the sake of the society. Every individual should give
away some of his individual benefits and desires in order to fulfill the
interest of the society.

Clash between the interest of an individual and the society takes place
in two ways. Firstly the sacrificing of an individual interest for the
sake of society takes place such a manner that it fulfils the
requirements of all the individuals of the society including this person
who has given up his interest and that this person is granted another
interest of the same value or greater that that. In this case his wisdom
would call for such a sacrifice. In other words his own interest demands
such a generosity.

The other case is that giving up of individual interest may not result
in the achievement of equal or greater interest of the individual. That
is to say such a generosity may provide him with no benefit or even if
any benefit accrues to him it is lesser than the interest he has
sacrificed. Can one say in such a situation that it would be wise of him
to overlook his interest so as to enable others to achieve their own?

The fact it that a positive reply cannot be given to this question on
the basis of materialistic outlook. It’s this outlook which explains the
logic of profiteering. It is on this basis that every individual tries
to exploit the society as much as he can irrespective of the great loss
he would incur to others in this process. He would forego his interests
only if he feels that if he did not do so he may have to suffer more and
may not be able to derive grater benefit from the society.

As a matter of fact those who speak of society’s welfare and declare
support for others interests and rights from a materialistic point of
view are hypocrites and imposters. In fact their only purpose is to
achieve their selfish motives and nothing else. This is the reasoning
which is prevalent in most of the human societies and he claim to
support truth, justice and human rights made by the leaders of the
arrogance and their followers are nothing more that deception.

However. Some of the law experts and jurisprudents are of the view that
the basis lies with the society and individual rights are only a part of
the society’s rights. It is but natural that in case of clash between
the rights of the individual and the society, individual rights have no
place. However,

irrespective of the intrinsic weakness of this view which is base on the
denial of the real existence of the individual and despite the fact that
various parties calling themselves as supporters of this view have in
action treaded the path of others as is seen from the deeds of the
socialists in different countries of the world, how can one convince an
individual to the effect that he should rationally give up his personal
interests without acquiring equal or greater benefit from the society.

We know that individuals can be made to be indulgent and by means of
propagation and inciting their sentiments and feelings. One can also
lead them to the battlefield by propagating nationalism and racial
sentiments. It is not the question f misguiding the people; it is the
question of finding out a rational solution of the problem.

It is through divine wisdom that a positive and clear-cut answer can be
found out for this issue. It is because, firstly divine expediency
demands that largest number of human beings achieve their own perfection
and worldly comforts be given to human beings as the means to achieve
this move for perfection. These should, therefore, be so exploited that
the objective of creation in respect to all the individuals is realized.

Secondly, though indulgence and disposition may cause deprivation from
material benefits but provide spiritual and moral perfection in return
and their achievement is the real purpose of the creation of man and the
world.

Thirdly, any deprivation suffered in this world in the path of divine
pleasure and for the realization of the objective hidden in the creation
of humanity shall be compensated for in the other world in a better and
more perfect form.

Therefore, the reason for giving up ones own interests, in case their
fulfillment conflicts with the interest of the society, is that divine
expediency and the realization of the objectives of creation demand
this. The way to convince people for indulging in such sacrifice is to
make them realize that such an indulgence will on the one hand perfect
their spirit and inner self bringing about enjoyment of conscience and
spiritual pleasure and on the other hand provide them with eternal and
everlasting. Bliss and closeness to divine benediction and unending
heavenly blessing. These blessings are not comparable with the
materialistic and worldly pleasures either in terms of quantity or
quality. In this way the relationship of the divine legal system with
ethical system and the divine concept of universe becomes clear.


