RELATIONSHIP OF TRUTH WITH EXPEDIENCY
=====================================

From what has been discussed above, the meaning of expediency and
mischief and the need for the conformity of law with individual and
social interests becomes clear. It is now the turn to moot the final
question: what is the relationship between the truth and expediency?

In the beginning of the paper we pointed out that the word truth has
different meanings. This difference must be carefully attended to so
that no mistake or confusion takes place.

One of the meanings of truth in connection with our discussions is that
deed should possess and appropriate and befitting aim and objective.
That is to say it should cause the achievement of greater success. As
against this, untruth means a deed which is devoid of such and
objective, for instance meaningless and futile deeds.

According to this definition a deed which is expedient is true and an
action devoid of expediency is untrue. Similarly, a law which specifies
the first type of deed shall be true and the law which provides for the
other type shall be untrue. In this way, truth and expedience shall be
in conformity with and testifying each other. In other words, both the
meanings shall be abstract essence and secondary philosophical
intelligible which shall be segregated in consideration of the
relationship between the action and the result accruing therefrom.

As far as rights as a legal term is concerned it means a legal privilege
which is confirmed by individual or society and has a two-side
relationship with the rightful and against whom the right is given, and
necessarily provides and obligation for the opposite side. This is an
essence of credibility which has close relationship with property. The
basic difference is that in regard to property attention is not paid to
two aforesaid relationships and only the relationship of owner with the
property is taken into consideration

If the essence of right is considered in a wider sense and not limited
within the circle of social relations, it would also include moral laws
and would also hold true in case of relationship between the Creator and
creation. However, the subject of truth should be related with voluntary
action in some way or the other. If only the creative distinction of a
being in exploiting the other being is taken into consideration there
will be to place for credence to terms like right, property, etc.,
unless the privileged person performs voluntary deed in this connection
or connected with the voluntary work of any other being. For instance,
if the relationship of a tree with sunlight or the rainwater is taken
note of and the negative or positive human effect is not given attention
to the credence of right for the tree in relation to light and water
will be nullified. But if human relationship is also added one can say
the tree has the right to make use of sunlight and rain-water; meaning
thereby that the man should not hinder the use of light or water. To be
more appropriate, if the two parties to right the rightful and one
against whom right is granted be free actors, this meaning would achieve
better credence. For instance, it may be said that all human beings have
the right to use sunlight and, therefore, nobody should hinder the usage
of this divine

blessing because in this case both, the rightful and the one against
whom right is granted are human beings and subject of right is sunlight.

Therefore, the word right in legal and moral terms is used in instances
where the possibility of exercising the will be someone having a free
will is under consideration. It is so because morality and rights are
voluntary deeds and their allied matters. Anything that is not connected
with voluntary action is entirely alien to subject dealing with morality
and law.

But the basic issue is that in cases where there is credence of right
and duty what is the source of these credences? What is the basis to
ascertain right and duty?

In order to reply this question certain instances are thought of, the
most important of them being as follows:

(1) Right and duty are fixed by nature. It is the nature of tree which
gives it the right to use sunlight, air and water; it is the nature of
an animal which grants it the right to use vegetation. Also it is human
nature which gives him the right to exploit vegetation and animals.
Finally, it is the nature of a society which fixes the right and duty of
individuals.

Irrespective of the fact that nature does not have an occult existence
and especially because it cannot be proved that society has a nature,
two other problems become evident:

**Firstly,** as pointed out the credence of right is correct for a thing
or person only in case which necessitates the specification of duty for
a person having a free will in that case. For instance, credence to the
right of use of water, air and light for a tree is appropriate if it
binds a man to observe this right and not to create hindrance in its
usage. Any one who gives the right to a thing or person in fact provides
a duty for the one who has free will to observe that right. Now the
question is as to what authority has the trees nature on a man so as to
fix such a duty for him? And reciprocally binds man to obey the order or
the trees nature?

Secondly, when something causes clash between two beings, each of which
want to exploit it, how can their right and duty be fixed? For example,
if the life health or growth of man depends on drinking the water which
an animal wants to drink, in that case will the right of man have
preference or that of the animal? Who would specify such a right?

In reply to such a problem it can be said that universal nature which is
the creator of all minor natures of man, animal and other creatures has
bestowed greater right to the mightier and, therefore, mans right has a
preference on animal rights.

Although it is a fact that the existence of the overall nature is not
stable for the world the standard of right, at least in case of clash,
in nothing but power and strength. Naturally, if the clash is between
beings, the stronger man will have greater rights, this is the basis of
the law of jungle and not the basis of human morality and laws.

(2) The other instance is that right and duty is fixed on the basis of
their objectives. For instance, a tree moves to attain its particular
objective which is the final stage of its grow. It should, therefore,
exploit the means to achieve its ultimate goal. So is the ultimate
object of mans move for perfection. It is this which decides its rights.
As far as the clashes between

human being are concerned, rights and duties should be so specified that
the largest number of members of a society achieve those highest
objectives.

However, this reply as also not convincing in any way because the
dependence of a thing to reach its ultimate aim and perfection on the
exploitation of other thing cannot be a convincing argument for man to
ignore his own interests and desires. Similarly, he cannot create
responsibility for any human being in relation to another individual
because each of them is active and endeavor to reach their ultimate
goal. How can, therefore, this individual submit to a limit for his own
exploitations?

(3) The other matter is that the rights of every creature are fixed
according to hi requirements. In a society its members have the right to
exploit it according to their requirements. This case is similar to the
previous one and raises similar doubts. In addition to this, the essence
of the word requ8irement is doubtful and flexible and no specific limits
can be fixed for that.

(4) The fourth case is that since right and duty go together, the right
of a person is fixed in accordance with the obligation and
responsibility he accepts for himself. In other words, everyone has the
right to benefit from the achievements of a society to the extent he
benefits the society. This equation and balancing of rights and duties
of individuals in relation to each other is called justice.

This statement is acceptable in regard to rights resulting from
contracts and rights accruing from performance of responsibilities which
a man takes upon himself voluntarily. But as far as primary rights and
duties are concerned, such as the right of a new born on his father and
mother and their obligation in regard to their children, as well as the
right of the disabled and the born-invalids on the society, the above
statement does not solve these issues.

(5) The fifth case relates to the fact that the right and duty of each
individual is fixed on the basis of depreciation and deflection of the
interests of the individual and the society. This is a more serene
matter that those discussed earlier. It clarifies the relationship
between right and expediency better than others. However, it should be
noted that firstly human interests are not entirely concerned with
material and worldly interests. While accounting for and evaluating
these interests, attention has to be paid to moral and eternal interests
as well. Secondly, the evaluation of various interests and the fixation
of the extent of their trends is a very difficult and complicated matter
and, as a matter of fact, it is beyond the capability of ordinary human
beings. It is here that clarifies mans need for guidance through
revelation is clear. And sent down with them the Book and the balance
that men may conduct themselves with equity***(57:25)***

Finally, one-minute point remains uncovered by all that has been said
above. It is that on what basis man has the right of expropriation in
things beyond himself, whether inanimate objects, vegetables, animals or
other human beings? Again the question is that irrespective of contracts
and optional commitments is man considered responsibility in regard to
them? Wherefrom does he get the right to use his limbs and organs?

A clear and logical reply to this question cannot be obtained on grounds
of material outlook and without taking into consideration the principles
of religious faiths. However, such a reply can be given on the basis of
divine outlook.

When human being feels the necessity of giving credence to essences like
right and duty in order to direct his voluntary movements and behaviors,
he has, in the first instance, to take into consideration the actual
relationship amongst the creatures so as to establish credibility on the
basis of realities. However, the most fundamental realistic relationship
can be found between the creator and the created. It is the relationship
of actual ownership of the Almighty Allah towards His creatures. Hence,
the first right of possession of creatures is established for the
Creator. On this basis the right of possession for every existent being
has finally to be authenticated by divine design. Therefore, if the
Almighty Allah did not permit man to use his limbs and organs he could
not have this right. The right to possession of other beings, all of
which are the total and absolute property of the Creator could not,
therefore, be imagined. Also, the first duty of a man originates from
the real overlordship of the Almighty Allah and no duty can take
precedence over it. All other rights and duties spring from this right
and duty.

No doubt, man due to negligence from the Almighty Allah and His real
ownership, turns attention towards his genetic domination on his own
organs, limbs and energies and considers that he has the right of
possession on them. But no sooner he realized his own bondage towards
the Almighty Allah; he would know that his ownership of his own organs
and limbs is along the ownership of Allah and towards other servants (of
Allah). No doubt man sees his possession of blessings available in his
environment as free and unrestricted. It is only in connection with
clash with others that he realized the need to give credence to rights
and duties. It is on the basis of standards such as precedence in
possession or severity of requirements etc. that man gives credence to
laws, preferences and privileges and accepts duties and
responsibilities. In fact the motive for these credits is the need for a
comfortable and peaceful social life which cannot be achieved except by
observing these rules. But once this matter gets related to Origin and
Resurrection, the question arises that if mans deeds become the source
of credence of right on the basis of an external element, why cannot his
own creation and that of the entire world become the source of right for
the Creator? If the comforts of social life induce him to accept
limitations for his own possessions and recognize obligations for
himself, why should he not pay attention to the natural inclination
towards attainment of spiritual perfection and eternal bliss and accept
responsibility towards their achievement.

However, the right and duty which relate to matters beyond social
relations go farther than their legal essence. But in consideration of
the fact that legal system forms a part of the total value system, they
cannot be considered wholly alien to each other. So is the case of value
system which cannot be considered unrelated with religious order?

In conclusion, it is said that according to divine thought mans primary
right of possession of his organs and limbs and other God given
blessings and comforts originate from the Will of Allah towards the
perfection of creatures and the ever-increasing realization of their
accomplishment. If and when there is a clash in the perfection of
different creatures, the lesser perfect beings are sacrificed for the
sake of more perfect beings. For instance, vegetation and animals are
subjected to the exploitation by man who has achieved greater
perfection, both*dejure* and*be facto* . Similarly, if the realization
of accomplishment for all the individuals of a society is subject is
subjected to the sacrifice of some, this has to he done. No doubt the
Almighty Allah will not leave such sacrifices unawarded and their
sacrifices will be compensated for in the best possible manner in the
eternal world.

Thus all rights and duties, whether moral or legal revert to the prudent
will of Allah. In case where wisdom can minutely discover the
requirements of prudence, there will be no need for divine revelation.
But in most of the cases need for divine revelation and Prophethood is
felt because of complicated formula and lack of comprehension by
ordinary wisdom of all the changes and pressures of their effects and
the exact balancing of preferences and evaluation. It is for reason that
Allah, the Prudent, in consideration of His extreme Benevolence and as
demanded by His Wisdom has sent prophets and divine laws so that men may
recognize the path of their perfection and possess accurate equilibrium
for evaluation. And the heaven, He raised it high, and He made the
balance, that you may not be inordinate in respect of the
measure***(55:7-8)*** . In this manner, the harmony between genesis and
legislation also becomes clear.


