Q100: Kissing the Shabith's
===========================

Are we allowed to kiss the "Julus' which we take out in Muharram? After
all they are made out of our own imagination A. I do not understand what
you mean by 'kissing the Julus'. 'Julus' in Urdu means procession. How
do you kiss a procession?

If you mean 'Tazaia', 'Alam' and other such symbols, then the answer is
'yes'. The respect shown to these things is not for the paper, cloth or
wood. It is for original tomb or Alam whose symbol or copy these things
are.

**Q101: PIGEONS ON SHABIH'S**

What is the significance of keeping pigeons on Imam Husain's (a.s.)
'lash' on Ashura day? A. It is the first time that I have heard of such
a custom. I cannot understand why it is done. Frankly speaking, it is
high time that the community-members sit down to scrutinize all the
customs and rites, not only of 'Azadari' but of marriage and death also,
with a view to remove all such things which have no basis in Sheriat.

**Q102: MOURNING AND CHANCES OF "SHIFA'AT"?**

Are there any better chances of Shifaat (Intercession) for the mourners
of the heroes of Karbala? Is it only Mourning' which entitles one to
Shifa'at or Mourning and following Islam?

A. Mourning on the tragedy of Karbala depends upon the true love of
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.). And the true love of Ahlul-Bait is bound to lead a
man on right path, i.e., following the path of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.).

Suppose someone asks you "Is it true that an apple a day keeps the
doctor away?" And you say: "Yes".

Then he says: "Will it keep the doctor away even if one starved himself
and did not take any food except that one apple a day? And you say:
"No". And then he retorts: "It means that the apple does not give us any
strength at all and that proverb is absolutely wrong".

What will you say to such a man? The same is the position of your
question.

**Q103: MAJLIS IN WRONG PLACE**

Can we hold the Imam Husain's Azadari (Majlis) in place which, we know,
is used for drinking, cinemas and dances? I personally do not agree with
it. But we have got one Mulla who said we can do that although we have
got other facilities like private house. A. No. Never do it. It will be
a disrespect to Imam Husain (a.s.).

**Q 104: PURPOSE OF NAZR MONEY**

Can we use the salaam, panjatan and Hazrat Abbas (a.s.) money towards
the building of Imambada?

A. This money is treated as 'Nazar' If the donor has given it for any
specific purpose, then it must be used for that specific purpose. If he
had no particular expenditure in mind, then it may be used, among other
things, for Azadari and/or building of Imambara.

**Q105: NAZAR**

Are we allowed to use the "Hazrat Abbas" Alam and Salaam's money for
religious purposes? A. Yes, but you should do Niyaat that you are using
it on behalf of Hazrat Abbas (a.s.). Here are the items for which such
money may be used (in order of preference): -

(1) Azadari of Hazrat Abbas (a.s.)
(2) Helping needy Zawwar of Hazrat Abbas (a.s.)
(3) Any work of religious uplift and propagation.

**Q 106: WHO CAN SIT ON MINBER?**

I would like to know more about Minber-e-Rasui i.e. who is allowed to
sit on it and recite majlises on it, and what are the conditions to sit
on it?

A. Minber is,the copy of the minber of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and it
can be used only for the preaching of religion, which includes the
description of Fadhail (Greatness) and sufferings of the prophets and
Imams (a.s.) and their true followers. The main purpose of such
preaching is to exhort people to be sincere followers of Muhammad (s.a.w
) and Aal- e-Muhammad (a.s.). The aim of the Majlises is not just to
pass the time, meet friends, drink tea or sherbat and then go home
without any improvement in the belief or character.

Keeping it in view, you will appreciate that if a preacher himself does
not follow the rules of sheriat how can he urge people to become good
Muslims. It is very unfortunate that in this century, minber and Majlis
have become just like business concerns; 'Zakirs' treat these
institutions as their earning places.

As a result, every Tom, Dick and Harry jumps upon the Minber, makes
some demonstration of his oratory, tries to make people appreciate his
'art', fills his pocket and that's that. Nowadays the main aim of
reciting Majlis is to get riches, or prestige in the community. Inna
Lillahi Wa Inna llaihi Raje-un.

**Q107: ZAKIR WHO TELLS LIES**

If you know that a certain man is speaking a pack of lies, backbiting
others, doing "haram' deeds and taking Najis food, can such a man sit on
the Minber of Rasul (s.a.w.) and recite Majlis?

A. Such a man should not be allowed to go on Minber.

**Q 108: WAS BIBI ZAINAB EXCESSIVELY DISTRESSED ON THE EVE OF
ASHURA?**

We have seen a book. In this book it is written that when Bibi Zainab
(a.s) came to know that all the companions and some of the relatives of
Imam (a.s.) were going to be killed in Karbala, she started shrieking
and crying. Imam Husain (a.s.) then tried to pacify her with
exhortation: "What is all this, sister? I am afraid faith and endurance
are over-powered by passion and devilish forces".

Zainab (a.s.) replied: "How could she control herself when Imam Husain
(a.s.) was killing himself with his own hands?" Imam (a.s.) answered
that such was ALLAH'S WILL. This reply added much to Zainab (a.s.)'s
distress and she went out of control due to excessive grief. Witnessing
this Husain (a.s.) made a lengthy speech on patience and
perseverance".

In this booklet the source of the above incidence was "Yakubi' and
"Ibn-e-Jarir'. What I would like to know is if this incidence is
authentic or not. If not, please supply us with an authentic one
(including the source).

A. Before replying to your question, let me explain some thing about
Ibn-e-Jarir and his book.

Ibn-e-Jarir (popularly known as Tabari', 'At-Tabri') is one of the
Sunni historians of 4th century of Hijra. He has collected in his
history narratives concerning any given subject without saying which
narrative he himself prefers.

He has written in his "Preface": "whatever news is in this book of mine
(which I have narrated from our predecessors) which the reader thinks
strange or the hearer deems absurd (because he finds no way of saying
that it may be correct and gets no meaning in reality), then he should
realize that (that absurdity or falsity) has not come from us; it is
from one or other of the narrators who narrated it to us. We have just
written it as it was told us." (See page 7 of the Vol. 1).

Now coming to your question: It appears that your writer does not know
Arabic and has never seen 'Tarikh' of Tabari. There was nothing wrong if
Zainab (a.s.) became distressed in the night of Ashura.

But Tabari (or more correctly, his narrator) added some sentences in
between and writer of your booklet, because of his stark ignorance, has
very badly twisted even those words. The result is a scene of such an
'absurdity' (to use the word of Tabari himself) that no man in his right
senses can accept it.

For example:

Your booklet says: "What is all this, sister? I am afraid our faith and
endurance are overpowered by our passion and devilish forces".

The words in Tabari are: "O sister, your forbearance be not taken away
by Satan". Your writer says: "Zainab replied how could she control
herself when Imam Husain (a.s.) was killing himself with his own
hands."

Tabari has written: "Zainab said, My father and mother be sacrificed
for you, O Abu Abdillah, you are resigned to be killed? My soul be your
ransom."

Note: It should be mentioned here that Shaikh Mufid (r.a.) has given
this incidence in his book Al-lrshad, and this particular sentence is
not therein. Sheikh Mufid's period was just after Tabari.

Your writer says: "Imam (a.s.) answered that such was Allah's will".

Tabari writes: "and (Imam) said, "If Qata (a bird) was left to itself a
single night it could sleep." It was a proverb to show that there was no
way out because of the enemies. In view of so much distortion from the
source, we can easily say that this episode, as recorded in your book,
is NOT in Tabari's Tarikh at all.

So far as authenticity or otherwise of this episode is concerned, I
have already quoted the words of Tabari in his preface. Some times, some
people mislead their readers by quoting the names of great authors like
Tabari or Majlisi without mentioning the fact that the books from which
they are quoting (like Tarikh of Tabari or Biharul-Anwar of Majlisi) are
only a collection of all available material on a given subject, and that
its inclusion in those books does not make them authentic.

One more proof of the absurdity of this episode is that it goes on to
say that Hazrat Zainab (a.s.) fainted and Imam (a.s.) threw water on her
face in the night of Ashura!!

**Q109: WHEN DID HUR JOIN IMAM HUSAIN (A.S.)?**

In the same book, Hur (at Karbala) joined the force of Imam Husain
(a.s.) on the day of Ashura (i.e., 10th Muharram) before the start of
the battle. In every Muharram majlis I hear that Hur went over to Imam
(a.s.)'s side on the night of Ashura.

A. Hur (a.s.) went to Imam Husain's side on the day of Ashura, not in
the night of Ashura. It is found in all books of history, traditions and
biographies. The story of his arrival the night before Ashura may be
just an invention of some Zakirs.


