Q110: Was Imam Martyred When Praying?
=====================================

Was Imam (a.s.) martyred when he was praying? Also, was it Sinan bin
Anas of Najaf who killed Imam Husain (a.s.)? I always hear that it was
Shumr who killed the Imam. A. Imam Hasain (a.s.) was praying (in the
meaning of Du'a) at the time of his martyrdom but not in the meaning of
'Salat'.

This "of Najaf" is very very amusing. It shows your author's ignorance,
not only of Arabic but of history and related subject also.

Sinan bin Anas is described as(Nakha'i) i.e., of the tribe of Nakha. It
seems that your writer had seen it somewhere and mistook it for(Najafi).
He does not know that there was no place called Najaf for a long time
after the martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s.)!

Shimr (not 'Shumr') was in charge of those who participated in
murdering the Imam (a.s.); he was second in command of the whole army at
Karbala; and was exhorting the soldiers to behead Imam (a.s.) without
delay, and in many narratives he is mentioned as the one who finally
killed the Imam (a.s.); and this version is generally narrated in
Majlises. But in other reports the name of Sinan is mentioned as the
killer of the Imam (a.s.).

**Q111. DID IMAM OFFER TO DO BAI'AT OF YAZID?**

From the same book, it seems Amr bin Saad was more sympathetic in that
he wanted to prevent bloodshed (than Yazid or Shumr). This can be seen
from the following letter to Ibne Ziyad:-

"Allah has extinguished the fire of mischief. He has resolved the
difference and created unity. He has set right the community's cause.
Husain held out a promise to accept any of the three alternatives.
Therein lies your as well as the community's welfare"

This letter was written after Imam Husain (a.s.) had offered 3
alternatives to latter: (1) Let him (a.s.) go back to the place he had
come from; (2) Let him have his case decided by Yazid himself; (3) He
may be allowed to go to a border place."

It seems that when Ibne Ziyad received the above letter, he accepted
the proposal. But it was Shumr bin Zil Jaushan who opposed it and hence
the latter went to Karbala. Please confirm if the above incident is
authetic. If not, give me an authentic account with source of
reference.

A. For reply, let me quota Tabari himself:-

"Hani bin Thubait Hadhrami (one of the commanders of Ibn-e-Ziyad's army
in Karbala) says that (Imam) Husain sent a message to Umar bin Saad to
meet him at night between the two camps............Umar bin Saad came
out with about 20 people and Husain came out with the equal number.

When they met, Husain told his companions to stay at a distance and
Umar bin Saad ordered his group likewise." (Hani says) Therefore, we
stood so far from them that we could not hear their voices or their
words. They talked a long time and then they went back to their camps
with their companions.

Then people started talking among themselves, on what those two people
might have talked-but all was just guess work on the people's part; they
suggested that Husain had told Umar bin Saad, "Let us go together to
Yazid".................(Hani goes on saying) People started talking like
this and they spread such rumours without anybody ever hearing anything
like this or knowing what was said."

After one more narrative, Tabari has narrated the words of Aqba bin
Sam-aan (r.a.). He was a freed slave of Bibi Rabab; and was a sort of
secretary of Imam Husain (a.s.); he was present in Karbala, fought
bravely, was seriously wounded. But he survived and was taken prisoner
and is one of the original sources of the narratives of the events of
Karbala. Tabari quotes him as saying: -

"I accompanied Imam Husain (a.s.), went with him from Madina to Mecca,
and from Mecca to Iraq. And I was never far from him till he was
martyred. And he did not talk with anybody a single word, (neither in
Madina nor in Mecca; neither in the way, nor in Iraq nor in the army) up
to the day of his martyrdom, but I heard it.

By God, he never even suggested to the enemies any such thing which
they are now propagating, like the thing which they suppose that he said
that he would put his hand in the hand of Yazid or that he was ready
that they should take him to any border of the kingdom of Islam.

But he only said. Leave me, so that I go away in this wide world, till
we see what turn the situation takes." After copying all these
narratives, Tabari copies the letter of Umar bin Saad to Ibn-e-Ziyad
which you have mentioned in your question.

We know by the emphatic declaration of Aqba bin Sam-aan (r.a.) that
imam never suggested any such thing. And the whole nature of the battle
of Karbala shows that there never was any proposal of accepting the
authority or order of Yazid.

The same tabari narrates in the same Tarikh that,on the day of
Ashura,Imam Husain (a.s) gave a lecture before the army of
Yazid,exhorting them not to indulge in blood-shed and not to kill the
only surviving grandson of the Holy prophet. At the end of the khutba,
he said; "O People, if you do not like me then let me return to the
place of my safety.'' Then Qais bin Ash'ath said to Husain:

Why not submit to the order of your cousins (i.e Yazid and Bani
Umayya), because they will not show you but what you like (they will not
treat you except in a way which you will like) and no evil will reach
you from them. Imam Husain said: "You are the brother of your brother
(Muhammad bin Ash'ath, the killer of Hazrat Muslim bin
Aquil).............. "No by God, I will not put my hands (into theirs)
like honourless person, nor will I accept (them) as do the slaves.

"O Servants of Allah, "I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord that you
do not stone me' (Qur'an 44:20). 'I seek protection of my Lord and your
Lord from every arrogant who believes not in the Day of Reckonning".
(Qur'an 40:27)"

Are these words those of a person who just 2 days ago had himself
offered to submit to the order of Yazid? Remember what Aqba (r.a.) said
and see how his statement is proved to be correct from all reliable
evidence.

In view of such overwhelming evidence, one may only assume that Umar
bin Saad wrote all those alternatives (without any basis, of course)
just to please Ibn-e-Ziyad, perhaps in the hope that once Ibn-e-Ziyad
postponed the battle and talk started, better results might follow.

It is a mirror of the honesty of your writer that while he copies the
letter of Umar bin Saad, he does not think it necessary to quote the
rebuttal of Aqba (r.a.) or even Hani bin Thubait. A more charitable
explanation may be that the poor fellow has never seen Tarikh of Tabari,
and has used the name of Tabari to impress his readers.

I am not interested in the mental luxury of deciding whether Umar bin
Saad was more sympathetic or not. All we care, and all that matters, is
the fact that he was the commander of the army of Yazid in Karbala; and
that when Allah gave him a chance to save himself from Jahannam, he
refused to grasp the opportunity and plunged into the Fire of Hell. That
opportunity was given to him when Ibn-e-Ziyad wrote to him that if he
was not ready to immediately wage the battle against Husain, he should
hand over the command to Shimr. He did not. Instead, he sent the first
arrow towards the camp of Imam Husain, asking people to be his witness
before Yazid that his was the first arrow sent towards Imam Husain
(as).

**Q112: DID IMAM GET WATER?**

My last enquiry on the above book is an incidence that took place after
the army of Ibn Saad had prevented Imam (a.s.) from taking any water
from the Euphrates. Imam (a.s.) sent Hazrat Abbas (a.s) to get water
from the river. The latter succeeded (escorted with 30 horsemen) after
some clashes with the enemy's forces.

Please confirm the authenticity of this incidence. A. Let us look at
this narrative in its context, (i am quoting the same Tabari except
where otherwise mentioned).

Imam Husein (a.s.) reached Karbala on 2nd Muharram. Hur had already
sent a messenger from the way to Ibne Ziyad about Imam Husain's arrival
in Iraq and the direction of his progress. Hur remained with Imam
Husain's group and they were now taking a way which went neither to
Hijaz nor to Kufa.

When they reached Karbala, the messenger of Ibne Ziyad came to Hur. The
letter of Ibne Ziyad ordered Hur to "put Husain under extreme pressure
as soon as my letter reaches you and my messenger meets you. Do not let
Husain stay anywhere except in a desert without any protection (or fort)
and without any water. And I have ordered my messenger to remain with
you and not to leave you till he is able to report to me that you have
enforced my order."

Note that water was to be denied to Imam Husain (a.s.) from the very
beginning. On 3rd Muharram, Umar bin Saad arrived with 4000 soldiers.
The same day he sent a message to Imam (a.s.) asking him why he had come
to Iraq.

Imam's reply is mentioned in the letter of Ibn Saad to Ibne Ziyad:
"When I camped near Husain, I sent a message to him. Husain said that
"People of these places wrote to me and their messengers came to me
requesting me to come here. So I came. Now if they do not like my coming
here, and if their ideas have changed I will go away."

(Incidently, this was Imam Husain's stand to the last moment, as Aqba
has so clearly declared)

It is reasonable to believe that this letter was sent on 4 th Muharram
(because the talk had occured on 3rd Muharram soon after the arrival of
Ibne Saad in Karbala). Ibne Ziyad replied that Umar bin Saad should ask
Imam Husain to submit to the order of Yazid - he and all his companions.
"When this is done, then we will see what to do."

When Umar bin Saad got this reply, he said: "I was afraid that Ibne
Ziyad would not accept the peaceful way (or, easy alternative). Most
probably this reply came on 5th Muharram.

And after this narrative, Tabari writes (without any other narrative in
between):- "There came a letter from Ibne Ziyad to Ibne Saad:-

"Stand between Husain and his companions and water (i.e. prevent Husain
and his companions from getting any water), and they should not taste a
single drop of water, as was done with Uthman.

"So, Ibne Saad sent Amr bin Hajjaj with 500 horsemen; they came to the
river bank and prevented Husain and his companions from getting a single
drop. And it was done three days before the martyrdom of Husain."

After describing some more details of denying water to Imam Husain,
Tabari goes on to say:-

"So when the thirst of Husain and his companions became intense, he
called his brother Abbas and sent him, with 30 horsemen and 20 men on
foot to the river (Then the same incidence is reported which you have
mentioned in the question).

Now, this incidence could not have happened on 7th Muharram (i.e., 3
days before martyrdom), because the order to strictly deny water to Imam
(a.s.) had come soon after that letter of 5th Muharram. And though
Tabari does not say so clearly, Sheikh Mufid has used the words "in the
wake of that letter (or 5th Muharram) arrived another letter, (i.e., the
letter ordering denial of water).

"In the wake of that letter" can mean only one thing - that the 2nd
letter also came on 5th Muharram.

And if water was strictly denied to Imam Husain (a.s.) on the 5 th
Muharram, their thirst could reach its highest point not later than 6th
Muharram's evening. Therefore, it is reasonable to say that the attempt
of Hazrat Abbas to bring water was done not on 7 th Muharram, but on 6th
Muharram latest. In view of all the factors mentioned here, it Was
obviously just a confusion on the part of the narrator to say that it
occured three days before the martyrdom.

**Q 113: WHERE WERE THE BODIES OF MARTYRS?**

Where did the Yazid's army in Karbala find the bodies of martyrs after
killing Imam Husain (a.s.). Because I have heard in many Majlises that
these bodies were taken to the tent by Imam Husain (a.s.) on the day of
Ashura.

A. Yes, Imam Husain (a.s.) had reserved a tent for the bodies of the
martyrs. Naturally it would have been there after the martyrdom of Imam
(a.s.).

**Q114: WHEN WERE THE SONS OF MUSLIM MARTYRED?**

In which Hijra' were the 2 sons of Muslim bin Aquil killed by Harith?
A. In 61 AH. about one year after the tragedy of Karbala.

**Q115: MEANING OF "WAWAILAH"**

There is a Mulla who says that to say "Wawailah" in Majlises or Matam
is wrong, as it is the exclamation mark of the people of Jahannam'. Is
it correct?

A. "Wail" literally means 'woe', 'grief. According to some Ahadith, it
is metaphorically used for 'hell', just as "Nair" (Fire) is used in
Qur'an and ahadith for 'hell'. The word "Wail" is very commonly used in
its literal meaning, just as "Nair" is commonly used in meaning of fire.
"Wail" like "Nair" is not a word specially coined for the hell.

When this word is used in exclamatory form "Wa Wailah" (or "Waili" or
"Ya Waili") then its only meaning is "Oh! The sorrow!", "Oh! The Grief!"
(or "Oh! My Grief!"); and no other meaning is ever understood from such
phrases, which are commonly used in Arabic language to express sorrow
and mourning.

Hadrat Ummul-Banin says in one of her "marthiyas" of her son, Hadrat
'Abbas (a.s.):- (Oh! My sorrow on my lion! his head was bent by a
club-blow)

**Q116: MAJLISES DELAYED FOR LATER DATES**

Can we delay a Majlis of a Ma'sum's birthday or death anniversary, if
it falls on a weekday and we postpone it upto Saturday? A.

There is no haram.

**Q.117: DIRECTION FOR ZIYARA T**

While reciting Ziyarat of a Masum, should we face towara Mecca or
towards his town? A. You may recite the Ziyarat of any Ma'sum either
facing the town where he is buried or facing towards Mecca.

Of course, in some Ziyarats of Imam Husain (a.s.) it is specifically
mentioned that it should be recited facing towards Karbala. Such Ziyarat
should be recited, accordingly, facing towards Karbala


