Q1. Whom Does Islam Belong To?
==============================

Unlike Judaism that belongs to the Jews, and Christianity that belongs
to Christians, Islam does NOT belong to Muslims but to the entire
mankind.

The follower of Islam are called Muslims just to distinguish them from
non-followers and it does not mean that whatever has been said in the
holy Quran - a guidance for mankind -is Exclusively meant for the
muslims as is the prevalent misconception.

A. Islam has been sent to lead the whole mankind onto the right path.
But it is wrong to say that it "belongs" to this or that person. It
belongs to Allah. The muslims who follow Islam, do belong to Islam.
Those who do not follow it are rebels having gone away from islam; and
hence called Kafirs.

Also muslims are called are called "muslims" not to distinguish them
from the non- Believers, but because they belong to islam. It is not a
"negative" name, but a Positive one which means "one who accepts the
Will of Allah and obeys His command."

**Q2. SHIAS IN WEST AND CENTRAL AFRICA**

In the last issue of "The Light" (February,1972) I read an interesting
topic of Shiite connection with early history of East Africa. Can you
please give me the present condition of shia Ithna-'asharis in West,
Central and South Africa?

A. There are very few Shias in South Africa. In Mozambique there are
about 10 families. The number of the Shias in central and west Africa is
as follows:-


of Khoja Origin Arabs from Lebanon etc.

Note: Since these figures were written, most of the Ithna-asheri have
left Nigeria and Zaire as a result of the decision of those governments
not to allow non-citizens to work there.

**Q3. WHY ARE SHIAS IN MINORITY?**

Why we Shias are in minority in the world though ours is the true
Islam. Is it because of (1) oppression to which we have been subjected
soon after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) closed his eyes for all times to
come, or (2) lack of Tabligh work or (3) Tragedy of Kerbala that we have
become lethargic - Tragic aspect being stressed more and the practical
aspect less.

A. When were the "people of truth" in majority? Give me one example.
And for the benefits of the tragic aspect of the events of Karbala, see
the answer to the question No. 98.

**Q4: ALLAH IS ONE**

Could you please give me one Ayat which proves oneness of God?

A. Read Surah Qul Huwallah, with its meaning:-

"Say, He is Allah, the One; Allah, the eternally Besought of all; He
Begets not nor was He begotten; and there is none like unto Him."

**Q5: WHERE IS GOD?**

I was once asked by a Christian to prove the whereabouts of God and why
do I follow the Islamic religion rather than Christianity?

A. God is everywhere by His Power; but not as a body. You should read
"God of Islam" and "Prophethood" to give the full answer to your
Christian friend. These books have been published by this Mission.

**Q6: WHY PLURAL PRONOUNS FOR ALLAH?**

Why sometimes Allah uses in the Qur'an the pronouns, I, ME, WE, US, MY
and OURS? A. You cannot have any objection about singular pronouns. The
plural is used to denote His Greatness, Honour and Power. It is the
usual custom in many languages.

**Q7: WHO CAME FIRST?**

Who was created first, man or animals?

A. Animals.

**Q8: ANY OTHER ADAM?**

Was there any other Adam or World before this world and Adam A.
According to the 'Ahadith' of Masumeen (a.s.), there have passed
thousands of Adams before ours.

**Q 9: WINGS OF THE ANGELS**

"Praise to Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, Who
appointeth the angels messengers having wings two, three an
four"(Qur'an, 35:1) Explain the phrase "wings two, three and four".

A. We may suppose "two, three or four" to refer to the pairs of wings
But it does not necessarily signify the precise number, rather it means
"many wings", because in 'Ahadith' we find mention of angels with
hundreds of wings; and also there are angels with just one pair of
wings.

**Q10: JINN AND SATAN**

Who are Jinn, Satan, Iblees and Ifreets?

A. "Jinn": In many passages of the Qur'an "Jinn" and man are spoken of
together. In an ayat 'man' is stated to have been created from clay
while "Jinn" from fire. There is much argument about the real nature of
"Jinn" but it is safe to say that they are a creation of God, who are
hidden from our eyes and have been given "Intelligence" like human
beings and are required to follow the Sheriat sent by Allah.

"Iblis" and "Satan" refer to the same person. He is from "Jinn", was
elevated to worship Allah with the angels; and that is why he was
included in the order of doing "Sajdah" towards Adam (as.).

"Ifreet":

"A huge, powerful Jinn".


