Q21: Total Number of Ahlul Bayt
===============================

What is the total number of Ahlut-Bait (a.s.) is it 5, 14 or more. Can
we include Hazrat Ali Asghar (a.s.) and the sons of Hazrat Muslim also
in Ahlul-Bait (a.s.)? Is there any limit to the number of Ahfuf-Bait
(a.s.)?

A. So far as the language is concerned, there is no limit. All the
descendants of Ali (a.s.) and Fatima (a.s.) or all Bani Hashim may be
included in this word. But when it comes to the interpretation of the
Ayat of "Purity" (Ayat-e-Tatheer), Ahadith have clearly shown that it
does not include anybody except the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), Bibi Fatimah
(a.s.) and 12 Imams (a.s.).

**Q22: DISTINCTION OF 'PANJATAN'**

What are the additional distinctions of Panjatan (a.s.) over the rest
of the nine innocent Imams? According to the "Event of the Blanket"
(Hadise Kisa) is it only Panjatan who are Ahlul-Bait?

A. Ahlul-Bait means Bibi Fatimah and 12 Imams (a.s.). The "Panjatan"
have more "Fadhilat" than the rest, because the Prophet (s.a.w.) is the
supreme most of all creatures of Allah, and Hazrat Ali (a.s.) is his
"Nafs", which means 'like him in almost all things (with exception of
prophethood and the specialities of the prophethood)'.

Bibi Fatimah (a.s.) has a position below her father and husband but
above all other Imams. And these 5 Holy personalities were directly
included in the Ayats of "Tat-heer," "Mubahila-" and "Mawadaat".

And Hazrat Ali, Imam Hasan, Imam Husain and 12th Imam (Peace be on them
all) have "Fadhilat" over remaining 8 Imams. But it is not good for us
to ponder too much on these matters. For us, all have equal authority;
and if among themselves one is superior to the other, it has nothing to
do with our own duties towards them.

**Q23: WHO IS "IMAM-E-MUBEEN"?**

(a) Please let me know the exact meaning of the Arabic word 'IMAM' and
'IMAM-I- MUBIN' These words are contained twelve times in Holy Qur'an.

(b) What is the meaning and commentaries of the word "YASIN' according
to our Shia belief?

(c) It looks many authors of Shia community claim that 12th verse of
Sura Yasin (36:12) was revealed in favour of Hadhrat Ali bin Abi Talib.
Will you, please, let me know at least three references of Sunni Muslims
and Shia Muslims respectively, who have admitted that Hadhrat Ali was
"Imam-i-Mubin".

(d) It sounds apparently that Sunnis either correctly or incorrectly
have translated the word "Imam-i-Mubin" (Qur'an, 36:12) as '"Aamal Nama"
and "Lauh-i-Muhfuz" on the strength of the following:-

i. The Sunnis are lacking the basic concept of Imamat;

ii. They are trying to conceal the excellence of Hazrat Ali by not
interpreting the real meaning of "Imam-i-Mubin";

iii. Their Mufassirin (Commentators) have followed the policy of
partiality, looking at only one side of Islam.

But, Sir, you must have noticed that none of these three points were
held by Christians and Jews scholars in their translations of Holy
Qur'an, and that Europeans have translated it utterly on the ground of
neutrality and impartiality.

Why they too have translated the word "Imam-i-Mubin" as ""Open Book",
""Plain Register". ""Clear Record or Writing"? Are their translation
works not correct? If incorrect, please supply your comprehensive
comments in this regard.

(e) Suppose, the word "Imam-i-Mubin" means "Open Book", "Plain
Register" and we may just hold it incorrect. Now please describe why
Shia commentators themselves have wrongly translated the word
"Imam-i-Mubin" of 79th verse of Sura Hijr (15:791) Why it is so? Here
Shia authors and commentators translated it as ""Plain highway" or
'"Open roadway".

A. Before I write anything let me point out that the Christian and
Jewish scholars have not translated the Qur'an "utterly on the ground of
neutrality and impartiality", as you have suggested.

First of all, their translations and commentaries are based on Sunni
Books of "Tafseer" and "Hadith". Shia books were not available to them;
and, moreover, as the motive of the orientalists' translations was not a
"search for truth" but to give some ammunition in the hands of the
missionaries (many translators were themselves missionaries),

they naturally looked into the books of the Sunnis who form the
majority of Islamic community and amongst whom the missionaries were
expected to preach Christianity in almost all Islamic place (except Iran
and a part of Iraq).Therefore, they followed Sunni ideas.

And it was because of this background that almost all of them dismissed
Shia sect as a non-entity, a supposedly heretical group of Islam, which,
according to them, came into being because of political differences and
had no religious standing.

So these are your neutral and impartial translators!

The-word "Imam" means "Leader" or "Guide". And it is used for various
meanings: Successor of the Prophet; Religious Guide, and hence the
Prophet; Divine book; One who leads in prayer.

All the above meanings are based on the basic concept of "Guidance" and
"Leadership" Also, it is used for the "Path" (because it leads from one
point to another). In the Qur'an it has also been used for the "Books of
deeds" in which our actions are recorded.

Now see the examples:

(1) Qur'an, 2:124 - Here Imam has been used for "Leader" (in the sense
of "prophet")
(2) Qur'an, 25:74; 21:73; 32:24 - It is used for Leader, meaning
"Religious Guides".
(3) Qur'an: 9:12 and 28:4 - Here also it is used for Leaders' who lead
people to Hell (or should we say, "Who mislead").
(4) Qur'an: 17:71 - mentions of "Imam" in the meaning of "Leader" and,
of course, good and evil, both types.
(5) In 15:79, this word has been used for "way" or "path".
"Imam-e-Mubin" in this ayat cannot be translated in any other way.

Now before explaining the meanings of "Imamin Mubin" (in 36:11) let me
explain one thing: According to numerous 'Ahadith' of the Holy Prophet
and Imams, "The Qur'an has been revealed...... and for each of its Ayats
there an 'appearance' (apparent meaning) and a 'hidden' meaning....."
(This Hadith has been narrated by the Sunnis from the Holy Prophet
s.a.w).

According to Shia faith, both types of meanings have to be believed, as
both are from Allah; and both meanings are complementary to each
other.

In this ayat of Sura "Yasin", the apparent meaning is the "Book of
Deeds", which has been described in various ways by various
translators.

And its "inner" meaning may be known from the tradition of the Holy
Prophet, narrated by the famous Sunni Mufassir, and Muhaddith, Imam
Jalaluddin Suyuti in his Tafseer "Ad- Durrul Manthur (Vol. V, Page 261,
Egypt edition):-

"Abd bin Hamid, Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim have narrated from Quatadah
that this ayat means that "everything is preserved in a "Leader" (The
Arabic word implies a human being.)

And our 5th Imam (a.s.) has said that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
explaining this ayat before Hadhrat Abu Bakr and Umar said-(in a long
Hadith) turning towards All bin Abi Talib: "Verily, this is that 9Imam
Mubin) in whom Allah has contained the knowledge of everything."

I hope this explanation will satisfy you that neither the "outer"
meaning given by our Sunni brethren is wrong, nor is the "inner" meaning
described by our 5th Imam (as.) on the authority of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.).

But I have not seen this "inner" meaning mentioned clearly in Sunni
books; therefore, you cannot blame them if they do not accept it.

"Ya-Sin" is one of the titles of the Holy Prophet (s.aw) This short
letter is not a place to give more details; but you may rest assured
that there is no difference between the Sunnis and Shias in this
matter

**Q24: INCOME OF 14 MASUMEEN**

What was the source of income of our 14 Masumeen (a.s)? A.Usually trade
and agriculture.

**Q25: RELIABILITY OF DUA**

I am perplexed with a problem that I don't know what I shall do. I
recite the Du'as in the Ithna-asheri Mosque, and it is one of the Duas
which is usually recited is For so long I have been reciting this Dua
without any doubt: but recently a certain old man told me that it is
'SHIRK' to recite this Dua. He showed me verses from the Holy Qur'an
proving his claim.

For certain period I ceased to recite this dua. Then my father insisted
that I should continue to recite it. When that man heard me reciting
this dua again, he asked me why I had resumed it and I replied him that
my father told me to continue reciting it. Then that man quoted this
verse from the Holy Qur'an and said that in this case I should not
follow my father-

"'AND IF THEY (THE PARENTS) CONTEND WITH THEE THAT THOU SHOULD
ASSOCIATE WITH ME (ALLAH) WHAT THEE HAST NO KNOWLEDGE OF (THEN THOU)
OBEY THEM NOT………..''(Ch 31,verse 15)

Now whom should I follow, my father or that man? To support his claim
that man said that there is not any tradition from the Aimma (a.s) which
says that we can ask them besides Allah A. Shirk, in short, is of two
kinds: (1) Shirk in belief, and (2) Shirk in actions. Shirk in belief
means believing that there is more than one God.

We know that your belief is free from that type of Shirk. Shirk in
action: One example, in Islamic Sheriat, of this type of Shirk is doing
Sajda to other than Allah. But this entirely depends upon the order of
Allah, and here we can not use our own judgment. For example, let us
look at the above-mentioned example:-

Allah ordered the angels to do Sajdah before Adam (as); and when Satan
disobeyed, he was not honoured as true "Muwahhid" (monotheist), but was
branded as a "Mal'un", because he disobeyed Allah.

Likewise, Hadhrat Yakub (a,s.) and his eleven sons did Sajdah to
Hadhrat Yusuf (as); and they were not called "Mushrik".

But the same thing which was allowed for angels and Hadhrat Yakub
(a.s.) is now absolutely forbidden in Islam, and if one does it now, he
will be called a "Mushrik". So, the Shirk in action can not be
comprehended or adjudged by us. It rests on the order of Allah.

Another example: There were hundreds of idols in Kaaba; and the Arabs
worshipped them and kissed them and what not. And also in the walls of
the same Kaaba was the "Black Stone", also honoured and kissed by the
Arabs.

The Holy Prophet destroyed all the idols; but did nothing against "the
Black Stone": rather, he made it an object of reverence and kissed it.
Now, the Christian writers allege that the Black Stone is a legacy of
paganistic rites. But we know that kissing it and respecting it is not
Shirk because it is done by the order of the Holy Prophet. Non-Muslims
may not understand the difference between kissing an idol and kissing
the Black Stone; but for the Muslims the difference is clear.

The trouble is that many people rely upon their own judgment in
deciding whether a certain action is Shirk or not. The result is that
Sunnis, for example, think that doing Sajdah on a "Muhr" is Shirk;
making Taazia is Shirk; kissing the Zarih of the Holy Prophet in Madina
is Shirk.

They do not understand that so far as our actions are concerned, they
have to be governed by the commands of Allah, the Holy Prophet (saw.)
and Masumeen (a.s.) After this short explanation, let me tell you that
this Duahas been recorded by Sheikh Mufeed (a.r), through his chain of
narrators from Hadhrat Seheb-ul-Asr (a.s.). Sheikh Mufeed died in 423
AH.

Then Sheikh Tabrasi (who wrote Tafseer Majmaul-Bayan and died in 548
A.H.) narrated another incident concerning the same Dua. The incident is
as follows:-

Abdul Hasan Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Abil-Laith (who was a well-known
pious man) was in danger of his life and had fled to the graves of our
7th and 9th Imams (a.s.) and hidden there.

Then Hadhrat Saheb-ul-Asr came to him and taught him this Du'a and by
reciting it, he was spared his life and the danger passed away. When the
Imam (a.s.) was teaching him this Du'a, and came to the wordshe pointed
to his own chest.

The Dua printed in 'Mafatihul Jinan' (on page 115-116) is narrated from
Sheikh Kaf'ami (who died in 895 A.H.). There are a few differences in
the 3 narrations, but they are immaterial.

I remember some one had written to me from Zanzibar that this Du'a is
narrated by an "unknown" person. In view of above-mentioned details it
is obvious that the narrator was "unknown" to only those "who do not
know".

It is not correct to say that there is no tradition to show that we can
ask from Masumeen (a.s.). There are some traditions, one of which quoted
here from Bihar-ul-Anwar:-

Imam Jafer Sadiq (as.) told his companion, Mufazzal bin Umar: "If you
have any "Hajat" (need) towards Allah and are unable to fulfil it then
pray 2 Rak'at Namaz; after Namaz say Takbir 3 times; then recite Tasbih
of E Fatima (a.s.), then go into sajda and say 100 times (O My Lady, O
Fatima, Help me);

then put your right cheek on earth and say likewise (100 times), then
go into Sajdah and say likewise 110 times; then mention your need, and
Allah will fulfil it." He is the same Mufazzal who had written the book
of from dictation of the same imam (a.s).

If seeking any help from anyone other than Allah is Shirk, then no
prophet and no Imam could be called Muwahhid. There are scores examples
even in the Qur'an where prophets sought others' help. Hadhrat Isa (a.s)
said ?? ??? ?????? ?? (Who are my helpers in the cause of Allah?)

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) sought help of the Muslims of Madina and they
are called (Helpers) in the Qur'an.

Also, we know that Imam Husain (a.s.) several times asked the army of
Yazid to help him (Istighathah). Was it, God forbid, bad to seek the
help of those unbelievers?

Our Imams (a.s.) had to contend with various types of "Fitnah' in their
days. There were some persons who thought that the Imams were Khalique
and Razique; others said that they were the "Rabb' (god). While refuting
such falsehoods, our Imams (a.s.) had to emphasize their total
dependence on Allah in all matters.

On the other hand, there were a great many people who did not know how
high was the position of Muhammad and Aal-e-Muhammad (a.s) before Allah.
When talking to such persons, (if the circumstances allow and there was
no danger to them from such statements) the Imams (a.s) described their
exalted position.

For example. Sheikh Karajiki (died 449 A.H.) has narrated that once
Imam Abu Hanifah (founder of the Hanafi school of law) took his food
with Imam Jafar Sadiq (a.s.); at the end of the meal, Imam Jafar Sadiq
(a.s) said:

"All thanks are due to Allah, the Lord of the universe; O Allah! it is
from Thee and from Thy Rasul".

Abu Hanifa said: "O Abu Abdillah! you ascribed a partner to Allah? Imam
Jafar Sadiq (a.s.) said: Woe to thee! Verily Allah says in His Book:

(And they did not become (your) enemy, but just because Allah and His
Apostle had made them rich from His bounty). (Qur'an, 9:74) And He says
in another Place.

(If only they had been content with what Allah and His Apostle gave
them, and had said, 'Sufficient unto us is Allah; Allah and His
Messenger will soon give us of His bounty").(Qur'an, 9:59)

Abu Hanifah said: "By Allah, it is as though I had never before read or
heard these two Ayats from the Book of Allah."

Imam (a.s.) said: "No; surely you had read them and heard them. But
Allah has revealed about you and your like and He said:

(or are their hearts locked up by them?) (Quran, 47:24) And also He has
said:

By no means! But on their hearts is the stain of (ill) which they do.
(Qur'an. 83:14) Your 'old man' should not try to refute this Hadith by
saying that this episode, perhaps, is not authentic; because, even if we
totally reject this episode, there is no way to reject the argument
given in this Hadith because that argument is based upon Qur'an and
Qur'an cannot be rejected.

**Q26. OUR IMAMS WERE ARABS. WHY NOT ARE WE ARABS?**

One Shia brother asked me. "Our Imams were Arabs. Why are we not
Arabs?" A. Well, Arab means a resident of Arabia, or one whose mother
language is Arabic. Our Imams were Arabs because they lived in Arabia.

How can a man living in Africa or India become Arab? The Prophet
(s.a.w.) was an Arab; but he was sent for the whole mankind. He
declared, "I have been sent to all: red, black and yellow." And surely
among his followers are people of every race and every country. Does
your friend mean that the whole mankind should be squeezed into Arabia,
to make them Arabs? You should remember what Allah has said in the
Qur'an:


"O people. We have created you of a male and female; and we have
distributed you into groups and tribes so that you might know one
another; verily the most honoured of you before Allah is the one who is
the most pious of you." (Qur'an, 49:13).

And the Holy Prophet of Islam has said: "There is no superiority for a
Quraishite over a non-Quraishite, nor for an Arab over a non-Arab. All
of you are from Adam and Adam was from dust"

So, the Prophet and Imams (peace be on them all) had come to make us
most pious and most God-fearing; they had not come to make us Arab. Our
colour, origin or country was not their concern at all; they were
interested in making us good believer and good Muslim.

**Q27. WHY SHOULD JESUS FOLLOW MAM MAHDI?**

Why should a great Prophet, Jesus,follow an Imam, Hazrat Mahdi (a.s.),
at the time of their re-appearance?

A. Our twelve Imams are higher and greater than all previous prophets
except Hadhrat Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.) whose successors they are. As
to why, please, read my book "Muhammad is the Last Prophet".

**Q 28: WHO ARE GOG AND MAGOG?**

Gog and Magog are two terms descriptively used in reference to two
nations of people they are mentioned in Christian Scriptures (the
Revelation of St. John - King James Version of the Bible).

Now, who are the Gog and Magog people? Realize that I understand that
Zul-Qarnain is considered to be Alexander the Great; however Sura is
dealing with the future tense and it is that I am concerned with. Any
assistance you may render in helping me will be most deeply appreciated
by me.......also…..Said the Prophet.

"How excellent a gift and how admirable a present is a word of wisdom
which you hear and inwardly digest and then carry it and teach it to a
brother Muslim; verity it is equivalent to a year's worship".

Said the Prophet. "In truth Allah and His angels as well as the heavens
and earth, even the ant in it's hill and the whale in the sea, will
bless the man who teaches his fellow man." A. I have sent you a book
"Day of Judgment" in which this topic has Seen discussed briefly.
Please, study that book and you will find that many of your queries are
answered therein.

As for these questions, read the following: -

1. Zul-Qarnain was a man of Allah; Alexander was a pagan. The two
cannot be the same.

2. Appearance of Dajjal is closely connected with re-appearance of Imam
Mahdi and Hazrat Isa (Peace be on both); and their appearance is the
precursor of the Day of Judgment. Allah Taala says no one can know when
the Day of Judgment is to come. Therefore, naturally, no one can know
when Im

3. am Mahdi and Hazrat-lsa will re-appear.

Therefore, we have no choice but to reject all the forecasts (whether
they are in the Bible or in Muslims' writings) which say that Dajjal
will appear in this or that time.

**Q 29: MUJTAHIDS SOON AFTER GHAIBAT**

Who was the 1st Mujtahid after our 12th Imam (a.s.) disappeared and how
many Mujtahids succeeded him. How many followers of the living Imam
(a.s.) are there in the world today? Could you give me the possible
figures for each country?

A. Between 260 A.H. and 329 A.H., there were 4 Deputies of the Imam
(a.s.) especially appointed by him (one after another) to act as a link
between the Imam (a.s.) and his followers.

At the end of that period. Imam (a.s.) informed his last Deputy that
after the death of that Deputy no one will be appointed in his place,
and the Shias were to follow the guidance of those scholars who knew the
Ahadith of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) (and who had certain virtues and
qualifications). It is not possible to give here all the names.

The number of the Shias in all countries is not known. As a rough
estimate, there are 70 million Shias in the world, most of them in Iran,
Iraq, Pakistan, India and Middle East.

**Q.30: CHANGING THE TAQLEED**

If one had made his mind to follow one Mujtahid; eventually he changes
his mind to follow another. Is it necessary to ask permission from the
previous Mujtahid?

A. It is not allowed to change from one Mujtahid to another unless the
second Mujtahid is 'more learned' than the one whose Taqleed you are
doing at present. And in such cases there is no need ask permission from
anyone.


