Q40:age Limit For Purdah?
=========================

Is there any limit to the age of 'Namahram'? We had a lady of 70 years
who died and her face was kept open and every man was asked to come and
see her face. Someone objected, but he was told that after 70 years it
is allowed.

A. If a man is of such an advanced age that he has completely lost all
sexual desires, then a woman may go before him with open face. But
nobody can fix any age-limit for this change. It depends upon health,
race and many other such factors.

And in any case, it was improper for the 'Na-Mahrams' to go to see the
face of that dead woman. Only 'Mahram' males should have been allowed
there, no matter what her age.

**Q41:VAGINAL EXAMINATION BY A DOCTOR**

Should a Muslim woman allow her vaginal examination by a male doctor?

A. According to Islam, a man is not allowed to look at the body or hair
of a "Ghair Mahram" woman, whether it is with lusty intention or not.
Likewise, a woman is not allowed to look at the body of a "Ghair
Mahram\*' man.

This is the basic rule. Now coming to your Question. If it is necessary
for a male doctor, for the purpose of treatment of a "Ghair-Mahram"
woman, to look at her or to touch her, then it is allowed. But if the
treatment can be done by just looking at her, he should not touch her;
and if it can be done by just touching her without looking, he should
not look at her.

If there is no lady doctor and diagnosis is not possible without
vaginal examination, the male doctor should at first try to use a mirror
and look into the mirror. If this is not possible, then looking at the
private parts is allowed.

**Q42: SEPARATION OF BOYS AND GIRLS A PROBLEM**

Is the meeting of a boy and a girl (both adult) with the sole purpose
of marriage allowed in Islam in this 20 century? A closed-eye procedure
leads to many problems later.

A. They are allowed to see each other once only. (This permission does
not include touching or going out together). And so far as "many
problems later" are concerned, the ratio of divorces to the Marriages in
western countries is well-known. (It reaches the ratio of 1:3, and in
some places even 1:2). So, the "open-eye" procedure creates more
troubles than our "backward out-of-date barbaric" system can ever do.

Anyhow, if they want to get to know more of each other, the only legal
way, which I can think of, is to enter into "Mut'a" openly.

**Q43: MIXING OF GIRLS WITH BOYS**

Nowadays boys and girls like to live together right from their youth
but results are not good; they fail to reach permanent bond of love and
marriage. Frequently, the girls move from one boy to another and at last
are left out.

For safety against marrying a left-out girl, can a Shia boy have a girl
from his youth? If not, then is it a sin marrying a prostitute? A. No
Shia (and no Muslim) is allowed to have any contact with any woman who
is not his 'Mahram' (e.g. mother, daughter, sister, aunt, niece,
mother-in-law, daughter-in-law) unless he is married to her.

If there is any social problem, it is because the people have left the
path of sheriat. If they encounter any difficulty by going against
sheriat, it is their fault. Rules of sheriat cannot be changed to suit
the whims of a man (or of a community) which has no regard for Law of
Islam, and wants Islam to give him concession because he (or they)
has/have already commited a sin. Sin deserves punishment, not
'concession'.

**Q44: HIGHER EDUCATION FOR GIRLS**

Is education, especially further education, for females forbidden in
Islam? Give reasons.

A. I am sending you the latest issue of the 'LIGHT' wherein you will
find the answer to a question about 'Purdah' (see Question 37)'.

If any girl can observe the rules of the Sheriat, as explained in that
answer, she may get education as you have asked. But if she, by getting
further education, is not able to remain within the limit laid down by
Sheriat, then she has to forego anything which makes her go against the
Sheriat, be it education or service.

In the eyes of Islam, a Muslim who follows the rules of Sheriat
faithfully (even if he/she is ignorant in the eyes of his friends) is
thousand times better than a Muslim who goes against Sheriat (even if he
is considered highly educated by the Society).

**Q45: RIGHT OF WOMAN CONCERNING MARRIAGE**

May I beg to seek your valued FATWA in respect of nikah Marriage
Ceremony, to be performed in accordance with the tenets of Islam.

I am a young Muslim girl of about 23 years of age of the Bohra Shia
Sect and our Amil Saheb, who possesses the High Authority of His
Holiness the Syedna Saheb in Kenya refuses to grant permission to the
Bohra resident Priest in Mombasa to perform my "Nikah' Marriage Ceremony
by putting allegation on my four brothers that they are Not obedient to
him or to the Syedna Saheb, whereas my whole family is MUKHLISIN, loyal
to the, Syedna Saheb and to the Dawoodi Bohra Faith.

I may further mention for your very kind information that if I go to
Kadhi Court for the marriage Ceremony to be performed by the Chief
Kadhi, then the local Representative and the Resident Bohra, Priest give
Fatwa that my nikah' will be considered illegal and that my children
will also be considered illegal, because the marriage ceremony will be
performed by some one else and n by the Bohra Priest appointed by the
Syedna Saheb.

Your Eminence, I only beg to know from you that if my marriage ceremony
would be performed by a Muslim Kadhi will it be considered legitimate or
not and that will my children be considered legitimate or not?

A. For your guidance, I enclose herewith an old issue of our Magazine
the Light (Vol. Ill, No. 6) and advise you to read the article
'Memorandum', which begins on page 6. You may be interested to read para
(b) on page 7 which says:-

"(b) Islam, according to Shia School, has given a woman right to
contract herself in marriage if she is adult and discreet." Also, see
last paras under the sub-heading "State- controlled Clergy?" which
says:-

"The White Paper requires a Muslim intending to marry to give notice of
his intention, 21 days before, to a Sheikh authorised by the Minister to
solemnize marriages." It has overlooked the fact that Muslim boys and
girls can solemnize the marriage themselves without any need to call a
Sheikh and ask him to perform the marriage.

"We are sure it is not the intention of the government to create a new
version of Islam which would have institutionalized clergy like
Christianity. So why this reference to a Sheikh authorized by the
Minister? Needless to say that this idea goes extremely against
Islam."

**Q46: MARRIAGE OF A SEYYID GIRL WITH NON-SEYYID**

Can a Seyyid girl marry a non-Seyyid Shia Ithna-asheri, who is
well-educated and has a high post in government?

A. Yes. And it does not matter whether he is well-educated and
well-to-do or not. There is no colour, caste or race-bar in Islam.

**Q47: SLAUGHTERING CHICKENS DURING WEDDING**

As you know, our weddings are very traditional and some of our customs
are un-Islamic. But it is sometimes difficult to distinguish if some of
the things we do during the wedding ceremony are Islamic or not. For
example, the bride and the groom have to step on the blood of a
freshly-slaughtered chicken or goat. Is this allowed in Islam?

A. This rite is un-lslamic, and should be discarded.

**Q.48: SHOULD ONE WAIT FOR A GOOD WIFE?**

I am a young man and I want to marry for physical comfort and peace of
mind. But the difficulty is that at present I can't find a good wife,
having Islamic manners and back- ground. Now, what should I do? Should I
wait for a good girl? Or, should I choose from the girls presently
available?

A. If someone cannot remain without a wife and is afraid that by
remaining unmarried he may fall into sin, then it is wajib to enter into
marriage; he must try, in any case, to teach the Islamic ways and
manners to the wife.

If, on the other hand, he may control his emotion and is confident that
he can save himself from falling into sin, then it is better to remain
unmarried and search for a good wife.

**Q49: DIFFERENCE BETWEEN NIKAH AND MUTAA**

What is the difference between Nikah and Mutaa? Why is the institution
of Mutaa not being widely used in Africa?

A. The differences between permanent and temporary marriages are as
follows:-

1. A woman married by Mut'aa cannot be divorced. The parties become
absolutely separated upon the expiry of the period agreed upon.

2. But the husband may dissolve the marriage of Mut'aa by making to the
woman a gift of the remaining term, i.e. to waive his right to her.

3. The wife, married by Mut'aa cannot be subject to 'ILA' or 'LAAN'

4. A Mut'aa marriage creates no right of inheritance in either party.
But, if there is an express condition stipulated in the formula (Segha)
of 'IJAB' and 'QUBUL' the parties would inherit from each other if the
death occurs during the period of Mut'aa or its Iddat.

5. In Mut'aa marriage, the woman's Iddat period extends for two full
terms of her monthly course, if she is not pregnant. But if she is
pregnant, the Iddat lasts until the delivery of the child. The Iddat of
widow is four months and ten days, like a widow of a permanent marriage,
if she is not pregnant.

But if she is pregnant, the Iddat of death lasts until the delivery of
the child, or four months and 10 days, whichever is longer.

If she is in the age of having her monthly course, but does not have it
owing to any reason other than pregnancy, her Iddat will be forty-five
days.

There are some other differences but this much is sufficient for all
practical purposes. People nowadays see no harm in committing adultery;
but are shy of taking advantage of the permissions given by Sheriat.


