Introductory note
=================

It is highly recommended as perceived from the sayings of the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.) to write a Will.

To avoid the common pitfalls and prevalent problems when persons die
instate, we have taken this initiative to prepare this booklet. It
contains guidelines on making an Islamic Will as well as a sample Will.
If you fill this tailor made Will it would become a legal and binding
document.

The Africa Federation embarked on this task of preparing the guidelines
and a sample will from which the members of the community can benefit.
The following booklet was compiled from various sources and edited to
meet the present needs. It is by no means a complete document and only
serves as a guideline to make a Will that is both Islamically and
legally acceptable. In short it explains certain aspects to be
considered when making a Will and elaborates the parts of an Islamic
Will and how to make one.

We would like to acknowledge the following sources where we extracted
information from: GCG booklet on how to make a Will, Sayyid Muhammad
Rizviâ€™s Making an Islamic Will (1994) and the World Federation Sample
Will.

We would like to add that there may be assets you own or debts you owe,
which nobody knows about. If you have them listed in this secret
document to be opened after your demise, at least the assets will not go
to waste and your debts will be cleared.

Many orphans and widows have had to endure hardships and resort to legal
wrangles lasting a long time until the estate of their deceased is
sorted. If the Will clearly stipulates all your wishes then there would
no room for any infighting.

You have the choice of using one third of your estate as per your wishes
and do not miss on this chance to earn salvation for the hereafter by
using this option to do the best charity. Their might be some activities
you have wished to undertake all along, this is the chance to get them
fulfilled by allocating valuable resources for it to become a reality.

We strongly believe you have benefited and been a proud member of our
community. Now it is the turn of the community to gain from you out of
the one third. Perhaps you could name your local Jamaat or Regional
Federation or a charity of the community as a beneficiary; and leave
behind a legacy from which many will benefit perpetually and you shall
be remembered with fond memories and be an example to emulate for
others.

We humbly suggest that you give this document the seriousness it
deserves and do not put your Will on hold any further. Please read it
carefully and fill it today. No one knows when death comes.

**With Salaams and Duas,**

**Zulfikar H Khimji**

**April 2003**


