Introduction
============

Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim. Alhamdulillahi Rabbil Aalamiin. Thumma
As-Salaatu wassalaamu Alaa Ashrafil Khalqi Ajmaeen, Muhammadin Wa Aalihi
at-Tayyibeen at-Taahireen, Wa As-haabihil Muntajabeen.

Allah (S.w.T.) says in the Holy Qur’an that:

***“in their histories, there is certainly a lesson for men of
understanding. it is not a narrative which could be forged, but a
verification of what is before it, and a distinct explanation of all
things, and a guide and a mercy to a people who believe”. (Sura Yusuf,
12:111)***

The style of story telling, that the Holy Qur’an adopts is considered to
be one of its miracles. In addition, this style has a tremendous effect
on making the reader interested in reading. A story is better understood
and not easily forgotten while mere words are easily forgotten. Stories
are easily absorbed without taxing the brain. This is the reason that
made us to adopt the same style in this book, which is filled with real
life events in the past and present, concerning the Ahlul Bait, great
scholars of Islam and ordinary people, in order to convey the message
without any changes, with perfection and in a summarized fashion to the
brain.

Why stories of people who sacrifice?
------------------------------------

When the people who sacrifice and the charitable, answer the call of the
Qur’an which says:

***“and spend out of which He has made you to be successors of …. (Sura
Al-Hadid , 57:7)”,***

and the call of the Holy Masum’in (a.s.) who said that:

*“On the day of judgment the act of charity will provide a shade for the
people who sacrifice”*[^1],

they are trying in their own fashion to find a solution to an age old
problem of poverty. Luqman the wise was true in saying to his son that:

*“He had tasted patience, but there was nothing worse than poverty*
”.[^2]

How many fathers return back to their families after a hard day of
finding sustenance only to find that they have failed to fulfill the
needs of their families? How many mothers feel so hurt and pained to see
the poor condition of their children compared to other children? How
many celebrations of Eid and other happy occasions pass with orphans who
don’t have good food and new clothes? How many capable youths have had
their dreams and hopes crashed because of not having enough funds for
their education. How many parents have not been able to save their
children from the pangs of death simply because they didn’t have funds
for the medicine to cure them?

The people who are generous and charitable inspire hope in hard times.
The people who secretly give charity, in such a way that if they give by
their right hand, the left hand doesn’t know, are saviours for the
milliards of poor people who roam around the streets and are on the
increase daily.

Such people are finding a gradual and partial solution for thousands and
millions of people; and at the same time are reaping rewards from Allah
in the world and Hereafter. It is for this reason that we have tried to
site real life events throughout the ages, so that others are motivated
to follow suit. Shall we then not answer the call of the Holy Qur’an
which says:

***“they shall be rewarded with high places because they were patient,
and shall be met there in with greetings and salutations” (Sura
al-Furqan, 25:75-76)***

The course of the book in hand deals with six chapters:

The first chapter of this book deals with people who sowed the seeds of
charity in this world, in order to form a bridge to benefit from, in the
hereafter.

The second chapter deals with events and stories related by various
sources, which show the connection between the people who are alive and
dead, and how we can perform certain acts which can directly benefit the
dead people.

The third chapter deals with the deep connection between charity and
protection from problems, mishaps and misfortunes.

The fourth chapter deals with the unseen or spiritual connection between
the giving of charity and increase in sustenance.

The fifth chapter deals with the efforts exerted by our great Islamic
Scholars to serve others and sacrifice their wealth and possessions in
order to encourage and motivate others to do the same.

The sixth chapter deals with people who have done service to the family
of the Prophet Muhammad (S) and how they have got worldly and spiritual
returns.

[^1]: Wasaail Al-Shia, 206/6

[^2]: Al Wasail, Vol. 6


