Our Scholars: Models Of Sacrifice And Charity
=============================================

The scholars of our nation are stars. They are models for each aspect of
life. Some people think that scholars are only involved in studying and
learning the religion of Islam and concerned with Fiqh, the sciences and
philosophy. People don’t think that our scholars are concerned with good
morals and ethics, and to uplift the society.

Sacrifice and charity are the basis of Islam that our scholars must take
the lead in being good examples, even if they become exhausted in
helping the oppressed and helping the needy and orphans. Let us relate
to you the way our scholars have taken the lead in charity and
sacrifice.

He did not have money for himself!
----------------------------------

Sheikh Kaasim Muhyideen, who died in the year of 1376 A.H., was one of
the noble scholars of the city of Najaf. This scholar used to go to the
rich merchants and businessmen in Najaf to pledge money for the poor and
needy. Although they used to refuse him in the morning, he used to go to
them in the afternoon and once again ask them again. In this way he used
to collect a lot of money to distribute to the needy.

It is known that he didn’t use this wealth personally and used to have a
simple diet of bread and milk due to his own poverty. It is also known
that when he became ill, and doctors advised him to go abroad for
medical treatment, he had to sell his library in order to get money for
the treatment. [^1]

He bought stale vegetables!
---------------------------

Sayyid Ali Al Qadhi (died in the year 1355 A.H.) is one of the great
scholars of Islam who used to teach lessons of ethics in the city of
Najaf. One of his students relates that he once saw the Sayyid go into a
green grocer’s shop. The Sayyid then started choosing some vegetables
and contrary to the common behavior of most customers who always look
for fresh vegetables, the Sayyid chose some stale vegetables, paid the
owner and went out of the shop.

The student decided to follow him and ask the reason for this. The
Sayyid when asked replied, that he knew that the owner was a poor man
and the Sayyid was in the habit of helping the poor owner, but because
it was not good to help someone without a reason, since it would be a
cause of embarrassment, encourage laziness and the habit of begging, the
Sayyid just made an excuse of buying some vegetables so that he would
get a chance of helping the poor man.

“As for us it doesn’t make a difference what type of vegetables we eat,
particularly so when I know that nobody will buy the stale vegetables
from the owner and he will incur a greater loss,” the Sayyid replied.
[^2]

Whoever loves his beard …!
--------------------------

Sheikh Jaafer Kashiful Gitaa, a great scholar and mujtahid used to
collect money in order to help the poor. One day as he had distributed
money amongst the poor, a poor man from the progeny of the Prophet (S)
asked him for something to fulfil his needs.

The Sheikh was apologetic that he didn’t have anything to help the poor
man when the latter pulled at the beard of the Sheikh and demanded to be
helped. The Sheikh announced that who ever loved his beard i.e.
respected him, should help the poor man; and so it happened that the
people filled the beard of the Sheikh with gold and silver in respect of
him.

In this way the Sheikh diverted the love the people had for him in the
service of the poor masses around him. [^3]

What will Allah ask us on the Day of Judgment?
----------------------------------------------

Sheikh Abdul Karim Al Hairi was a great scholar and founder of the great
Islamic College or Hauza in the city of Qum. One of his assistants
called Sheikh Ali relates that one night as he was sleeping, he heard a
knock on the door.

As he went to open the door, he saw a poor woman who asked for help. She
said that her husband was sick, and in addition they didn’t have any
food, and her family was cold as they didn’t have any fuel to get
warmth.

The assistant informed her that his master could not help her as his own
condition was not good in those days. The woman left with great
disappointment.

Sheikh Abdul Karim Al-Hairi had heard somebody at the door and so he
asked his assistant what was going on. The assistant informed him about
the whole incident. Sheikh Abdul Karim said, “What will Allah ask us on
the day of judgment?”

Then he asked his assistant whether he knew the house of the lady.
Although it was difficult to reach the lady’s house as the roads were
covered with snow, yet the Sheikh Hairi was determined to reach the lady
and help her. Thus they found themselves on the way to the lady.

On reaching the lady’s house, they found the family in a dire state. The
Sheikh asked his assistant to call a doctor who diagnosed the husband
and prescribed the medicines. Again the Sheikh asked his assistant to go
and buy the medicine from the chemist on credit and that he would pay
for it, as well as getting some firewood and food to give warmth to the
family.

When the sick husband took the medicine he felt better and they had food
and warmth restored in the house. Then only did the Sheikh find it
suitable to leave and return. In addition, the Sheikh asked his
assistant to divide the portion of firewood which was supplied to their
house daily and give it to the poor family. Such were these great
scholars who served Islam by example.[^4]

Why didn’t you give out all your wealth?
----------------------------------------

In Nahjul Balagha, the believers have been described as people in whose
heart Allah has become so magnified that the world has become
microscopic for them and of little significance. One of the people who
fit this description is Mullah Sabzwari who died in 1289 A.H.

He owned land and wealth on which he took out the Zakaat (charity) and
distributed it amongst the poor personally. Every Thursday he had an
appointment with the needy and distressed, so that he would fulfill
their wishes.

On the last three days of the month of Saffar he commemorated Majlis for
Imam Husayn (a.s.) in which he called the poor. A man would be chosen
amongst them who would recite the majlis, a poor man not known in the
society, but the Mullah would give such people a chance to recite, after
which food and money was distributed to each and every poor man.

It is said that in his youth he inherited a lot of properties, yet he
sold shops and houses and distributed the wealth to the poor. He
repeated the same procedure in his old age and were it not that the
Qur’an[^5] asks people to adopt a medium way between miserliness and to
be over charitable such that if a man dies his orphans do not have to
beg and curse their father, he would have given all his wealth to Allah.

People asked him why he didn’t give all his wealth away and sit as a
monk. It is interesting to hear his answer in which he said that he
would love to do so but his children did not favour the same type of
life, and what wealth remained with him was for only his children. [^6]

Marja’s Secret!
---------------

One of the scholars in the U.S.A. was conversing with the representative
of Imam Mohammed Shirazi, may Allah have mercy on him. The scholar
stated that he thought that the Imam was one of the richest Marja of the
world.

The representative of the Imam queried the scholar as to why he made
this statement. The scholar replied that it was because of so many
organizations and centres in so many countries of the world from America
to Asia, Europe, Africa and Australia. The representative of Imam
Shirazi replied that on the contrary the Marja had a great debt and
faced many problems.

The scholar was puzzled and said that how then was it possible for so
many mosques and organizations to exist if the Marja was not so rich. It
is here that the representative gave the scholar the Marja’s secret.

The great Marja always inspired his friends and believers a love of
starting a project such as a mosque, a printing press, a library,
publishing a book, etc. just so as to renew the spirit of a Muslim to
contribute and sacrifice for his/her religion. The great Marja’s
philosophy was to awaken the nation and exploit the potentials of each
and every individual however small the potentials may be as expressed in
his book (The Awakening of the Nation).

The scholar was amazed and remarked that it seems that the Marja had a
spirit of sacrifice and of that of encouraging and inspiring others. It
must be noted that due to his encouragement, management, planning and
foresight more than hundred mosques, organizations, publication of
magazines and books in addition to charitable trusts and humanitarian
institutes have been established all over the world.

Start the work and Allah will help !
------------------------------------

One great scholar related to the representative of Imam Muhammad
Shirazi, that he once decided to build a Madrassah although he didn’t
have any money. The Islamic tradition states that man should make the
first move, and Allah will shower the blessings on him. One should
always start the work first and Allah will help to find the necessary
funds for it, and not wait for the funds to start the work.

Thus he decided to ask some laborers to start the work making a clear
agreement that they would be paid when the money was available. The
agency that supplied them with the building materials did so under the
same agreement.

Sometimes the laborers would work till evening while the funds were not
available, yet in the evening by Allah’s blessings they would be paid.
Shortly after, the walls of the Madrassah reached up to a meter in
height.

One day it so happened, that a man knocked the door of the scholar and
said that he had been passing by and was impressed with the
determination of the scholar to build the Madrassah. He handed over an
envelope to the scholar saying that it was a meagre donation. Expecting
that it was a small amount, the scholar was excited to see a huge sum of
money when he opened it.

Soon the project reached its peak with the handsome donation, and the
donor contributed a second amount of money to complete the project.

Help the debtors!
-----------------

Sayyid Nematullahi Al Jazairi says that I looked for a teacher who would
teach me and I heard about Allamah Muhammad Baqer Al Majlisi who is the
author of the book Bihaarul Anwaar in Isfahaan. I went to him and he
taught me and took great care of me as if I was one of his children.

We in the course of our stay with each other had promised that whoever
out of us died first would come in the dream of the other and relate
about the world Hereafter.

Sayyid Jazairi says that he stayed with Allamah Majlisi for a long time
until the Allamah fell sick and died. The funeral procession was an
event which showed how respected he was.

Shortly after his death, Sayyid Jazairi went to the graveyard and sat
and recited verses of the Holy Qur’an for him and cried in his
remembrance of him and as a result fell asleep. In his dream, he saw
Allamah Majlisi richly dressed and apparently in good condition.

Sayyid Jazairi remembered that Allamah had died and so asked him what
happened to him when he was put in the grave. The Allamah replied that
as soon as he was buried he was addressed by a voice which asked him
what he had brought of good deeds in the world hereafter. The Allamah
mentioned various deeds that he had performed but the voice was not
satisfied and asked repeatedly.

The Allamah was terrified, and as he pondered he remembered an act of
charity. He related that once as he was walking in the streets of
Isfahan, he saw a poor old man being harassed by many pedestrians. The
Allamah felt pity on the poor man and decided to gather courage to
confront the crowd.

When he asked the crowd of people about the reason for their harassment,
they replied that the poor man owed them all some amounts of money. The
Allamah asked them to stop the harassment and to follow him to his house
so that he would pay them the amount which the poor man owed them.

When the Allamah had related this event, a door to heaven was opened for
him and so many blessings were showered for him. [^7]

Use of Turban!
--------------

It is related that Muqaddas Ardabili who was a very great scholar in the
tenth A.H., was a man of great piety and good morals. Ardabili used to
donate so much food to the needy during famines that he often was left
with very little food for himself.

People often used to gift him with expensive shawls with which turbans
were worn. When he wore these expensive turbans and came across poor
people, he would remove his turban and cut a meter or two of the
expensive shawl like cloth and give it to the poor. In this way he
repeated this act several times and when he would come home he would
often be left with a mere piece of cloth. It has been said that it was
for this reason that he wore very big turbans. [^8]

Envelopes!
----------

It has been related that a great scholar called Allama Shaheed Sayyid
Abdu Sahib Al-Hakim, once received a big sum of money as charity, the
amount totalling up to twenty thousand dinars. The Allamah at once set
to put various sums of money into envelopes and wrote the names of
numerous people on the envelope. He would put hundred dinars in some and
two hundred in others, until he completed dividing the money.

The man who relates this incident says that the Allamah then told him to
accompany him and as they came up to the house of a person the narrator
was told to knock the door, while the Allamah stood a distance away. As
soon as the door was opened the narrator threw the envelope and they
hurried away with the Allamah.

In this way all the money was distributed in one night while the Allamah
didn’t keep anything for himself. [^9]

I will not consume the Kababs!
------------------------------

Sheikh Fadhil Al Muwahhidi, relates that he had the opportunity of
accompanying the great Marja of Islam, called Sayyid Al Burujardi who
died in the year 1370 A.H., to the hot springs situated in the city of
Mahallat, which are known to be the cure of bones and muscles, as the
great Marja was complaining of pain in the legs.

Sheikh Fadhil says that they remained in that city for a short time, and
when the people came to know that their Marja was residing in their city
as a guest, they warmly welcomed him and it became obvious that most of
the people were very poor.

The Marja on appraising the situation asked Sheikh Fadhil to buy cattle
and have them slaughtered so as to distribute the meat to the poor.
Sheikh Fadhil carried out the order and as the meat was distributed, a
bit of the meat was set aside and delicious Kabaabs or broiled meat were
cooked and put in front of the Marja.

The Marja only drank some milk with bread and cucumbers, and ignored the
kabaabs completely. When he was asked the reason for his action he said
that how could he consume the kabaabs when the poor people were not
offered the same. As a result all the kabaabs were distributed amongst
the poor. [^10]

Charity even in the state of grief!
-----------------------------------

It has been related by Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Al Husayni Al Milaani,
that Sayyid Abdullah Al Shiraazi once told him that a young scholar in
the city of Najaf once came to the great Marja Sayyid Abil Hassan Al
Isfahani, and asked him to give him some money as a help to get married.

The great Marja promised to help him the next day. Now it so happened
that within that day the great Marja’s son was assassinated while
praying behind his father in the congregational prayer. This incident is
famous and well known in Najaf.

The following day during the burial ceremony, the great Marja was seen
to be looking around as if searching for someone. His followers thought
that he was mentally disturbed since it was an odd behaviour potrayed by
the Marja as it was a time of poignant sadness for the Sayyid at the sad
demise of his son.

As he kept looking around they saw him calling somebody, and found a
young man approaching the Marja and they then saw the Marja give a bag
of gold coins to the young man as he had promised to do so, and did not
forget this even though he was surrounded with grief.[^11]

The Expensive Cloak!
--------------------

One of the followers of Sheikh Murtaza Ansaari gifted him an expensive
winter cloak whose color quality and material was indeed extra ordinary.
The Sheikh wore the cloak on the first day to the mosque, but it was
observed by the man who had given him the cloak that the next day the
Sheikh wore his old ordinary cloak.

When the disciple asked him the reason for not wearing the cloak which
he had gifted to the Sheikh, the Sheikh replied that he didn’t feel
comfortable wearing the cloak, while so many people around him were
poor, so he had sold the cloak and bought about twelve ordinary winter
cloaks and given them to the poor people. [^12]

He sold his own house to publish a book!
----------------------------------------

Sheikh Jawaad Al Balaghi An-Najafi was an author of great prowess, who
discussed and debated with people of various faiths: the Jews,
Christians, Marxists and even atheists who believed that the world has
come about through coincidence.

A man of such great talents used to live in great poverty, in a poor
house, his bed made of palm leaves. It is related that the extent of his
poverty was so great that when he wanted to publish his writings, he had
no money, and thus had to sell his own house.

This shows how our scholars sacrificed their basic necessities just so
as to spread the religion of Allah. [^13]

Closeness to Prophet (S)
------------------------

Mullah Muhammad Taqi Al Barghani who is commonly known as the ‘Third
Martyr’ related that his father saw in his dream the Holy Prophet
Muhammad (S) surrounded by so many Scholars of Islam.

However, he saw the son of the scholar called Fahad Al Hilli sitting
very close to the Prophet (S). Mullah Barghani says that he was
surprised to see this when there were other scholars who were greater in
calibre, knowledge and their service to Islam who were not sitting so
close to the Holy Prophet (S).

Mullah Barghani’s father asked the Prophet (S) the reason for this, and
the Prophet replied that it was because all the scholars surrounding him
used to give charity when they possessed something, but if they didn’t
have any property they didn’t give anything to the person who was
begging or in need. However the son of Fahad Al Hilli used to give in
charity despite not possessing anything extra, and used to sacrifice his
personal belongings in order to fulfil other people’s needs. This gave
him a higher degree of proximity to the Prophet. [^14]

Under the Mattress!
-------------------

Al-Hajj Muhammad Hassan Shaukat who lived in Isfahan relates that he
heard from one of the relatives of Sheikh Baid Abaadi that the former
used to be a servant of Sheikh Baid Abaadi.

He used to be sent on a daily basis to a friend of the Sheikh who used
to sell perfumes and was called Al Haj Sayyid Musa to get some money,
some few Riyals. Sheikh Abaadi used to distribute this money amongst the
needy. The Sheikh used to keep the money under a mattress under his
feet, and when ever he was approached by the poor and destitute, he
would extend his hand under the mattress and come out with a few coins.

The nephew of the Sheikh relates that he used to often visit his uncle
when in need and he found out that what the Sheikh gave him was less
than what he gave to others. When he enquired his uncle, he was told by
his uncle that the latter didn’t decide what to give to various people,
rather he only extended his hand under the mattress and gave out what
came in his fist.

Many people kept the coins given to them, since it was believed that the
coins were blessed. [^15]

[^1]: Mausooatul Atabaat Al Muqadassa Page 314-317

[^2]: Seema Al Saliheen Page 294

[^3]: Maadhi An Najaf Wa Haadhiruha 122-123, Qasas Al Ulama 201, 207

[^4]: Noor Ilm Vol 11

[^5]: Ref: Surah An-Nisa 4:9

[^6]: Qasas wal Ibar lil Imam Al Shirazi Page 89

[^7]: Jamiul Qasas Lil Redha Kadhimi Page 99

[^8]: Mustadrak Al Wasail Page 392-393, Aqaid Al Shia Page 298

[^9]: Kitaab Al Najafiat Page 175

[^10]: Mardare Ilm Dar Miaane Ali, Page 212

[^11]: Qasas Wal Khawatir Page 157

[^12]: Al Mubaligh Al Risaali Page 32

[^13]: Aalame Barzakh Page 210

[^14]: Mardaane Ilm Dar Amal Page 228

[^15]: Qasas Al Ajeeba Li Dastghib Page 405


