Allah's Names Are the Symbols of His Person
===========================================

Whatever little information man can get about the Divine Being, he can
acquire it through His names. Otherwise man has no access to His Person.
Even the Holy Prophet did not have, though he was the most learned and
the noblest of all human beings. No one other than Him can know Him. Man
can have access only upto the Divine names. The knowledge of the Divine
names has several grades. Some of them we can comprehend. Others can be
grasped only by the Holy Prophet and some of his chosen followers.

**The Whole World is a Name of Allah**

The whole world is a name of Allah, because the name of a thing is its
sign or symbol and as all the things existing are the signs of Allah, it
may be said that the whole world is His name. At the most it can be said
that very few people fully understand how the existing things are the
signs of Allah. Most people know only this much that nothing can come
into existence automatically. Nothing, the existence of which is only
possible, can come into existence automatically.

It is intellectually clear and every body knows it intuitively that
anything the existence and non-existence of which is equally possible,
cannot come into existence automatically and that there must be an
external force to bring it into existence. The first cause of bringing
into existence all possibly existing things must be an eternal and
self-existing being. If it is supposed that the imaginary upper space,
and it must be imaginary because it is a non-entity, has always existed,
then it possibly can neither automatically turn into anything nor
anything can come into existence in it automatically.

The assertion of some people that in the beginning the whole world was
an infinite vacuum (anything being infinite is questionable in itself)
in which subsequently appeared a sort of steam from which everything has
originated, does not stand to reason, for without an external cause no
new thing can appear nor can one thing change into another thing. For
example, water does not freeze nor does it boil without an external
cause.

If its temperature remains constant and does not go below 0 degrees nor
above 100 degrees it will always remain water. In short, the existence
of an external cause is essential for every change. Similarly nothing
the existence of which is only possible can come into existence without
an external cause. These facts are self-evident truths.

**All Existing Things are a Sign of Allah**

This much can be easily understood by all that all existing things are
a sign and a name of Allah. We can say that the whole world is Allah's
name. But the case of this name is different from that of the names
given to the ordinary things. For example, if we want to indicate a
lamp, or a motor car to someone, we mention its name. The same thing we
do in the case of man or Zayd. But evidently that is not possible in the
case of the Being possessing infinite sublime qualities.

**Anything Which is Finite is a Possibly Existing Thing**

If an existing thing is finite, it is a possibly existing thing. As
Allah's existence is infinite, He should evidently possess all sublime
qualities, for if he lacked even one quality, He would become finite and
as such possibly existing. The difference between a possibly existing
being and an essentially existing being is that the latter is infinite
and absolute in every respect. If all the sublime qualities of the
essentially existing being were not infinite, that being would not be
the essentially existing being and the source of all existence.

All the things caused by this source of existence are endowed with the
qualities possessed by the essentially existing Being, but on a smaller
scale and in varying degrees. What is endowed with these qualities to
the utmost possible degree is called the Grand Name or al-ism
al-a'zam.

**What is the Grand Name?**

The Grand Name is that name or sign that is somewhat endowed with all
the Divine qualities to the greatest possible degree. As compared to
other existing things it possesses the Divine qualities most perfectly,
though no existing thing lacks them completely, for everything has been
endowed with them according to its nature and capacity. Even those
material things which appear to us to be totally devoid of all knowledge
and power are not really so and possess some degree of perception and
knowledge.

**All Existing Things Glorify Allah**

As we are veiled, we cannot perceive it. but it is a fact that the
sublime qualities are reflected even in the things lower than man and
animals. At the most these qualities are reflected in them according to
the capacity of their existence. Even the lowest creations possess the
quality of perception. The Qur'an says: There is not a thing that does
not praise Him, but you do not understand their praise. (Surah Bani
Isra'il, 17:44)

As we are veiled and do not understand the praise of all existing
things, the ancient scholars did not know that the imperfect beings also
possessed perception. that is why they took this praise to mean the
praise indicated by the creation of all things, but in fact this verse
has nothing to do with that kind of praise, which is quite a different
matter as we already know.

According to a tradition once the people heard the pebbles in the Holy
Prophet's hand praising Allah. They could understand the praise of the
pebbles, but this praise was such that the human ears were quite
unfamiliar with it. It was in the pebbles' own language, not in any
human language.

Hence, it is clear that the pebbles possess perception, although of
course according to their existential capacity. Man who considers
himself to be the source of all kinds of perception, thinks that other
things are devoid of it, but that is not a fact, although it is true
that man has a higher degree of it. Being veiled, we are unaware of the
perception of other things and their praising Allah, and think that
there is no such thing.

**There are Many Things that we do not Know**

There are many things about which man thinks that they do not exist,
but in fact they do, though we may be unaware of them. Every day new
discoveries are being made, Formerly it was believed that the plants
were inanimate objects, but now it is said that they have a hearing
system. If you put the tissues of a tree in hot water and pass a voice
through them, there will be a reaction and you will hear some voices in
response. We do not know how far this report is correct. But it is
certain that this world is full of voices and sounds. The whole world is
living and is a name of Allah. You yourselves are a name of Allah. Your
tongues and your hands are names of Allah.

**All Movements are the Names of Allah**

The praise you make of Allah is His name. When you go to the mosque
after washing your feet, you go with the name of Allah. You cannot part
with the name of Allah because you yourselves are His name. The beat of
pulse, the throbbing of heart and the blowing of wind are all names of
Allah. Perhaps that is what is meant by the names of Allah in this
verse. There are many other verses in which the phrase:

"With the name of Allah" has been used. As we have said, everything is
the name of Allah, and the name has passed away in the named. We think
that we have an independent existence, but that is not a fact. If that
Being, who has brought everything into existence by means of His will
and the reflection of the light of His glory withdrew His light for a
moment all the existing things would be annihilated immediately and
return to their pre-existing state. Allah has created the whole world by
the light of His glory which is the true nature of existence and the
name of Allah.

The Qur'an says: Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth.
Everything is illuminated by His light. Everything has appeared by dint
of His light. This appearance itself is a reflection of His light. Man's
appearance is also a light. Therefore man himself is a light. Animals
are also a light of Allah's glory. The existence of the heavens and the
earth is a light from Allah. This light has so passed away in Allah that
the Qur'an has said: Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth. It
has not said that the heavens and the earth are illuminated by the light
of Allah.

The reason is that the heavens and the earth are a nonentity. Nothing
in our world has an independent existence of its own. In other words
there is nothing here that is self-existing. In fact there is no
existent other than Allah, That is why the Qur'an says: With the name of
Allah all praise belongs to Allah. 'With the name of Allah say: He is
Allah the One'. Perhaps the Qur'an does not ask you to utter the
words:

'With the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful ' It actually
mentions a fact. By asking you to say so with the name of Allah, it
means that your saying so is also a name of Allah. The Qur'an has said:
'Whatever there is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Him.' It has
not said whoever there is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Him.
That means that everything whether animate or inanimate praises and
glorifies Allah, for all are a reflection of the light of His glory and
it is His glory that causes all movements.


