Everything in the World Is a Manifestation of His Glory
=======================================================

The cause of all that occurs in the world is the manifestation of
Allah's glory. Everything is from Him and everything returns to Him. No
creature has anything of its own. If anybody claims to have anything of
his own, he virtually wants to compete with the source of Divine light,
while as a matter of fact even his life is not of his own. The eyes you
have are not your own. The light of Divine manifestation has brought
them into being. The praise of Allah that other people or we express, is
a Divine name, or it is because of a Divine name. That is why the Qur'an
says: With the name of Allah and praise belongs to Allah.

**The Word Allah is a Comprehensive Manifestation of Divine Glory**

It is a manifestation that includes all manifestations. Allah's names,
Rahman (the Compassionate) and Rahim (the Merciful) are the
manifestations of this manifestation. Because of his mercy and
benevolence Allah has bestowed existence in the existing things. This is
itself is a show of mercy and kindness. Even the existence conferred on
the harmful and obnoxious things is a show of His favor, which is common
to all existing things. It is the manifestation of the glory of His
name, Allah, which is a true manifestation of His glory in every
sense.

Allah is a station. It is a comprehensive name, which is itself a
manifestation or Divine glory in every sense. Otherwise the Divine Being
has no name apart from His Essence or Person. Allah His names including
Allah, Rahman, and Rahim are only the manifestations of his glory. In
the 'bismillah' His names Rahman and Rahim have been added to His
comprehensive name Allah, because they signify His self-sustaining
attributes of mercy, favor and compassion. His attributes of
retribution, anger etc. are subservient to these attributes. The praise
of any kind of excellence is actually the praise of Allah.

When a man eats something and says how delicious it is, he praises
Allah unconsciously. When a man says about another man that he is a very
fine man or that he is a great scholar or philosopher, he praises Allah
because a philosopher or a scholar has nothing of his own. Whatever
there is, it is a manifestation of Allah's glory. The man who
understands this fact, he and his intellect are also a manifestations of
Allah's glory.

**No Praise is of Anyone Else's Praise**

Whenever we praise anybody, we say that he has such and such good
qualities. As everything belongs to Allah, the commendation of any merit
of any person or a thing virtually amounts to praising Allah. We, being
veiled, do not realize this truth and think that we are praising Zayd or
Amr, the sunshine or the moonlight. When veil is lifted we will come to
know that all praises belong to none but Allah and that everything we
praise is nothing but a manifestation of Allah's glory.

The Qur'an says: Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth, In
other words, every excellence and every sublime quality, wherever it may
be, is attributable to Allah. He is the cause of the whole world and the
whole world is a manifestation of His glory. The things we do, are not
actually done by us.

Addressing the Holy Prophet Allah said in the Qur'an: You did not throw
(the pebbles), when you threw (them), but Allah threw (them). (Surah
al-Anfal, 8:17) Consider the words: 'You threw' and 'You did not throw.'
Both of these phrases are a manifestation of 'but Allah threw.' There is
another verse that says: Those who swear allegiance to you, swear
allegiance only to Allah. (Surah al-Fath,, 48:10)

Being veiled as we are, we do not understand the truth these verses
imply. As a matter of fact we all are under a veil except the Holy
Prophet who was educated direct by Allah and the Holy Imams of the Holy
Prophet's Progeny who received training from him. So there is a
possibility that the preposition 'bi' and the noun 'Ism' in 'bismillah'
may be related to 'al-Hamdu; meaning, 'With the name of Allah all
praises belong to Him.'

It is a manifestation of the glory of Allah that draws every praise to
it and does not allow any praise to be a praise of anyone other than
Allah, for howsoever you may try, you will not find anyone existing
other than Him. Therefore whatever praise you express, it will be a
praise of Allah. It may be noted that praise is always made of positive
qualities. The defects and faults being negative qualities, do not
actually exist. Everything that exists has two aspects.

It is positive aspect that is praised and it is always free from
defects and faults. There exists only one excellence and one beauty and
that is the excellence and beauty of Allah. We should try to understand
this truth. Once we are convinced of this fact, everything else will be
easy. As a matter of fact it is easy to acknowledge something verbally,
but it is difficult to persuade oneself to believe even a rational thing
firmly.

**To Believe Something Intellectually is One Thing and to be Convinced
of it is Another**

To be convinced of the truth of a thing is different from believing it
intellectually because of the existence of some scientific arguments to
prove it. The impeccability of the Prophets was due to their firm
conviction. A man who is fully convinced of a truth, cannot act contrary
to his conviction. If you were sure that somebody was standing near you
with a drawn sword in his hand and that he would kill you if you uttered
a single word against him, you would never say anything against him
because your first concern was to save your life. In other words, as far
as this matter was concerned, you were so to say infallible.

A man who was convinced that if he slandered anybody behind his back,
his backbiting would assume the shape of a dreadful animal with a long
tongue stretching from the slanderer to the slandered and this animal
would be crushing him, he would never indulge in backbiting anybody. If
a man was sure that "slandering is the food of the dogs of hell" and the
slanderer would be ceaselessly devoured by them, he would never stoop to
this vice. We occasionally indulge in backbiting only because we are not
fully sure of the consequences of this bad habit.

**Man's Deeds Will Assume a Concrete Shape**

If man was convinced that whatever deeds he performed would be embodied
in the hereafter, the good deeds assuming a good shape and the bad one a
bad shape, and that he would have to give an account of all that he did,
he would not commit a bad deed even unconsciously. We need not go into
the details of this affair. It is enough to say that everything will be
reckoned. If a person slandered anyone else, he would be accountable for
doing that. If anybody harassed or injured the faithful, he would go to
Hell.

The good men would get Paradise. One must be fully convinced and sure
of this procedure. It is not enough to read the law in the books or to
understand it rationally. Knowing and understanding are quite different
from heart-felt conviction. By heart I mean the real heart, not an organ
of the body. Man often knows and understands a truth, but not being
firmly convinced of it, does not act according to what a belief in it
requires. He acts only when he gets fully and firmly convinced.

It is this firm conviction that is called faith. Simply knowing a
Prophet is of no use. What is beneficial is having faith in him. It is
not enough to prove the existence of Allah. What is necessary is to
believe in Him and to obey His commandments whole-heartedly. With the
true faith, everything becomes easy. If a man was convinced that there
was a Being who was the source of this world, that man was accountable
and that his death would not be his end but would only mean his shifting
to a more perfect stage, he would surely be saved from all errors and
slips.

The question is how can he be convinced? I have already described one
aspect of the verse saying: 'With the name of Allah all praises belong
to Allah.' I once again emphasize that what I say is only a possibility,
not a definite interpretation of the Qur'an. Anyhow, it appears that a
man fully convinced that all praises belonged to Allah, could never have
any polytheistic ideas in his mind, for whomsoever anybody praises, he
actually praises some manifestation of Allah's glory.

Anybody who composes or intends to compose an ode in honour of the Holy
Prophet or Imam Ali, that ode of his is for Allah because the Holy
Prophet and the Imam are not but a great manifestation of Allah, and
therefore their eulogy is the eulogy of Allah and His manifestation. A
man who is convinced that all praises are due to Allah, would never
indulge in bragging, boasting and self-praise. In fact man is
self-conceited because he does not know himself. 'He who knows himself,
knows Allah.'

A man knows Allah only when he is firmly convinced that he himself has
no significance and that everything belongs to Allah only. In fact, we
neither know ourselves nor Allah. We have faith neither in ourselves nor
in Him. We are neither sure that we are nothing nor that everything is
Allah's. So long as we are not certain of these things, all arguments to
prove the existence of Allah are of little use, and all that we do is
based on egoism. All claims to leadership and chieftaincy are the result
of self-conceit and personal vanity.

**Self-Conceit is the Cause of All Troubles**

Most of the troubles man faces are the result of his vanity and empty
pride. Man loves himself and desires to be admired by others. But that
is his mistake. He does not realize that he himself is nothing and that
he is the property of another Being. Man's self-conceit and love of
power are the cause of most of his troubles, sins and vices, which ruin
him and drag him to Hell. Because of his selfishness man wants to
control everything and becomes the enemy of others whom he rightly or
wrongly considers to be a hindrance in his way. He knows no limits in
this respect and that is the cause of all troubles, misfortunes and
calamities.

**All Praises Belong to Allah**

It appears that the Book of Allah begins with the question that
includes all questions. When Allah says: 'All praises belong to Allah',
we feel that so many questions have appeared before our eyes. The Qur'an
does not say that some praises belong to Allah. That means that if
somebody says to another person: 'I know that Allah is Almighty and
Omnipotent, but still I am praising you, not Allah', even then his
praise would go to Allah, because all praises are Allah's praises.

The Qur'an says: 'All praises belong to Allah'. This means that all
kinds of praises in all conditions belong to Him. This short verse
resolves many problems. This verse is enough to cleanse man's heart from
the impurity of all kinds of polytheism provided he is fully convinced
of its truth. He who said that he had never committed any sort of
polytheism, said so because he had intuitively discovered this truth and
grasped it mentally. This state of conviction cannot be secured by any
argument. I do not mean that argument is of no use. It is also required.
But it is only a means of understanding the question of Allah's
monotheism according to one's intellectual capacity. To believe in it is
the next step.

**Philosophical Reasoning is not much Effective**

Philosophy is a means not an end. Philosophical arguments help in
understanding the problems, but they do not lead to a firm faith, which
is a matter of intuition and taste. Even faith has several grades. I
hope that we will not be contented with reading and understanding the
Qur'an, but will have a firm faith in every word of it, because it is
the Divine Book that reforms man and wants to turn him into a being
created by Allah from His 'Ism A 'zam' (grand name).

Allah has gifted man with all kinds of faculties but many of his
potential capabilities are dormant. The Qur'an wants to raise man from
this lower position to the high position worthy of him. The Qur'an has
come for this very purpose. Allah the Prophets have come to help man in
getting out of the depths of selfishness and seeing the Divine light so
that he may forget everything other than Allah. May Allah bestow this
favour on us also!


