The Difference Between the Bismillah of Each Surah
==================================================

The 'bismillah' preceding one surah is different from that preceding
another surah. We were saying to which word the preposition and the noun
it governs in the 'bismillah' are related. One of the possibilities is
that the 'bismillah' of every surah is related to some appropriate word
of that very surah; for example in the Surah al-Hamd it may be related
to the word, al-Hamd. In that case 'bismillahi al-hamdu lillahi' would
mean: With the name of Allah all praises belong to Allah. On the basis
of this possibility 'bismillah' would signify differently in every
surah, for in each surah it would be referring to a different word. If
it was related to the word 'al-hamdu' in the Surah 'al-Hamd,' we would
have to look for some other appropriate word, for example, in the Surah
'al-Ikhlas'.

According to a rule of theology, if somebody pronounced the bismillah
with some surah and then wanted to recite another surah, he would have
to repeat the bismillah, and the previous bismillah would not be enough
for him. This rule shows that 'bismillah' does not have the same meaning
everywhere.

It has a different significance with each surah, although there are
some people who wrongly maintain that 'bismillah' is not the part of any
surah and it is quite a separate verse revealed as a benediction. If it
is accepted that 'bismillah' was related to 'al-Hamd' then 'hamd' might
include everything to which the word 'hamd' applied, that is every kind
of praise expressed by anybody on any occasion.

Thus the verse would mean that every praise expressed is with the name
of Allah, because he who expresses it is himself a name of Allah; his
organs and limbs are a name of Allah and the praise he expresses is also
a name of Allah. From this point of view every praise is with the name
of Allah. We all are His names, or manifestations of His names, because
we all are His signs, He is our originator, who has brought us into
existence.

The Divine Originator is in several ways different from a natural cause
or agent. One of the points of difference is that anything that is
brought into existence by the Divine Originator, or in other words,
anything that emerges from the Divine source disappears in that very
source. To illustrate this point to some extent, let us take up an
example, although this example falls too short of the relation between
the Creator and the created.

Anyhow, let us take up the example of the sun and its rays. The rays
have no existence separate from the sun. The same is the case with the
Divine Originator or the Creator. Anything coming into existence from
this source depends on it for its existence as well as continuation.
There is no existing being which can continue to exist if Allah
withdraws from it even for an amount the light on which its existence
depends. As no existing thing has any independent position, it is said
to be lost in its source.

**Every Possibly Existing Thing Depends on Allah for its Existence as
well as Continuation**

Every possibly existing being is Allah's name, His deed and a
manifestation of His glory. He Himself says: Allah is the Light of the
heavens and the earth (Surah an-Nur, 24:35). Every possibly existing
being is a manifestation of the glory of Allah, but not Allah.
Everything that appears in the world is so related to the source of its
origin that it cannot have any independent existence. That is why it has
been said in the Qur'an that: 'Allah is the light of the heavens and the
earth.'

If it is admitted that the definite article 'al' in al-Hamdu indicated
'Comprehensiveness', the verse would mean that every praise by
whomsoever it might be expressed, takes place with the name of Allah. As
he who praises Allah, is himself, one of Allah's names, it may be said
that in a sense the praiser and the praised are one and the same. One is
the manifestation and the other is the manifester.

Some sayings of the Holy Prophet, such as: 'You are as You have praised
Yourself', and 'I seek refuge from You in You', point in this direction.
As the relationship between the praiser and the praised is that of
passing away of the former in the latter, the former cannot claim that
it is he who praises. In fact it is the 'praised' who praises Himself,
for the praiser has passed in Him.

According to another possibility it may be said that the definite
article in 'al-hamdu' is not for showing comprehensiveness, but it
indicates that the word, 'hamd' signifies general praise without any
qualification being attached to it. In this case the praise of Allah
performed by us is not actually His praise. His praise is only that
which He performs Himself. The reason is that Allah is the Infinite
Being while all others are finite.

Any praise expressed by a finite being will naturally be finite and
limited and therefore it cannot be the praise of the infinite Being.
While mentioning the first alternative we said that every praise was
Allah's praise. Even when you think that you are commending the merits
of a beautiful handwriting, you are actually extolling Allah. Similarly
when you believe that you are paying tributes to the world, in that case
also you are praising none but Allah. That is why, while describing the
first alternative or the first possibility, we said that every praise
was that of Allah, whosoever might be the praiser, for nothing except
Allah has an independent existence. Every excellence, every beauty and
every perfection belongs to Him only. If Allah withdraws the
manifestation of His glory, nothing would be existing any longer.

**All Existing Things Are A Manifestation of Allah's Glory**

The existence of everything depends on Allah's glory. While discussing
above the first possibility, we pointed out that everything existing is
the outcome of a divine light. Allah Himself says that He is the light
of the heavens and the earth. If He takes away this light, everything is
bound to disappear and come to an end. As nothing except Allah has any
excellence of its own, nothing except Him is worth praising. In fact
there is no excellence except His.

He excels in His essence, His attributes and the state of His
manifestation. All the merits attributed to anything or anyone else are
His merits. Anybody who praises anyone for his excellence and merit,
actually praises Him. This is true if we accept the first possibility
mentioned above. In the case of the second possibility, which is also no
more than a mere guess or a possibility, the word 'al-hamdu' does not
imply totality or comprehensiveness.

It only signifies absolute praise without any qualification,
restriction or any conception of its opposite being attached to it. But
the praise that we perform is definitely not absolute. It is a
particular praise expressed by a particular to a particular. We do not
have access to the Absolute, nor can we perceive Him. So how can we
praise Him. Even at the time of saying, 'al-hamdu lillah', you do not
perceive the Absolute Truth, and as such the question of praising the
Absolute does not arise.

Whatever praise is expressed, that actually is not the praise of Allah,
but is the praise of some manifestation of His glory. In the case of the
previous possibility no praise was that of Allah except that expressed
by Himself. In this case the word 'ism' (name) in 'bismillah al-hamdu
lillah' will not have the same meaning as we stated earlier when we said
that everybody is Allah's name including you and me. Now the name of
Allah is a symbol for His absolute and unqualified manifestation, the
meaning of which can neither be explained nor grasped. It is this name
of Allah that is praised and this praise can be expressed only by Allah
Himself.

This is a possible explanation based on the assumption that 'bismillah'
is connected with 'al-hamdu lillah'. In short there are two
possibilities. According to one possibility every praise is the praise
of Allah and according to the other, praise of Allah is only the
absolute and unqualified praise pronounced and performed by Allah
Himself. According to the first possibility there is no praise that is
not of Allah; and according to the second possibility a praise can be of
Allah only in its limited sense, not in its absolute sense. In this case
the 'hamd' (praise) in 'al-hamdu lillah' will mean an absolute and
unqualified praise. Allah can be praised only by the name that is worthy
of Him. This rule is also a mere possibility.

There is another possibility that 'bismillah' might have no link with
the surah following it. We know that some scholars maintain that the
preposition and the noun in 'bismillah' are linked with an omitted but
understood verb, 'Zahara' (appeared), meaning, existence appeared. Thus
the sentence would mean: Existence appeared with the name of Allah. In
other words the name of Allah is the source of everything existing. This
name of Allah is the same that is alluded to in a Prophetic tradition in
the following words: 'Allah created His will Himself and created all
other things through His Will.'

Here Allah's Will means 'the first manifestation of His glory' that was
created by Him direct. It is this manifestation that has been called
existence in the ellipsis mentioned above, namely 'Existence appeared'.
On the basis of the assumption that 'bismillah' is not linked with the
surah following it, some grammarians hold that some such elliptical
phrase as 'We seek the help' exists before 'bismillah' These grammarians
may not realize, but in fact, whoever seeks the help of Allah, he
invariably seeks the help of His name.

It is not possible to seek His help in any other way. Though it is not
necessary to always use the words, 'with the name of Allah', the fact
remains that in everything His appearance or presence is His name and
thus the help of His name is invariably sought. It is this appearance
the help of which we seek and with the help of which everything is done.
The grammarians may not be aware of this conception, but it is a fact
that seeking help means turning to Allah. This much as to which word
'bismillah' is linked with.

We said earlier that a name is the sign of the named. But there is
nothing which is not the sign of Allah. Whatever you see, you will find
that to be a sign of Him. Of course signs also have degrees. There are
some names which are perfect signs of Him in every respect. There are
some others that cannot be said to be so perfect signs. Anyhow, all
existing things are His signs and manifestations in varying degrees. A
tradition says: 'We are the beautiful names of Allah'. Anyhow, at the
stage of manifestation the loftiest and the most splendid names of Allah
are the Holy Prophet and the Imams who, unlike us who are still lying in
the abyss of base desires, have reached the highest stages of spiritual
journey towards Allah.

**Emigration**

We have not yet started even moving, but there are some people who have
not only came out of the abyss but have also emigrated from that stage.
The Holy Qur'an says: He who leaves his home, emigrating for the sake of
Allah and His Messenger and is then overtaken by death, shall surely to
be rewarded by Allah. (Surah an-Nisa', 4:l00)

According to one possible interpretation 'emigration' here might have
meant going from oneself to Allah and 'home' might have meant one's
lower self. In this case the whole verse would mean that there were some
people who came out of the dark and dingy home of their base desires and
continued to move towards Allah till they were overtaken by death, that
is they passed away from self to survive in Allah, who was to reward
them.

In other words Allah Himself is their reward, for they attach no
importance to Paradise and the bounties found therein. Their sole
objective is Allah, because for a person who undertakes the path of
self-annihilation and proceeds towards Allah and His Prophet, nothing is
left which he could call his own. For him everything belongs to Allah.
He who reaches this stage is surely to be rewarded by Allah. It may be
noted that there are some who have reached their desired goal after
emigration, while there are some others who though they emigrated, yet
they could not reach the stage of passing away in Allah. The third
category is that of the people like us who could not emigrate at all and
are still groping in darkness.

We are not only lost in the labyrinth of the mundane things but are
also a prey to selfishness and egoism so much that we cannot see
anything beyond our self-interest. We want everything for ourselves, for
we think that nothing except us has any value. We have not yet thought
of emigrating, because our thinking is limited to this world only.

**Seventy Years Back**

We do not discard the faculties with which Allah has equipped us, but
we use them for mundane purposes as if we were to live in this world
forever. As the time passes, we continue to get away farther and farther
from the source to which we should have emigrated. According to a report
once the Holy Prophet was sitting along with his companions when a loud
sound of something falling was heard. The Holy Prophet's companions were
startled.

They enquired what had happened. According to the report the Holy
Prophet said: 'A stone was rolling down in the middle of Hell. Now after
70 years it has fallen into a well located at the other end of it. This
was the sound of its fall.' This event is said to be an allegorical
description of a wicked man who died at the age of 70. We are all
rolling down towards the same hole. I may go there at the age of 80. You
will also go to that side in a few years.

**Worst Enemy**

It is our selfishness and egoism that are responsible for our present
condition. The following maxim expresses the same truth: 'Your worst
enemy is your lower self that is within you.' It is this idol which man
worships most and to which he is attached most. Man cannot become godly
unless he smashes this idol, because an idol and God cannot go
together.

An egoist can never be a devout person. We may apparently be religious,
but in reality are idol-worshippers unless we get rid of our selfishness
and egoism, which are the root-cause of all our troubles and evils.
While offering prayers we say: 'You alone we worship and You alone we
ask for help' but unfortunately all our thoughts remain concentrated on
ourselves. We offer prayers to serve our own selfish interests and thus
in reality worship ourselves only.

**Egoism the Cause of All Quarrels**

All wars in the world are due to man's egoism. Believers are not
expected to fight each other. If they do, they are not believers. A
dishonest and selfish man wants to seize everything for his own benefit.
It is this attitude which gives rise to all sorts of troubles. I want a
position for myself; you want it for yourself. As both of us cannot
occupy it at one and the same time, a quarrel is bound to arise. I want
to take this chair; you also want it. When I and you want to take the
same thing, naturally there will be an altercation.

If two persons attempt to occupy this country, a war would ensue. All
wars and battles are the outcome of selfishness, the result of the
conflict of personalities and their interests. As the holy men are not
selfish, they do not fight each other. Even if all the holy men gather
together at one place, there would be no fight and no quarrel among
them, for whatever they do, they do for the sake of Allah. As they are
neither selfish nor egoistic, they do not oppose each other.

They all have the same source and the same direction. It is we who are
lying in a well that is as dark as possibly can be. This darkness is
that of our egoism. So long as we do not give up our egoism, we cannot
get out of this darkness. We are selfish and self-conceited. That is why
we do not attach importance to others and consider ourselves alone to be
all important. If a thing is advantageous to us, we accept it. If it is
not, we reject it howsoever right it may be. We believe only that thing,
which is in our favour. All this is egoism and selfishness.

It is this attitude that is the cause of all our troubles and is
responsible for all misfortunes of humanity. I want to pursue my
interest and you want to pursue yours. There can be no godliness so long
as selfishness persists. Then what is the remedy? Man has within himself
an idol-temple. It is not easy for him to get out of it. He needs Divine
help, a hidden hand which may take him out of this dungeon. The Prophets
have come for this very purpose.


