Aim of the Prophets
===================

All the Prophets and the revealed Books have come only to smash this
idol-temple and to take man out of it. The Prophets have come to set up
a divine order in this fiendish world ruled by the Devil whom we all
obey. Our base desires are the Devil's manifestation. The greatest Devil
being our own appetitive soul, whatever we do become devilish. That is
the reason why nothing that we do is free from selfishness.

The Devil holds influence over us and we are dictated by the Devil. We
can get out of this labyrinth only if we emigrate from our present
stage, act according to the teachings of the Prophets and other holy men
and cease to be selfish and egoistic. If we do so we will gain an
inconceivable success. This emigration is essential for anybody who
aspires to attain to perfection.

**Major Jihad**

He who wishes to get out of the dungeon of egoism, must strive to
emigrate from his present state. According to a Prophetic tradition once
certain companions of the Holy Prophet came back from a Jihad (holy
war). The Holy Prophet said to them: 'You have returned after carrying
out a minor jihad, but still owe a major one". A major jihad is carried
out against one's lower self. All other jihads are subservient to this
one. Any other jihad performed by us will be worth the name only if we
succeed in the major jihad. Otherwise all other jihads will be nothing
more than a satanic act. If a person takes part in the holy war with a
view to obtain a slave girl or to provide for his livelihood, these very
things would be his reward.

But if a person performs jihad for the sake of Allah, then it would be
Allah's responsibility to reward him. In fact the reward depends on the
quality of the job performed. Obviously there is a vast difference
between the quality of our performance and that of the holy men and
friends of Allah, for our aims and objects are quite different from
theirs.

**Devotion is the Criterion**

Has it been said without any reason that at the war of Ditch (Khandaq)
one stroke of Imam Ali's sword was more meritorious than all the acts of
worship performed by the jinn and mankind? Apparently his stroke was no
more than a blow to kill a person. But it had a far greater
significance. At that time Islam was facing the combined forces of
infidelity and if Muslims had been defeated in that encounter, the very
existence of Islam would have been endangered. There is still another
aspect of the question, and that is the dedication and devotion involved
in Imam Ali's act.

Once while Imam Ali was on the chest of an enemy, he spat on the Imam's
face. Imam Ali at once got off so that his act might not be affected by
the motive of personal vengeance. The spirit of such a stroke is
certainly superior to all acts of worship. It is this spirit which gives
the acts of a true believer their proper meaning and significance.
Outwardly the acts performed by the polytheists and the monotheists, the
idolaters and these who do not worship the idols, look alike.
Apparently there is no difference in them. Abu Sufyan also used to
offer prayers. Mu'awiyah was himself the Imam of Congregational prayers.
They performed their religious acts like others. It is the spirit of
prayer that accords sublimity to it. If the spirit is there, prayer is a
devotional act. Otherwise it is nothing more than a mere show and a
fraud. This principle applies to us also. We simply deceive each
other.

**Our Worship is For Paradise**

All our devotional acts serve our own interests only. Those who are
more pious among us perform them for the sake of Paradise. Take away the
temptation of Paradise, then see who performs them. Imam Ali's case is
different. He was in fact fond of the acts of devotion and worship. It
is said about him that he loved the acts of devotion and embraced them.
As a matter of principle it is not of much significance to perform acts
of worship for the sake of Paradise.

A person who has reached the stage of passing away in Allah, attaches
no importance to Paradise. He actually does not care for it. Paradise
and Hell are alike for him who has annihilated himself. He praises Allah
because he believes that Allah deserves devotions. This position is
attained by those who are fond of acts of worship. They worship Allah
because they believe that He is fit for being worshipped.

There are many degrees of devotion. Anyhow, the first step is shunning
the selfishness and getting out of the narrow hole of egoism. For this
purpose the first thing to be done is to wake up for the sake of Allah
and not to remain sleeping. At present we are asleep, although
apparently awake. Our waking is that of animals, not of man. A tradition
says that people are asleep; they will wake up when they will die. At
that time they will realize that they were totally unconscious of the
real situation.

A Qur'anic verse says: 'Hell is surrounding the unbelievers'. It means
that Hell is even now surrounding them but man being in a state of
unconsciousness does not perceive that. When he will gain his
consciousness, he will realize that there is a fire all round him. We
all have to go by this path. Therefore it is better for us to wake up
and walk along the 'straight path' shown to us by the Prophets.

**Prophets Come to Reform Men**

Reforming mankind is the mission of all Prophets. For this purpose they
set up a just order. It is man who is just or unjust. To establish a
just order means turning the wicked into the righteous and the
unbelievers into believers. The Prophets' job is to transform the
people. If people were left to do what they liked, they would certainly
fall into the deep pit of hell. It is the Prophets who guide them to the
right path. Alas! We are not yet following it. I am 70 years old, but am
still where I was. I have not emigrated. Perhaps my condition will not
change till the end of my life. Anyhow, it is essential for everybody to
follow the straight path. There is no alternative.

**An Appeal to the Youth**

You are young and can adopt this path better. Do not worry about us,
for we are already a spent force. You can purify your soul easily as you
are closer to the world of divinity than we the old people.
Comparatively you have detenorated less but things are becoming worse
day by day. The more delay will make the matter more difficult. It is
difficult for an old man to be reformed, but a young man can be reformed
quickly.

It is easier to reform thousands of young men than to reform an old
man. Therefore do not postpone the task of reform to old age. Begin this
work while you are still young. Follow the teachings of the Prophets.
This is the starting point. The Prophets have shown us the way we should
follow. While we are unaware of it, the Prophets are familiar with the
way of safety and security. If you want safety, follow the way shown by
them. Gradually pay less and less attention to your desires.

You will not get the desired result immediately, but gradually you can
get rid of your egoism. One day all our desires will come to nought. It
is not in our interest to pay attention to them. Lasting is only that
which relates to Allah. The Qur'an says: What is with you will come to
an end, what is with Allah will remain. (Surah an-Nahl, 16:96) Man has
that 'which is with you' as well as that 'which is with Allah'. All the
things that keep your attention directed to yourselves, are that 'which
is with you'. All these things will vanish. But those things that keep
your attention directed to Allah, are lasting and permanent.

Continue Your Effort Till You Gain Complete Victory Over Your Lower
Self

You and we should make every effort to change our present state. Those
who achieved success in their struggle against the unbelievers, never
worried as to how many people were with them. After all it was he1 who
said that even if all the Arabs were combined against him, he would not
give up. As he was doing the duty assigned to him by Allah, there was no
question of failure in it, what to say of being repulsed.

Then there is another question. Suppose you retreat, but where will you
go to? Those who advanced in the jihads, went forward without caring for
their lives or their personal interests. They fought against their lower
self to the utmost degree. The struggle of those who occupied a higher
spiritual position was proportionately more intense. In fact man can
achieve nothing unless he fights against his lower self. He cannot go
forward unless he ignores his desires and keeps clear of this world,
which is another name of base desires. The desires of every body are his
world. It is this world which has been denounced, not the physical
world. This world is within you.

When you pay attention to your lower self, you yourself become this
world. Thus this world of everybody is within him. It is this world
which has been condemned, not the sun, the moon or any other natural
object. All the natural objects, being the signs and manifestations of
Allah, have been praised. It is this world in the above mentioned sense
that deprives man from gaining proximity to Allah. May Allah grant us
success in getting out of the deep dungeon of egoism. It is the friends
of Allah who have gained success in being delivered from the catastrophe
of egoism.

Notes: 1. Imam Ali (Peace be upon him).

Relationship between Allah and His Creation

We were talking as to which word the word 'ism' in 'bismillah' is
connected. In this regard there are several possibilities as I have
mentioned.

The Creator and the Created

We cannot understand certain questions in this regard unless we know
what sort of relationship there exists between Allah and the creation.
We talk about this relationship either parrot-like and repeat some set
words, or occasionally in addition to that advance some arguments also.
A stage higher than this is the privilege of some other people.

Anyhow the relationship between Allah and the creation is not of the
sort that exists, for example, between father and son, that is between
two things existing independently but related to each other. The sun and
its rays are an example of a closer relationship. In this case also the
sun and its rays are two different things, each having a separate
existence to some extent. Man and his mental and physical faculties are
an example of another kind of relationship.

Even in this case man and his faculties are not identical, though they
are closely related. Unlike all these examples, the relationship between
the existing things and Allah, Who is the source of their existence, is
of quite a different kind and cannot be compared to any of the
relationships mentioned above. At several places in the Qur'an and the
traditions the relationship between Allah and His creation has been
described as Allah's glory.

The Qur'an says: When his Lord revealed His glory to the mountain.
(Surah al-A'raf, 7:143).

There is a sentence in the Samat Supplication which says: 'By the light
of Your glory You revealed to the mountain and thus sent it down
crashing…' At another place the Qur'an says: Allah takes away the souls
at the times of their death. (Surah az-Zumar, 39:42) while it is known
that taking away the souls is the job of the Death Angel.

If somebody kills a person, in that case also it is said that he has
put him to death. At another place the Qur'an says: You did not throw
when you threw (the pebbles), but Allah threw. (Surah al-Anfal, 8:17)
All this is the description of a light and a glory. If we ponder over
this concept, certain questions occur to our mind.

**Meanings of Al-Hamd**

We said earlier that the first possibility about the definite article
in al-Hamdu is that it might be denoting comprehensiveness. In that case
hamd (praise) would mean all praises, and the word 'hamd' as well as the
word, 'ism' will have a sense of multitude. From this point of view
'al-hamdu lillahi' would mean that every praise that is made is that of
Allah, for it is always the praise of some aspect of His manifestation
or glory. The sun manifests itself in its rays. Man is manifested in his
seeing and hearing faculties. Allah manifests Himself far more clearly
in every creation of His.

Therefore, when anything is praised actually a manifestation of Allah's
glory is praised. As all the existing things are the signs of Allah,
they are His names. According to the second possibility we mentioned,
the meaning would be diametrically different, and 'al-hamdu lillahi'
would signify that no praise made by any praiser was that of Allah,
although in this case also His glory is revealed in all the objects
which are praised. But our praise cannot be absolute, nor are we capable
of praising the Absolute Being.

Anyhow, as all pluralities are lost and absorbed in the unity of the
Absolute Being, it may be said that from one angle even in this case it
is the Absolute Being that is praised. The only difference is of the
angle from which you look at this issue. If you look at it from the
angle of plurality, then every praise would be that of Allah, every
existing thing would be His name and every name would be different from
other names.

According to this possibility the meaning of bismillah will be
different from its meaning according to the other possibility. The main
feature of this possibility is that a sense of numerousness is implied
in the conception of 'ism' or name. Allah is the name in which the stage
of multitude and detail is taken into consideration. This name is the
'Exalted Name' in which Allah's glory is revealed.

**Divine Glory in Everything**

The glory of Allah's Exalted Name is revealed in everything. Allah's
name Rahman (Beneficent) is the reflection of His beneficence in the
state of action and His name Rahim (Merciful) is the reflection of His
mercy in the state of action. The same applies to 'rabbil 'alamin' (Lord
of the Universe), 'iyyaka na'budu' (You we worship) etc. According to
the second possibility, hamd (praise) in 'al-hamdu lillah' signifies
absolute and unqualified praise. In this case the conception of Allah,
Rahman and Rahim will also be a little different. According to the first
possibility 'ism' (name) means every existing thing with reference to
its function. In other words, as the function of anything changes, it
becomes a different 'ism' or name.

But according to the second possibility 'hamd' in 'al-hamdu lillah'
signifies unqualified and absolute 'hamd' with the names of Allah,
Rahman and Rahim. Allah alone can perform such a 'hamd' or praise and He
does so with a name that is the name of the manifestation of His glory
at the stage of self. In other words, He praises Himself with some of
His names at this stage. Allah is the comprehensive name at the stage of
self, not at the stage of manifestation. Allah's every name at this
stage is His glory. Rahman (Munificent) is the name of His munificence
at the stage of self.

Rahim (Merciful) is the name of His mercy at the stage of self. The
same is the case with such other names as Rab (Sustainer) etc. These
conceptions can be proved by means of higher philosophy which is
different from commonly known ordinary philosophy. But the case of the
holy men, the friends of Allah is quite different. They have perceived
and grasped these things by traversing the stages of spiritual
journey.

**Prophets' Observations and Experiences**

The holy men cannot tell others what they see. Even in the Holy Qur'an
many sublime truths have been mentioned in a simplified and diluted form
so that they may be communicated even to the ordinary people not yet
free from their low and base desires. In this respect the hands of the
Holy Prophet himself were tied. He was not allowed to explain the truths
to the people in clear terms and therefore he stated the truths in a
weakened form. The Qur'an has many degrees of meanings and has been
revealed in 70 or 70,000 layers.

Having been reduced in intensity in each layer it has come to us in a
form which we may be able to understand with our limited intellect.
Telling us about Himself Allah says: Will they not regard the camels how
they have been created? (Surah al-Ghashiya, 88:17)

It is our bad luck that while describing lower creations like sun, sky,
earth and man, the Prophets felt that there was a knot in their tongue
and that they could not express the truth in clear words: O my Lord!
Open my chest for me; make the matter easy and untie the knot in my
tongue. (Surah Taha, 20:25)

Other Prophets also had knots in their tongues as well as their hearts,
and for that reason they could not express the truths exactly as they
perceived them. They tried to a certain extent explain them to us
through examples and illustrations. When an example of camel is used to
explain to us the existence of Allah, it should not be difficult to
understand where we stand.

In fact we are no better than animals, and as such the knowledge we can
obtain must be very defective. As for the Prophets the Qur'an says at
one place: And when his Lord revealed His glory to the mountain, He sent
it crashing down. And Moses fell down senseless (Surah al-A'raf,
7:143).

When Allah imparted special spiritual training to Moses he said to
Allah: 'My lord, let me see you.' Obviously an eminent Prophet cannot
ask for seeing Allah with his physical eyes. Therefore his request must
have been for a kind of seeing appropriate to the seer and the object to
be seen. But even this kind of seeing was not possible, Moses said to
Allah: 'My Lord! Let me see you.' The answer was: 'you will not see Me.'
Allah further said: 'But gaze upon the mountain.' What is meant by the
mountain here? Does it signify Mount Sinai?

Was it that the glory that could not be revealed to Moses, could be
revealed to this mountain? If some other people had been present at the
Mount Sinai at that time, could they also see the revelation of Allah's
glory? The sentence, 'Gaze upon the mountain' implies a promise. Allah
said: 'You cannot see Me. But gaze upon the mountain. If it stands still
in its place, then you will see Me.' (Surah al-A'raf, 7:143)

There is a possibility that the mountain here might have meant the
remnant of egoism still left in Moses. As the result of the revelation
of glory the mountain was smashed. In other words egoism of Moses was
completely done away with. 'And Moses fell down senseless.' That means
that Moses reached the stage of completely passing away of his human
attributes. What happened to Moses is a story for us, but for the
Prophets it is an experience. This experience has been narrated to us in
the form of a story because we are not yet free from egoism. The mention
of the mountain or the Mount Sinai is only for our sake.


