Belief Must Be Based On Reason
==============================

As there must be a valid reason to prove a thing, there must also be a
valid reason to deny a thing. If you do not have a reason in favour or
against a thing, then simply say: "I don't know". But there are some
obstinate people who deny everything. As these people do not understand,
they behave inhumanly. Whatever you hear you should normally admit that
at least there is some possibility of its being correct.

Do not reject anything outright without any reason. We do not have
access to what is beyond this world. Even about this world our knowledge
is defective and limited. At present we have a certain amount of
knowledge. In future we will know much more. So many things which we now
know, about this world, were totally unknown till a hundred years ago.

In future many more discoveries will be made. When man is still unable
to know and perceive this world fully, how does he dare to deny what the
saints (Awliya') of Allah know and see. A man denies the spiritual
truths, because his heart lacks the spiritual light. He says that
spiritual truths do not exist, but does not admit that he is unaware of
them.

He alleges that what the believers in spiritual truths say are all
fables. He dares to say so because he is ignorant. He does not know that
the things he rejects as fables have been mentioned in the Qur'an too.
What the Muslim gnostics say has been derived from the Qur'an and sunnah
(traditions). Then how can he deny what the Qur'an confirms?

**To Deny What One Does Not Know Is Unbelief**

If not legally unbelief, at least it is a sort of unfaithfulness. The
root-cause of man's misfortune is that he denies the truths he does not
perceive. He rejects these truths because he has not reached the stage
that has been reached by the 'Saints of Allah'. This is the worst kind
of negationistness. The foremost thing is that one must not deny what is
contained in the Qur'an and sunnah, what is acknowledged by the Imams
and what is admitted by the philosophers.

If somebody has not perceived the truth himself, he should frankly
admit that he does not know. But it is all humbug if some idiot says
that he would not believe in Allah unless he himself has dissected Him
with his sharp knife. The most important thing is that we must not deny
what we have been told by the Prophets and the Imams. This is the first
step. We cannot take the next step if we deny the things in the very
beginning. If anybody wants to go forward he should as a first step
admit that the spiritual things he does not know, may possibly he
correct. Then he should pray to Allah to open for him a way that might
lead him to the place where he should reach.

**We Must Not Deny the Qur'an and Sunnah**

If a man will not deny the Divine things and will pray to Allah, Allah
will certainly help him and will gradually open the way for him. I hope
that we will not deny what is in the Qur'an and sunnah. It often happens
that a man believes in the Qur'an and sunnah, and does not deny even
when he does not understand what is in them, but when somebody else
tells him that the Qur'an and sunnah say so, he instead of admitting his
lack of knowledge, rejects that outright as nonsense.

**Total Denial Is A Stumbling Block**

Total denial deprives man from acknowledging many truths and prevents
him from proceeding on the right path. The veracity of the facts which
have been affirmed by the saints of Allah should be acknowledged at
least tacitly if not expressly. A man who denies them totally and
describes them as nonsense, can never succeed in proceeding further.

We Must Do Away With Negative Attitude

I hope that we will give up the negative attitude and will pray to
Allah to make us familiar with the diction of the Qur'an which is of a
special type. Like man the Qur'an also has many potentialities. It is a
large table on which many dishes of various tastes have been placed by
Allah. From it everybody can have food of his choice, provided he has
not lost his appetite, which happens in the case of heart patients.

The Qur'an like this world is a vast dining table. This world is also
used by different people differently according to their requirements and
taste. Man utilizes it in one way, animals in another and the men who
are on the same level as the animals in a third way. As the level goes
up, the way of utilization improves. The same is true of the Qur'an. It
is for all. Everybody can be benefited by it according to his taste and
choice. Its highest beneficiary is he who is its first addressee and to
whom it was revealed. "Only he knows the Qur'an to whom it was
addressed."

**Denial of Prophethood**

We need not be disappointed. Instead we must try to be benefited by the
Qur'an. For this purpose it is essential that first of all we remove
from our mind the idea that there exists nothing besides physical and
material problems and that the Qur'an also has been revealed only to
deal with these problems and is exclusively concerned with this worldly
life. This way of thinking amounts to total denial of Prophethood. In
fact the Qur'an has come to make man a real human being and all this is
a means to an end.

**Supplications and Worship Are Means**

Worship is a means. Supplications are a means. They are a means to
develop real human qualities and to awaken dormant human potentialities
so that man becomes a real human being, a godly man, able to see what is
right and understand what is right. Prophets have come for this very
purpose. Prophets are also a means. They did not come merely to set up a
government. The government has its own place, but the Prophets did not
come only for the sake of obtaining power and administering worldly
affairs. This is what the animals also do. They also have their own
world and they administer the affairs of it.

**Justice Is A Quality Appropriate to Allah**

Those who have an insight look at the discussion of justice as the
discussion of a characteristic of Allah. The administration of divine
justice is one of the functions of the Prophets. They set up a
government as a means of leading man to that position which is the real
aim of the Prophets' coming. May Allah help us in all affairs! Before
dealing with the remaining points perhaps it is necessary and useful to
point out that the scholars often disagree because they do not
understand the language of each other properly. The reason is that each
group of scholars has its own language.

**A Dispute About Grapes Between An Iranian, A Turk And An Arab**

I wonder whether you have ever heard this story. There were three men.
One of them was an Iranian; another was a Turk and the third was an
Arab. They were discussing what they should have for lunch. The Iranian
said that angur would be quite suitable. The Arab said: "No, we would
have inab." The Turk said: "No, I don't like either. We would have
uzum." As they did not understand the language of each other, they
differed. At last someone of them went out and brought grapes. Then they
realized that all of them wanted the same thing. To express the same
thing there are different words in different languages. For example, the
philosophers have a particular diction. They have their own terminology.
Similarly the sufis have their own language.

The jurists have their own terms. The poets have their own poetic
diction. The Imams have their own separate style. Now we have to find
out which one out of these three or four groups has a language closer to
the language of those who are infallible and to the language of
revelation. I do not think that any sensible person will deny that Allah
exists and that He is the source and cause of all that exists. Nobody
believes that you with your coat and pants are God, nor can any sensible
person imagine that any man with a turban, a beard and a staff is Allah.
Everybody knows that all men are creatures.

Anyhow the way in which the cause and effect are described and the
impression that such description creates, often gives rise to
disagreement. We should find out what those who belonged to the gnostic
class actually wanted to say and what induced them to use questionable
words and a vague style. How To Reconcile Different Groups And Their
Ways Of Expression?

Now I want to reconcile these different groups for they all say the
same thing. I do not want to condone all philosophers or to defend all
gnostics or all jurists. That is not my intention. I know that many of
them are shopkeepers. They say only that which may promote their
business.

What I mean to say is that in all these groups there are people who are
pious. The differences which exist between them are due to the scholars
of to which they belong. Their differences may be compared to the
difference existing between the Usulis and the Akhbaris
(traditionalists).

Sometimes some Akhbaris condemn the Usulis as infidels and unbelievers,
and Usulis condemn the Akhbaris as ignorant. They do so despite the fact
that the objective of both the groups is the same. Now the main point of
our discourse is that a group of philosophers uses such terms as the
primary cause, first effect, second effect, causativeness etc.

Such terms as causativeness, source and consequence are some of the
favourite terms of the ancient philosophers. Even our jurists do not
refrain from using terms like causativeness and effectiveness nor have
they any objection against using such words as creatorness and
createdness. There is a class of the Muslim gnostics, who because of
difference they have with other classes, use quite different
expressions, such as manifest, manifestations, glory etc. In addition,
they use certain other words to which the literalists take exception.
Now let us see why they use such words and why some of these words have
been used by the Imams also.

I do not remember to have seen such words as illiyat, ma'luliyyat,
sababiyyat and musabbibiyat (causativeness and effectiveness) being used
by the Imams, but other such words as khallaqiyyat (creatorness)
makhluqiyyat (createdness) tajalli (revelation of glory) zahir
(manifest) and mazhar (manifestation) are found in what they have said.
Now let us see why the Muslim gnostics and sufis have refrained from
using the terminology of the philosophers as well as the language of the
common people. They have invented a style of their own to which the
literalists usually object. Let us know the reason.

**Cause And Effect**

On the basis of causation one thing is considered to be the cause and
another to be the effect. As a rule the cause should be on the one side
and the effect on the other. In other words they should be in two
different places. Take the example of the sun and the sunlight. There is
light in the sun, but it also emits light. The sun and its light have
two separate identities and are located at two different places. As the
sun emits its light, the sun is the cause and its light is its effect.
But the question is whether it is possible in the case of the
self-existing being also to imagine such relationship of cause and
effect as is found in nature. For example, fire is the cause of heat and
the sun is the cause of light. In nature the effect is a consequence of
the cause and the cause and effect are usually found in two separate
places.

In nature the cause and the effect are also usually located at two
different places. But we cannot say about the Creator and the created
that they are in two separate places or exist at two different times.
Even it is difficult to say how AIlah exists, because He is Absolute and
His existence is abstract. Whatever the way of expression you may adopt,
it is impossible to say how Allah exercises His eternal and ceaseless
power of creating and sustaining every thing. The Qur'an says: He is
with you wherever you are. What does "with you" mean in this verse? Is
Allah by the side of every man?

Meaning of "with you"

This way of expression has been chosen because it is impossible to
express the truth exactly. Therefore, words as close to the reality as
possible, have to be chosen. It is very difficult to understand where
the Creator is and how He is with the created. Is the relation between
the Creator and the created the same as between fire and its effect? Or
is the relation between them similar to the relation between soul and
eyes, ears, nose and other organs? The second similitude may be closer
to the reality.

Anyhow it also cannot express the meaning clearly. The Creator is
encompassing the whole creation and this encompassing is related to His
eternal attributes of creation and sustenance. It is difficult to say
anything more. All that may be added is that this encompassing is such
that there is no place where Allah may not be. A tradition says: "If you
were dropped to the lowest earth by means of a rope, you would find
Allah even there." This is only a way of expression.

For example if it is said: "All that exists is Allah". This does not
mean that any particular man wearing a gown and a turban is Allah. No
man who is mentally normal would ever say so. We can only use words
which may be as close to the reality as possible. Only to draw the
attention of a man not conversant with the reality, to the relation
between the Creator and the created it is said that it is true that "All
that exists is Allah".

But that does not mean that any particular man or a particular thing
may be called Allah. That is why the Muslim philosophers say that Allah
is pure existence, and He is all things, but not anything particular out
of them. This statement may appear to be somewhat contradictory. But
what is meant is that Allah is free from every shortcoming. He is pure
existence and has no deficiency or defect. He is characterized with
every perfection, whereas all other things are defective.

Therefore He 'is not anything particular out of them'. As Allah is free
from every defect and deficiency, He consequently enjoys every
perfection. Any perfection found in any creation of His is a reflection
of His own perfection. As every perfection is a revelation of His glory,
He Himself is all perfection. In the above quoted tradition "all things"
means all kinds of perfection and "not anything particular out of them"
means that He is free from every defect and deficiency. "All things"
does not mean that you are also Allah.

That is why it is said that "He is not any thing particular out of
them." In other words He is all perfection while no one else is
characterized with every perfection. There is another example of this
kind. There is a well-known Persian poetical line that means: 'Because
non-attachment became confined to attachment.' This line has nothing to
do with any question of divinity.

But those who are not conversant with this topic, often confuse its
meaning. This line in fact is concerned with the hostility between two
persons. But those who do not understand its meaning say that it amounts
to infidelity. In fact it has been misunderstood and misinterpreted. It
actually deals with quite a different question, that is why the wars
occur in the world.

**Why Do the Wars Occur?**

Why are the wars fought? What is the basis of the wars? In the above
mentioned line and in Persian the word, 'rung' (colour) is used in the
sense of attachment and 'berungi' (colourlessness) in the sense of
non-attachment. Some other poets have also used these words in this
sense. If one is not attached to any thing, there can be no quarrel. All
quarrels are caused by somebody's attachment to some thing, which he
wants to obtain for himself.

The poet who wrote the above mentioned line wants to say that
attachment to any particular thing or things is not a part of real human
nature and if this attachment to worldly things is done away with there
will no longer be any quarrel. In the story of Prophet Musa and Fir'awn,
if Fir'awn had been as indifferent to worldly things as Prophet Musa
was, there would have been no trouble. If all the Prophets gathered
together at a place there would be no dispute at all, for all disputes
and quarrels are due to attachment.

Nature was unattached, but when it became a captive of attachment,
quarrels arose. Even Prophet Musa and Fir'awn would make friends, if the
sting of attachment was removed. This topic has no concern with
divinity. It did not occur to him who objected to this line, that it
related to two men quarreling between themselves.


