Preface
=======

Before commencing the main topic of this section (i.e. a short review of
the Holy Prophet’s (S) biography), we shall look into two vital matters
in this introduction:

1) Human instincts and the roots of need for religion for humanity.

2) The Arab world during the prophetic mission and before the advent of
Islam.

On elucidation of the aforementioned points, the necessary background
for acquiring the finer aspects of the Holy Prophet’s (S) life will be
provided for, Insha’Allah.

Human Powers and Instincts
--------------------------

Man is a combination of material-physical powers as well as
sensual-spiritual powers. He possesses animal instincts, human instincts
and metaphysical instincts. Every set of these powers possess some needs
related to their state and these instincts too, possess some desires
connected to those very instincts. The Lord of the Universe has created
on this earth all that is required by mankind.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُم مَّا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He has made subservient to you whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth “ (Quran, 45: 13)***

Thus, it becomes obvious that man is in need of guidance, in order to
recognize the manner in which he should utilize all that has been
created for him in the best possible manner. For example, to show him as
to how he should overcome his hunger and thirst by eating and drinking,
useful and healthy things, and not harmful foods and drinks.

And how he should satiate his sexual instincts through legitimate and
healthy intercourse and not through illegitimate and fatal
homosexuality. And how he should utilize the instinct of egoism in the
correct manner and not to the extent of inflicting harm on others.

In all these affairs, man should be directed as to how he should tread
the moderate path and abstain from extremities so that the evolution and
progress of his existence reaches the utmost level of human perfection.
For this reason, Allah the Almighty guided man to the religion of “Islam
“ through the Prophets (a.s.). On sending the last of His Prophets (S)
He perfected Islam for man and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This day have I perfected for you your religion “ (Quran, 5:3)***

By the Power of the Almighty God, we shall discuss in the near future,
the means and channels provided for His Prophets (a.s.) by Allah, to
enable them to propagate Islam and allowing it to remain in the hands of
the people until the end of this world. We shall also review how the
Holy Prophet (S) endeavored and strove on this path on the commands of
God.

In order to prepare the ground for such types of research, it is also
necessary to study the Arab society before Islam. By the Power of the
Almighty, let us commence our discussion.

The State of Arab Society in the Pre-Islamic Era
------------------------------------------------

In order to explore the condition of Arab society in the pre-Islamic
era, it is indispensable to examine the following three affairs:

1) Arab race and origin.

2) Religion, culture, economic and social conditions of the Arabs before
Islam.

3) Situation of Mecca and Medina before the Holy Prophet’s (S) mission
and migration.

1. The Arab Race and Origin
---------------------------

It is said that the Arabs are from the descendants of Saam, son of
Prophet Noah (a.s.). Originally, all Arabs are divided into two
generations of Adnan and Qahtan. The description of these two races is
as follows:

1) The Adnan race is from the progeny of Ismaael, the son of Ibrahim.
Initially, they were living in Mecca but later on, they resided in the
lands of Najd and thereafter all over the Arabian Peninsula. Those who
lived in Mecca before the prophetic mission belonged to the tribe of
Quraish.

2) The Qahtan race is from the offspring of Yahrab-ibn-Qahtan.
Originally, they resided in Yemen. Thereafter, ten of their clans
migrated to Syria, Iraq and Medina. At the time of their settlement in
Medina, they consisted of two tribes- Aws and Khazraj.[^1]

2. The Religious, Cultural, Economic and Social conditions of the Arabs in the Pre-Islamic Era
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1) Religious Conditions in the Arabian Peninsula

In Arabia and its environs, Allah revealed three divine laws (shariah)
the Almighty for the guidance of the people, all of which were distorted
by its followers before the advent of the Holy Prophet (S).

First- The Shariah of Ibrahim (a.s.), the Friend of Allah (Khaleel
al-Rahman)

In the Holy Quran and the prophetic traditions, the followers of this
“Shariah “ are called as “Hanif “. Its plural is “Ahnaf “ and “Hunafa “.
“Hanafa “ in Arabic means “turning away from falsehood towards the truth
“[^2] and “Hanif “ means: “(the one who has) turned away from falsehood
towards the truth. “ This name has appeared in the Holy Quran along with
the word (Muslim) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ يَهُودِيًّا وَلَا نَصْرَانِيًّا
وَلَٰكِن كَانَ حَنِيفًا مُّسْلِمًا وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Ibrahim was not a Jew nor a Christian but he was a “Hanif “ (upright
man), a Muslim, ” (Quran, 3:67)***

After Ibrahim, his son Ismail and thereafter the son of Ismail pursued
Ibrahim’s “Shariah “ and they were the “Hunafa “. The first one who
effected a change in Ibrahim’s “Shariah “ was “Amr-ibn-Lahy “, a
descendant of Ismail.

In his journey to Syria, he reached the city of “Ma.’ab “ in the land of
“Balqah. “[^3] There, the tribe of “Amaaleqah” worshipped the idols. Amr
inquired: What are these that you worship? They replied, ‘These are
idols. We ask rain from these idols and we receive it. We seek help from
them against our enemies and they assist us!.’

Amr requested, ‘Give me one of these idols.’. They gave him the idol
“Hubal “. He took it to Mecca and setting it there, he invited the
people to worship and to revere it. He also brought about other
innovations in Ibrahim’s religion.[^4]

Thereafter, idol-worship became rampant amongst the Quraish and other
tribes from the offspring of Ismail. This took place while they were the
sons of Ibrahim, till then the biggest idol-breaker in human history!

In this manner, Ibrahim’s followers (who were from the offspring of
Ismail and were living in Mecca) erected the most famous idols of the
Arabs around the very Ka’ba, which the greatest idol-breaker in human
history had constructed for the worship of the Unique God. Over there,
they circumambulated around the idols and asked their needs from them!

Under these circumstances, the Quraish reckoned themselves to be the
heirs to Ibrahim’s “Shariah “, the custodians of the House of Ka.’ba and
the host to the pilgrims to the House of God. Thus, they imagined
themselves to be the chosen ones amongst the descendants of Adam!

The rest of the Arab tribes were also idol-worshippers (except for a few
who were inclined towards Judaism and Christianity) and they all would
perform the pilgrimage to the House of God. However, they had distorted
the “Hajj” rites too as preached by Ibrahim.

They considered four of the months as forbidden, and did not fight or
participate in battles during these months. These four months comprised
of Zil-Qadah, Zil- Hajjah and Muharram during which they undertook the
pilgrimage and Rajab during which they performed the “Umrah” (lesser
pilgrimage).

In these four months, the people of the Arabian Peninsula lived in
peace. Even if ever a person came across the murderer of his father, he
would not cause him any harm. During these four months, they would also
engage in trade, and attend markets for buying and selling goods.

The tribe of Quraish and the other Arab idol-worshippers were not at all
aware that Ibrahim’s “Shariah” was distorted until four of them
discovered this distortion on an occasion of idol-worship.

#### Few Who Sought Ibrahim’s “Shariah”

Before the prophetic mission, four Meccan residents viz.
Waraqah-ibn-Naufal, Ubaidullah-ibn-Jahash, Uthman-ibn-Huwairath and
Zaid-ibn-Amr-ibn-Nufail said to each other, “Our nation has been led
astray and they are not following the path of our father Ibrahim! What
are these stones, around which they circumambulate and ask their needs
from, while these can neither neither see nor hear? Come and let us
visit the cities until we find the upright (Hanif) religion of Ibrahim.
“

Consequently, Waraqa and Uthman pursued Christianity; Ubaidullah
accepted Islam, then became a renegade and reverted to Christianity;
Zaid-ibn-Amr-bn- Nufail abandoned idol-worshipping and other heresies of
the Quraish and called out to the Quraish in the House of Ka.’ba, “You
are not on the path of Ibrahim’s religion. “[^5]

The work of these men acted as a catalyst in preparing the minds of the
Quraish for the Holy Prophet’s (S) mission.

#### The “Shariah” of Moses son of Imran (a.s.)

Although in the beginning, the “Shariah “ of Musa-ibn-Imran (a.s.) was
revealed to him in Mount Sinai, yet the addressee nation (i.e. the
Bani-Israil) were in the state of journey towards Bait-ul-Muqaddas in
Syria, and their “Qiblah” (direction of prayer) and religious center.

After their wars and skirmishes with other nations and prior to the
proclamation of the Holy Prophet (S), a small number of Jews (who were
the inheritors of this “Shariah “) lived in Yemen anonymously, while a
few others lived a life of disgrace in Syrian cities. However, a
majority of them lived in Medina and its flourishing outskirts like
Khaiber, Wadi al-Qura and Taima (near Syria).

Like Ibrahim’s “Shariah “, the “Shariah” of Moses and his heavenly Book
“Torah” too could not escape from the clutches of distortion. Moreover,
the same distorted “Torah” was not within the reach of the common Jews.
Rather, these were manuscripts in the hands of their religious leaders,
the descendants of Harun (a.s.). Therefore, some parts were kept
concealed by them. Besides, Moses.’ “Shariah “, was mainly confined to
such slogans like: Baitul-Muqaddas as the “Qibla “, Saturday being a
holiday and the spirituality of Harun’s descendants.

These books, in the possession of the Jewish religious leaders, also
contained the glad-tidings given by the Prophets of Bani-Israil about
the Holy Prophet’s mission (along with his distinct characteristics) and
had remained safe and intact. Of course, such prophecies were not in
conflict with their daily affairs.

Hence, the Jewish scholars residing in Medina conveyed about the Holy
Prophet’s mission and his stay in Medina to the people of Aws and
Khazraj. Third- The “Shariah” of Jesus son of Mary (a.s.)

After Moses, Jesus son of Mary (a.s.) was sent on a mission as a Prophet
in Bait-ul-Muqaddas and he too was from Bani-Israil. After his ascension
to the heavens, his “Shariah “ too got severely distorted like the
previous two “Shariahs “ so much so that his followers started believing
in the Trinity: Father, son (Isa) and the Holy Spirit and changed the
holiday from Saturday to Sunday.

Therefore, nothing remained much from Christianity either except for a
few slogans like “Qiblah “ and the carrying of the cross (where they
believed that Christ was crucified on it).

Nevertheless, the glad-tidings of Christ and the Prophets before him
about the Holy Prophet (S) remained safe from distortions in the
religious books of the Christians, simply because these did not come in
conflict with their day to day affairs. Moreover, wherever they went,
the Christian scholars would inform the people about the expected
arrival of the Holy Prophet (S).

In the Arabian Peninsula, the majority of the Christians lived in Syria
and only a few amongst them lived in Yemen and Iraq. Some of their
priests lived in monasteries on the way from Syria to Mecca where on
occasions; they would come in contact with the trade caravans and talk
to them about the Holy Prophet’s mission.

#### Relationship between the followers of the Three Religions

The Jews and the Christians were at loggerheads from times ancient.
While accounting their sayings against each other, the Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ لَيْسَتِ النَّصَارَىٰ عَلَىٰ
شَيْءٍ وَقَالَتِ النَّصَارَىٰ لَيْسَتِ الْيَهُودُ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ وَهُمْ
يَتْلُونَ الْكِتَابَ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the Jews say: The Christians do not follow anything (good) and
the Christians say: The Jews do not follow anything (good). This is
while they recite the Book (perhaps implying that they do not act upon
it) (Quran, 2:113)***

The idol-worshippers reckoned themselves and the followers of the Book
to be on the right path but respected the Jews more and called them as
the first followers of the Book.

#### Belief in the Resurrection and Day of Judgement

Before the Holy Prophet’s mission, none of the religious groups, whether
they were Sabians (star-worshippers), Magians (dualists), Jews or
Christians, had any clear belief about resurrection and the Day of
Judgment. The Arab idol worshippers too, denied resurrection and the Day
of Judgment. As per the Holy Quran, they would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ هِيَ إِلَّا حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا نَمُوتُ وَنَحْيَا وَمَا نَحْنُ
بِمَبْعُوثِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is naught but our life in this world; we die and we live and
we shall not be raised again“ (Qur'an, 23:/37)***

Moreover, their belief vis-a-vis god and the idols (which they reckoned
to be God’s partners) was such that they sought all their worldly needs
from them. For example, they would ask them to degrade and despise their
foes, send rain for them, cure their sick, make their camels and sheep
give milk, etc.

Thus, they did not fear from indulging in any wicked and unjust acts
like killing, plundering, persecuting, cursing and imprecating others
save whatever was unpleasant for them in this worldly life. For
instance, as they were aware that if they killed someone, a person from
the victim’s tribe would seek revenge by killing someone from the
assassin’s tribe, they would refrain from committing such an act. Or
they would desist from deeds that was considered improper by the society
and would be because of disgrace for them.

Such was the religious state and belief of the Arabs in the pre-Islamic
era.

### 2) The culture of the Arabs

The Arab culture in those days consisted of two vital branches:

#### Science of Genealogy

In the era of paganism, the Arabs would lay tremendous amount of
emphasis on the memorization of genealogy of their race (lineage of
ancestors). Until the second century of hijri, every Arab knew by heart
his ancestors lineage down to Ismail and Ibrahim (if he was from the
descendant of Adnan), and to Ya.’rabibn- Qahtan (if he was from the
descendant of Qahtan).

They lent such significance to this science that they had memorized the
genealogy of Arabian horses as well. The book, “Ansab al-Khail “ of
Hisham-ibn-Muhammad-ibn-al- Kalbi[^6] can be cited as an evidence of our
point. Yet, notwithstanding the aforementioned information, whatever is
within our reach and has come down in the books of genealogy about the
descent of the Arab tribes is doubtful and refutable due to a number of
reasons.

Firstly, sometimes a group amongst a tribe would detach from their
original clan and join another tribe. In this regard, Ibn al-Kalbi has a
book titled “An- Nawaaqil “[^7], which in itself means those groups
amongst the Arab tribes who transferred their genealogy from one tribe
to another. Consequently, in the books of genealogy, these sects have
been related to those tribes to which they had moved.

Secondly, many of the Arabs would adopt children, with the result, that
while citing his genealogy, a person would not be linked to his real
father but to the man who adopted him.

Lastly, during the period of paganism, there are other instances, which
tamper the authenticity of the aforesaid descents in such documents. We
shall relate one such example. Ibn Abil Hadid narrates from Rabii
al-Abrar Zamakhshari as follows:

The mother of Amre Aas was a wicked bondmaid living in Mecca and her
name was “Naabegha“, the freed one of Abdullah-ibn-Jad.’an. Five men
slept with her in one “Tohr “ (Tohr means the period of a woman’s purity
between two menstruation cycles). These five men were Abu Lahab, son of
Abdul-Muttalib, Amiyya-ibn-Khalaf, Hisham-ibn-Mughaira,
Abu-Sufyan-ibn-Harb and Aas-ibn- Waael. The result: Naabegha gave birth
to Amr and though he resembled Abu Sufyan, all of them claimed to have
fathered the child. Finally, they asked Naabegha to judge this matter
herself. She said: “Amr is the son of Aas-ibn- Waael. “ After this, Amr
was called as Ibn (son of) Aas-ibn-Waael and was linked to his tribe and
descent. The reason why Naabegha selected Aas-ibn- Waael was because he
had endowed her with numerous gifts and presents.[^8]

Thereafter, Amr is introduced as the son of Aas-ibn-Waael in the books
of Arab genealogy till date. Numerous incidents similar to the above
exist in the Quraish genealogy.[^9]

Besides the Quraish, the tribe of Thaqif, who lived in Taif some 72 Km
away from Mecca, had also experienced similar incidents. However,
experts on genealogy have not said anything about the tribes of Aws and
Khazraj in Medina, the tribes of Hamadan in Yemen and the other tribes
of Qahtan in the Arabian Peninsula.

##### Experts On Genealogy In The First And Second Centuries

In the first and second Hijri, there existed experts on genealogy
amongst the Arabs such as Abu-Bakr, the first Caliph, and Aqeel-ibn-Abi
Talib who were well aware of these events and people would acquire
knowledge from them in this regard.

#### Eloquent poems

Ya’qubi says:[^10] “The Arabs reckoned poems rather than knowledge and
other sciences to be the true wisdom. Whenever an accomplished poet
would emerge in a tribe, they would bring him to the market places (that
were set up on special occasions during the year) and to the House of
God during the Haj season so that the Arabs would gather and listen to
his poems. This act, according to them, was the source of their honor
and dignity.

Except for poetry, they did not possess any other culture or attraction
in their activities. Sometimes, the poems would lead them towards
hostility and enmity and on other occasions, it would result in
friendship and unity. They would use these poems to enrich their
speeches, seek precedence over each other and distinguish good and evil
amongst themselves. By the help of poems, a tribe would fight with
another tribe, engage in flattery and rebuke the other tribe.

The Arabs would compose poems having four different implications:

1. In describing the velour of a person in battles and their tools of
war such as sword, spear, bow and arrow and horse riding. In this
regard, their poems are similar to the poems of Firdousi about Rostam
and his horse and tools of war (in Persian literature). The only thing
addition in Arabic poems is the description about camels.

2. In describing their own generosity and their tribe’s munificence,
especially the food prepared for guests. Such type of poems is not in
vogue in Persian.

3. In describing the beloved and the beloved’s house and whatever is
related to the beloved. This kind of poem is found in all languages. In
this regard, sometimes very ordinary poems can be found in their lyrics
like the poems of Ubaid Zaakani.

4. In describing the glories of a tribe, which the like of it cannot be
found in any other nation.

Occasionally, of course, they rhymed verses on practical knowledge.
Therefore, odes on good ethics by Arab poets can also be seen. Eloquent
sermons calling for praiseworthy morals were delivered in the Arab
market places. Insha’Allah, we shall mention these in the near future.

Before the advent of Islam, the greatest poet in Mecca was “Abu Talib “
and the most famous poet in Medina was “Hassaan-ibn-Thabit “.

### 3) The economic condition of the Arabs in the pre-Islamic era

Arab tribes residing in Yemen, Medina, Iraq and Syria were involved in
farming, gardening and cattle breeding, while the Meccans who belonged
to the Quraish tribe were engaged in trade and business. During winter,
their trade caravan would move from Syria, Iran and Iraq towards Mecca
and in summer, they would move from Mecca to Yemen and Ethiopia in
Africa. In this regard, the Almighty God informs through the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّـهِ الرَّحْمَـٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ. لِإِيلَافِ قُرَيْشٍ
إِيلَافِهِمْ رِحْلَةَ الشِّتَاءِ وَالصَّيْفِ فَلْيَعْبُدُوا رَبَّ
هَـٰذَا الْبَيْتِ الَّذِي أَطْعَمَهُم مِّن جُوعٍ وَآمَنَهُم مِّنْ
خَوْفٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For the protection of the Quraish, Their protection during their
trading caravans in the winter and the suummer, So let them serve the
Lord of this House, Who feeds them against hunger and gives them
security against fear”. (Qur'an, 106:1-4)***

Verily, the Quraish had gathered enormous wealth as a result of these
trade trips, which was unparalleled amongst other Arabs.

Such was the economic condition of these few Arab tribes. Except for
them, all other tribes that formed the majority of the Arabian Peninsula
were nomads living in distressing conditions. They lived in dry and arid
places with scanty water and grass.

The real and vital wealth of these tribes was the camels, which possess
greater power of withstanding thirst than other four-legged creatures. A
few tribal warriors also possessed horses for the purpose of battles,
hunting wild animals and fleeing (from the enemy).

Like the Europeans of today who eat all kinds of animals and insects,
the desert dwellers too, used to hunt and eat all types of animals!

Sometimes, a particular tribe would attack another tribe and after a
battle with one another, the victor would plunder the wealth, women and
children of the vanquished to the maximum possible extent. On occasions,
they would even sell their captives to other tribes.

In all these situations (i.e. at the time of hunting wild animals or
grazing camels or wars), the women and children were considered a heavy
burden for the men and had no share in this entirely onerous life.
Therefore, some of the fathers would bury their daughters alive. In this
regard, the Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَقْتُلُوا أَوْلَادَكُمْ خَشْيَةَ إِمْلَاقٍ نَّحْنُ نَرْزُقُهُمْ
وَإِيَّاكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And do not slay your children for (fear of) poverty. We provide
sustenance for you and (and so will We do) for them “ (Qu’an, 6:151)***

Another source of income for the Arabs was slavery, where they derived
benefit from the work of their slave or bondmaid. At times, they would
set their bondmaids to fornicate for the purpose of earning income and
if in this the bondmaid became pregnant, their child would become a
slave of their owner and this itself was another profit for the owner of
the bondmaid![^11]

If a bondmaid was set free and she continued in the act of fornication
and consequently gave birth to a child, it was she who would determine
the father of this child. Consequently, the newborn would be linked to
his tribe.[^12]

Sometimes, these harlots would fix a flag on top of the doors of their
houses, a sign of their willingness to indulge in prostitution.[^13]

Whatever we have mentioned was only a hint of the economic condition of
the Arab society in those days. In those periods, all Arab tribes would
organize markets on special occasions.

#### The Arab Markets

The Arabs arranged markets on special occasions during the year where
people from all over the Arabian Peninsula would congregate. At such
times, their life and property was secured. Amongst all these markets,
the market of “Akkaz “, situated beyond Najd (a distance of one day from
Taif and three days from Mecca) was the most important one.

During the month of Zil-Qadah, the Quraish and other Arab tribes would
gather in this market. Apart from being a place for trading, it was also
a ground for extolling tribal glories and virtues, a place for reciting
poems and delivering sermons. Moreover, contracts were signed between
the tribes at this very place.

From here, they would depart for the market of “Majaanah “ (a day’s
distance from Mecca) where they would stay until the end of Zil-Qadah.
Thereafter, they would leave for the market of “Mujaz “ (a distance of 6
km from Arafat) and there, they would halt until the 8th of Zil-Haj. On
the 9th of Zil-Haj they would leave for Arafat for performing the Haj
rites.[^14]

### 4) The sociopolitical condition of Arabs in the pre-Islamic era:

Human societies run either on system formulated by man himself, or a
divine one. In case of the latter, people learn gnosis, world-view and
ordinances pertaining to life from their Lord through Prophets. In such
type of societies, they perform every act for the satisfaction of God
and are called as monotheists. As for a society based on man-made
regulations, its people perform every act as per their desire, personal
gains and losses being their primary concern. Of course, if man thinks
that the benefits and losses of a society is his own gain and loss, he
will sometimes perform acts to the benefit of the society even though it
may result in personal loss.

In a society based on man-made system, or established on racial
principles, like the German Nazi society of yore and the present Zionist
state in occupied Palestine, or founded on the basis of nationalism, a
person acts for the interest of his society, even if he has to inflict
loss on other societies and transgress their rights. But, in a society
whose people are monotheists and fulfill the affairs for divine
satisfaction, they perform acts for their personal benefits as well as
for the benefit of the society but never to the extent of transgressing
the rights of others.

During the era of paganism, the Arabs were egoists possessing strong
patriotic feelings towards their own tribes. In other words, they
performed acts for their own personal benefit as well as for their
tribe’s benefits even if this resulted in loss for other people and
societies. This is because the tribal societies are either racial or
nationalists.

The basis of the Arab tribal system in the pre-Islamic era:

The hierarchy of the Arab tribes during the period of paganism was
established on four pillars:

1. The chief of the tribe.

2. The poet of the tribe.

3. The heroes and warriors of the tribe.

4. The income of the tribe.

The details of this resume are as follows:

#### First: The Power Of The Tribe’s Leader

In Arab society of those days, the leader of a tribe possessed the rank
of a ruler and commander and the entire tribe was submissive before him.
His rule over the people was established on the basis of love, respect
and fear. One fourth of the war-booty belonged to the leader of the
tribe[^15] and in exchange to this; he entertained his tribe, defended
their rights and protected them. In Mecca, the Holy Prophet’s (S)
forefathers were the leaders of the Meccan tribes, till this rule was
taken over by Hisham and then by his son Abdul-Muttalib. After him, Abu
Talib became the Meccan chief.

In Medina too, the various sects from the two tribes of Aws and Khazraj
possessed various leaders in every era.

#### Second: The Power of Poems

In the Arabian society, poetry was the only beautiful art and admired
culture. A tribe’s poet was the official speaker, who waxed eloquent
tribal glories. He was the protector of his tribe’s interest and the
defender of its dignity. Sometimes, through a single verse or a few
lines of a poem, the antagonists were humbled and degraded. At times,
battles and bloodshed would take place between two tribes because of a
couplet or a few lines of poem. In contrast, an ode would bring
friendship and love between two tribes.

Elegant poems would be recited in tribal gatherings during Haj and the
market seasons and then, these very poems would be transferred from one
person to another amongst the entire Arab tribes. In this way, poems
were the only means for disseminating good and evil thoughts and ideas
in the Arab societies. It shows that the power of poem was more than the
might of wealth and sword in that society.

#### Third: The Heroes And Warriors Of The Tribe

In the early society of desert-dwellers, championship and physical power
exerted considerable influence. Amongst the Arabs, the value of
gallantry was much higher than other desert-dwellers. In the pre-Islamic
era, Hamza-ibn- Abdul Muttalib and Amr-ibn-Abdawud were the most famous
champions of the Quraish in Mecca.

#### Fourth: The Power of Wealth

Wealth and property have always had a significant effect in human
societies. But wealth exerted a greater influence in the Arab society of
those days than in many other human societies. They also reckoned
spiritual values to be untrue and worthless.

They would say,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا مَا هِيَ إِلَّا حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا نَمُوتُ وَنَحْيَا
وَمَا يُهْلِكُنَا إِلَّا الدَّهْرُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is nothing but our life in this world; we live and die and
nothing destroys us but time “ (Qur'an, 45:24)***

##### The Positive Aspect

In their greedy, ignorant and malicious life, they possessed one
righteous facet rarely seen in other human societies, especially the
present day civilization. And that was their fulfillment of all promises
and agreements.

#### The Importance of Promises and Agreements in Arab societies

Before Islam: The flow of social affairs in the human societies is based
on fulfillment of promises and pacts between individuals in a society.
Buying and selling of goods, property and necessities of life,
partnership amongst individuals in various affairs, marriage contracts,
and stipulation for their annulment are all based on reliance of
promises and contracts.

Today, pledges and contracts are written down and are usually registered
and notarized by government organizations, which ensure their
implementation. But, in the pre-Islamic tribal Arab societies, pledges
and contracts were based on an individual’s respect for promises and
contracts and he would strive hard to implement them in order to exhibit
his worthiness. Implementation of promises and pacts was also the proof
of one’s dignity and superiority. Every member of that society strove to
respect and fulfill his promise to others.

By uttering a few words like, “You are my son “, to an alien belonging
to another tribe (no matter how distant he was from the announcer in
race, genealogy, place of residence and customs), this stranger would
become the announcer’s son, a brother to his sons and in genealogy; he
would be counted amongst his tribe. The adopted son also had the right
of inheritance. Moreover, the experts on Arab genealogy have registered
such a stranger as the announcer’s son in the books of genealogy and
have reckoned him to be amongst the announcer’s tribe.

\* \* \*

If two tribes concluded a peace contract and vowed to support each
other, then each individual from these two tribes would become prepared
to sacrifice even their lives for the sake of their respective tribe’s
honor and dignity.

Moreover, if a person belonging to a tribe would announce, “So and so
person from so and so tribe is under my protection “, then all the
announcer’s sons, relatives and near ones would sacrifice their lives
for the sake of protecting that man’s life. Besides, each of his
tribesmen too would protect this man in turns.

Similarly, if a person paid allegiance to another to cooperate with him
in an affair, he would assist him to the extent of sacrificing his life.
If two fighters clad in their war outfits faced each other in the
battle-field with their swords and horses (where everything is fair) and
if one would address the other, “You are safe “, then both could
dismount peacefully, throw off their waroutfits and rest side by side
without fear.

An individual’s firmness in fulfilling promises depended on the extent
he held in esteem his own dignity, prestige and human values. This ethic
and behavior prevalent in those days of ignorance was a plus point of
that society, the like of which cannot be found in any modern
civilization.[^16]

The above mentioned quality by no means implies that disputes and
conflicts did not exist amongst the Arabs. Rather, like all other
humans, the Arabs too were involved in disputes and feuds and would drag
their opponents to court. These courts were presided by judges
accomplished to solve such disputes.

#### The Arab Judges

In every human society, there exist arbitrators and judges for
settlement of disputes. The Arab society before Islam, was no exception
to this rule and in every era, there was one or more persons (known for
their intelligence, sagacity, steadfastness and rectitude), who settled
litigation and cases among the various Arab tribes. These men were
called as “Hukkaam “ ((ÍßÇã. People from far and near would approach
these judges for solving any matter that required court proceedings.

In Mecca, Abdul-Muttalib, followed by his son Abu Talib, were amongst
the Arab judges during their respective times.[^17]

Such was the condition of the Arabs in the entire Arabian Peninsula and
its environs. Now, by the Power of the Almighty, we shall further
examine, in an impartial manner, the condition of the people of Mecca
and Medina.

3. The Conditions of Mecca and Medina in the Pre-Islamic Era
------------------------------------------------------------

### A- Culture of Mecca and Medina

#### 1. Culture of the Meccans

Due to their trade journeys to Syria, Iran, Iraq and Ethiopia, the
Meccans were better acquainted with the culture of the civilized nations
of their time than all other Arabs were. As a result of their social
links with the people of the Book (i.e. the Jews and the Christians)
they were aware of their habits and customs.

Similarly, owing to the constant inflow of the Arabs in Mecca for Haj
and Umra and the markets in its outskirts (especially the market of
Akkaz, which was an arena for the Arab poets and orators), the language
and accent of the Quraishites, were the most eloquent amongst the Arabs.

In the pre-Islamic era, seventeen people from Mecca had learnt how to
read and write.[^18]

#### 2. Culture of the people of Medina

The people of Medina had close relations with the Jews and Jewish
scholars. Consequently, they acquired most of their cultural information
from them. Before Islam, there were eleven people in Medina belonging to
the tribes of Aws and Khazraj who had learnt reading and writing.

Amongst them, seven were called as “Kaamil” because besides reading and
writing, they also knew swimming and archery. Anyone who would learn
these three arts would earn for himself the epithet “Kaamil” (meaning
perfect).

### B- The Socio-Political Conditions of the People of Mecca and Medina

Like the entire Arabian Peninsula, politics in Mecca and Medina was
ruled by the tribal system. However, the social system of these two,
just as we shall see, differed vastly with each other.

#### 1. Sociopolitical condition in Mecca

In Mecca, the Quraish reckoned them to be the descendants of Ismail and
Ibrahim and this itself made them feel haughty against all the other
Arab tribes. Similarly, nearness to the House of God wherein all the
Arab tribes (except the Jews and Christians) would gather for Haj and
Umra had also become a source of additional honor and glory for the
Meccans.

Moreover, the Quraish linked the incident of “Abraha “ (who had come
with the intention of destroying the House of God) to them and in this
way, unduly held themselves to be dear before the Arab tribes.

On the other hand, various indecencies and unlawful acts like usury,
gambling, fornication, arrogance and insolence was rampant amongst them.
This was due to their regular trade with Iran, Syria, and Iraq, Yemen
and Ethiopia and consequently, their amassment of enormous wealth. For
this reason, they were unparalleled during those days in the Arabian
Peninsula. The following verse applied to them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْإِنسَانَ لَيَطْغَىٰ  أَن رَّآهُ اسْتَغْنَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Man most surely becomes inordinate, when he sees himself free from
want”. (Qu’an, 96:6&7)***

In that era, immorality and corruption was not as prevalent in any part
of the Arabian Peninsula as they were in Mecca. This was due to a number
of reasons, a few of which are as follows:

(1) As they disbelieved in the resurrection and the Day of Judgment,
they would, during their leisure time, engage in trade and during their
stay in Mecca, involve themselves in debauchery and all sorts of
voluptuousness.

(2) As a group of Quraishites would move to tropical and cold regions
during their trade journeys, it would be months that their families
would remain without any male member. Consequently, with the absence of
any interactive barriers between the members of the two sexes in the
Arab society, there remained no obstacle for sin between the voluptuous
men who stayed behind and the womenfolk present.

(3) The presence of slaves and virgin bondmaids in the houses of the
aristocrats amongst the Quraish, facilitated illicit sexual intercourse
for both men and women.

The aforementioned factors were influential in the spread of sins and
indecencies in Mecca, more than in all other Arab societies. For better
acquaintance with the morality of the Meccans, suffice it is to mention
the following event taken from the book “Aghaani”:

Abu-Lahab, son of Abdul-Muttalib, laid a bet with Aas, son of Hisham,
over a hundred camels. Their gambling was such that they would design a
hole in the ground to the size of a pebble or walnut. Then, they would
stand at a distance and cast this pebble or walnut in the hole. If the
object would find its target then that person would be declared the
winner.

In this gambling, Abu-Lahab won a hundred camels from Aas. Once again
they laid a wager, with the same result. Again, for the third time, they
played and Abu-Lahab emerging as winner. After losing whatever he owned,
Aas addressed Abu-Lahab, ‘O son of Abdul-Muttalib! I feel that the dice
has befriended you. Let us take a final gamble and see which one of us
will become the slave of the other..’

Abu-Lahab said: ‘so be it..’ Once again they cast the dice. Abu-Lahab
emerged as winner and took Aas as his slave.

After this incident, Aas would pay tax to Abu-Lahab. During the battle
of Badr, the Quraish had stipulated that all should either themselves
participate in this war or send someone as a proxy. Abu-Lahab sent Aas
in his place and promised to set him free after his return. But he got
killed in the battle of Badr.[^19]

##### The state of Taif, a rural district of Mecca

The wide spread fornication and indecencies in Mecca had their effect in
Taif, a rural district located some twelve leagues from Mecca. A
majority of the people of Taif belonged to the tribe of Thaqif. Also, a
few affluent Quraishite also lived in this place. Perhaps, due to this
very reason, the people of Taif were only second to the people of Mecca
in fornication and usury.[^20] Now, in order to throw light on the
influence of the Meccans on the people of Taif and the tribe  
 of Thaqif, we relate a story narrated by historians:

In Taif, Harith-ibn-Kaldah Thaqafi owned a bondmaid named “Somayyah “.
He got her married to his Roman slave and was collecting tax from her
prostitution business. Meanwhile, Abu-Sufyan returned from a journey and
straightaway went to Taif. After getting on a high from his drinks, he
approached Abu Maryam Saluli, a wine-seller and asked, ‘Indeed, my
journey was a long one.

Do you have any prostitute at your disposal?’ Abu Maryam took him to
Somayyah. After this event, Somayyah gave birth to “Ziyad “ in the year
1 A.H.

Initially, Ziyad was reckoned to be Ubaid’s son (the Roman slave who was
Somayyah’s husband). It was in the year 41 A.H. or 42 A.H., when Muawiya
declared Ziyad to be Abu-Sufyan’s son and his own brother because of his
father’s adultery with Somayyah. Right till the end of Bani-Ummayah’s
rule,

Ziyad was reckoned to be Abu-Sufyan’s son. Thereafter, during the
Abbasside reign, he was called as “Ziyad-ibn-Abih “[^21].

From the above incident, we draw two conclusions:

1. As mentioned previously, the affluent Quraish had polluted the city
of Taif and the tribe of Thaqif with their (evil) deeds.

2. The Quraish spread their wings of vices and evil not only in their
own city and at their leisure time; rather they did not desist from
their reproachable ways and habits, even during their travels and jaunts
to other cities.

Perhaps, the following incident is yet another evidence for such state
of affairs:

After the battle of Badr, the Muslims held as captives about seventy
people from Quraish. Amongst them, was a group of the affluent and the
elite?

Abdullah-ibn-Ubayy, a hypocrite, tried to persuade one of his two
bondmaids to have intercourse with one of the wealthy Quraishite
captives, hoping that she would become pregnant and would give birth to
a child. After the return of the captives to Mecca, he (Abdullah) would
receive enormous amount of money from the wealthy Quraishite in return
for his illegitimate son (who, as per the Arab custom, belonged to
Abdullah-ibn-Ubai).

However, none of these two bondmaids resorted to this wicked act and
they complained to the Prophet (S). Thereupon, Allah the Almighty
revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُكْرِهُوا فَتَيَاتِكُمْ عَلَى الْبِغَاءِ إِنْ أَرَدْنَ
تَحَصُّنًا لِّتَبْتَغُوا عَرَضَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not force your slave girls for prostitution to seek the life
(wealth) of this world, if they want to protect their chastity…” [Qur’an
71:43]***

This incident shows that this rich Quraishite had made a request to
Abdullahibn- Ubai to have sexual intercourse with his bondmaids and
hence the persuasion. [^22]

To conclude, we shall remind you of a story, which depicts noteworthy
diligence of the tribe of Thaqif in prostitution and perversion.

In the year 9 A.H., a group belonging to the tribe of Thaqif left for
Medina in order to accept Islam conditionally. At that moment, they
consulted amongst themselves and laid the following condition to accept
Islam, “(We, the) Thaqif cannot refrain from fornication and wine. “ But
when the Holy Prophet (S) rejected their condition, they were forced to
agree to abstain from these two evil deeds.[^23]

Such was the state of Mecca and its rural outskirts (i.e. Taif) during
the era of paganism.

#### 2. Sociopolitical conditions in Medina

As far as Medina is concerned, its state of affairs was as follows:

Before the Holy Prophet’s migration to Medina, the Jews were residing in
it and its outskirts, and possessed firm strongholds. They were equipped
with the best war equipment of their time, complemented well with
experienced men for warfare. In a few flourishing areas, they lived with
the most advanced methods of gardening, farming and animal husbandry.
All of them (especially those residing in Medina) engaged in trade and
usury as well.

As per the revelation in their religious books, the Jews believe that
God has created them a privileged nation to rule over all other nations
and reciprocally He has created all other people to serve the Jews.

Hence, the Jews have always strove to dominate and behaved arrogantly
with others, regardless of the society they lived. Similarly, taking
into consideration their inclination for accumulating wealth and their
greed, they have an astonishing exploration for appropriation of other
nations.’ wealth by all possible means.

For achieving these two aims (i.e. gaining supremacy over all nations
and appropriating their wealth), they have resorted to all conceivable
means within their disposal. Such a situation prevailed in every era and
in every society that they lived. Moreover, as the Jews fail to achieve
their objectives in a society established on ethics, they become the
source of propagation of every type of sin and slipshod and indulge in
all sorts of conspiracies.

Keeping in view these Jewish qualities, the Jews living in the ancient
Arab society were rich and arrogant. Reading and writing were widespread
amongst them and they reckoned themselves to be from the progeny of
Bani-Israil, the chosen ones of mankind, the people of the “Shariah “
(religious laws) and the first heavenly book. They spread such ideas
amongst the entire people of the Arabian Peninsula.

In order to manifest their virtues, they would narrate to the people of
Medina all that the Torah had foretold about the advent of the last
Prophet. They would explain the signs of his emergence, prophesying that
his coming is near and Medina will be his place of residence.

These prophecies, prompted Abu-Aamer (whose name was Abd-Amr and who
belonged to the tribe of Aws) to resort to the worship of God with this
hope that he would become this promised Prophet.[^24] He would wear
coarse, woolen clothes such that he was addressed as Abu-Aamer, the
monk. However, on the occasion of the Prophet’s migration to Medina when
he realized that he had not become the Prophet, he engaged in
sabotage![^25]

As per their customary habit, the Jews in Medina would arouse antagonism
between the two tribes of Aws and Khazraj and set them to fight against
each other. Resultantly, on occasions, bloody wars would take place
between them. The tribes of Aws and Khazraj each had a treaty of
friendship and cooperation with one of the Jewish tribes. During wars,
both the tribes would hire arms from their Jewish ally. Thus, the Jews
would derive massive gains, while the two tribes of Aws and Khazraj
would receive nothing but desperation and distress.

This is quite similar to the dealings of America and Russia today with
their allies in the third world.….

By comparing the state of the two tribes of Aws and Khazraj with the
state of the tribes residing in Mecca and Yemen, which coexisted
peacefully in the same era, it becomes obvious that the wars that took
place were the result of Jewish conspiracies!

The people of Medina lived under such conditions till the Holy Prophet’s
migration to Medina, when the two tribes of Aws and Khazraj planned to
find a remedy for their helplessness. They arrived at a solution that
all should agree to elect a king, whereupon they would take commands
from him to prevent future wars.

Thus, they selected an eminent person of Medina named
Abdullah-ibn-Ubaiy. They were in the process of setting up the royal
crown for him and buying the necessary jewels from the Jews that they
came into contact with the Holy Prophet in Mecca and realized that he is
the same Prophet about whom the Jews had foretold. Hence, they accepted
Islam and invited the Holy Prophet (S) along with his companions to
Medina.

After his entry into Medina, a treaty was signed between all the
Medinites viz. the Jews, Aws and Khazraj, in accordance with the
Prophet’s (S) guidance and instructions. This truce stipulated that
nobody would commit injustice against the other and if ever anyone did
commit any wrong, the Prophet (S) would be the judge. Moreover, the
entire Medinites were also backed up in the face of any possible
external aggression or invasion.[^26]

Also, taking into consideration the Arab habits and customs of that
time, the consequence of the treaty of fraternity and brotherhood
between the Muslims and the pact with the Jewish tribe residing in
Medina becomes obvious and evident.

By paying attention to what was said about the state of the Arabs in the
pre- Islamic era, we can now cast a glance over the Holy Prophet’s (S)
biography.

[^1]: Refer to “Mukhtasar Jumharah Ansab al-Arab “ of Ibn Kalbi and
“Ansab “ of Ibn Hazm. For acquaintance with the Arab places, refer to
“Qab.’el al-Arab “ of Omar Ridha Kahhale.

[^2]: Refer to “al-Mufradaat by Raagheb Isfahani “.

[^3]: Balqah is situated between Syria and Wadi al-Qura (which is near
Medina). For a detailed description on Balqah and Ma.’ab, refer to
“Mu.’jam al-Buldaan. “

[^4]: Refer to Seerah Ibn Hisham 1/81-82:- The story of Amr-ibn-Lahy and
the worship of idols.

[^5]: The life-history of Zaid has come down in length in Seerah Ibn
Hisham 1/242-247

[^6]: A manuscript of this book can be found in the library of Majma.’
Ilmi al-Islami.

[^7]: Refer to the life history of Hisham-ibn-Abi Nasr in “Hadiyat
al-Aarefeen “; 2/509

[^8]: The genealogy of Amr Aas has come down in detail in the commentary
of Ibn Abil Hadid 6/283--Sermon No 83 of Nahjul-Balagha.

[^9]: Refer to the genealogy of Muawiaya and Ziyad in the commentary of
Ibn Abil Hadid 1/336 and 16/187; and also the incident of Zekwaan, the
slave and adopted one of Amiyya whose agnomen changed to Abu-Omar and
Walid-ibn-Uqbah-ibn-Abi Ma.’eet-ibn-Abi Omar was his grandson and
Uthman’s brother. (Refer to Aghaani 1/24); and also the incident of
Walid in “The role of Ayesha in the Islamic history. “ 1/152 10
Tarikh-Ya.’qubi 1/262: Arab poets

[^10]: Tarikh- Ya'qubi 1/262: Arab poets

[^11]: Refer to the story of Abdullah-ibn-Ubayy in the forthcoming
discussion on the state of Taif.

[^12]: Refer to the story of genealogy of Amr Aas mentioned above.

[^13]: Refer to "Al-Muhbar", p. 340. Such houses existed in Mecca and
Taif.

[^14]: Regarding this discussion, refer to the Arab history in the
pre-Islamic era in Tarikh-Tabari, Yaqubi, Muruj az-Zahab and Seerah Ibn
Hisham.

[^15]: One-fourth of war-booty that belonged to the leader was called as
“Mirbaa “. Refer to the description of "Robh “ (one-fourth) in Sihah
Jauhari, Qamoos al-Muhit, Lisan al-Arab, Taj al-Arous and the story of
Adi-ibn-Hatims.’ meeting with the Prophet (S) in Seerah Ibn Hisham.

[^16]: With regards to this discussion, refer to the Arab history in the
pre-Islamic era in Tarikh-Yaqubi, Tarikh-Tabari, Muruj az-Zahab and
Seerah Ibn Hisham.

[^17]: Tarikh-Yaqubi 1/258: The Arab Judges.

[^18]: “Futuh al-Buldaan “: Balaazari, p.580 and 583.

[^19]: Aghani: 4/179--In explanation of the battle of Badr from the
words of Hassaan-ibn-Thabit. Aas was the son of
Hisham-ibn-Mughaira-ibn-Asad and his agnomen was Abul-Bakhtari. Refer to
Seerah Ibn Hisham 2/281-283.

[^20]: Refer to the description of Taif in Mu.’jam al-Buldaan; 6/10-16.

[^21]: Refer to the narration of the event of the year 44 A.H. in
Tarikhe Ibn Athir 3/223-225; Estia.’b 1/548-555 and Al-Isaabah 1/563.

[^22]: Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthur of Suyuti 5/47. On the same page, in
connection with “occasions of revelation “ Of this verse, he has
narrated other traditions as well. However the traditions that describe
the above event are considered to be correct by us and we have explained
it in brief.

[^23]: Refer to “Amtah al-Asmah “ by Muqrezi; Page 492 about the visit
of the group of Thaqif to Medina.

[^24]: Ansaab al-Ashraaf: Balaazari 1/340.

[^25]: Seerah Ibn Hisham 2/234 and Mughazi of Waqedi in the narration of
the battle of Uhud.

[^26]: Seerah Ibn Hisham 2/234 and 147 and Uyoon al-Athar 1/197.


