A Brief Glance At The Biography of The Holy Prophet (S)
=======================================================

Before Appointment
------------------

### The Holy Prophet’s ancestors

To the best of Arab knowledge, the Holy Prophet’s ancestors were leaders
of the Quraish in Mecca. And considering that the pilgrims to the
Ka.’bah were guests in Mecca, the Holy Prophet’s (S) ancestors assumed
the responsibility of serving food and water to the pilgrims in the hot
hills and valleys until this authority was taken over by “Abd-Manaf “.
He (Abd-Manaf) had four sons namely Hashim, Abd-Shams, Nufel and
Muttalib.[^1]

### Hashim’s Authority

After Abd-Manaf’s demise, a severe power struggle in Quraish took place
between “Hashim “ and “Abd-Shams “, leading to hostilities and
conflicts. Ultimately, Hashim emerged victorious. During his time, he
earned more fame than even his forefathers did.

Hashim was the first person who established the two summers and winter
trade trips for the Quraish. During the summer season, their trade
caravan would set out for Syria and they named this journey as “Rehlat
al-Saif”. In winter, they would depart towards Ethiopia and Africa via
Yemen and called this trip as “Rehlat al-Shetaa”.

In those days when no individual or tribe was safe from loot and
plunder, Hashim at first entered into a security pact with Caesar, the
Emperor of Rome who was in Syria, for protecting the trade caravans of
the Quraish. Later, while returning to Mecca, he also took an
undertaking from each Arab tribe on the route that the trade caravan of
Quraish would not be harmed while passing through their territories.
Thus, the safety of these caravans moving on trade trips was fully
guaranteed. As mentioned earlier and as described by the Quran, the
treaties of the Quraish with the Arab tribes were named as “Eelaf”.

During famine, Hashim would provide food for the Meccans. On one of his
journeys to Syria, he alighted in Medina and got himself married to
“Salma “, daughter of Zaid who was from the tribe of Khazraj. Salma
stayed back in Medina and Hashim continued his trade journey. As a
result of this wedlock, Salma gave birth to a son named “Shaibah “
(Abdul-Muttalib).

When Hashim died, the tribe of Quraish feared that other Arab tribes
would prevail upon them and consequently, their trade caravans would
come to a standstill. Therefore, Hashim’s two brothers, Abd-Shams and
Nufail renewed their covenant and treaty with Najashi the King of
Abyssinia and Casra the King of Iran.

A few years later, these two also died and the reigns of governance fell
in the hands of their brother “Muttalib “, the son of Abd-Manaf.
Muttalib went to Medina and brought his nephew Abdul-Muttalib to Mecca.
After Muttalib’s demise, the power was transferred to Abdul-Muttalib.

### Abdul-Muttalib’s Authority

Several reasons contributed to the increase in Abdul-Muttalib’s
authority over the Quraish and the Arabian territory than his
forefathers.

Firstly, he belonged to the progeny and race of both the great Arab
sects of Adnan and Qahthan.

Secondly, there were many worthy deeds to his credit. Like the digging
of the ZamZam well which was utilized by the inhabitants of Mecca and
the pilgrims to the House of Allah right from the time of Hazrat Ismail
(a.s.). Consequently, the few elements that were buried under the soil
were discovered by Abdul- Muttalib and barring him, none was aware of
its whereabouts.

After his skirmishes with the Quraish, Abdul-Muttalib excavated the well
with the help of his only son Harith and quenched the thirst of the
pilgrims. Abdullah-ibn Abdul-Muttalib

In digging this well, Abdul-Muttalib had no helper, save his only son
Harith. At that moment, he took an oath that if God provided him with
ten sons he would sacrifice one of them in His way. When the Almighty
granted his prayer, his youngest son “Abdullah “ was selected to be the
sacrificial offering, for the fulfillment of his covenant.

Abdul-Muttalib wanted to sacrifice his son Abdullah in front of the
House of Allah. But the elite of the Quraish, who had gathered there,
advised him against it, saying, “Such an action would set a bad example
for the others amongst the Quraish and others too would pursue your
footsteps and sacrifice their sons “

Consequent to this argument, it was resolved that Abdul-Muttalib would
draw a lot between a hundred camels and Abdullah for the sacrifice. If
the lot fell on the camels, he would sacrifice them but if it fell in
favor of Abdullah, his son would be sacrificed. When the lot was drawn
it fell on the camels. Abdul- Muttalib did not accept this verdict until
the lot was drawn thrice and on all the three occasions, it was in the
favor of the camels. Abdul-Muttalib sacrificed the one hundred camels
and prepared food out of their meat. Thus, Abdullah was delivered from
sacrifice.

Abdul-Muttalib’s action brought back memories of Ibrahim’s attempt to
sacrifice his son, Ismail. Hence, Abdul-Muttalib was also called as “the
second Ibrahim “.

Abdul-Muttalib got his son Abdullah married to Aamena, the daughter of
Wahab. A son was born to them and they named him, “Muhammad-ibn-
Abdullah-ibn-Abdul-Muttalib “ (the last prophet-S)[^2].

### Aam-ul-Feel (Year of the Elephant)

The Holy Prophet (S) was not yet born when his father Abdullah died. In
the year of the Prophet’s birth, Abraha the commander of Ethiopia
advanced from Yemen to Mecca along with huge army and war elephants, the
aim being the destruction of the House of God.

Abdul-Muttalib climbed the mountains of Mecca and raised his hands in
prayers and cried. God answered his prayers and sent the birds
(Abaabeel) against Abraha’s army and destroyed them in entirety.

Such incidents related to Abdul-Muttalib found fame amongst the tribes
of the Arabian Peninsula and earned special laurels for him. The Arabs
named this year as the year of the elephant (Aam-ul-Feel).

Initially, the Prophet (S) was put under the guardianship of his
grandfather Abdul-Muttalib. He was only a child when his mother Aamena
died. Thereafter, when he turned eight, his grandfather Abdul-Muttalib
too became fatally ill. Before dying, he entrusted the guardianship of
his grandson to his noble son, Abu Talib.

### Abu Talib’s Authority

After Abdul-Muttalib’s departure, the onerous task of governing the
Quraish fell upon his son Abu Talib. In the same year, Abu Talib, like
all other Quraishites, departed for Syria for trade, but in this
journey, his nephew, Muhammad (S), accompanied him.

During this excursion, the Christian monks discovered the qualities of
the last Prophet present in Muhammad (S) and disclosed the same to Abu
Talib. They also warned him of the lurking danger from the Jews and
insisted that Abu Talib should return to Mecca along with Muhammad (S)
and strive to safeguard him. Acting on their admonishments, Abu Talib
returned to Mecca and took real care of Muhammad (S).

When he was twenty-five years old, the Holy Prophet (S) married the
wealthiest woman of Quraish, Khadijah (s.a.), and the daughter of
Khuwaylid. In the year when severe famine struck Mecca, the Prophet (S)
requested his uncle Abu Talib to entrust his son Ali to him so that he
could take him home and keep him under his special guardianship. Abu
Talib accepted his nephew’s request[^3] and Ali who was only a child was
brought-up in the house and under the guardianship of the Prophet (S).

### Construction of the Ka’ba

The Holy Ka.’ba possessed a low wall, slightly taller than the height of
one standing figure but sans any ceiling. Inside the Ka.’ba was a well
wherein laid its treasures. In the thirty-fifth year of the Holy
Prophet’s life, some thieves stole these treasures, on which the Quraish
decided to re-build the Ka.’ba. They divided the work of re-building the
Ka.’ba amongst their own tribes. When the work reached the stage for
fixing Hajar-ul-Aswad (the black stone), a dispute arose amongst the
tribes of Quraish, as each was determined to place the black stone
themselves to earn a distinction.

Things reached to a stage where the various tribes prepared themselves
for a battle so that the one emerging victorious would place the black
stone.

At this moment, the eldest man amongst the Quraish,
Mughaira-ibn-Abdullah Makhzumi, (to prevent unnecessary bloodshed)
addressed the Quraish who had gathered in Masjid-ul-Haraam, ‘O the
tribes of Quraish! Anyone who enters the mosque at this very moment will
judge this dispute and you should accept his verdict.’

Everybody accepted his suggestion and fixed their eyes on the entrance
of the mosque when suddenly they saw Abdul-Muttalib’s grandson,
Muhammad-ibn- Abdullah (S) setting foot in the mosque. Joyously, they
all cried in one voice,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا الأمين , رضينا ! هذا محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is Muhammad, the trustworthy. We are satisfied with his judgement”.

When the Prophet (S) came nearer, they narrated to him the incident. He
(S) ordered them to fetch a piece of cloth and they duly obliged. The
Holy Prophet (S) placed the Hajar-ul-Aswad on this cloth by his own
hands.

Thereafter, he (S) ordered every tribe to hold a portion of this cloth
containing the black stone and carry it to the desired spot. When they
did so, the Holy Prophet (S) elevated the stone by his own hands to its
place, thereby bringing a threatening dispute to a friendly end.[^4]

### People of the Book awaiting the arrival of the last Prophet (S)

Allah, Exalted be He, had informed His prophets (a.s.) about all the
qualities of the last prophet (S). He informed them about his
birthplace, his house, the signs of the period of his mission and
migration, the signs present in his stature, his characteristics, his
behavior, the distinctions present in his sacred laws, etc.

He had commanded His prophets (a.s.) to reveal all these qualities to
their nations and to take an undertaking from them that whenever such a
prophet arrived with these characteristics and qualities, they should
believe in him.

The prophets (a.s.), in turn, had propagated all these qualities and
particulars to their people and divulged these to their own legatees.
Moreover, this matter was recorded in detail in heavenly scriptures and
their commentaries, written by the legatees.

As long as these were not detrimental to the worldly lives of the people
of the book, such news and information remained untouched in these
heavenly canons and were not distorted and were available with the Jew
and Christian scholars and priests.

The Jew and Christian scholars would relate and explain these prophecies
to all and sundry, including Abdul-Muttalib and Abu Talib, the Prophet’s
grandfather and uncle respectively.

Moreover, the Jew scholars disseminated this report in Medina and
informed that this Prophet would migrate to this city. It was for this
reason that after the Prophet’s appointment, Abu Talib would repeatedly
stress this point in his poems. Also, for this very reason, when the
people of Medina came in contact with the Prophet (S) in Mecca, they
realized that he was the same Prophet about whom the Jews had talked and
they brought faith in him. Insha’Allah, we shall explain this matter in
its proper place.

The Prophet’s Appointment
-------------------------

Before turning forty, the Holy Prophet (S) would seclude himself every
year in the cave of “Hera “ for a few hours and preoccupy himself in the
worship of God. In this seclusion, the Holy Prophet (S) would allow Ali
(a.s.) to accompany him.

At forty, a revelation descended upon the Holy Prophet (S) for the first
time in this very cave. Ali, who had accompanied him on that occasion as
well, became the first witness of the divine revelation.

After revelation, Ali (a.s.) and Khadijah (s.a.) were the first to bring
faith in the Prophet (S). They performed the congregational prayers with
the Prophet and except for these three, none believed in Islam. In this
connection, Tabari and other historians have narrated from Afif Kandi as
such:

“During the era of paganism, I went to Mecca and was the guest of
Abbas-ibn Abdil Muttalib. One day when the sun was above the horizon, I
cast my glance over the Ka.’ba. I saw a youth approaching and he looked
towards the sky. Then, he stood in the direction of the Ka.’ba. A few
moments later, I saw a child approaching and he stood on his right side.
Moments later, a woman too approached and stood behind them. Then, the
young man bowed in obeisance.

The child and woman too followed him and bowed down. The young man stood
on his feet. The child and woman too repeated the same action. The young
man went in the state of prostration. The two followed suit.

I said,‘O Abbas! It is indeed amazing..’ Abbas queried, ‘A great affair
indeed! Do you know the identity of this young man?.’ I replied in the
negative. He said, ‘He is my nephew Muhammad-ibn-Abdullah-ibn-Abdul
Muttalib.’. Again, he inquired, ‘Are you aware of the youth accompanying
him?.’

I replied, ‘No..’

He said, ‘He is my nephew Ali ibn Abi Talib ibn Abdul Muttalib! My
nephew (once) told me: “My Lord! The Lord of the heaven and earth has
ordered them (i.e. the heaven and the earth) to follow the path for
which they have been created. “

I swear by Allah that I am unaware of anyone on earth who is steadfast
on this religion save these three.[^5]

Commencement Of The General Call
--------------------------------

Till the Prophet’s (S) message and practice was confined to the four
walls of his house, nobody bothered him. But in the third year of his
mission, the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

was revealed and the Prophet (S) invited his relatives over for dinner.
When he finished serving, he invited them to Islam and said, ‘who
amongst you is ready to assist me in this affair so that he will be my
successor, vizier and legatee?!

All refused except Ali who was then only in his teens. He responded, ‘O
Messenger of Allah! I am ready to assist you in this affair.’. The
Prophet (S) repeated this call three times and on each occasion, the
people refused to acknowledge positively save Ali. Thereafter, the
Prophet (S) embraced

Ali and said, ‘You are my successor, vizier and legatee.’.

At this, Abu Lahab scoffed insultingly at Abu Talib and left in a
huff.[^6]

Later, Zaid, the Prophet’s (S) freed slave, and Jafar ibn Abi Talib, the
Prophet’s (S) cousin, accepted Islam followed by Abu-Zar and a few
others. The tenth to accept Islam was Fatimah, the wife of Abu Talib and
mother of Ali-ibn-Abi Talib (a.s.).[^7]

Reaction of the Quraish and their leader’s support for the Prophet (S)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Islam spread in Mecca and a few from the various tribes of Quraish
converted to Islam. However, till the time the Holy Prophet (S) and his
followers were busy in the worship of the One God and did not condemn
their idols, the Quraish did not show any reaction except astonishment.

But when the Prophet (S) was commanded by Allah to warn the
idol-worshippers and explain to them the folly of idol-worship, the
situation exploded. The polytheists approached their leader Abu Talib,
saying, “You are our leader and master. Your nephew insults our gods and
calls them names. Restrain him from defaming our idols and abusing them.
We too will allow him to be free with his own God. “

Abu Talib called the Prophet (S) in a gathering and addressed him thus,
‘They are eminent personalities and leaders of your nation and have
requested to be allowed to worship their idols.’.

Prophet (S): ‘O Uncle! Shouldn.’t I invite them to something better?

Abu Talib: ‘What’s that.’?

Prophet (S): ‘I invite them to utter a creed (of faith) by which the
Arabs would become humble before them and the non-Arabs would come under
their domination.’.

Abu Jahl: ‘What is the single creed? Tell us for we are ready to utter
this creed ten times.’.

Prophet (S): ‘The creed to be uttered is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا اللَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

[meaning: there is no god but Allah]..’

On hearing this, they all got up angrily and left, saying, ‘By god! We
shall defame you and your God who has given you such commands.’.[^8]

Other Recommendations of the Quraish

The Quraishite polytheists offered another proposal to the Prophet (S).
They suggested that for one year they would worship the Prophet’s (S)
God and for one year, the latter would worship their gods. As a riposte
to this demand, the following verses were revealed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا الْكَافِرُونَ لَا أَعْبُدُ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ وَلَا
أَنْتُمْ عَابِدُونَ مَا أَعْبُدُ وَلَا أَنَا عَابِدٌ مَا
عَبَدْتُمْ وَلَا أَنْتُمْ عَابِدُونَ مَا أَعْبُدُ لَكُمْ دِينُكُمْ
وَلِيَ دِينِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: O unbelievers! I worship not that which ye worship, Nor will ye
worship that which I worship. And I will not worship that which ye have
been wont to worship, Nor will ye worship that which I worship. You
shall have your religion and I shall have my religion “ (Quran,
109:1-6)***

And the Prophet (S) continued his task..................

For the third time, the Quraishite polytheists approached Abu Talib.
This time, they took with themselves “Ammaarah” the most handsome and
astute youth amongst all Quraish. They addressed Abu Talib thus, ‘We
offer you this youth who is the best amongst all the Quraish and you
hand over to us Muhammad so that we can kill him and hence bring to an
end this atmosphere of anxiety.’.

To their absurd suggestion, Abu Talib replied, ‘Should I hand over to
you my son for you to kill him and keep your son to take care of him.’?

At this juncture, the Quraish saw no alternative but to torment the
Prophet’s (S) followers. Consequently, each tribe began to trouble and
torture the Muslims of their tribe.

When the torture and harassment increased, the Holy Prophet (S)
commanded the Muslims to migrate from Mecca to Ethiopia, with “Jafar ibn
Abi Talib “ as their leader.

The polytheists dispatched Amr al-Aas and Ammaarah to Ethiopia with
gifts and presents to meet “Najashi “, the King of Ethiopia and request
him to extradite the Muslims to Mecca. However, Najashi declined their
request and instead, continued to honor Jafar and his companions.

When Abu Talib received this news, he recited the following poem in
honor of Najashi and amidst his poem; he invited the King to Islam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعلم خـــيار الــــناس أن محــمد \*\*\* وزير لموسى والمسيح ابن مريم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتى بالهــــدى مثل الذي أتــيا به \*\*\* فكــــل بـــــأمر الله يهدي
ويعصم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإنكم تتلـونه في كتابكم بصــدق \*\*\* حديــــــث لا حــــــــديث
المترجم
  </p>
</blockquote>

> فلا تجعـــــلوا الله نـداً وأسلــمو \*\*\* فإن طريق الحــق لـــــيس
> بمظلم 35

In this poem, the leader of Mecca addressed the King of Ethiopia as
follows:

Behold! O best of men! Know that Muhammad (S) is the helper of Musa and
Isa Messiah, son of Maryam,

Like them (Musa and Isa), he (S) too has brought the guidance. Each of
these three Prophets guides according to the divine command and protect
the people from the evil deeds,

You (Christians) read about him in your own Book (Injeel) unambiguously,
and not out of words based on conjecture and surmise,

Indeed when any group amongst us (Muslims) take refuge in you out of
your grace and magnanimity, they will surely respond with honor and
respect.

Najashi called a joint meeting of Amr-Aas and the Muslims under the
leadership of Jafar ibn Abi Talib. Jafar gave (positive) replies to Amr,
while Najashi rejected Amr disdainfully.

Najashi accepted Islam and introduced it as the official religion of the
state, just like the “Shariah” of Moses (a.s.) and Jesus (a.s.). The
number of emigrants to Ethiopia exceeded eighty. The news spread like
wildfire amongst the various tribes in the Arabian Peninsula. Islam had
crossed the frontiers of Mecca and people from other Arab tribes, such
as “Abuzar Ghaffari “, began accepting Islam.

In his poems, while expressing support for the Prophet (S), Abu Talib
also invited the people to Islam,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنَعنا الرَسولَ رَسولَ المَليكِ بِبيضٍ تَلَألأُ لمع البُروقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> بِضَربٍ يُذَبِّبُ دونَ النِهابِ حذارَ الوَثائِرِ وَالخَنفَقيقِ36

We supported and defended the Prophet, the master, with a sword that
flashes like lightning.

I will support and defend the Prophet, the master; a support from a
supporter who is tender and sympathetic to him.

In another poem, he challenges,

I swear by Allah that I shall die but not allow them (i.e. the
polytheists) to lay hands on him.

You presented us a religion, which according to me, is the best religion
for mankind.[^9]

In yet another couplet, he questions,

Don’t you realize that we have found Muhammad to be a Prophet, similar
to Moses, whose name has come down in the first Book (Torah)?[^10]

\* \* \*

Once again they suggested that if the Prophet (S) desired worldly
wealth, they could offer him so much that he would become the richest
man in Mecca or if he craved for power, they were willing to select him
as their ruler.

The Prophet (S) responded, “By Allah! If they place the sun in my right
hand and the moon in my left, I shall not refrain from inviting the
people (to Islam). “

In these exchanges of offers and refusals between the Quraish, Abu Talib
and the Holy Prophet (S), Abu Talib expressed his helplessness before
the Prophet (S), saying, “O my nephew, your nation has spoken as you
see. Ponder over my affair and your affair and do not ask me something
which I am unable to fulfill! “

At this moment, the Holy Prophet (S) cried. Turning back, he began to
walk away, but Abu Talib called out to him. When the Prophet (S) halted,
he said, ‘O my nephew, you may continue to preach as you wish (and) I
shall not forsake you, come what may..’

Conflict between the Prophet’s uncle (Hamza) and Abu Jahl
---------------------------------------------------------

One day Abu Jahl, finding the Prophet (S) all alone near Mount Safa,
insulted and abused him, and called Islam by ugly names. A bondmaid
witnessed this scene.

At that moment, Hamza Ibn Abdil Muttalib, an eminent Quraishite known
for his bravery and valor, had left Mecca for hunting. It was his
practice that after returning from hunting, he would hasten towards
Masjid-ul-Haram and circumambulate the Ka.’ba and then depart for his
house.

Inside the mosque, he would visit every group from the Quraish who would
assemble in some corner of the mosque and offer his greetings to them.
This time, on the way back, the aforesaid bondmaid narrated to him the
incident of Abu Jahl’s misbehavior with the Prophet (S). Hamza was
furious and hastened to the mosque angrily. But this time, without
approaching anybody, he simply dashed towards the group amongst who was
Abu Jahl.

When he approached them, he stood before Abu Jahl and raising his bow
struck Abu Jahl’s head as a result of which his head split open and
challenged, ‘How dare you insult my nephew while I follow his religion
and pay heed to his words? If you can, try to get rid of me!.’

People belonging to the tribe of Bani-Makhzum (Abu Jahl’s relatives)
wanted to assist Abu Jahl. But the latter, sensing the consequence,
refrained them saying, ‘Leave alone Abu Ammarah (Hamza) for I have
insulted his nephew very badly.’.

\* \* \*

For the sake of supporting the Prophet (S), the chief of the Quraish
(Abu Talib) stepped up his campaign against the Quraishite infidels. His
blazing attacks on them in form of odes were like thunderbolts from the
sky. In this battle, he also encouraged his relatives and associates to
assist the Prophet (S). His odes would comprise of significant imports,
a few of  
 which were as follows,

“Nay! I swear by Allah that none can lay their hands on my nephew On
this path, the brave warriors of Bani-Hashim shall draw their swords
from the scabbard and like lions, which attack their prey, They will
tear apart the enemies. (Even if) on this path, women may turn widows “

Abu Talib recited many such odes and one of them comprised ninety-four
verses.[^11]

Revolt against the Meccan chief
-------------------------------

The infidels among the Quraish became helpless in the face of all-round
support by Abu Talib for the Prophet, Islam and the Muslims. Thus, in
the sixth year of the Prophet’s mission,[^12] they gathered to find a
solution. In this meeting, they agreed to revolt against their chief as
well as the tribes of Bani-Hashim and Bani-Muttalib who were backing the
Prophet (S).

For achieving this aim, they prepared an agreement to impose sanctions
on the Prophet’s (S) supporters. They signed a covenant not to enter
into matrimony with them, not to buy or sell anything from/to them and
not to sit with them in any gathering. After signing this treaty, they
hung it from the wall of the Ka.’ba.

At that moment, the two sects of Bani-Hashim and Bani-Muttalib (with the
exception of Abu Talib) abandoned their houses in Mecca and took refuge
with the help of Abu Talib in a valley, which still stands in his name
and is called “Sheb Abi Talib “.

Under the circumstances, Abu Talib addressed the Quraish through the
following brilliant poem,

1. ‘Lo! Send message on my behalf to Lui’s tribe and in particular the
tribes of Ka’b:[^13]

2. Don’t you realize that we have found Muhammad (S) to be a Prophet
similar to Moses; whose name has come down in the first Book (the
Torah)?

3. And that God has placed in the hearts of His slaves the love for
Muhammad and who is better than the one in whose heart God has placed
his love?

4. And whatever you have written down in your agreement shall indeed
become ominous for you just as the cry of the young one of Prophet
Saleh’s she-camel (after her union with her mother) became ominous for
that nation. (In other words, a great calamity shall befall you as a
result of your deeds).

5. Awake! Awake! Before your grave is dug and the innocent become like
the sinful (equal in punishment)

6. Do not follow the slanderers and do not break off ties of
relationship and kinship after friendship and fraternity!

7. And do not cause a severe prolonged war for it is likely to be
unpleasant and severe for the one who kindles the flames of war.

8. I swear by the Lord of the Ka’ba that we shall never abandon Ahmad
(S) in times of difficulties!

9. Until our hands and face are severed with the naked sword.

10. And in the battlefield are scattered pieces of spears and the black
eagles gather for devouring the dead bodies.

11. And the hippodrome of horses and the roaring of the warriors fill
the scene of the battlefield.

12. Is it not that our father Hashim tightened the belt and stated in
his will that we should familiarize ourselves with the spear and the
sword.

13. We, the Bani-Hashim never get weary and depressed from war until the
war (itself) gets tired of us and we have no grievance against events
following the war.

14. Yet, we are men of war and men of reason at the time when the lives
of the champions are at their wit’s end.

Abu Talib’s odes had a comforting effect on the Quraish. Moreover, the
Prophet (S) and the other Hashimiites were in peace from the harm of the
Quraish. However, the economic sanctions had its effects on them, which
lasted for years. During these three years, Khadijah (s.a.), the
wealthiest lady of Quraish, donated her wealth to all those who suffered
from this economic blockade.[^14]

During this period, they procured their foodstuffs by way of smuggling.
At night, Abu Talib would send his son Ali to Mecca for procuring the
necessary provisions. In this regard, Ibn Abil Hadeed narrates,

“At night, Ali would exit from the mountain-valley and wear the disguise
of a bandit in order to conceal his identity. Then, he would travel to
the same place as instructed by Abu Talib and return carrying loads of
wheat and flour.[^15]

During this period, none would come out from the mountain-valley and
others too would not visit them.[^16]

Abu Talib would make the Prophet (S) sleep at night in such a place
where he could not be seen easily. When a part of the night elapsed, he
would transfer him to another spot and instead make Ali sleep in his
place so that if in case anyone had marked the Prophet’s (S) place with
the intention of assassinating him, Ali would be there instead of the
Prophet (S).[^17]

Those at the receiving end of this economic blockade were severely
afflicted with poverty and want. Allah assigned the ants to eat away the
writings of the pact. The Prophet (S) informed Abu Talib about this
incident. Abu Talib approached the Quraish in Masjid-ul-Haram and
narrated to them the incident and said, “Go and see the pact. If it is
as my nephew says, then you should lift the economic sanctions. However,
if his words turn out to be false, I shall  
 surrender him to you so that you may kill him “.

The Quraish became glad. They brought the pact and saw for themselves
that the writings had been destroyed except the words: "باسمك اللهم" (In
Thy Name O Lord). They said: ‘This is nothing but sorcery............!
At this moment, a group accepted Islam.[^18]

Thereafter, five people (who were related to the Bani-Hashim) along with
Khadijah (s.a.) got together and tore apart the pages in the presence of
the Quraish.[^19]

After this event, the Bani-Hashim and the Bani-Muttalib came out from
the mountain-valley and returned to their houses in Mecca.

The Demise of Khadijah (s.a.)
-----------------------------

As against the interests of the Arabs, Islam began to spread beyond the
frontiers of Mecca. More than eighty Muslims traveled to the African
continent and spread monotheism as far as Ethiopia. In all these places,
they recited the Holy Quran and worshipped the One and Unique God. Under
these circumstances, the Quraish could no longer impede the progress of
Islam as they did in the first year of the Prophet’s (S) mission.

On the other hand, at the age of eighty-four and after severe
confrontation with the Quraish, Abu Talib had turned old and feeble.
Khadijah (s.a.) too, after completing sixty-five years of age and
spending her entire wealth in the way of Islam, had become indigent and
physically shattered. Both these companions sincerely strove to their
utmost capacity in assisting the Prophet (S).

Finally Khadijah (s.a.) expired in the month of Ramadhan, three years
before the Prophet’s migration.[^20]

The last moments of Abu Talib’s life
------------------------------------

When he was on his deathbed, Abu Talib put in his last effort in the
path of Islam and protection of the Holy Prophet (S). He addressed the
Prophet (S) thus:

.‘O nephew, after me, you may approach your uncles from the sect of
Bani- Najjaar (from the tribe of Khazraj in Medina) as this tribe is
more devoted than all other people from the viewpoint of protection and
assistance of their household..’[^21]

When Abu Talib was breathing his last, his brother Abbas and the Prophet
(S) were besides him. Abu Talib spoke in a frail voice. Abbas listened
attentively and could hear Abu Talib uttering, “La-ilaha-illallah”
(there is no god but Allah).[^22]

Thus, during the last moments of his life, Abu Talib uttered the same
words for which he had spent his life (in its promotion and
propagation). He passed away while uttering the word: “Allah“.

Taking into account his services on the path of Islam, his help to the
Prophet (S) and the creed “La-ilaha-illallah“, it can be said with
certainty that Abu Talib was unparalleled. But since he was Ali’s (a.s.)
father, the pagans labeled such a Muslim an infidel due to their enmity
with Ali! What a great injustice they have indeed inflicted on
themselves!

Ya.’qubi says:

The Prophet uttered these words over the dead body of his uncle:

“O uncle! You fostered me while I was a child; you acted as my guardian
when I was an orphan and assisted me in my adulthood. May Allah give you
a good reward? “

“He would sorrowfully walk back and forth before Abu Talib’s coffin and
would then stand in front of the coffin and say:

“May you receive the reward for strengthening blood-kinship; and the
reward for goodness has also been attained by you. “[^23]

The Prophet of Islam (S) uttered these words. But the Muslims said, “Abu
Talib shall burn in the Fire of Hell. “ And they narrate this from this
very Prophet (S)!

In our view, those traditions which are indeed inconsistent with these
set of traditions (which were mentioned before) were forged by them
during the era of Muawiya Ibn Abi Sufyan, and were falsely attributed to
the Prophet (S).

Thereafter, all the Caliphs have substantiated and strengthened the
aforesaid view, particularly the Caliphs of Bani-Abbas who faced the
mutinies of Abu Talib’s offspring.

By such traditions, they wished to convince the Muslims that since they
were from the descendants of Abbas (the Prophet’s (S) uncle) who was a
Muslim, they were the legal heirs to the Prophet (S) in all aspects,
material and spiritual. On the other hand, the progeny (of Abu Talib)
was from the descendants of Abu Talib (another uncle of the Prophet (S))
who according to them was an infidel and in Islam, a believer and
non-believer cannot inherit from each other.

However, they do not possess any evidence to prove that Abu Talib was a
non-Muslim. Besides, a lot has come down from the sayings and poems of
Abu Talib in the books of history and biographies. In these books, not
even one instance can be found wherein Abu Talib has called out the
names of idols belonging to the Meccans and Arab infidels such as Laat,
Hubal and Uzza.

In all the instances, words like Allah, Lord of the Ka.’ba and such
other names of Allah were on his lips and he would swear by these names.
Moreover, these names were his habitual phrase, whereas the names of
such idols have excessively come down from the Arab polytheists.[^24]

Abu Talib passed away[^25] just three days after Khadijah (s.a.)’s
demise and as per some sources, he died even before Khadijah (s.a.).
Thereafter, Allah assigned his son Ali (a.s.) to assist the Prophet (S)
and Ali too exhibited such a role against the Quraish.

The stalwart of Islam face to face with the Quraish
---------------------------------------------------

After Abu Talib’s demise, it was necessary on the part of the
Bani-Hashim to instil some fear in the hearts of the Quraishite infidels
so that they would never ever imagine that with Abu Talib’s departure,
the Prophet has now been left without any helper and that the
Bani-Hashim would abandon the Prophet (S).

This task was performed by Abu Talib’s son, Ali (a.s.) in the best
possible manner. In the Arab society of those days, the best means were
the very composition of odes. After his father’s demise, Ali (a.s.)
warned the Quraish in the form of a brilliant ode as such:

1. I remained awake at night after receiving news of Abu Talib’s demise;
(he was) a shelter for the helpless accompanied by generosity and
forgiveness.

2. A master possessing forbearance, who was neither hot-tempered nor
rough nor disabled. They gave me the news of my master’s demise, a great
master indeed.

3. Redresser for the distressed (such) that if any grievance would occur
in any place, he would redress it; the protector of Bani-Hashim and the
supporters of Bani-Hashim from oppression and aggression.

4. The Quraish became glad by his departure but I do not see life to be
immortal.

5. They intended to commit such deeds, which their carnal desires
manifested to be pure and good and eventually a day will come when these
very deeds will cause them to deviate.

6. They wished to display the Prophet as a liar and wanted to kill him.
They strove to defame him and disparage his affairs.

7. You have exhorted falsehood! Nay, I swear by the Ka’ba; until we make
you taste the tip of the spear and the sharp sword.

8. And until you do not witness an irresistible and difficult scene from
our side; at that moment when we shall be ironclad.

9. And until when either you shall destroy us or we shall annihilate
you, or that you consider peace with the people of your own tribe to be
more prudent.

10. Otherwise, this tribe is on the side of Muhammad (S) and they are
his heralds. I am speaking about the Bani-Hashim; those very ones who
are the best warriors.

11. The Prophet’s succor is Allah against you people.

12. A Prophet who has brought for us a revelation and my Lord has named
him Muhammad in the heavenly Book.

13. His face is radiant like the sun so much that nothing can overcome
the brightness of his face (just as the clouds cannot prevent the
radiant sun from shining).

14. He is trustworthy upon what Allah has deposited in his heart, and
whatever he utters is salvation.[^26]

In this ode, Ali (a.s.) warns the Quraishite infidels that they should
never ever imagine that since Abu Talib, the chief of the Quraish has
passed away, the Bani-Hashim have now become helpless.

Like his father, Ali (a.s.) too declares in his ode, the prophet hood of
Muhammad (S) from Allah’s side and creates fear of Allah in the hearts
of the Quraishite infidels. And if in case they do not fear and they
will not fear so, he warns them of the fierce spears and sharp swords of
Bani-Hashim who will be clad in iron.

And he warns them that for the sake of the Prophet’s protection,
confrontation is inevitable, wherein either the Bani-Hashim or the
Quraishite infidels will be annihilated except if the Quraish follow the
path of peace with their cousins Bani-Hashim. And here too, like his
father, Ali (a.s.) strives to enliven the affection for ties of
relationship amongst the tribe of Quraish.

In this ode, Ali (a.s.) appears to be the same Abu Talib, who is
rebuking the Quraishite infidels. How beautifully the Arabs have painted
the scenario, (Verily, this lion-cub is the son of that same lion). The
effect of this ode

In order to perceive the effect of this ode, kindly pay attention to the
following story:

After the end of the battle of Jamal in Basra, Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.)
went to Kufa and in a sermon delivered on the pulpit in the mosque of
Kufa, he called the people to prepare themselves for a battle with
Muawiya in Syria.

At this moment, a man stood up and facing Ali (a.s.) said, ‘You wish to
send us to Syria so that we kill our brethren just as you took us to
kill our brethren in Basra? Nay, I swear by God that we shall never do
such a thing!.’

This talk had its effect on the morale of the people. However, the brave
commander of Ali (a.s.), “Malik al-Ashtar” sprang on his feet and said
that very soon he would give him his reply. Seeing Malik’s mood, the man
took to his heels. The people chased him until they caught him in the
market where mules were sold. There, they trampled him (down) and fisted
and kicked him to death. Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.) gave his blood money to
his family members from the public treasury and then said: “His murderer
is unknown and his blood-money is being given from the public treasury
of the Muslims “.[^27]

Here, if Malik Ashtar had not stood on his feet and uttered these words
then those of the same mind (as the murdered man) would have approved
the murdered man’s sayings and consequently, Amir-ul-Mumineen (a.s.)
would have been defeated. However, Malik Ashtar’s (the chief of the
Hamadan tribe) remark prompted the people of his tribe and others to get
on their feet and kill that man. In this manner, the enemies held back
their breath.

The situation in Mecca was equally or even more dangerous. Bani-Hashim
had lost their chief and leader and one critical blow from the Quraish
was enough to destroy them. This ode from the son of the Quraish chief
left two positive effects on that society:

### 1-Effect on the tribe of Bani-Hashim and the entire believers

The Bani-Hashim needed a strong-hearted pivot, who could cheer them up
and give them hope and release them from dispersion and fear. Ali’s ode
met such a need and also filled the other oppressed Muslims.’ hearts too
with hope and courage.

### 2-Effect on the Quraish

Under the given circumstances, if only one person from the Quraish had
attacked the Prophet (S), hundreds of others would have followed suit
and a common assault resulted on the Prophet (S), the Bani-Hashim as
well as the oppressed Muslims.

Allah appointed Ali (a.s.) and by means of this ode transformed the
state of Mecca to the advantage of the Prophet (S), Islam and the
Muslims just as Malik Ashtar’s statement had changed the situation to
the benefit of this Ali (a.s.) in Kufa.

The Quraishite infidels intensify their persecution on the Muslims
Although the unbelievers amongst the Quraish were aware that after Abu
Talib’s demise, the Bani-Hashim would not abandon the Prophet (S) and
they would not succeed in killing the Prophet (S), nevertheless, they
inflicted such persecutions on the Prophet that they never ever dared
during Abu Talib’s lifetime.[^28]

Now we shall mention the names of two tormenters who tormented the
Prophet (S) throughout his stay in Mecca and describe a few instances of
the impediments laid by them in the way of Islam and the Prophet (S).

### Abu-Lahab and his wife Umm-Jameel

Abu-Lahab was Abdul-Muttalib’s son and the Prophet’s uncle. “Lahab”
Means the flames of fire and he was titled as Abu-Lahab because of his
handsome face (i.e. one whose appearance emits light like the flames of
fire).

The persecution and impediments by Abu-Lahab began right from the day
the Prophet (S) invited Bani Abdil Muttalib to his house. It continued
until after the battle of Badr, when Abu-Lahab died from a contagious
disease called “Adsah “, similar to the disease of plague. Amongst his
persecutions and impediments were the following:

At the outset of his general invitation, the Prophet (S) once climbed
the mountain of Safa and cried out: “Wa Sabahah! “ This cry is commonly
used amongst the Arabs for inviting the people and warning them from
frightful events.

After this call, the Quraish gathered around the Prophet (S). The
Prophet (S) sough confirmation, ‘If I tell you that mounted soldiers are
approaching you (for attack) from this mountain slope, will you believe
me?.’ They affirmed, ‘We have never heard you utter a lie..’  
 At this moment, the Prophet (S) said, ‘I warn you from a severe
retribution..’

Amongst all the people, it was the Prophet’s (S) uncle Abu-Lahab who
reacted and said, “May you perish! Have you called us here just to
listen to these words? “[^29]

Abu-Lahab continued his vitriolic, “This Muhammad promises us the world
after death and in this regard, makes certain claims. I for myself do
not reckon that there is any news after death. “ To display his mockery,
he opened his hands and blew into it and said, “May it be severed! I do
not see anything but vain words coming out from Muhammad’s mouth. “[^30]

Abu-Lahab’s wife, “Umm-Jameel“ (daughter of Abu Sufyan and aunt of
Muawiya who belonged to the tribe of Bani-Umayyah) was another person
who tormented the Prophet (S) with no end. She would throw thorns on the
Prophet’s (S) path and excite sedition against him. About Abu-Lahab and
his wife, the blessed verse of “Masad“ was revealed where Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَّتْ يَدَا أَبِي لَهَبٍ وَتَبَّ مَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُ مَالُهُ وَمَا
كَسَبَ ,سَيَصْلَىٰ نَارًا ذَاتَ لَهَبٍ وَامْرَأَتُهُ حَمَّالَةَ
الْحَطَبِ فِي جِيدِهَا حَبْلٌ مِّن مَّسَدٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Perdition overtakes both hands of Abu Lahab, and he will
perish.***  
***His wealth and what he earns will not avail him,***  
***He shall soon burn in fire that flames,***  
***And his wife, the bearer of fuel,***  
***Upon her neck a halter of strongly twisted rope.“ (Qur'an,
111:1-5)***

Abu-Lahab’s two sons “Utbah “ and “Utaibah “ had married the Prophet’s
(S) two daughters and “Aas-ibn-Wael Sahmi “ had married yet another
daughter of the Prophet (S). The Quraish advised them to divorce the
Prophet’s daughters so that their lives turn miserable and the Prophet’s
(S) invitation to Islam is hindered. In return, we shall allow you to
marry any woman from the Quraish of your choice.

Aas-ibn-Wael did not accept the advice and refused to divorce the
Prophet’s (S) daughter. However, Abu-Lahab’s two sons divorced the
Prophet’s (S) two daughters since, after the revelation of Sura Lahab,
their mother Umm-Jameel threatened them that, “If you refuse to divorce
Muhammad’s daughters I shall not speak a word to you. “

Umm-Jameel did not stop here in her enmity with the Prophet (S). Once,
while reciting a poem condemning the Prophet (S), she picked up a stone
and went to the House of God for flinging it at the Prophet’s (S) face.
However, even though she came face to face with the Prophet (S) she
could not see him and returned disappointed.[^31]

The obstacles created by Abu-Lahab on the Prophet’s (S) path were more
than the all other Quraishites put together.

As stated earlier, following the pact designed by the Quraishite
infidels, the Holy Prophet (S) and his followers (the two sects of
Bani-Hashim and Bani-Muttalib) were left in “Sheb Abu Talib “, walled on
all sides by the infidels.

Moreover, the Quraishite had prohibited all sorts of trade with them and
they passed their lives in hardship and hunger.

At that time, whenever a trade caravan would enter Mecca and someone
from Sheb Abu Talib would approach the caravan to purchase some
provisions, the enemy of God (Abu-Lahab) would stand up and address the
traders thus,

“Increase the prices of your merchandise for Muhammad’s followers so
that they are unable to buy them. You are aware of my wealth and know
very well that I fulfill my promise and agreement. I give you a
guarantee that you shall face no loss or damage. “

Thereafter, the tradesmen would increase the prices of their goods to
such an extent that the Prophet’s (S) followers were rendered helpless
and would return empty handed while their children would cry and wail
due to hunger. At the end, Abu-Lahab would give the tradesmen a good
profit for whatever clothes and foodstuffs they had not sold to the
Prophet’s (S) followers. In this manner, the Muslims passed their lives
in hardships and difficulties.[^32]

[^1]: Refer to Seerah Ibn Hisham 1/11 and the biography of the tribe of
Fahr in the book Ansab Ibn Hazm.

[^2]: Refer to "Tarikh Ya'qubi"- Vol: page 242- 252.

[^3]: Tarikh Tabari, European Ed., 3/1163.

[^4]: Seerah Ibn Hisham (hadith regarding .‘Construction of Ka.’ba) Vol
1; pg. 204-210.

[^5]: Tarikh-Tabari, European Edition, Vol. 3, p. 1161.

[^6]: Refer to Tarikh-Tabari; 1/1171-1172 and Uyoon al-Athar 1/98-100.

[^7]: Refer to Tarikh-Ya.’qubi; 2/23 and 28.

[^8]: This verse refers to the above event:
وَانطَلَقَ الْمَلَأُ مِنْهُمْ أَنِ امْشُوا وَاصْبِرُوا عَلَىٰ
آلِهَتِكُمْ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ يُرَادُ

[^9]: Tarikh Ya’qubi; vol. 2, p. 31.

[^10]: Seerah Ibn Ishaaq, p. 157; Seerah Ibn Hisham, vol. 1, p.373.

[^11]: Seerah Ibn Hisham; 1/286-298.

[^12]: Tarikh-Ya.’qubi 2/31; Beirut print-1379.

[^13]: Lui-ibn-Ghalib is the great ancestor of the Quraish tribe and
Ka.’b and Aamer are his sons. The lineage of the tribes of Quraish
traces back to this very Ka.’b-ibn-Lui who is the addressee in Abu
Talib’s statement. Refer to the genealogies of Ibn Hazm; the detailed
account of the tribes of Bani-Lui.

[^14]: Seerah Ibn Hisham, vol.1,p.373-376.

[^15]: Sharh-o-Nahjil-Balagha by Ibn Abil Hadeed; vol.13,p.254

[^16]: Ibid., vol.14, p.58.

[^17]: Sharh-o-Nahjil-Balagha, vol.14,p. 64, and Uyoon al-Athar,
vol.1,p.127.

[^18]: Tarikh al-Ya.’qubi vol. 2, p.31-32.

[^19]: Seerah Ibn Hisham, vol.1,p.400, and Tarikh Tabari
vol.1,p.1196-1199.

[^20]: Tarikh al-Ya'qubi, vol.2, p.35.

[^21]: Tarikh al-Islam by Zahabi, vol.1, p.138

[^22]: Seerah Ibn Ishaaq in the Chapter of 'Demise of Abu Talib', p.
238, and Seerah Ibn Hisham vol.2, p.95.

[^23]: Tarikh-Ya'qubi 2/35.

[^24]: It is worth mentioning that numerous books have been written
about Abu Talib's faith. Some of them have been mentioned in the book
"Az-Zariah" 2/510-514 mainly: Baghyat-ul-Talib and Imaan Abi-Talib wa
husna khatamah written by Allama Suyuti; Asnal-Matalib-fi-Nejat
Abi-Talib written by Shafaee Mufti of Mecca Sayyed Ahmad-ibn-Zaini
Dehlan and the books which have been been recently printed like: Imaan
Abi-Talib written by Shamsuddin Abi Ali Fakhr-ibn-Ma'dal-Musavi and Abu
Talib-the innocent figure in history, written by Allama Amini which is
the translation of a portion of Al-Ghadir.

[^25]: About Abu Talib’s demise, refer to Seerah Ibn Ishaaq; page 236;
Seerah Ibn Hisham and Tarikh al-Ya'qubi.

[^26]: Seerah Ibn Ishaaq; page 239-240.

[^27]: This was narrated in brief from “The Event of Siffeen “ by
Nasr-ibn-Muzaahem; page 94.

[^28]: Concerning the events in the post Abu Talib era, refer to Seerah
Ibn Ishaaq, Seerah Ibn Hisham and Uyoon Athar.

[^29]: Refer to the exegesis of Sura Lahab in the books of exegesis and
in Sahih Bukhari.

[^30]: Seerah Ibn Hisham 1/372.

[^31]: Refer to Seerah Ibn Hisham 1/378-379.

[^32]: Seerat un-Nabawiya 2/17.


