Migration To Medina
===================

Before migrating to Medina, the Holy Prophet (S) sought assistance from
the Arab tribes during the Haj (pilgrimage) season so that he could
succeed in propagating his message. At that moment, he came across a
group from the tribe of Khazraj, which had come for Haj from Medina and
invited them to Islam. This group, which had heard from the Jews the
prophecy of the last Prophet’s (S) advent, recognized the Prophet (S)
and accepted Islam.

Moreover, while returning to Medina, they gave news about the Prophet
(S) to the people of Medina and thus, gradually, Islam spread in Medina.
In the subsequent year, a group from Medina came for Haj and there, paid
allegiance to the Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet (S) dispatched
“Mus.’ab-ibn-Umair“ from amongst the Muslims to accompany them so that
he could preach Islam and the Quran to the newly converted Muslims of
Medina  
 and lead them in the congregational prayers.

Thereafter, Islam spread rapidly in Medina until in the third year, more
than seventy Medinites came to Mecca for Haj. There, they swore
allegiance to the Prophet (S) promosing to establish the Islamic
government if the Prophet came to Medina. When this group returned to
Medina, they established the congregational prayers under the leadership
of Mus.’ab and Islam was recognized as the official religion.

At that very moment, the Holy Prophet (S) issued an order to the Muslims
residing in Mecca to migrate secretly to Medina. No Muslim remained in
Mecca save Ali (a.s.), and a few other Muslims who were imprisoned by
their parents and relatives.

On the other hand, the infidels among the Quraish, who now feared from
the increasing number of the Muslims in Medina, gathered for
consultation. At the end, they agreed that one person from each tribe
should be selected for the task of killing the Prophet (S) and that
overnight they should enter the Prophet’s (S) house and kill him so that
Islam is uprooted once and for all.

Jibraeel, the Archangel informed the Prophet (S) about their (evil)
intention and on behalf of Allah, ordered him to migrate to Medina.

The Prophet (S) charged Ali (a.s.) with four duties:

Firstly, to prepare the required mounts for this journey

Secondly, to sleep on the Prophet’s (S) bed for that night so that the
killers would be under the impression that the Prophet (S) is lying on
the bed and hence, he (S) could leave Mecca safely.

Thirdly, to return the things, which the Quraish had deposited with the
Prophet as trust and to repay his debts

Fourthly, to take along with himself the Prophet’s (S) household members
to Medina.

Later, the same night, the Prophet (S) left Mecca along with Abu Bakr
and together they hid themselves in the cave of ‘Thaur’, situated
outside Mecca. Ali (a.s.) slept on the Prophet’s (S) bed. The Quraish,
among them Abu-Lahab (the Prophet’s uncle), besieged the house with the
intention of killing the Prophet (S). From behind the wall (which was of
a low height in those days), they fixed their eyes over the Prophet’s
(S) bed so that with the approach of dawn they would kill the Prophet
(S). They reckoned Ali (a.s.) who was lying on the Prophet’s bed to be
the Prophet (S). But at dawn, when Ali (a.s.) got up from his bed, they
realized their folly. When the infidels recognized their mistake, they
searched for the Prophet (S) almost as far off as the cave of Mount
Thaur.[^1]

At that moment, Abu Bakr was very scared. The Prophet (S) said, ‘Do not
grieve, for Allah is on our side..’[^2]

The Quraishites returned from the cave. Ali (a.s.) purchased a camel for
the Prophet (S).[^3] A camel was brought for Abu Bakr along with
Aamer-ibn- Fahira, the slave of Ayesha’s stepbrother.[^4]

They also took along with them a guide by the name of Abdullah ibn
Areeqah, a non-Muslim from the tribe of Bani Dail.[^5]

The Prophet (S) migrated from Mecca along with these three fellow
travelers until they reached the village of Quba, which was situated two
miles from Medina. They remained there until Ali (a.s.) returned the
things which the Quraish had deposited with the Prophet (S) and then
joined the Prophet (S) in Quba along with his family members.

This news reached the Muslims in Medina. Consequently, they would come
out of Medina every morning and await the Prophet’s (S) arrival until
the end of the day. This continued till Monday, the eighth or twelfth of
Rabiul-Awwal when the Prophet (S) finally arrived in Medina along with
his companions.

The Prophet’s (S) camel halted at a place in the centre of Medina. The
Prophet (S) bought this place and built there, the mosque of Medina,
with bricks and mud and covered its ceiling with branches of date trees.
On the rear side of the mosque, he constructed a small shed named
“Junhah” and made the homeless “Muhajirs” (the Immigrants) reside in
this place.

Similarly, he built houses alike the structure of the mosque for each of
his spouses adjoining the mosque. Seven months after migration, he
married Ayesha. Thereafter, he got his daughter Fatimah, his daughter
from Khadijah (s.a.), married to his cousin Ali, the son of Abu Talib,
and constructed a house (which looked similar to his own house) near his
own house for Fatimah (a.s.)

The Foundation of the Islamic Society
-------------------------------------

As such, the Prophet (S) founded the first Islamic society. He created
brotherhood between every two persons from the Muhajirs (immigrants)
like Abu Bakr and Omar. Moreover, he set every Muhajir as a brother to
every Ansar (Helpers) like in the case of Abu-Bakr with Kharejah ibn
Zubair Ansari and Omar-ibn-Khattab with Etab-ibn-Malik Ansari.

On both these occasions, he called Ali (a.s.) as his brother and
addressed him as such,

“You are my brother in this world as well as the Hereafter “[^6]

Similarly, for the sake of safeguarding this small society, he entered
into a peaceful coexistence treaty with the Jewish tribes of Medina who
were financially sound and wealthy. Moreover, the Prophet (S) signed a
pact of cooperation with them (in particular, the tribes of Bani-Qainaqa
who were tradesmen and usurers and the two tribes of Bani-Nazir and
Bani-Quraizah, whose professions were farming, gardening and
cattle-rearing) to fight against anyone who wanted to attack Medina. In
this pact, they had implicitly acknowledged the Prophet’s (S) authority
and rule in Medina.[^7]

After concluding these agreements and gaining confidence in the internal
security, the Prophet (S) turned his attention to the enemies of Islam
(i.e. the Quraish in Mecca). This was while hundreds of Muhajirs existed
who had left their entire wealth in Mecca under the occupation of the
Quraish and were now living in utmost hardship, with the assistance of
the Ansars.

To solve this problem, the Prophet (S) would dispatch warriors to
overcome the trade caravans of the Quraish who would pass near Medina on
their way to Mecca. On one occasion, they gained control over a small
trade caravan belonging to the Quraish and the Prophet (S) distributed
the spoils amongst the indigents.

The battle of Badr
------------------

This state of affairs continued until the month of Ramadhan 2 A.H. when
it was reported to the Prophet (S) that a big trade caravan belonging to
the Quraish was on its way from Syria to Mecca. The Prophet (S)
persuaded a few Muslims to move out of Medina to keep watch over this
trade caravan. For this purpose, one hundred and thirteen men set out of
Medina until they halted near a place called “Badr “. The valley of
“Badr “ is situated seven stops from Medina.

The big trade caravan of the Quraish, under the leadership of “Abu
Sufyan “, received news of this event. Abu Sufyan informed the Meccans
about this entanglement but he managed to escape.

The Quraish set out from Mecca with a thousand well-equipped men for
encountering the Prophet (S). A few men from Bani Hashim too had
accompanied this army, albeit reluctantly, and amongst them were Abbas,
the Prophet’s uncle and Talib (Ali’s brother). The Quraish rebuked them
and as a consequence, Talib managed to escape and returned to Mecca.

The Prophet (S) became aware of this event. A great portion of the
Islamic army was formed by the Ansars (the helpers) who in their
allegiance to the Prophet (S) in Mecca had promised to assist the
Prophet but only during his stay in Medina. Thus, now that they were
outside Medina and they had also not set out of Medina for the purpose
of war, it was not out of place for the Prophet (S) to inquire whether
they reckoned themselves to be obliged  
 to fulfill their promise or not under the present circumstances.

For this reason, the Prophet (S) gathered together his army for
consultation and informed them about the flight of the trade caravan and
the approach of the equipped army. He addressed them, “Let me have your
opinion.

What should be done “?

At this moment, Abu Bakr and Omar suggested,

“O Prophet of Allah! We swear by Allah that these are the Quraish who
have come forward with all their might and splendor.

We swear by Allah that from the time the Quraish have gained power and
splendor, they have never been defeated and humbled.

We swear by Allah that from the day the Quraish have turned infidels
they have not brought faith.

We swear by Allah that the Quraish will never forsake their power and
splendor and will fight against you. So be prepared for a battle. “[^8]

The Prophet (S) did not pay heed to these two and their intimidating
sayings.[^9]

After them, Miqdad said, “O Prophet of Allah! Act according to the
divine command as we are on your side. We shall not repeat the statement
of Bani Israel who said to their Prophet (S), ‘You go along with your
Allah and fight while we shall remain here.’. But, we say, ‘Fight
against them. We are on your side and we shall fight against them. I
swear by the One who sent you by the truth! If you go as far as the
shores of the sea we shall follow suit. “

The Prophet (S) sent blessings on him and repeated his earlier statement
and said, (O people let me have your opinion).

The Ansars became aware that the Prophet (S) wanted to know their
response. Sa.’d-ibn-Ma.’z, an Ansar chief, stood on his feet and said,
‘O Messenger of Allah. It appears that you want our reply?’

The Prophet (S) replied in the affirmative.

Sa.’d said, “I give my response on behalf of the Ansars and say, ‘O
Prophet!

Perhaps you have set out of Medina for some particular task and now, you
have received a divine command for another task. O Prophet! We have
brought faith in you and have testified in you. We have also vowed to be
obedient and submissive before you. You may act as per the divine
command. I swear by the One who sent you by the truth, if you head
towards the sea we (too) shall head for the sea even if only one amongst
us may remain alive. You may establish relationship with whomsoever you
wish and severe relationship with whosoever you desire. You may take
from our wealth whatever you wish. If you take from our wealth we will
be happier, than if you refuse. “

After Sa.’d’s speech, the Prophet (S) said, ‘You have the blessings of
Allah who has promised me victory. At the moment, I can see the
destruction of the infidels..’

Thereafter, he showed them the killing spot of each of the eminent ones
from the Quraish[^10].

The Prophet’s (S) army descended upon Badr. They prepared a shady place
for the Prophet (S) and then put guards near it. Abu Bakr went near this
safe spot and remained there till the end of the battle.[^11]

The army of Quraish arrived, all decked up and ostentatious. And on the
seventeenth of Ramadhan, the famous battle of Badr came to an end
between the Muslims and the infidels.

From the Prophet’s (S) army, Ali (a.s.) and Hamza (a.r.) exhibited their
valour more than anybody else and killed the chiefs and champions
amongst the Quraish.[^12] Amongst the Ansars too, the valiant battled
fiercely. The few men from the Hashimites who had come to Badr by force,
did not assist the polytheists in their fight against the Muslims.

In this war, the Muslims emerged victorious. Amongst them, fourteen
achieved martyrdom, six from the Muhajirs and eight from the Ansars.
Amongst the polytheists, seventy got killed and another seventy were
taken as captives.

Amongst those killed were Utbah, Shaibah and Hanzalah, Hind’s father,
brother and son respectively, and Ali (a.s.) and Hamza (a.r.) killed
them all.[^13]

On the day of Badr, the Prophet (S) declared as prohibited the killing
of certain figures amongst the Bani-Hashim as well as a few others.
These people were those who had either come with the Quraish
involuntarily, like the Bani-

Hashim, and a few others, or had devoted some kind of service to Islam
and had defended the Prophet (S) during his stay in Mecca like Abul
Bukhtari, who was amongst those who had cooperated and torn apart the
pact of the Qurasih against the Muslims.

In particular, the Prophet (S) announced the name of Abbas and said, ‘Do
not kill him as the Quraish have brought him by force’.

At that moment, Abu Huzaifa, the son of Utbah said, “Should we kill our
fathers, sons, brothers and near ones but leave Abbas unharmed? I swear
by Allah that if I see him, I will pierce my sword in his body “

The Prophet (S) turned to Omar and said, ‘Do they wish to strike the
Prophet’s paternal uncle with the sword?

Omar retorted, ‘O Prophet, allow me to severe his head with the sword. I
swear by Allah that he has revealed his dissension.’[^14]

The Prophet (S) did not give him permission.

### Disagreement in Distribution of the Spoils of War

When the Quraishite army faced defeat and turned its back in the
battle-field, a group of Islamic soldiers pursued them in the desert and
whoever was caught, was either killed or taken as captive. Another group
stormed the enemy’s tents and seized their belongings. A few others
guarded the Prophet’s (S) place lest the enemy finds an opportunity and
attacks the Prophet (S) when the Islamic soldiers were away.

After the termination of the battle, a dispute arose between these three
groups over the distribution of the spoils of war. The group that had
brought the booties along with themselves reckoned they were the sole
owners and believed that others had no right over them.

The group that had pursued the enemy said, ‘We swear by Allah that you
do not deserve this booty more than we do. Had we not pursued the enemy
and kept them busy in fighting, they wouldn.’t have allowed you to seize
their wealth.

Moreover, the group which was on duty guarding the Prophet (S) said, ‘We
saw the enemy’s belongings without any caretaker but resisted from
collecting the booty, lest the enemy might see the Prophet’s place
unguarded and hence return and attack the Prophet. Thus we remained in
our position and guarded the Prophet and so you are not as worthy as we
are in acquiring this booty..’

Under such circumstances, a revelation descended upon the Prophet (S)
according to which he earmarked this wealth as that belonging to Allah
and His Messenger (S). The Prophet (S) commanded all those who had taken
these spoils of war to return them back and assigned one of the Ansars
to collect and safeguard them. Thereafter, he set out from the land of
Badr towards Medina until he reached a territory named “Seer “ near
Medina. He halted at this place and issued a command for the equal
distribution of the spoils of war amongst all.[^15]

### The effect of the battle of Badr on the people of the Arabian Peninsula

Amongst all the tribes in the Arabian Peninsula, the most respected and
affluent one was the tribe of Quraish in Mecca and its awesome presence
was felt by one and all. In contrast, the most helpless people in the
Arabian Peninsula were the Muslims of that time where a group amongst
them fled to Ethiopia due to fear of torture and persecution by the
Quraish while another group got scattered and secretly sought shelter in
Medina. Amongst this helpless group, “one hundred and thirteen” unarmed
men set out of Medina for the purpose of laying hands on the trade
caravan of the Quraish. And in contrast, “one thousand well-armed and
fully equipped men “ from the Quraish set out of Mecca with the aim of
destroying the Muslims.

These two groups, with all the differences that existed in their forces,
battled fiercely in the land of Badr. Eventually, seventy men (amongst
who were Quraishite chiefs) got killed and seventy men were taken as
prisoners and this helpless group took with themselves the tents,
horses, camels, warring equipment and other belongings of the Quraish to
Medina. The survivors fled from the battlefield and retreated towards
Mecca. This astonishing phenomenon moved these stonehearted men and
altered their assessment on Islam and the Muslims.

With the Prophet’s (S) entry into Medina and the conclusion of a
security treaty between the tribes of Ansars and the Jewish tribes,
Abdullah ibn Ubai’s wishes came to a naught. (The same Abdullah ibn Ubai
who before the Prophet’s migration to Medina was a candidate for being
its king and the people had prepared the royal throne for him). Just
before the battle of Badr, he passed his days and nights praying for the
Prophet’s (S) defeat. But after the battle of Badr, he gave up and
accepted Islam along with all his followers.

On the other hand, the Jewish tribes, who had no consideration for this
helpless group of new-entrants to Medina, realized their error after the
battle of Badr. With the progress of Islam in Medina, they were losing
their own factors of advancement, superiority and lordship. For, the
Jews always thrived in undisciplined, aimless and chaotic societies and
engaged in usury and wealth accumulation.

With the advent of Islam in Medina, the disorder was done away with. The
tribes of Aws and Khazraj (whose futile arguments would lead to bloody
wars, where each tribe would take on rent, the war-tools from different
Jewish tribes and hence provide them the chance of engaging in usury)
had now pronounced the formula of brotherhood with each other. They were
now living in a society abounding in peace, calmness, purity and
stability where no stranger had any influence on it.

After the battle of Badr, the Jews became alert and started engaging in
the sabotage of the Islamic affairs and creation of hatred amongst the
Muslims. In this subversion, the most arrogant amongst them was the
tribe of “Bani- Qainaqah “. Ibn Hisham writes, “The Prophet (S) gathered
them in the market of Bani-Qainaqah and addressed them in this manner
thus, ‘O Jews!

Fear Allah and accept Islam, lest you suffer the same fate as the
Quraish. You are aware that I am the divine Prophet. My prophet hood has
been mentioned in your heavenly books and Allah has taken a promise from
you regarding my prophet hood. “

The Jews replied, “O Muhammad! Do you think we are like your tribe, the
Quraish? Do not become proud as you encountered (and got victory) over a
nation that lacked the knowledge of warfare. By God! If we engage in a
battle against each other, you will realize our identity (i.e. if there
are worthy humans, it is only us!).

### The First Encounter with the Jews

The Jews continued their subversive activities and treason until one day
the wife of one of the Ansars (the Helpers)[^16] visited a jeweler shop
in the market of Bani-Qainaqah. They forcefully demanded her to uncover
her face but she refused. Taking some tool in hand, the goldsmith raised
her skirt till her waist and when she stood up, her nakedness was
manifested. The Jews had a hearty laugh. When the lady cried for help, a
Muslim stepped forward and killed the goldsmith.

A mob of Bani-Qainaqah gathered and killed the Muslim. They broke their
pact with the Prophet (S) and gathered in their castles and
fortifications and prepared themselves for a war.

The Prophet (S) laid a siege on them for fifteen days i.e. from the 15th
Shawwal, 3 A.H. till 1st Zilqad. Eventually, they surrendered before the
Prophet (S).[^17]

Amongst those who surrendered were seventy warriors. The Prophet (S)
dispatched all of them to the land of Azaraat in Syria and took away
their wealth as spoils of war. This wealth did not include their farms
and palm groves. They were tradesmen and possessed abundant war tools as
well as goldsmith tools.

The Prophet (S) took one-fifth of the war booty and distributed the rest
amongst the Muslims.[^18]

After the battle of Badr, the Meccans were mourning for their dead for
almost a year and were now preparing for avenging their murder. Finally,
they headed for Medina with three thousand soldiers, three thousand
camels, two hundred horses and a well-organized army.

The battle of Uhud
------------------

Uhud is the name of a mountain situated one mile from Medina. In the
year 3 A.H., the Quraishite infidels marched towards Medina under the
leadership of Abu Sufyan with a well-equipped army and on Wednesday,
12th Shawwal of the same year, they set up tents near Mount Uhud.

Abu Sufyan had brought along with his army the two idols of the Quraish,
Laat and Uzzah. Moreover, fifteen of the Quraishite chiefs.’ wives too,
headed by Abu-Sufyan’s own wife (Hind) had joined his army with the aim
of encouraging the soldiers.

The Prophet (S) consulted the Muhajirs and the Ansars whether they
should remain in Medina and fight the Quraish in hand to hand combat in
the streets of Medina, with which the Quraish soldiers are unacquainted,
and the women and children attack them from roof-tops? Or, they set out
of Medina and fight the Quraish in the desert?

As far as strategy was concerned, the Prophet (S) personally thought it
to be more prudent to stay in Medina and fight. Abdullah-ibn-Abi
Manafiq, the leader of the Aws tribe, held the same view. But, most of
the warriors including Hamza said, ‘If we don.’t go outside Medina to
face the enemy, then defeat is certain..’

The Prophet (S) thought it wise to accept the opinion of the
enthusiastic Islamic soldiers and confront the Quraish outside Medina
because, if he stayed back in Medina, the Islamic soldiers.’ morale (for
achieving martyrdom) which was accompanied with fervor and excitement
would be shattered.

The Prophet (S) left Medina with a thousand soldiers and amongst them
were Abdullah ibn Ubai and his followers. On the way, Abdullah ibn Ubai
addressed his followers as such, “The Prophet acted upon the opinion of
the youngsters while he disregarded our views. “ Saying this, he
returned to Medina with three hundred of his followers.

The Prophet (S) reached near Mount Uhud with seven hundred soldiers and
there, they came face to face with the Quraish army. The battle began on
Saturday 15th of Shawwal and ended on the same day too. Array of troops
on both sides

The Prophet (S) marshalled seven hundred Islamic soldiers in front of
Mount Uhud in such manner that Mt. Uhud lay behind them. He placed fifty
archers headed by Abdullah ibn Zubair behind the army for the purpose of
guarding the mountain slope, so that if ever the Quraish horsemen
thought of attacking the army from the rear, the archers would drive
them away.

Abu-Sufyan appointed “Khalid-ibn-Walid “ to lead the two hundred
Quraishite horsemen and handed over the army banner to the heroes from
the tribe of Bani Abdud Dar. Hind and other women, who accompanied her,
walked behind the rows of the polytheist army and played the tambourine.
They encouraged the soldiers by reciting epic verses. When they reached
behind the heroes from the tribe of Abduddar and the standard bearers of
Quraish, the ones reciting the epic verses recited as such:

“Behold O men of Bani-Abduddar!

Behold O the heroes supporting the army and guarding the rear side of
the army! Strike by your naked swords. “

In the Quraishite army was a black and fearless slave called Wahshi, who
from a far distance would take aim at the champions with his sharp
weapon and inflict effective blows. Hind said to him, ‘If you kill
Muhammad, Hamza or Ali in this battle, you shall be set free; either
Muhammad or Hamza or Ali..’

Wahshi said, “I can neither kill Muhammad nor Ali. As for Muhammad, a
group of soldiers are guarding him and as for Ali, he attacks like a
lion while fighting although at the same time he is vigilant on his
left, right and all other sides. However, I can kill Hamza because, even
though he advances like a roaring lion, he is not careful on his left or
right side. “

### The Commencement Of The Battle

Talha ibn Uthman, the standard bearer of the polytheist army, who was
called “Kabshul-Katibah “ (indicating the hero of the army) started the
battle and cried out, ‘O champions of Muhammad! Do you think that God
will send us to Hell by means of your swords and will send you to
Paradise through our swords? Is there anyone amongst you whose sword can
dispatch me to Hell or that my sword will dispatch him to Paradise?!

Ali (a.s.) approached him and said, “I swear by the One to Whom I owe my
life, I shall not depart until you step into Hell by means of my sword
or I enter the Paradise by means of your sword. At that very moment, Ali
(a.s.) struck him with his sword. He lost one of his legs and fell on
the ground with his private part exposed.

At that moment, Talha said: “O cousin! For the sake of God and our
kinship, let me free..’ Ali (a.s.) left him unharmed and the Prophet (S)
cried, “Allah- O-Akbar” (Allah is the Greatest).

When Ali (a.s.) went back to his position, the companions said, ‘Why
didn.’t you kill him?.’ Ali (a.s.) said, ‘When my cousin’s private part
was exposed, he swore by our kinship and (so) I felt ashamed..’

At that very time, the battle between the two armies began. Ali (a.s.)
displayed such magnanimity that he destroyed the standard bearers of
Quraish. When one would fall, the other would raise the flag on his
shoulder. The battle continued in this manner until ten amongst them
were killed. Thereafter, the freed one amongst them carried the flag.
Ali (a.s.) killed him as well. At this moment, the Quraishite flag fell
on the ground.

When the Quraish witnessed this scene, they began to flee. Hamza, Abu
Dajjaneh Ansari and other Muhajir and Ansar warriors too exhibited their
valour. The Muslim warriors pursued the Quraishite soldiers until they
reached their camps. The Quraish fled from their tents as well and
headed for the desert.

The Prophet’s (S) army went inside the Quraishite camp and became busy
in collecting the spoils of war.

When the men guarding the mountain slope saw this, they felt that the
battle had come to an end. Amongst them, forty disobeyed their commander
and abandoned their duty and joined the Islamic soldiers in plundering
the Quraishite tents.

Observing this scene, Khalid ibn Walid took advantage of this
opportunity and appeared from the rear of the mountain with two hundred
horsemen and killed Abdullah ibn Jubair and a few of his associates.
Thereafter, he attacked the rear side of the Prophet’s (S) army from the
mountain-peak. He entered the battlefield and attacked the Prophet’s (S)
soldiers who were now in disarray.

Under these circumstances, a man from the Quraish picked up the
Quraishite flag from the ground. When the Quraishite army found the
situation changed and witnessed their flag raised once again, they
returned from the desert and attacked the Prophet’s (S) army from
another side. The Prophet’s (S) army found itself sandwiched, being
attacked by the Quraishite army from two sides. A fierce battle took
place.

At this moment, Wahshi found Hamza unguarded and flung a spear at him.
Hamza fell on the ground and was martyred. A group amongst the Prophet’s
(S) army was martyred.

The polytheists attacked the Prophet (S) from all sides, when Nasibah
Mazniah, a lady from the Ansars who had come to the battlefield for
providing water to the injured[^19] saw this situation, rushed to defend
the Prophet (S). She received injuries and became weak as a result of
the battle.

The news spread in Medina. Men from the Ansars who were in Medina came
to the battlefield and got martyred. Under such circumstances, a
polytheist flung a stone at the Prophet’s (S) face. The Prophet’s (S)
blessed forehead and tooth broke. His nose received injuries and blood
flowed down his face.

At this moment, one group after another from the Quraishite heroes
attacked the Prophet (S) from all sides with the aim of killing him. The
Prophet (S) cried out to Ali, ‘O Ali! Repel this group..’ At this time,
Jibraeel (a.s.) addressed the Prophet (S) thus, ‘O the Messenger of
Allah, this is what is called self-sacrifice.’ The Prophet (S) retorted,
“Ali is from me and I am from Ali. “

Jibraeel (a.s.) said: “ And I am from you two. “

Thereafter, they heard a cry:

‘There is no sword but Zulfiqar (Ali’s sword) and there is no stalwart
but Ali.’

Under such circumstances, a polytheist killed Mu’sab-ibn-Umair, one of
the Prophet’s (S) companions and thinking that he had killed the Prophet
(S), he cried out, ‘I have killed Muhammad..’

This cry spread on both sides of the army and had a disastrous impact.
The Islamic soldiers fled in all directions from the battlefield.
Ya.’qubi says, ‘No one remained near the Prophet (S) save Ali, Talha and
Zubair..’

A group of deserters, who had climbed on Mount Uhud, assembled together
and said, ‘We wish someone would go and request Abdullah ibn Ubayy to
seek protection for us from the Quraish..’

The Prophet (S) himself saw a few fleeing from the battlefield. He
called them one by one by names. A few amongst them returned until they
became fifteen in number and they rallied around him (S). Moments later,
they took the Prophet (S) on top of Mount Uhud. Ali (a.s.) brought water
and washed the Prophet’s (S) wounds.

The battlefield became devoid of Islamic warriors. Hind brought her
female accomplices to the battle arena and personally cut off Hamza’s
and other martyrs.’ noses and made a necklace and an anklet out of them.
She then wore them and gave away her own necklace and anklet to Wahshi.
Her accomplices too did the same. Hind split open Hamza’s stomach and
extracted his liver. She tried to chew the liver but it fell off from
her mouth.

Abu-Sufyan came over Hamza’s corpse and while striking Hamza’s face with
the tip of his spear, said, ‘Taste it for you have broken off ties of
kinship..’

Halees, the chief of the Ahabeesh tribe (an ally of the Quraish), was a
testimony to the entire scenario. He cried out: .‘O tribesmen see what
the Quraish chief is doing to the lifeless body of his cousin!.’
Abu-Sufyan said to him, ‘Excuse me! It was an error!.’

Thereafter, Abu-Sufyan cried out, ‘Is Muhammad (still) alive?.’ His
people replied in the affirmative.

Once again Abu-Sufyan cried out, “Exceed in superiority O Hubal! Exceed
in superiority O Hubal!

The Prophet (S) replied: “Allah is most High and Glorified. “

Abu-Sufyan yelled, “We are having the idol Uzzah with us while you do
not! “

The Prophet (S) said: “Our Master is Allah whereas you do not have a
Master! “

The battle of Uhud ended with sixty-eight Muslims dead. On Prophet’s (S)
command, the dead were buried in that very mountain slope and all
returned to Medina on the same day.

### A Brief Comparison

In this battle, Ali’s (a.s.) behavior with the standard bearer of
Quraish is worthy of attention in contrast to Abu-Sufyan and Hind’s
(Muawiya’s parents) behavior with Hamza, the chief of the martyrs.
Similarly, the behavior of one Ansar woman (Nasibah) in connection with
her love and self-sacrificing attitude towards the Prophet (S) and the
behavior of one Quraishite woman (Hind) in connection with her hatred
against the Muslims are also noteworthy.

The battle of Hamrah-ul-Asad
----------------------------

On their return journey to Mecca, the Quraish consulted with one another
and said, ‘After the defeat of Muhammad’s army, why didn.’t we make an
assault on Medina so that Muhammad’s affairs would come to an end!.’

The Prophet (S) received this news on the first night after his arrival
from Mount Uhud. The next day, Sunday, 8th of Shawwal, he commanded his
army to set out of Medina with the aim of pursuing the enemy. For this
task, he permitted only those who had fought and received wounds to
participate. This itself was a severe admonition for those who had
deserted the battlefield. On the same day, the soldiers who had suffered
injuries left Medina and moved forward until they reached
Hamrah-ul-Asad, situated at about eight miles away from Medina. The
soldiers halted at this place and two persons were dispatched in the
direction of the Quraishite army for the purpose of collecting
information.

A man belonging to the tribe of Khazah (an ally of Bani-Hashim) gave
news of this event to Abu Sufyan and in an elegant poem, warned him of
the aweinspiring army of the Prophet (S).

Fear-struck and scared, Abu-Sufyan commanded the Quraishite army to move
in the direction of Mecca and dispatched someone to warn the Prophet (S)
not to pursue the Quraish. After staying in Hamrah-ul-Asad for three
days and receiving news of the Quraishite army’s departure to Mecca, the
Prophet (S) returned to Medina.[^20]

[^1]: Seerah Ibn Hisham vol.2, p.127

[^2]: It is in reference to the blessed verse: إِذْ يَقُولُ لِصَاحِبِهِ
لَا تَحْزَنْ إِنَّ اللَّـهَ مَعَنَا

[^3]: Muruj az-Zahab - Masoudi; Chapter of “Migration “

[^4]: Uyoon al-Athar 1/181

[^5]: Uyoon al-Athar 1/184 and Murooj az-Zahab, Chapter of “Migration “
2/279

[^6]: Refer to Uyoon al-Athar 1/200-201.

[^7]: Refer to Uyoon al-Athar 1/197.

[^8]: The references for this statement as well as the Prophet's (S)
consultations with the companions will appear in the next reference.

[^9]: About the Prophet's (S) heedless behaviour towards these two
figures, one can refer to Sahih Muslim; Book of Jihad and As-Sair;
Chapter of Badr.

[^10]: Refer to the incident of the battle of Badr in “Maghazi “ of
Waaqedi, Oxford publication; 1/48-49 and “Emtah al-Asmah “ of Muqrizi;
1/74--75.

[^11]: Refer to Seerah Ibn Hisham 2/267.

[^12]: Refer to the incident of the battle of Badr in Seerah Ibn Hisham.
In this book, Ali’s name has been mentioned seventeen times in the list
showing the killers of the Quraishite infidels.

[^13]: Refer to Seerah Ibn Hisham 2/365.

[^14]: Refer to the word "…" in Mu'jam al-Buldaan and Seerah Ibn Hisham
2/281.

[^15]: Refer to the word "Seer" in Mu'jam al-Buldaan.

[^16]: Waaqedi has narrated that the lady was the wife of one of the
Ansars.

[^17]: The history of this event was narrated from “At-Tanbih wal
Ashraf” of Masoudi.

[^18]: Refer to the battle of Bani-Qainaqah in Maghazi of Waaqedi
1/176-180 and Seerah Ibn Hisham 2/426-428.

[^19]: Anyone, who bleeds profusely, becomes severely thirsty. In the
past, it was the practice to appoint a few people in the battlefield for
the job of providing water and first aid to the injured. Nasibah
fulfilled this responsibility in the battle of Uhud. Those who set forth
Nasibah’s participation in the battle as the proof for permissability of
women’s participation in other such activities should take note of the
following: Firstly, this war took place only a mile away from Medina and
did not involve travelling. Secondly, Nasibah had entered the
battlefield for the purpose of providing water to the injured and when
she saw the polytheists attacking the Prophet (S), she hastened to
defend the Prophet (S) and defending the Prophet (S) is obligatory upon
every Muslim. However, this affair cannot be taken as a proof for
permissibility of women’s participation in all other fields.

[^20]: The battle of Hamrah-ul-Asad has been mentioned in “Maghaazi “ of
Waaqedi 1/334 and Seerah Ibn Hisham 3/52.


