The Birth Of Different Sects In The Caliphate School
====================================================

Foreword
--------

In the last section, we discussed the approach of the four Caliphs
vis-à-vis the Prophet’s Sunnah, soon after his demise. We also took note
of the scant regard that the caliphs displayed towards the Prophet’s
Sunnah during their respective regimes.

In this section, we will delve into the factors that divided the Islamic
nation into myriad sects of Muslims. To this end, we shall introduce the
sects ascribed to the two schools of thought along with their views and
beliefs.

We shall also discuss the historical background of the emergence of the
various groups in the Muslim society and the fundamental cause of their
origin. Nevertheless, we will also elaborate on the fact that in the
Ahlul Bayt (as) school, only one group exists i.e. the “twelve-Imam
Shiites“ (Ithna-Ashari) and the sects which are ascribed to this school
are either imaginary; false or existed briefly.

We hope that the discussion helps the seekers of the truth and enhances
understanding among the Muslims.

Introduction
------------

After the Prophet’s demise, there was a sharp division in the Islamic
Ummah: those who believed that the Prophet (S) has appointed Ali (as) as
his successor, caliph and Imam after him and those who claimed that
Allah and His Prophet have not issued any command concerning the ruler
and leader after the Holy Prophet and the decision was left to the
community.

A brief account of what transpired after the Prophet’s demise is
mentioned below:

At Saqifa, Abu-Bakr attained the caliphate through allegiance of a few
people. Before his death, Abu Bakr nominated Omar as his successor and
he became the second caliph. When Omar was fatally injured in an
assault, he formed a council (shu’ra) of six men from the Muhajirs who
were responsible for the caliph’s appointment. Uthman gained the
caliphate due to the cunning maneuvers of Abdul-Rahman-ibn-Auf.

After Uthman’s assassination, the common companions from the Muhajirs
and Ansars as well as the disciples of companions swore allegiance to
Ali (as).

Talha and Zubair who had pledged allegiance to Ali (as) revolted against
him. Under the leadership of Ayesha and on the pretext of avenging
Uthman’s blood, they fought pitched battle with Ali (as). Consequently,
they suffered a humiliating defeat in Basra. Later Muawiyah too waged a
war against Ali and fought the battle of Siffeen.

Even as Ali (as) was poised to win the battle, Muawiya played a trick by
inciting the soldiers to abandon battle and accept arbitration of the
Quran. Consequently, some of Imam’s soldiers compelled Imam to accept
the appointment of Abu Musa Ash.’ari as an arbitrator. Muawiya, on his
part, appointed Amr Aas as the arbitrator.

These two arbitrators reached an agreement. Abu-Musa was outsmarted by
Amr Aas.’ deception and decreed that Ali (as) and Muawiya both be
deposed from the seat of caliphate. However, Amr Aas concurred with
Ashari as far as deposition of Ali (as) was concerned but he insisted
that Ali (as) be replaced, and Muawiya should be appointed as caliph.

Consequently, a group from Imam’s army from Kufa who believed in
caliphate ideology and maintained that caliphate is by selection,
separated from the mainstream and branded Muslims as infidels. This
group revolted against Ali (as). Another battle was foisted on Imam who
fought with them in Naherwan and killed the majority of them. A
minuscule minority had survived including the assassin of Imam Ali who
later fatally assaulted him in the mosque of Kufa.

Thereafter, the Muslims swore allegiance to the Prophet’s grandson,
Hasan-ibn-Ali. When Muawiya prepared himself for a battle against him,
the people of Kufa betrayed Imam Hasan. Consequently, in 40 A.H., Imam
Hasan (as) forcibly signed a peace treaty with Muawiya. The caliphate
school named that year as " عام الجماعة " (Year of reunion) because
Muawiya was unanimously accepted as caliph.

\* \* \*

Muawiya ruled for twenty years. During this period, Muawiya ensured that
numerous traditions in support of the caliphate system were forged and
attributed to the Prophet (S). The caliphate school mistook these
fabricated traditions (which were mentioned in the last lessons) as the
Prophet’s *Sunnah*.

These fabricated traditions are divided into four categories:

a) Traditions that were genuinely narrated by the Prophet but over a
period of time, while being narrated by one narrator to another got
distorted. Naturally, several of the Prophet’s sayings lost its
originality.

b) Traditions, which were originally opinions of the Ahle- *Sunnah*
scholars or their students but were so mingled and merged with the
Prophet’s traditions that it became impossible to distinguish them from
the genuine traditions.

The belief in the physicality of God and His resemblance with creatures
is the fallout of such traditions.

c) Traditions that were narrated from the Prophet but were moulded to
serve the interest of the ruling government.

d) Traditions that were blatantly distorted and forged in the interest
of the caliphate system. These traditions itself are divided into many
groups:

1. Traditions which were forged in praise of caliphs.

2. Traditions which were fabricated to denigrate the caliphs’ opponents.

3. Traditions which have been forged to suit the policies of the Caliphs
and their erroneous judgments.

Traditions prohibiting revolt against the ruler belongs to this group.
According to them, the Prophet has said, “Obedience to a ruler is
obligatory under all circumstances; even if he professes sin and
tyranny. His government is the Wish of Allah, as good and evil are all
Allah’s Acts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الخير كله والشر كله من الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

They further say that man is not free in his actions .

These sets of traditions caused further schism and resulted in the
formation of sects like Jabriah (necessitarians) and others in the
caliphate school.

These four set of traditions; the sayings of the companions and their
independent judgments in the ordinances as well as the views of their
disciples (some of which are contrary to the text of the Quran and the
Prophet’s *Sunnah*[^1] but nevertheless are now being narrated with the
Prophet’s traditions in the caliphate school) created differences in the
ordinances. Thus numerous jurisprudence schools of thought in the
caliphate school came into existence.

For instance the believers in Ijma (the consensus), believers in
independent reasoning (aql), the school of the predecessors and others
were offshoot of the caliphate school due to such traditions.

Permission for compilation of hadith in the caliphate school In 100 A.H.
when Omar-ibn-Abdul Aziz lifted the ban from recording of the Prophet’s
*Sunnah* in book format, the followers of the caliphate school strived
hard in collecting the Prophet’s traditions from the narrators.
Traditionists would travel from one city to another for collecting as
well as narrating traditions. They would receive traditions from the
traditionists of one city and in turn, they would also narrate
traditions to the traditionists of that city.

As a result, the traditions that were confined among a few individuals
in Medina, Kufa, Basra and Damascus spread in the entire Islamic nations
of those days. Dissemination of such traditions created severe
differences in the caliphate school, which will be explained, in our
subsequent discussions.

The dissemination of Ahlul Bayt (as) ahadith during the tussle of power
between the leaders of the caliphate school

After the issuance of Omar-ibn-Abdul Aziz’s command, the followers of
Ahl albayt (as) approached Imam Baqir (as) and learnt from him the
Prophet’s traditions. This continued until Hisham came to power in 105
A.H. and began to subjugate the Ahlul Bayt (as) and their followers.
According to one narration, he even poisoned Imam Baqir (as) in 117 A.H.

Hisham died in 125 A.H. After him, Walid-ibn-Yazid-ibn-Abdul Malik
attained the caliphate. At that time, the campaign of Bani-Abbas began
to gain grounds in Khorasan. Soon a group of campaigners and preachers
from the Bani-Abbas (including Abu Muslim Khorasani) left Khorasan with
gifts for Muhammadibn-Ali Nawadeh bin Abdullah-ibn-Abbas. He appointed
Abu Muslim Khorasani as the chief.

Muhammad died in the same year. Following him, his son Ibrahim nominated
Abu Muslim to his post. Marwan Hemar, the last of the Bani-Umayyah
Caliphs, killed Ibrahim. After him, the followers of Bani-Ummayah swore
allegiance to his brother Abdullah, famous as Saffah. He managed to
wrest the seat of caliphate in 132 A.H.

From 125 A.H. till 132 A.H., the Bani-Umayyad were preoccupied on the
two fronts, they were constantly fighting battles with the Bani-Abbas
and also faced a series of Khawarij revolts. The incessant power
struggle and battles took its toll on the Bani-Umayyads.

Following Yazid-ibn-Muawiya, the second most notorious person for his
sin and tyranny was Walid-ibn-Yazid from the household of Bani-Umayyad.
He was so sinful that he contemplated building a structure on the roof
of the Holy Ka.’ba where he could engage in drinking wine. For
accomplishing this task, he had even dispatched an engineer to
Mecca.[^2] As a result of his tyrannical and corrupt rule, chaos took
place in every city.

His cousin, Yazid-ibn-Walid-ibn-Abdul Malik joined hands with a group
from the Bani-Umayyad chiefs and fought against him until
Walid-ibn-Yazid’s defeat in 126 A.H. Walid-ibn-Yazid was killed and
Yazid-ibn-Walid-ibn-Abdul Malik gained the caliphate. In the meanwhile,
those who had inclination towards the Islamic sciences and the Prophet’s
hadith, rallied around Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) and acquired from him the
Prophet’s *Sunnah*, the exegesis of Quran and other Islamic sciences.

Particularly, during the Haj pilgrimage, people from distant cities
would come to Mecca, Medina, Arafat and Mina to visit Imam (as). Imam’s
debates with the heretics and other followers of Milal-wan-Nihal
(heresiography) are well known.

This state of affairs continued from 125 A.H. till the beginning of
Manthur Abbasi’s rule. For more than twelve years, Muslims would come
for the Haj pilgrimage from cities stretching from Khorasan province
till Rai, Qum, Kufa and other cities and learn the Prophet’s *Sunnah*
and Islamic sciences from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as). The narrators who had
learnt the Prophet’s hadiths from Imam exceeded three thousand in
number. Thousands of traditionists would say:

“Abu-Abdullah Jafar-ibn-Muhammad Sadiq (as) narrated to me from his
father, who related from his grandfather, who in turn narrated from his
great father, who quoted from the Messenger of Allah (S), who related
from Gibrail and he narrated from The Creator............... “

Sometimes, they would say:

“Abu-Jafar Muhammad al-Baqir (as) narrated to me from his father, who
from his grandfather and he directly narrated from the Messenger of
Allah (S)............ “

During this period, the number of small treatises compiled in the Ahlul
Bayt’s science of traditions and which were called ‘Asl’ (fundamental)
amounted to four hundred. This is how collection and spread of hadith
were done in the Ahlul Bayt school.

Compilation Of Hadith In The Caliphate School
---------------------------------------------

Omar-ibn-Abdul Aziz, who allowed the recording of traditions, remained
in power for a short period. He gained the caliphate in Rajab 99 A.H.
and died in Safar 101 A.H., probably poisoned by the Bani-Ummayads. The
other Bani- Ummayad caliphs did not approve his ideas. It is said Zuhri
(died in 124 A.H.) wrote a book but could not reach Omar-ibn-Abdul
Aziz’s tenure.[^3]

After the fall of the Bani-Ummayad government, the Bani-Abbas Caliphs
who came to power in 132 A.H. were occupied in destroying the signs of
Bani-Ummayad and their ringleaders. Manthur Dawaniqi gained the
caliphate in 136 A.H. and faced the uprising of “Muhammad “ and “Ibrahim
“, the two brothers from Imam Hasan’s lineage who called the people
towards the Ahlul Bayt government.

Thereafter, the Bani-Abbas faced successive revolts by the offspring of
Ali and Fatimah who exhorted the people to the government of the chosen
one from Muhammad’s progeny. In this period, the spread of hadith from
the Ahlul Bayt school and students of Imam Sadiq and Imam Baqir reached
its peak.

Thousands of traditionists in the Islamic cities were heard saying:
(Al-Baqir narrated to me) and (Al-Sadiq narrated to me).

The Bani-Abbasid government faced two dangers: One was the uprisings by
offspring of Ali and Fatimah and the other was the spread of true
Islamic reflections through traditions narrated from the Prophet’s
legatees by the traditionists.

These traditions awakened the Muslims and exposed the caliphate system
as an unjust government and proved the ordinances enforced by the
Caliphs as anti- Islamic.

The successive uprisings waged by offspring of Ali were also triggered
due to these traditions. When the Muslims realized that the Caliphs.’
verdicts were not in consonance with the Islamic ordinances, they
refrained from giving them such title as “Ulul-Amr” (master of the
affairs). Instead, they gathered around the offspring of Imams to
overthrow the Caliphs tyrannical rule.

The Bani-Abbasid Caliphs made efforts to crush the rebellion of the
offspring of Imam with force. But they could not suppress the truth of
genuine traditions, which had unmasked the falsehood of their un-Islamic
government. Thus, they countered the genuine traditions by propagating
the fabricated traditions, which were common in the past.

Consequently, the policy of Bani-Abbas government (from Abu-Jafar
Manthur’s era onwards) was based on propagation of hadith related to the
caliphate school. Moreover, the traditionists from the caliphate school
enjoyed special respect in the Bani-Abbas court.

Traditionists from Balkh, Bukhara and Samarkand would travel to
Naishabour, Rai, Kufa, Basra, Baghdad, Damascus, Mecca, Medina,
Alexandria and Spain for the purpose of learning and teaching of hadith
to the people. It was during this very era that hadith from the
caliphate school was compiled and Malik-ibn-Anas (died in 179 A.H.)
wrote his book: “Muwatta “. In this book, he collected together the
traditions narrated from the Prophet as well as the personal opinions of
the Prophet’s companions and their disciples.

The other writers that followed Malik have also collected the same
traditions (the four categories) in their books such as Darami (died in
255 A.H.), Ibn Maajah (died in 273 A.H.), Abu-Davoud (died in 275 A.H.),
Tirmidhi (died in 279 A.H.) and Nesaee (died in 303 A.H.). They have
named their books as “Sunan “ (plural of *Sunnah*) meaning the Prophet’s
*Sunnah*. The “Sunan “ of the last four traditionists are reckoned to be
the authentic books on hadith in the caliphate school.

Bukhari (died in 256 A.H.) and Muslim (died in 261 A.H.) have also
compiled such category of traditions in their books named
“Jameah-Sahih”. The caliphate school considers their traditions to be as
authentic as the verses of the Holy Quran and condemn those who doubt
the authenticity of traditions recorded in these two books.

The propagation of such traditions in the Muslim states and their
compilation in the books on hadith generated severe differences among
the followers of the caliphate school in matters concerning Islamic
beliefs and precepts.

First Discussion: Differences and division of sects in the caliphate school
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Islamic nation was further divided into two groups

1. Differences in the Islamic ordinances.

2. Differences in the Islamic beliefs.

Now, we shall point out these differences only to the extent necessary
for understanding the future discussions.

### 1. Differences in the Islamic ordinances

The cause of sectarian differences was mainly due to acceptance or
rejection of the Prophet’s traditions. In this regard, the most renowned
person who categorically rejected the Prophet’s traditions that were in
contradiction with his personal views was Abu-Hanifa (died in 150 A.H.).
We have mentioned his biography in detail in the book: Ma.’lem
al-Madrasatain in the chapter concerning “Al Ijtihad Fi’l Quran
al-Thani” and have also discussed a few examples wherein Abu-Hanifa has
pronounced certain decrees contradictory to the Prophet’s *Sunnah*.[^4]

In fact, Abu-Hanifa and his followers had laid down certain rules called
as Qiyas (syllogism), Estehsan (preference) and Masaleh Marsaleh (the
sent affairs) which in reality are based on one’s personal opinion. Like
the Quran and the Prophet’s *Sunnah*, they have set these rules as proof
of the Islamic ordinances and have named the one who extracts the
ordinances as Mujtahid and his actions as Ijtihad.

Incidentally, according to caliphate school, Ijtihad or independent
reasoning is in contrast to the ordinances which was described in the
Quran and Prophet’s *Sunnah* was founded from the time of the
(Prophet’s) companions and the first three Caliphs. It has already been
discussed as also in the second volume of the book Ma’lem
al-Madrasatain.

After the companions, the first person who set the independent reasoning
of the companions and their disciples at par with the Prophet’s *Sunnah*
and declared them as proof of the Islamic ordinances was Malik-ibn-Anas.
He accomplished this task in his book “Muwatta “. However, Abu-Hanifa
was one step ahead of Malik and devised certain rules for putting into
effect the independent reasoning on ordinances.

Following Abu-Hanifa, his students (especially those who were employed
in the caliphate system like Abu-Yusouf, Chief Judge of Haroun
al-Rashid) distorted the ordinances to such extent that numerous haram
(forbidden) acts were declared as halal (lawful) and they named this as
“Al-hiyal ash-Shari’yah. “[^5]

Of course, Malik refused to accept such a brazen attitude on the part of
Abu- Hanifa and his students. It has been narrated from Malik as saying:
“No face as sinister as Abu-Hanifa has been born in Islam. The Prophet
passed away after Islam having reached its perfection. It’s worthy to
follow the Prophet’s hadith and the Prophet’s companions and not to
follow independent reasoning........ “[^6]

To counter the spread of Abu-Hanifa’s creed and the rise of some of his
students in distorting the Islamic ordinances under the name of
.‘religious ruse.’, various ideologies came into existence. The most
renowned cogitative creed against Abu-Hanifa’s school was founded by
Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal (died in 241 A.H.). He is the author of Musnad, the
book on hadith.

The motto of Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal’s school: Return to the era of the Prophet
and his companions who were named as “Salafe-Saleh “ (predecessors in
goodness). This difference between the two schools widened and both
sects labeled each other as sinners and declared them to be out of pale
of Islam. Khateeb, in his Tarikh narrates from Abu-Hanifa’s opponents,
the following poem:

"If someone produces a vain and blatant heresy by using independent
reasoning and syllogism, we shall set forth reasoning in accordance to
the Divine sayings and traditions. How often it has happened that by
Abu-Hanifa’s Fatwa (independent reasoning), the marriage of already
married chaste spouse has been declared lawful for a stranger “[^7]

Political stance of Abu-Hanifa and his students

According to Khateeb-Baghdadi, Abu-Hanifa exhibited two different
attitudes vis-a-vis Manthur, the Abbasid Caliph. Initially, he served
Manthur as Khateeb in his Tarikh says:

In construction of the Baghdad wall (during 142 A.H.), Abu-Hanifa
supervised the workers in laying the bricks and counting them by means
of bamboo sticks. (i.e., he would hold a stick after every hundred or
thousand bricks and then count those sticks). He was the first person
who employed this method for counting bricks.[^8]

But, towards the old age, he became the Caliph’s opponent. According to
Khateeb and others, when Ibrahim rebelled against Abu-Jafar Manthur in
Basra, Abu-Hanifa pronounced a Fatwa (decree) in favour of Ibrahim’s
uprising against the Caliph.[^9]

Irked at the fatwa, it is said that Manthur imprisoned Abu-Hanifa in
Baghdad who later died in the prison.

After Abu-Hanifa, his students such as Abu-Yusouf (the Chief Judge
during Haroun al-Rashid’s era) joined the group of scholars in the
caliphate court. Abu- Yusouf would say: “We would approach Abu-Hanifa
and learn Fiqh (jurisprudence) from him and would not follow him in
religious affairs “.[^10]

Anyhow, the Caliphs would propagate mostly Abu-Hanifa’s school of
jurisprudence. During the Othmani rule too, Hanafi was the state
religion of the caliphate court.

This was an example of difference between two schools of jurisprudence
in the caliphate school arising out of adherence or non-adherence to
traditions. Now, we shall explain some other differences in the
caliphate school in matters pertaining to beliefs.

### 2. Differences in beliefs

Aside from the differences in the Islamic jurisprudence and ordinances,
the followers of the caliphate school had several other serious
differences in fundamental beliefs as well;

(a) One sect believes: “The legs, hands, eyes and occupation of space
are among God’s attributes. According to them, anyone who disbelieves
that God possesses organs, limbs and space has nullified God’s
attributes and they are called “Mu’attaleh al-Sefaat” (one who suspends
the attributes). “

Another sect maintains: “Possession of limbs and organs are among God’s
physical attributes and God is just like the creatures. “ Those who held
such a belief were named as “Mujassameh” (anthropomorphists) and
“Mushabbeheh” (likeners) i.e., those who considered God to be a body and
likened Him to the creatures.

(b) The first sect also believes that God is eternal and His attributes
too are eternal. The Quran, which is God’s words, is among God’s
attributes. Thus, the Quran too is eternal and is not created.

The second sect asserts: God is eternal and the Quran is God’s words but
not eternal. Anyone who says that the Quran is eternal has believed in
the eternity of Quran just as he has believed in the eternity of God
whereas belief in two eternal beings is tantamount to polytheism.

Author says: I fail to understand what is wrong with these people who
have not paid attention to God’s words in the Quran where He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الأَنفَالِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O the Prophet, they ask you about the windfalls..... (Qur’an,
8:1)***

Did the dispute among the companions over the distribution of windfalls
and their questioning before the Prophet take place before their birth
and was this matter eternal so that we can say that the Quran is
eternal!?

Similarly, there are fourteen other instances where the word "يسألونك"
has been mentioned in the Quran. In two other instances, the word
"يستفتونك" has been used meaning: they ask you a decree. There are other
cases too where the Quran relates the dispute among the people of that
time and their recourse to the Prophet for setting aside their
differences like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ سَمِعَ اللَّهُ قَوْلَ الَّتِي تُجَادِلُكَ فِي زَوْجِهَا
وَتَشْتَكِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah indeed knows the plea of the woman who pleads with you about
her husband and complains.... “ (Qur’an, 58:1)***

Under such circumstances, can one regard the Quran to be eternal? Or
that these instances had occurred from eternity and the people had taken
recourse to the Prophet from eternal time (even before the Prophet’s
era) and the Quran relates whatever had occurred since eternal times?
The less said about it the better?

(c) There is another sect which claims: All human actions are God’s
actions and man is not free in his actions.[^11]

Yet another sect opines: Man’s actions are his own actions. It is
against Divine Justice to punish someone for an act performed under
compulsion.[^12] The second sect named the first sect as “Jabriyah” and
themselves as “Adliyah”.

(d) Majority of the followers of the caliphate school are unanimous on
the necessity of obeying the Caliphs even though they may be unjust and
sinful. However, a small group existed among them who considered the
uprising against the unjust and sinful Caliph as lawful although they
would be crushed by the caliphate system and their names would be
recorded in the history as sinners.

The origin of these differences was those very traditions of the
caliphate school, which was fabricated or forged in the past.

Now, we shall discuss the sects, which had deep differences concerning
these beliefs:

#### 1. The Jahmiyah sect

Jahmi or Jahmiyah are the followers of “Jahm-ibn-Sefwan “[^13]

##### The beliefs of Jahm and Jahmiyah

Most of the contents of the beliefs of Jahm and Jahmiyah sect has
reached us through mainly two sources:

a) Whatever their enemies have written against their beliefs and have
remained intact until now.

b) Whatever the authors of Milal wal-Nihal have written about this sect.

Hence we will have to practice caution while dealing with the beliefs of
the Jahmiyyah, moreover when there is no evidence to verify the
authenticity of the writings of rivals against the Jahmiyah.

Nevertheless, while discussing the existence of different sects (like
Sabaeeyah and Navvasiyah) and their beliefs, we realized that the
writings of Al-Milal wan-Nihal in most cases, lacked research.

Sometimes, their references regarding a particular sect were nothing but
whatever were written by the rivals of the sect. Occasionally, their
writings about a sect comprise the notions, which were prevalent among
the people of their era.

Obviously in the scientific discussions, neither of the references can
be relied upon absolutely. Thus we have to be all the more cautious
while discussing Jahmiyah. We will restrict our discussion about Jahm
and his ideology to the limit which is essential for our future
discussion.

1. Jahm and Jahmiyah denied that God possesses limbs and organs.[^14]

2. They believed that the Quran is not eternal but created.

3. They believed that God is the source of man’s actions and that man is
compelled in his actions.[^15]

4. They say: Jahm believed that Imamat has three pre-requisites:
Knowledge of the Divine Book, knowledge of the Prophet’s *Sunnah* and
consensus of the Muslims on Imam’s selection.[^16]

##### Jahm’s life in brief

Jahm was the freed slave of the tribe named Azd. He hailed from Balkh
and his agnomen was Abu-Mahraz.[^17]

Once, Jahm visited Kufa and held a series of debates with
Abu-Hanifa.[^18] When he returned to Balkh he held debates with
Maqatel-ibn-Sulaiman who exaggerated the incarnation of God.[^19]
Consequently, at the instance of Maqatel, the ruler of Balkh externed
Jahm to Termez.[^20]

In Termez, there were many Samaniyah. It is said the Samaniyah were in
reality the Buddhist who did not believe in any existence other than the
material bodies.[^21]

During the Islamic conquests in Termez, there were twelve temples and
one thousand Buddhist monks lived in Termez.[^22]

Jahm’s debates with the Samaniyah led them to convert to Islam.[^23] It
is said Jahm also debated with Mu.’tazilah through correspondences.[^24]

##### Jahm’s political movement

During Jahm’s era, which was the fag end of the Bani-Ummayad rule, the
masses were weary of a tyrannical government and throughout the Islamic
nations revolted against the governments. Harith-ibn-Shuraij Tamimi led
one of these uprisings. He revolted in 116 A.H. and exhorted the people
to follow the Divine Book and the Prophet’s *Sunnah* and to oust the
Ummayad Caliph, Hisham-ibn-Abdul Malik.

It is said that his army comprising sixty thousand men conquered the
cities of Balkh, Jauzejan and Taleqan. However, he lost the battle of
Marv and had to escape to Turkestan. He lived for twelve years in
Turkestan and with the assistance of native Turks led several rebellions
against the Bani-Ummayad. In 118 A.H., the Bani-Ummayad attacked the
citadels which were stronghold of Harith’s relatives and massacred them.
The survivors were made captives and later sold as slaves in the market
of Balkh.

In 126 A.H., Nasr-ibn-Saiyyar, the governor of Khorasan requested the
Ummayad Caliph, Yazid-ibn-Walid-ibn-Abdul Malik to give protection to
Harith-ibn-Shuraij Tamimi. Subsequently, Harith returned to Marv. The
Ummayad governors offered cooperation to Harith so much so that he
offered him the post of the minister of a state and send him a hundred
thousand dirhams.

However, Harith refused the offer and wrote to the governor thus: “Since
I wanted to denounce the unlawful and rebuff the injustice, I avoided
this city for thirteen years. I do not seek the world and its pleasures
while you entice me towards it. I want you to act upon the Divine Book
and the Prophet’s *Sunnah* and to appoint virtuous governors upon the
people. Once you have done this, I shall join your army and fight your
enemies “ Nasr-ibn-Saiyyar, the governor of Khorasan refused his
request. Once again, Harith renewed his earlier call and amassed an
army. This time, Sefwan-ibn-Jahm joined him. Harith suffered defeat and
was killed in 128 A.H. Thereafter, Sefwan-ibn-Jahm was taken captive and
killed.[^25]

\* \* \*

Jahm was an active preacher and a die-hard zealot. His most vital
difference with the traditionists from the caliphate school was his
rejection of their belief on anthropomorphism (humanization of God) and
eternity of the Quran. Jahm had a sizeable following.[^26] The
traditionists from the caliphate school have refuted his beliefs in
their books and probably the oldest writing in this regard belonged to
Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal (died in 241 A.H.) named: الرد على الجهمية والزنادقة »
(Refutations against the Jahmiyah and the Zanadiqah).

Jahm was a contemporary of the founders of the Mu.’tazilah sect and some
of his views were similar to their creeds. However, it’s not clear which
sect influenced whom.[^27] We believe both sects have acquired a few of
their beliefs (like negation of anthropomorphism) from the students of
Ahlul Bayt school although they have described them vaguely.

Now, we shall mention a few points on the Mu.’tazilah and their
beliefs.[^28]

#### 2. The Mu’tazilah sect

The founder of the Mu.’tazilah sect was Wasel-ibn-Atha Gazzaal (died in
131 A.H.). His agnomen was Abu-Huzaifa, while he the freed slave of the
Arab tribe “Zabbah “ or “Makhzum “. He resided in Basra and attended the
lectures of Hasan-ibn-Yasaar Basri (died in 110 A.H.). Later, he quit
his lectures because of difference in opinion between the two on certain
issues related to belief.

“A’tizal” is the Arabic word for separation and “Mu’tazil” means
separatist.

Thus, the followers of this sect are called as “Mu’tazilah” and their
sect as

“A’tizal”.

Wasel-ibn-Atha dispatched emissaries to the west (Alexandria to Spain),

Khorasan, Yemen, Kufa and other Islamic cities for propagating the
“A’tizal” sect.[^29]

Amongst those who followed him was “Amr-ibn-Ubaid.’ (died in 142 A.H.)
who was the freed slave of the tribe of .‘Taiyem.’. He lived in Basra
and attended Hasan Basri’s lectures. However, Wasel-ibn-Atha influenced
him to leave Basri’s lectures and consequently he joined the “A’tizal”
sect.[^30]

##### The Mu’tazilah creed

Like the Jahmiyah, the Mu.’tazilah does not believe in human traits of
God. Besides, they believe that the Quran is created and not eternal.
They disagree with the Jahmiyah in the matter of compulsion
(predestination) and say that the actions of human beings are their own
actions and not that of God.[^31]

This sect thrived till the era of Mutawakkil, the Abbasid caliph,
launched a campaign to suppress and subjugate them.[^32] However, after
Mutawakkil’s death, Mu.’tazilah remained in constant conflict with the
Ash.’arite school and Ahlul Hadith for centuries and continuously held
debates with them. But, the Ash.’arites with patronage of the Ottoman
caliphate managed to eliminate the Mu.’tazilah. Now, we shall describe
the two sects of Ash.’arite and Ahlul Hadith.

#### 3. Ahlul Hadith (people of tradition)

Earlier, we mentioned Abu-Hanifa’s derogatory attitude towards the
Prophet’s hadith and developed a principle called: “Analytical reasoning
and preference” (for extracting the ordinances) which is in stark
contrast with the Prophet’s traditions.

We had also mentioned that the Jahmiyah and the Mu.’tazilah reject
(unlike the Ahlul Hadith) all traditions that describe God’s organs and
limbs and God’s movement from one place to another.

Consequently, intellectual disputes arose between the traditionists and
these sects. Over a period of time, the supporters of hadith
(traditions) took a firm step against these sects leading to the
formation of a new sect called “Ahlehadith” (people of tradition).

The most renowned figure in this front-line is Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal (died in
241 A.H.). He has written a book comprising of traditions called “Musnad
Ahmadibn- Hanbal”. He has other books to his credit too, the most
important among them being “Al-Radd ala-Jahmiyah” and “Faza’el
Ali-ibn-Abi Talib”.[^33]

The reason for Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal’s fame was his rejection of the notion
that the Quran is created. This belief had reached its peak during
Ma.’mun’s (Abbasid caliph) era where scholars of that time were forced
(through tortures) to believe that the Quran is created. After Ma.’mun
(died in 218 A.H.), Mu.’tasim (died in 227 A.H.) imprisoned
Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal for his belief that the Quran is eternal until he was
released during Wasiq’s (died in 232 A.H.) era. When Mutawakkil (died in
247 A.H.) came to power, Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal gained his favour because the
former believed in the eternity of the Quran. By then Ibn Hanbal had
achieved a legion of followers.[^34]

Soon after the death of Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal, dispute between the Ahlul
Hadith and Mu.’tazilah gained momentum. The Ahlul Hadith re-christened
themselves as .‘Ahle-*Sunnah*-wal-Jama’at’ which then turned into a
distinct and separate sect. In the meanwhile, the caliphs ordered the
translation and dissemination of the Greek philosophy among the Muslims
spreading the philosophical thinking and reasoning among them. This
deeply influenced the written and oral debates of the Mu.’tazilah and
led to the evolution of .‘Ilme-Kalam’ (theology) in the Muslim
theological centres. Inevitably, the Muhaddeseen (traditionists) were
further sub-divided and it was during this period that the Ash.’arite
sect branched out from the caliphate school.

#### 4. The Ash’arite sect

The Ash.’arite sect follows Abul-Hasan Ali-ibn-Ismail Ash.’ari (died in
324 A.H.). He was a descendant of Abu Musa Ash.’ari. He lived in Basra
for forty years and was a student of Jabba.’ee Mu.’tazila (died in 303
A.H.).[^35] Thereafter, just like the two founders of the Mu.’tazilah
sect (i.e.,Wasel-ibn-Atha and Amribn- Ubaid) who at first were among
Hasan Basri’s students but later separated from him, founded the
Mu.’tazilah sect, Ash.’ari too quit his Mu.’tazilah master[^36] and
exhorted the masses to refer to the hadith (like the traditionists).

Subsequently, Ash.’ari traveled to Baghdad and strived hard to repudiate
the Mu.’tazilah sect. However, in his debates he would not only employ
the traditions of the Muhaddeseen (traditionists) but would also seek
benefit from the Mu.’tazilah theology.[^37] In some cases, his beliefs
did not reconcile with the traditions in its apparent form. Therefore,
in-spite of reckoning himself to be the promoter of Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal’s
school of thought, all the traditionists (particularly, those following
Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal’s school) did not follow him. But since he attended the
classes of Abu-Ishaaq Maruzi, (a Sha.’faee jurisprudent), a group of
Sha.’faee scholars welcomed Ash.’ari’s beliefs, though another group
followed the Mu.’tazilah beliefs.

Thus the caliphate school got divided into two major sects in matters of
beliefs:

The Mu.’tazilah sect and the Ash.’arite sect. In fiqh (jurisprudence),
they followed the Hanafi, Maaleki, Sha.’faee and other legal
(jurisprudence) sects.

Later, the school of Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal too was included among the legal
(jurisprudence) sects of the caliphate school.

From the fourth century A.H. onwards, Muslims used Ilme-Kalam (theology)
in their debates. The constant polemics between the Ash.’arites and
Mu.’tazilites led to the formation of Ahlul Hadith from these two sects.

During this period, numerous jurisprudence sects spread in the caliphate
school.

Finally in 665 A.H., Malik Zaher Baibars al-Bunkukdari from
“Hukkam-Ma.’maleek “[^38] officially recognized the four schools of
Hanafi, Maaleki, Sha.’faee and Hanbali, however, they adhered to the
Ash.’arites in matters of belief. The verdict is still valid among the
followers of the caliphate school.[^39]

#### 4. The Salafiyah sect

The end of seventh century A.H. saw the rise of Ibn Taimiyah (died in
728 A.H.) from the Hanbali sect who rebelled against all other Muslim
sects. Although, he closed the door of Ijtihad (independent reasoning)
in the caliphate school, he claimed to be a Mujtahid (religious jurist)
himself.[^40]

His belief in anthropomorphism exceeded all bounds. Once, while stepping
down from the pulpit, he said that the way he was stepping down from
step to another God descends from the first heaven to the next heaven in
the similar manner.[^41] He considered the cry: O Muhammad and the act
of imploring help from the Prophet as unlawful.[^42]

Moreover, Ibn Taimiyah refuted the virtues of Ali (a.s.) to such an
extent that the scholars from the caliphate school consider this to be
the sign of his animosity towards Imam (a.s.). The scholars have said:
.‘Ibn Taimiyah is a hypocrite because; the Holy Prophet (S) once
addressed Ali (a.s.) as such: “Nobody will hate you except the hypocrite
“.[^43]’

On several occasions, the scholars from the caliphate school from
Damascus, Cairo and Alexandria held debates with him and adjudged that
he should be imprisoned. At times, they would ask him to recant his
beliefs[^44] and repent. After Ibn Taimiyah’s death, his followers
honoured him with the title of Shaikh-ul-Islam (chief of the Muslims)
and called themselves as the Salafiyah i.e., the sect that follows the
Salaf (ancestor). According to them, Salaf includes the companions,
disciples of companions and a few traditionists from the first, second
and third century A.H. like Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal.

The Salafiyah sect is very harsh in their behaviour towards other
Muslims. They consider themselves as believers and pious and all other
Muslims (from third century onwards) as deviators and heretics.[^45]

#### 5. The Wahabiyah sect

Th twelfth century witnessed the movement of Muhammad-ibn-Abdul Wahab
(died in 1207 A.H.) who was a staunch believer in the Salafiyah creed.
He launched an unabated bloodletting spree against the Muslims and
renewed Ibn- Taimiyah’s call more intensely than even Ibn-Taimiyah could
manage to do it. His followers were branded as the “Wahabiyah “.

According to Muhammad-ibn-Abdul Wahab, visitation of graves is heresy;
seeking intercession from the Prophet after his demise is perdition and
the cry: O Muhammad and imploring help from the Prophet is polytheism.
According to him, all Muslims from the third century onwards save
Ibn-Taimiyah’s followers are polytheists. He adds: ‘Polytheism of our
times is more intense than the polytheism that prevailed during the era
of paganism..’[^46]

The Wahabi sect differs from the Salafiyah sect in three respects:

1. Their intense hostility against the Holy Prophet.

2. Their belief that a Muslim’s blood is lawful until he accepts
Wahabism or according to them, quits polytheism and accepts monotheism.
For this reason, they presume the Muslim lands to be the land of the
polytheists and the Wahabi lands and territories to be Islamic lands.

3. Their belief that God would forgive all their sins and would bestow
them the Paradise regardless of the magnitude of their sins.

During my pilgrimage to Mecca on 10 Safar, while holding discussions and
debates with various classes of people from the Wahabi sect, I noticed
the above three points in their deeds and words. I investigated the
cause for such a belief and derived the following conclusion:

1. Regarding their intense offences against the Holy Prophet, a few of
my observations have already been explained in the previous discussions.
They reckon the Prophet’s blessed corpse to be decayed and decomposed
like all other corpses hence they refrain from showing any reverence to
him after his death or give any distinction to the Prophet’s grave over
the graves of other human beings!

Author says: The reason of such a notion is the result of thos
fabricated traditions wherein the Prophet’s position is shown lower than
even an ordinary man.[^47] Similarly, the false traditions that have
been attributed to the Holy

Prophet wherein he says:

‘O Allah, do not allow my grave to become an idol. O Allah, curse those
tribes that have converted their prophet’s graves into mosques..’

That this hadith is fabricated has already been explained in Vol: 1 of
“Ma’lem al-Madrasatain “ in the chapter concerning

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الخلاف حول البناء على قبور الانبياء
  </p>
</blockquote>

About their belief regarding the permissibility of killing the Muslims,
we have already discussed before, the reason for such an idea which is
also reflected in their speeches, writings and deeds.

About their belief that God would forgive all their sins and they would
not be sent to Hell, I would like to narrate an incident which I had
witnessed personally.

The pilgrims to the House of Allah would relate to me about the
indecencies practiced by the Wahabi people in the two Holy shrines. When
I heard some of these incidents for the first time, a shiver went down
my spine. Subsequently I personally witnessed them committing sinful
acts in reckless manner. What surprised me was that they believed that
such acts were sin, yet they indulged in it shamelessly. I was curious
to find out the cause for such a wanton behaviour.

Finally, I found the answer during one of my visits to the Khif mosque.
I heard a Saudi preacher delivering a sermon on the subject concerning
polytheism. He enumerated the various types of polytheism practiced by
the non-Wahabi sects such as the very utterance, ‘O messenger of Allah,
making a vow for those in grave, etc etc.…. At the end of his speech,
while going into a state of ecstasy, he said: The Prophet said: “Allah
says, ‘O My slave! You may indulge in sins to the extent you want! You
may fill the world with sin, but do not become a polytheist. I will
forgive all your sins and consider them as insignificant; you only avoid
becoming a polytheist![^48]

While narrating this hadith, I found the preacher, as if recalling some
of his sins and experiencing a feeling of joy on the pulpit!

\* \* \*

##### History of Wahabism: Muhammad-ibn-Abdul Wahhab and the Sauds

Muhammad-ibn-Saud, the king of Dareeya in Najd, embraced the doctrine of
Muhammad-ibn-Abdul Wahhab in the second half of twelfth century A.H.
Later his son, Saud and his followers attacked the Muslim tribes under
the pretext of *Jihad* (Holy war). They killed Muslims, looted their
property and violated their rights; all in the name of Holy struggle in
the path of Allah.

Until this date, they have spilled so much of Muslim blood and plundered
their property that it was unprecedented in the Islamic history. The
last of their atrocities was in 1407 A.H., when they massacred more than
four hundred pilgrims during the Haj ceremony.

These aforementioned sects are the most prominent ones in the caliphate
school. Now, we shall discuss the sects and their differences from the
Ahlul Bayt school of thought.

Second Discussion: Unity in the Ahlul Bayt (as) School
------------------------------------------------------

### Preface

At the outset, it’s necessary to pay attention to the following five
issues:

1. Appointment of the prophet’s legatees.

2. Concealment of hadith.

3. Uprisings by followers of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) against the tyrant rulers

4. Consequences of appointment of prophet’s legatees and consequences of
concealment of hadith.

5. Recognizing Shi’a and Shi’ism.

A detailed explanation of these five issues

### A) Appointment of the prophet’s legatees

1. The duty of the prophets and their legatees is to inform the masses
of their religious obligations. Considering that the Muslims living
during the Prophet’s era needed to know the Imam after the Prophet, the
Holy Prophet (S) introduced Ali (a.s.) as his legatee on the very first
day of his call to Islam when he invited the Bani-Hashim to his house.

The Prophet repeatedly maintained this introduction of Ali until it
culminated on the occasion of Ghadir al-Khum. On the day of Khum, by
Divine order, the Prophet (S) introduced Ali (a.s.) as the “master of
the affairs “ (Waly al-Amr) before tens of thousands of Muslims.

2. The prophets are supposed to convey to the people their legal duties
after his death. Nevertheless, the Holy Prophet (S) too, introduced his
legatees and the “masters of the affairs “ after Ali-ibn-Abi Talib till
the day of judgement:

a) He conveyed the tidings about the advent of the Promised Mahdi and
that he would be the last Imam.

b) He explained that Imams would be twelve in number.

c) He introduced Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain (a.s.) as the two
Imams who would succeed the first Imam in the chain of Imamat.

d) He specified the names of each Imam through his elite companions
like, Jabir-ibn-Abdullah Ansari. Besides, in the writings delivered to
his first legatee, (Ali-ibn-Abi Talib) the names of Imams and prophecies
about their lives have been related in an elaborate manner.

It was not a widespread or universal announcement instead the Holy
Prophet (S) explained these things in an informal manner. Insha’Allah,
we will discuss the reason behind such an informal mention.

After the Prophet’s departure, each Imam, on his part, would introduce
his successive Imam to their followers. They would also convey tidings
about the advent of the Promised Mahdi and to a few followers, even
mention the names of rest of the Imams.

### B) Concealment of hadith

#### In the Caliphate school

Earlier, we had discussed that until the end of the first century A.H.,
the Caliphs had prevented the recording of the Prophet’s hadith.
However, the scholars from the caliphate school have managed to conceal
the Prophet’s hadith until the end of 7-century A.H in various
ways.[^49]

#### In the Ahlul Bayt (as) school

Due to killings, tortures and imprisonment of the Ahlul Bayt and their
followers, the followers of Ahlul Bayt always practicing taqiya
(dissimulation) except during the end of Imam Baqir’s era and the
beginning of Imam Sadiq’s era. Which is why they could not preach the
Prophet’s *Sunnah* openly that had been entrusted to them.

### C) Uprisings by followers of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) school

In the school of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and their followers, two types of
uprisings took place against the tyrant governments:

- Uprising for the sake of enjoining goodness and forbidding the evil.

- Uprising in the name of Mahdawiyyah.

In the series of uprisings of the first category, we know the uprising
by the chief of the martyrs, Imam Husain (a.s.). In his will to
Muhammad-ibn-Hanafia, he described the intention behind his revolt as
follows:

“Indeed I have set out only for the purpose of rectifying the nation of
my grandfather. I wish to enjoin the good and forbid the evil “

Imam Husain never exhorted the people to swear allegiance to him. So,
his uprising was not for the purpose of attaining the caliphate and
forming a government. This was the first and the most manifest example
of uprising of the first kind.

Regarding the uprising of the second type, we may mention the uprising
undertaken by Muhammad-ibn-Abdullah from the progeny of Imam Hasan
(a.s.). The purpose of this rebellion becomes evident from the reply
which Imam Jafar Sadiq (a.s.) gave to Abdullah when the latter asked
Imam to swear allegiance to his son Muhammad. Imam (a.s.) replied:

“If you imagine your son is the same Mahdi then, you are wrong. Besides,
this era is not the era of Mahdi. However, if you desire that he revolts
due to his zeal for Allah’s sake and enjoins goodness and forbids the
evil, then by Allah, we shall not abandon you while you are our elder
and we shall swear allegiance to your son in this affair “[^50]

This uprising was one instance of uprising by the descendants of Imams
under the guise of the Promised Mahdi.

From the remarks of Imam Husain (a.s.) concerning his own uprising and
the remarks of Imam Jafar Sadiq (a.s.), it appears that the Prophet’s
legatees considered as correct, only those uprisings that took place
with the aim of enjoining good and forbidding the evil.

### D) The effect of appointment of the legatees and effect of concealment of hadith

Due to the Prophet’s propagation, all the residents of Medina and all
the companions were fully aware about the identity of Imam Ali (a.s.),
Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain (a.s.). After Imam Husain’s martyrdom
on the hands of caliph Yazid and subsequently, the destruction of the
Ka.’ba by the same caliph, the mistake of the caliph’s appointment
through allegiance of the people had become clear. Thus, after Imam
Husain’s martyrdom, there remained no choice for the Muslims, but to
accept the chain of Imamat.

Since Imam Husain (a.s.) had entrusted his heritages to Umm-Salma before
setting off on journey to Mecca and Iraq and later Imam Sajjad (a.s.)
had collected the same in Medina, it was not difficult for anyone in
Medina to recognize the successor of Imam Husain and the Imam of his
time.[^51]

After having briefly discussed the consequences of appointment of the
legatees by the Prophet (S), we will now discuss the negative effect of
concealment of the Prophet’s hadith.

The caliphs had prevented the propagation of the Prophet’s hadith,
particularly the spread of traditions concerning the Prophet’s legatees
and the advent of the Promised Mahdi, especially the ones which conveyed
tidings of his establishing justice and equity in the earth after it was
filled with oppression and tyranny.

These traditions were in such a large number that the offspring of Imams
and the Prophet’s cousin (the Bani-Abbas) gathered in Medina to swear
allegiance to Muhammad-ibn-Abdullah as the Promised Mahdi. Later, Imam
Jafar Sadiq (a.s.) informed them of their error.

Although recognition of each of the Prophet’s legatee was clear to a few
elite, it could not remain apparent for the general public after the era
of Imam Baqir (a.s.).

### E) Recognition of Shi’a and Shi’ism

**For recognizing Shi’ism, it’s first necessary to recognize Islam**

Islam is to have faith in monotheism (Divinity and Lordship) followed by
faith in all the prophets till the last of them; faith in the Islamic
commandments accompanied with sincere intention of acting upon them;
belief in the Prophet’s *Sunnah*; belief in physical resurrection, the
reckoning of deeds, reward and punishment on the Day of judgement.[^52]

Shi’ism is a school wherein its followers, in the era soon after
Prophet, accept these beliefs and commandments from the Prophet through
his successors—the Imams from Ahlul Bayt; and they follow the Prophet
and Imams. The condition for following the Imams from Ahlul Bayt during
Imam Husain’s era is to recognize and accept the three Imams; and
similarly during Imam Sadiq’s era, to recognize the six Imams.

The same rule prevails until the time of the Promised Mahdi (a.j.t.s.)
and during his time, a Shi’a is one who recognizes the twelve Imams and
follows them all.

Now, we will discuss a few examples of the way the Prophet (S)
introduced his legatees after him as well as the manner in which each
legatee would appoint his own immediate successor. We shall also discuss
the result of these methods of appointment.

#### First example: The Holy Prophet (S) introduces Imam Baqir (a.s.)

The Prophet (S) introduced Imam Baqir (a.s.) in his lifetime as can be
seen from the following tradition related by Jabir:

(i) Jabir-ibn-Abdullah Ansari would sit in the Prophet’s mosque wearing
a turban on his head[^53] and would cry out: “O Baqir! O Baqir “[^54].
By this act, Jabir, the only surviving companion of the Prophet, wanted
to attract the attention of the people who would come from far flung
areas for performing the Haj rites.

(ii) The people would say: Jabir speaks in delirium! (I.e. old age has
turned him feeble-minded). Jabir would reply: Nay, I swear by Allah,
I.’m not speaking in delirium but I heard the Prophet saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنك ستدرك رجلا مني، اسمه اسمي وشمائله شمائلي. يبقر العلم بقراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You will (live to) see a man from me; his name will be my name and his
character will be like my character. He will split the knowledge and
unfold it “

This was the reason for my utterances and you heard it.[^55]

Another important point in this hadith that calls for attention is that
the Holy Prophet (S) refers to Imam Baqir (a.s.) as: *a man from me*.
Earlier, we had discussed about this expression and concluded to mean:
‘His task in propagating Islam is the same as mine.’

(b) Jabir would also walk down the streets of Medina and cry out: “O
Baqir! O Baqir! “ Once again, the same conversation would take place
between him and the people in Medina.[^56]

#### Second example: Imam Sajjad (a.s.) introduces Imam Baqir (a.s.)

Before his demise, Imam Sajjad (a.s.) handed over the books of Imam Ali
(a.s.) and the armoury of the Holy Prophet (S) to Imam Baqir (a.s.).
When Imam Sajjad (a.s.) passed away, Imam Baqir’s brothers approached
him and claimed their share in these books and the armoury. This dispute
gained prominence in Medina thus the inhabitants of the entire city
heard that the books that were written by Imam Ali (a.s.) himself in his
own hand-writing were now in the possession of Imam Baqir (a.s.)

\* \* \*

Similarly, the Prophet (S) and subsequently the Imams from Ahlul Bayt,
(a.s.) conveyed the matter of executorship [until Imam Baqir (a.s.)] to
all the companions and people of Medina.

However, after Imam Baqir (a.s.), the events took a different course and
situation changed for the rest of the Imams until the Promised Mahdi
(a.s.). The reason:

When caliph Manthur received news of Imam Sadiq’s demise, he wrote a
letter to the governor of Medina: “Kill whosoever he has appointed as
the legatee (wasi). “ The governor of Medina replied: “He has appointed
five people as his legatee. They are: 1) The caliph himself, 2) The
governor of Medina, 3) & 4) his two sons Abdullah and Musa and 5)
Hamidah, mother of Musa.

The caliph said: They cannot be killed.[^57]

Thus, it’s evident that in the era after Imam Sadiq (a.s.), his
successor would have been killed if publicly declared. Thus the duty
entrusted to him by Allah in guiding the people and safeguarding Islam
would have remained unfulfilled. After Imam Baqir’s era, the other
method of appointment of Imams was as follows:

The Imam would introduce the next Imam only to the elite among the
Shi.’as.[^58]

Thereafter, on the people’s request for recognizing the Imam of their
time, Allah would smoothen the way until the Imam of the time gained
prominence amongst friends and foes. In order to protect the Imams
against the hostile attitude of the ruler, it was essential to be
discreet in the announcement of their successors.

Haroon al-Rashid summoned Imam Kazim (a.s.) from Medina to Baghdad and
imprisoned him. Ma.’mun ordered relocation of Imam Ridha (a.s.) from
Medina to Khorasan and kept him under surveillance in the pretext of
making him his heir apparent. Similarly, Imam Javad (a.s.) was escorted
to Baghdad; Imam Ali an-Naqi (a.s.) and Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) were
summoned to Samerra. In short, every Imam was kept under vigilance of
the caliphs right till the end of their Holy lives.

What reason could the caliphs give for treating these Imams in such
manner?

Wasn.’t it that they were aware that these personalities are the Imams
of the Shi.’as?!

This matter was clear for the people of Medina and the people residing
in the ruling capital wherein Imam was either imprisoned or kept under
vigilance. This was more so after the people used to witness Imams.’
debates and discourses and saw their pious ways of life (seerah).

Concerning those living in faraway cities,[^59] they too could clearly
perceive this matter by inquiring from the citizens of Medina and from
the surviving companions and their disciples.

\* \* \*

While Imam Sadiq’s last will over the matter of Imamat remained a secret
for the caliphate organisation and kept them confused, it did not create
any sort of doubt for the Shiites. Rather, the matter became clearer for
them:

When the Shiites in Kufa were informed about the demise of Imam Sadiq
(a.s.), Abu Hamza Thomali asked the informer: ‘Did Imam appoint anyone
as his legatee?.’ He replied: .‘Yes, his two sons, Abdullah and Musa as
well as caliph Manthur. The informer had hardly finished that Abu Hamza
laughed and said: All praise is to Allah Who has guided us; Imam has
made us aware about the state of his eldest son; and guided us towards
his youngest son (Musa-ibn-Jafar) and kept concealed a great affair.

When asked about his comment, Abu Hamza explained thus: By nominating
his younger son along with his elder son, Abdullah, he has given us an
indication that his elder son is not eligible for the Imamat. Instead he
had conveyed that by referring to his younger son, that he is the Imam
and the successor. When he mentioned the caliph he clearly indicated
that he want to be secretive about his true legatee. Now, if Manthur
will inquire about Imam Sadiq’s successor and legatee, he would be told:
You are his legatee.[^60]

Incidentally, Imam Sadiq (a.s.) disclosed Imamat of Musa-ibn-Jafar
(a.s.) to the elite among the Shiites prior to his departure from this
world.[^61]

Such an event was not hidden from someone like Abu Hamza. By this
explanation, Abu Hamza wanted to dispel any doubt concerning Imam
Kazim’s succession and Imam Sadiq’s (a.s.) intentions in defeating the
designs of Manthur.

We will now focus our discussion on the differences among the followers
from the Ahlul Bayt school.

### Differences amongst the followers from the Ahlul Bayt school

The differences attributed to the followers of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) are
not insignificant in most cases.

Let us recount the sects they claimed that appeared during the lifetime
of the Imams and then review the disputes that arose during the major
occultation.

#### 1) Saba’eeya

This is the first sect attributed to Shiaism. In the three volumes of
the book “Abdullah-ibn-Saba “, we have proved that such a sect did not
exist in the first place. Rather, it had only an imaginative existence
in the minds of malicious authors who wrote books about Milal wan Nihal
(stories about nations and cultures) and later claimed their own books
to be the documentary evidence of existence of the sect.

#### 2) Kaisaniya

Kaisaniya was ascribed to Kaisan. According to a group of writers on
Milal wan Nihal, Kaisan was the freed slave of Imam Ali (a.s.).[^62]

According to another group, Kaisan is none other than Mukhtar Thaqafi
and the Kaisaniya sect is attributed to him.[^63]

According to yet another view, Kaisan was one of the names of
Muhammadibn- Hanafia and this sect is attributed to him.[^64]

##### The Kaisaniya belief

Numerous contradictory claims have been made about the Kaisaniya belief.
We can summarize them as such:

They were the followers of Muhammad bin al-Hanafia (died in 81 A.H.) and
they considered him to be the Promised Mahdi. Mukhtar Thaqafi (died in
67 A.H.) was one of his followers and has claimed the prophethood for
him.

It was also claimed that the Kaisaniyas believed that the Imamat after
Muhammad bin al-Hanafia was transferred to his son Abu-Hashim (died in
98 or 99 A.H.) who in turn transferred the leadership to Muhammad bin
Ali bin Abdullah bin Abbas (died in 124 or 125 A.H.). After Muhammad,
the Imamat was transferred to his son Ibrahim and then to the two
Abbasid caliphs, Saffah and Manthur[^65] who set up the Abbasid
caliphate.

As per this view, Kaisaniya was one sect from Shiaism which established
a Sunni caliphate lasting for five hundred years!!

Naturally questions arise:

- Finally, who amongst the three figures was the real Kaisan?

- Except for the writers on Milal wan Nihal, has any other writer
attributed to Hazrat Ali (as) any freed slave by the name of Kaisan?

- Muhammad bin al-Hanafia, son of Imam Ali (as), is a famous figure and
his biography is recorded in all the books on .‘Rijal.’ (distinguished
men) and books on hadith and seerah (life-history).

Barring the books on Milal wan Nihal, has anybody mentioned anywhere
that Kaisan was the title given to Muhammad bin al-Hanafia?!

The same is true for Mukhtar too!

It was much easier for these scholars from the caliphate school to have
said that Kaisan, the founder of the Kaisania sect was actually a jinn.
This is because it wouldn.’t be easy for someone to disprove a creature
like jinn. Just as they have attributed the killing of Sa.’d bin Ebadah
to jinn and said, “The jinns have killed Sa.’d. His killers were from
jinn and not men! “[^66]

Thus, like the Saba.’eeya sect, the Kaisaniya sect is only a imaginative
creation on the part of the authors of Milal wan Nihal.

##### The True story

After the martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s.), a group among the lovers of
Ahl albayt gathered in Kufa for seeking vengeance for Imam’s blood and
they named themselves as the Tawwabeen. In 65 A.H., they waged a war
against the Syrian army headed by Ibn Ziyad and got killed.

In the following year, Mukhtar-ibn-Ubaid Thaqafi took vengeance for
Imam’s blood by revolting against Ubaidullah-ibn-Ziyad in Kufa. In this
battle, Ibn Ziyad and seventy thousand Syrian soldiers were killed.[^67]
Moreover, Mukhtar killed all of Imam Husain’s murderers like
Omar-ibn-Sa.’d, Shimr and others and dispatched their severed heads to
Medina as a gift for Imam Sajjad (a.s.).[^68]

In the meanwhile, Abdullah-ibn-Zubair claimed the caliphate in Mecca and
sought allegiance from the people. Muhammad-ibn-Hanafia refused to swear
allegiance to him. Abdullah imprisoned Muhammad-ibn-Hanafia and his near
ones in a mountain pass named Aarem in Mecca.

Abdullah piled up firewood at the mouth of this mountain pass and
threatened to burn, Muhammad-ibn-Hanafia and his relatives, alive if
they refused to pay allegiance to him within the stipulated period.
Muhammad sent someone to Kufa and sought Mukhtar’s help. Mukhtar
dispatched four hundred men and eventually, freed Mukhtar and his nears
ones from the captivity.[^69]

Thereafter, in 67 A.H., Abdullah dispatched an army headed by his
brother Ma’sab-ibn-Zubair to confront Mukhtar. In this battle, Mukhtar
was defeated and finally killed.

Mukhtar had killed a great number of men from the army of Bani-Ummayad.
Similarly, he had killed the tribal chiefs and their relatives from Kufa
(who had massacred the prophet’s progeny in Karbala under the leadership
of Ibn Ziyad). Consequently, after Mukhtar’s death, the survivors of
Mukhtar’s victims, who now possessed the power and pen, said and wrote
whatever they liked against Mukhtar. Later, these were recorded in the
books of history and in Milal wan Nihal

Regarding Muhammad-ibn-Hanafia, the truth is that he died without
staking any claim to the Imamat. Thus, the allegation that he
transferred the Imamat to his son Abu-Hashim and he to others proves
baseless.

Since there was a restriction on the spread of the Prophet’s traditions,
the concept of Mahdawiyyah was vague in those days. As explained
earlier, the Bani- Hashim who had gathered to swear allegiance to
Muhammad-ibn Abdullah were also uncertain on this issue until Imam Jafar
Sadiq (a.s.) enlightened them.

Therefore, after Imam Husain’s (a.s.) era, it is likely that a few
individuals must have recognized someone as the Promised Mahdi until
they were corrected by the Imam of their time.

About Mukhtar, it can be said that the exigencies of war may have
compelled him to use equivocal statements and references for
Muhammad-ibn-Hanafia or Imam Sajjad (a.s.). It is also likely that he
must have heard and known the prophecies (through the Imams) about his
own revolt against the Bani-Umayyad and killers of Imam Husain (a.s.).

In neither case, the imaginations of a few individuals about
Muhammad-ibn-Hanafia and the sayings of Mukhtar (assuming he ever said
anything) can be taken as a sectarian view in Islam and Shiaism. Which
means that no sect by the name of Kaisaniyah ever existed in history
except in minds?

#### 3) Gharabiyah

About the Gharabiyah, it is said:

“Gharabiyah are a group who believe that Allah sent Gabriel to Ali
(a.s.) but Gabriel made an error of judgement and instead approached
Muhammad (S), and gave him the revelation. This error was because
Muhammad resembled Ali in appearance! And they have said that Muhammad
and Ali were more alike than even two crows or two flies. Similarly,
they believed that Ali is Allah’s messenger and Ali’s sons are the
prophets!

This group advises its followers to curse the creature with wings i.e.,
Gabriel!

The infidelity of this group is more condemnable than the infidelity of
the Jews!

The Jews asked the Messenger of Allah (S): Who brings to you God’s
revelation? The Prophet replied: Gabriel. They said: We do not like
Gabriel because he is the carrier of chastisement. They further said:
Had Meekaeel, who is the carrier of mercy, brought revelation to you, we
would have brought faith in you without the least hesitation. “

Thus, though the Jews disbelieved the Prophet (S) and bore enmity with
Gabriel, they did not curse Gabriel; they only imagined Gabriel to be
the angel of chastisement and not mercy.

But, the Gharabiyah from the tribe of Ra.’fiza, curse Gabriel and
Muhammad (S)! And the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كَانَ عَدُوًّا لِّلَّـهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَجِبْرِيلَ
وَمِيكَالَ فَإِنَّ اللَّـهَ عَدُوٌّ لِّلْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever is the enemy of Allah and His angels and His apostles and
Gabriel and Meekaeel, so surely Allah is the enemy of the unbelievers. “
[Qur’an, 2:98]***

According to this verse, the one who bears grudge and enmity with some
of the angels is an unbeliever and whoever is labeled as an unbeliever
by Allah, can no longer be called a Muslim.[^70]

They name such vain discourses as scholastic discussions! The writers of
Milal wan Nihal have falsely attributed some more of such fancy sects to
the Ahl albayt school. The motive becomes obvious if we compare these
with the sects that have appeared and still continue to exist in the
caliphate school.

A Comparative Analysis of the Sects Ascribed Towards The Ahlul Bayt School And The Sects of the Caliphate School
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the caliphate school, the Ash.’arite, Mu.’tazilah and Salafiya sects
dominate in matters of belief while the Hanafia, Malikiya and
Sha.’fieeya sects are followed in matters of jurisprudence. The scholars
of their respective sects have recorded their sect’s views on beliefs
and precepts and rationalized their authenticity with great pride.
Besides, each of these scholars has researched the history, origin, and
the classification of scholars of their respective sects.[^71]

For instance, the history of the Asharite including its founder, the
date of foundation, the year of birth and death of its founder has been
recorded in detail. Besides, his views have been extensively recorded
and are unanimously accepted by all the scholars.

Similarly, the lineage, death and writings of scholars who emulated the
founder of this school are also known and recorded and made available to
the common readers. A glance at these is sufficient to know everything
about the Asharite sect. In the scholastic discussions, the correct
method for recognizing any sect is to refer to the writings of the
scholars of that sect. It is through these that the concerned sect can
be appreciated or criticized.

Let us have a look at those sects that have been falsely attributed to
the Ahl albayt school by the caliphate school:

### 1) The Saba’eeya sect

They claim Abdullah-ibn-Saba is the founder of this sect. There are
several unanswered questions in this regard.

Did Saba, father of Abdullah, descended directly from the heaven or did
he have a father at all? If he had a father, what’s his name? What is
his lineage? Is there any example of the writings of Abdullah-ibn-Saba?

Did the Prophet’s companions like Abu-Zar and Ammar or the disciples of
companions like Malik-Ashtar and Muhammad-ibn-Abi Bakr who were alleged
to have to belong to Saba.’eeya sect have themselves ever said: We are
from the Saba.’eeya!

Is there any writing from the Saba.’eeya sect or even from Ammar,
Abu-Zar, Hujr bin Adi and Sa’sah bin Sauhan? Or whatever is available is
actually the creation of their enemies, which was written after their
death, and those pious men did not have the least knowledge about the
existence of such sect?

### 2) The Kaisaniya sect

Was Muhammad-ibn-Hanafiya himself ever called Kaisan with whose name
this sect is referred? Or was the freed slave of Ali (a.s.) known as
Kaisan? If no then what was the name of this freed slave?

Who are the Kaisaniyas? Who has claimed to be Kaisan? Is there any
documentary evidence at all about this sect except whatever has been
written by the enemies of Mukhtar?

### 3) The Gharabiya sect

Who was the founder of the Gharabiya sect? When and where did he live?
Who staked a claim to the title of Gharabiya? And who has claimed to
have seen or met the mysterious Gharabiya?

Apart from the imagination of certain prejudiced writers and historians
did this sect exist at all?

Such was the difference between the sects falsely attributed to Shaiism
and the sects that existed and still continue to exist in the caliphate
school!

Amongst the sects attributed to Shiaism, only two sects, actually
existed Ismailiyah and Zaidiyah.

### 4) Zaidiyah

The Zaidiyah is a sect among the Muslims and it follows
Zaid-ibn-Ali-ibn-Husain. In 121/122 A.H., Zaid-ibn-Ali had traveled to
Syria where he felt offended by the then Umayyad caliph, Hisham bin
Abdul-Malik and his governor in Kufa. Both of them also slandered the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Angered at the humiliation and encouraged by the
support of the citizens of Kufa, who pledged allegiance to him, Zaid
revolted against the governor of Kufa and got martyred.[^72]

After him, Yahya, son of Zaid revolted in 125 A.H. against the Umayyad
caliph in Khorasan and was maryrted in the city of Juzjan.[^73]

The uprising undertaken by both Zaid and Yahya were for the sake of
enjoining the good and forbidding the evil (Amr bil-Ma’fuf and Nahy
an-Munkar).[^74]

After the martyrdom of Zaid and Yahya, a group emerged who claimed to be
the followers of Zaid and became famous by the name of Zaidiyah sect.
Unlike the Shiaites, this group does not believe that Allah has
appointed the Imams nor that the Prophet has propagated this matter to
the people on divine commands.

Rather, they believe that after Imam Ali (a.s.), whoever from the
progeny of Ali and Fatimah (a.s.) revolts with the sword becomes the
Imam of the Muslims.[^75]

Thus, the Zaidiyah are common with the Sunnis in their belief that Allah
has not appointed an Imam for the Muslims. In legal provisions (Ahkam)
too, they follow Abu-Hanifa, the Imam of one of the Sunni schools of
jurisprudence. The reason they follow Abu-Hanifa is because he had given
a verdict in support of the uprising of Muhammad and Ibrahim against
Manthur, the Abbasid caliph.

Moreover, he had also urged the people to give their support to them.
Their peculiar beliefs raise the following questions:

\* If revolt against the government is the pre-requisite of Imamat, then
how will they explain the Imamat of Imam Ali, Imam Hasan and Imam Husain
(a.s.) when they were kept confined to their houses? Did Imam Hasan
(a.s.) cease to be the Imam after his signing the peace treaty with
Muawiya?

\* How will they explain the Imamat of Imam Sajjad and Imam Baqir (a.s.)
who never revolted against the caliphs and never possessed the reins of
government?

\* In the final analysis, how can they ever follow Abu-Hanifa and
consider him to be their Imam in fiqh (jurisprudence) and Ahkam
(ordinances) while he (i.e., Abu-Hanifa) never subscribed to their
principle in Imamat and did not recognize the Imams which Zaidiyah
accepted (i.e., Imam Ali and his two sons, Imam Hasan and Imam Husain).
Besides, he considered the caliphate of the three caliphs to be in order
and opposed the views of Zaid and his forefathers in matters of
jurisprudence and acted upon his own judgement!

If Zaid happened to meet them how will he react to their beliefs?
Anyway, the Zaidiyah have accepted partly the Sunni belief and a little
of Shi’a belief. Besides, they have added something of their own belief
too. They are neither Sunnis nor Shias; rather, they have formed a third
sect by the name of Zaidiyah. However, their beliefs and deeds
fundamentally differ with the belief and deed of Zaid, son of Imam
Sajjad and all other followers of the Ahlul Bayt school, while their
ideology is closer to the caliphate school.

#### Fathiyeh

This sect is attributed to Abdullah, son of Imam Jafar Sadiq (a.s.) who
was given the title “Aftah “.[^76] After the demise of Imam Jafar Sadiq
(a.s.), Abdullah was the eldest living son and his name was included
along with others in Imam’s will.

After his father’s death, Abdullah left open the door of his house and
kept a gatekeeper besides it. He sat over the uppermost portion of his
house and claimed the Imamat.[^77]

A few Shias approached him and asked a few questions related to Islamic
precepts. Abdullah gave them wrong answers. The Shias realized that he
was ignorant in the Islamic ordinances. Consequently, they approached
Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.).[^78]

After his father’s demise, Abdullah lived only for seventy days.[^79]
Practically it was not possible for him to set up a sect within this
short period and anyway which sect could have existed in his name during
that era.

### 5) Ismailiyah

When the sect was founded, the Ismailiyah sect believed in the Imamat of
the Imams until the sixth Imam, i.e., Imam Jafar Sadiq (a.s.) and
claimed that after Imam Sadiq (a.s.), the Imamat has been transferred to
his son, Ismail.[^80] For this very reason, they are known as six
Imamiah.[^81] Thereafter, they got divided into various sects with
diverse beliefs.

We shall now glance over the belief and history of this sect as follows:
Ismail to whom this sect is attributed died during his father’s
lifetime. After Ismail’s death, Imam Jafar Sadiq (a.s.) behaved in a
manner, which was unusual for an Imam. Amongst them, we may mention the
following:

When Ismail died, Imam (a.s.) gathered thirty of his Shias in his house.
Then, he addressed Davood, one of his companions as such: .‘O Davood!
Uncover his face. Then, he asked all the thirty men to look at Ismail’s
face carefully and he asked each of them: Is Ismail alive or dead?
Everybody replied: “He is dead “.

Then, he said: “O Allah, Thou be witness! “

Thereafter, he ordered that Ismail’s corpse be given the ceremonial
washing and then shrouded. Later, he said to Mufazzal: .‘O Mufazzal,
uncover his face. He repeated the same question again after asking the
people to look carefully at Ismail’s face. This surprised all of them
and they replied in an astonishing tone:

“O our master, he is dead “. Imam said: O Allah, Thou be witness! “

When Ismail was laid to rest on the niche, Imam (a.s.) said: .‘O
Mufazzal, uncover his face. Then, Imam (a.s.) said: .‘O people, have a
look. Is he alive or dead? They replied: He is dead, ‘O Wali (Friend) of
Allah. Imam (a.s.) said: .‘O Allah, Thou be witness! Certainly, the
people of falsehood shall doubt Ismail’s death..’

When Ismail’s corpse was covered with soil and his burial ceremony
completed, Imam (a.s.) once again said: Who is this dead man shrouded
and buried? All replied: He is your son, Ismail! Imam (a.s.) said: O
Allah, Thou be witness. “

Then, he caught hold of his son, Musa’s hand and said: “He is with the
truth and truth is with him.[^82]

In another tradition, it is related that, as per Imam Sadiq’s (a.s.)
command, the sentence: ksjfklsj flksjfklsjflks djfklsjflksjd (Ismail
bears witness that there is no god but Allah)[^83] was written at the
side of Ismail’s shroud. Following Imam’s instructions, he was washed
and shrouded. After Ismail was wrapped in the shroud, his face was
repeatedly uncovered and Imam would kiss his forehead, chin, and
throat.[^84]

During the funeral procession, the coffin was laid on the ground for
several times on Imam’s (a.s.) command. Each time, Imam (a.s.) would
push aside the shroud from Ismail’s face and look at him so that the
people would not doubt in Ismail’s death.[^85]

Moreover, it has been repeatedly narrated in several traditions that
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) sent some of his Shias to perform the Haj on behalf of
Ismail.[^86]

After Ismail’s death, Imam Sadiq (a.s.) summoned thirty of his eminent
Shias and gave order for uncovering Ismail’s face. He asked each of them
whether Ismail has died or is still alive! Everybody answered that
Ismail has indeed died!

Later, he gave orders for washing and shrouding Ismail and inscribing
the sentence “Ismail bears witness that there is no god but Allah “ over
the coffin. This was just to emphasize that this coffin bear the corpse
of Ismail. He repeated his action after shrouding. Several times
Ismail’s face was uncovered and he asked everybody to look once again at
Ismail’s face. Then, he asked: Whose corpse is this?

All of them replied, ‘He is your son, Ismail and he is dead!

Thereafter, during the funeral procession that was attended by more than
thirty people, he ordered for the corpse to be laid on the ground. He
removed the shroud and looked at Ismail’s face. He repeated this act
several times so as to attract the participant’s attention!

And after placing Ismail on the niche, he once again asked the people:
Whose corpse is this? All of them affirmed that it was Ismail’s corpse!
After completion of the burial ceremony, he once again asked: Who is he,
who has been washed shrouded and buried? All of them said in unison: He
is your son, Ismail!

Later, he contracted some of the Shias to perform the Haj on behalf of
Ismail.

Despite the best efforts of Imam (a.s.) to convince people of Ismail’s
death, a group asserted: “Whatever Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said is not
true! Ismail has not died! He has been living after Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
and he is the Imam after him. “

This group too should have been given the title of six Imamiah because,
they believed in the Imams till Imam Sadiq (a.s.), the sixth Imam. But,
they cannot be called as such! They are not six Imamiah; rather, they
are zero Imamiah.

They did not recognize any of the Imams before Ismail and did not accept
the sayings of any of the six Imams. They said: “Ismail continue to live
after Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and the Imamat was transferred to him. “ A few
amongst them said:

“After Ismail, the Imamat was transferred to his son, Muhammad. “

With the passage of time, this sect, (called as Ismaili or Ismailiyah),
got split from the Shias and the Imams of the Shias. Subsequently, they
splintered into various sects.

Amongst them, we may mention the Qarametah group that went on a killing
spree in Mecca and who stole the Hajar al-Aswad (black stone) from Holy
Kaaba until it got restored after several years by the Fatimid caliph in
Egypt.[^87]

Yet amongst them were the followers of Hasan Sabbah who lived in the
Alamut forts.….…and the other sub-sects, which exist until these days
are the Druze in Lebanon and Palestine and the Agha Khani sect,
scattered in various parts of the world. The Ismailiyah sect, since its
inception, was not a Shi’a sect for two reasons:

\* They opposed Imam Sadiq (as) and

\* Gradually, they deviated from Islam and even turned anti-Islam and
anti-Shi’a!

For better understanding of the Ismailiyahs, here is an example.

The example of Ismailiyah is like the example of Bani-Hunaifa and
Musailamah, the liar.

#### The story of Musailamah, the liar and Bani-Hunaifa

During the Prophet’s time, those Arab tribes that would accept Islam
would send a few of their representative to the Prophet for expressing
their faith and swearing allegiance to the Prophet (S). The Prophet in
turn would accept their profession of faith and offer them some gifts.
In Arabic terminology, these people approaching the Prophet are named as
“Wafd”

The Bani-Hunaifa tribe who lived in Yamamah[^88] sent a “Wafd “ on
behalf of their tribe to the Prophet for announcing their faith in
Islam. Amongst the “Wafd” from the tribe of Bani-Hunaifa, was
Musailamah, the liar.

According to one tradition, when the “Wafd” visited the Prophet (S),
Musailamah stayed back to look after the luggage and belongings of the
“Wafd”. Once in the Holy Prophet’s presence, the Prophet offered each
one of them some gifts. He also sent a gift for Musailamah and said:
Musailamah is no worse than you.

When the “Wafd” returned to Yamamah, Musailamah turned an apostate. He
claimed the prophethood and said: The Prophet said about me: ‘I’m not
worse than anyone of you. Thus, God has made me his partner in the
prophethood.’

Thereafter, in the Islam, which he introduced for the Bani-Hunaifa, he
declared the ‘salat.’ (prayers) as null and made drinking of wine and
fornication as lawful.

Like the western Islamicists, the Islam that Musailamah portrayed before
his tribe was approved and sought by the people of that time! The
Bani-Hunaifa accepted the prophethood of Musailamah, the liar.
Subsequently, Musailamah wrote a letter to the Prophet in the following
manner:

“From Musailamah, the messenger of Allah to Muhammad, the messenger of
Allah. Peace is to you! I have been made a partner with you in the
prophethood. Half of the land belongs to us (Bani-Hunaifa) and half of
the land is for the Quraish (i.e., the Prophet’s tribe). But the Quraish
wishes to infringe on our right.”

The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “From Muhammad, the messenger of Allah, to
Musailamah, the liar. Peace is to the one who follows the guidance. The
land belongs to Allah. Whosoever He wishes, will surely inherit it.
“[^89]

After the Prophet’s (S) demise, the Muslim army attacked Bani-Hunaifa at
Yamamah. In this fierce war in which thousands were killed from both
sides, Musailamah was killed and the Bani-Hunaifa were either killed or
taken as prisoners of war.[^90]

In this story, the Prophet (S) accepted the Islam of “Wafd “ from the
tribe of Bani-Hunaifa and presented them with gifts. He also accepted
Musailamah’s belief in Islam and offered him gifts too.

The Prophet’s conduct with Musailamah, the liar was similar to his
conduct with all other hypocrites (like, Abdullah-ibn-Abi for whom Sura
Munafiqun has been revealed). About the Prophet’s remark that, “he is no
worse than you “, perhaps the Prophet wished to say that he has accepted
Islam for the moment and his case is like your case where you have
accepted Islam now but would all turn apostates later.

Musailamah was one of the “Wafd” from Bani-Hunaifa, which had accepted
Islam and had received gifts from the Prophet (S). Under the
circumstances, they were all Muslims and formed a part of the Islamic
“Ummah” (nation). But, after Musailamah claimed the prophethood and the
Bani-Hunaifa followed him, all turned into renegades.

Thus, after this incident, one cannot accept them as a Muslim sect just
because in the past, they had approached the Prophet and the Prophet had
accepted their Islam and offered them gifts.

Therefore, we can neither name them as Musailamah sect or the
Bani-Hunaifa sect nor we can say that this sect had accepted Allah, His
messenger and the Islamic precepts and their difference with other
Muslims was only that they believed Musailamah to be a partner with the
Holy Prophet (S) in prophethood and their views differed with them in
matters like prayers, fasting and fornication! These are such issues
where nobody has said so far and rather, has no right to comment on them
on his own accord. The truth is that

Musailamah was far from Islam and a liar and someone who had falsely
claimed the prophethood. Thus, he and all his followers from
Bani-Hunaifa had turned apostates.

Similarly, the Ismailiyah who believed in the Imamat of the six Imams
until Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and thereafter in Ismail, followed by his son
Muhammad and others are like the example of Bani-Hunaifa who although
believed in the Holy Prophet (S) of Islam and the Musailamah’s
prophethod, they exited from Islam and ceased to remain Muslims.

The same is true about the Ismailiyah. The moment they said Ismail is
the Imam followed by Muhammad as Imam, they exited from Islam. Thus, one
cannot reckon them to be a Shi’a or a sect among the Shias. Besides,
considering that they kept themselves aloof from the Imams (a.s.) and
developed certain commandments contrary to the Islamic commandments
which gradually took them farther from Islam. Thereafter, one can
neither call them Muslims nor recognize them as a sect in Islam or a
sect among Shi’a.

### 6) Ghulat

Small groups emerged during the era of the Imams that made tall claims
about the Imams and invited the people towards themselves. Considering
that the Imams would condemn these groups in their statements and expose
their true faces, Shias and Sunnis had no doubt about the true identity
of such groups. Often, they would disappear after a while. Shahrestani,
(died in 548 A.H.) a renowned scholar from the caliphate school who
followed the Ashari in beliefs and the Shafei in jurisprudence writes in
his book “Milal wan Nihal”, chapter “Al-Ghaliyah”, about the Ghulat sect
and the polemics Imams had with them. Towards the conclusion, he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و تبرأ من هولاء كلهم جعفر بن محمد الصادق (رض) وطردهم و لعنهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Jafar-ibn-Muhammad-Sadiq (may Allah be satisfied with him) expressed
his disgust with all the aforesaid sects. He drove them out and cursed
them “[^91]

### Reason for Emergence Of Religious Sects

Before we conclude this discussion, we will briefly review the basic
reasons behind the emergence of sects in the human societies.

1- “Egoism “ is the most important motive behind man’s drive and mundane
activities. Often man strives to fulfill his carnal desires out of
eccentricity.

Perhaps, man’s most powerful attraction is his quest for power, combined
by his free will in achieving desires.

For achieving these two types of lusts, man wants to amass wealth.

Considering that man is an egoist, hunger for fame and popularity in the
society is also a part of his carnal desire. Consequently, man approves
and follows any social system that helps him in achieving the aim of his
carnal desires.

2- In Allah’s way of creation, mankind has been created in two forms:

- Man, as a leader.

- Man, as a follower

Man, as a leader is again divided into two categories. As Allah, the
Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أئمة يهدون بأمرنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Imams to guide by Our command “ (Qur’an, 21:73 & Qur’an, 32:24)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أئمة يدعون الى النار
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Imams who call to the fire” (Qur’an, 28:41)***

Man, as a follower is also of various types:

\* Those who by correct insight, follow such leaders who lead them to
perfection (leaders of the first type)

\* Those about whom Imam Ali (as) says:

\* “Those who run after every caller and bend in the direction of evry
wind “[^92]

3- Progress of true knowledge and insight in human societies as also
human ignorance and lack of culture among people plays an evident role
in the formation or disintegration of these sects.

Thus these factors help us understand the reason for the occurrence of
social disputes in the Islamic countries in the name of religion.

In all these groups, there existed people who loved power and
leadership. For gaining power and position, they exploited the “weak
mentality “ of a society and used such names and titles that were
accepted by the people of their time. They would also convey tidings
about rule and authority to others who, like them, were fond of ruling.
They would introduce a religion to the ignorant masses, which suited and
satisfied their carnal desires. In this manner, by attracting a group
around themselves, they would devise a sect under the name of that very
religion. Thereafter, the continuity or discontinuity of that sect
depended upon internal and external factors.

For instance, in the case of the Bahai sect, Husain Ali Baha initially
enjoyed the support of the Russian Czar government. After the Russian
revolution and downfall of the Czar government, Husain Ali and his son,
Abbas Afandi lived under the protection of the English government. At
present, the survivors of this sect enjoy the support of the U.S.A. In
every era, the leaders of this sect have acted as secret agents for the
powerful colonial government of their time and were it not for this
collusion, this sect would have perished long ago.

This example will help us to examine the cause of formation of the
social sects that came into existence as religious sects. Subsequently,
we can investigate the reason for the stability of some sects and the
destruction of few others.

#### Musailamah, the liar and Bani-Hunaifa

Bani-Hunaifa was inclined towards Islam because it had spread in the
Arabian Peninsula. This feeble-minded tribe had its existence in a
remote place at Najd. A man from this tribe claimed the prophethood and
recited for them a few Arabic prose and rhyme as revelation and then
said: “God has raised me from your tribe and made me a partner in
prophethood with Muhammad, from the Quraish. God favoured the Quraish
with half the land leaving the other half to you. Besides, He declared
the prayers (Salat) redundant for you and made adultery and wine
permissible to you.

Thus, he propounded a religion that made them the owners of half the
land and set them free in adultery and wine thereby fulfilling their
carnal desires and released them from the hardship of Salat (prayers).
Consequently, all the people of this tribe followed his religion en
masse. They devoted all their life on this path merely because it
satisfied their lust and carnal desires.

#### Ismailiyah

Similarly in the Ismailiyah sect also those who desired to hold the
reigns of government denied the death of Ismail. In the pretext of
acting as Ismail’s representative, they gained power and prominence
among the feeble-minded people.

Thereafter, their continued success depended on the ignorance of their
weak followers which they achieved by keeping their followers away from
the Imams (a.s.). Besides, they altered the Islamic injunctions in every
era and place, thus making it convenient for their followers in
fulfilling their carnal desires so much that they turned anti-Islam. In
the contemporary world, the Ba.’hai sect is following the same principle
and had joined hands with the imperialist powers.

#### Ghulat

The story of Ghulat is close to the story of the Ismailiyah sect. Some
of the contemporaries of Imam were overtaken by the desire to rule (like
Musailamah, the liar). Initially, they introduced themselves as Imam’s
representative. Thereafter, with the aim of introducing themselves as
prophet, they described certain divine attributes for the Imams.
Sometimes, their sensual desires exceeded all bounds and they introduced
themselves as God!

However, due to the Imams.’ constant efforts, the people did recognise
their true face. Consequently, their claim to Imamat, prophethood and
divinity were rendered ineffective and in most of cases it resulted in
their death. Regarding the sects attributed to the Ahlul Bayt school, we
shall review once again the following two points:

**(i) Uprisings by descendants of Imams.** Previously, we had divided
the uprisings by the Prophet’s descendants into two:

Uprising for the sake of enjoining good and uprising in the name of
Mahdawiyyah. It was also said that in the uprising undertaken by Imam
Husain, (which was progenitor of all uprisings for enjoining good), Imam
(a.s.) did not practise dissimulation. At all times, Imam’s slogan was
the one that he .wrote for the Bani-Hashim:

“Anyone who joins me shall be martyred and anyone who will desert me
will not achieve victory“

This was Imam’s slogan under all circumstances. On the other hand, the
descendants of Imam who would revolt for the sake of enjoining good
(like Zaid), would not communicate with the people in precise terms and
would adopt dissimulation. Mukhtar too, who revolted to avenge Imam
Husain’s blood, preferred dissimulation in speech?

This send confusing signals in the Islamic society concerning Imamat and
Mahdawiyyah, as they were unaware of the Prophet’s hadith on these
issues (due to the ban imposed by the ruling government from spreading
the Prophet’s hadith). Consequently, any Imamzadeh who would revolt from
a distant place would receive the support of any Muslim group that had
suffered injustice by the ruling government. For example, the support
Harith received during his revolt in Termez.

In all such uprisings, after the leader’s defeat, the people found
themselves on the crossroads again and hence it did not lead to
formation of a particular sect.

The only exception being Zaidiyah sect, which came into existence much
after Zaid’s failed revolution and martyrdom.

(ii) Groups that were confused in recognising their Imam Sometimes,
after the demise of one of the Imams, a few Shias who were unaware or at
the time of Imam’s demise was situated in far off places refused to
believe in the Imam’s demise. Thus they would practise caution until
they would become certain about the Imam’s demise and then would follow
the successive Imam.

The biographers of Milal wan Nihal have recorded these groups as a Shi’a
sect.

For example, a group that was uncertain about the demise of Imam Musa
Kazim (a.s.) and continued to believe in his Imamat even during the
period of Imam Ridha’s Imamat, was considered as a Shiite sect by the
writers of Milal wan Nihal, though this belief remained only for a few
days. The biographers have written detailed account of this group and
have termed them as ‘sabeeyah.’ i.e., seven-Imamiyah or .‘Waqefiyah.’.
They would conveniently ignore the group’s return to the mainstream.

The biographers have followed the same approach in case of some
Imamzadehs who claimed the Imamat for a brief while, like the Imamat of
Abdullah Aftah, which lasted merely seventy days. In this period, a
handful of Shias were confused and remained lost for a while. The
biographers would record the action of these few men as a sect among
Shias.

In fact, they were so zealous to enumerate sects in Shias that even if a
crow would have sat over the wall of an Imamzadeh’s and made a noise
they would have called him a Crow Sect and began to write a biography
for this sect!

### The Truth

During this era of confusion, if an impostor staked a claim of Imamat
from the Ahlul Bayt, then Imams ensured that he should not succeed and
his lie should be exposed. During the time when Imam Ridha (a.s.) was
designated as the heirapparent, all such fabrications were dealt in
debates of Imam (a.s.) which he had with the writers of Milal wan Nihal
in the caliphate court.

Thereafter, the successive Imams who became famous as Ibn Ridha, were
well known as the Shiite Imams among the Muslims. The ruling caliphs.’
behavior with them, their relocation from Medina to the government
capital in Baghdad and Samerra made their Imamat all the more clear.

During the tenure of Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.), the selection of special
representatives was initiated with the appointment of Uthman-ibn-Saeed.
This continued in the era of Imam Hasan Askari when Uthman acted as the
Ma.’rjae (religious authority) over all the Shiites holding the title of
special deputy.

Nevertheless, during the time of Imame Zaman too, initially Uthman was
Imam’s special deputy and the Ma.’rjae of all the Shiites. Before his
death, as per the instructions of Imam, Uthman-ibn-Saeed appointed his
son, Muhammad-ibn-Uthman-ibn-Saeed as Imam’s special deputy. After
Muhammad, Imam al-Zaman (a.j.t.f.) had two more deputies namely
Husainibn- Ruh and Ali-ibn-Muhammad Samiri.

During the time of Imams, no group got separated from the Shi’a sect
except the Ismailiyah. The Ismailiyah sect was not even a Shi’a sect as
they were against the Imams and later even turned anti-Islam. As regards
the Zaidiyah sect that emerged after Zaid’s martyrdom, the exact date of
its formation is not known. More so they are a Muslim sect and not a
sect from Shiaism.

Similarly, a mammoth task of compilation of .‘Usul’ or principles (that
comprised of four hundred or more principles) was completed during the
era of the Imams. Moreover other books on various subjects were also
compiled. The Prophet’s twelve legatees spread the Islamic insight and
knowledge among the Shiites to such an extent that all followed the
twelve Imams and all had faith in the occultation of Vali-Asr (a.j.t.f.)
and received through them, the Prophet’s *Sunnah*.

Let us have a look at the intellectual differences in the Ahlul Bayt
school during the period of major occultation.

Differences in the Ahle-bayt (as) school during major occultation
-----------------------------------------------------------------

We have discussed that Imams ensured that their Shias should not be
confused or suffer from mental distress. As a result of Imams efforts
and their followers.’ efforts two concepts had become evidently clear
for the Muslims after the twelfth Imam’s major occultation:

1- Everybody had commonly known the 12 Imams of the Shias, their names
and lineage.

2- The Shi’a beliefs (or rather the pure Islam) concerning ‘tafsir.’
(exegesis of Quran), the Prophet’s *Sunnah* and other Islamic sciences
that were explained by the Prophet’s twelve legatees were recorded by
their students in their books. Such compilations continued till the end
of the twelfth Imam’s minor occultation and were made available to all
the Muslims.

Of course, since the beginning of the twelfth Imam’s occultation until
his reappearance, there is no possibility of formation of a new sect in
Shi’ism, except the differences in comprehending the hadith from Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.). However, two diverse opinions have emerged, namely the
Akhbari and the Usuli.

### The Akbariyah and the Usuliyah

The Akbaris difference with the Usulis originated from the assumption
that the scholars of Usul have extracted some of the terms of Usul
(principles) from the caliphate school. Such an assumption has led some
of the traditionists from the Ahlul Bayt school to have a cynical
approach to “Ilme-Usul” (theology) and made them believe that all
matters related to “Ilme-Usul” has been transmitted from the caliphate
school. However, it is not correct except in few cases, they have made
use of terminologies from the caliphate school for the purpose of
deriving correct meaning.

For example, the term “Mujtahid” in the caliphate school has been
defined to mean someone who is allowed to legislate legal ordinances
according to his personal opinion.

But, in Ilme-Usul in the Ahlul Bayt school, this term applies to the one
who is an expert in extracting religious ordinances from the Book of
Allah and His messenger’s *Sunnah*. In other words, they mentioned a
“Faqih’, which is an Islamic term for a “Mujtahid”.

The only other similarity is that of traditionists from the caliphate
school, who consider traditions from only selected books of hadith to be
correct. Similarly, the scholars of Usul, too regard traditions from the
four books (Kafi, Man-la-Ya.’zur al-faqih, Tahzib and Estibsar) to be
authentic.[^93]

The method of our “Muhaddesin” has been to analyse one by one the terms
of Usool and then, based on solid proofs, reject all such cases that do
not agree with the insight of the Ahlul Bayt school and accept the rest.

Nonetheless, with regard to the books on hadith, the correct method is
to examine the chain of transmission and text of each and every hadith.
Any hadith that meets the criteria set by the Prophet (S) and his
legatees (a.s.) for a reliable hadith is accepted while the one fails to
meet the standards is rejected.

These were some of the instances of differences between the Akhbaris and
the Usulis. Occasionally, the differences of view among some of the
scholars from both sides are of individual nature and cannot be
considered to be the general view of the Akhbaris or Usulis.

This clearly indicates that the Akhbaris and Usulis are not two
different sects. Rather, they are followers of the same school and they
differ only in the method of extracting the ordinances from the Book and
the *Sunnah*. Besides, such a difference existed in the past and at
present there exists no separate group by the name of Akhbaris, they are
named as “Muhaddesin”.

Conclusion
----------

After the Prophet’s (S) demise, the Muslims were divided into two
groups: the caliphate school and the Ahlul Bayt (a.;s.) school. The
caliphate school claimed: After the Prophet’s demise, Allah and His
messenger left the leadership of the Ummah (nation) at the discretion of
the people. This school maintains that the caliphate till the last
Uthmani caliph (died in 1336 A.H.) to be in accordance with the Islamic
law.

They believe that the sources of Islamic Shariah (religious laws) are
the Quran, the Prophet’s *Sunnah* and the Ijtihad (independent
judgements) of the prophet’s companions (particularly, the independent
judgements of the first three caliphs). Soon after the Prophet’s demise,
they were ready to learn the Prophet’s *Sunnah* from anyone who claimed
to be the ‘sahabi’ i.e., the Prophet’s companion.

The Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) school believes: After the Prophet, Allah has
appointed twelve guardians to lead the Islamic Ummah and the Prophet (S)
has conveyed this matter to the Ummah in clear and lucid terms. This
school believes the true Islamic sources are the Quran and the Prophet’s
*Sunnah*. And after the Prophet’s demise, they receive the Prophet’s
*Sunnah* from his twelve legatees. This school also accepts narration of
traditions from the Prophet’s faithful companions.

Besides, during the last part of the 40 A H, one group separated from
these two schools. It branded the Muslims as infidels and polytheists
and attacked them with swords. This group was named the “Khawarij”.

Gradually, the caliphate school divided into various sects the most
famous among them being the Mu’tazilah, Asharite and Salafiya (in
matters of belief). The Wahabiya sect is an offshoot of the Salafiya
sect. And in matters of Ahkam (precepts), the most famous sects in the
caliphate school are the Malekiyah, Hanafiya, Shafiya and Hanbali sects.
As for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) school, their differences among the
followers were confined to only two stages: differences during the
Imams.’ lifetime and differences during the major occultation of the
twelfth Imam.

During the Imams.’ lifetime, occasionally few Shias were at loss to
understand the truth after their Imam’s demise. This was because they
had no access to the subsequent Imam and their knowledge about the
Prophet’s hadith and the hadith of his legatees was limited. This
uncertainty continued until a few learned among them would meet the Imam
and the issue would become clear for them. Besides, the Imams would
constantly strive to guide the Shias in matters of Islamic beliefs and
precepts.

During the era of the Imams (a.s.), nobody thought of propounding new
sect among the followers of this school. In fact, when the era of the
12th Imam began, all the Muslim sects were entirely familiar about the
twelve legatees by name, lineage and character. Besides, all the Islamic
sciences were recorded in books by the students of the Ahlul Bayt school
and were accessible to everyone.

Thus, the propagation of Imams was concluded and the period of major
occultation began. During the lifetime of the Imams (a.s.), no
controversial sects could raise its head among their followers because
of the diligence exhibited by the Imams. As for the Zaidiyah sect, they
barely acquired their creeds from the Ahlul Bayt school while a major
portion of their beliefs was extracted from the caliphate school. They
combined these together and formed the Zaidiyah sect. Thus, they are
neither Sunni nor Shi’a sect but rather form a third sect among the
Muslims.

As for the Ismailiyah sect, they are like the Bani-Hunaifa and the
followers of Musailamah, the liar who at first were Muslims but
following their belief that Musailamah has become a prophet like
Muhammad (S), they turned apostates. Thereafter, they no longer could be
recognised as a Muslim sect as they left the domain of Islam.

Similarly, the Ismailiyah sect too, after they believed in the Imamat of
the deceased Ismail, they exited from the domain of Shi’ism. Gradually,
by legislating certain laws contrary to the Islamic precepts, they
exited from Islam too. Thus, one cannot count them to be a sect among
the Muslims. The same holds true about the Ghulat where they cannot be
called Muslims.

As for the imaginary sects like the Sabaeeyah, Kaisaniyah and
Gharabiyah, the authors of Milal wan-Nihal have falsely attributed them
to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) school whereas such sects did not have any
existence at all in history. In this regard, we quote a famous saying:

“I am powerless against the liar who fabricates lies against me! “

This was the gist of differences between the followers of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) school during the lifetime of the Imams (a.s.). Even when the
major occultation of the twelfth Imam (a.j.t.f.) commenced, the names of
twelve Imams (a.s.) were so well known among the Muslim sects that
nobody could dare to claim the Imamat. Rather, the power-hungry
individuals could only claim the deputyship of the twelfth Imam, which
was concluded by Imam after the death of his fourth  
 special envoy. Under the circumstances, those who claimed the
deputyship were dismissed from Shi’ism and Islam like, the Ba.’hai sect
in Shiah and the Qadiyaniah sect in Sunnis.

The followers of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) school wrote such insightful and
comprehensive treatises and compiled books of hadith narrated from the
twelve legatees that no sect could dare to stake a claim among the
Shias. However, differences of opinion did exist among the Shi’a jurists
concerning hadith as a result of which some were named Akhbari and some
as Usuli. Presently, the Shi’a jurists are Usuli and there is no
separate group called as Akhbari.

\* \* \*

In the future discussions, we shall discuss that why after the Prophet’s
demise, the followers of the Ahlul Bayt school learnt the Prophet’s
*Sunnah* and the Islamic beliefs and precepts from the Prophet’s twelve
legatees.

[^1]: The details concerning‘Ijtihads’ (independent judgments) by the
Caliphs and disciples can be read in the second volume of the book:
Ma.’lem al-Madrasatain.

[^2]: Refer to Tarikh-Ya’qubi 2/333. Ibn Kathir too has pointed out this
matter in his Tarikh, 8/10.

[^3]: Refer to the book: Qawaed al-Tahdith, page 46-47 written by
Muhammad Jamaluddin al-Qasemi, Cairo print; Tadrib al-Raawi page 41,
written by Suyuti and Al hadith al-Nabaviyah al-Sharif, page 43 written
by Muhammad al-Sabbagh, Damascus print.

[^4]: It implies Abu-Hanifa’s opposition to the Prophet’s Sunnah which
has come down in the Prophet’s hadith.

[^5]: Refer to Al-Muhalla, by Ibn Hazm; 11/251-257.

[^6]: Tarikh-Baghdad 13/396.

[^7]: Tarikh-Baghdad 13/408.

[^8]: Tarikh-Baghdad 1/71.

[^9]: Tarikh-Baghdad 13/284-286

[^10]: Tarikh-Baghdad 13/386-375.

[^11]: Al-Milal wan-Nihal/Sha.’restani 1/85; second chapter:
“Al-Jabriyah”.

[^12]: Al-Milal wan-Nihal/Sha.’restani 1/43; first chapter:
“Al-Mu’tazilah".

[^13]: Ansab Sam.’aani; under the word “Jahmi”.

[^14]: The Book of Jahm-ibn-Sefwan, page 71: chapter three: Negating
attributes for Allah, Exalted be He.

[^15]: Refer to Al-Radda alal Jahmiyah wa.’l Zanadiqah written by
Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal (died in 241 A.H.) Cairo print; Al-Radda alal Jahmiyah
written by Uthman-ibn-Saeed Darami (died in 280 A.H.) and
Jahm-ibn-Sefwan written by Hamed, Baghdad print. The last book is a
comprehensive book on Jahm.

[^16]: Refer to Feraq ul-Shiah, page 145

[^17]: Ansab-Sam’aani

[^18]: Refer to Manaqib-Abi Hanifa; 1/145-148 written by
Muwaffaq-ibn-Ahmad Makki, printed in Hyderabad.

[^19]: Biography of Maqatel in the chapter concerning: The effects of
beliefs of Ahl-Kitab (people of the Book).

[^20]: Tarikh Ibn Kathir 9/350 and Tarikh ul-Islam Zuhbi 5/56.

[^21]: Tabaqaat al-Mu.’tazilah, page 34 written by
Ahmad-ibn-Yahya-ibn-al Murtaza (died in 840 A.H.) Beirut edition 1961
A.D.

[^22]: Da.’era al-Ma.’aref Islami; Article “Termez “.

[^23]: Tabaqaat al-Mu.’tazilah, page 34; Al-Radda ala.’l Jahmiyah,
written by Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal, page 15.

[^24]: Tabaqaat al-Mu.’tazilah, page 32.

[^25]: Refer to Tarikh Ibn Athir in the narration of events of 116-128
A.H. European edition, 5/126-261. Some of these events have come down in
detail in Tarikh-Tabari and in brief in Tarikh Ibn Kathir.

[^26]: Ansab Samaani.

[^27]: Refer to the book Jahm-ibn-Sefwan, page 161; chapter six.

[^28]: Reliable references is at hand about the discussion that will
take place henceforth on Muslim sects like, the writings of those very
sects or the writings of reliable contemporary scholars such as Masoudi
and others.

[^29]: His biography has come down in .‘Wafayat al-A.’yan - Ibn
Khallakan 5/60, Tarikh al-Islam - Zuhbi 5/311, Muruj al-Zahab - Masoudi
4/22 and Ansab Samaani.

[^30]: The biography of Amr-ibn-Ubaid has come down in Tarikh-Baghdad
12/166; Wafayat al-A.’yan-Ibn Khallakan 3/130 and Tarikh-Ibn Kathir
10/10.

[^31]: Al-Feraq bain al-Feraq, page 114, chapter three: discourse on the
Mu.’tazilah and Qadariyah.

[^32]: Refer to Mutawakkil’s biography in Tarikh Khulafa-Suyuti;
Tarikh-Tabari and Tarikh-Ibn Athir.

[^33]: Refer to Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal’s biography in Tarikh-Baghdad 4/412 and
Tarikh Ibn Kathir 10/325-343.

[^34]: In order to realize the consequence of sectarian disputes in the
caliphate school, its worthy to mention in brief, the sayings of Imam
al-A.’aimma, Ibn Khuzaima in support of Abu-Huraira which has come down
in Mustadrak-Hakem 3/513. Ibn Khuzaima says: "Those who talk against
Abu-Huraira’s traditions are either the Jahmiyah who have negated God of
all attributes and who find Abu-Huraira’s traditions contrary to their
faith. Or they are the Khawarij who do not consider as obligatory the
obedience to the caliph and ruler but rather believe that revolt is
compulsory. Or they are the Qadarites (free-willers) who believe that
man’s actions have been decreed by God from eternity and find
Abu-Huraira’s traditions contrary to their views. Or they belong to the
jurisprudents who reckon Abu-Huraira’s traditions to be contrary to
their views on jurisprudence. These are the people who reject
Abu-Huraira’s traditions.

[^35]: Da.’ert ul-Ma.’aref ul-Islamiah 2/218.

[^36]: Refer to Ash.’ari’s biography in Wafayat al-A.’yan 3/398.

[^37]: This will become apparent by referring to the Ash.’arite works.

[^38]: Hukkam-Ma.’maleek in Egypt were those rulers who in reality were
slaves but later freed.

[^39]: Refer to Khutat-Maqrezi 6/161, Cairo edition.

[^40]: Al-Durral ul-Kamenah Fi A.’yan al-Ma.’at al-Saamenah written by
Ibn Hajar Asqalani (died in 852 A.H.) on page 163; Cairo edition 1385
A.H.

[^41]: Ibid; page 164.

[^42]: Ibid; page 158.

[^43]: Ibid; page 166.

[^44]: Ibid; page 150-170.

[^45]: Refer to Ibn-Taimiyah’s works like Minhaj al-Sunnah.

[^46]: Refer to Ma.’alem al-Madrasatain 1/62

[^47]: Refer to the previous discussions concerning the second factor of
distortion. Similarly, refer to Ma.’alem al-Madrasatain, Vol 1 page 39,
second edition.

[^48]: The preacher narrated this hadith from Sahih-Bukhari. However,
the author has found this hadith in Musnad-Ahmad 5/167 as follows: The
Prophet said: Allah says, ‘O sons of Adam! Verily, if you call and
beseech Me, I shall forgive you, whatsoever your condition. If it
happens you meet Me on the day of judgement with sins to the size of
this earth, I too will meet you while bestowing My forgiveness to the
size of this earth. If your sins reach the heavens, I would still
forgive you and pay least attention (to your sins) provided you do not
seek any partner with Allah and seed forgiveness from Me.” This
tradition has partly come down in Sahih-Bukhari 1/150. Numerous other
traditions of this nature have come down in their reliable books and
God-willing, we shall discuss them in the coming lessons.

[^49]: In Vol 1 of Ma’lem al-Madrasatain, we have explained in detail,
the following ten type of concealment: a) Omission of part of the
Prophet’s hadith and replacement with vague words. b) Complete omission
of news about Seerah (way of life) of the Prophet’s companions c)
Interpreting the Prophet’s traditions contrary to their real meaning. d)
Omission of some of the sayings of the Prophet’s companions. e) Complete
omission of tradition about the Prophet’s Sunnah. f) Prohibition from
writing the Prophet’s Sunnah. g) The endeavors in weakening the
traditions and narrators as well as the books that were detrimental to
the ruling government. h) The burning of books and libraries. i)
Omission in part, of the news about the companions Seerah and distortion
of facts. j) Fabrication of traditions replacing the true traditions
concerning the Prophet’s Sunnah and his companions Seerah.

[^50]: In Islam, swearing of allegiance is of various types. One type is
to swear allegiance for uprising on the path of enjoining to good and
forbidding the evil. The above belongs to this category.

[^51]: Refer to Ma’lem al-Madrasatain, 2/320; discussion on “how Imams
(a.s.) circulated the books of knowledge “; chapter concerning “Al Imam
Ali-ibn-Husain (as)

[^52]: In Islam, there exists a difference between a hypocrite and
believer. The former accepts Islam in a pretentious manner and not at
heart.

[^53]: In those days, people would put on a turban during official
meetings. The Holy Prophet (S) too would put on a turban during his
official meetings as well as during Eid prayers. Refer to
Abdullah-ibn-Sabah, Vol 2.

[^54]: Arabic Arabic Arabic meaning, he lifted the curtain from the
hadith; and slkjlksdjflksd means, he lifted the curtain from the
knowledge and gave light; and slkfjskldjfkls means, one who lifts the
curtain from the knowledge.

[^55]: Refer to Al-Kafi, 1/469 and Bihar al-Anwar, 46/225-228.

[^56]: 188 Esferayeni (died in 429 A.H.) in his book Al-Feraq bain
al-Feraq, Cairo print, page 60; and Tarikh-Ya.’qubi 2/61 while
describing the Imam’s demise.

[^57]: Kafi 1/310 and Bihar al-Anwar 47/3.

[^58]: Refer to the biography of each Imam in Bihar al-Anwar, by Allama
Majlisi.

[^59]: In those days, the distance of some cities from Medina was equal
to one or more than one year’s journey. However, every year, people from
these cities used to travel to Medina for performing the Haj.

[^60]: Bihar al-Anwar 47/4, tradition 11 narrated from Manaqib of Ibn
Shar Aashoub, 3/434.

[^61]: Refer to Bihar, 48/12-28.

[^62]: Milal wan Nihal, by Sha.’restani; commentary on Al-Kaisaniya,
1/147.

[^63]: Al-Farq bain al-Firaq, by Abdul Qaher Esfarayani (died in 429
A.H.), Cairo print, chapter concerning Al- Kaisaniya, page 38.

[^64]: Maqalat al-Islamiyeen, by Ali-ibn-Ismail Ash.’ari, page 21.

[^65]: Al-Farq bain al-Firaq, by Esfarayani, page 40 and Milal wan
Nihal, by Sha.’restani, 1/147 and 150-151.

[^66]: Refer to the story of Sa.’d’s murder in the book Abdullah bin
Saba, vol 1, chapter concerning Saqifa.

[^67]: Al-Farq bain al-Firaq, page 46.

[^68]: Refer to Tarikh Ibn Athir, in the events of 66 A.H. and 67 A.H.

[^69]: Refer to Tarikh Ibn Aithi, in the events of 66 A.H.

[^70]: Regarding this imaginary sect, also refer to “Al-Tabseer Fi’d .–
Deen wa Tameez al-Ferqat-ul-Najiah Min al-Feraq-al-Halekeen “, page 75
written by Abul-Muzaffar Muhammad-ibn-Taher Esferayani (died in 471
A.H.), printed in 1374 A.H. in Cairo.

[^71]: Like, Tabaqat-Shafiyyah, by Tajuddin Sabaki (died in 771 A.H.);
Tabaqat al-Hanabilah, by Abu Ya.’li Muhammad-ibn-Husain and Tabaqat
al-Mu.’tazilah, by Ahmad-ibn-Yahya.

[^72]: Refer to Bihar al-Anwar, by Majlisi 46/170-188 and Maqatel
al-Talebeyeen, Cairo print, 1368 A.H., page 127-151. Ibn Athir, in his
Tarikh, while discussing the events of 121 A.H, has explained the
injustices faced by Zaid and has referred to his martyrdom in the events
that occurred in 122 A.H.

[^73]: Refer to Maqatel al-Talebeyeen, page 152-158; and Ibn Athir in
his Tarikh, while explaining the events of 125 A.H.

[^74]: Refer to Ibn Athir in his Tarikh, topic concerning the martyrdom
of Zaid and Yahya.

[^75]: The author has perceived this matter out of the scholastic
discussions with Zaidiyah. Also, refer to al-Milal wan Nihal, by
Sharastani, 1/154: Al-Zaidiyah.

[^76]: A person whose head or leg is broader than the usual limit is
called an “Aftah “.

[^77]: Bihar al-Anwar 47/252-253.

[^78]: Bihar al-Anwar 47/252-253; and Al-Maqalat; and al-Farq, by Sa.’d
bin Abdullah Ash.’ari (died 301 A.H.), page 86, Tehran edition, 1963.

[^79]: Al-Maqalat and al-Farq, by Ash.’ari, page 86; and Milal wan
Nihal, by Sharastani, 1/167.

[^80]: Refer to Milal wan Nihal, by Sharastani 1/167.

[^81]: In our era, it is the Shias who oftently call them by such title.

[^82]: Bihar al-Anwar, 47/254 narrating from Manaqib, by Ibn Shar
Aashoub, 1/228.

[^83]: Bihar al-Anwar, 47/248, hadith 11, narrating from Kamaluddin, by
Saduq 1/160; Tahzib, by Shaikh Tusi 1/289 and Bihar al-Anwar, 47/255
narrating from Manaqib, 1/229.

[^84]: Kamaluddin, by Saduq 1/160.

[^85]: Bihar al-Anwar, 47/242 narrating from Irshad, by Shaikh Mufid,
page 304.

[^86]: Bihar al-Anwar 47/254 narrating from Manaqib, by Ibn Shar Aashoub
1/228; and Bihar al-Anwar 47/255 narrating from Manaqib, by Ibn Shar
Aashoub 1/230.

[^87]: Refer to Tarikh-Ibn Athir; events of 339 A.H.

[^88]: Yamamah is situated in Najd, the place from where the followers
of Wahabi sect raised their heads and massacred the Muslims.

[^89]: Refer to Seerah Ibn Hisham, 4/245-272; Tarikh Tabari, European
edition, pages 1737-1739 and 1748-1749.

[^90]: Refer to Tarikh-Tabari, page 1943 and Seerah Ibn Hisham, 2/5.

[^91]: Milal wan Nihal, by Sharestani 1/173-181

[^92]: Nahjul-Balagha (Subhi Saleh), page 496

[^93]: Refer to Ma.’alem al-Madrasatain, Vol 3.


