The Quality of the Objectives in Allah's Acts
=============================================

Allah's Attributes of Essence necessitate that He should have mercy
upon His servants, because He likes Himself, and, consequently, He likes
what He creates, i.e. Allah likes to be manifest, to have His names and
attributes displayed. Thus, the original cause of Allah's acts and their
final objectives are Allah Himself. That is why when the philosophers
speak of the Necessary Being, the Exalted, they say: "The why of
finality and the why of agency are the same." The cause of agency and
the cause of finality are the same, i.e. Allah has no objective outside
Himself. All these are no more than technical and philosophical terms.
The gist is that Allah does not do things in order to satisfy a need nor
to obtain what He doesn't have. Allah needs nothing. It is His Essence
that requires Him to be bountiful, generous and merciful. The original
cause is His very Attribute of Essence, nothing else. Middle objectives
can also be considered, as will be referred to presently.

**The Objectivity of Allah's Acts in the Qur'an's View**

Through the previous discussion we concluded that it can be admitted
that Allah's acts have objectives, which turn back to His Divine
Essence, as well as other ones, which can be regarded as middle
objectives, or, from a point of view, they are regarded as preliminary
ones. This conclusion was reached at through a reasoning analysis of the
Attributes of Allah. Let us now see what the viewpoint of the Qur'an in
this respect is. There are in the Qur'an ayahs which not only confirm
that Allah's acts have objectives, but describe them to be worthy,
invaluable and wise. These ayahs can be divided into two parts according
to their concepts:

1. Ayahs which generally confirm that Allah's acts have objectives,
and
2. Ayahs which point out the objectives of the acts.

We first deal with the ayahs which speak in general of the fact that
Allah's acts are not done purposelessly and in vain, actually they have
wise objectives.

Among this group are the ayahs which include the adjective "wise", i.e.
by describing Allah as "Wise", it means that His acts are wisely done,
they are not aimless, but have wise, reasonable and worthy objectives.
So, whenever Allah is described by the Qur'an as wise, it is an
indication of the said meaning. Furthermore, there are ayahs which
stress in particular that Allah's acts are not purposeless. This group
of ayahs can also be sorted out: some indicate the context that Allah's
acts, such as creating and managing the world, are true and not vain.
Some other, ayahs stress that His acts are not futile. A third group of
them say that His acts are not for amusement and fun. From all these
ayahs, which confirm both the negative and positive sides of the subject
it is gathered that Allah's acts are done for worthy and true aims, and
that they are not vain nor for fun or amusement.

**Explaining Some Terms**

Originally, the Arabic word haq (true, truth) means something which is
established, certain and proved. This is its linguistic meaning. But,
terminologically, it has different usages, though common in letter, i.e.
besides its original linguistic usages, which are diverse, it has many
further practical usages, which sometimes have conflicting meanings. It
is sometimes said that haq means a being which is self-existent, which
exclusively means Allah. So, in this sense the word has but a single
application.

Sometimes it indicates something which is consistent, continuous, no
matter whether it is self-continuous or is caused to be continuous. So,
because it has continuity we say it is haq, its opposite being that
which is transient, perishing, not haq. The third usage of haq belongs
to beliefs. It is said, for example, that so-and-so belief is haq, and
so-and-so belief is batil (untrue, invalid). By a haq belief we mean
that which is true and real: "I witness that death is haq (true) and
Resurrection is haq." The questioning of Munkar and Nakir [the two
angels who interrogate the dead in the gravel is haq. Such beliefs are
true and real. Sometimes it is used to describe a statement, saying:
"This speech is haq." Here we also mean that it complies with reality
and truth. Formerly it was in respect to belief, while here it describes
the speech. However, we may regard these latter two instances to be of
the same meaning i.e. haq is that which complies with reality, be it a
belief or a statement.

In both those examples, that is: a haq belief and a haq statement, the
compliance is between the believer and the belief, or the speaker and
the speech. Yet, sometimes haq is used as an adjective to a promise,
which is predicative not compositive, i.e., somebody promises that he
would do so-and-so. If he actually did it as he promised, we say that
his promise was haq, but if he failed to keep his word, we say that his
promise was batil (false). Here also it can be said that a promise is
compositive, not predicative, so as to speak of something, though it may
imply some sort of narration. The one who promises that he will do
something, means to say that in a given time an act will be done. Though
the style is compositive, not predicative, yet it includes a hint to a
predication, i.e. he means to say something will happen at that time.

Now as it complies with reality according to its own condition, we say
that this promise is haq or true, as is used in the Qur'an: "...that the
promise of Allah is true"[^153] That is what Allah promises will
undoubtedly come true. So, here, too, there is a kind of conformity
between the speech and what is hinted at to happen. The state of
conformity is obvious in this instance.

Why do we say that this promise is haq? Because it is in conformity
with the reality, and it will be fulfilled under its conditions. So far
we have been using the term haq in real and genetic matters. Sometimes
haq has juristic and legal applications, and sometimes acquires ethical
concepts. Here the subject takes a different trend. It refers to values
when the subject is ethical, and it .acquires conventional and nominal
concepts when the subject is legal and juristic, in which case haq means
"right, the right to possess, the marriage rights, etc.

This does not mean that something has, in itself and in actuality, the
right to take place, as this right is nominal and based on mutual
agreement. Likewise are the parental rights filial rights, the
commander's right to be obeyed by his subordinates (the ruler's right
upon his subjects) and vice versa. These are juristic concepts. The
confirmation of real right is not intended here. Actually the
confirmation of a convertional right is intended. The same is true when
it is used in ethical concepts, and even some scholars do not
differentiate them, using the fallacy of literal similarity and the
like, i.e., by way of argumentation, they use a syllogism in which the
word "haq" is repeated and is placed, as it were, in a "middle'
position, while in a premise a different meaning is meant than in
another one. Or they take the word haq. to have a certain meaning in the
premises of the syllogism, and to have another meaning in the conclusion
of the syllogism.

For example, in order to prove that theism is an innate disposition,
they conduct the argument saying that: everybody by nature seeks the
"truth" (haq) ,for the reason that he shuns the "untrue" -the non-haq
(1st premise),and since Allah is haq(2nd premise), then man by nature
seeks the haq(conclusion), noting that the term haq in the 1st premise
denotes an ethical value, and in the 2nd premise it denotes another
meaning. It must be noted that although man's natural disposition to
worship Allah is, as had already been said, correct, yet it cannot be
proved by such reasoning. Or, to say the contrary, in order to prove
that man is by nature inclined to goodness, they argue by saying that:
since man has an innate inclination to Allah (1st premise), and, since
Allah is haq (2nd premise), then man is, by nature, a seeker of haq,
(conclusion), while what they want to prove is the inclination to haq in
its ethical concept, but they used it in a different meaning in the
premises.

**Creation - A Truth**

Let us now see what it is meant by saying that: "The world is created
in truth, not in vain." There is no doubt that "truth" (haq) is not
intended here to mean a self-existent being (Allah). It refers to a
created being. It is also incorrect to describe a transitory and
ephemeral being like that especially that the Qur'an says: "...Allah
created not the heavens and the earth, and what is between them, save
with truth and a prescribed term."[^154] So, whatever is in this world
tastes for a while and then comes to an end-nothing is permanent in this
world. Thus, "truth" does not mean here, the permanent and constant.
Therefore, does saying "Allah created the world in truth", mean that
this is a belief consistent with reality? This is inconsistent, too,
since it does not concern the concept of truth and falsity nor of
speech. It concerns creation. Creation is a truth, not a falsity, and
thus it cannot be consistent with reality. Then, is the truthfulness of
a promise? Allah says that this world, which He created, was created
with the truth. There is no promise of any kind; therefore, haq, in this
instance, does not refer to a promise which is to be fulfilled.

Has it, then, an ethical concept? Outside entities cannot acquire
ethical concepts. It is a man's act that bears ethical values. No
outside entity can have such values. The ethical concepts belong to the
voluntary acts of man or of any other free-will being. Its legal meaning
is also not intended, i.e. it has no intention to explain whether Allah
has the right to create the world or not.

From among the many meanings of haq the one which suits this instance
and which is supported by some ayahs, is that the creation of the world
is an act with a worthy objective, contrary to an act of play and
amusement, which has no worthy objective.

What proof is there of this? We have already studied the different
meanings of haq and found out that none of them was consistent with the
subject of the ayah, except this latter one. Yet, a better proof is that
the very ayahs place the haq in contrast with play and amusement, and
say: "And We created not the heavens and the earth, and all that is in
between them, in play. We created them not save with truth."[^155] So, it
is clear that the meaning of haq intended in these ayahs is that which
stands in contrast with play, amusement, falsity and futility. This can
be explained more by a deeper study of these terms.

**The Term Futility in the Qur'an**

The Arabic word "abath" is equivalent to the English word "futility",
some act with no reasonable objective that which would be futile because
the doer did not intend a worthy objective for it. Play and amusement
have two close concepts. This is evidenced by these ayahs: and We did
not create the heavens and the earth, and what is in between them, in
play. Had We wished to have amusement, We could have had it Ourselves,
if We ever did."[^156] It is obvious that play and amusement are almost
synonyms, i.e. the same thing can be said to be playful or amusing, and
their evidences are not different, as otherwise the consistency of these
two ayahs would be disturbed.

What are play and amusement? In the Persian language, amusement means
pastime or entertainment, and play means sport or game. You do know that
play is a sort of amusement, too. Therefore, both may be said of the
same thing. In a way we call it play, in another, amusement.

The Qur'an uses these terms to describe this world: "The life of this
world is but a play and amusement,",[^157] or: "And the life of this
world is nothing save play and amusement."[^158] That is, if man takes
the life in this world as his objective, he will be like the one who
acts only for play and amusement. When one aims at a reasonable
objective beyond that, using this world as a preliminary step to the
other one, only then the world will have a value, or else, the very
worldly life, disregarding its results in the Hereafter, is but a play
in itself, and the achievements which he gains are not worthy of the
pains and sufferings he accepts upon himself in this world. One's life
in this world is to be regarded as a preliminary stage to an objective
beyond it. Only then one may look for the Hereafter, which is to be his
final goal. The preliminary will, then, melt in the final objective,
losing its originality, if any, and will have no independence of its
own.

**The Term "La'ibun" in the Qur'an**

What are meant by the terms "la'ibun"(play) and "lahwun (amusement)?
Why do we speak of something as play, and of something as amusement?
Play is a series of regular movements, performed to implement an
objective which satisfies man's fancy, not his intellect, such as when
some children gather to play and each of them undertakes to play a part
of the game. There is no concrete outcome of playing, save that which
tickles the player's fancy, through winning or losing. Sometimes there
can be concrete results, but the very nature of play is some movement
with a fanciful result. As a matter of fact, there can be reasonable
aims for playing, such as the horse races, or shooting, which are used
to encourage people to learn them for war time. Nowadays, if the plane
pilots conduct contests in pilotting they will be better trained for
wars, too. These sports, though for playing, have good objectives behind
them.

Or football matches, which bring up strong bodies and encourage people
to practise it. Actually, this objective belongs to sports, not to
playing, as it can be achieved if practised at home, too. Strengthening
the body is the result of movements, not the result of the concept of
playing. The rules and regulations of a game have nothing to do with
strengthening the body. What actually matter in this respect are the
movements of the body. So, from this aspect, it is not playing, but
since it also has fanciful winning or losing, it can be regarded as
playing, too. Therefore, playing can have reasonable objectives, and the
playing is only a means of attaining to its goal, which deserves it.

That was an explanation of the word play. The conclusion is that
playing consists of certain regular movements based on certain agreed
upon rules for the purpose of achieving a fanciful objective.

**The Term Amusement in the Qur'an**

As to the word "lahwun", amusement, it means in Persian, as in Arabic,
amusement or entertainment, which implies that one engages oneself with
something diverting one's thoughts from a particular subject. For
example, a certain event requires us to think about a solution. This
thinking is tiresome. We do not like too much thinking about that; so,
we buy a newspaper with a crossword puzzle and busy ourselves solving
it. This is an amusement. We may not want to carry out a duty, or we may
want to relieve ourselves from a moral responsibility; in such cases we
resort to an amusement to relieve our conscience. All these are
amusement. Man was created so as to attain to his supreme humane
objectives, as well as to the eternal happiness in the Hereafter. To
attain to that happiness he will have to cover a road, a difficult one
and with full responsibility. Man does not like, by nature, to cover
that road. He likes to go without responsibility, to be free with no
restrictions: "But man would want to burst off what (obstacle) is before
him".[^159] He wants to do whatever he desires. No body is to tell him
what to do and what not to do. So, in order to relief himself from these
biddings, forbiddings , and from any responsibilities, as well as from
having to think about it and in order not to feel uncomfortable, he
indulges in other irrelevant affairs. It is a characteristic of this
world to deter man from the Hereafter.

To engage oneself with worldly affairs, as final objectives, hinders
one from the Hereafter and from pursuing the objective for which he was
created, and which one has to try to attain to.

Thus, this world's nature is that of seeking pleasure and
entertainment, a nature which prevents man from advancing along his own
road. In the Qur'an, life is obscribed as "pleasure and entertainment".
But Allah did not create this world for this purpose, since such an
objective does not befit the position of Divinity. Had such an objective
been intended, Allah's work would have been mere "pleasure and
entertainment". The objective of creation is, in fact, something
becoming of Allah's divinity. We shall refer to that later on.

**Conclusion**

So, by saying that the creation of the world is true, not false, or it
is not for pleasure and entertainment, we mean to say that it has a
worthy purpose and a good objective, and not that Allah had aimlessly
created it, just for play and amusement, since such unwise acts cannot
be expected from the Supreme position of the Absolute wise.

**The Purpose of Creation**

Consequently, it is understood that Allah does His deeds for a wise
purpose. The ultimate objective of all deeds is Allah Himself - the One
who is of intrinsic qualities. These deeds are to display the said
qualities. Here a question arises: Are there, besides the ultimate
objective of all deeds, other intermediate objectives for each deed, or
each creature? Are there, for all creatures of the same level, both
intermediate and supreme objectives, or are there differences among the
creatures in this respect? By considering the whole world of creation,
that is, everything except Allah, the Exalted, it can be realized that
there is no objective other than the manifestation of the Divine
Essence, as we had explained in our former discussions. Thus, it can be
said that the world had been created to receive the divine emanation.
This emanation has no objective other than itself.

But if we consider the creatures in their separate individualities and
take the kingdoms of the creatures according to their ranks, we may find
that some of them have intermediate objectives, too.

**The Abstracts**

Among the creatures created by Allah, the Exalted - as is proved by
rational argumentation, and probably can be concluded from some ayahs
and narratives - there are series of creatures which are void of
temporal, spatial, materialistic conditions and changeability. These are
called "the complete abstracts". Now, these abstracts are of many kinds.
They are proved by neither intellectual argumentation nor explicit
statement in the Qur'an or the tradition, supposing that there is a
world of complete abstracts without any change and alteration. From the
beginning the Creator bestowed upon them what caused them to exist.
Their existence is not gradual, and they undergo no change. Therefore,
they cannot be more perfect. They remain the same from beginning till
end, or, actually, with a deeper look, they have neither beginning nor
end, since such beings are above time and place.

Maybe the ayah, quoting the angels who say: "And there is none of us
but has an assigned position,"[^160] denotes that they cannot move out of
their positions and be more perfect than they are. They have a limit of
existence. The one who was more perfect than the others from the
beginning remain at the same degree of perfection, and the one who was
in the second degree from the beginning remains so till the end.

Similarly the other degrees, whose numbers only Allah knows, and every
one of them is in his prescribed position. There is no meaning in their
being created to become more perfect, as their existence is the same
from the beginning to the end. What perfection was possible for such a
being, it had been given to him from the beginning. His capacity can
contain no more perfection. Hence they can have no middle objectives.

They had been created to be benefitted by Allah's benevolence. Why
should he be benevolent to them? Because it is in His Essence. But they
themselves cannot have any objective other than receiving divine
benevolence and emanation. They undergo no evolution so that we may say
that they move from a stage to the next as their sought - for objective.
Their complete existence is the same from the beginning to the end.
Having passed through the world of the abstracts, we come to the world
of matter and materialistics. That is, those beings which have no aspect
of abstraction, or they have, but belong to matter, though essentially
being abstracts - like the spirit of a human being, which is essentially
an abstract being, but is united with, and belongs to, matter are under
the shadow of this connection with matter, and attain to their
perfection, too. The spirit, unlike the complete abstracts, does not
have, from the beginning of its creation till its separation from the
body, the same and unchanged degree of perfection.

As long as it is connected to matter, the body, it attains to its
perfection under its shadow. Therefore, everything that is material and
belongs to matter is changeable, alterable and perfectable. Such beings
can have middle objectives. Generally speaking, the entire world is
created so that perfection can take place, i.e. as a result of evolution
it can be prepared to receive more of divine emanation. So, the
difference between the realm of the abstracts and the realm of the
materialistics is that the evolution and perfection have no meaning in
respect to the abstracts, while in the .realm of the materialistics,
besides that, there are middle objectives, too. There is no doubt that
if these are wise objectives, they will inevitably be such as to lead to
further perfections in the next stages.

If you suppose that Allah created a human being, endowed him with
utmost ability, intelligence, wit, wisdom and other human faculties, the
best in both the body and the soul, and suppose that this person
gradually began to bodily deteriorate, worn out and get old, his soul
also gradually declined, losing his knowledge, learnings, faith and
thus, he began a downward movement, both materially and morally. Well,
such a being who underwent changings and evolutions, but without any
perfectness, would his creation be a wise act? It is clear that such an
act could not be wise. The wise act is to prepare the preliminary
arrangements for the creation of a worthier and more perfect being.

If somebody takes a worthy raw material, makes some changes in it such
that it becomes less valuable; say, somebody takes a precious gem which
worths billions of Tumans [Iranian currency], and uses it for a
worthless and trivial experiment, this would not be a wise act, because
the result of this experiment would be less valuable. Not any kind of
changing can be regarded wise and reasonable. The change and alteration
must be such that the result would be a more perfect being.

The supposition that Allah creates from beginning a completely perfect
human being, and then due to the effects of natural factors and
reactions, his perfectness decline and deteriorate, would not be an act
based on wisdom. So, in order to make the evolution of this world wise,
it must be in such a way that the result of the entire actions and
reactions would lead to more perfection. It would be possible, however,
that in this process, in some instances, some beings, due to the
competition existing in the kingdom of nature, take a downward advance.
Yet, if this system, which we had explained in our previous discussions,
is a single one whose parts, within the whole system, enjoy inseparable
coherence and totally connected to each other in a way resulting in the
appearance of a more perfect and worthier being, despite there being
within the process of actions and reactions instances of deterioration
and downfall - such a system will be a wise one.

Now, as we believe in the Divine Wisdom, we think, as we had formerly
proved, by reason and through the Qur'anic ayahs that the world of
nature proceeds towards perfection. That is, the entire world of nature
is such created that the evolution, which it undergoes along the time,
will be better prepared for the appearance of more perfect beings.

This argument is not based on experiment, since experiments are less
sufficient to form a ground for talking about the beginning and the end
of the world. Experiments show a limited period of time under certain
conditions. Therefore, through experiment we can never judge the post-
and the pre-eternity. For example, experiment cannot prove that the
world has always had a perfective advance. Likewise, it cannot prove
that it will have such a perfective advance in the future.

**Graduation in Creation**

The hand of experiment is too short to be extended to the post- and
pre-eternity. But through intellectual and philosophic argument it can
be proved that since Allah is wise and never does whatever is vain and
absurd, the advance of creation is, thus, to be towards perfection.
Hence, it can be said that the world of nature had been created to reach
its perfection. The perfection which we think of is the philosophic one,
not the biological. By perfection we do not mean a change of species. By
it we mean that the world of nature is so created that its parts are
connected to each other and exchange action and reaction, effecting each
other. These actions and reactions gradually pave the way for the
appearance of more perfect beings.

For example, the earth, when it was first created, was not suitable for
living beings, according to the experts. There are some traditional
narratives which confirm this opinion. Nahjul Balagah also contains
information which support it. Then gradually many changes took place in
the universe. Allah alone knows how many millions or billions of years
those changes took to happen, since there is neither a definite
scientific, nor a devotional, proof.

Nevertheless, we do know that the earth had passed through several
stages during which it underwent many evolutionary. changes, which,
gradually, prepared the earth for plantation and for animals to come to
existence. Then, after the elapse of a long time, it became prepared to
receive the appearance of human beings. Those who believe in the change
of species say that man had evoluted from other animals, while those who
believe in the constancy of species say that man is a separate species
that had been created under particular conditions. It is not our
intention, however, to handle this subject for the time being. Generally
we know that the evolution of the earth was in such a way as to prepare
it for the appearance of man and for his living in it. This is regarded
a kind of perfection for the earth, i.e. the earth, along its history,
was proceeding towards its perfection. If the entire world of creation
can, in this way, prepare the earth, through actions and reactions, for
the appearance of more perfect beings, it will be a process of
perfection.

**The Middle Objective**

Consequently, each of the beings of this world, before the appearance
of man, must have had a middle objective, namely, the preparation for
the appearance of a more perfect being, namely, man. The creation of the
sky and the earth, besides their final objective, have a middle
objective, too. It is the paving of the way for the appearance of man.
Man himself, as a corporeal being susceptible to change and evolution,
undergoes certain changes, both materially and spiritually. Thus, we can
say that man was created in order to attain to more perfections so as to
deserve receiving the emination of a more perfect mercy.

Somebody may ask: "If Allah's objective of creation had been bestowing
mercy and emination, it would have been better to grant man whatever he
could receive at the beginning of his creation, and to create him in
Paradise. What are all these troubles and adventures of man's creation
and appearance, for?" If the original objective had been that man should
gain Allah's mercy, then it would have been better to place that mercy
in man's hand at the very beginning and rest carefree. Or, as the
heavenly Books say, Adam and Eve had been, driven out of Paradise, it
would have been better if they had stayed and begotten their children
and lived there and there would have been no quarellings, killings and
corruptions.

Such questions are usually put forth by naive and simple-minded people.
This means that we think that any kind of perfection can from the
beginning be given to any being, like an empty vessel, which we can
either gradually, or immediately, fill with water, and that the
creatures of the world are like that vessel - the belief which arises
the question: since the vessel is to be filled with water, why should it
be filled drop by drop, causing it so much pains? Let what is to be
given to him be given at the beginning, disregarding the fact that the
final eminations which Allah prepares for man, and whose real nature we
cannot now understand, require special capacities which must be prepared
by man himself, i.e. it is up to man himself to choose these capacities.
If these are forced on man at the beginning, without his consent, he
will acquire none of the required capacities, as our minds are incapable
of understanding their truth. This can be brought nearer to our
understanding by way of an example.

**The Significance of Man's Optional Acts**

Suppose that an instrument or a machine, in the shape of a statue, had
been invented and stationed at the door in order to receive whoever
opens the door by greeting him: "Salam! You are welcome!" Now, when you
open the door to enter, which one will have more effect upon you:
encountering a machine greeting you with a smile and a nod, saying:

"Salam! You are welcome!", or facing your host receiving you with his
own sweet words, saying: "I'm very pleased to see you! You are very much
welcome!" Will both these greetings have the same or different effects
upon you? The former is an automatic act done with no free-will. It is
just a sound made by a machine. You attach no importance to it; except
when you do not know that it was from a statue. But if you do know that
it is a statue made in such a way to issue a sound, unknowingly and
involuntarily, you would not take it to be a sign of respecting you. The
greetings can be valued only when the saluter is free to greet or not to
greet. If he did, on his own free will, you would endear it. But a being
that greets you without knowing what it is doing, can be of no value at
all.

Thus, you realize that the originality and credibility of some matters
depend on their being done voluntarily and according to one's free will.
They are to be done knowingly and consciously so as to be regarded
valuable, as otherwise, a more mechanical gesture can be of no value.
The mercy which Allah bestows upon man, as a reward for his voluntary
good deeds, is such that man would not have deserved it had he not
advanced along the voluntary path of free will. If man, from the
beginning, had been created in Paradise, he would not have deserved
understanding the divine blessings and spiritual pleasures. His highest
pleasures would have been those of an animal.

Consequently, we can say that man had been created in this world of
matter so that he might acquire such perfection that it would enable him
to understand the supreme divine blessings.

Therefore, we may assign many objectives and several stages for man to
go through to attain to the position of becoming worthy of understanding
those divine blessings. Each one of his objectives would be one of his
middle objectives. The conclusion is that the entire universe, i.e. the
world of existence, minus Allah, if. taken as a whole, it can have no
more than a single objective, because whatever perfection that may be
obtained along the passing of time would be part of that whole. All the
degrees of existence and the diverse realms, taken altogether, have but
a single objective, i.e. obtaining Allah's blessing - the blessing
which, as a divine act, has no objective except the very Divine Essence,
in accordance with the gradation mentioned before.

Therefore, Allah's objective in creating the world is the manifestation
of His Attributes, whereas the objective of the creatures, the world,
and everything other than Allah, is to obtain His blessings. But if we
take the realms of the world of existence separately, we realize that
this is true of the realms of abstracts, too, since these are not
subject to any further perfections, changes and alterations. So, their
objective is also to obtain Allah's blessings, while Allah's objective
in creating them is the manifestation of His Attributes and Names. But
the non-abstracts or the semi-abstracts (such as the human soul),
besides having the said final objective, they also have middle
objectives, the total of which can be placed under the title
"perfection" - that is philosophical, not biological perfection, as had
formerly been explained.


