The Objective of Creation in the Qur'an
=======================================

In the previous discussion, with the help of both rational analysis and
Qur'anic statements, we concluded that the creation of the world, as a
whole, has an objective, and that the materialistic realms, besides
their final objective, have middle objectives which altogether aim at
obtaining perfection. Now we intend to refer to the Qur'anic ayahs which
explain the divine acts and the reason, the wisdom and the management of
the creation, the world and man. We shall read what is said in the
Qur'an about the middle objectives which are in the world and man: "And
He it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days - and His
throne was upon the water-that He might try you, which one of you is
best in conduct."[^161]

There are in this ayah expressions that need to be explained. Some are
directly connected to our topic, and some will be explained in their
more suitable places.

**Stages of Creation**

The heavens and the earth, which the Qur'an refers to, mean, as
obtained from context indications that the whole world is material.
Sometimes this is confirmed by saying: "and what is between them",[^162]
[the heavens and the earth]. Thus the total of the heavens and the earth
denote the world of matter. Here a question may arise about the meaning
of "day" in the ayah. It is clear that it is not the day which appears
as a result of the rotation of the earth. Before the creation of earth
there were no day and night as known to us now. They appeared after the
creation of the earth and its rotation.

The Arabic term "yawm", meaning "a day", denotes "a period of time",
with no definite length of time. The ayah itself does not make it clear,
either. As to the narratives known to us, no definite conclusion can be
derived from them, although there are some possibilities which may
further be enforced.

But to say positively what definitely is meant by those "six days" is
quite doubtful and no decisive explanation can be offered. The phrase
under our consideration is, however, "...that He might try you, which
one of you is best in conduct.". Undoubtedly, this ayah tells what the
purpose, or the objective, of the creation is. Allah had created the
heavens, the earth, the world, the nature, in general, with the
objective of trying the human beings in order to make known those who
behave more piously. Yet, the connection between the deed and the doer
is a bit vague. How can the world be created so that man may be tried?

What connection is there between creation and trying man? Brevity in
speech is a style of eloquance which is frequently used in the Qur'an.
That is, when the subject is obvious, a lot of phrases are omitted from
the speech, as long as it can be understood from the context, and there
would be no need to express it openly, especially when the situation
requires conciseness. This conciseness is used in the Qur'an in many
instances, especially when relating stories. Looking into the stories of
the Qur'an, we realize what an amazing style of brevity is used.

From among the stories one sentence is selected from hundreds of
sentences which should have been said and singled out, because there had
been a reason for selecting it, and disregarding the rest. This style
had also been used in other instances, including the ayah being
discussed, where instead of saying: "We had created the heavens and the
earth as preliminaries for the appearance of man, then We created man in
order to have the purpose of his creation (trying him) fulfuilled." The
sentences before and after are discarded and omitted, while the stress
is put on the purpose for which man was created: "We created the world
to try you". At the time of creating the heavens and the earth no human
being had been created as yet to be tried. So what relation is there
between the creation of the heavens and the earth with man? By
considering the style of brevity we find out that, at least, one
sentence had been omitted, that is, the heavens and the earth had been
created in preparation for the creation of man, who was to be later
created in order to be tried to find out whose conduct was better.

**Trying Man**

Finally, the gist of this ayah is that the Qur'an regards trying man as
one of the objectives of creation. What does trying man mean? Actually
this is an elaborate subject which is handled in anthropological topics
as well as in Divine laws of managing man. Generally speaking, trying,
or examining is to arrange the grounds for bringing a potentiality to
actuality, or implementing a potential matter. A scientist, in his
laboratory, moves around, arranges certain materials, gives them
particular shapes, etc., until a new phenomenon appears. Why does he do
this? In some instances the scientist locks knowledge. He does not know
what would happen if he mixed certain quantities of some chemical
elements. So, he carries out an experiment to find out the answer. In
some other instances the experiment is carried out for teaching purposes
so that the others may see and learn, and there can be many other
purposes.

At any case, the aim of an experiment is to prepare the grounds for the
appearance of a new phenomenon, which has the potentiality to appear
under certain conditions. The required grounds are arranged for, so that
the new form may take shape. When a teacher wants to examine his
student, he asks him a question which can have positive or negative
answer, or a question with several suggested answers, of which only one
is correct and the rest are incorrect, or one is correct and the other
is more correct. The teacher prepares the grounds for the student to
help him to choose one of the answers, to discover the hidden, in order
to know how much he knows, or he wants to have an answer to show to the
others, while be does know the extent of his student's standard of
knowledge and capacity such that he can guess his marks even before
looking into his paper. Yet he may need the paper as a document to be
shown to anybody who may have an objection. However, preparing the
grounds for the student to express himself is called "examination".

We have no doubt that Allah, the Exalted is not ignorant of His
servants' conditions. Allah's knowledge includes their final destiny,
their past, present and future. We had also understood from the former
discussion that Allah's existence was not a temporal one, and that He
encompassed both time and place. To Him all times are the same, and His
knowledge of all is the same, too. Nothing, then, is concealed from Him,
neither the past, the present nor the future. But He arranges the
conditions for man to manifest themselves, or to bring to actuality what
is potential, or to display what talents they have, especially that man
is practically a gifted creature. Under certain conditions his talents
manifest and blossom out. Allah, the Exalted arranges the grounds for
everyone to show out his faculties, to demonstrate what is hidden in
him, and, finally, to choose his own way, either a right or a deviated
one, a way of development and perfection or a way of deterioration and
degeneration.

The second ayah of Suratud-Dahr (or Insan) (The Time or Man), says: "We
created man from a mixed sperm to try him, so We have made him hearing,
seeing. We have shown him the way: either grateful or ungrateful." We
are not intending to go into an exegesis on this ayah. We only refer to
the word "try" which immediately comes after the creation of man,
meaning "to examine" him. "We have made him hearing seeing." The one who
is to be examined and to be left to choose a way, must have knowledge
and be aware. Moreover, "We have shown him the way - the right way, and
guided him to choose one of the two ways: either the way of being
grateful, or the way of being ungrateful, and for either of them he will
get the relevant result."

This is a fact which is repeated in the Qur'an many times: "We have
made whatever is on the earth an embellishment for it, so that We may
try them (as to) which of them is best in deeds."[^163] If we had created
the earth without any embellishments, it would not have been attractive
to man. Whatever is there on the earth, such as plants, animals and the
results of actions and reactions, all help in making the earth
attractive to man, or, according to the Qur'anic expression, an
embellishment of the earth. Had the earth been dry, waterless, without
plants, and monotonous, it would have had not attraction, and man would
have loathed to live on it. But the jungles, the flowers, the ups and
downs of the mountains, valleys and seas, all have made the earth so
attractive that man would not stop looking at it. But why was the earth
created so? "... so that We may try them (as to) which of them is best
in deeds", i.e. these are only means of examination. All are to be there
to place man at a cross-road and see if he takes the aptor one. Thus,
this ayah refers, too, to examining man as the purpose for creating the
phenomena on the earth.

"Who had created life and death that He may try you which is best in
deeds". Many exegeses had been suggested for this ayah. Generally,
however, we gather that the objective of creating life and death in this
world is to have man tried. So, to sum up, we gather from the Qur'an
that the creation of the world, of the world's phenomena, which are the
embellishments of the world, and of life and death, including human
beings' life and death, are all for trying man. That is, the creation of
lifeless world is a preliminary for the creation of the living world,
and the creation of the living world is a preliminary for the creation
of man, his development, perfection and means of existence.

There are other ayahs which explicitly state that everything had been
created for man, such as: He it is who created for you all that is in
the earth",[^164] and many other similar ayahs, which we do not intend to
explain.

Consequently, middle objectives can be seen in the world of matter. The
objective of. the lifeless world of nature is to prepare the grounds for
the living creatures. Naturally, the living creatures as regards their
existence, are more perfect than the lifeless creatures, because
whatever the latter have, the former also have, plus something else.
Besides all the elements that are in lifeless creatures, as well as in
the living creatures, the latter have, moreover, a phenomenon, namely,
life, which makes them more perfect.

As far as we know, and as is confirmed by the Qur'an, no being is more
perfect than man. The jinn, however, have their share of such
perfections, as is gathered from some ayahs. It is not our concern, for
the time being, to discuss what the jinns are. In many instances the
Qur'an regards the Ins (man) and the jinn as to be equal and on the same
footing: "O folks of jin and ins!"[^165] and "Which, then, of the
blessings of your Lord do you (both) deny?"[^166] from which it is
obvious that the hint refers to both the jinns and man, and that the
jinns, like man, are also bound to perform religious duties.

At any rate, the Qur'anic ayahs do not state that there is any being
more perfect than man on the earth. So, we may well say that the middle
objective of the world of matter is to prepare the grounds for the
appearance of a being called man. Therefore, we disregard what the
philosophers, ancient and contemporary, ascribe to man, as to be a
selfish creature, falsely claiming to be honourable, doubted whether he
has any merits over other animals though a pessimistic view, it is also
possible to intellectually prove that man is much more perfect than
other beings and all kinds of animals. This is also gathered from the
Qur'an.

We have to mention a parenthetical clause to the effect that the
perfections ascribed to man, as the most honourable creature, are
granted by Allah. Nevertheless, this man, with all his perfections, is
placed at a crossroad so that he may by himself choose the way which
would take him up to a position above that of the angels, while, by his
ill-selection of his path, he would be the worst of all beasts. Thus, by
saying that man is the noblest of all creatures we mean that there are
among the human beings persons who choose the way leading to the highest
positions known to any creature. But this does not mean that any man,
under any condition and anywhere, is better than all creatures, because
the Qur'an itself says that some .persons are even lower than the
quadrapeds.

The Qur'an does not look at man as the humanitarians look at him man,
being man, is a noble creature. It says that man is more perfect than
other creatures because he possesses God-given faculties and can utilize
them. He can also be the noblest only when he, with his good choice,
selects the best way: "Surely, the vilest of animals in the sight of
Allah are those who disbelieve, and would not have faith".[^167] For
"animals" the Arabic word dabbah is used, which means any "moving"
creature, even worms and microbes, which move, too. The one who would
not believe because of his obstinacy and would not accept what is right,
is looked at by the Qur'an as to be worse than any moving creature and
the beasts of prey, and is worthless. Hence, the Qur'an regards the
killing of some men as a must, whereas it does not allow the killing of
any animal as long as it shows no sign of an offensive intention that
may endanger one's life.

In such cases one is allowed to kill the harmful animals. Even so the
animals which disturb one's comfort and prevent one's growth. Otherwise
the Qur'an does not permit killing living creatures for no good purpose.
As regards the animals which are slaughtered for their flesh, they may
be killed only after remembering the name of Allah over them, so as to
be done with Allah's permission. Otherwise man must not bother any other
moving creature. But despite all these advices and instructions, to the
effect that even an ant must not be harmed, the Qur'an orders that
certain persons to be killed.

Amirul Mu'minin Ali (A.S.) says: "By Allah, even if I am given all the
domain of the seven (stars) with all that exists under the skies in
order that I may disobey Allah to the extent of snatching a husk of a
barley grain from an anti would not do it".[^168] This is the Islamic
education. This same Ali (A.S.) draws his sword and chops off men's
heads as autumn wind chops dry leaves off the trees. That is, those
people were even lower than the ants, according to the Qur'anic view:
"Surely the vilest of animals in the sight of Allah are those who
disbelieve and would not have faith".

Therefore, Islam does regard every person to be honourable, but it
regards man more perfect than other creatures, because of the faculties
bestowed upon him. His destination, however, is up to his own freewill
choice. If he could well benefit from those faculties, he would progress
and advance to reach a position even higher than that of the angels.

But if he misused them, he would be debased and worthless, even lower
than a worm in the swamps. Man, therefore, is at a crossroad, which is,
expressed in the Qur'anic term, as "trying". This can be regarded as
middle objective for creating him. But can either one of these two roads
be chosen as the intended one, or only a particular one of them is to be
chosen? That is, if he chose the good one, would, the bad one be a
subsequent to that?

From some ayahs we gather that the original objective is that man
should himself choose the way of Allah: "And I have not created the jinn
and the ins(man) except that they should worship Me".[^169] This is the
same as in Surat Yasin: "And that you should worship Me: This is the
straight path."[^170] The straight path, in the viewpoint of the Qur'an,
is the path which has the tint of servitude to Allah and worshipping
Him. If a man performed an act with a tint of godliness, this would be a
movement towards perfection. But if it was not so, then it would mean
either to mark time or a turn back. Any movement which is not a kind of
worshipping Allah is either nonsense, as the one who tries a movement
but keeps marking time in his place, or falls down (may Allah protect us
against that), i.e. it is a movement, but towards Hell. The movement
which leads to perfection is that which is regarded by the Qur'an to be
a sort of worshipping Allah, while other roads lead to the worship of
Satan: "Did I not charge you, O children of Adam that you should not
worship Satan? Surely he is your open enemy."[^171] Only one road is
straight. The others are crooked and deviated.

**The Final Objective**

We can say, then, that the purpose of creating man is that he should
worship Allah. Why? Because his perfectness depends on worshipping
Allah. Undoubtedly, Allah is absolutely needless of everything. So, when
He says that He created the people - "that they should worship Me", is
because their perfectness cannot be achieved without worshipping Him.
This point will be explained, by Allah's will, later on.

Consequently, we must worship Allah in order to be worthy of obtaining
the blessings which otherwise we will not have the merit of receiving
them: "Yet they cease not differing, except those on whom your Lord has
mercy, and for this did He create them.[^172] It has never happened that
all people were on the straight path. It has also never happened that
all people were on the wrong path. There have always been differences
among people in choosing the right and wrong, except for those who had
been favoured with Allah's mercy, as they would not deviate from the
right path, and keep proceeding along the road of truth: "and for this
did He create them". Concerning the phrase "and for this" the
commentators offer two explanations.

A group say that "this" refers to their "differing". Another group say
that it refers to the word "mercy". Therefore, "this" may point to
"differing" or to "mercy". If it refers to "differing", that is, if man
had been created with a free will to freely choose his way, then,
naturally, one would choose the right and another the wrong way. So,
man's free will naturally leads to different choices. Consequently, it
can be said that man had been created for differing and dividing into
two groups: "...a party shall be in Paradise and a party in Hell"[^173]
But if "this" refers to "mercy", i.e. Allah has created man to receive
His mercy, then man's final objective, brought about by his voluntarily
done good deeds, would make him worthy of receiving Allah's mercy, which
is a merit of the pious people. Hence, the final objective behind
creating man is to attain to the highest degrees of Allah's mercy that
is possible for His creatures to attain to.

Arranging these objectives together, we realize that they have a
longitudinal sequence. They do not cross each other. It cannot be said
that man has been created to be tried, and crosswisely, he has been
created to worship Allah, and, also crosswisely, he has been created to
receive His mercy. No, they are arranged in successive sequence.

If man wants to receive Allah's mercy specially prepared for him, he
must follow the path of servitude, that is, he is to choose the way of
Allah, and in order to choose the way of Allah, there must be two
different ways: the way of Allah and the way of Satan. So, man must be
tried. In order to let him choose the way of servitude on his own free
will, the grounds for trying him must be prepared so as to find out
whether he will choose the way of Allah or the way of Satan.

Therefore, trying comes prior to worshipping Allah, and worshipping
comes before receiving Allah's mercy. So, we may say that man has been
created to be tried, then to voluntarily choose worshipping Allah, and
then to attain to Allah's final and eternal mercy.

Consequently, there can be many longitudinal objectives, none of them
contradicting the other. Those who are not acquainted with the Qur'an,
or with its style, probably think that these are a number of crossing
objectives, or there is contradiction in the statements of the Qur'an.
No, it is not so. In an instance, the art of eloquence required that a
different objective should be mentioned. These objectives are not
contradictory, because they are longitudinal and are middle ones, while
the final objective is the attainment of Allah's mercy.

**Stages of Allah's Acts**

The acts which we purposely do are preceded by preliminaries and pass
through stages. One of these stages is to regard the act as to be
correct, and it appears in a scientific and intellectual image in the
mind.

The second stage is getting interested and inclined to it. After
becoming interested, one is to consider whether it contradicts one's
other interests or other people's. We have to study and investigate to
see if this act, to which we are inclined, is really to our interest and
if our interests necessitate it. Having done so, it will, then, be the
turn for taking the necessary decision. The implementation of many acts
requires conditions and preliminaries outside ourselves. That is, it is
not that whenever we willed to do an act, it would be done immediately
solely according to our will. We would have to do something upon the
matter, to prepare the required conditions. Studying the outside
preliminaries, causes and conditions are considered as part of the
preliminaries of the act. Before starting a journey we must first select
the means, know what we need during the journey, know what we need at
destination. We have to reckon all these questions.

So, a correct plan of the act is to be drawn in our mind. It is
possible that the onside conditions for an act are changeable. This must
also be taken into consideration. Suppose if you want to travel by air,
you will have to take into your consideration the possibility of the
late arrival of your plane. In such a case you must have a plan to know
what to do. All these considerations, thoughts, inclinations, desires,
measurements, etc. are regarded to be the stages and the preliminaries
of an act.

But how is it with Allah's acts? Have His acts to go through similar
stages and preliminaries, or not? Most of the preliminaries which we
need for our acts are caused by our ignorance and incompetence. We have,
for example, to consider whether the act is advisable. Why should we
consider this? Because originally we do not know. Had we known from the
beginning, we would not have to consider anything. Why should we think
about the pros and cons of an act? Because we do not know which one is
better, which one is profitable, which one is harmful. If we knew from
the beginning, we would not be in need of thinking.

So, this sequence of the matters - i.e. first we must imagine the case,
then an inclination is to rise in us, then we are to think about it,
then the pros and cons are to be compared besides considering the
conditions. All these are caused by the fact that we are incompetent and
ignorant creatures, as our knowledge does not cover everything. There is
no doubt that such suppositions about Allah, the Exalted are incorrect.
That is, we must not think when Allah wants to do something, He sits
down to think whether it is profitable to do it or not. Allah does not
need to think over. To think over is the characteristic of ignorant
people, while Allah knows everything. We are never to think that there
appears in Allah a desire which formerly was not there, as this will be
another incorrect thought about Allah. It is impossible to think that
there appears in the Exalted Divine Essence a thing that was not there
before. In other words, bereavement has no way to Allah. Or, in the
philosophic terms, the Holy Essence of Allah is never subject to
events.

In religious expressions, especially in Nahjul Balaghah, it is said:
"...for whom one condition does not proceed another."[^174] That is, it
cannot be supposed that Allah may be in a mood at a time, and in a
different mood at another, like man who may be happy now and miserable
later, or content at a time and discontent at another. Allah has no
diverse conditions. Therefore, we are not to imagine that Allah thinks,
is subject to moods or inclinations which may intensify into eagerness.
These are impossible to happen to Allah. But how can we put our
questions? How can Allah's acts happen? Do they happen randomly,
unknowingly, unmeasured and unconsidered? Of course, Allah, the Exalted
is far above doing things without consideration and unawares. So, what
are we to say in such instances?

**The Acts of Allah**

As regards the Attributes of the Necessary Being, the Blessed, the Most
High, it had already been said that, concerning our own attributes and
acts, we first comprehend certain concepts, then we omit their
deficiencies, and, having cast away these privational aspects, we
ascribe those concepts to Allah. For example, we first realize in
ourselves the faculties of knowledge, power and life, then we regard
them as abstract concepts. The evidences of knowledge, power and life
are limited ones, and being so, they are not becoming of Allah.

In order to make them suitable to be ascribed to the Glorified Essence
of Allah, the Exalted, we drop off the negative and deficient sides of
those attributes and say that Allah's knowledge, unlike ours, is
limitless. It is knowledge, but boundless. It is knowledge, but
essential, not acquired. Despite the fact that we do not have an outside
evidence showing an essential, not acquired and limitless knowledge, yet
we can imagine such a wide concept of knowledge that it can cover the
limitless knowledge, too. Then we say Allah is knowing, but unlike our
knowledge. Similarly we may apply abstraction to acts, i.e. the
concepts, which are true of our acts, are accompanied by aspects of
deficiency and negation, and so they cannot be ascribed to the Sacred
Essence of Allah, the Exalted. But by discarding these deficiencies off
the acts and looking at them as to be suitable to be ascribed to Allah,
the Exalted, we may do so. Concerning the attributes too, after
ascribing abstracted concepts of perfection to Allah, reason is used to
offer evidences to prove that those attributes were the very Essence of
Allah. As for acts we also consider similar ways, such as:

Firstly, when we ascribe the origin of the act to Allah, we must take
into our consideration that, in respect to His acts, time is irrelevant.
When we say that Allah knows, wants and likes to do this act, it does
not mean that in a particular period of time He knows it, but He does
not want it yet, and in another period of time He wants it, but has not
considered it yet, etc. No, it is not like that. We did say that time is
irrelevant in respect to the Essential Being. Time has to do with the
material beings. Therefore it is impossible to imagine that there are in
His Essence things arranged according to a sequence of time, requiring
Him to be a place for the events.

Secondly, we must know that these concepts are abstracted from a state
of action, i.e. they are abstract concepts which are derived by reason
from comparing the Holy Essence of Allah with His creatures. In the
outside we have nothing except the Holy Essence of Allah, the Exalted -
Who is a Being of utmost greatness, void of all kinds of limitedness and
deficiency - and His creatures whom He created in the outside according
to His will. There is nothing except these two.

The acts which are ascribed to Allah are concepts which are abstracted
by the mind. When it is realized that the issuance of acts, and the
appearance of creatures, are caused by the will of Allah, not per force
or pressure, not it is imposed upon Him to create the world, the mind
abstracts the concept that the act is performed by Allah's "will".

Allah never does anything without a will, though it does not mean that
His Will is something accidental and comes from outside. This does not
coincide with Allah's divinity. No change whatsoever may happen in the
Holy Essence of Allah, the Exalted, neither in His Essence nor in His
Attributes. The same is true in respect to moods. In fact, ascribing
moods to Allah is incorrect.

When the mind notes that something happens in a particular time, and is
not against Allah's will, i.e. it is not imposed per force upon Him, it
says that Allah wanted and performed it. But does wanting mean that it
was caused by a certain state that appeared in Allah? No, no changings
occur to the Divine Essence. When we ascribed the attributes of
knowledge and power to Allah we did not mean to say that He had strong
and muscled hands.

In fact, the mind noticed that the One Who created such a great world
cannot be an impotent being. On this basis we used to aseribe power to
Allah, but this power is nothing but His very Essence, His simple divine
self. The same is true in respect to the divine attributes of action, as
there is nothing, except the Essence of Allah and His creatures. There
is nothing that can be named: will, want, permission, destiny and the
like. These are mere abstract concepts.

Thirdly, there is no multiplicity in His Attributes of Action. That is,
just as all His Attributes are His very Essence, His knowledge also is
nothing but His Power, and His Power is nothing but His Life, and all
these are nothing but His Essence. Similarly His acts. There is Allah
and the world which He created. The other entities called: permission,
will, want, etc. do not exist. It is the mind that abstracts other
additional concepts - concepts which have two basis and two ends: one is
linked to Allah and the other to Allah's creatures.

The evidence for all these is, in fact, the very divine act, which is
of automatic function. Just as the Attributes are abstracted from
Allah's Essence, without meaning any multiplicity in His Essence,
similarly the Attributes of acts are also abstracted from His acts,
without there being any multiplicity. This was an analysis which must be
considered so that one may not commit a mistake in respect to Allah's
act and attributes of acts.


