The Stages and the Degrees of the Act
=====================================

The Glorious Qur'an ascribes the world to Allah, the Exalted in the
form of some concepts which conform with the attributes and the stages
of act. The noble narratives state a certain system for those concepts.
For example, some narratives say that the happening of everything in
this world depends on four things: knowledge, will, measurement and
decree. Some other narratives count them to be five or seven.

These, however, are sporadically stated in the Qur'an. But there is not
a single ayah to count all the four, five or seven of them. The origins,
the stages or the degrees of the act are the same as that named as to be
the origin of, and the prelude to, our acts. The mind, after abstracting
and purifying these concepts, ascribes them to Allah. We may not forget
that, in respect to Allah, time is of no concern, and it does not appear
in the Essence of Allah as an accidental event. Actually, they are
concepts which the mind abstracts them from the connection between Allah
and the world.

**Allah's Knowledge**

Knowledge is one of the said concepts. Talking about the Divine
Attributes, we said that one of the essential attributes is knowledge,
and, whether there is a world or not, the Holy Essence of Allah, the
Exalted, is the very Knowledge itself. Allah is aware of His own
Essence, because His Divine Existence is such that He cannot be unaware
of Himself. This awareness, in a sense, awareness of all other things,
as is explained in its place.

Besides the essential knowledge, the Qur'an ascribes other kinds of
knowledge to Allah. In some ayahs we read about a knowledge which is
registered in a book, such as: "He said: The Knowledge thereof is with
my Lord in a Book; my Lord neither errs nor forgets,"[^175] or "And with
Him are the keys of the unseen, no one knows them but He," up to
"neither anything green nor dry is but in a clear Book."[^176] These
ayahs say that Allah is aware of everything. No leaf of a tree falls
down unless Allah is aware of it. No event happens unless Allah knows
it. The ayah ends with "...neither anything green nor dry is but in a
clear Book". It is quite clear from these ayahs that the divine
knowledge, or a part of it, is registered in a book.

A number of scholars wrote analysis about this Book. They expanded on
the meaning of the "Book" so much that it may include Allah Himself. We
do not support such disposals of linguistic concepts. It is true that
some concepts can be generalized by ommitting their particularities so
as to enlarge their capacities and widen their limits, but only to a
commonly acceptable extent. Otherwise all the concepts would be
amalgamated into each other. The ayah says that the knowledge of all
things is in a Book. This expression does not fit in with saying that
the Book is Allah Himself, and it is not commonly agreeable. This Book
must naturally be one of Allah's creatures, as it is referred to in
other instances as "The Preserved Tablet".

So, based upon the ayahs which mention the Book or the Preserved
Tablet, we may ascribe to Allah knowledge other than the Essential
Knowledge. It is a knowledge as a created being, i.e. Allah has created
a being which reflects, like a mirror, what He will create afterwards.
The one who can get knowledge of this being, supervises and looks at it,
will be able to see the events and be aware of the past, present and
future happenings. This is a divine knowledge demonstrated in a
creature.

An ayah says: "But it is a Glorious Qur'an, in a Preserved
Tablet,"[^177] and another says: "Surely it is an honourable Qur'an, in a
guarded Book, no one touches it except the purified ones."[^178] Those
"ones", according to the Qur'an, are Ahlul Bayt (A.S.) [the progeny of
the Prophet], because it says: "Allah only wants to keep away the
uncleanness from you, O Ahlul Bayt and to purify you thoroughly."[^179]
These two ayahs, taken together, give us to understand that only Ahlul
Bayt ( A.S.) are apt to get in touch with the truth of the Preserved
Tablet. This is a God-given knowledge to a being whose truth we are
unable to understand. We only know that the Qur'an speaks of a being by
the name: a Guarded Book, a Preserved Tablet or a Clear Book, in which
everything is quite clear, and, if anyone could reach it and get in
touch with it, he would understand the truths of things. So, here is a
knowledge ascribed to Allah in respect to this creature: "He said: The
knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a Book"[^180]

**The Factual Knowledge**

There is another knowledge which is ascribed to Allah by the Qur'an. It
is of a lower degree. It covers the parts of any act that happens. We
are inclined to name it: The Factual Knowledge. As a matter of fact, the
Factual Knowledge is expressed in many terms: in philosophy it counters
the emotional knowledge. In another instance it counters the essential
knowledge, like the factual will and the essential will. Our intended
Factual Knowledge is that which is not essential, which is ascribed to
Allah in respect to the happening of any part of an act.

Taking this into consideration, many of the allagorical ayahs of the
Qur'an concerning knowledge can be solved. On one side, we know that
Allah is never ignorant of anything, but, on the other side, we
encounter ayahs which say that Allah knew that at a certain time or will
know. The way of coordinating these ayahs is to know that Allah's
knowledge, which is His very Essence, is unchangeable, is not temporal,
never transposeable and is unlimited, while the knowledge, which is in
practice, is a concept abstracted by the mind through observing the act
and the one who performs it.

It had already been said that the abstract concepts follow the
abstracting side and the origin of abstraction. As the origin of
abstraction, here, is two things: one is essential and divine, the other
is created, and, being ascribed to the created, it can be temporal. But
as the Essence of Allah is not temporal and outside time, the latter,
being ascribed to Allah, is void of time.

For example, the concept of creation, is taken from its relation to the
created, it is temporal. So, when we say that Allah had created this
creature at so-and-so time, this time is not referred to Allah, but to
the world. But this concept of creation, being an annexed concept, and
since one side of the annexation is a temporal being, it is possible to
regard it temporal. Similarly, the knowledge which is abstracted from
the position of action, can also be temporal, with a view to its
annexation, not with the view of the Divine Essence.

By the way of throwing light on this subject, we may better change it
from the concept of knowledge to the concept of seeing, hearing, or the
like. . It happens that somebody is unable to see, but in a time he is,
or sometimes he is able to see, but there is nothing to be seen before
him. So, despite the fact that his eyes are open and there is light, but
because there is nothing to reflect the light, he sees nothing. At night
you can see nothing in the lighted sky, but you can see the bird flying
in it, in which case you realize the sky is lighted. You could see only
because of certain conditions, that is, the seen object appeared in the
required time.

Concerning the Factual Knowledge, the same thing is applicable. so,
when we say that Allah knew at this time, is because the known thing
appeared only at that time, not that Allah was ignorant and then He
Knew. Therefore, there is a knowledge related to the act, such as the
ayah: "Now has Allah lightened your burden, for He knew that there is
weakness in you,"[^181] that is, the weakness appeared in them at that
time, and belonged to Allah's Knowledge: "And certainly We will try you
until We know those of you who strive hard and the forbearer.[^182] That
is, till striving and forbearing blossom in you and become manifest, not
that Allah was ignorant and He knew only when you showed striving and
forbearance! In short, we ascribe three kinds of knowledge to Allah:
first, the Essential Knowledge, which is the very Essence of Allah,
second, the knowledge which is preserved in the Book or the Tablet, and
which the others can be acquainted with, but only for a few whom Allah
had purified, and third, the knowledge that belongs to act, i.e. it is
the very act itself, and which is abstracted by the mind.

We must add that by Factual Knowledge we do not mean that when Allah
had created the world and performed some acts. He got a new knowledge,
or He had an Essential Knowledge and then He got a new Factual
Knowledge. If we say that He got something which He lacked, it would
mean deficiency and change in the Divine Essence. The Factual Knowledge
is a concept which the mind abstracts, by way of comparison with the
Divine Essence. It is not an actual reality added to the Divine Essence.
In the Divine Essence there is nothing but the Essential Knowledge. That
which appears is related to the created. Ascribing it to the Divine
Essence is in the shape of annexed abstract concept.

**The Divine Permission**

One of the points related to acts is Allah's permission to do things,
followed by the Divine Decree. Permission, conventionally, denotes the
case of somebody, who has no legal right to dispose of something, but
somebody else, who has the legal right, permits him to do so. For
example, no one has the right to enter another's house unless the owner
of the house gives him permission to enter it. The Qur'an, referring to
good behaviour and the rules of good companionship and sociability,
presents a number of ayahs concerning getting permission: asking the
Prophet's permission, the children asking their parent's permission
before entering their room and asking the permission of the owner of a
house before entering it, etc.

Permission, in this sense, is a legal concept, i.e. when we say that
one cannot enter a house without its owner's permission, the term
"cannot" is not a genetic matter, because he can enter per force. It is,
in fact, a legal prohibition, which is a relative, not corporeal,
matter. The wise people decided, for certain reasons, that nobody should
enter a house without its owner's permission, as otherwise the people's
comfort and the society's order would be disturbed. On this basis, we
say that this is a conventional, legislative or legal permission. But
its usage in the Qur'an is not only confined to the legislative, legal
or conventional use, as there is also the genetic permission.

In some instances the Qur'an refers to the natural factors as to be
functioning by Allah's permission, and that no phenomenon appears
without Allah's permission.

**Legislative and Genetic Permissions**

Consequently, we may divide permissions, according to the Qur'an, into
two divisions: Genetic and Legislative Permissions. The Qur'an claims
that all which happen in the world of reality, no matter who the doers
are or the way they are done, are done by Allah's general permission.
There is a general permission covering them all, otherwise nothing could
have taken place. Besides this permission, the Qur'an refers to another
connection for the appearance of the world's phenomena, namely: taqdir
(divine decree). There is a third connection called: qada' (fate). There
is further another connection named: knowledge. We may also refer to
another connection by the name: "the written", i.e. Allah has written
everything on a "Tablet", and it seems that the expression: "what is
written on the forehead", denoting destiny or fate, is not irrelevant.
That is, the teachings of the Divine Books tell that Allah has written
down the events before their taking place.

**The ayahs Related to "Permission"**

There are many ayahs concerning the legislative permission, such as:
"And We did not send any messenger but that he should be obeyed, by
Allah's permission,[^183] or that which denotes the legislation of jihad
for the first time: "Permission (to fight) is given to those who are
being fought because they have been wrong, and surely Allah is able to
give them victory."[^184] This was when the Muslims had no reasonable
defending power. They, of course, wished to be able to fight the
infidels and the polytheists. Especially when they were persecuted and
tortured, they used to ask the Prophet (S.A.) to permit them to fight
their enemies, but they were told: "Withhold your hands, and keep up the
Salat",[^185] until the Muslims migrated from Mecca to al-Madinah, where
they established their headquarters and mustered their defending power.
At that time the above ayah was revealed, which seems to be the first
ayah permitting the holy war, jihad, for defence. This was a legislative
permission, which told the Muslims: so far you were not permitted to
fight, but from now on you are permitted to.

Regarding the genetic permission, the Qur'an says: "And as for the good
land, its vegetation comes forth by permission of its Lord".[^186] The
point here is the growing of the plants out from the earth. The Qur'an
says that this happens by Allah's permission. That is, the natural
elements which cause the growing of the plant such as the seeds, the
earth, the water etc., do their job by Allah's permission. If Allah had
not permitted the land to cleave, the clouds to rain and the seeds to
grow there would have been no vegetation. This permission is not a legal
one, because the earth, the sun, the rain etc. have no sense so that a
law can be coined for them. This permission, therefore, is a genetic
one.

Here is another example about witchcraft. What is certain about it is
its effect on one's perception. That is, there are people who believe
that witchcraft has certain effects upon the world. Even if these
effects were imagined and fancied, the very believing in them is an
effect stirring one's imagination. As regards the magic of the Pharaohs,
the Qur'an says: "...their cords and their sticks-he imagined them, by
their magic, as if they were moving".[^187] In another story, the Quran
tells about Harut and Marut who taught witchcraft, and says: "...and
they cannot hurt with it any one except with Allah's permission.".[^188]
That is, no witchcraft can be effective without Allah's permission. What
kind of permission is that: legal or genetic? Undoubtedly, legality is
irrelevant here, as witchcraft is inanimate and cannot understand and
obey. The permission, therefore, is genetic. There are ayahs which say
that man appears and dies by Allah's permission: "No soul can ever die
except by Allah's permission".[^189] Even more than that. There are ayahs
which confirm that even man's voluntary actions would not take place
without Allah's permission. In the Qur'an we read: "And it is not for
any soul to believe except by Allah's permission".[^190] This is a
genetic permission, too, as otherwise, the legislative permission is for
all, even the infidels.

**Conclusions**

From the specimens of the above mentioned ayahs - of which there are
much more - we gather that Allah wants to inform us, through these
expressions, that no action and reaction can be out of Allah's control
and will. Allah, who created the world, has in His control all its
phenomena and effects. It is His power and will that appear in the
world. No one can overcome Allah's will or wage war against Him to do
anything contrary to His will. Those who rose against the prophets and
the straight path are not considered to have risen against Allah, unlike
what is stated in the current Torah that victory is sometimes Allah's
and sometimes His servants'.[^191] As a matter of course, in the original
Torah there are no such allegations. These are the distortions which had
been inserted in it later. The Qur'an stands quite against such
blasphemous ideas , and asserts that nothing is out of Allah's control
"And the jews say The hands of Allah are tied up".[^192] The polytheists
also used to say that the management of the affairs is in the hands of
Allah's associates and the lords.

The Qur'an takes a firm stand against such allegations and stresses, in
different manners, that Allah's power and will cover everything, and
whatever happens anywhere, happens under the management of Allah. It
further wants to guide man to understand Allah's unity of actions. It
wants to educate and bring up the believer to realize that all effects
are from Allah independently, and to recognize Allah's divine hand in
all beings and their affairs. This is a reality to which a believing man
should attain.

But how a man, who thinks himself and nature to be independent, can
attain to that stage? We believe ourselves to be independent and do not
feel being in need of Allah: it is we who say, it is we who hear, etc.
In none of these we feel to be in need of Allah, and even it is we who
turn the world upside down, it is we who fight, conquer the stars, roam
through the space, without feeling any need of Allah in our
activities.

Thus, man takes himself and the natural elements to be independent in
their effectiveness. But the Qur'an wants to educate the believer in
such a way, and to make him so aware, that he recognizes the hand of
Allah in everything, or even to see the hands of the others under the
light of His hand. That is why the Qur'an pays a special attention to
its expressions and methods of declarations. It ascribes all acts to
Allah in different forms, the simplest of which is to say that all
events happen by Allah's permission. This is the least to be said in
respect to His unity of actions.

So, when a believing man wants to become elevated in monotheism, he
must begin with acquiring the belief that whatever happens is not
without Allah's permission, and that He can stop it if He wills so. When
He allows a number of people to do whatsoever they like for a short
period, it does not mean that they had escaped from His control and that
He can no longer curb them. This is, in fact, a sort of management. He
wants them to feel as if they were the masters of the situation, and
that they were free to do whatever they desired, so as to let them
expose themselves and their deeds, but not that He has been overcome.

We are not to think that when the tyrants could dominate the people,
they could overcome Allah, too. It was Allah Himself Who allowed them,
in order to both try them and the society as well. This was by Allah's
permission, and He could stop them any time, as He did when He destroyed
Namrud by a gnat.

So, concerning these grace periods given to some groups, we should not
think that these denote Allah's defeat, such as the Jews used to think
that Jacob had defeated Allah and threw Him to the ground, and asked Him
blessings and favours, but Allah told him that the day will break and
His servant would come and see Him defeated, but Jacob told Him that He
must give him first the blessings which He had given to Ibraham and
Isaac. Thus, Jacob could get those blessings per force. Such is their
description of Allah, whereas the Qur'an says that the entire world
belongs to Him and that nothing happens without His permission. That is,
whatever happens everywhere in the world, in any form, quantity and
details, happens by His permission.

Allah has given the fire the permission to burn, the sun to shine, the
clouds to rain, the plants to grow and the earth to cleave. Had it not
been for His permission, none of these would have happened. This was the
first step of the monotheistic knowledge concerning action, i.e.
believing that everything is by Allah's permission, which covers the
lifeless nature, as well as the living creatures, including the human
beings, even their voluntary acts come under His genetic permission.
This is, even the servant who commits disobedience, his disobedience is
covered by this genetic permission, though not covered by the
legislative permission, i.e. Allah has not legally permitted us to
disobey Him, but genetically, He has. That is, He has created man with a
free will, giving him the power to choose to disobey or obey.

There is difference between the genetic and the legislative
permissions, between genetic and legislative wish, and between genetic
and legislative will. Everything happens according to divine permission,
wish and will, but this is true of the genetic kind only. That is, Allah
has given the power of being effective to man and to other factors, so
as to be able to show out their effects. This is the very genetic divine
permission. In some instances He has given the legislative permission,
too: "...all good things are made lawful for you".[^193] This is a
legislative permission. In some instances there is only a genetic, no
legislative permission. Something is legally forbidden. Similar division
is true in respect to "wish" and "will".

Everything happens by the divine genetic will and wish, but not
everything happens by Allah's legislative will and wish. Only those
things, which are in accordance with the divine laws, happen by Allah's
legislative will and wish. But there is nothing in the world to happen
contrary to Allah's genetic permission, wish and will.

**Teaching the Divine Unity of Actions**

Actually, this kind of teaching, on which the Qur'an insists, saying
that everything happens by Allah's permission, is a method of teaching
Allah's unity of actions, which gradually brings man nearer to the truth
of Tawhid, monotheism. First it says that things happen by permission,
then it says they happen by will. It then says: Beware not say: "I will
do such-and-such tomorrow", unless you add "by Allah's Will". The custom
of using the phrase: insha'allah - by Allah's Will - common among the
Muslims, is not a mere polite ceremony. Allah tells His Messenger: "And
do not say of anything: I shall do it tomorrow, unless Allah
wills".[^194] How do we know what would happen tomorrow?

It maybe that Allah willed something else. You may decide to travel to
somewhere the next day. You reach the airport in time and wait in the
waiting saloon. Suddenly they announce that your flight has been
postponed for two hours. You wait for two hours. Then they announce
again that the delay will be twelve hours. Your decision to travel was
determined, but does everything happen in accordance with your desire?
We have no control over all the factors of an act. Are our lives under
our control? Is there anybody who knows that he will be alive the next
hour that he may plan for this next hour? The one who believes in the
Oneness of Allah and recognizes His hand in everything and that His
management is apparent everywhere, will not allow himself to decide for
the future. This is a question related to Tawhid, and it goes .far
beyond self-reliance known to psychology.

In psychology the question is whether man should rely upon himself or
upon others. The answer is that man should depend upon himself. What
does that mean? It means that he must rely on himself, be brave in
acting, and expect no help from the others. Those who have no such
merits will linger behind in life.

In other words, man in his life should shoulder his own luggage,
expecting no body to carry it for him. But depending on Allah and on His
help is above all these things, it is a different chapter. A believer
neither depends on others, nor on himself. He always depends upon Allah,
the power which is above him and above all mankind, nature and the whole
world. This dependence creates a stronger power in man. Much as I try to
depend on my own self, I know my power to be so limited, and I may reach
a blind point where I can do nothing more. Even if I depended on others,
their total human abilities would, afterall, be limited, too. But the
one who depends upon the limitless divine power, will never feel being
defeated, because no power can ever stand against His.

The monotheist is made up in such a model that he says: by Allah, I am
afraid of nothing. Had he depended on his own power, he would have felt
afraid even at the very first step. No one can allege this, unless he is
depending on the divine power. He always says: "Allah did it", never
says" I did it". This viewpoint, this spiritual dependence, makes man
undefeatable. But the one who depends on himself, to whatever extent,
will finally be defeated. How much power can an individual have?

Therefore, relying upon Allah is something much higher than the
self-reliance taught to us. The monotheist believes that a great and
complete management is governing the whole world, in which the human
beings are but a small pieces in this huge system of divine management.
Can such a small piece depend on himself? Having known Allah, he will
always fix his eyes on Him. He decides, thinks, acts, but he still says:
"insha'allah", by Allah's Will: "And you will not, unless Allah
Wills."[^195] Your own will depends on Allah's. Allah wants you to will.
Had He not willed, He would not have given you the power to will, to
want, to think and act freely. This very free will which you have and
your freedom to choose depend on Allah's Will.

When you decide on doing something, take all the needed steps, but your
heart should be directed to Allah. It is He who causes you to succeed in
your work and to be victorious. Should this frame of mind appear in man
he would not be defeated, if not, he would be like a straw in the wind,
or a hay in the hands of roaring torrents and universal factors. When
man connects himself to Allah's Will, and places it under the rays of
His Will, he would never be defeated, nor would he feel worried and
disturbed. To proceed towards this monotheistic knowledge, man will have
to pass through many stages, the first of which is to believe that
nothing can happen without Allah's permission. The next stage is to note
the divine decree and fate, the subject we will handle presently.


