Divine Decree
=============

Foreordainance is one of the stages of Allah's act. It is, thus,
worthwhile to handle it in this chapter. As it had already been
discussed in the past chapters, some narratives have references to the
subject that every act or phenomenon which takes place in the world is
preceded by a number of preliminaries: knowledge, will, want,
permission, Book, term, divine, decree and fate and (perhaps there can
be some differences in the transposition of the narratives. This
arrangement, however, is temporal).

It suffices to arrange these concepts according to their intellectual
sequence. There is no need, for example, to say that the stage of
"knowledge" temporally comes before the stage of "will" or "permission".
It is enough to have these transpositions done according to reasoning,
taking into consideration the concepts which the mind abstracts from the
relation between the act and the person who performs it. In some other
instances the correlation is temporal and accordingly the transpositions
would take place.

For example, there can be a temporal transposition between qada' and
qadar, fate and divine decree, which would be obvious in the following
explanation. Nevertheless, it is not necessary to attach big importance
to the temporal transposition in all stages. By saying that "will" is
preeeded by "knowledge", we do not necessarily mean that there must be a
temporal distance between them.

**Fate and Divine Decree**

One of the topics of theology which is used to raise a great fuss is
the question of Fate and Divine Decree, which is not, practically,
confined to the circle of the Islamic theologians. This question is
noticeable in almost all sects and religions, even in the distorted
ones. Scholars have diverse opinions about it. It appears to be so
complicated to a topic that many scholars confessed being incapable of
explaining it. In a number of narratives some persons had been advised
not to think about it, though it can be gathered from other narratives,
which explain the qada' and the qadar, that to think about it is not
prohibited.

It is stated in Nahjul Balaghah that Amirul Mu'minin, Ali (A.S.) was
asked about qadar. His answer was: "It is a dark path. Do not tread upon
it. It is a deep ocean." Yet, in other instances, he himself and other
Imams (A.S.), referred, in details, especially by the Imam al-Hadi
(A.S.), to this subject, quoted in the books of narratives.

**Is Determinism Concomitant of Divine Decree?**

This is, anyhow, a complicated case accompanied with vagueness and
ambiguity wherever it was discussed. The main difficulty in this respect
is that to accept fate and divine decree inseparably requires accepting
determinism. Some thinkers could not distinct between fate and decree,
on one hand, and man's free will, on the other. They could not solve the
problem so as not to necessitate determinism, and keep man's free will
intact. Some even denied free will and said: "Fate and divine decree are
inevitable, and we do not accept free will". Even among some scholars
who belong to Islam such opinions can be heard - a notion which requires
serious consideration, because it is unbelievable to be a Muslim,
accepting the Qur'an, and still consider man to be completely compelled.
As a matter of fact, accepting the religion cannot be in harmony with
admitting determinism in its strict sense.

Any how, it had been related that there were persons who did have such
a belief, named: "al-mujabbirah" or "al-jabriyyah", i.e. those who
believed in determinism, as referred to in theology. Even the ash'aris,
who are a great section of the Sunni theologians, are said to believe in
determinism. On the other side, those who believed in free will denied
fate and divine decree, or interpreted it in such a way so as not to
contradict free will. In this direction there were diverse
inclinations.

Some said that fate and divine decree are true, but they do not cover
man's free will acts. That is, they defined particular limits for them
covering only the involuntary acts of man. They actually, agree that
determinism is concomitant with fate and divine decree, with the
difference that fate and decree are applicable only to the compulsory
acts. They assign a particular circle for free will, too, excluding it
from the effect of fate and decree. They attain to this by making a
combination between the evidences proving free will and the evidences
proving fate and decree, saying that the proofs of fate and decree cover
a series of affairs and phenomena which are involuntary, while the
evidences of free will cover another series.

Some others define fate and divine decree in such a way so as not to
contradict free will, thinking that they have joined fate and decree in
respect of all things, and free will in respect of the voluntary acts of
man. For example, they interpret qadar as to be Allah's knowledge of the
measures of things, and say that knowledge never contradicts free will.
As to qada' they say that it means judgement, and judgement does not
deny free will. A judge's judgement in the court does not prevent the
other party from free will. In this way they tried to run away from the
difficulties, saying that they accept qada' and qadar as not
contradicting free will.

To present this subject as a theologic or philosophic case, and study
their diverse opinions, doubts and evidences, would take a long time.
Therefore, we try to handle it, like other subjects related to theology,
based on the Qur'an. We shall explain the concepts of taqdir and qadar,
then we refer to what can be gathered from interpreting and analysing
qadar.

**The Lingual Concept of Taqdir**

Taqdir is the infinitive noun, derived from the three-lettered root
q-d-r [qadr or qadar]. The literal meaning of these roots is: measure.
Tadir can have two meanings: one is to measure something, and the other
is to find a measure for something. Later on we shall explain that both
meanings are intended by us, as measuring and establishing a measure.
One is a scientific taqdir, i.e. measuring something, the other is
material taqdir, i.e. creating a measure for something. So, it suffices
us to know that qadr and qadar mean a measure, and taqdir means
measuring, or knowing the measure of something, with the other version
meaning finding something with a particular measure.

Qadr, meaning measure, sometimes means high position or noble status,
and that is why some commentators said that "laylatul qadr" [in the
Surah No. 97] means the "nobel night", i.e. a very honourable night. In
fact, high position or nobility is concomitant with qadr, in some
instances. Originally, qadr does not mean "noble", it means "measure",
the same as when we mention the position and prestige of a great man.
The word "position " or "status" does not mean "greatness" or "honour",
and this loftiness is not part of the concepts of "position" or
"status", but it is concomitant with a special evidence. Likewise"
nobility" is concomitant with the special evidence of qadr.

**Qadr and Taqdir in the Qur'an**

Now we shall study the ayahs concerning qadr and taqdir to see what are
meant by such expressions. An advantage of this study is that it will
show us that they cover voluntary acts, too. The Holy Qur'an states:
"...Who created every thing and ordained for it a measure".[^196] Here
taqdir is used for everything". Also in another ayah it says: "We have
created every thing by a measure."[^197] These ayahs are general and
cover every thing, that is, if there is a decisive proof that the
general covers the particular. It is not that the general cannot be
particularized. At any rate, these ayahs speak in general, covering
every thing, unless there can be an evidence proving that by this
generation a particular is meant. Among the instances in which taqdir is
used for particular cases are those concerning the movements of the moon
and the sun. Concerning the sun, the Qur'an says: "And the sun moves to
a station (ordained) for him. That is the measuring of the Mighty, the
Knowing".[^198]

Now what does the movement of the sun mean? Is it its visible movement
which we see, from the east to the west? Or is it its movement within
the galaxy, as it has already been proved that the seen, together with
the whole solar system have a special movement within our galaxy? For
the time being we are not concerned about this. A movement of the sun is
referred to. It says that this movement is Allah's measuring. It is He
Who measured for the sun to have such a movement.

Likewise is the moon. It says: "And the moon, We have ordained for her
stages until she becomes again like an old dried palm-branch."[^199] That
is, the moon's movement passes through special stages. This very
expression is also used in respect to other phenomena. Concerning the
rain it says: "And We send down from the sky water in measure."[^200]
That is, the quantity of water which is on the earth, and which is
evaporated by the sun, and once again rains down, is a measured
quantity. Should the quantity of rain be doubled many times, the surface
of the earth would have been flooded with water, the buildings would
fall down, the plantations and orchards would be destroyed, and the
earth would no longer be suitable for dwelling. Was the rain to pour
down like a torrent, it would wash away every thing. So, the way the
rain comes down by drops is a measured method. Regarding eatables,
grains and foodstuff, the Qur'an says: "...and measured therein its
sustenance in four Days."[^201] Some narrations say that "four Days" mean
"four seasons", i.e. the movements of the earth are so arranged as to
have four seasons on the earth, resulting in the growing of different
foods in different seasons.

However, "in four Days" means that in four temporal periods Allah
measures out the sustenances of the earth, and that the appearance of
the four seasons, or periods, is effective in the preparation of
foodstuff on the earth, measured by Allah's wisdom.

**Taqdir in Particular Instances**

The measurements, so far explained, concerned the general course. There
are, sometimes, instances in which a special case of measurement is
referred to. For example, in respect of "Noah's Flood", Noah (A.S.)
tried to guide his people, for 950 years, to the right path and to
frighten them of Allah's chastisement, but only a few responded to him.
Finally, Allah's torment befell them in the form of a severe flood
caused by the down pour of rain and the springing of water out of the
earth, inandating the whole land, with nothing staying on the water
except Noah's ship and its passengers. The Qur'an says: "...so that the
water gather together according to measure already ordained."[^202] The
rain which comes down by drops, as usual, has its measure, and this
special downpour of rain has its measure, too.

Hence, taqdir can be in particular occasions as in usual generalities,
and it is not confined only to the general course of nature. So far, our
study of taqdir had no direct relation to man's voluntary acts. The
sun's course, the moon's movements, the coming of water from the sky,
Noah's flood, all have no connection with the voluntary acts of man, and
are acceptable with no difficulty.

Now let us see whether taqdir also covers man's voluntary acts or not.
All the former ayahs which referred to "everything" can be regarded as
to cover man's voluntary acts, since these acts are "things", too. But
what about the particular instances of the voluntary acts? Is there any
ayah referring to such particular instances? The Qur'an includes ayahs
in which taqdir and qadar are used in this respect, one of which is
Moses' story.

After the disputes between the Israelis and the Copts, in which a Copt
of the followers of Pharaoh, was killed by Moses, he ran away from Egypt
heading to Midyan, a town where Prophet Shu'ayb lived. After suffering
much difficulties, Moses reached the town, exhausted and hungry, for he
had travelled the whole long distance from Egypt to the town of Midyan
in few days, having nothing to eat but the grass of the desert, much
that Amirul Mu'minin Ali (A.S.) describes him in Nahjul Balagah as the
green of the grass was visible from under his transparent skin. He
entered the town in a bad state of fatigue, hunger and weakness. Nearby
there were water-wells from which people used to water their sheep. The
stronger ones could get to the wells before others to water their
animals. The weak had to wait till the departure of the strong ones,
before they could proceed to the water.

Moses (A.S.), tired and wearisome, laid down under a tree. He noticed
two girls shyly standing aside with a number of sheep. From their
appearance and conduct he guessed them to be honourable. He stood up,
and went to them: "Why do you not water your sheep?" he asked. "We do
not hire any shephered," they replied. "We are unable to draw water out
of the well, "they added, and continued: "So, we have but to wait until
the strong shepherds water their sheep and go away, and then we can use
their leftover to water our sheep". Moses (A.S.), though weak and
hungry, went to one of the wells, drew alone a big bucket of water, and
told the girls: "Come , water your sheep". So they did, and went back
home.

Their father, noticing that they returned much earlier than usual,
asked them: "How is it that you came back so quickly?" They told him
what happened between them and "a strong young man with an appearance
showing nobility and magnanimity, helped us with the job". One of the
two girls suggested: "It would be good if we gave him his wage for what
he had done, and, also employ him to shepherd for us". "Go and fetch him
here", said the father, consenting to the suggestion.

The Qur'an stresses the details in the story. It further says that one
of the girls came back and shyly told Moses to answer her father's
invitation. He accompanied her. It was natural for a tired, hungry and
homeless fugitive to heartily accept such an offer. Shu'ayb further
offered to spouse him to one of his daughters, for working for him for
eight or ten years. Moses (A.S.) agreed and worked for him nearly ten
years. He, then, asked Shu'ayb to permit him to take his wife and go
back to his homeland. On his way home, he passed through the valley of
Tur at night time. It seems that his wife was about to give birth to a
child. It was cold, in a dark desert, with nobody to help. Naturally he
was worried and disturbed: The coldness of the whether on the one hand,
and the darkness of the night on the other, and his inability to get any
help. Bewildered and confused, Moses (A.S.) was looking around, when he
suddenly saw a glow of light on the right side of the mount Tur. He
thought it was the fire of some shepherds. He told his wife to stay
there till he could bring help and some fire from them. Getting nearer,
he was surprised to see a tree glowing with a wonderful light.
Approaching further he heard, stupefied, a voice addressing him: "O
Moses! It is I, Allah, the Lord of the Worlds".[^203] It would really be
an extraordinary scene, if we would draw it correctly. Moses goes to
fetch fire, approaches a tree glowing with light, hears a voice telling
him: "It is I, Allah, the Lord of the worlds".

Then the voice tells him that He had appointed him as His messenger,
and orders him go to Pharoah, he has transgressed".[^204] By relating
this part of Moses' story concerning his going to the tree to fetch
fire, but what happens is that he hears Allah's voice, and is ordered to
go to Pharoah and invite him to the right path, and to deliver Bani
Israel out of his claw. Moses had never expected to encounter such an
event. He went for something, but found something else. In the address
it was said: "...then you came hither as measured, O Moses".[^205] Your
coming here was predetermined and according to a measure. It was not per
chance nor it happened at random. It had been calculated that you should
leave your home and come to this desert and to this spot so as to
receive Allah's revelation: "...from the right slope of the Mount".[^206]
It was a divine taqdir and measuring. As a matter of fact, Moses' travel
was a voluntary act with a particular purpose. But its result and
particular conclusion were not governed by him, they were in the hands
of someone else. Allah had arranged the chessmen and the courses in such
a plan that Moses should reach that very spot on that very night so as
to become a prophet. Here the word qadar is used: "...then you came
hither, as measured, O Moses."

As regards qada', fate, a similar event happened. In the war of Badr,
the Muslims planned to attach Abu Sufyan's caravan to revenge themselves
for their formerly confiscated properties. This was their intention and
objective. But the events happened in a way unexpected by the Muslims.
Abu Sufyan's caravan passed by the well of Badr, where the Muslims had
gathered. The army of Quraysh advanced from Mecca towards them, and all
met near that well. The Muslims had not been thinking of a war, but
Allah's taqdir so willed that a war should take place at that spot, and
that the Muslims should win, despite the fact that the Muslims' number
and preparations were quite unsuitable to wage a war. The war should
have happened, but the Muslims had not been expecting it nor was it in
their calculations.

The Qur'an has a beautiful expression in this respect: "...and had you
made an appointment you would certainly have failed to keep it. But it
was destined by Allah to bring about a matter that was to be done.[^207]
Thus, it is clear that fate and divine decree are applicable to man's
voluntary acts, too.

**The Connection Between Divine Taqdir and Man's Free Will**

From the past discussion it was noted that apparently the ayahs and
narratives denote that the Divine Taqdir is general and covers
everything, even the voluntary acts of the human beings. It is here that
the problem arises: If there is a divine taqdir, how can we have a free
will? To answer this question we have to present a preliminary
introduction: The phenomena of this world happen under certain limits
and restrictions, disregarding place, time and conditions.

In the kingdom of nature there is no such being as to be unlimited,
measureless and unconditional. Whatever creature you may think of, you
will realize that it has limits, dimensions and particular conditions,
without which it cannot exist. From the greatest celestial body down to
the smallest particle of the atom, all have the same characteristic,
i.e. they are measured and measurable, whether big or small. They also
have a limited life, that is a limited term. None of the phenomena of
this world can have a limitless age: "...to an appointed term".[^208]
Every thing has an end. It is a kind of limit, a temporal limit, which
is termed in the Qur'an and the traditions as "ajal", the final end. The
phenomena of this world are somewhat dependent on the other phenomena.
Nothing in this world can be separate and independent from other things.
At the same time, the shape, the characteristics and the features of any
thing have their limits, too, as every thing has its features and
specific marks.

To give an example, we take the human being. Man's existence is not
limitless. This human species was never from pre-eternity till post
eternity along history. This is contrary to the opinion of some ancient
philosophers who thought that the original species were from
pre-eternity. Since man was created in a particular historical sector,
he is, temporarily, limited. That is, he has a beginning before which he
did not exist, and he existed in a certain place, the earth. Is there in
other than the earth any living being? It is doubted. But it is certain
that the living beings are not in all other planets. Man must live on
the earth, as he cannot live on the moon, Jupiter or Saturn.

So, as regards place, he is also limited and cannot live anywhere, nor
inside the earth or in the space. This is also a kind of limitation on
man's existence. Man's organs and systems are also subject to certain
limits, such as size and position. The eye has a size-limit, though a
little smaller or larger. It never becomes as large as one's head or the
whole body. Likewise are the other organs and limbs, they are
proportional to the size of the body and do not exceed the standard
limits, more or less. The heart never becomes as large as a man's head,
and so on. Concerning place and position, everything has its size and
measure. The eye is never placed inside the sole. It must be in its
usual place in the head section. The heart is never positioned in the
head. It must be inside the chest. Similarly the stomach, the liver and
other organs and limbs, each has its limit and position in proportion to
the other parts.

Acts are also performed by their respective organ or system, under
particular conditions and limitations. We cannot see with our ears.
Seeing can only be performed through the eyes. With the nose we cannot
hear, as it is the means of smelling. With our foot we cannot write,
which is done by the hand. With the hands we cannot walk, we walk with
our legs. Each organ does its prescribed duty. The duty of an organ
cannot be expected from another organ.

Consequently, our acts are limited and confined to special means and
organs, which are to perform their defined functions. Even the duties of
each organ have limits and restrictions. We see with our eyes, but can
we see everything with our eyes? No, the too tiny things cannot be seen
by the eye. Thus, our faculty of seeing is also conditional. Even the
large things, can we see them at all times? No. Certain amount of light
is necessary. Can we see it from any distance? No. When you are up in an
airplane, not too high in the air, you can see the moving cars as small
as ants. The higher you fly the smaller they appear, until you can no
longer distinguish even a huge thing as a mountain.

So, things can be seen only at a limited distance, and the sounds can
be heard only at a limited distance, too. The food which we eat is eaten
through the mouth, not through other inlets. Can we eat whatever we put
in our mouths? No. We cannot eat stones, bones and the like, though some
animals can. Can we eat any quantity we like? Certainly not. The
capacities of our stomachs and digestive systems are limited. Can we eat
whenever we like? No. We must feel hungry and have the appetite, if not,
we will feel nausea. Can we breathe through our eyes? No. We must use
our breathing system. We must breathe air, i.e. a certain compound of
gases. We cannot breathe any sort of gases, as some kinds of gases may
kill us if we breathe them. Our breathing systems are to be so arranged
as to enable the air to reach the cells which make the tissues of our
body, organs and systems.

Each one works only under thousands of conditions and requisites,
without which they cannot function. All these functions are to take
place within the frame of limits and restrictions. With more careful
consideration, we realize that uttering even a single world requires
hundreds of conditions. In this respect, to know some physiology would
help in showing how many conditions would be required for doing a single
vital function.

Consequently, there is nothing in this world which can be without
limits and measure. Everything is measured: "We have created everything
by a measure."[^207] Among these measures is time, i.e. everything has a
prescribed ajal, a life-time, a term. The narratives stating that
everything has a term, is an evidence of this type of qadar,
time-measure. Therefore, saying that taqdir and qadar are true of every
thing is correct. Everything has a measure. But who has decided these
measures?

Having understood that the entire world was created by Allah, and its
existence and all affairs are in His hands, it goes without saying that
the limits and measures of all things are also in His hands and under
His control. When Allah created us limited in time and place, who could
measure these for us? The One who created us with such measures. We have
been created in a particular section of the history of the world. Who
decided this section of time for us? The One who created us. We are to
live on an assigned planet. Who has assigned this qadar, fate, for us?
The One who brought us to life on this planet.

Hence, all the taqdirs are from Allah. Everything has a measure, and it
is decided by its creator.

**Conditions of Voluntary Acts**

We know that even the voluntary acts are limited and they are mostly
not under our control. The first condition required for a voluntary act
to be performed by us is that we must be alive. A dead person cannot do
any voluntary act. But is it under our control to be alive or to
preserve it? Can any one remain alive as long as he likes? Everybody
knows that to remain alive is not in our hands. We have unvoluntarily
come to existence, made to live and we unvoluntarily pass away. Had it
been left to us, we would not have accept no less than a thousand years:
"... everyone of them would like to live a thousand years."[^208] This
ayah concerns Bani Israel who very much loved life. But, naturally,
there are others who cherish such desires, too. Our sense, knowledge and
attention are the second condition. When we want to perform a voluntary
act, we must know the act. Sometimes one wants to remember something,
but he cannot, much as he tries.

Naturally, he would not be able to do what he wants to before
remembering what he had forgotten about that voluntary act. So, our
memory is also not in our complete control such that we can remember
whatever we want and whenever we want. Our own memory is out of our
choice, let alone the other conditions and limitations. Is it to our own
choice to eat our food through our mouths? There is no choice at all. To
see by means of our eyes is also not our choice. It is a non-voluntary
act. We were not consulted whether we want to see with our eyes or
ears.

All of these are non-voluntary. After arranging for all the
non-voluntary preliminaries, it will be our turn to choose. Now that you
have all the instruments for speaking, you are free to speak or to keep
silent.

Therefore, the circle of our choice is too small, there is no doubt in
this. We all realize that these preliminaries and instruments are not
chosen by us. In short, through a very limited frame, surrounded, at
different dimensions, by non-voluntary conditions, there is a narrow
passage open to us to move through. Each act has its limited circle,
within which we are allowed to move, but never to step outside the
circumference of the circle. Inside this limited circle we are free to
choose the direction of our movements.

So, there is no question about qadar as meaning the different
indispensable conditions, means and materials necessary for everything,
all of which are provided for by Allah. It is enough for an act to be
voluntary to have the last section of the "complete cause" under our
choice, as our elders say, while the other sections of the "Complete
Cause", which may exceed hundreds or thousands in number, are mostly out
of our control. It is strange enough, however, that man's highest
perfection, as a human being, is performable within this small and
limited circle of voluntary acts. Through this single channel,
prescribed for us by Allah, man can achieve his perfection.

As regards the degree of qadar, it belongs to a period when the act, or
the phenomenon, has not yet taken its final shape, and is still
changeable, i.e. its Complete Cause has not yet completed. All the
preliminaries are provided, but you have not yet made your choice. In
other words, the stage of the qadar is confirmed to the period prior to
the choice.

Therefore, the complication in respect to the qadar is much less than
that of the qada' (divine decree), which will be the topic of our coming
discussion. In conclusion we point out the following:

**1. The two Divisions of Qadar: Specific and Personal**

Some of the formerly mentioned examples belonged to the specific qadar,
such as saying that man was destined to appear at a certain period of
the history. This is a specific qadar. "And there is for you in the
earth an abode and a provision for a time"[^209] After the dwelling of
Adam and Eve in the earth, this divine qadar was implemented, both
spatially and temporally.

The individual characteristics, such as race, colour, shape, stature,
etc., are the personal qadar. Each person has his personal taqdir: one
has black hair, another is blond, and so on.

**2. The Knowledge: Taqdir and the Corporeal Taqdir**

Taqdir is also divided into the knowledge - taqdir and the corporeal
taqdir. The first means that Allah knew the measures, the conditions,
the limitations of time and place with which every being is created. The
corporeal taqdir means that Allah had ordained the creation of each
creature to be according to the prescribed limitations.

**3. The Stages of Taqdir**

For taqdir there can be stages according to its distance from the
thing. We may consider a condition immediately needed for the happening
of a thing. But this very condition requires the happening of another
one before it. For example, to see there must be light, but for having
light there is a condition. For the light's condition there is a
condition, too, and so on. For our eyes to see it must be day-time with
sunlight, should there be no other light. In order to have sunlight
there is a condition, that is, our hemisphere should face the sun.

It is not only that, the sun must continue issuing forth its energy,
and, according to the theory of the transformation of material into
energy, a part of the body of the sun continually transforms into
energy, creating light, which is to reach us, on the condition that
nothing would block its way. So, for our acts, or for any phenomenon, we
admit a series of direct and immediate conditions that have near
connection with the act. There are also other remote conditions, and
others in between:

Consequently, there are stages for the taqdir, according to its
distance from the act. The farther the taqd ir, the greater the
possibility of its changeability, and the nearer the taqdir, the quicker
its shaping and the better its clarity.

Similar are the other affairs of our lives. They have far causes whose
possibility to change is great before reaching the affair. The more they
get nearer to the affair's spatial or temporal condition, the clearer
their entities, the less their ambiguities and the fewer their
possibilities of changing, until the complete cause is obtained, and
then the phenomenon itself would appear. Once the phenomenon is
completed, there will be no further changing, and it keeps connected to
its originator, though, to say the least, it may later have a weakening
effect on the former act, or do away with it, like repentance, which
weakens the effect of the former acts, or efface them for good.

So, when all the parts of a complete cause have not yet been obtained,
the thing would not become inevitable nor necessary, i.e. it may change.
But when all the parts of its complete cause are there, it will not be
changeable any more. In the voluntary acts, the choosing is the last or
the nearest part.

It, therefore, becomes clear that the qadar is changeable as long as
the last part of. the complete cause is not finally fulfilled. This is
exactly what is said about the ajal [ordained term], which is a temporal
qadar, as "the suspended ajal. Ajal is like a wave directed towards a
certain point, on the condition that nothing hinders it or changes its
course. Ajal denotes that this person, with his given particularities
and under the usual conditions, is to live, say, for 60 years. So, the
life-time of this person is measured to be 60 years. But there can be a
handicap, such as an accident in the street, and the 60 years changes to
30 years. So, the 60 years life-time is "suspended ajal", and is
conditioned that no accident may happen. This, actually, denotes a
change in the Known, not in the Knowledge.


