The Preserved, Tablet Eraseable and the Recordable Tablet
=========================================================

We had already hinted at Al-Lawhul Mahfuz [The Preserved Tablet], as a
creature which reflects, like a mirror, the other creatures, and in
which all the particularities of things, such as time, place, limits,
shape etc. are strictly distinguished. If anybody could get in touch
with Al-Lawhul Mahfuz, he would be able to know, beforehand, what event,
with what particulars and when it would happen, as well as whether it
would be voluntary or compulsory.

There are other tablets, besides Al-Lawhul Mahfuz, in which the events
with their details are not minutely registered. Actually, they are
ambiguous, or only parts and sections of the events and their taqdir are
recorded. Suppose that it is registered in a tablet that so-and-so in
such-and-such date would move from such-and-such place, but it is not
stated when he would reach such-and-such place. It is gathered from the
ayahs and narratives that besides al-Kitab-al-Mubin, Ummul Kitab, or
al-Lawhul Mahfuz, in which the inevitable and final destines are
registered, there are other Lawhs in which ambiguous or conditional
events are reflected. There are persons who can get in touch with those
middle tablets, but not with al-Lawhul-Mahfuz. By way of contacting the
middle tablets, they can foretell some events, though there may be some
discrepancies in them. As regards the prophets and Imams, probably some
of their profecies were based on their contact with those middle
tablets, which are called 'the tablets for erasing and recording'.

It is narrated that the Prophet (S.A.) was one day sitting with his
companions, when a Jew passed by them. The Prophet said: "This man is
going to the desert where a snake will bite him". It happened that in
the evening the same man showed up from the distance, carrying a bundle
of firewood. The companions told the Prophet that that was the same
man.

The Prophet said: "Let him get nearer". Then he called the man and told
him to undo his bundle. There they saw a snake coiled in the middle of
the bundle. The Prophet said: It was in the taqdir that this snake
should bite the man. But, as he left his house he gave alms. The alms
protected him against this misfortune. The taqdir which I first told you
about was a suspended one, and its normal course was that this snake
should bite this man, but there appeared an obstacle, though not a
physical one. The natural effect of alms-giving is not to prevent the
snake from biting. There is no such physical connection between the alms
and the snake to prevent its biting. The connection is a metaphysical
one.

The changes in the suspended and conditional taqdirs are termed as
"bida"'. [Allah's innovation]. For example, observing family relations,
being kind to one's parents, giving alms, and the like, change the
taqdirs, while, on the other hand, disregarding family relations and
incurring the wrath of one's parents, change the good taqdirs to bad
ones.

It happens that Allah, the Prophet or the Imam may announce something,
but not decisively, yet, the hearer takes it to be decisive because he
does not notice its condition. Later on, the condition changes and the
event does not take place. This is bada'.

In some narratives it is stated that one of the best worships is to
believe in the bada'. That is, if we believe that the taqdirs are final
and unchangeable, and that we are deprived of the chance to choose, then
we shall not implore Allah and exert no activity nor any effort, and
say: let happen what it may, and we do not ask Allah to lift the
calamity from us, because the belief in the effectiveness of benediction
comes when we believe that the taqdirs are suspended and conditional,
and that the du'a' [invocation] can make an obstacle blocking the way of
some taqdirs, only at that time the motive for praying Allah obtains.

Those who do not believe in the bada', i.e. in the changeability of the
suspended taqdirs, will have no motive for invocation and for being
active in that. That is why the disbelief in the taqdir and qadar cause
a kind of inactivity, weakness, stillness and backwardness. It should
not be so from the monotheistic point of view. The reasons and the
conditions of each are effective at their proper time. Taqdir does not
deprive man from his free will.

The very ability to choose is one of the things moving within the
limits of taqdir, and one's optional acts should be carried out through
one's attempts and hard work, despite the fact that we do not know what
the final destiny is. Our duty, nevertheless, is to try. If our efforts
are successful, we shall attain to our aim, but if we are not
successful, we will be doing our duty. At any rate, it will have a
definite result with Allah, which will never be lost.

As a result, the monotheist will always be thinking of what his duty
is. You had repeatedly heard the Imam saying: "We perform our duty, but
what would happen is not our concern. Our duty is to struggle, but
whether we are going to be successful or not is not our concern.
Whatever Allah wants will happen. Such a person will never feel
perplexed, nor will he regret his work. So, this belief is a factor of
success, not of failure. Consequently, qada' and qadar, if correctly
understood, can be regarded as factors of progress, improvement and
integrity of knowledge which is monotheism, not that they are factors of
stagnancy, weakness and seeking excuses.

**The Difference between Qada' and Qadar**

Traditionally, qada' and qadar are of almost the same meaning and
reciprocally used. It seems that this reciprocity has occurred long ago,
in early days of Islam, as they thought them to be synonyms. But by
careful study of these two terms and their lexical differences it can be
realized that they differ in precedence, degree and status. Qadar's
status is prior to that of qada'. Qadar means measurement, while qada'
denotes an end and finishing. Comparing these two concepts, it can be
observed that the status of qada', logically, comes later, because it is
the finishing stage, whereas the concept of qadar denotes weighing and
measuring, a stage which, logically, takes place before finality, and is
regarded to be part of the preliminaries.

Therefore, it can be said that qadar is the stage in which the
phenomenon has not yet reached the stage of necessity, i.e. the details
of its Complete Cause have not yet been fulfilled completely, leaving
them subject to possible changes, as they have not yet obtained their
finality. But qada, being a final stage, is reached at when the complete
cause is implemented, and there remains no room for expectations.

In some narratives, qada' and qadar are used, in general, as synonyms,
such as the narrative which divides the qada' into two kinds: the
changeable qada', and the unchangeable qada'. According to our studies,
the changeable qada' is the very taqdir. Some other narratives confirm
the difference between qada' and qadar, and that qadar precedes the
qada'. In order to clarify the difference between the concepts of qadar
and qada', and that the qada' comes after the qadar, as the qada' is the
last and unchangeable stage, we shall study the Qur'anic ayahs using the
term qada'.

**The Qada' in the Qur'an**

We refer first to the places in the Qur'an where the term qada' is used
in order to study its concept as is intended through its exact meaning.
Afterward we shall discuss the term according to its special meaning,
which is intended by us. 1- The word qada' is used in the Qur'an, in
some instances, to mean a prescribed duty: "And your Lord has decreed
[qada] that you worship none save Him, and (show) kindness to (your)
parents."[^210] What does qada [as a verb] mean here?

This verb denotes here that: you should worship none except Allah; and
that you should be kind to your parents. These two are among the very
much stressed duties which have no exception. The duties, as a matter of
fact, are numerous, but two of them receive exceptional stress. There is
no doubt that qada' in this ayah means a strict decree or an order which
goes as a strong and confirmed law. The Schismatics used to grasp such
instances as an excuse to say that, as far as man's optional acts are
concerned, qada' is but a command, and nothing else.

**2- In some other instances qada' means judgement, arbitration and
settling disputes.**

The Qur'an says: "And Allah Yaqdi (judges) with truth".[^211]

3- Sometimes it is used to denote "announcement, such as the ayah in
Surat Bani Israel[^212] "And We decreed [qada'] for the children of
Israel in the Book: You shall make mischief in the land twice, and you
shall act with too great insolence",[^213] and finally says: "...But if
you repeat We shall repeat."[^214] That is, if you repeat your mischief
making, We shall also repeat our punishment. It seems that it refers to
the attach of Nebuchadnezzer on Palestine and severely routed the Jews
and destroyed al-Aqsa mosque and humiliated the children of Israel,
dispensing them out to other countries. Group of the Jews moved to
Arabia and dwelt in Khaybar and near Yathrib [al-Madinah]. Before this
happened, Allah had announced it to the Jews: "And We decreed for the
Children of Israel in the Book: You shall make mischief in the land
twice." There is no doubt that the word "qada" "announced" is
understood.

In fact, "qadayna" [We decreed] does not originally mean "We
announced". There is in the Arabic literary language style called tadmin
and ishrab, which is to incorporate two meanings together, and the
transitive article, or the genetive case, of one of them is transported
to the other, a process which denotes that the incorporation has taken
place, and that the twin meaning is wanted.

The verb "qada'" is transitive and it does not need the preposition
"ila": Wa qadayna ila bani Israel", means that a meaning is incorporated
in it, and the preposition "ila is used to make it transitive, without
having to plainly state it. That is, instead of saying: We decreed, and
announced that decree, the announcement is omitted. Or. We decreed and
revealed the decree, but the word "revealed" is not mentioned and is
satisfied with the genetive case instead of the very words. So, the
concepts "announce" or "reveal" are not originally in qada, but they are
incorporated in it. 4- In other instances qada' means the end or
something finished, such as in "qudiyal amr" [the affair is finished]
and it cannot be altered. In this context, the word is used in the
Qur'an repeatedly, such as in the story of Yusuf, who, while in prison,
two of his prison-mates tell him of their dreams, asking him to
interpret the dreams to them. He does, and then says: "qudiyal
amrulladhi fihi tasta, ftiyan" [the matter is decreed concerning which
you inquired]. The interpretation of your dreams is as I told you and it
will definitely happen.

Another instance is the dialogue between Satan and his follower in
Hell: "Waqalash-shaytanu lamma qudiyal amr [And Satan shall talk after
the affair is decided]. After that the judgement had been completed, and
everything had come to an end, and there remained no return, at that
time Satan talks to his followers, who attack him and tell him it was he
who misguided them. He retorts that he had no control upon them. He
merely invited them to come and they came after him. This dialogue takes
place when everything had ended, which is expressed through "lamma
qudiyal amr" [after the affair is decided]].

From this survey of the many uses of this word we gather that the
original lexical meaning of qada' denotes final end. But in other
instances other meanings are incorporated in it, and it may appear later
to form a single, though originally it has a single root. For example,
by studying the word "qada'" we notice that when there is a dispute
concerning a house. One says that it is his, the other says that it is
his. A judge will hear the case and issue his decree, which is final and
puts an end to the dispute.

So, when this judgement or arbitration is called "qada"', it means to
put an end to an affair and to conclude the case. Therefore, there is a
hint at the end included in qada', or in the duties which are confirmed,
stressed and irrevocable, where "qada'" is used, the meaning is a
decisive end and a finality, with no return. If in some cases there are
exceptions in performing certain duties, or even abrogations and
changes, in cases of qada' there can be no such thing, and the decree is
final and unchangeable, and everybody should observe that. So, here also
the meaning of ending is intended, though in respect of making laws, not
genetically.

Hence, it can be said that the root of all usages qada' the intended
meaning is finality and finishing, be it a genetic, legislative or legal
affair. Another affair may be in a state of fluctuation, instable, with
a possibility of changing. Sometimes it reaches a fixed state and
becomes unchangeable, which is the final stage. As long as an affair has
not yet finished, there is the possibility for it to change form, to be
altered. But as soon as it reaches its full stop, it can never change.
From this linguistic analysis we get to the conclusion that the concept
of qada in the genetic affairs is proportionate to the last stage of the
act, i.e. when all the parts of the Complete Cause have been
implemented, the existence of the subject reaches the limit of
inevitability and finality, with no possibility of return. So, if in
some narratives we notice a qada' which is not inevitable and
changeable, it is, in fact, qadar taken as synonym to qada', divided
into two stages.

The same thing is true to qadar itself.

Traditionally speaking, any event passes through stages before reaching
its finality and regarded as finished. For example, when you finish the
building of a house and prepare for dwelling, if you are asked whether
your house has been finished, you will answer: "Yes, we are living there
now". But when you are asked whether you had connected the house to gas
supply, we will say: "No , not yet, but it will be done in few days".
So, the completion of an affair goes through stages. It is out of
carelessness to say the house is finished, while actually it is not. Or,
on a journey, the traveller says: "We reached the town", while he still
has to go a few more kilometres. It is one of the journey's stages, and
to arrive at home is the last stage.

In the invocations recited during "the nights of qadr during the month
of Ramadan, we implore Allah: "O' Allah! if it is in Your qada' and
qadar that should be miserable, change this qada' very night and make me
of the happy and the fortunate". So, if "qada' was unchangeable, then
our invocation would be of no avail. It is also narrated that
invocations change the qada' "even if completely ratified". At any rate,
it is understood that there is a qada' which is stressed and ratified,
and there is a qada' which is not finally ratified,. Even the ratified
qada' can be changed through invocations. These changes denote that
traditionally qada finishing and ratification pass through stages, and a
change may be expected. Nevertheless, careful study of the concept of
qada' implies that this word should be used when the stage is final and
unchangeable.

**Divine Qada'**

In the previous discussion the difference between qada and qadar has
been explained. It has also been said that sometimes both are taken to
be synonyms. If qada' is used instead of qadar, there will be no need
for a particular explanation. We need two discussions under the titles
"qada'" and qadar only when each of these has a separate concept and
particular precepts.

In the past discussion we took qadar to be changeable and explained it
in details, whereas qada' is a stage past that of instability and
changeability, and reached finality where no change would be possible,
where one would say: It is the end. Allah had ratified the matter. So,
our discussion concerns this concept, and therefore, we shall study
"qada' as a separate topic.

**Connection Between Divine Qada' and Man's Freewill**

The dubicosity of determinism in respect to the divine qada' is more
obvious, and explaining it is more difficult. If we have to accept the
idea that all the world's phenomena, including man's voluntary acts, are
governed by the divine qada', and that it is Allah Who brings everything
to its final stage of fulfilment, and that every phenomenon exists by
the divine command, there arises the question: "What about man's
freewill, then?" As regards qadar we could say that Allah would not
bring the affair to its final stage. It would be as preliminaries for
man to practice his right to freewill. Therefore, the qadar does not
contradict freewill. But if the meaning of divine qada' is that Allah
brings every phenomenon to its end, and, after the preparation of the
preliminaries for its existence according to the divine taqdir, the
final end is also brought about by His command: "When He decrees (qada')
an affair, He only says to it:

"Be, and it is"[^215] Thus, there remains no chance for man's freewill
activities.

In order to explain this dubiosity within the limit proportional to
this discussion, a preliminary is needed:

When we try to study the causes of the appearance of a thing, and to
know the parts of the Complete Cause, we usually take into our notice
the immediate and direct causes. For example, we say that for the water
to exist there must be measured quantities of oxygen and hydrogen and a
space with a given temperature, no more, no less. These we regard to be
the conditions needed for a chemical interaction to take place and a new
chemical matter to appear. In this study of the parts of the Complete
Cause we never ask about the one who created this laboratory and
measured the degrees of temperature and pressure, let alone the more
distant causes, factors and conditions which are necessary for each of
the nearer causes and conditions.

So, to point out the parts of a Complete Cause we consider only the
near and direct causes, and never the middle and remote ones. Another
point is that, in order to know the parts of a Complete Cause, we are
used to study only its physical experimental causes, neglecting its
metaphysical cause which, naturally cannot be sensually examined in our
laboratories, although it is effective. We confine ourselves to the
natural and material factors which can be experimented and formulated.

But if we looked at a thing scrutinizingly and philosophically in order
to obtain a strict philosophic account about its genetic existence, we
must study everything that has, whatever trinsial, an effect in its
bringing to existence, and find out the successive causes upto wherever
they lead us. It happens, however, that we can mentally follow up the
series of the causes, though of a general nature. If it could be proved
that a metaphysical power had any role in the appearance of the thing,
whether directly or indirectly, it would philosophically be regarded as
a cause, too, and must be studied. It is noticed that even the Muslim
scholars, in stating the causes of the appearance of a phenomenon, they
do not mention Allah along with them. They do not say that for a
chemical interaction to happen, Allah's presence, the Creator of the
world, is necessary before everything else.

But when we carefully consider the statements of the Qur'an, we realize
that it says that even the simplest natural phenomenon is created by
Allah. We have already explained that to ascribe the appearance of the
phenomena does not mean denying the near and middle causes, but it
stresses a subject which had been neglected. The people's materialistic
way of living does not require them to count upon them, nor they
consider even the remote material causes, let alone the metaphysical or
supernatural ones.

The divine teachings, however, are based on the command that we should
insist, before everything else, on Allah's effect, ascribing the
original effectiveness to Him, it is He Who is the originator of the
whole existence, the Guardian and the constant Protector. The divine
insight requires that man should direct his attention to Him, because
the constancy of existence and the options are in His hands, the
Sustainer, so how could He be forgotten. This is why this point is
stressed in the Qur'an, which says: "We did, We shall do. He it is Who
moves the sun, He it is Who sends down the rain, He it is Who grows the
plants, it is He Who creates you, He it is Who forms you: "Into
whatsoever form He wills, He casts you"[^216] "He it is Who shapes you in
the wombs as He wills."[^217] "He grants to whom He wills daughters and
grants to whom He wills sons".[^218] None of these ayahs implies any
denial of the materialistic and middle causes. They draw attention to
the metaphysical cause, which is above them all and parallel to them.

This is true of qada'. By saying that He it is Who brings the affair to
an end, takes the preliminaries to their finalities, and creates the
creatures, Allah draws attention to the divine factor so that it may not
be forgotten, as if to say: "You are used to count only the natural
factors, but you do not see the hand which is above all and which has in
its powerful grasp".

Therefore, the divine qada' does not cancel the middle and immediate
causes. It, actually, stresses the high and longitudinal cause, i.e. all
the phenomena and their cause should be ascribed to Allah. Everything is
related to its causes, conditions and dispositions of common levels.
Suppose a child is born to a father and mother. It is a material being,
and so are they. There were in the father and mother conditions and
particular organs which make it possible for the appearance of a child.
But all the three of them, the father, the mother and the child, their
existence is related to Allah. But we do regard the relations among
things, but the relation between things and Allah is disregarded.

Consequently, the final stage of an effect is determined by the
completion of the parts of its Complete Cause so that the effect comes
to existence of necessity. Yet, this necessity does not disprove
freewill, because one of the parts of the Complete Cause is man's
freewill act. As long as we have doubt about some act we do not do it.
So, we do not do anything before we will it and decide to do it
voluntarily. Nevertheless, ourselves, our will and the phenomenon
implemented by our will, all are related to Allah all the time. The
father, the mother and the child receive their existence from Allah.
That is, all these, with all their relations, have another relation with
the Creator. It is not similar to the natural relations. Man's need of
Allah is not like his need of father and mother. The existential
relation is not confined to natural relation, it is a different
relation. The relation is between the entire nature and the
nature-creator, which runs along the other relations and is above
them.

The best way to know the relations with metaphysics is to refer to the
relation of the spirit with the psychological phenomena. One of the
aspects, which are trusted by the religious leaders, the great gnostics
and the wisemen, is contemplative thinking about oneself. This is the
way to understanding such facts which can never be caught in the net of
experimentation. For this reason the heavenly religions direct people to
self-knowing, meditation and self-reformation: "...mind your own
selves"[^219] "And in your own selves, cannot you, then, discern?"[^220]
Whoever Knows himself, Knows his Lord!"[^221] A good many problems of
knowledge can be solved through contemplation, meditation,
self-observation and self-introspection, due to the fact that the soul
is different from the beings of nature, it is, originally, an abstract
being, though it is, in some ways, connected to, or even united with,
matter. On the other hand, our soul is the nearest thing to us, and we
can observe it and think about it much better. This would be a way to
know about the metaphysical things.

Upon contemplating ourselves we notice a kind of connection between the
psychological phenomena and ourselves - a connection unlike that which
is between the natural causes and their natural effects.

The best topics to think about are the mental images and their
connections to the soul which imagines them. At the moment you are
sitting here, you can imagine an orchard, a person, or an animal and
incarnate it in your mind. No sooner it flashes in your mind than it is
embodied there. So, what kind of a connection is there between this
mental image and me, the imaginer, i.e. the power of awareness which
automatically creates the image? When you obtain that image in your
mind, do you take something out of yourself and shape it in that image?
Is anything deducted from you? Does anything from outside enter into
your mind? No, you had already been capable of imagining the image and
present it into your mind.

Now that this mental image had appeared, can it continue to exist
without your mind? Never! Its existence depends on you. If you do not
exist, or even if you have no intention or will, the image cannot be
there. Such are the connections between the things and the metaphysical
causes. When we count the natural causes of a thing, this does not mean
that it has no other connection with a higher level.

**Divine Qada'-A Connection with the Metaphysics**

Briefly, divine qada' is a kind of connection between Allah, the
Creator of the world, and the world, a connection unlike the usual
connections among the natural things, yet it does not negate those
connections. It is a connection above them, governing them, along them
and of the metaphysical kind.

We are not accustomed to take this connection into our consideration
and count upon it. The Qur'an tries to draw our attention to it. So, to
say that the divine qada covers our voluntary acts, too, does not negate
freewill, because our freewill is a connection between us and our acts,
while qada' is a connection between us, our freewill, our act and Allah,
and which is along and above them. In order to throw more light on this
subject, we refer to the example presented by the late Allamah
Tabataba'i,[^222] who says: imagine a person who, by his own freewill,
thinks, choses a good act, goes to prepare for it, and then he performs
it. This imaginary person is connected to his act. He eats, prays,
moves, does an evil act. All these acts he does on his own freewill. But
he himself, his will, his acts and their results are connected to you.
The connection between him and his acts does not contradict their
general connection with you.

The divine qada', thus, is not beside the physical causes, nor is it a
substitute for them. It is something above them and a connection along
the other connections. So, the relation between the voluntary act and
the voluntary and freewill acter is preserved. But all of them
altogether, have a different relation with Allah, i.e. the divine
qada'.

In short, for an act to be regarded a voluntary it must be done by the
acter on his own freewill, and his awareness, will and decision must
play their role in the implementation of the act. If an act was imposed
upon him, contrary to his will such that his freewill and decision had
no effect on the act, it would be compulsory. Yet, both the voluntary
and the compulsory acts are dependent, in a higher level, on the Creator
of the existence, upon whom depend the existence of the acter, the will,
the choosing, the act and its results. Had it not been for His will,
there would have been no acter, no will and no act, whether voluntary or
compulsory. Allah's will does not take its place so as to depend either
on the acter's will or on Allah's. Actually it depends on both, but on
two levels: the low one depends on the acter's will, the high one on
Allah's will and qada'.

This subject, however, cannot be easily understood by those who have
little experience in intellectual and philosophical question. For this
reason, in many narratives it is recommended that we should not think
about the truth of qada' and qadar. Amirul Mu'min [Ali] (A.S.) says: "It
is a dark path do not tread upon it, it is a deep ocean, do not plunge
into it."[^223] In fact, this does not mean that absolutely no one should
ever discuss it, as, actually, it is mentioned in many narratives. Such
recommendations are, in fact, addressed to those who have not enough
experience and trainings in such subjects.

**The Advantages of Believing in the Qada' and Qadar**

Taking into consideration the difficulty of solving the problem of the
qada' and qadar, particularly after the recommendations of some
narratives to the effect that this subject is not to be thought about,
there arises this question: If the case is so, what wisdom was there in
stating this problem in the Qur'an and the tradition, and the stress of
some narratives upon the believe in the qada and qadar? To answer the
question it must be said that to believe in the qada and qadar has many
advantages, at the top of which are the two theoretical and practical
advantages.

As to the theoretical advantage, it is obvious under the light of what
we had already said, which, briefly is that the more complete one's
tawhid [monotheism], the greater one's everlasting happiness and
self-perfection. One of the higher stages of tawhid is the belief in the
"Unity of Action" in its gnostic concept. Man is to believe that all the
phenomena of the existence are dependent on Allah's Will, and that there
is no phenomenon that can take place outside His will and arrangement.
This question had been mentioned by the Glorious Qur'an and the
impeccable leaders - a fact described as to be fulfilled by the divine
permission, will, taqdir and qada'. so, such statements are gradual
teaching for the understanding of this fact aiming at knowledge
integration and tawhid. As regards the practical advantage, which can be
a moral or educational advantage, too, is that, on the basis of
believing in the qada' and qadar, man looks at the world's phenomena and
events to be governed by a wise system ordained by Allah.

This viewpoint prepares such a psychological grounds for man that he
would not feel frightened at the sight of any unpleasant event, and, at
the same time. he would not be too much elated at pleasant news. He
would do all his activities and efforts with the intention of fulfilling
his duties and to please Allah.

The Glorious Qur'an says: "No evil befalls on the earth nor in
yourselves but it is in a Book before We bring it into existence. It is
easy for Allah - so that you may not grieve for what escaped you, nor be
exultant at what you have been given."[^224] Consequently, the person who
believes in the wise system and divine destiny of the world he would not
lose himself on encountering unpleasant events and disasters.

Likewise, he would not get inebriated and proud because of some
pleasant events. No danger would frighten him off his duty nor would he
be filled with despair and weakness at facing defeat and failure. nor
his success and victories would cause him to feel conceited, proud and
intoxicated. Understanding this subject was quite valuable and
constructive to the Muslims of early Islam, who had been under great
pressure, difficulties and tortures of the infidels, prior and after
migration they had continually been warning against their enemies.

Today too, correctly understanding qada', qadar and Allah's unity of
action, would be a great constructive factor for our new Islamic
community, which resembles, from many aspects, the community built by
the great Prophet of Islam (S.A.). I hope that Allah, the Exalted, will
grant us all the ability to correctly understand all the learnings of
Islam, so that under their light we, can ensure our personal and social
happiness, as well as our eternal moral perfection.


The End


