Glossary
========

'abath: vain, useless, ineffectual, uselessness.

ajal: a fixed or a prescribed period, end, death. Ahlul Bayt:
literally: those living in a house, members of a family. As special
term, it denotes the progeny of the Messenger of Islam, also called: the
Ma'sums. ayah: a Qur'anic verse or part of it. Batil: untrue, invalid.

bida': Allah's innovation as the Originator. du'a': invocation,
benediction, supplication. hajj: the Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca at a
certain time every year. halal: lawful, religiously legal. haq: Allah,
true, truth. haram: unlawful, forbidden, religiously illegal. Iblis:
Satan, the Devil.

ins: the human beings. jihad: any endeavour or practice, including holy
wars, for the sake of Allah and Islam. jinn: genie, an unseen spiritual
being. Ma'sum: infallible. An epithet given by the Shi'ites to the
Prophet (S.A.) his daughter Fatimah, her husband 'Ali ibn 'Abi Talib,
and their eleven successive offspring Imams, making altogether 14
ma'sums. qada': fate, destiny.

qadar: divine decree, predestination. rahman: an attribute of Allah,
meaning: The Beneficent, the Bestower of existence on His creatures.
rahim: another attribute of Allah, meaning the Merciful, the kind, the
Compassionate. salat: the Islamic version of prayers. Special rituals
performed five times a day, according to the Islamic regulations.
shafa'ah: intercession, particularly to Allah.

shirk: polytheism, believing in deities besides Allah. sunnah: the
traditions of the Prophet of Islam Sunni: a follower of the sunnah, a
Sunnite. taqdir: qada, divine decree, predestination. tawhid:
monotheism, believing in the Oneness of Allah. 'usul: principles,
doctrines, basic elements of jurisprudence, methodology. Waliyye'asr: an
epithet given by the Shi'ites to the still living 12th Imam (A.S.).

**NOTES**

1. [(A.S.) stands for 'Alayhis-salam. i.e. "Peace be upon him/her/them]
translator.

2. "Nahjul Balaghah", Sermon No. 18.

3. [The Ma'sums (i.e., the 14 infallible ones according to the Shi'ite
beliefs. They are: the Prophet, his daughter Fatimah. her husband 'Ali
and the 11 Imams of his offspring]. translator.

4. Surat Sad/29


5. Surat Muhammad/24 6. [(S.A.) stands for sallallahu 'alayhi wa alihi
wasallam = May Allah's peace and blessings be upon him and his progeny)]
translator.

7. Usul Kafi", Vol. 2. p. 238

8. The noble Prophet (S.A.) is described by the Qur'an to be the one
who would: "...teach them the Book and wisdom..." (62;2) after saying
that he would; "...recite to them His ayahs and purify them." (Surat Ali
'Imran/164). It should be noted that after "reciting" and "purifying",
comes the turn for "teaching the Book". Thus, it is clear that teaching
the Book is other than mere reciting its ayahs for learning, purifying
and teaching. Thus, teaching cannot be mere reading of words, since, in
this case, it would be the very reciting itself. Actually, it means the
teaching of the meaning of the Qur'an to the people, that is, he was to
teach them what they did not know. "...He teaches you what you did not
know." (2;151). In another ayah Allah says; "...We have revealed to you
the Reminder that you may explain to the people that which had been
revealed for them..." (Suratun-Nahl/44).

It is clear, then, that some of the ayahs need explanation, which is
different from reciting, and the Prophet's duty was to explain them. We,
as Shi'ites. believe that this post of the noble Prophet (S.A.). from
among his other ones, was true of the Ma'sum Imams (A.S.) as well.

9. Suratul-Ma'idah/42, Suratul-Hujurat/9, Suratul-Mumtahanah/8

10. Suratul-Ali 'Imran/146

11. Suratul-Ma'idah/64

12. It is possible that we can find such a connection in the Qur'an,
but not at the first glance.


13. Suratul-Ra'd/ 17 14. "Usulul-Kafi", vol. 1, the Book of "He (the
Almighty) cannot be recognized except through His own self."

15. Such as the narrative quoted from the Imam al-Baqir (A.S.) who
said: "Whatever you recognize through your own imagination with its
tiniest concepts is but a creature made like yourself and it returns to
you." "Al-Mahajjatul-Bayda", vol. 1, p.219, printed by As-Sadiq press
And a narrative quoted from the Imam As-Sadiq (A.S.) that: '"'Whoever
claimed that he worshipped [Allah] on the basis of attribute, not of
understanding, he would be referring to an absent...Recognizing the
present thing Itself comes before Its attribute, and recognizing the
attribute of the absent comes before the very thing." ('Tuhaful 'Uqul")
in his speech about describing love for Ahlul-Bayt" (A.S.) 15. If used
with capital "G", it is a proper name, and if used with a small "g", it
is a general name.

16. Surat Bara'ah/128

17. Suratut-Tur/35

18. Look carefully into the formerly mentioned narrative: "..and
recognizing the attribute of the absent comes before the very thing,"
quoted from Tahaful-'Ugul.

18. Suratur-Rum/30

19. "Al-Kafi", vol. 2, p. 12 Darul-Kutub al-Islamiyyah Publishing

20. Surat Ali 'Imran/19.

21. Al-Kafi", vol. 2, p. 13, Darul-Kutub al-Islamiyyah

22. Suratul-'A'raf/172

23. Al-Kafi, vol. 2. p. 13

24. "Al-Mizan exegesis, vol. 8, p. 340

25. ibid, p. 345

26. Suratul-An'am/95

27. ibid/102

28. Suratul-'A'raf/173

29. Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 12-13 and Al-Mizan exegesis.

30. Surat Yasin/60-61

31. Suratun-Nur/37

32. "Nahjul-Balaghah", Ser. No. 222.

33. "Nahjul-Balaghah", Ser. No. 222

34. A verse of a Persian poem-tr.

35. Surat Yasin/82

36. Suratul-'An'am/172

37. Suratut-Tawhid/1

38. Suratul-Baqarah/163

39. Suratul-'A'raf/85

40. Suratul-Baqarah/163

41. Surat Muhammad/19

42. Suratun-Nahl/36

43. Suratul-Fatihah/4

44. Suratul-Ma'idah/23

45. Suratul-Ahzab/39

46. Surat 'Ali 'Imran/175

47. Suratut-Tawbah/28

48. Suratul-Baqarah/191

49. Surauz-Zumar/3

50. ibid/38

51. Surat Yusuf/39

52. Suratul-'A'raf/12 and Surat Sad/72

53. Suratul-Hijr/39

54. ibid/36

55. "Nahjul-Balaghah", sermon 192, al-Qasi'ah.

56. Surat Sad/78

57. ibid/85

58. A saying ascribed to Amirul-Mu'minin 'Ali (A S.)

59. Suratul-'Isra'/109

60. "Arafah" Supplication of the Imam al-Husayn (A.S.)

61. Suratul Ma'idah/110

62. Surat Ali 'Imran/49

63. Suratun-Nisa, /171

64. Suratun-Nisa' /64

65. Suratun-Nazi'at/5

66. Suratul-'A'raf/54

67. Suratus-Sajdah/5

68. Suratun-Nisa'/59

69. Suratul-Zumar/3

70. Surat Yunus/18

71. Suratul-Baqarah/255

72. Suratul-Anbiya/28'.

73. Suratul-Anbiya, /22

74. The results of those premises are as below:

a. The "apparel" of existence, with respect to every "possible" being,
must be bestowed by the "Necessary Being", and it is only the Necessary
Being who is Self-Sufficient and cannot be imagined to be in need.

b. The "caused" is in need of the cause, both in its existence and
creation. and its existence is its very creation. as it in nothing but a
connection and affinity to the "cause".

c. Affiliating a single "caused" to two "causes" is impossible. like
preferring without justification. From these premises we reach to the
conclusion that in supposing that there are two or more gods, the
existence of a being is to be attributed to them both. But, as the
existence of a being is its very creation and affinity to its cause. and
if it is affiliated to one of them, there we wilt have a preference
without justification. which is impossible. If it is affiliated to many
causes, then there must be as many "caused" as there are "causes", in
which case the universe will be different and there will be chaos. For a
detailed explanation, please refer to "The Principles of Philosophy and
the Method of Realism". Vol. 5, ch. on at-Tawhid, footnotes by the
martyr Professor Murtada Mutahhari, [in Persian].

75. In the following lines we shall explain what we mean by "a single
order".

76. Suratul Anbiya/22

77. Suratul-Baqarah/163

78. Suratul-Baqrah/164

79. Suratul-Qamer/50

80. The verses are ascribed to the gnostic poet, and man of letters
Sahib ibn 'Abbad, minister of the Iranian Monarch, Fakhruddawlah
ad-Daylam. He loved Ahlul-Bayt (A.S.) [the offspring of the Prophet
(S.A.).] He died in 385 A.H.

81. Suratun-Nur/35

82. Suratul-Mulk/14

83. Suratun-Nahl/74

84. Suratul-Mu'minun/91

85. "Tawhid As Saduq", narrative No. 6, p. 100

86. '"The Invocation of 'Arafah", by Al-'Imam-Al-Husayn (A.S.)

87. "The Invocation of 'Arafah", by Al-'Imam-Al-Husayn (A.S.)

88. Ibid

89. Ibid

90. Suratul-Baqara/260

91. Suratul-An'am/101 and Suratul-Furqan/2

92. Suratul-An'am/102 and Surat-Ghafir/62

93. Suratus-Saffat/96

94. Surat Yunus/3

95. Suratur-Ra'd/31

96. Suratul-'A'raf/54

97. Suratul-Baqarah/164

98. Suratul- An'am/95

99. Suratul-'Anfal/ 17

101. Suratur-Ra'd/26

102. Suratun-Nur/46

103. Suratul Hajj/61

104. Suratul Hajj/5

105. Suratul-Nahl/65

106. Suratul Hadid/17

107. Suratul An'am/91

108. Suratul Qasa/56

109. Surat Zumar/42

110. Suratus-Sajdah/ 11

111. Suratul An'am/61

112. Surat Fussilat/11

113. Suratul Anbiya'/30.

114. Suratus-Saffat/11

115. Suratul Hijr/27

116. Suratul Fatir

117. Surat Maryam/17

118. ibid

119. ibid/18

120. ibid/19

121. Suratun-Nas/1-5

122. Suratut-Tawbah/14

123. Suratul Ma'idah/15-16

124. Suratur-Rum/41

125. Suratun-Nisa'/160

126. Suratul A'raf/96

127. Surat Yunus/9

128. Suratul Mu'minun/111

129. Suratul A'raf/107 and Suratush-Shu'ara'/32

130. Surat Maryam/27-32

131. Suratush-Shu'ara'/63

132. Surat Yasin/82

133. It should be noted that by "entity" we do not mean something
"material". Contrary lo what the materialists say. entity does not mean
corporeal. The entity is that which has its own existence, disregarding
our opinion. It is real and outside our thought. Its existence does not
depend on our recognition. Whether we exist or not. it does exist.

Consequently. Allah is an entity.

134. Suratun-Nisa'/17

135. Surat Yasin/82

136. Surat Hud/7. [In Suratul Hajj/47] it is said that "...a day with
Allah is as a thousand years of what you reckon" -translator]

137. Suratul Baqarah/255

138. Surat Yasin/82

140. Suratun-Nisa'/164

141. Suratul Anfal/67

142. Suratul Qasas/30

143. Suratul Baqarah/30

144. Surat Yasin/82

145. Suratul Baqarah/20

146. Suratul Hajj/18

147. ibid/14

148. "Al-Kafi", Vol. 6, p.438

149. Suratul Baqarah/30

150. Suratul Baqarah/29

151. Surat Hud/7

152. Suratus-Sajdah/7

153. Suratul Kahf/21. This expression is repeated many times in the
Qur'an.

154. Suratur-Rum/8

155. Suratud-Dukhan/38-39

156. Suratul-Anbiya' 16-17

157. Surat Muhammad/36

158. Suratul An'am/32

159. Suratul Qiyamah/5

160. Suratus-Saffat/5

161. Surat Hud/7

162. Suratul Ma'idah/17

163. Suratul Kahf/7

164. Suratul Baqarah/29

165. Suratur-Rahman/33

166. Ibid/13

167. Suratul - Anfal/55

168. "Nahjul Balagah", Sermon 222.

169. Suratudh-Dhariyat/56

170. Surat Yasin/61

171. Surat Yasin/60

172. Surat Hud/118-119

173. Suratush - Shura/7

174. "Nahjul Balaghah", Sermon No. 63.

175. Surat Taha/52

176. Suratul An'am/59

177. Suratul Buruj/21-22

178. Suratul Waqi'ah/77-79

179. Suratul Ahzab/33

180. Surat Taha/52

181. Suratul Anfal/66

182. Surat Muhammad/31

183. Suratun-Nisa/64'

184. Suratul Hajj/39

185. Suratun-Nisa, /77

186. Suratul An'am/58

187. Surat Taha/66

188. Suratul Baqarah/102

189. Surat Ali 'Imran/145

190. Surat Yunus/100

191. The Torah introduces Allah to be regretting His creating man. It
says that Allah had descended from the heaven, wristled with Jacob who
knocked Him down!

192. Suratul Ma'idah/64

193. Suratul Ma'idah/4

194. Suratul Kahf/23-24

195. Suratul Insan/30

196. Suratul Furqan/2

197. Suratul Qamar/49

198. Surat Yasin/38

199. Ibid/39

200. Suratul Muminun/ 18

201. Surat Fussilat/10

202. Suratul Qamar/12

203. Suratul Qasas/30

204. Surat Taha/24

205. Ibid/40

206. Surat Maryam/52

207. Suratul Qamar/49

208. Suratul Baqarah/96

209. Suratul Baqarah/36

210. Suratul Isra'/23

211. Suratul Mu'min/20

212. It should be remembered that some surahs have two or more names.
such as Suratul Isra' which is also called Bani Israel, or surat Ghafir
which is also called Suratul Mu'min, and many others. So. when looking
up a surah, you are to remember this.

213. Suratul Isra'/4

214. Ibid/8

215. Suratul Mu'min/68

216. Suratul Infitar/8

217. Surat Ali 'Imran/6

218. Suratush-Shawra/49

219. Suratul Ma'idah/105

220. Suratudh-Dhariyat/21

221. Of the Prophet's Maxims.

222. The celebrated author of "Al-Mizan" on the glorious Qur'an.

223. "Nahjul Balaghah", maxim No. 287.

224. Suratul Hadid/22-23


