Notes On Knowing Allah
======================

Before discussing the original subject, it is necessary to be aware of
a few points:

1. There are two ways for knowing a being: personal and general. The
personal knowledge of the tangibles is acquired through senses and takes
place in the form of a sensory understanding, while in respect of
intangibles, it is acquired only through intuition and vision. But as
regards a general knowledge about all beings, it is effected by means of
intellectual concepts.

This knowledge, in fact, concerns the natures and titles of all beings,
though the individuals and persons are occasionally labelled by it. For
example, man's awareness of himself (the understanding "I"), and of his
inner powers, actions and psychological emotions, such as his will and
egoism, are of the personal and intuitive knowledge, whereas his
awareness of the colours he sees and the sounds he hears, are of
personal and sensory.

Knowing Hasan, Husayn and Taqi, as human beings (i.e. living beings of
reasoning faculty and other human characteristics), is a general
knowledge which principally concerns the nature of "man", but is
incidentally ascribed to save Hasan, Husayn, etc. Similarly, knowing the
electricity as an energy that changes into light and heat, and is the
cause of many other material phenomena, is a general knowledge which,
principally, belongs to a general title, but incidentally is ascribed to
a particular electricity.

**Two Types of Knowing Allah**

Two types of knowing Allah can be imagined: The intuitive knowing which
is fulfilled without the intermediation of mental concepts. The other is
the general knowing which is fulfilled by means of the rational
concepts, and does not directly belong to Allah.

The knowledge, which is achieved by way of rational proofs, is a
general and acquired knowledge attained to through mental concepts. Yet,
if a visionary and intuitive knowledge takes place, it will be known
without the intermediation of mental concepts. Probably, the prevision
mentioned in certain ayahs and narratives is this very visionary
knowledge. It is also possible that Allah cannot be recognized except
through His own self[^14] refers to the same knowledge.

The contexts of some other narratives can also be regarded
likewise.[^15]

Admitting this point would protect our minds against a prejudgement on
the ayahs concerning recognizing Allah, by taking them as general and as
mental knowing of Him. They are to be better scrutinized lest some of
them might refer to the presence of Allah through heart intuition, which
may happen consciously or half-consciously. It is of the intuitive kind
of knowledge.

Naturally, the intuitive knowledge can neither be learnt nor taught.
Learning and teaching are practised by means of words and concepts which
insert certain meanings into the minds of the listeners and thinkers.
The intuitive knowledge is not an intellectual meaning and can neither
be conveyed nor received. Even the Qur'anic declarations cannot, by
themselves, grant us intuitive and visionary knowledge, but they can
guide us along the road which helps us to get to intuitively know Allah,
the Exalted, or to bring our unconscious, or half-conscious, knowledge
up to the level of conscious knowledge.

So, we have to answer this question: does the Qur'an aim at giving man
a general idea about Allah, the Exalted, His Names and His Attributes,
like that which is taught by the philosophers and theologians, or does
it have another loftier aim - i.e., does it acquaint us with Allah and
guide us to the intuitive and visionary knowledge?

2. The names and the words which refer to Allah in the diverse
languages are of two kinds: some are "particular names", or "proper
names", and some are used as names or general attributes". Sometimes a
word is used in two forms: as a "proper name", or as a "general name",
since there seems to be a kind of verbal communion between them, such as
the word "GOD".[^15] In the Arabic language, the Glorified Name, "Allah",
is used as a proper name or a personal pronoun, and "Ar-Rahman" [The
Beneficent], is His Exclusive Attribute.

As to his other Names and Attributes they have no such exclusiveness,
and, as such, they can be grouped and used for other than Allah, such as
"rabb, pl. arbab" [master(s), owner(s)]", ilah, pl. alihah" [god(s)],
khaliq, pl. khaliqun" [creator(s)] and "rahim, pl. ruhama and rahimun"
[merciful].

In the Qur'an we find such qualities as "ra'uf" [kind] and "rahim",
attributed to the Prophet (S.A.): "(he is) kind and merciful to the
believers". [^16]

3. The proper name might have been assigned to a particular being from
the beginning , with no previous common name, though, before using it as
a proper name, it might have been used as a general name or attribute,
such as Muhammad and 'Ali, which had not formerly been used
attributively. Such names, in their new position as proper names belong
to the first group.

Consequently, the Glorious Word "Allah", whether aplastic or derived,
when used as a proper name, it exclusively refers to the Divine Sacred
Being. But, as His Sacred Being is not visible, He is introduced by way
of an exclusive epithet that cannot be used to describe other than
Allah, such as: "The Being All-Inclusive of all attributes of
perfection", yet, it does not mean that the word "Allah" is intended to
cover the total of these concepts. So, any research about the matter and
form of this word would not help us to know any more of the meaning of
the word as a personal knowledge.

4. Although the Persian word for Allah, "Khuda", is said to be the
abbreviation of "Khud-aa", which is equivalent to "the One whose
existence is necessay' or "the Necessary Being" there are some other
similar ones, like "Khudawand" and "KadKhuda", one may declare that it
means "The Owner" or "The Proprietor", while its common meaning is like
"The Creator" or "The Originator".

The most common word used in the Qur'an to denote God is "Ilah" and
"Rabb", the first of which is used even in the slogan of monotheism: "La
ilaha illallah" (there is no god but Allah). It is, then, suitable to
offer an explanation regarding these two words: "Ilah, though on the
measure of "fi'al", has the meaning of "maf'ul" , like "Kitab" which
means "maktub". So, linguistically it means "ma'bud" [The Worshipped].
One can also add that "Ilah", like many other derivatives, denotes
status and meritoriousness. Thus, He can be said to be "worthy of
worshipping". So, in the slogan "la ilaha illallah", there would be no
need to think of a relevant attribute.

Here, another question may be asked: If "Ilah" means "the One worthy of
worshipping", why then it is used in the Qur'an to denote the false
deities such as "the Samiri's calf", which is referred to as "your
Ilah", or Pharaoh's deities which are referred to as "your Ilahs"? The
answer is that such uses are either according to the beliefs of the
addressees, or uttered by the disbelievers - the case in which it means
"the thing which, according to the listener's, or the speaker's, belief,
is worthy of worshipping". Thus, even in such instances the Intended
meaning of the word is also "worthiness", though from the point of view
of the addressee or the addresser.

As to "rabb", which means "educator", "nourisher" or "breeder",
originally meant "the owner", as is gathered from the Arabic phrase:
"rabbul-ibil" [the owner of the camels], or "rabbud-dar" [the owner of
the house] although it can be related, through "the grand derivation",
to the root "to bring up", yet it does not exactly mean that. Therefore,
translating it into "rearer" is not quite suitable, and using it for
Allah, the Exalted is because He is "the Owner" of His creatures, and
needs no genetic nor legal permission from anybody to deal with them and
manage their affairs.

So, believing in one's "ownership" means believing in one's independent
and needless of permission from anybody to do whatever one likes to what
one owns. Believing in the oneness of the "owner" means believing that
it is only Allah who can, independently and without any permission,
dispose of all His creatures (the whole world) and manage their
affairs.

Looking into the meanings of "ilah and "rabb, we realize that the
former is a carollary to the latter, as worship and servitude are
practised by the one who believes that the worshipped must have an
independent mastery, domination and absolute ownership over the servant,
inasmuch as to benefit or harm him.

**The Rational Evidences in the Qur'an on Allah's Existence**

The first question that is asked in respect of the Qur'anic knowledge
of Allah is whether the Qur'an could prove the existence of Allah. A
good number of the exegesists of the Qur'an, especially those versed in
theology, could locate numerous ayahs in the Qur'an that prove the
existence of Allah, regarding their import to be evidences that depend
on the order of the universe.

On the other hand, another group of commentators believe that the
glorious Qur'an made it needless to prove the existence of Allah, and,
thus, it did not care to prove it.

This group believes that the evidences brought about by the first group
are either to prove monotheism and deny polytheism, or they are not to
be regarded as proofs in the Qur'an, and that it was the commentators
who used parts of the Qur'an together with some other introductions to
show them as evidences.

**Indirect Proving of Allah's Existence**

Correct and documented judgment concerning this subject naturally
depends on strict and all-embracing study, which cannot be accommodated
in this concise discussion. What can be said to bring together these two
opinions is that the Qur'an might not have directly tried to prove the
existence of Allah, because it regarded the idea of His existence as to
be so self-evident that it needed no argumentation, or because it
encountered no serious dangers, and so it did not find it wise to
discuss a topic which could arise some doubts and controversies.

Yet, it is possible to find out in the declarations of the Qur'an some
evidences on the subject. It is even not impossible that the Qur'an
itself indirectly takes care of them. For example, it is not
contradictory that an ayah may directly aim at proving the oneness of
Allah, and indirectly prove the very existence of Allah, too. Or an
ayah, by way of defying those who did not believe in the prophethood of
the Prophet (S.A.) and denied it, may refer to a subject which
indirectly proves the existence of Allah, too. For instance, the Qur'an,
arguing with the disbelievers who refrain from believing in the noble
Prophet (S.A.), puts forth a number of ensuring questions: "Or were they
created without there being any thing, or are they the creators?"[^17]

There is no doubt that the ayah is not openly intended to prove the
existence of Allah, yet it can be a tacit proof on that. That is, a
human being must have either been created by himself, without having a
creator, he himself had created himself, or he must have a creator. The
invalidity of the first and second suppositions is obvious and no sane
person can accept them. So, the third supposition must inevitably be
regarded as correct, i.e. man has a creator.

This inference is based on the fact that the meaning of "thing" in the
noble ayah is "creator" , that is: were those disbelievers created
without there being any creator, or were they the creators of
themselves? Naturally, neither of these two notions is correct, and the
answer to both questions is negative. So, they must believe that there
was a creating god. But there are two other possibilities in respect of
the sense of "thing". one is that it means a "previous matter", i.e.
were they created without there being a previous matter? The other is
that it means "a goal", i.e. were they created without any objective? It
seems that neither of these two senses befits the next question: were
they the creator of themselves? It is not that whether they had been
created without a previous matter or with no goal.

Actually, it coincides with such a question as: were they created
without a creator, or did they create themselves? It may be that the
reason for not putting the question like this: "Do they have no creator
or are they themselves creators?" is that a stress is wanted on "were
created" so as to make more the invalidity of both suppositions more
clear. Therefore, as we realize that the Qur'an did not present the
question of the existence of Allah as a problem, and did not try to
directly prove it, we also realize that it requires that it should not,
even indirectly and tacitly, refer to its proof, too, inasmuch as we may
not be able to obtain even preparatory inferential steps.

It is to be noted that the rational evidences, whether in the Qur'an or
in the discourses of the philosophers, prove the existence of Allah by
way of mental concepts, which result in a total and acquired knowledge.
For example, the evidence showing the movement in the world proves the
existence of a mover for the world, and the evidence showing the order
of the universe proves the existence of Allah as the organizer of that
order, and then other evidences prove His existence as Creator, Maker,
the Necessary Being, the Perfect, the Absolute, and afterwards, the
evidences of monotheism prove that all these total titles prove but only
a single thing - that Allah is One.

As to the evidences of Allah's Attributes, they also affirm His
Attributes of perfection and negate all defects from Him, and final
conclusion comes to:

"There exists the Being Who possesses Knowledge, Power, Life, and has,
no limitations, such as time, place and the like, and it is He Who is
the Creator of the universe and man." This is a knowledge that concerns
a totality confined to a single One, and it is an in-absentia knowledge
of "Being" and of "Him"[^18]

Here this question presents itself. Does the Qur'an say anything about
knowing Allah, the Exalted visually and personally? We may get the
positive answer to this question from "Ayatul-Fitrah and
Ayatul-Mithaq.

**Knowing Allah Through One's Fitrah (Nature)**

Before entering the discussion about the two ayahs of al-Fitrah" and
"al-Mithaq, it is worthy to give some explanations concerning the word
fitrah (nature) ["disposition" or "invateness:"]: The word "fitrah" is
an infinitive of kind, denoting the kind of creation, though commonly
used in respect of human beings. Usually it refers to something which is
an innate constitution of man. It is God-given, and not acquired, and
more or less common to all human individuals. Consequently, it is
inclusive of all man's God-given views and tendencies.

Fitrah has many idiomatic usages in logic and philosophy. But only
three of these idiomatic meanings concern our purpose:

1. That which denotes that the quest for Allah is one of man's innate
wants. The proof evidencing this allegation is that man, during the
entire history, and disregarding his racial, geographical and
educational differences, was in quest of Allah. A sort of religion and a
belief in the existence of a creator-god have always prevailed among the
people. 2. That which denotes that knowing Allah is a natural kind of
knowledge, by which we mean the two kinds of knowledge: the acquired
Knowledge of Allah, and the intuitive Knowledge of Allah.

a. By the innately acquired Knowledge of Allah we mean the fact that
the human intellect needs not to exert itself in believing in the
existence of Allah, as it very easily realizes that the existence of man
and all other natural phenomena need Allah. Thus, there must be a
needless Allah who can meet his own being needs.

b. By the innately intuitive Knowledge of Allah we mean the fact that
the human heart has a deep connection with its Creator. When man looks
deep into his heart he will discern that connection. But most of the
people give little heed, if any, to that cordial connection, especially
when they are too busy in their everyday engagements to do so. But when
their hopes are taken away from everything and are cut off all means,
they can recognize that connection.

3. That which denotes that worshipping Allah is an innate inclination,
and that man is motivated by his nature to demand to worship Allah, to
pay homage, and submit to Him.

It is clear that the Fitrah, in its first and third meanings, is a kind
of inner inclination and tropism, and has no direct connection with
knowledge. But, as to the second meaning, it is a kind of knowledge,
either intellectually acquired or through a visual intuition. The first
is, actually, obtained through reasoning and proofs. Now as its proofs
are almost self-evident, it is called the innately acquired knowledge,
while the innately intuitive knowledge is that which we intend to
explain.

**Ayatul-Fitrah**

"Then set your face for religion as the one by nature upright-Allah's
nature of which He had made man. There is no altering of Allah's
creation. That is the right religion, but most people do not know.[^19]
In this ayah the full attention is first drawn to the religion, then
there is an intimation to the fact that this is in complete accordance
with the nature which Allah, the Exalted has put into man, and which is
unalterable. Then, it is said that it was the upright religion. Finally,
it is noted that the majority of the people are ignorant of that fact.

Now, the argument is about: what is this natural thing? Is it knowing
Allah, worshipping Him, or is it something else? If the "natural thing"
means the very cordial, intuitive knowledge, it will coincide with the
matter we formerly referred to, and which is backed by the
narratives[^19] which regard the context of this ayah to be identical to
that of Ayatul-Mithaq, whose explanation will come later on. But , if it
means the intellectual knowledge, it will have little connection with
what is being discussed. This latter opinion, however, is rather weak.
Another commentary on this ayah says that the general ideologic thoughts
and laws, such as monotheism, worshipping Allah, caring for the
deprived, establishing equity and justice in the society and other basic
Islamic questions, coincide with man's innate nature, and are in harmony
with his human wants, insight and tendencies.

According to this commentary, knowing Allah and worshipping Him are
natural as mentioned in the said ayah. Another commentary, which is near
to the above one, says that the actual meaning of religion is nothing
but submission and obedience to Allah, the Exalted, shown in diverse
forms of worship, and carrying out His instructions and laws. This is
understood from the very word "Islam". "Surely the religion with Allah
is Islam..."[^20] By saying that religion is natural we mean that having
an inclination to worship Allah and to submit to the Lord is an
inclination deeply-rooted in the constitutional nature of man. Everybody
wants by nature to get nearer to the Absolute Perfect, while the
diversive and polytheistic questions are the production of incorrect
inspirations and education, or of ignorance and bad applications: "Every
child is born up to nature..."

According to this commentary, the ayah does not directly refer to
knowing Allah, but it can be said that the naturalness of
God-worshipping necessitates the existence of some sort of natural
knowledge of Allah, the Exalted, as man should know Allah in order to
worship Him. Should the tendency to worship Allah be natural, knowing
Him should also be natural. In this respect there is in Al-Kafi a
narrative quoted from the Imam al-Baqir (A.S.), commenting on the said
ayah, which says: "He had made them to know Him."[^21]

**Ayatul-Mithaq**

"And when your Lord brought forth from the children of Adam, from their
backs, their offsprings, and made them bear witness against themselves:
Am I not your Lord? They said: Yes, we bear witness. Lest you should say
on the Day of Resurrection: We were heedless of this."[^22] This ayah is
one of the most difficult ones to interpret and requires extensive
discussions on diverse grounds. But to handle them all would take us
away from our intended objective. What can be clearly obtained from this
noble ayah is that everybody has a kind of knowledge of Allah, the
Exalted, and which can be described to have occurred like this: Allah
asked them: "Am I not your Lord? They replied: "Yes, we bear witness".
This conversation is carried out in such a way that they are deprived of
any excuse of committing mistakes in practice.

Consequently, on the Day of Resurrection, no one would have the excuse
to say that he had no knowledge of His Divine Lordship, or that they had
only followed their fathers and ancestors in worshipping other deities
besides Allah, as a pretext for their deviation and polytheism.

It seems that such intuitive conversing and excuse-denying, which
refute even mispractising, cannot take place except by way of intuitive
knowledge and vision. This is supported by many narratives that refer to
discerning and eying. A narrative of this kind, quoted from the Imam
al-Baqir (A.S.), says: "...He made them to know Him and showed Himself
to them, as otherwise one could not have known one's Lord."[^23] Also in
the expression of 'Ali al-Qummi, quoting ibn Maskan, it is said that he
had asked the Imam as-Sadiq (A.S.): "Was it real eying?" He said:
"Yes."[^24]

In "Al-Mahasin by al-Barqi, quoting the Imam as-Sadiq (A.S.) as he has
said: "...otherwise no one would have known who his creator and
sustainer is."[^25] This gives one to understand that the noble ayah
refers to a personal knowledge, not to a general one, which occurs
through abstractive mental concepts. Personal knowledge of Allah cannot
occur except through intuitive and visionary knowledge. Had it meant a
general knowledge acquired by means of mental inference, it should have
been expressed like this: "...otherwise no one could have known that he
had a creator, not who his creator was.

In short, this ayah gives us to realize that knowing Allah by nature
does not mean that intuitive and visionary knowledge of Allah, the
Exalted is accessible to everybody. This knowledge of Allah, the Exalted
is accessible to everybody. This knowledge, however, is a semiconscious
one, which may become fully conscious on severing one's material
relations and strengthening spiritual inclinations. With the holy people
it reaches a stage when they say: " "Can anyone else be more manifest
than You are?" and "I do not worship a god whom I do not see."

Probably the objective of many Qur'anic ayahs is to draw attention to
this natural knowledge and let hearts be more acquainted with Allah. For
example, having drawn the attention to the phenomenon of life, it says:
"...such is Allah, how then are you perverted?"[^26] It seems that
contemplating the living creatures prepares the heart to see the hand of
Allah in the nature and feel His presence. Once again having mentioned
many divine signs in the same surah, it says: "Such is Allah, your Lord.
There is no god save Him..."[^27] The import of knowing Allah as an
inward nature speaks, in fact, of the connection between man as a being
with the Creator of existence. This kind of knowledge shown by a
creature and his faculty of understanding it are inseparable. Thus, to
describe it as to be "natural" is quite true. Such vision does not
belong only to the principle of the existence of the Creator, but it
also belongs to all affairs of the above-mentioned connection, including
His State of Lordship , as indicated by us in g the word "rabb" [Lord ]
in Ayatul-Mithaq, i.e.

in this vision both the Existence of Allah and His State of Lordship
are proved. Had there been a similar existential connection between man
and another being, it would have been visible. So, this knowledge refers
to "Allahs Oneness", too. That is why there can be no excuse for
associating another deity with Him: Or lest you should say: our fathers
did associate others (with Allah)..."[^28] As Divinity and being
worshipped are worthy only of the one who is the Creator and the Lord,
it is evident that none other than "Allah", who is innately discerned,
may be worthy of being worshipped. Consequently, it can be said that
unification of creativity, Lordship and divinity is something natural.
The Imam as. Sadiq (A.S.) had been quoted in many narratives in
"Al-Kafi" to have said: "He created them [the creatures] on
monotheism".[^29] Probably the following ayah refers to this, too: "Did I
not charge you, O children of Adam, that you should not whorship the
Satan? He is, indeed, your open enemy, and that you should worship Me.
Here is the straight path,"[^30], taking into consideration that "the
straight path" is that which is shown by the human nature - worshipping
the Only One God, Allah. The worshipping of any one else is deviation
and turning from the straight path of human nature.

**Natural Monotheism**

It had already been said that the intuitive knowledge of Allah could be
understood from the ayahs of al-Fitrah and al-Mithaq. It had also been
said that the content of Ayatul-Mithaq confirmed that Allah, the Exalted
had made all the children of Adam witnesses against themselves, and they
did so and confessed that their Lord is "Allah". This, as it were,
face-to-face conversation between them and Allah, and Allah's asking
them: "Am I not your Lord?" and their reply: "Yes", leaves no excuse for
the children of Adam to take to polytheism, and to say that they knew
nothing of such a truth, nor can they pretend to have followed the wake
of their ancestors who had adopted idolatry, and they followed them
unaware, and, therefore, they should not be punished for that. Such a
pretext cannot be accepted after that Allah had such a face-to-face talk
with the children of Adam.

It had also been said that this ayah was difficult to be interpreted,
that is, the commentators had different ideas about its parts and their
relation to each other, and they also differed in explaining the gist of
its meaning. Some even said that they understood nothing from the ayah
and that it was one of the allegorical ayahs of the Qur'an that should
be left to the versed authorities to explain.

Yet, it is fair to say that, although there is some ambiguity in this
ayah, which is, in fact, of the allegorical ones, but this does not mean
that nothing can be derived from the allegorical ayahs, and that their
allegories can never be clarified. Actually, by thorough scrutinizing
these two ayahs the above-mentioned subject can easily be understood.
Should there be any difficulty, it would be due to our insufficient
understanding of their truths. The ayah clearly says that Allah had a
face-to-face meeting with individuals; asking everyone of them "Am I not
your Lord?" to which they gave answer: "Yes, You are our Lord". This
meeting with them individually deprived the idolaters from their excuse
saying: "We were unmindful of At-tawhid [monotheism] and the worship of
the One, as following our ancestors caused us to be idolaters.

So, the sin is our fathers' and we ourselves are not to be blamed."
None of such excuses would be acceptable. They would be told: "you
should have paid your attention to this fact. You cannot be excused for
neglecting such a truth, nor can following your ancestors be an excuse,
as you can very well realize it." Undoubtedly, the ayah wants to express
these things. The ambiguity is in the fact that we ourselves have no
idea about our face-to-face meeting with Allah, and that Allah had asked
us: " Am I not your Lord?", and that we said: "Yes". We do not remember
such an incident, and it is difficult for us to accept it. Otherwise,
there is no doubt about what the ayah says. Many questions can be asked
on this occasion: In which world and under what conditions did that
questioning and answering happen? Did it happen collectively or
individually? And so on.

The reason for referring to this ayah in this respect is that the
mentioned conversation was not done in absentia and from behind a
curtain. If a voice rises from somewhere asking: "Am I not so and so?"
and you answer: "Yes, you are", it will be insignificant, as you may
later say that you were wrong. It should be in such a way that allows no
mistake, as otherwise you would have your excuse. Suppose it was Satan
who called out: "Am I not your Lord?" and somebody thought him to be
God, and replied: "Yes", it would be an error, i.e. a mere voice that
enters our ears cannot definitely tell us who it was. The conversation
which deprives you from an excuse and leaves no room for any
misunderstanding is that in which you can see your addressee and
definitely recongize him, as otherwise, just hearing a voice from behind
a curtain cannot refute your excuse. So, the ayah alleges that such a
conversation did take place between Allah and man, such that no excuse
can be acceptable. Any excuse presented by man on the Resurrection Day
to Allah that "I could not recognize You and did not worship You because
of such and such reasons" would be refused. But this refusal cannot be
acceptable without witnesses and actual comprehension.

Man must know Allah Himself and get a sort of knowledge of Him that
causes. no mis-application. This is confirmed by many narratives which
are received from the Pure Imams (A.S.) by the way of commenting on the
said ayah. They are identical in their contents and trusted by
authority. For instance, there are narratives in "Usulul-Kafi", the
exegesis of 'Ali ibn Ibrahim, "Al-Burhan" exegesis , "Nuruth-Thaqalayn"
exegesis and in other books of narratives, to the effect that Imam
as-Sadiq (A.S.) or, the Imam al-Baqir (A.S.) (most of the narratives are
quoted from these two Imams) was asked whether this conversation had
taken place "through eye-witnessing"? He said: "Yes, but the knowledge
remained and the situation was forgotten." As to how the eye-witnessing
took place, the world in which it took place, its time, etc., they are
details that have nothing to do with our topic, although they are misty
and ambiguous. But, as regards the original subject there is no
ambiguity as the ayah presents it. We regard it to be applicable to the
intuitive world.

It must be noted, however, that when we talk about seeing, witnessing
and the like in respect of Allah, the Exalted, we positively do not mean
seeing by the eyes and feeling by the senses. Actually we mean the
heart-discerning and intuitive witnessing, which are expressed in
different styles.

Commenting on the said ayah Imam 'Ali (A.S.) said: "Otherwise no one
would have known who his Creator and Sustainer is".

If man could have visionary knowledge he would not be able to
understand the fact that there is somebody who does a special work,
suppose you did not observe the builders of a building which at work
'nor the workers making something with his hands yet on seeing the
building on the thing you can immediately realize that there must have
been somebody had done them. By studying the features of the
construction you can gather some knowledge about the constructor. The
degree of its beauty, precision and artistry denotes the degree of the
cleverness and the knowledge of the maker. Up to this stage you will be
able to recognise the effective through its effect. But you cannot find
out who the maker was. Through your inferences you are unable Lo know
the very person who made it.

So, the inferences of the intellect can tell us that the world had been
made by Wise Maker, Powerful Creator, Unbeatable Creator. Yet, these are
concepts of general meanings: somebody is creator, powerful, knowing,
wise, but who is it? The answer cannot be told by mental inference. Had
it not been for our intuitive connection with Allah we could not have
known Allah. We could only know that the world had a Creator. One can
know the Creator in person only when one had, in some way recognised
Him. Otherwise, it would be just a general knowledge of Him. We want to
draw the attention to the strictness of the wording of the narrative. It
is different to say: "Otherwise no one would know (or realize, or learn)
that he has a Creator", or to say: "Otherwise no one would know who his
Creator is".

It may sometimes be said that had it not been for that, no one would
have known that the world had a Creator, or sometimes it is said that
had it not been for that no one would have known who the Creator of the
world was. None of the narratives said: "Had it not been for such a
conversation and facing, no one would have known that the world had a
Creator", because, even if it had not happened, the human intellect
could have realized that the world had a Creator. It could even
understand the Creator's Attributes, but it could not have known Him.
So, the conversation created a connection between the heart and Allah
such that when man looks deep into his heart finds his Lord, not that he
knows that there is a Creator.

If man, by Allah's help, could fully concentrate his attention on
contemplating and praying, becoming cut off everything save Allah, he
would be able to discern Allah before himself, to hear His speech, and
to be in a mood in which he sees Allah - not that he would say from
behind a curtain: "O You who are high above the earth and the heavens,
and manage the world," in fact, he would see Him in front of him and
hear His words and hear His words Amirul-Mu'minin ['Ali] (A.S.),
commenting on the ayah: Men whom neither trading nor commercing.
distracts from remembering Allah",[^31] says: "There are some people who
are devoted to the remembrance of Allah."[^32] Counting the attributes of
"the people of remembrance" he also says: "...there have been persons
with whom...Allah whispered through their wits...",[^33] that is, instead
of the servant whispering to Allah, the Imam (A.S.) says that Allah
Himself whispered to the. servant. There are persons who can hear the
secret talk of Allah. Such things do happen. Man is so great that he can
attain to such positions. Actually, they are not confined to the
prophets and the impeccables (A.S.). The true followers of the prophets
and the impeccables (A.S.) can also attain such positions. The prophets
had come to extend a helping hand to the people to pull them towards
themselves and to get them nearer to their own positions.

**Conclusion**

This ayah tells us that man has a kind of intuitive knowledge of Allah,
which acquaints him with Him. This is exactly like a clever mason whose
artistic work you witness with your eyes, i.e. this mason is the one who
constructs such a building. Then, when you see somewhere else another
building with similar features and artifice, you remember that mason
whom you had seen at work, and tell yourself that it must be the same
mason who built this one, too. You take the features to be your
witness.

If a man is acquainted with Allah, knows Him and has seen the effects
of His wisdom, his heart will be drawn to this one whom he saw and was
acquainted with. Only then the heart will be attracted, and only then it
will be able to perform real worshipping.

In other words, if somebody wants to know a being who is absent, he has
first to know his attributes. This ayah says that everybody knows Allah
in his heart, and when he sees His effects his knowledge of Him is
animated. This knowledge is intuitive not acquired, and yet it does not
attract our attention. Whenever it catches our attention the said
knowledge occurs to us and is revived. The narrative says that had it
not been for that scene no one could have known who his Creator was;
that is, he could have known well that he had a Creator, but he could
not have known who He was, as he had never seen Him.

Yet, as this knowledge is visionary, when the reason says that the
world has a Creator, one remembers that the Creator is the one he had
already known.

Therefore, depending on this point of view, which is backed by so many
narratives and which is not a personal point of view, we may say that:
The Qur'an confirms that man does know Allah intuitively and
visionally.

Another point which is worth mentioning in this respect is that this
vision, besides giving man to recognize the principle of the existence
of Allah, that is, besides man finding out that there is a God, it
further helps him to know some other points as well, such as the
Attributes of Allah. One of these Attributes is His Lordship.

The visionary knowledge takes place in such a way that man finds out
not only who his Creator is, but he also finds out that it is He Who
owns him, has his will and manages his life. The phrase expressing this
scene in the Qur'an is His interrogation: "Am I not your Lord?" He does
not ask: "Am I not your Creator?" It is more like asking: "Am I not your
Lord in whose hands are your lives? Am I not the one Who owns your
entire existence? By their saying: "Yes" not only His Attribute as
Creator is proved, but His Lordship, too. In addition to that, His
Oneness is also proved, i.e. that there is no other one who can be
Creator and Lord except Him.

The conclusion of the discussion, then, is that the intuitive and
visionary knowledge is a kind of knowledge existing between man and
Allah (in the philosophic term: The Giver of Life) through which man
discerns the cause of Divine profusion, the union of the existence. The
meaning of the intuitive knowledge is that I see the genetic connection
between my existence and Allah. Towards whom such an intuitive knowledge
happens to me? Towards the one with whom I have this connection. It is a
kind of coherence and attachment that is intuitively discerned. Whenever
there is such an attachment, it can be seen, but if it is not there, no
intuitive knowledge can take place at all. When the existent attachment
is intuitively seen, it is so, disregarding the subject of the
attachment. In this instant, one discerns only one's own attachment with
"Allah". Had it been with something else, one should have discerned it,
too.

For example, a lamp is attached by means of a wire to the ceiling and
thus it is connected to the ceiling, and the connector is the wire. If
somebody is not blind, and if the necessary conditions for seeing are
there, and if he cares to look, he can see what is there, i.e. if the
lamp is connected to the ceiling with a single wire, he will only see
that single wire. If it is a twin wire, he will see them, and if they
are three wires, he will see them three. So anybody who is capable of
seeing can see whatever is there. The connection between us and Allah is
a genetic and real one. i.e. our existence is connected to Him and
belongs to Him, the same as our actions and psychological conditions are
connected to us and belong to us.

You may visualize an image in your mind. It may be visualized by some
other person, too, without his being aware of what is there in your
mind. Now think of an apple-tree in your mind. Can there be such an
image of an apple-tree without there being a mind? Of course not. In
fact, it is connected to your mind and belongs to it. There is even a
stronger connection between the whole world and Allah, the Exalted. This
is said only to simplify the idea, as, in fact, we cannot understand the
reality of the connecting attachment between man and Allah, or between
the world and Him. Now, had there been such a connection between man and
two Gods - God forbid! - that is if we had two creators, we should have
seen our intuitive connection with two Gods, too. But, as in such an
intuitive vision only single God is seen, it proves, that besides Him
there is no Lord at all. So, this visionary discerning proves both the
existence of Allah and His Lordship. That is in this scene, one sees his
relation to Allah like the relation of a mental vision to the mind which
imagines it.

Actually, it depends on one's inclination. If your mind is inclined
towards the apple-tree, then its image is there, but if you divert from
it, there can be no such image. The very consistency of its existence
depends on your own will and inclination. All the world, in connection
with Allah, is explained in the same way. If He willed and cared for the
world, it would be there, and if He lifted His care off the world, it is
nothing, there would be no world.

"If she coquettishly turns away, all the moulds collapse."[^34] If one
realizes that his existence is connected to Allah, that it is in His
powerful hands, and that if He wishes him to be he will be, and if He
does not, He will not be, one will be understanding the truth about
Allah's Lordship and that our existence is at His disposal. He is our
Lord, which means He owns us and our existence is from Him. If He wants
we shall be, and if He does not, we shall not be:

His command, when He wills anything, is only to say to it: 'Be!' so it
is."[^35] The connection of the world's existence to Allah, the Exalted,
(is just like to say: "Be!" and it is, or: "Not to be!" or not to say:
"Be!" and it is not. We had seen this situation in the world mentioned
by the Qur'an, but we forgot it now. Maybe Allah assist us to bring it
to perfection so that the intuitive knowledge becomes a conscious one,
and then we shall find that our existence is connected to Allah in the
same way. We have no independence of our own. We are bound to His
will.

In other words, everything other than Allah is the crystallization of
His Will. It is His Will that the world should exist. Had it not been
for His Will there would have been nothing. Man can discern this through
his intuition, and he had already seen it in some world - a world which
is called by some scholars "'Alamudh-Dhar", or "The world of the
Covenant". In that world Allah asked: "Am I not your Lord?" that was a
covenant with His servants.

As to how it happened, what kind of world it was, we know nothing,
since we know only this natural world. We cannot comprehend what kind of
a world it was, what kind of a conversation took place and how it
happened. These are the features of the ambiguity of this ayah,
according to some scholars. It is, however, caused by our insufficient
understanding of the metaphysics. Yet, as a result of the said
witnessing and conversation, knowing Allah, His Lordship and His Oneness
had been established. That is why some narratives stress that this ayah
is a proof of man's natural belief of monotheism: "He moulded them on
monotheism" .

In the comments on Ayatul-Fitrah of Suratur-Rum and Ayatul Mithaq of
Suratul-'A'raf, it is said: These two ayahs denote that Allah had
moulded the people as worshippers of the One-a fact which necessitates
that they should know Allah and His Lordship status, as well as His
worshipability and Oneness. Thus, some narratives say: "He made them
such as to know there is no Lord but He".

Therefore, it may be said that this ayah proves the natural intuitive
knowledge of Allah. As we said, natural knowledge is of two concepts:
knowing Allah by means of reasoning, which is obtained through general
concepts; and knowing Allah by means of intuitive vision, which is
obtained through heart-witnessing.

Consequently, the ayah is an evidence confirming that such
heart-witnessed and intuitive vision of Allah had happened to man
sometime, and it still has its effects which refute our excuse. That is,
when we want to know Allah, we are like the one who, on seeing the
craftsmanship of an architect, remembers similar works by an architect
whom one had known before.

In this case, one cannot allege that these works belong to some other
architect. Similarly, our hearts, which had been acquainted with Allah,
the One, have no excuse for associating any other deity with Him. It is
true that attending to the world of matter and material means has
extracted man's attention and weakened his intuitive knowledge of Allah,
but, after the establishment of the intellectual proofs, and after the
coming of the prophets with warnings and good tidings, there remains no
excuse for man to say: "I thought that the creator of the heavens and
the earth was an idol made of earned stone", nor has he the right to
say: "...Our fathers associated others (with Allah) before and we were
(their) offspring (who came) after them."[^36] They would be told: No,
you had reason and you had been formerly acquainted with Allah and your
hearts knew Him. So, you had no right to say that an idol made of dates
or dried clay is worthy of worshipping.

This is the refutation of their excuse. Hence, this ayah says that
Allah is known, through intuitive and visionary knowledge, to be the
Creator of the world and the only worshipped deity.


