At-tawhid and Its Limits
========================

Some groups of patchy beliefs take at-Tawhid (monotheism) - which is an
Islamic principle - to mean the unity of the society. They allege that
the first principle is that the society must originally be classless, or
all the classes should be a single one. They think that at-Tawhid is the
unity of the society, i.e. it has nothing to do with Allah, it is a
principle that demands the unification of the society.

Some others take at-Tawhid to be a principle of knowledge, and
presented it into the Islamic philosophy, saying: from the Islamic point
of view, things advance towards unification, and contradictions are to
be united. This is what they thought at-Tawhid to be. Similarly, they
gave to other principles such meanings which; "make the bereaved of her
child laugh", as the proverb says: "Yes, if one does not base one's
speech and writing on a definite criterion, and carelessly plays with
everything for the sake of showing off one's ideas and fancies, one may
say whatever one likes, "lies have no bones to stick in the throat", as
the saying goes.

When one decides to write and say whatever one desires, to play with
whatever one likes - with words, literature, science, philosophy, the
Qur'an and everything, a question presents itself: What does at-Tawhid
the first principle of Islam's viewpoint of the world - mean? Is it to
unify the society and make a single community, to tend to unify
everything, or is it to recognize Allah's Oneness?

In answering this question we say: Throughout the entire Qur'an, the
word at-Tawhid and its derivatives, such as "to unify, unification and
unified" had never been mentioned even once - one of the surprises of
the Qur'an. But the original principle referred to by the Qur'an as the
top fundamental one, is stated in such forms as: "Say: Me is Allah, the
One!",[^37] "your God is one God",[^38] "... worship Allah, you have no
god other than Him",[^39] "...there is no god but He",[^40] "...there is
no god but Allah",[^41] and many others which announce the first
principle in the Qur'an, i.e. we must realize that there is only One
God, and that we must worship none but Him: "Your God is one God", "And
We sent to every nation a messenger (saying): Worship Allah and shun the
Taghut..."[^42] The top call of all prophets is: Worship Allah and shun
the satan. Therefore, the principle of at-Tawhid, as an ideological
principle, can have no meaning except the unification of Allah as the
only diety. Wherever the word at-Tawhid occurs in Nahjul-Balaghah and in
other Islamic traditions, it has the said meaning. Consequently,
interpreting this Islamic principle, at-Tawhid, differently, would be
nothing but deviation, ignorance, or prejudice.

Other matters, true or untrue, have nothing to do with this principle,
that is, supposing that a classless society is supported by Islam, it
has no connection with at-Tawhid as an ideological principle of Islam.
Even if it could be proved that Islam's opinion was to have a society
without classes, still it would be related to at-Tawhid.

**Stages and Limits of at-Tawhid**

Believing in Allah's Oneness has many stages:

1. At-Tawhid in the Necessary Being, i.e. no being has come to
existence by itself except Allah. In the terms of philosophy, it is the
belief in a being whose existence is necessary. It is only Allah, the
Exalted, whose existence is untrinsically a must, and from Whom the
other beings take their existence.

2. At-Tawhid in creation. That is, there is no creator except Allah.

This is a logical result of the previous point.

3. At-Tawhid in the genetic Lordship. The third stage of at-Tawhid is
the genetic management and Lordship. That is, having admitted that Allah
is the Creator of the world, we have to know who its manager and
director is, and whether there is anyone, other than Allah, who manages
the world without having to obtain His permission. Should there be an
allegation that Allah had created the world, and then its management was
handed over to some others, or Allah had nothing more to do with its
management, or, if He had, He had it together with some partners, it
would be multitheism in Lordship or in Management. In this stage, a
monotheist is that who believes that, as the creation of the world
needed none other than Allah, similarly, the genetic management,
directing and Lordship are exclusively Allah's.

4. At-Tawhid in the genetic Legislative Lordship. Having known that our
Creator is Allah, and that our existence and management are exclusively
in His hands, we have to believe also that .none other than Him has the
right to issue orders to us and to give law for us. Every law must be
endorsed by the Divine order of permission before being regarded as
authorized. Admitting that all existence is from Him, none shall have
the right, without His permission, to command His creatures, to bid and
forbid them, and to make laws for them. This is called "unity of
Legislative Lordship."

5. At-Tawhid in worshipping. This is another stage of at-Tawhid. It is
the unity of Divinity and worship. That is, none except Allah is worthy
of being worshipped: "There is no god but Allah." This is also another
outcome of that natural belief inherited in man. If our existence is
from Allah, the management and directing our lives are up to Him. The
independent effecter in the world is He, and the rights to legislate and
issue orders are solely in His hands, there remains no room for anybody
else to be worshipped. Him alone we must worship, which means we should
place ourselves, unquestionably, at His service. This is what servitude
to Him means. Only the one who owns everything deserves to be
worshipped.

In other words, deity is a result of believing in His Lordship. Man
worships the one whom he feels to have complete mastery and full command
over him. So, the natural outcome of the genetic and Legislative
Lordship of Allah is that no one else should be worshipped.

6. At-Tawhid in worshipping is another stage of at-Tawhid. It means
that man should worship no one but Allah. The former stage was that
there was no one deserving to be worshipped except Him. This stage
requires that man should practically worship no one but Allah. This is
called "unity of worshipping."

You might have realized that the Qur'an regards polytheism as a sin.
When the grand sins are counted, "polytheism comes at the top of the
list", as they say. This is worshipping, in practice, other than Allah,
even if the worshipper did not believe that his worshipped one deserved
worshipping, but he did it for some interests of his.

7. At-Tawhid in asking help is another phase of at-Tawhid. It means
that man should practically seek the help of none other than Allah.
Regarding Allah to be the real effective in the world means that no gain
or loss affects us unless Allah wills it. So, how can we ask help from
other than Him? Should we ask it from the one in whose hands is
everything, or from the one who himself is in need of help, like
ourselves? So, one of the aspects of monotheism is the unity of asking
help: You do we worship and You do we seek for help[^43] This is a kind
of unification. In case this aspect reaches its perfection, it will
change into a psychological attribute, which, in the terms of the
Islamic ethics, is called "Dependence on Allah". Many ayahs, after
commanding people to worship Allah, order them to depend on Him: "...and
on Allah should you rely if you are believers."[^44]

8. At-Tawhid in fear. This is another aspect of monotheism. It means
that man should fear none but Allah. Knowing that He is the real and
only effective, why should we fear anyone else who can do nothing and is
void of any power. All powers are originally from Him, while the others
are no more than means of execution. The perfect monotheist is he who
fears Allah alone, and no one else. Many ayahs enjoin: fear Allah, and
fear none other than Him: "Those who convey the messages of Allah and
fear Him, and do not fear any one but Allah..."[^45] and "...but do not
fear them and fear Me if you are believers."[^46]

9. At-Tawhid in hoping is another aspect of monotheism. It means that
we should place our hopes in none other than Allah. This is also a
logical consequence of believing in the Genetic Lordship of Allah. If we
really believe that the real effective one in the world is Allah, why,
then, shall we expect any thing from anyone else? No one else can do
anything, so, all hopes must be confined to Him.

10. At-Tawhid in love is another aspect. If one believes that all
perfections and beauties originally are Allah's, one's love originally
belongs to Him, while other loves are false. Our love to somebody or
something is naturally caused by the perfection or the beauty which we
see in the beloved. Realizing that perfection or beauty is false, and
that the one who has the original perfection and beauty is Allah alone,
we should not, intrinsically, love anyone else.

The perfect monotheist is the one whose heart is given up to Allah,
and, should he happen to love anyone else, it would be a radiation of
his love to Allah and for His sake, as it is natural that when one loves
somebody, his love- covers his lover's belonging, too. If someone loves
his friend he loves his clothes, his books and his house, too. Loving
Allah, then, necessitates that whatever belongs to Allah is loved for
that, too.

Finally, at-Tawhid reaches a stage where man becomes eyewitness of the
fact that the entire existence and its affairs are in need of Allah, or,
actually there is nothing but the need of Allah. In the terms of
philosophy, this is expressed as: "The world of existence is the very
connection, the very belonging itself, not something that belongs or has
a connection." In an instance this subject appears in man in the form of
a belief supported by proofs; in another instance, when man's knowledge
increases and his faith becomes more perfect, it reaches a stage in
which he becomes an "eyewitness" of this fact and understands it. These
were the stages of monotheism (at-Tawhid)

**The Border Between Polytheism and Faith**

If one wants from the Islamic point of view, to become a monotheist and
embrace Islam so as to be counted in this world among the Muslims and
the monotheists, and, in the other world be happy and enter Paradise,
must he pass through all these stages, or is it enough to have only the
first one, or is there any particular limit which must be attained to,
and a lower stage will not be acceptable? Which one is it?

Should the limit, which man must comprehend, be the last stage, only
few individuals along the history had actually reached it, could be
eyewitnesses and understood it through intuitive knowledge. As a matter
of fact there were such individuals in the history, but what about the
others? Should they be rejected? Of course not. On the other hand, is
the first stage sufficient? i.e. somebody believes that the Necessary
Being is One, but admits for others to have the attributes of creation,
lordship and being worshipped. He does believe that the only
self-existent being is Allah, yet he also believes that there are other
world-creators, too. Naturally, this belief is contradictory.
Nevertheless, there are many such self-contradicting beliefs which are
believed in by people who do not recognize the duality of their
contradictory beliefs. This is because of their insufficient
knowledge.

For example, there are some people who believe that the Creator of the
world is none but Allah, who, after having created it left it to be
managed by some of His creatures, or they did it automatically even
without any permission from Him by taking the management out of Allah's
hands! Incidentally, basic polytheist beliefs along the history stem
from this very question. Even the Arab polytheists, about whom the
Qur'an says: ...the idolaters are but unclean"[^47] and "...and kill them
wherever you find them",[^48] and who were the same filthy idolaters who
drove the Muslims out of their homes, did not believe that the world had
many creators. They believed that the management of the world was done
by many, such as the angels, whom they believed to be Allah's daughters.
The idols were to represent those daughters, which they worshipped in
order to draw nearer to the angels - the directors of the world. They
even thought that those daughters were so dear to Allah that He rejected
none of their demands. Thus, they wanted them to intercade for them with
Allah: ...we do not worship them save that they may bring us nearer to
Allah"[^49] and Should you ask them: 'Who created the heavens and the
earth?' They would most certainly say: 'Allah'."[^50] Their polytheism
was in lordship and worship. Similarly were the idolaters of the time of
the Prophet Joseph (Yusuf). He did not ask them: "Are sundry creators
better or a single one?" He asked them: "Are sundry lords better or
Allah the One, the Omnipotent?"[^51]

It is clear, then, that their polytheism was in lordship. If a person
believes that the Creator is One, but the world has many lords who
direct its parts - a lord for each part: for the earth, the animals, the
lands, the waters, and so on, but that all of them had been created by
Allah, will such a person be regarded by Islam as a monotheist or a
polytheist? Undoubtedly he is a polytheist. That is, only at-Tawhid in
creation is not enough.

There are, however, others who believe that the genetic manager of the
world is Allah, the one who created it, yet there, are besides Him,
others who have the right to make laws for the people; and to obey them,
like obeying Allah, is a duty. Allah sends a law and tells people to do
so and so.

There are also others who make other laws, besides Allah's, which are
to be obeyed, too, i.e. both the laws of Allah and the laws of those
individuals are to be enacted, and it is incumbent upon them to obey
both. This is polytheism in legislative lordship: They have taken their
rabbis and their monks for lords besides Allah."

The Jews and the Christians believed that the big people in the
synagogue and in the church had the right to legislate laws, or change
the Divine law and dispose of it, just as it is currently done by the
church - to make lawful what is unlawful and vice versa. For example in
Catholicism divorce had been unlawful for many years. Marriage had been
an everlasting bondage between man and woman once they were wed to one
another. They had to live with one another. There was no way to divorce,
but of late there appeared some particular exceptions in which the
Ecclesiastical Council allowed divorce, i.e. making law is in their
hands. What does the Christian religion say? It says whatever the said
Council says.

This is the religion of Messiah. If they have to change their opinions
tomorrow, the religion will change accordingly, and yet it will remain
the same Christianity, only this time it appears in a different form.
This type of belief is polytheism in the legislative lordship.

It seems that the Qur'an refers to this by the said ayah about the
rabbis and monks whom the Jews and the Christians regarded as their
lords. Did they really believe that, say, the Pope was the creator of
the world? Apparently there was no such belief in the Church nor among
the Christians. They only accepted their authority to originally
legislate laws, taking it a duty upon them to obey their commands as
they obey Allah's, though, as regards worshipping, they were of the
opinion that no one deserved to be worshipped except Allah.

Looking thoroughly into the Qur'an we realize that the said items are
necessary for one to be a monotheist. That is, the monotheist, in the
view of the Qur'an, is the one who sees that the attributes of being
necessary and being a creator both are exclusively confined to Allah, as
well as Genetic Lordship, Legislative Lordship and the only Ilah to be
worshipped. And, since believing in Allah's divinity and Unity belonged
to the last stage, Islam's slogan was "La Ilaha Illallah", "there is no
god but Allah". It does not say: "There is no Necessary Being but
Allah", "There is no Creator but Allah" or "There is no Lord but Allah'"
because these alone are not enough. They must include "There is no one
to be worshipped but Allah." So, the limit, here, is at-Tawhid.
Believing in this turns the individual into a monotheist, from the
Islamic point of view, such that it is accepted and he is regarded as a
Muslim, deserving to enter the House of Happiness. A stage below this is
insufficient. But what about a higher stage? So much the better! man
should try to attain it. The more he advances the more perfect he
becomes in his monotheism. As a matter of fact, man's procession of
perfection advances towards at-Tawhid, and the evaluation of a man's
merits in accordance with the Islamic criterions is measured in
proportion to the degree of his monotheism.

Here someone may ask: Does each one of the said stages of at-Tawhid
provide a part of our happiness and secure a stage of our perfection and
piety, or are those monotheistic concepts like a mixture which if it
contained all the ingredients it would be effective, and if not it would
be as if it did not exist at all?

In more explicit terms: suppose a person accepts at-Tawhid in creation,
but he does not accept at-Tawhid in Lordship. When this person is
compared with another person who accepts none of these two concepts, can
we say that these two are, as regards perfection and piety, in two
different stages, such as to say this one gets 10 degrees and the other
gets 20 degrees? Or by acquiring all the stages of at-Tawhid one has,
actually, just started the process, and is it here that the effects
appear, whereas before reaching this stage there would be no effect
whatsoever? It occurs to one that these are almost a successive series
of stages, each of which is relatively effective. That is, if somebody
denies the existence of Allah, even as the Necessary Being, he will be
extremely low. The one who admits that Allah is the Necessary Being has
found a part of the truth and ascended a step towards perfection. He is
better than the one who denies it; and so on until comes to accept
at-Tawhid in Divinity. What is the answer to this question?

The Qur'an says that it is not true that the one who accepts some
aspects of at-Tawhid is better than the one who accepts none of them,
i.e. if one accepts only the first four stages of at-Tawhid will be
regarded as if one accepts none of them - a fact which appears to us
strange, at first glance. An explicit example of this in the Qur'an is
the disbelief of Iblis (Satan). It is not our concern to discuss whether
Iblis is a real creature or a legendary one, or whether he is separate
from man or an inseparable dimension of him. We, however, believe that
Iblis is a separate creature who has a real existence outside man, and
who lives for a long period, all of which is not our concern now.

At any rate, the episode of Iblis, which is repeated in the Qur'an
several times, is not a mere useless legend.

The Qur'an's repetition and insistence upon it is but for us to take a
lesson from it. Did Iblis believe ill Allah's creation? The Qur'an says
that when Allah asked Iblis why didn't he fall down in obeisance to
Adam, he replied: "...You had created me of fire, while You created him
of clay. I am better than him",[^52] why should he make obeisance to him?
In this conversation there is no denial of Allah's creation, on the
contrary, it declares that He is the Creator of both of them. Satan
admits that Allah is the Creator of the world, including Satan and the
human beings. So, he did believe in Allah's power of creation, but what
about Allah's Lordship? He addressed Allah, saying: "My Lord! Because
you have sent me astray, I shall entice them..."[^53] Allah is addressed
as "Lord", which means that he believed in Allah's Lordship, too. He
also believed in the Day of Resurrection, as he says: "...My Lord! Then
respite me till the time when they are resurrected."[^54] This he asked
after that Allah had cursed him for his disobedience. He asked Allah to
lengthen his life till the Day of Judgement so as to instigate them and
deviate them from the right path.

Therefore, if each of these beliefs was individually sufficient to be
regarded as a virtue and perfection, he should have had as many virtues
and perfections, since he believed in Allah's Existence, Oneness,
Creation, Lordship and in the Resurrection.

In "Nahjul-Balaghah", by Imam 'Ali (A.S.) we read about Iblis that: "He
had worshipped Allah for six thousand years, whether counted by the
years of this world or of the next world is unknown."[^55]

Now let us suppose that Iblis had worshipped Allah for six thousand
years before the creation of Adam - and the worship of six thousand
years is not a trivial thing - what shortcomings did Iblis have? He was
short of obedience. He should have obeyed what Allah had ordered him to
do. It is Allah's right to be obeyed without dispute. When He commands
He must be obeyed. All existence is His; so, self-assertion before Him
is pointless, since one has to accept Allah's legislative Lordship and
to obey Him unquestionably. Nobody else is to be obeyed in this manner.
But Satan disputes with Allah, meaning to say to Allah: "This order of
Yours is irrelevant- [we seek Allah's refuge!] - if someone has to bow
down before someone else, the former must be lower in position than the
latter, whereas my position is higher than that of Adam. It is Adam who
should make obeisance before me. So, You have issued a groundless order.
You have no right to tell me to bow to Adam." Nowhere in the Qur'an, nor
in any Divine Book and any traditional narrative, it was said that Iblis
had committed any error except this one which is mentioned with its
psychological preliminaries. This was the cause of Satan's downfall - he
refused to obey Allah's order. The reason for his refusal is, of course,
conceit and envy. He envied Adam. These are psychological causes. But
what had practically caused Satan's downfall was Allah's verdict: "And
My curse is on You to the Day of Judgement"[^56], and on that day it will
be said: "That I will indeed fill Hell with you and with those who
follow you, all.

"[^57] That is, the forerunner of the people of Hell is Iblis, while the
others follow him. Allah had pledged that He would fill hell with Satan
and his followers. If we suppose that whoever accepts a stage of
at-Tawhid must be superior and more honoured than the one who does not
accept it, then Iblis must be much superior to the one who denies even
the existence of Allah, such as a person who does not believe in any
deity lives a few years in this world .and perhaps no evil deed is
committed by him, and yet, Iblis, who worshipped Allah for six thousand
years and believed in several aspects of at-Tawhid, is placed at the
head of the Hell-dwellers, that is, he is confined to the lowest stratum
of Hell.

Maybe Iblis had partners. There may be human Satans even, and not
better than him, but none of them may be benefitted by whatever
worshipping he had done, since he did not reach the necessary limit of
at-Tawhid, such as the mixture which lacks one of its essential
ingredients. This mixture can benefit only when all its ingredients are
added. A mixture lacking an essential part may even be harmful. In
medicine, if a compound lacked a particular material, it may not only be
useless, but it may also be harmful. Similarly, the collection of the
monotheistic beliefs is a mixture effective in bringing about man's
happiness, and entering him in Allah's Mercy and His Paradise. If it
lacks any of its elements it will be ineffective.

We know that if a Muslim denies a necessary Islamic precept mentioned
in the Qur'an he is regarded as an apostate; that is, he has forsaken
his religion. We remember that the Imam [late Ayatullah Ruhullah
Al-Khumayni, the Founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran] some time ago
said that, whoever regards the [Islamic] Penalty Bill as inhumane will
be an apostate, his wife will be haram [illegal] to him, his penalty
will be death, killing him will be lawful and his property will be
distributed among his heirs. Why? Does he deny the existence of Allah,
or the Prophet? Does he say that there will be no Judgement Day? No, he
denies none of these. He even performs his salats and fasts. He only
says that that "Bill, , is inhumane and unfair. Why should he be
regarded as an apostate? He has so many [Islamic] beliefs. He serves so
much. Why should he become lower even than the one who denies Allah? Is
it because he does not attain to the accepted limit of at-Tawhid?

This shows as if some part of the mission of Muhammad (S.A.) were
inadequate, or that Muhammad (S.A.) himself had - we seek Allah's
refuge - badly conveyed Allah's message to the people, or Allah
(W.S.A.R.) had badly expressed Himself, or badly legislated the laws. In
any case, it is a denial of either the Message or the limit of
at-Tawhid. The one who admits that the Prophet (S.A.) utters nothing out
of himself and believes in the Message, by objecting to any of the
Prophet's utterances, will actually be objecting to Allah i.e. he
objects: why did Allah, for example, legislate the Penalty Code?

It is not without reason that the episode of Satan is so much stressed.
We must understand it. We cannot be Muslims unless we submit to Allah's
commands. If I say: "I accept this only when I understand its reasonable
proof, but I'll leave it if I do not understand it", I will be following
my reason. Of course, the Islamic precepts have their rational evidences
and they are related to the good and the bad. But it is different to
say: "I will not accept them unless I know what good there is in them",
and to say: "There is no precept without an interest, though I do not
know it."

Is there anything minus Allah? Whatever we have is from Him, so how can
we say before Allah: "You are One and I am one, You will and I will."
Who are we? What do we have from ourselves? When I say: "Allah said so
in the Qur'an, but I think it would have been better if He had said so,"
is as if I say: "I have a sense which Allah does not have." Thus, in
this sense you are a god, and the taste is not from Allah. If it is,
then Allah is its originator. If you understand something which Allah
does not, then you, in this understanding of yours, are the god of your
understanding, since you did get it from Allah!

Islam means "submission", resignation to the will of Allah. So, how can
it be possible for somebody to be a Muslim and nevertheless questions
Allah about His commands, and shows off his own opinion, and says: "This
precept is an insult to the women's dignity, that one is inhumane", and
things like that? This is why the Imam [Khumayni] said that the penalty
for such a person is death, he must be killed, because he lacks the
foundation of Islam in himself. This, however, is a religious decree and
is backed by particular proofs. This precept is explained according to
the Islamic point of view, as denying a necessary precept means denying
the Divine Legislative Lordship. The parable of this person is like the
parable of Iblis. If he worships for a thousand years and fights for
Islam for a thousand years, but he denies a single necessary precept
which is stated in the Qur'an, killing him will be lawful, his wife will
be haram to him and his wealth will be distributed among his heirs, as
it will no longer be his. Thus, there is a limit, a norm, before Allah.
To dispute these norms is not accepted in Islam.

Islam is submission. If it is sometimes recommended that one should be
tough and self-assertive, the opposite is required before Allah. One is
to be humble, powerless, helpless, modest and submissive before one's
Lord. Those who think that Islam does not want man to be humble even
before Allah have understood nothing of Islam.

Man, before Allah, must be the most humiliated, and he must show his
humiliation before Him.

Man's perfection is in his being humble before Allah. No one should be
self-assertive before Him. This is actual worship. Islam without
worshipping means nothing, and no worship is possible without showing
humility to Allah. So, how can it be said that Islam does not want man
to be humble even before Allah? What does it want, then? Islam is
nothing but this. Islam is submission (to Allah).

"It is enough for me as a pride to be a slave of Yours and it is enough
for me as an honour to have You for a Lord!"[^58] Islam says: "Put your
forehead, before Allah, on the soil, and your face, too", "And they fall
down on their faces weeping, and it adds to their humility."[^59] If not,
why, then, 'Ali (A.S.) used to cry and to humiliate himself before
Allah? How can they say that Islam does not want us to show humiliation
before Allah?

At any rate, the Qur'anic ayahs tell us that the agreeable limit or
norm of the human perfection, i.e. the least standard acceptable to
Islam from a worthy godly person is his accepting these aspects and
manifestations of at-Tawhid. To be careless or indifferent to any one of
them leads to man's downfall from the lowest stage of Islam. The highest
stage of man's perfection comes after this one, as without passing
through these stages, there would be no advancement on the road of
perfection and human virtue endorsed by Islam and acceptable to it. All
those aspects can be helpful. Originality belongs to at-Tawhid, while
other virtues help man to progress upwards. That which has the
originality is the connection between the heart and Allah, which is
manifested in those beliefs.

To conclude what has been mentioned above: at-Tawhid means considering
Allah to be One, as an Islamic principle. His Oneness is admitted in the
following subjects:

1. In the necessity of His existence, and this necessity is exclusively
in respect of Allah alone.
2. In Creation
3. In Genetic Lordship, i.e. the management of the world.
4. In the Legislative Lordship, i.e. giving laws, biddings and
forbiddings, which are to be carried out undisputedly.
5. In worshipping and deity, i.e. no creature deserves worshipping
except Allah.

At this point one will be representing the concept of "La ilaha
illallah", there is no god but Allah, which is the first stage of Islam,
without which Islam cannot be fulfilled. Then, there are other stages of
at-Tawhid, which can be attained to by way of knowledge and deeds on the
road to perfection: at-Tawhid in seeking help and reliance, at-Tawhid in
fear and hope, at-Tawhid in love, and so on until one reaches the
highest stage of at-Tawhid, that is at-Tawhid in His "independent
existence". The independent existence is exclusively His. All the
affairs of existence are from Him - this must become a visualized fact,
not just a mental concept attained to by mental and philosophical
reasoning. Whoever reaches this stage will be a perfect monotheist. Such
a person will have no independent relation except with Allah: "You are
the One Who made the lights shine in the hearts of Your friends so that
they could know You and admit your Oneness; and You are the One Who
removed the others from the hearts of those who love You so that they
could love no one save You."[^60]

The connection between at-Tawhid and the genetic guardianship raises a
question: Having admitted that Allah is One as the Necessary Being, the
Creator and Lord, should we, consequently, deprive all other creatures
of any kind of effect in respect to creation and management, and if we
attribute to them some effect would it be a sort of polytheism?

Or what is meant by at-Tawhid is not this, as others can also create,
raise the dead and practise management, but only with permission of
Allah. For example, there are some ayahs concerning Jesus (A.S.), in
which certain things are mentioned. Allah, addressing Jesus (A.S.) says:
"...and you create out of clay the shape of a bird by My permission,
then you blow into it and it becomes a bird by My permission, and you
heal the blind and the leprous by My permission, and you bring forth the
dead by My permission..."[^61]

So, Jesus (A.S.), son of Mary did not only cure the sick, but raised
the dead to life, and even more than that - he could turn a handful of
clay into the shape of a bird, breathe into it, and it flew away a full
real bird by Allah's permission. Those were the miracles which Jesus
(A.S.) showed to the people to prove his prophethood.

In another ayah he himself says: "I bring the dead to life by Allah's
permission."[^62] Some of the commentators who deny miracles and try to
explain them according to the laws of nature, believe that Jesus's
curing of the sick was a kind of genius in the science of medicine,
alleging that Jesus (A.S.) was a very clever physician who could very
easily cure the sick, which used to be regarded as a miracle. Otherwise
there was nothing unnatural about it. Then, when they reached this part
of the ayah "...and you bring forth the dead", they said that "to bring
forth" referred to disentombing the dead bodies, which Jesus (A.S.) did!
This is, of course, a ridiculous thing that only an insane can utter.
Why should Allah hold Jesus (A.S.) under obligation for telling him , he
was the one who dug the dead bodies out of their graves? Was it a pride
for him to do so? Yet, Jesus (A.S.) himself said in another ayah: "I
bring the dead to life".

At any case, these comments are symptoms of certain ailments which
usually attack those who assume to be Muslims. They are motivated by
their pro-Western tendencies and try to show off their fake scholarship,
or whatever you may call it. It is their weak faith which causes them to
think that all laws of the world are only the natural ones. They deny
all metaphysical rules governing nature, and thus, whatever happens in
the world must be in conformity with the natural laws. Consequently, to
them, there can be no miracles and no extraordinary accomplishments.
Therefore, in their efforts to combine their false beliefs with those
ayahs which they pretend to accept and believe in, they fall into
contradictory statements and find themselves in straits, and hence such
absurd and childish talks.

The Qur'an definitely says that Jesus (A.S.) did bring to life dead
people, create living creatures and cure acute diseases, and , yet he
was one of Allah's servants. Actually, this was the very cause which
made some of his apostles and followers exaggerate his position and say
that he was the son of Allah, or even he was Allah Himself. Those
beliefs are positively reputed by the Qur'an: "...and say not: Three.
Desist, it is better for you. Allah is only One God..."[^63] At the same
time it confirms that Jesus (A.S.) did practise those acts, by Allah's
permission. Once again we repeat the said ayah for a more serious
consideration: "... and you create out of clay the shape of a bird by My
permission, then you blow into it and it becomes a bird by My
permission, and heal the blind and the leprous by My permission, and you
bring forth the dead by My permission..." It should have been enough to
use "by My permission" only once for all those achievements of Jesus
(A.S.). However, such achievements are regarded as polytheism only when
one thinks that they had been achieved independently and without Allah's
permission. But if one believes that Allah may grant somebody a power
enabling him to affect the world of nature and bring about phenomena
contrary to the accepted laws of nature, this belief, besides not being
polytheism at all, it is, actually, the very monotheism itself, and to
deny it is to deny the Qur'an, the message of the Prophet (S.A.) and
at-Tawhid in its complete tenets.

We have, thus, to believe that such performances can possibly be
achieved by other than Allah, but by Allah, s permission. Now, what is
the nature of this permission? It is what is known in our culture as
"the Genetic Guardianship", and whether the holy Prophet (A.S.) and the
infallible Imams (A.S.) possess this "genetic guardianship" or not.

**The Opinion Denying Genetic Guardianship**

Some of the brethren of the Sunni sects think that such a belief is
polytheistic, that is, if a person believes that the Prophet (S.A.)
possessed "Genectic Guardianship", i.e. he could bring to life the dead
or cure the sick, he is a polytheist, because such acts are only done by
Allah. Consequently, they regard other Muslim sects, who make more than
95% of the Muslims, to be polytheists, including the Shi'ites who
believe that the Prophet (S.A.) possessed "Genetic Guardianship".

Such accusations can be referred to as being ill-informed if partiality
and political motives are excluded. The one who has read the Qur'an and
those ayahs, too, how could one allow oneself to take such a belief as
polytheism? The Qur'an itself says that Jesus (A.S.) did create, animate
the dead and remedy the sick, so, how can these be regarded as
polytheistic beliefs? Sometimes they add other unwise talk to that. They
say that only the very instances stated in the Qur'an are not shirk
(polytheism). But to ascribe them to persons not mentioned in the
Qur'an, will be shirk. It is quite clear that this talk is groundless.
If some act is shirk, then it is shirk even if the Qur'an does not
mention it. Can the nature of monotheism be changed that which is shirk
is shirk, disregarding what the others say. How is it possible that when
the Qur'an says, addressing Jesus (A.S.): you created, you brought the
dead to life, it is called Tawhid, but if it is not directly mentioned
by the Qur'an, it is counted shirk?

This kind of immature viewpoint, which is spreading among many Muslims,
is caused by economic and political factors. It is imposed by the force
of money upon the poor people of the Islamic countries. It is now
spreading throughout such countries as India, Pakistan and some Arab
countries, whose majority of people are too poor to resist temptations
of the Wahhabi money.

The connection between at-Tawhid and the "Legislative Guardianship"' in
this respect, is similar to that of the "Legislative Lordship" . That
is, by saying that no one but Allah has the right to legislate laws, to
issue orders and to be unquestionably obeyed, we do not mean that no one
else is to be obeyed in all cases, nor that no one has the right to
issue orders in all cases. Actually, what is meant here is that no one
has, independently, the right to issue orders on his own account, unless
Allah Himself gives him the right to do so, in which case, to obey him
would practically mean obeying Allah Himself.

The Qur'an confirms this by saying: "And We did not send any messenger
but that he should be obeyed by Allah's permission..."[^64] So, to obey
somebody by Allah's permission is, actually, to obey Allah. Such
obedience not only does not contradict at-Tawhid, but is part and parcel
of it. What contradicts Divine Legislative Lordship is to think that
there are others, besides Allah, and diagonally, who have the right,
like Him, to legislate laws, without depending upon Him, and regard
obeying them is obligatory, like obeying Allah. This is real shirk. But
to say that Allah had appointed some persons to see to people's affairs,
to direct them and to bid them what to do and what not to do, and, at
the same time, He ordered us to obey them - this is not shirk at all.

The said topics are referred to in the Qur'an: "Then those who manage
the affair,"[^65] despite the fact that management is exclusively His,
as: "Surely His is the creation and the command",[^66] and: "He manages
the affair from the heaven to the earth..."[^67], yet, at the same time,
He says: "Then those who manage the affair", no matter who they may be.
(Most of the commentators believe that they are angels). At any case,
there are others who, by the permission of Allah, practise some sort of
managements, which are admitted by the Qur'an.

The Qur'an orders the people to obey the Prophet (S.A.): "...obey Allah
and obey the Messenger and the authorized from among you... ."[^68]

They are to obey not only the Prophet (S.A.), but also his infallible
successors, as was told by the Messenger (S.A.) himself that "the
authorized from among you" were the 12 infallible Imams (A.S.). It goes
without saying, then, that obeying the Messenger and the authorized also
covers those who had, in particular or in general, been appointed by the
Prophet (S.A.) or the Imam (A.S.).

When the Prophet appoints a governor to a certain region, the people
there must obey him, and their obedience to him is, in fact, obedience
to the Messenger himself. Likewise, obeying the Supreme Islamic Guardian
who had been appointed by the "Imam of the Time" [the 12th Imam] to take
care of the people's affairs during his Occultation, is obeying the
Imam, and obeying the Imam is obeying Allah: "They are my Proof before
you and I am the Proof of Allah" So, believing in the legislative
guardianship of the Prophet (S.A.), the Imam and the related, including
the great jurisprudents during the Occultation of the "Guardian of the
Time" [the 12th Imam] not only does not contradict at-Tawhid, but it is
one of at-Tawhid's affairs. That is, obeying Allah includes obeying
Allah's Messenger, because He ordered us to obey him, and so on until we
get to the jurisprudents. This explanation was necessary to be annexed
to the case of at-Tawhid so as to remove some of the doubts cast on this
matter by the ignorant and the prejudiced.

This case of at-Tawhid is exactly the same as that of ash-shafa'ah
[intercession]. In the previous lesson we said that the idolaters of
Mecca believed that the angels were the daughters of Allah we seek
Allah's refuge! - and that Allah obliged them by granting them whatever
they demanded, even if it was contrary to His will.

They used to say: "We worship them, and although we do not see them, we
carve their statues. So, they made the idols and worshipped them so that
their souls - being Allah's daughters - may cast a kind glance at their
worshippers and interceded for them with Allah. Asked: "Why do you
worship these idols?" the idolaters would say: "We do not worship them
save that they may bring us nearer to Allah,"[^69] or: "They are our
intercessors with Allah."[^70] This provoked the Wahhabis and others like
them to consider the believers in intercession (ash-shafa'ah) to be, in
some cases, polytheists.

As a matter of fact, the leader of the Wahhabis does believe that the
Prophet (S.A.) will have the privilege of intercession on the
Resurrection Day. But as to the others, including the Imams of the
Shi'ah, and especially if such interceding expands to cover worldly
materials, they regard it to be polytheism. There are people who are
more Catholic than the Pope. They allege that the very idea of there
being an intercession is a mere falsity, and that it actually means
leadership, guidance and teaching, and nothing else. They even surpassed
the Wahhabis. They say that "intercession" is shirk, and it is a belief
like that of the idolaters in respect of the idols. But the Qur'an
itself says that "intercession" is accepted from the angels, the
prophets and the godly men, and it is with the permission of Allah, on
the one hand, and is acceptable only from particular people in
accordance with their special merits and virtues, on the other. It is
accepted under particular disciplines, and never on nepotism or
arbitrarily. Actually, this in itself is one of the Divine laws. We hope
to be able later on to expand on this subject a little more.

The Qur'an says: ..."Who is he who can intercede with Him except by His
permission..."[^71] The ayah negates the "independent intercession" i.e.
to impose one's own will on Allah's - as the idolaters used to say - and
say to Him: Your will is to throw this person in Hell, but since we are
bashful of one another, you must take him to paradise. And, on the basis
of this reciprocal bashfulness, and as Allah attaches importance to such
people, says: I shall not let you down, and will send him to paradise.
This is shirk, because it is an independent intercession. But if Allah
himself enjoins such a law and appoints certain persons allowed, in
certain occasions, to intercede and invoke Allah's mercy for others,
even before asking it for their own benefit according to their merits
this is confirmed by the Qur'an. Allah's mercies are of His bounties. He
can bestow His mercy upon some of His creatures, or upon all of them
even more than they deserve. But for such grants He had assigned special
channels and special regulations. Those who directly receive their
rewards in proportion to their deeds only, are treated in a certain
way.

But there are persons who, through certain deeds, deserve to receive
indirect Divine favours, more than their due. For example, there are
people who eat only their bread, and there are others who are worthy of
being invited as guests, too. But they have to acquire the merit of
deserving to be guests, as no one will be invited without a cause or a
reason. The Prophet (S.A.), the infallible Imams (A.S.) and the godly
people have the right to invite guests on the Day of Resurrection, but
they do not invite everybody to be their guest. At any rate, the Qur'an
says: "...and they do not intercede except for him whom He
approves...,"[^72] This means that there are certain conditions, approved
by Allah, for one to get their intercession. Many ayahs in the Qur'an go
this way, i.e. basing the intercession on Allah's permission, on the one
hand , and limiting its effect to those who have won Allah's approval,
on the other.

Thus, believing in intercession not only does not contradict at-Tawhid,
but is, actually, a part of it.


