The Qur'anic Proofs of At-tawhid
================================

The former discussion about at-Tawhid concerned its limits in Islam. In
this respect we talked about management and legislation with' Allah's
permission. The topic now is to find out whether at-Tawhid, whose limits
had been discussed before, is proved in the Qur'an, or it only accepts
it and leaves the task of proving it to the people. The answer is that
the Qur'an has stated some proofs which are logically administrated and
based on the criterion that should be used in such instances: "...Had
there been in them any gods except Allah, they would both have certainly
been in a state of disorder..."[^73]

It is quite clear that such an argumentation is a rational one, asking
us to realize that since the heaven and the earth are in good order,
then there can be no gods other than one God. This is called, in the
terms of logic, "the exceptional syllogism". Those who know about logic,
know that syllogism is of two kinds: the exceptional and the
conjunctive. In the exceptional syllogism, there appears a correlation
between two things, then one of them is proved. It has special forms, as
explained in the books of logic. For example, they say: "If the sun has
risen, then it is daytime". Then they say: "It is daytime", from which
they deduce that "the sun has risen". Or they say: "It is not day time",
from which they deduce " then the sun has not risen. This is a common
example often used by the logicians. Here, too, is a correlation between
polytheism and the corruption of the heaven and the earth. Had there
been more than one god, the heaven and the earth would have been in
chaos, like if there is sun there is daytime. However, no other matter
is mentioned as to what happened to the heaven and earth, and whether
there are many gods.

Once again the logicians say that there is a hidden part of a
syllogism. Some times the deduction is made in such a way that when a
premise is mentioned, the other premise (an induction usually consists
of two premises) automatically occurs to the mind and it need not
particularly stated, so, it is called the "hidden premise", although it
does not exist. In this instance, the exception is not stated in the
speech. It should have been said: but they are not", to end the said
ayah, then the deduction would be: "Therefore, there are no gods in them
except Allah". But, as you see, the exception and its result are
manifest, i.e. the heaven and the earth are there and in an orderly
state, therefore, it goes without saying that they are not in disorder.
This leads us to conclude that there is no god to rule them other than
Allah.

Thus, this is perfect logical induction based on the logical method of
syllogism. What is important here is bringing the correlation to light.
What does it mean to say: "Had there been in them any gods except Allah,
they would both have certainly been in a state of disorder"? What is the
correlation here? What is meant by stating this correlation?

Commentators differ in explaining this correlation, which can be put on
different statements. One is rather simple and naive. The other two are
technical and strict. The first statement says that in order to direct
and manage an establishment, a group or a society, it is necessary to
have some sort of order which must be a single unified one, otherwise
that establishment will fall to pieces. Sometimes the example is offered
that even within the limits of a family, if two of its members try to
independently rule it, the family will be ruined. Or, if a township has
two mayors its affairs will be in chaos. So, such being the case in
these instances, how can a universe, so large and great as ours, be
controlled and managed by more than one god.

This explanation is not logically satisfactory and can be disputed. But
the other two explanations are technical and based on strict
philosophical principles.

**The Philosophical Induction of Antagonism**

This antagonistic induction had been chosen by the scholars with
philosophical inclinations, because there is in the philosophical
writings a proof of at-Tawhid called: The Proof of Antagonism.

Those with philosophical taste had applied this proof to the said ayah,
and, in order to shed light on its strict logical form, they offered
premises, each of which is considered to be a philosophical
principle.[^74] The conclusion obtained from the Antagonistic Proof is,
briefly: Two causes cannot independently be effective in the creation of
a single "caused". If two causes take part in that, each one can have
created a part of the "caused". Thus, such a "caused" must be composed
of two parts, one part created by one of the two causes, and the other
part by the other.

Finally, on the basis of the said premises, it can be concluded that
there cannot be two gods in the world, as it is impossible to run the
world by two deities both of whom are "Necessary Beings". A Necessary
Being must, from every respect, be a necessary being - a necessary being
in essence and a necessary being in all aspects.

In a term, there is, according to this proof, a false consequence in
the said argument about the well-known example: "If the sun has risen
then it is daytime", or sometimes we say: "The sun has not risen, then
it is not daytime", or "It is not daytime, then the sun has not risen".
Concerning the second part, it is said that it is consequently false,
i.e. the case is consisting of two parts, the first called the premise,
and the second called the consequent. Thus: "If the sun has risen" is
the promise, and "then it is daytime" is the consequent. If the
consequent was false, the premise would be false, too, that is, if "it
is not daytime", then it will be known that "the sun has not risen". In
this argument the consequent - the disorder of the world - is false, it
is a lie, since the world is not in disorder. The falsity of the
consequent means the falsity of the premise, that is, the supposition of
multiplicity of gods is false, too.

In the said noble ayah the false consequent is not the non-existence of
the world, but the false consequent is the disorderliness of the world.
It says: "Had there been in them any gods except Allah, they would both
have been in a state of disorder", but you see that the world is not in
a state of disorder.

It does not say: "Had there been many gods, the world could not have
existed." The sate of disorder befalls something existent. If it is said
in respect of a non-existing thing, it will be a falsity. This is why
the Qur'an says: "If the world had had many gods it would have been
corrupt". It does not say: ...it would not come to existence, whereas
the relevant induction of antagonism mentioned by the philosophers
denotes the disorderliness of the world. Using this proof of antagonism
is critisized on the grounds that what is applicable to this ayah is
other than this proof established by the philosophers. The critics
assert that this proof does not well conform to the appearance of the
ayah. The import of the proof is: "Had there been many gods, the world
would not have been created," while the import of the ayah is: "Had
there been many gods, the world would have been in a state of disorder."
That is, the existing world would have been in disorder.

These two cases are not quite the same the conclusion of this
statement, though a serene and in itself a philosophic proof, is not
completely applicable to the ayah. I myself do not approve of it in
respect of this ayah.

**The third statement**

The third statement which can be a proof of at-Tawhid in this ayah
needs a preliminary explanation - an explanation on which we depend in
this instance. This universe, including the heaven, the earth and all
the phenomena therein, are run by means of a single order.[^75] In the
antagonistic proof pain is taken to prove a unity throughout the whole
universe, i.e. the universe itself is a single being. In this proof we
support the opinion that the world has a single order. But a single
order does not necessitate that the world should have a unity of
existence, as there may be many existing beings, but ruled by a single
order. This is quite enough for us to prove that the world is ruled by a
single order, and we need not prove, in stating this, that the world is
one, and even if it is not one, this proof will still be applicable. We
just want to prove that the order of the world is one.

But what do we mean by one order? We mean that this world, whether we
take it as one with many parts or a whole one, i.e. to take it
consisting of many independent systems, each existing independently and
without any organic connection among them. Even if it is so, we cannot
deny the oneness of its order, because the world which we know had been
constructed and created in such a way that its beings are not isolated
or independent from each other. It is not that I should have in this
world an existence which has no connection whatsoever with the phenomena
of the past, nor that the coexisting beings have connection at all with
the beings to come. We are not like the grains of rice in a bag they do
exist next to one another, but none of them has any connection with its
neighbour.

Try to study each part of this world individually. It does not even
need a thorough scientific study. Simply looking into it would be
sufficient. Take a flower in a vase, a green plant in the garden, a baby
in his cradle, or anything within your reach. How does each come into
existence? Can this shrub of roses grow without your watering it? Hence,
its existence depends upon that water you give to it. It cannot live
without water. Nor can it grow without first sowing its seed, or
transplanting its seedling. Before becoming a rose-bush it was a seed.
You have to sow it first in order to obtain a rose. Thus, it is
connected with a former phenomenon, and is not isolated from it. It
utilizes the oxygen or other gases of the air. If they had not been
there, the rose could not have grown and continue its existence. Yet, at
the same time, it has its effective role in changing the percentage of
the gases in the air. By taking oxygen it decreases its percentage in
the air, and by taking other kinds of gases, it increases the percentage
of the oxygen in the air. So, it has a close connection with its
neighbouring atmosphere.

Consequently, neither the air is independent of the rose-shrub, nor the
rose-shrub is independent of the air. Such is the case with the animals.
That chicken which has just hatched out, under your observation, could
not have come into existence without its mother and the egg. Now as it
is alive and runs about in the yard, has its connection with its
surroundings in the form of action and reaction. It breathes the air,
eats, etc., and, in its turn, it has its effect on its environment, lays
eggs and brings forth the chickens for the future.

So, it has reciprocal interactions with its contemporary, past and
future creatures. Even if we turn to the inanimate world and study the
physical and chemical reactions of its lifeless matters, we shall
realize that each phenomenon has appeared as a result of the
interactions of some former phenomena, and that it acts upon its
contemporaries, and becomes the material for the appearance of coming
ones. This is the system that governs this world - the system of
correlation, action and reaction. As a matter of fact, this does not
even need any philosophical proof. Everybody can, according to his
knowledge, understand the existence of such correlation, connection and
unified order. Of course, the more precise and expansive our knowledge
is, the deeper our understanding of this correlation. Yet, even a
passing glance is enough to make one get it to a great extent.

Now somebody may say: "There are different systems in the world, each
of which has organic connection with the other from inside, but none of
them has a connection like this with the other." This is one of the
theories of systems, with which we shall not deal for the time being.
Nevertheless, however independent these systems may be, we still notice
such a connection among them, and recognize that they are contained in a
single larger order. That is, supposed partial systems do not mean that
they are not parts of a general one, which brings all the phenomena of
the world under the control of the law of being effective or being
affected. This is quite clear.

**Supposing a Multisystem for the World**

Now look into the following question: If we suppose that each one of
these systems has a god, to whom belongs the existence of a creature,
and all the needs of that creature are staisfied by that god; so do you
think that such a world can continue? Please note what a god means.
Especially according to the concept of the Islamic at-Tawhid mentioned
before, as we have said that at-Tawhid in creation is not enough, unless
it is accompanied by at-Tawhid in Lordship, too.

So, Allah to whom we refer, as Muslims, is that Who has created the
creatures, Who controls their existence and Who meets all their needs.
Had it been otherwise, one would have had to stretch one's hand to some
other one to meet one's needs. If He is the God of this creature, He
will have to satisfy all his needs, since the creature's existence is in
His hands. So, it is meaningless to say that a god has created a
creature, whose needs have not been satisfied by his own god, but by
another god. This is an irrational supposition. There can be no such
god. The God is the One Who has created this creature, whose existence
is in His hands. He manages his affairs, develops him and guides him
towards his perfection. If each of these different systems in the world,
had a god, this god must have himself created his own system, and it
must be self-sufficient and in need of nothing from outside himself. The
supposed god and creation must be like this. When Allah creates a
creature, the complete existence of this creature will be in His hands,
and all his needs will be provided for by Him or by other creatures whom
He Himself has created. Now, if we suppose that the world had many gods,
there must also be as many self-sufficient systems which must be in no
need of any help from outside themselves.

If the human kingdom had a god, the animal kingdom, the plant kingdom,
and the kingdom of inanimate matters each would have a god too. It would
be necessary to suppose that the human kingdom is only in need of its
own god and his creatures, and it has nothing to do with the creatures
of other gods, since the other gods have different independent and
separate systems. That is, it should not breathe the air which is
created by another god and is at his disposal, because that air belongs
to another god and is in his possession, and the creation of this god
should be self-sufficient, needing nothing from other than its own god
and his domain. This system must keep its existing connection with its
own god.

If we suppose that the universe is composed of such isolated and
separate systems, do you think that will last long?

Suppose that we had been created by a god who had nothing to do with
the god of the earth, heaven, air, etc., could we, who had been created
like that, live without air? Could we live without water? - the things
supposed to belong to another god with another system, separated and
isolated from us. We must live away from that system, without being in
need of that god and his creations. But the universe is not like that.

We do not see any being or system which lives alone and with no
connection whatsoever with other creations, or if it did live, it
wouldn't be able to last long. Even if we suppose that Allah had created
man out of no material, no clay, no sperm, yet, this man had to breathe,
to eat, to drink, to make use of meat, vegetables, etc., or he would
die.

The Almighty Allah says: "Had there been in them any gods except Allah,
they would both have certainly been in a state of disorder..."[^76] If we
suppose that this universe consisted of systems with a god for each to
run it, its order would fall to pieces and perish, because we notice
that the creatures need one another and without mutual efforts they
cannot continue, they rot and perish away. So, this unity governing the
order of the world can easily be recognized by everybody, though the
degree of the recognition differs according to different individuals.

No one, however, fails to notice that the parts of this world are
connected and coordinated, and they are not isolated from each other,
and that a single order governs the whole world. This means that it is
only one hand that runs and manages all things. Had there been many
independent hands, each one of them wanting to "independently" run this
world according to the requirement of its lordship, then the world would
have been disintegrated. But, since we see this world sound and intact,
running with a single order and free from any corruption and
disintegration, we, consequently, realize that the one who runs this
world, directs its affairs, looks after its development and connects its
parts, is a single One Who had brought up a single order.

**Preference of the Rational Argument**

Originally this rational argument belongs to the 'Allamah Tabataba'i
(may Allah bless his soul), only its statement may be a little
different. It seems that it is more appropriate to the meaning of the
ayah, because the false consequent for the condition of multiplicity of
gods is "..., they would both have certainly been in a state of
disorder...", not "they would both have not existed." This statement has
another merit.

The 'Proof of antagonism' established by the philosophers only proves,
at the most, that there cannot be two or more Creators. That is it can
prove the oneness of the Necessary Being, and, at the most, the
creation. It says that if the world had two gods, or, in the philosophic
terms: had there been two causes of existence, it would not have
existed, because having two complete causes for a single caused is
impossible, and it is impossible to have a single caused by two complete
causes.

The result, thus, will be the Oneness of the Creator. This proof,
besides proving the Oneness of the Creator, also proves the Oneness of
Lordship, i.e. it proves that the original creation has not been done by
two gods, and it proves that the management of the world is not carried
out by two gods either.

According to this statement, which is based on the management and the
order of the world, it becomes clear that the world has only one Manager
and Lord. That is, besides proving at-Tawhid in the Necessary Being and
Creation, it also proves at-Tawhid in Lordship and worship, i.e. there
is no creator, no lord and no one deserving worship, but Allah. Islam
confirms this by saying: "Had there been in them both any gods..." it
does not say: "Had there been in them both any creator except Allah, or
any lord except Allah."

So far it has been proved that none except Allah is the Lord of this
world, nor is there any creator except Him. Now, in order to bring our
belief in at-Tawhid to the agreeable level, we must also prove that none
except Him deserves to be worshipped. So, how shall we start? We have
already explained the connection between Allah's Lordship and Divinity,
and it has been made clear that the one who deserves to be worshipped is
the one who owns and controls the worshipper's affairs.

The one who wants to offer his worship and servitude must believe that
the one whom he worships is his Lord and Owner, so that he can manifest
to Him his practical servitude by showing submission, humbleness and
inability before Him. So, He must be Mighty, Possessor and Master, in
order that man may be a slave and show his servitude in the form of
worshipping. So, believing in His Divinity includes believing in His
Lordship. If we want to rightly worship we are to believe that the
worshipped is our Lord, and that no one, except the Lord, deserves
worshipping. When the Divinity of the Lord is proved, i.e. when it has
become obvious that man and the world have no Lord except Allah, it
would consequently be proved that except him there is none to be worthy
of worshipping, because if some other one is to be worshipped, he must
have divine lordship, and, since none but Allah has it, it goes
naturally that it is only Him Who is to be worshipped. Here the limit of
the Islamic at-Tawhid: "La ilaha illallah (there is no god but Allah),
is completely proved.

**Another ayah Proving At-Tawhid**

And your God is one God! There is no god but He, the Beneficent, the
Merciful."[^77]

The claim is stated in this ayah. Some say that it even refers to a
proof, but we shall not rely on this aspect. What is quite obvious in
this ayah is that the claim of at-Tawhid is stated, i.e. the Qur'an says
that its claim is that "Your God is one God." "La ilaha illallah" is a
confirmation of it. When your worshipped one is He, then there will be
no other worshipped except Him, "ar-Rahman", or "Rahim" (the Beneficent,
the Merciful). Why should these two attributes be mentioned here? There
are very delicate explanations in this respect, which we do not want to
discuss. We may, however, say that the attribute "ar-Rahman" (the
Beneficent) denotes creation and genetic Lordship. While "ar-Rahim" (the
Merciful) concerns man's development and spiritual perfection, which is
brought about under the shadow of the Legislative Lordship. The stated
claim here is that the Ilah (Allah) and the worshipped are one, and that
except Him there is no god, and it is He Who is the "Rahman", the
Bestower of existence, and it is He Who is the "Rahim", the Merciful. He
takes those who tread upon the road of servitude to Him, to a becoming
perfection and a worthy happiness. In the next ayah we read:

"Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth, the alternation
of night and day, and the ships that sail on the sea for that which
benefits mankind, and the water that Allah sends down from the sky to
revive with it the earth after its death, and spread in it all (sorts
of) animals; and the changing of the winds and the clouds made to serve
between the sky and the earth; there are signs for a people who
reason".[^78]

After making the claim, it says: if you think of those phenomena, you
will recognize signs that prove the claim. By deeply contemplating on
the ayah, it becomes more obvious when you descern the whole universe,
its sky, its earth, its moon, its sun, and the revolving of the earth
resulting in the appearance of the day and the night, which is related
to the sun.

Let the earth revolve around itself a thousand million times, but there
will be no day and night without there being a sun. These phenomena,
whether celestial or terrestrial, are connected to each other.

These movements cause the sun to shine on the seas, where from the
clouds ascend to the sky, then, under the effect of the conditions of
the weather, they turn once again into rain drops pouring down on the
earth, causing plants to grow out of it, and the animals to survive. All
these phenomena are related to one another. Neither the sky is separate
from the earth, nor the earth from the sky. Other terrestrial phenomena
are also connected to each other. By studying these phenomena in general
you will find that they are governed by a single, coordinated and
harmonious order. They are joined together, and whatever you think of,
you will see in it the unity, harmony and order. Consequently, such a
universe cannot have many gods, or many creators or many directors,
because all its phenomena are connected to one another in creation. The
Creator of man is the same One Who has created the earth, the parents
and the sperm to create man.

It is not possible to say that man's earth is created by another god,
and his parents by a second one and their new born baby by a third. Nor
can it be said that the sun is created by someone, while the rain is
sent down from the sky by another. What does sending down the water
mean? Is it anything other than the sun's sending of its heat onto the
oceans, turning their waters into vapour, which rises to the sky, and
then, under low temperature and certain conditions, it turns once again
into water?

Does rain mean anything other than this? Doesn't it happen by the
effect of the sun and some other factors? So, the one who has created
the sun and the said factors is the same who brings down the rain from
the sky. It is a single order, and it cannot be said that the god of the
sun is different from that of the rain. The one who moves the wind, also
moves your ships on the sea.

Anyhow, it is the laws of nature that are being utilized to make all
that man invents and fabricates. Allah has enjoined and regulated these
things, and He is the One Who has created the matter, the human beings,
and the metals of which ships and planes are made. He created the brain
to enable man to turn the metals into those shapes. It is He Who created
the plane as well as the whole world, directly or indirectly. One cannot
say that the creator of the ship and the plane is someone other than the
One Who created man and the elements of nature, as without the human
brain and the elements of nature the plane and the ship cannot be
created.

As a result, a deep contemplation on the world's phenomena will guide
you to realize that the universe has a single God, Allah.


