The Divine Acts
===============

In the former discussions we got to the conclusion that the limit of
at-Tawhid in the Necessary Being and in Creation - covers also at-Tawhid
in Genetic Lordship and Legislation, as well as in Divinity.

From the Qur'anic standpoint, a monotheist is the one who believes in
these five stages of at-Tawhid, all of which are summarized in the good
slogan of La ilaha illallah, [there is no god but Allah]. Every
monotheist must generally have this belief. Yet, when it comes to
analyzing and applying it in particular instances there appear some
ambiguities in certain questions, not only for the laymen, but also for
the scholars versed in theological and philosophical matters, who find
them rather difficult to solve.

For example, when we say Allah has created everything, it is undoubted
that every monotheist believes in it. But when we want to apply the idea
to see: Whom did Allah create? What did He create? What is He going to
create? Does He directly create everything by Himself, or does He create
only the raw materials of the world and then these materials, through
their own dynamism, bring about all the other phenomena, and, according
to the law governing matter, everything comes to existence gradually,
needing no help from Allah?

**Creation and Management in the Islamic Tawhid**

The scholars of the monotheist religions bear different opinions in
this respect. We have to see what the opinion of the Qur'an about this
subject is. We have formerly referred to an example about the management
of the world, with the conclusion that the total Divine Acts can be
summarized under the title of Creation and Management, since the latter
is inseparable from the former.

Concerning the management a question is put forth: after the creation
of this world, did Allah create together with it a particular order and
a sort of management such that afterwards it continued functioning
automatically in perfect order till the end? Is it like the watchmaker
who arranges the parts of a watch in such a way that when it is filled
up it goes on working without any further interference on the part of
the watchmaker, all its wheels and springs work in a good order, needing
no more help from the watchmaker? Is the world like this? Is it that
Allah had put its parts in such a strict order that there will be no
need for any readjustment and interference? Is Allah now sitting idly
aside, while the world is running itself alone, or, on the contrary, the
world is in needs, in every moment, of Allah's management, and Allah is
present in every event that happens in the world as a manager, His
Lordship covering all the phenomena along time and place?

Perhaps you have heard of the two European scholars, Rene' Descartes
and Blaise Pascal, both monotheists, who had different opinions about
Allah's Lordship over the world. Descartes used to minutely describe the
mechanism of the universe in such a way that one would think that there
was no need for Allah's influence.

Somewhere he wrote that the world just needed a sign from Allah to get
a moving power to run its wheels forever. Allah was the original mover,
which meant that the first power which caused the appearance of movement
in the world was created by Him. This power remains forever and is
enough to run all the phenomena of the world.

Pascal, who had a stronger intuitive and moral spirit, accused
Descartes that he, according to his above theory, said that we would no
longer need Allah, as His job was just to make a sign, and nothing more.
Now, it is none of our business to discuss their arguments. We just
wanted to point out that even the philosophers and those versed in
intellectual and theological matters, such as these issues, used to
discuss them. What every monotheist must believe in is a general belief
that Allah is the Creator and the Lord of the world.

But regarding the details, even the great scholars cannot comprehend
them, let alone the ordinary people. Naturally, the more one's knowledge
(whether rational through the intellect, or through the heart by means
of divine inspiration) the better one's understanding of at-Tawhid and
more clear the details of monotheism to one's mind. We pray to Allah,
the Exalted to make our intellect more perfect, and our knowledge of the
Book and the Tradition (Sunnah) more explicit, as well as to give our
hearts the luminosity of a better knowledge.

**Allah's Connection with the World And Mankind**

The Glorious Qur'an follows a special method in presenting Allah's
connection to the world and mankind - a method which is, in itself, an
example of the Divine Wisdom and His Genetic Lordship and Legislation in
respect of the human beings. It informs us, at the same time, that as we
cannot know well the Divine Essence, we also can neither know the truths
of the Divine Attributes as they should be, nor the truths of the Divine
Acts. Nevertheless, we shall try, through a special method, to explain
man's knowledge of the Divine Acts and Allah's connection to man and the
world. Perhaps our expression that we cannot even comprehend the truths
of the Divine Acts appears to some a bit heavy. A brief explanation is
necessary here, in order to throw light on the fact that we actually
cannot very well understand the connection between Allah as Creator and
the Divine activity and creativity. The concepts which we use in this
instance, such as the concepts of creativity, causity, activity and the
like, are concepts extracted from possible evidences. That is, we first
found something in ourselves, or we knew the connection between two
material things. We then derived from that which we found, or that
connection which we knew, a concept, then we generalized that concept in
order to cover Allah, too. When I say I did a certain task, I use the
concept of "task" and doing it, and ascribe the same concept to Allah
and say that Allah, too, did it. Or when they say that somebody managed
to rule a given community, or directed a group, or looked after a
machine - these are concepts which are obtained from special connections
between man and nature, or between a person and other persons. Making,
finishing, directing, managing and the like are concepts which result
from man's connection with nature. For example, take the making of a
machine, or the talking about man's connection with other men, or when
reference is made to managing a society, we usually expand the concepts
of these experiences, which we ourselves see or know, and omit from them
certain limitations, so that we can say: Allah, too, made the world,
meaning the same "making" which we use when talking about what a worker,
a constructor or an architecture makes. We use the same word
"management", which we use in respect of the manager of a community, to
say that Allah is likewise managing or directing the world. But what we
find in ourselves are certain connections which are characterised by
deficiencies and limitations. So, when we want to ascribe them to Allah,
those deficiencies and limitations, which do not befit Allah, the
Glorified, are to be left out. When we want to do something, how do we
do it? We do it by using our hands, body and with the help of our eyes,
ears and other senses. But when we say that Allah does something, do we
mean that Allah, like ourselves, - we seek Allah's refuge - has hands
which he moves? Or, as we put a mechanical energy in a body to move it,
does He, too, press His hands against the world to move it? Or as we
kick a ball, does He also kick the earth with His foot - glorified He! -
in order to give it its revolving movement? Of course, the case is not
like this, as we do know that Allah has no physical body and no
corporeal limbs to use for moving the sun and the other planets. Allah's
Acts are not done by means of physical and corporeal limbs. Yet, there
is a kind of connection here. If we do not kick the ball it will not
move. Likewise, if Allah did not do something with the world it would
not move, though we do not know how it was. This is also true of Allah's
Attributes. When we say that Allah is Knowing, we have incomplete and
limited evidences of His "knowledge". Yet, we say that "Knowledge" can
have other than these limited evidences, such as what? We do not know.
It can be "knowledge", but not that kind which is acquired by hearing or
reading. Lacking this kind of knowledge does not give us the right to
regard it impossible. When the rational proof tells us that Allah's is
not an acquired knowledge we accept the concept of there being a
non-acquired knowledge, but how? We do not know, and therefore we are
used to describe His knowledge to be a "knowing, but not like ours".
This is true of His Acts, too. Allah, the Cause of the Causes When we
say Allah is the director and the manager of the world, we must add: but
not like our managing and directing. When, in the terms of the
rationalists, the philosophers and mutakallimun, we say: Allah is the
cause of the world, or the cause of the causes, we must define it by
adding: but not like when we ourselves are the cause. The
characteristics seen in the connection between the natural cause and the
effect of the world's phenomena are never seen between Allah and the
world. It is a different kind of causation. How? We do not know. That
is, our reason cannot understand it. It can only understand that Allah
is the Cause of the Causes, i.e. had there been no Allah there would
have been no world. This is what a cause means. It means the cause upon
which everything depends, or that which causes existence to a thing,
such that if the first had not been existent, the other would not have
been existent, too. So, the first is the cause of the second. Likewise,
when we say that Allah is the Cause we mean that if He had not existed,
the world would not have existed, too. But we cannot know or understand
how Allah's connection with the world is, since we cannot realize the
truth of Divinity and Divine Act. We cannot understand how it is, except
through visionary knowledge, as we had already said. Allah bestows on
some of His worthy slaves the favour of having a visionary knowledge so
that they can understand, according to their individual capacities, the
truth of the Divine Acts, as we said in respect of the Essence and the
Attributes. It may be that the ayah concerning the Prophet Ibrahim
(A.S.) refers to this subject: It is in the Qur'an that Ibrahim (A.S.)
asked Allah: "O Lord! Show me how do you give life to the dead?"[^90] A
superficial impression of this episode is that Ibrahim (A.S.) wanted to
know how a dead can return to life, because witnessing a demonstration
of bringing a dead to life can be more effective. The late 'Allamah
Tabataba'i has a very delicate comment on this ayah. He says: "Ibrahim
(A.S.) did not ask Allah to show him how a dead is brought to life. He
asked Him to show him how He brings the dead to life. That is, he wanted
to see Allah's way of bringing the dead to life." He wanted to see the
connection between Allah and His creatures which brings the dead to
life, i.e. what does Allah do that brings the dead to life? He wanted to
see the Divine manner of bringing the dead to life, not the manner of
coming to life. In other words, he wanted to see the evidence of Allah's
Act - an Act which all of us wish to see - what does Allah do to give
existence to a world? How is it directed? What connection is there
between Allah and His creation? Allah ordered Ibrahim (A.S.) to take
four birds, kill them, mix the parts of their bodies, divide them into
four parts, put each part on top of a mountain, then call them to him.
At that moment they came to life moving towards him. 'Allamah Tabataba'i
says: "Actually Ibrahim (A.S.) was involved in Allah's Act of giving
life, i.e. Allah gave life to the birds through Ibrahim (A.S.). It was
Allah's Will that it should be achieved by him. It was a visionary
knowledge. Should anybody get a similar chance he would find, according
to his capacity, the truth of Allah's Act. We should not expect to know
the truth of Allah's connection with His creatures, except to the limit
which the intellect can explain. As to these inviolabilities: He acts,
but not like our act; He creates, but not like our creation; He makes,
but not like our making; He arranges, but not like our arrangement - we
must keep all Divine Acts inviolate from all human defects shortcomings
and insufficiencies which are present in our own acts. Now, as we have
mentioned that we are unable to find out the true nature of the Divine
Act as it is in actuality, we do not mean that we should keep our
intellect and reasoning faculty inactive and idle, and go on saying: we
do not know. This "we do not know", which is said by scientific
researchers, is different from that which is said by an ignorant at the
beginning of the work. Much as we may try we would not be able to
understand the truth about the Divine Act by means of our reason.
Nevertheless, we have to use our thinking faculties. We can proceed a
great deal, though not to the extent of finding its very nature. We
must, however, go ahead and increase our knowledge. Allah's Connection
with the World in the Qur'an The Qur'an guides us on this road. On
different occasions it explains Allah's connection with His creatures
and points out to it in such a way that if we care to find out how it
was stated at the first instane, then at the second, we will gradually
increase our knowledge. Answering the question: "Is Allah the Creator of
the origin of the world only, or is He also the Creator of all its
phenomena?" The Qur'an says that He not only created the first matter of
the world, but He also created every thing in the world. So, Allah's
creation covers every existing thing in the world. The Qur'an, for
example, says: "...And He created everything...,"[^91] "...(He), the
Creator of all things..."[^92] and: "And Allah created you and what you
make."[^93] He created even what you make or what you do; for man's acts
are things, too, since they exist, and they are also created by Allah.
Thus, from the Qur'anic viewpoint, there is no doubt that whatever can
be said to be "a thing" is a creation of Allah, and that His creation is
not confined only to the first matter. As regards "management", other
ayahs speak of the fact that wherever there appears the question of
directing and willing something, Allah's Lordship and His management are
present. This is generally referred to in ayahs such as: "...(He)
regulates (all) the affairs"[^94] So, managing and regulating the affairs
of the world are absolutely of Allah's concern. Another ayah says: "...,
but Allah's is the commandment entirely."[^95] Starting a name with the
Arabic preposition lam, in the Arabic syntax, gives exclusiveness to it.
That is, the commandment belongs to no one but Allah. In another ayah it
is said: "...His is the creation and the commandment; blessed is Allah,
the Lord of the worlds."[^96] Therefore, since He is the Lord of the
worlds, everything is covered by His Lordship: Creation is done by Him,
and the management is commanded by Him. Many other ayahs exclusively
confine creation, management and lordship, in general, to Allah alone.
By way of detailing, the Qur'an, in several instances mentions natural
phenomena and then says that it is Allah who does all these things.
Generally, when the Qur'an mentions the natural phenomena and
contemplating them, it connects them solely with Allah. The Qur'an is
not interested in directly enhancing such a contemplation merely to
understand nature, because man will do that willy-nilly for his own
interests. But the Qur'an's stress is on encouraging man to try to
understand the connection between Allah and nature, and then to get a
better knowledge of Allah. There are many ayahs which refer to different
natural phenomena and remind us that they are Allah's Act and creation.
An ayah says: "..., and the water that Allah sends down from the sky,
then gives life with it to the earth after its death and spread in it
all (kinds of) animals..."[^97] The Qur'an frequently repeats: "The water
which Allah sends down, the plants which He grows out of the earth for
you and your cattle. This is stressed everywhere. Everybody knows that
water comes down from the sky, but the Qur'an stresses the event of
sending it down and the Sender. Everybody knows that plants grow out of
the earth, and that the earth comes to life in spring, but the Qur'an
stresses the fact that it is Allah Who does all these things. What does
this mean? We shall come to this later on, by Allah's Will. For the time
being we want to make it clear that the Qur'an's claim is that all this
is Allah's Act. This is the tone of the Qur'an in mentioning the natural
phenomena that even the smallest movement or change in the world of
existence is done by Allah. What is simpler than the falling of a seed
on a damp place, where it absorbs the moisture, gets a little fat, then
peels off? It is a phenomenon of nature. The Qur'an says: "Surely Allah
is the splitter of the seed and the date-stone..."[^98] What does this
mean? It is Allah's presence in every phenomenon, even in man's
voluntary and compulsory acts. Allah says: "You (believers) did not slay
them (unbelievers), but it was Allah Who slew them, and you did not
throw when you threw, but Allah threw..."[^99] In Badr Battle the Prophet
(S.A.) threw a handful of sand at the enemy, and the Muslims were
victorious, despite their being few in number. Likewise, in other
battles Allah refers to the fact that the Muslims, though fewer in
number, were victorious, and tells them that it was Allah Who killed
them (the unbelievers) not they (the Muslims). Similarly, in respect of
man's subsistence, man knows how he is provided for, how his income
increases or decreases. How it is that one is more comfortable or less
comfortable. Such notions deserve consideration. There must be some
factors. But Allah repeats that it is He Who increases or decreases
providence: "Allah amplifies and straitens the means of subsistence for
whom He pleases."[^100] As regards being guided or going astray, and how
it is that somebody is guided to find the right path, or to go astray,
there are certain factors which are worthy of consideration. Allah says:
"Allah guides whom He pleases to the right path."[^101] As to those who
go astray, it is because of their evil deeds that He guides them astray.
These are of the Qur'anic expressions. The Connection Between Man's Free
Will and Allah's Creation Many questions can be asked on this subject.
If it is Allah Who does everything, what is our role then? Is it not
fatalism? If Allah had created the world and all its phenomena, does it
not mean that we must disregard the natural causes and factors? It is He
Who does every thing, whether there are laws in nature or not. Does this
not mean a denial of world's mechanism and dynamism? Concerning man's
actions, does it not mean that he is compelled and has no free will?
Such questions are put forth and to answer them is not an easy task. It
is our intention to try, with Allah's help and backed by the Qur'anic
declarations, to solve the problems occurring in the analyzation of the
unity of Creation and that of Lordship, as well as its application in
different instances. We hope to be able, with the blessing of the
Qur'anic light, to illuminate such questions as: What does Allah's
creation mean? Does it contradict the existence of natural and
supernatural factors? What is meant by saying that Allah is the only
regulator of the world? Does it mean that there is no other management
at all? Concerning Allah's Acts and man's management, which are stressed
by the Qur'an, both the material such as giving subsistence, or
spiritual such as giving guidance, all of which are ascribed to Allah,
do these not lead to an idealistic knowledge and to the denial of the
existing realities and the rules of this world, or do they mean
something else? In our coming discussions these questions will, by
Allah's Will, be explained. The Qur'an never tried to deny the natural
factors and their effects altogether. As an actual matter, the Qur'an's
arguments are based on man's free will within the circle of his own
activities. If there had been no free will, what then the prophets had
been sent for? If a human being is like a straw on the surface of a
stormy sea, surrounded by compulsory factors, how can he be advised to
do this and not to do that? If it is the determined factors that direct
man, there can be no room for guidance, management, preaching, advice,
education and purification, since it is the inevitable which will
happen. In principle, the objective of the prophets and the philosophy
of their coming with the Divine Books can be justified only when man has
his free will and may be ordered to do this and not to do that, and man
is free to accept or to refuse. But if man is under compulsion, this
talk will be useless. If man is not free to do what he pleases, there
will be no meaning in keeping on telling him: do this, don't do that.
You are responsible! What responsibility? If man's subjection to the
compulsion of nature, society, and history gives him certain
characteristics, then what responsibility can he undertake after being
told to do or not to do? Such being the case, there can be no use of
sending prophets, divine Books and giving laws and regulations. So, the
Qur'an does not deny man's free will. If man's free will is denied, the
philosophy and wisdom of sending down the Qur'an will, practically be
destroyed. It is not like this. As a matter of fact, the Qur'an tries to
gradually make man understand Allah's connection with him, and thus,
increase man's knowledge of Him. How, we will, God willing, give details
about that later on. The Generalities of Allah's Acts The topic is the
generalities of Allah's Acts. The Qur'an talks about all aspects of
creation, regulation and different acts ascribed to Allah, the Exalted
such that it would not be possible to handle them separately. Similarly
it cannot be said that the only factor in growing the flower plant is
the soil, the rain, the sun, the air or the nourishing elements. All of
these are to be present. If any one lacking the process would be
incomplete. Under such conditions we usually do not count the element
which is always there or within easy reach and do not depend on it.
Normally we count the factor which is to be sometimes there to complete
the conditions. For example, the soil is always there, the sun is always
there, the air is always surrounding the earth, so we usually do not
count them, and say that the gardener grows flowers, although this
factor may not always be present. If we want to be precise and exact we
will have to count the gardener, the soil, the sun, the water and
hundreds of other factors effective in growing that flower. In this way
we regard a collection of factors as the complete cause to be completely
present for bringing the flower into existence. Therefore, if it is said
that a number of factors or causes had helped in the appearance of a
phenomenon, it is not only correct, but actually it is hundred per cent
true and realistic. Sometimes a phenomenon depends on two factors to
substituting one another, if one works the other does not work and vice
versa, like a master key. This phenomenon is in need of either this
factor or that, if the one is present the other is not needed. But it is
possible that we may ascribe the appearance of a phenomenon to two
factors and say that it is done by both of them , whereas actually only
one of them did it, and the other was a substitute. Suppose there are
two gardeners who successively take care of a garden. One of them,
either this or that, is to plant the flower. so , here we have two
factors, but the one substitutes the other. They do not work together.
They are not to meet together, as "an impossible exclusion", to use the
term of the logicians, i.e. it is impossible that neither of them be
present. Sometimes two factors are regarded working longitudinally, i.e.
it is ascribed to both of them, but not together and side by side, each
working at one of the dimensions. Two factors, along each other, effect
in each other, the one conveying the effect of the other to the caused
in a particular form. Examples of this can be seen in nature, in
ordinary affairs as well as in the supernatural realm. In common
matters, too, you may ascribe an act to two persons, such and in
details. So, we have but to look at them from a general point of view,
in order to see how He ascribes to Himself the collection of these acts
in their diverse shapes and features. what secrets there are in this
connection and whether it severs them from their natural and normal
direct causes. In this respect we mention a general principle which is,
in fact, the key that solves a lot of problems. It concerns the
connection between things and Allah. By carefully studying this
principle and fully understanding its impact and digesting it, we are
apt to overcome many problems which accompany this subject. The
principle is this: the connection of a phenomenon to two factors or
agents is effected in many ways. Sometimes, to come into existence, a
phenomenon needs many things, each of which has a special role in its
appearance or shaping of it. All of these are known as the complete
cause of that phenomenon, such that if it lacked any one of them the
phenomenon would not appear, though this does not mean that they all
participate in the making of the phenomenon. Each one has its special
part to play in the process of bringing it into existence. For example,
these flowers which you see in the garden, in order to become what they
are they need a number of factors which simultaneously work together to
make a pleasing and fragrant flower growing out of the earth. It needs a
seed or a seedling. How the seed or the seedling come into existence? It
requires a number of preparatory stages which also need hundreds of
factors and conditions. However, this flower seed is to be sown into the
soil, or the seedling is to be planted in the earth. Sometimes the wind
may insert a seed into the soil, which may grow by itself, such as the
wild flowers in the desert. So, for that wild tulip to grow the wind is
one of its factors, placing the seed into the earth. But this is not
enough. Water must come down from the sky to give moisture to the soil,
as the seed cannot grow in a dry land. In the garden, there must be a
gardener to sow the seed, or to plant a seedling. He is to insert the
seedling into the soil, then to water it, and to take care of it now and
then, as it is necessary for the plant to grow out and develop.
Consequently, the appearance of this flower bush cannot be ascribed to a
single special factor, nor even to the gardener who takes care of it, as
the crime which is committed by a secret police who is ordered by his
superior to commit it, like the SAVAC of the tyrannical regime [in
Iran]. To whom should we ascribe this crime? To the one who personally
committed it, to the prosecutor, to the regional head of the SAVAC, to
the Director General of the SAVAC, to the big tyrant or to the masters
of the tyrant? You are right if you ascribe it to all of them, because
the persecutor killed the victim at the order of the local SAVAC head,
who issued the order according to that of the higher superiors. The same
is true in respect of good deeds. The charity which somebody gives at
the order of somebody else, is regarded to have been given by the direct
giver as well as by the one who ordered it. So, it is possible, then, to
ascribe one act to two doers, but neither crosswise nor
substitutionally. The Longitudinal Connection Among the Causes The
longitudinal connections are not such that they also form diagonal
connections, since they do not work on the same level. The work of the
direct doer is on a level, and the work of the commander and causer is
on a higher level. The former does not act side by side with the latter.
So, sometimes an act is ascribed to two doers on two levels,
longitudinally positioned in respect of each other, not diagonally. In a
certain aspect it is ascribed to the one doer, and in another aspect it
is ascribed to the other on a higher level, and none of them substitutes
the other. Neither the former does the work of the latter, nor the
latter does the work of the former. On a given level the work is done by
the one and on the other level the work is done by the other. This is so
in respect of common and accidental affairs. Sometimes it is said that
the cause is stronger than the direct doer, i.e. the crime is better
ascribed to the commander than to the one who was commanded to commit
it. This arrangement is also common in supernatural matters, i.e. the
effect of the supernatural doer does not cross the effect of the natural
doer, but it goes along with the natural doer, that does not work in
place of the supernatural doer, nor the supernatural doer works in place
of the natural one, but it is the supernatural that brings the natural
doer into existence and puts it into work. How does it put it into work?
Whether it does need this putting into work or not is a different
question, which will be dealt with later on, by Allah's will. For the
time being our concern is to stress that the dependence of the phenomena
of the world on Allah and on natural factors is not on the same level.
This, however, does not mean that Allah and nature bring about an act
together. Such a god is not a god. The god who has to work with the help
of nature is a very needy god. The god who needs no help acts
differently. Furthermore, it is polytheism to believe that, besides
Allah, there is another one with any effect. When we say that Allah
grows the plants, brings the animals to life, moves the wind, causes the
night and day to appear in succession, we do not mean that Allah must
sit beside the sun and the earth so that the three of them start working
to make the day and night appear, that is they do not diagonally do a
team-work. This is incorrect. This is not Qur'anic thinking. How does
Allah bring about the day and night? If there were no moon, no sun, no
earth, no sky and no movement of the earth how could there be day and
night? That is why we say that it is Allah Who does it: "That is because
Allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter
into the night?[^103] Without the earth there would be no meaning of day
and night. There they are because of the movement of the earth.
Similarly if there was no sun there would be no meaning of day and
night. Without the shining of the light of the sun on the earth there
can be no meaning of the day. So, what is Allah's role in this respect?
On this level and beside them, there is no role; the effect is of the
earth and the sun. Allah's role goes with them longitudinally, neither
diagonally nor substitutionally. Where there is the earth and its role
of bringing about the day and night there it is not the place of Allah.
Allah's place is above that. It is He Who brings to existence all the
universe by His will. It is by His will that the moon, the sun, the
stars and the sky move. The effect of His will in the appearance of the
day is the same as in the appearance of the sun and the earth. The
entire world as a whole exists and continues to exist by His will. But
it is not that Allah comes to replace the gardener in growing flowers.
The gardener, the power of his hands, the flowers and all other factors
are created by Him and their existence is in consistent need of His aid.
If He stops His aid even for a single moment there will be no existence.
Allah's Connection to the Causes Thus, Allah's effect in the appearance
of the phenomenon does not cross the material factors, nor does it come
beside them nor act in their place. Saying that Allah cured a patient
does not mean that no other material factor had any effect in that case.
By saying that Allah provides for man we do not mean that there were no
natural factors effective, and that the provision descended upon man
from some unknown world, or it came, as some say, from the nonexistence.
Allah's provision is the very bread whose wheat is grown by the farmer,
whose water descends from the sky, whose warmth comes from the sun, the
millers ground it and a bread is baked so that we may eat it. Without
His Will there will be no plant, no gardener, no sun, no oceans, no
earth, no moon, no clouds, no rain and no wind. So, who is it who
provides the living? Is providing livelihood anything other than
managing these world phenomena in a way that the result would be
satisfying my need of food? Such an organized and harmonious order that
gives such results, who other than Allah can direct it? Therefore, He is
the Provider and He is the One Who brings death. Here also the talk can
be lengthy. We just wanted to offer a general criterion for solving such
problems as how a phenomenon can be ascribed to nature, to man and to
Allah. Do such ascriptions mean contradiction? Do they mean that all are
at work? Do they replace one another? or else? If it is something else,
then what is it? It is now clear that there is no contradiction, no
collective work and no replacement. It is something else. Each factor of
any sort of effect on anything in the world has been brought into
existence by Allah, its power is from Allah and its life from Him.
Therefore, for all connection among the creatures there is a higher
connection to Him. Sometimes it happens that a supernatural cause
replaces a natural one, other than Allah, the Exalted, as we said in
respect of the miracles, such as curing diseases, or the Jesus (A.S.)
saying to a dead body in its grave: "Rise up, by Allah's permission!" In
that instance there was no natural factor for the dead to come to life,
except if we consider it to be the connection of Jesus (A.S.), who had a
physical body, to the dead man. Otherwise, there were no natural laws
for the dead to come to life. Had there been such laws, it would have no
longer been a miracle. On occasions it happens that natural factors and
some supernatural ones replace each other in some way. But what is
intended is the connection that exists between Allah and the phenomenon,
which is not a kind of replacement. Nothing can replace Allah, who has
the effect of His divine Lordship upon every natural and supernatural
factor, and no factor can take His place. But this does not mean that
the factors have no effect alongside Allah's. Allah Himself assigns
other things as means, as causes, by means of which certain effects can
be obtained and they are true effects. So much for that general rule.
Let us now talk a little about its details - leaving the rest of it for
the coming discussions, by Allah's Will - how we get these subjects from
the Qur'an, and how the Qur'an tries to acquaint our minds with these
facts in order to gradually prepare us to understand and accept the
concepts which we could not understand at the beginning. Allah, Man and
Nature The Qur'an sometimes ascribes a phenomenon to a natural factor.
It says, for example, that the soil grows the plants, sometimes it
ascribes it to rain, and sometimes to Allah: "...and you see the earth
barren, but when We send down water thereon it thrills and swells and
sprouts. forth every pleasing pair."[^104] "And Allah sent down water
from the sky and therewith gave life to the earth after its death."[^105]
"Know that Allah gives life to the earth."[^106] In these three ayahs,
the coming of the earth to life is ascribed to the earth itself in the
first, to the water in the second and to Allah in the third. Similar
ayahs come frequently in the Qur'an. Some people (those overwhelmed by
materialistic thoughts, who formulated the ideologies of some groups)
thought, therefore, that nature is Allah, since we sometimes say that
the plant is grown by Allah, sometimes by the rain and sometimes by the
earth. So; Allah is the very rain and earth. In other words, the Qur'an
contradicts itself by ascribing it once to Allah, and once to nature, or
we must say that Allah is nature itself. In order not to say that the
Qur'an is contradictory, we say that Allah is the very nature. Or, once
it says that Allah caused you to be victorious, and once it says that
the believers had won the victory, so this means that Allah is the
believers. In an instance it says that "you" had killed the
disbelievers, and in another instance it says that it was Allah who
killed them. So, Allah must be "you". What kind of a god is this who
sometimes is nature, sometimes "them" and sometimes "you"? They say that
by "Allah" it is the general order of the world that is meant. Or they
say that by Allah it is the dynamism of nature, or the general laws of
nature that is meant, and the like. Those are all deviations from
knowing Allah. He is neither nature, the spirit of nature, the very man,
nor the "people" themselves. He is none of these. Allah is Allah, nature
is nature and people are people. Nor is He the laws of nature, because
these laws are general forms that exist in man's mind, whereas Allah is
neither a mental being nor an abstract concept. Allah is an identical
and real Being. No being can be described as really existing in
comparison with His existence. Allah is the one and according to His
Will the whole universe was created. So, how can He be the "people" or
nature? How can Allah mean the creatures, and be equal with "people",
and other similar talks? The whole world, along its limited and
unlimited time, in its proportion to the existence of Allah, the Exalted
is much less than the proportion of a drop of water to a fathomless
great ocean. Why? Because when you pour a drop of water into the ocean,
its volume increases by the volume of that drop, whereas the whole
universe added to the existence of Allah cannot increase it: "And they
did not measure (the power of) Allah its true measure,"[^107] as
otherwise they would not have uttered such nonsense. Allah created the
whole world with a single command and if He withdraws His will
everything will vanish. How such a Being can be called "people",
"society", "creation", or "nature", of compare Him with the spirit to
the body of a living creature? If the spirit leaves the body, the body
will not immediately perish, but if there were no Allah - God forbid! -
what nature could be there? No connection of any kind which we realize
between two beings can be compared to that between the world and Allah.
We are unable to understand the nature of that connection, but we do
understand that if there were no Allah, if. it were not for His Will,
nothing could exist even for a single moment. This is a recognition of
the effectiveness of Allah at the highest level, and the effectiveness
of the means at lower levels. It is not a denial of the effectiveness at
lower levels. It is fire that burns, it is water that quenches man's
thirst. But this burning happens when there is fire and something to
burn. It is only in that case that the process of effecting and being
effected takes place. There must be fire, cotton and air contiguously,
each depending on the Divine Essence of Allah, the Exalted. This is
unlike the connection between fire and burning, it is a loftier and
deeper one that cannot be compared with any other kind of connection
between two beings. This must very well be accepted and digested, that
Allah, in His effectiveness and causation, should not be compared with
those of any other beings, even when a prophet or an Imam performs a
miracle with Allah's permission, like Jesus (A.S.) who brought the dead
into life. Even this bringing to life by the prophets and Imams is quite
different from that of Allah's, i.e. these bringings to life and
creatings depend on the means which have nothing of their own, while
ascribing them to Allah is to ascribe them to a doer who is the creator
of every existing, and does not come diagonally with them. It is the
same in spiritual matters. What were the prophets sent for? They were
sent to guide the people, yet Allah tells His Prophet: "Surely you
cannot guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He wills."[^108] He
tells him: It is not in your capacity to guide whomever you like. It is
not up to you. Allah has bestowed upon you a limited favour under
certain conditions. It is Allah's Power that is temporarily put in your
hands, or in the hands of all other creatures. Every thing is from Him,
and it is He Who controls every thing. So, it is not that if you liked
to guide somebody you could do it as you liked. No, it is only Allah's
Will which, if He decided something, there can be no delaying. If your
will was within His and was a beam of His Will, it would be Allah's Will
brought about and implemented. But if your will was not within the frame
of Allah's, it would have no effect at all. This is a rule that bears no
exception. In short, the connections among things, such as we know, can
be imagined in several forms: The Connection Among Things 1. The
connection of an effect with the complete parts of its cause. If the
parts of a complete cause are gathered in a single collection, the
phenomenon will be implemented. 2. The connections between things and
the replacing factors, as each one of them can be effective in the
appearance of the phenomenon, which cannot appear without the existence
of anyone of them. 3. Sometimes the effect of two things in the
appearance of a phenomenon or the implementation of an affair, is not
like either of the above two forms, but they work longitudinally, that
is, the effect of the one factor on a level is real, and the effect of
the other factor on another higher level is also real. By using the
expressions: higher, lower, superficial or deeper we refer to a fact
whose nature is not quite clear to us, i.e. we do not mean the factual
high or low positions. We actually mean that Allah's real and
independent effect is of such originality that nothing else can have any
effect on the same level. It is under His radius that the effective
factors appear. These are the results of that independent effect of
Allah, the Exalted. The real independent effective is Allah. Other
things demonstrate their effects according to their capacities to
receive Allah's radius, according to the extent of His Will, and
according to the flow of blessing bestowed upon them. Otherwise, the
others have nothing of their own, and should Allah remove His Will, it
would become clear that all other factors would be nothing. Therefore,
the key to the solution of the problems is to think of the connection
between Allah and the factors and the natural phenomena to be
longitudinal, and to accept it as such. Allah, in an ayah says: "Allah
takes the souls at the time of their death"[^109] Here, the taking of the
souls is ascribed to Allah. In another ayah He says: "Say: the angel of
death who was put in charge of you will take you."[^110] Somewhere else
He says: "...when death comes to anyone of you, Our messengers take
him."[^111] At first sight one may think that these ayahs are
contradictory. It says: "Allah takes the souls", and it says: "The angel
of death... will take you", and it says: "...Our messengers take him".
But the fact is that these connections are longitudinal, i.e. the real
effective is Allah's Will, which is at the top and along everything. He
is the originator of all powers and activities, while the others are
mere channels or passages. It is His Will that flows through the angel
of death, who, in his turn, is effective through His assistants, the
angels under His command. Allah's Will shows in the Angel of Death, who
issues his orders to his subordinates to take peoples' souls at the
prescribed time. Therefore, those ascriptions are correct. Both the
"messengers" and "the Angel of Death", take the souls, in obedience of
Allah's Will. They cannot do anything independently and directly. All
these effects are along the natural effects. This, however, does not
mean that one would die without having a heart attack, a stomach disease
or hepatalgia, or, for example, without receiving a strike on the head
or having an accident, one would be killed. All these factors are
possible in nature, nevertheless they are under the managing control of
a single upper power. When you peel an apple, is it the knife which
peels it or you? If you say: "I peeled the apple", you are right, and if
it is said that it is the knife which peels, it is also right. But the
knife is under your control, and it is you who use it to peel the apple.
Take another example. The driver who drives a car, is it the steering
wheel which guides the car, or the driver, or both? Without the steering
wheel the car cannot be directed to left or right, similarly without the
hands of the driver the wheel would not turn. Eventhough, without the
driver's brain and will, his hand would not move. Admitting that whether
the mechanical or the physical laws cause the car to move, whether the
cause is the turning of matter into energy, or the appearance of
mechanical energy, or else, does not mean that there is no driver. A
corporeal natural person exclusively fixes his eyes on natural factors,
taking no care of the supernatural factor which governs and controls
them. The prophets were keen on making you open your eyes a little to
see what is behind the curtain, behind the wall, so that you may not
think that this is everything and it is confined only to this natural
level. Above are factors and worlds, as well as powers of which the
natural forces are manifestations. Those are means in the hands of some
of those powers, because they cannot be independently effective.
Stressing the fact that all actions are done by Allah, the Qur'an wants
to remind us of Allah whom we had forgotten. It wants to make us
remember Him, not that what we see is incorrect, or non-existent. It
tells us to open our eyes and not to say that it is the pen that writes,
to look at the hand which moves the pen, and think of the brain which
orders the hand to move the pen, and then you are to decide whether the
writer is the man, the muscles of the hand, the nerves or the pen. It is
the man who writes, and the others are mere means and tools. The real
effect is from him. Yet, Allah's connection with the natural factors is
even higher, because the existence of the pen, in that case, would not
be in need of man. Even if man did not exist, the pen did exist, since
the existence of material means is connected to Allah's Will. The sun
does have its effect, but its very existence is by Allah's Will. So,
again "...and Allah's is the loftiest similitude". Yet, those similies
are unable to explain the truth of the matter concerning Allah. In that
case their would be no need of measuring. Here another question may
arise: If we take the word elah, god, to mean "worthy of worshipping",
how can we explain using it by the Qur'an to also denote the false
dieties, such as concerning As-Samiri's calf which is referred to as
"your elah, and concerning Pharaoh's gods as "your elahs? The answer is
that such utterances are either taken to represent the beliefs of the
addressees, or to repeat what the disbelievers used to say. 8. Unity of
fear. This is also one of the aspects of at-Tawhid, and means that one
should fear nobody except Allah. Since we know that the real effective
is Allah, why should we fear others? No one else has any effect, and
nobody has any power at all, except as an instrument. The one who truly
believes in at-Tawhid is the one who fears Allah alone.
