The Principle of Causation in the Qur'an
========================================

We had said that all the phenomena of the existence are related to
Allah, and that no being in any time, place and dimension can do without
Allah. A question may arise here: If the Unity of Acts is so vastly
extensive as to encompass every phenomenon with its dimensions and
details, it must mean that no other factor or cause can have any effect
in the appearance of any thing, since the Unity of Acts means that all
acts are done by Allah, and since He is the real effective, and that we
must deny everything else any kind of effect and causation. Therefore,
this can be a question for discussion.

**The Connection of the Principle of Causation to the Unity of Acts**

To get a clear expression of this connection, we may explain first the
concept of "cause" and the principle of "causation". "Cause" is usually
used to denote the aim of the doer, and it is commonly called "causa
finalis" or "the final cause", when you ask: "What was your final cause
for doing that?", i.e. your motive and aim. In the terms of philosophy
it has a much wider meaning, besides being divided into the general and
the particular. A general cause is that on which another thing depends,
disregarding the thing itself nor the kind of its dependance. Writing a
letter depends on the writer. Without a writer no letter can be written.
So, the writer is a cause.

The writer must normally have a hand. So, the hand of the writer is a
cause, too. Besides, the writer, regarded as a thinker, as a spiritual
personality, must have physical tools, his hand is to be sound, its
nerves and muscles are to be sound, as these are also needed for
writing. So, these are causes, too.

Furthermore, a writer needs paper, ink and pen, each of which is a
cause, since without a pen, ink and paper the letter cannot be written.
So, writing a letter depends on all these items.

Consequently, each of these is a cause according to its general
meaning. The particular meaning denotes the doer, i.e. the being that
brings another being into existence, even if it depended on other things
in the bringing one of these things into existence, such as the example
of the writer, who is a being, though he would need pen, ink and paper,
but these are not causes under this particular meaning, because they do
not write. In this instance the cause equals the doer, as in the former
term, the cause included the doer, though not exclusively. But here the
term "exclusively" means the doer.

Causation is the affected source of the cause, i.e. to be a cause is
the origin of causation, the origin of the effectiveness of something in
the appearance of something else, according to the general term, or the
doer of a phenomenon, according to the particular term. Now, one may ask
whether the Qur'an accepts the principle of causation, and, if it does,
how can the connection of this principle with the Unity of Acts be? Is
it possible to accept both the Unity of Acts and the principle of
causation? Or if the one is accepted, is the other to be rejected? If we
consider the principle of causation in its general meaning, i.e.
something that depends on something else, we will have to study the
different causes in the world of existence, so as to see whether the
Qur'an accepts them all or not.

**Causation in the Qur'an**

We confirm here that causation, meaning that the phenomena have doers,
is not only acceptable to the Qur'an, but the very principle of the
Unity of Acts is based on the principle of causation. The well-known
proof of the existence of Allah is also called the proof of the cause of
causes. Thus, this proof is based on accepting the principle of
causation. By saying that Allah is the real doer of all acts and the
Creator of all phenomena we actually present Him as the doer, i.e. the
One Who is known in the philosophic term as the cause. So, Allah is the
cause of all phenomena, that is, all phenomena are in need of Him.

In this view it is the very Unity of Acts, and does not contradict
at-Tawhid. But in its general meaning, as to be the different doers and
causes, it is not exclusively confined to be the cause of doing, such as
the constructor being the cause of construction, the writer being the
cause of the writings, the natural causes, of the natural phenomena, or
water and air, of the appearance of the plants. The Qur'an not only
accepts the different causes which we know, but it also mentions other
kinds of causes which we do not know. As a matter of fact, it accepts
the widest concept of the principle of causation, even to a further
extent than what we accept of the connection among the phenomena of the
world. Allah had stated other kinds of effects and causes in the Qur'an
that otherwise we could not have known and understand them. To prove
this we shall have to bring examples of the Qur'anic ayahs.

**The Materialistic Causation**

Among the many causes mentioned in the Qur'an is that which is known in
the philosophic terms as the materialistic causation, which, in this
term, means that each of this world's phenomena usually appears from the
changing of another phenomenon. i.e. every being in this world which may
occur to your mind was formerly something else, which had undergone
certain changes and transformed into a new thing. For example, the soil
was before a mountain, but because of erosion, rain and sun, the
mountain erodes and gradually turns into dust, the soil turns into
plant, which transforms into animal, which is eaten by man and turns
into human beings. This body of ours was formerly other beings, some of
it was the flesh of former animals, some of it was of eatable plants,
some was of mineral materials.

Whatever phenomenon of the nature you lay your hand on was formerly
something else. This "something else" is called "the materialistic
cause" in the philosophic term, and this is because there is a kind of
union between the former thing and the latter one, to which we say: this
is what was formerly a plant. There is a sort of sameness and unity
between the present phenomena and the former one. So, the former
phenomena, on which the latter ones depend, arc, thus, causes.

**The Qur'an and the Materialistic Causation**

Is this causation acceptable to the Qur'an? Yes, it frequently says
that Allah has changed these phenomena into other ones, or He created a
given thing from a certain thing, which means that the first was the
cause of the appearance of the second. Many examples can be sited. This
sky which we see nowadays in different shapes, from the Qur'anic
standpoint, formerly was a phenomenon called "smoke, which we today
scientifically know as gases. That is, this world was one day in the
form of a gas. The noble ayah in this respect says: Then He turned to
the heaven when it was smoke.[^112] Regarding the living beings the
Qur'an says: "...We made every living thing of water".[^113] So water is
a materialistic cause of living things, i.e. water is a necessary part
of every living being. This is a proof of the accepted principle of
materialistic causation in our world.

As for men, the Qur'an repeatedly says that Allah had created him of
clay. Many ayahs in the Qur'an refer to the creation of man: "Surely We
created them of firm and sticky clay."[^114] The Qur'an expands the
circle of causation to cover things which we do not see, and had it not
been mentioned by it we would have known nothing about them.

The creation of the jinn is also an example of causation. The Qur'an
talks of the jinn as real beings who, like man, had been created of a
material already existed - a subject which we do not intend to discuss
for the time being. The Qur'an in this respect says: "And the jinn We
created before of intensely hot fire"."[^115] So far we talked about the
materialistic causation which is acceptable, and of which examples were
presented.

Further to these there are the active causes of different features,
some of which are unknown to us, such as the activities of the angels.
Had the Qur'an not talked about them we would not have known their
existence, let alone understanding how their actions and reactions
happen. Their activeness is confirmed by Allah, and a lot of tasks had
been ascribed to them.

We can say, in brief, that, according to the Qur'an their mission or
intermediation is of two types: One is their mission in genetic matters,
and the other is in legislative matters. That is, some of them perform
genetic affairs as helpers in bringing them about, and some others
deliver Allah's instructions to the prophets. The first is called the
genetic mission and the other the legislative mission or intermediation.
Here is an example of each. Generally, the question of having a message
is ascribed to both groups of angels. The Qur'an says: "...Who appoints
the angels messengers".[^116] This Surah is also called Suratul Mala'ikah
or the angels. Allah had appointed the angels as His messengers and
envoys delivering His messages, that is, they are intermediates. A
specimen of the messages that are being conveyed by the angels, or
beings like angels, in the genetic affairs was that related to the
episode of Mary (A.S.). The Qur'an relates this episode many times,
explaining how Jesus (A.S.) was born without having a father. What
concerns our topic is this: "...then We sent to her Our spirit."[^117]
That is: We sent the spirit, who is a great angel, or, according to some
narratives, a creature greater than the angels, to her, "Who appeared to
her like a perfect man."[^118] This spirit may be Gabriel, another angel
or some other creature (no indication in the Qur'an specifying it). It
has been sent to Mary, and it showed itself in the shape of a man. So,
one of the characteristics of the angels is that they can turn into a
man.

Mary was busy worshipping in a room. (It was the custom in those days
to build rooms near Jerusalem for people to worship in seclusion). She
was frightened at seeing a stranger who might hide an evil intention:
"She said: I take refuge in the Beneficent from you, if you are
God-fearing."[^119] In reply "He said: I am only a messenger of your
Lord, that I may give you a pure boy."[^120] So, the angels can give
offsprings, "...that I may give you a pure boy." This is an act
performed by the angels - Jesus (A.S.) was given to Mary (A.S.). She
felt the boy in her womb. Gabriel did not bring a legislative message to
Mary (A.S.), it was a genetic one. It is the how, the effectiveness and
activity that create the spirit, or the angel, in the human world, by
the permission of Allah, of course, and through the message sent by
Allah. Had it not been stated by the Qur'an, we could not have proved
the existence of a being called "the spirit" capable of having such an
effect on the world.

On the other hand, the Qur'an admits some effectiveness for the satans,
in the form of whispering into the souls of the people: "Say. I take
refuge in the Lord of the people...from the evil of the shinking
whisperer who whispers into the hearts of the people."[^121] This is a
kind of effectiveness of the satans against the people, by way of
whispering into their hearts to seduce them to go astray.

Concerning Satan, his nature and acts we shall, by Allah's Will, have a
thorough discussion. For the time being we only mentioned this Satan's
particular characteristic of his whispering evil in people's heart. Had
it not been stated by the Qur'an we could not have known it.

**Man's Effectiveness**

Man also has many kinds of effects on the world, all of which are not
intended to be discussed here. One of the ayahs referring to this
question is that in which Allah says: Fight them, Allah will torture
them by your hands and bring disgrace on them."[^122] In this short
sentence Allah discloses the effectiveness of man in the slaughtering,
defeating and destroying the idolators. He tells man to fight and defeat
them. So, man is effective, and the shedding of their blood is a
punishment inflicted by Allah upon them through man. Man is the doer of
the act of killing, but it is Allah Who kills them by man's hand. It is
the longitudinal effectiveness explained previously. It is both your
doing and Allah's doing, the latter on a higher level, and the former on
a lower level. Or we may say: the direct and close doer, man, and the
remote doer, Allah, though it seems that this is not quite expressive.

At any rate, man's being a fighter is taken for granted, i.e. it is man
who fights and combats, and, at the same time, Allah's act goes along
man's action. So it is possible to say that Allah tortured the
disbelievers and the idolators by the hands of the believers, and it can
be said that the believers attacked the disbelievers and destroyed them,
though in two stages.

Another example: Allah says that the Qur'an has a guiding effect on
man's heart. Here also two kinds of parallel effects are at work: "There
has come to you a light and a clear Book. With it Allah guides the one
who follows His pleasure into the ways of safety."[^123] Here also many
concepts can be inferred, the discussion of which we postpone for the
time being. Whom does the Qur'an guide? What should their merits be in
order to receive divine guidance? The first condition is that their
hearts must seek Allah's pleasure and try to obtain it. This is the
first condition for availing oneself of the Qur'an's light. Thus, the
Qur'an is a means of guidance. It can be said that the Qur'an guides,
and it can be said that Allah guides by means of the Qur'an. These are
two parallel actions: It is one of the examples of causations which are
stated in the Qur'an, as otherwise we could not have quite understood
these facts.

There is a connection between human acts and the appearance of evils
and misfortunes on the earth. We do, however, understand, to some
extent, that some bad deeds, some crimes, have corruptive results, and
that the crimes of despotic regimes cause social corruption. These are
known and understood. But as a general law, every bad deed done by man
causes an evil effect in this world, and there will be a corruption.

The misfortunes that happen in the land and at sea are caused by the
evil deeds of people. We could not know this, but the Qur'an says:
"Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea because of what the
bands of men have wrought."[^124]

Moreover, it is surprising that the acts of some people sometimes
caused particular regulations to be issued by Allah. Some
punishments-and severe ones-were imposed upon ancient people because of
their evil deeds. Allah prohibited certain food for Bani Israel, as
punishment, because of their evil conduct. From such ayahs many things
can be understood. An ayah says: "Because of the injustice of those who
are Jews did We disallow to them the good things which had been made
lawful for them."[^125] From this we realize that man can have his effect
even on the divine laws. This is another different kind of
effectiveness. There are other kinds of causations on the part of man
which are also unknown to us, such as the effects of the good deed of
men in the blessings of the earth and the heaven.

These are confirmed by the Qur'an, as otherwise we could never have
known them. The Qur'an says: "And if the people of the towns had
believed and feared Allah, We would certainly have opened up for them
blessings from the heaven and the earth,"[^126] though presently it adds:
"but they disbelieved, so We convicted them according to what they
earned." Accordingly, the bad deeds of man cause corruption in the
earth, and his good deeds bring blessing from the earth and the heaven.
This is also another kind of causation between man's acts and spiritual
matters which benefit man himself. The previous ayah showed us the
effect of good deeds in causing material blessings. Here the connection
is between man's good deeds and their spiritual effects which are to
man's interest: "Those who believe and do good, their Lord will guide
them for their faith"[^127] This is a divine guidance conditioned by
man's faith and good deed.

If a man has faith and does good deeds Allah will guide him and grant
him a light which the others cannot understand. So, it is his faith and
good deed that become the cause for Allah to bestow upon him guidance
and light to his benefit. This is a kind of effectiveness in respect to
a moral, a spiritual matter. It is a different effect of the connection
between man's acts and the phenomena of the other world that which has
never been known to us, nor do we have now a correct knowledge of its
truth. The Qur'an says that the smallest of your acts in this world will
have its effect in the other world. None of your acts can .have no
effect on your life in the other world, and what a great and eternal
effect resulting from a worldly and transitory act! This kind of
causation is quite unknown to us, but the Qur'an confirms it. Many ayahs
refer to this, such as: "I have rewarded them this day, because they
were tolerant, that they are the winners (of happiness)."[^128]

So far, we noted examples of causations, among natural, living and
supernatural phenomena from the Qur'anic standpoint.

By the above-mentioned examples our claim has been proved, that is, the
Qur'an confirms the principle of causation at a wider level than that
which occurs to human mind. It establishes a causational connection even
between our smallest act done in this world and the eternal rewards and
results. So, the causation doctrine has never been denied by the
Qur'an.

Such being the case, how can the Unity of Acts and the causation
doctrine be accepted at the same time. The answer is the same as had
been mentioned, i.e. in the longitudinal connection, the two acts go in
parallel to each other, not a crosswise act consisting of several doers
making a single group, nor a substitutional act that takes the place of
another act. Actually, the doer is both, though each acting on his
particular and different level and degree. We already said that the
Qur'an extends the causation doctrine to its widest limit and accepts
it. As a matter of fact, it does not present the scientific and
philosophic topics in their technical terms, since it is not a book of
science nor of philosophy, but it includes subjects which are related to
them.

We may say that a certain ayah, or ayahs, coinside with so-and-so
scientific or philosophic matter. We do not say that it handles a
certain philosophic problem, solves it and proves it, The Qur'an does
not present the causation doctrine by way of questioning whether there
is a cause in the world or not. Yet, its statements cannot be
interpreted except on the basis of the causation doctrine, i.e.
accepting this doctrine is inevitable for those statements. There is no
doubt that the Unity of Acts presents the divine effect on a higher
level, not on the level of natural and ordinary causes, and without
there being any contradiction. In other words, the effect of Allah and
of the other causes go parallel to one another, not crosswise.

Here appears another question related to the causation doctrine. All
that had been gathered from the Qur'anic ayahs prove the fact that this
doctrine had been confirmed on diverse occasions, but does Qur'an's
acceptance of the causation doctrine, as understood from the said
occasions, mean that this doctrine is like a necessary and indispensable
law such that nothing is out of its limits, or do the ayahs say that
generally the world is governed by this doctrine, but there can also be
occasions on which it does not work?

In the new philosophy there is a term called "determinism". Is it
necessary and inevitable that each effect is brought about by means of a
certain cause, or is it that some phenomena cannot be proved to have
certain causes? In this respect there are several theses which can be
squeezed into three ones: some people believe that every phenomenon is
subject to the principle of "determinism, , and necessity. Some others
believe that this principle can never be proved in any instance. Some go
into details and say that the macrophysical phenomena are deterministic,
whereas in respect to the microphysical phenomena they are not governed
by the causation doctrine. For example, take an atom, one of the
electrons will leave its orbit, but it is unknown which one, as there is
no evidence pointing to any one of them. It is a matter of chance and at
random. This belongs to microphysics, where, they say, the law of
causation does not rule, contrary to the phenomena of macrophysics,
where that law does rule.

The correct thesis accepted to us and to the Islamic philosophy is that
the doctrine of causation is necessary and bears no exception. If we
could not, however, find out the cause of a particular phenomenon, the
reason is our insufficient knowledge, not that it happened without any
cause. It does have a cause, but we have not discovered it yet. However,
this is philosophic topic which is irrelevant to our discussion. We
mentioned it just to throw light on the connection between the causation
doctrine and at-Tawhid, i.e. whether the cause acceptable to the Qur'an
is regarded as a necessary and indespensable principle, or it happens,
rarely or frequently, per chance, that is, in the terms of logic, it is
acceptable as a positive partial proposition, not as positive universal
proposition or a general law. The importance of this discussion appears
only when we think of its connection with miracles. We do know that all
divine religions, especially Islam in the Qur'an, declare that many of
the world's phenomena do not happen because of merely material actions
and reactions, as there is an apparatus other than that of material
causation. It also rules the world, though unknown to people and is not
put at their disposal.

**The Connection Between Causation and Miracles**

A characteristic of the religious and divine belief is the acceptance
of the idea of miracles, which is unknown to the materialistic school.
It is, in fact, one of the pretexts used by the materialistic schools
against the theological schools, especially the religious, accusing them
of violating the causation doctrine. They say that the acceptance of
such religious matters actually is violation of the causation doctrine,
which, if acceptable, must come into existence through its own cause and
conditions, otherwise it will be impossible. "How can you say," they
protest, "that a phenomenon may come into existence without having a
material cause? "This is a denial of the causation doctrine". They
regard this a weak point of the divine school. Maybe some Marxist
literature had referred to this, saying that the religious school
believed in the accidental happening of things, by which they mean the
miracles.

Despite the fact that those who believe in accidentalism, in its
incorrect concept, are the very materialists themselves, and of which
they have no escape, yet they accuse us of being accidentalists.
Realizing that we admit the happening of exceptional and miraculous
phenomena, they say: here you have an accident, and, by admitting it,
you reject the causation doctrine as a necessary general law. This is
one of the allegations of which the materialists accuse the theologians.
How much truth is there in this? Is the causation doctrine a general and
inevitable law? If we accept this law, are we, then, to deny the
miracles, or can the question be solved in a different way?

It must be said that the causation doctrine is a philosophic, universal
and necessary one. It accepts no exception. To explain this subject, we
shall have to go into a thorough philosophic discourse, which is, in
fact, out of the frame of our discussion. It is not in our intention to
handle such a wide philosophic subject. If we do sometimes explain
similar subjects, it is because they are related to certain Qur'anic
questions which require explanation. Otherwise, we do not concern
ourselves with irrelevant philosophic topics. The problem, now, is if
the causation doctrine is a universal and necessary one, how can
miracles be justified?

**Taking Position in Respect to Miracles**

The First Position:

It is the position of those who take the miracles to be superstitions
and say that they are myths and legends which remained in the human mind
from the mythical and legendary periods. Their residues transported to
the next religious periods and rested in the deep depths of the human
mind, to appear in the form of miracles, which are no more than unreal
fabulous legends.

This is the position of the materialists and the scientists. Such
thinkers basically deny all religions, since the prominent
characteristic of every divine religion is to acknowledge miracles,
especially Islam, as the Qur'an is quite explicit in this respect such
that to deny miracles is to deny the Qur'an itself. That is, we are
either to affirm that the Qur'an is a true Book and, thus, the miracle
is also true, or to say that since the Qur'an is a miracle it is false -
God forbid! - Otherwise it is irrational to accept the Qur'an and deny
the miracle. The Qur'anic declarations in this respect are so extensive
that there can be no doubt about the truth of miracles. Such being the
case, some accuse Islam as being a false religion because it says, for
example, that somebody had thrown his stick and it turned into a snake.
This is more like a myth. How could a piece of wood turn into a snake?
The Qur'an says: "So he threw his staff, and lo! lo! it was a real
serpant"".[^129] They say this is a legend, and, consequently, the Qur'an
itself is not a true Book. Or they say that the Qur'an states that Jesus
(A.S.) was born without having a father at all, and that a spirit
appeared before Mary (A.S.). Science does not accept such things.
Therefore, the Qur'an is - God forbid! - a lie.

They also say that the Qur'an alleges that Jesus (A.S.), a child of one
or two days, lying in its cradle, started talking and even claimed to be
a prophet with a divine scripture. When Bani Israel accusingly said to
Mary (A.S.): "You have done a strange thing. O sister of Aaron! your
father was not a bad man, nor was your mother a harlot"'. Their attack
was severe upon her. She pointed to the infant in the cradle: "They
said: How can we talk to one who is a child in the cradle?"" But he
surprised them by saying: "I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the
Book and appointed me a prophet. And He has made me blessed wherever I
may be, and He has enjoined upon me the Salat and the Zakat so long as I
remain alive; and dutiful to my mother..."[^130]

A new born infant, speaking from its cradle like this, astounded them
all! What a story this is! Then the Qur'an adds that it was a divine
sign which was brought among the people so that they may know Allah,
that He is capable of doing everything and that they should submit to
Him.

As for the scientific thinkers, they say such things are impossible,
science has never proved them, they are but superstitions, of which
there are many examples in the Qur'an. so, this position rejects the
Qur'an for including such things.

**The Second Position**

This position is a little milder than the first. It is the position of
those who apparently introduce themselves as Muslims and supporters of
the Qur'an but they, out of ignorance or hypocrisy, resort to the
interpretation of such ayahs as formerly stated. They say: the meanings
of those ayahs are not as they had been understood by some people. They
have different meanings. Or sometimes they ascribe them to be like
superstitions. They say the Qur'an includes myths, too, and those are
some of them. Myths, they say, have their benefits, if they are
explained by the mythologists.

**The Third Position**

Those who take this position say that these are vocabularies from which
you understand the said meanings, while the story was something else.
People, and sometimes men of religion, gradually show such subjects to
appear as superstitions. The subject is different. By saying that he
would cure their patients Jesus; they say, intended to say that he would
treat them, since Jesus was a clever physician. In that era of good
medication, Jesus was a genious physician who dedicated himself to the
weak and the poor. He used to tell the people to bring the patients to
him for treatment. He wanted to offer his humanistic services to the
society, not to show miracles: "...and I heal the blind and the
leprous." means that he medicated their patients, as any physician would
try to do. "and bring the dead to life" means Jesus used to dig out some
dead bodies. These acts cannot mean that he miraculously cured the sick
or brought the dead to life. No, he disentombed the dead as dead, not
alive!

As regards an episode such as Bani Israel's crossing the sea, and the
drowning of Pharaoh and his men in the sea, which was another one of
Moses' miracles, they say: you misunderstood this one, too. Moses (A.S.)
was brought up in Pharaoh's court. At those times astronomy and other
similar sciences were very common among people. Moses (A.S.) was clever
and talented. He had learned from the scholars of the court of Pharaoh
the law of the seas ebb and tide. He could very well calculate the
periods of high tide and low tide. His calculations showed him that a
very strange low tide was going to start such that the bed of the sea
would be exposed. He decided to cross the sea with his people at that
very time. So, when he was told: "Strike the sea with your staff. And it
parted, each like a huge mound,"[^131] it was a reference to this
question of low tide, and the striking of the sea with his staff was
ordering him to proceed, at the time of the ebb, and cross the sea. So,
it was a natural phenomenon. Likewise the other miracles stated in the
Qur'an can be interpreted in similar ridiculous or tearful ways.

One of the prominent examples of such dull and distorting
interpretations of the Qur'an is that of the Indian commentator Mir
Ahmad Khan, who has a lot of such specimen. Some Egyptian commentators
have quoted him. It is regretted that persons who consider themselves
writers of exegeses and they did write them in the Persian language,
quoted such matters, and made of these felts hats for their heads.

This is another position, which, in fact, distorts the Qur'an. If we
want to make puns on words and explain things as we desire, there can be
no specific meanings for words, and everybody may assign any meaning he
likes for the words, such as being done by the hypocrites who interpret
the. ayahs of the Qur'an in any form they like.

If such a door is flung open, no discourse can be trusted and no word
may retain its specific meaning, in which case two contrary meanings,
both positive and negative, may be ascribed to a single word. If this is
to be the case, it is better to leave the Qur'an aside than to fabricate
such ridiculous interpretations of it. Every fair thinking with a
knowledge of the Arabic language can realize that giving such meanings
to the ayahs is more disgraceful than denying the Qur'an altogether. It
is better to say that the Qur'an is a lie - God forbid! But to admit
that the Qur'an is a divine Book and it is true and was sent to the
people, cannot conform with such ridiculous interpretations.

**The Fourth Position**

This position towards miracles is also a mild one. The supporters of
this position say that the truth about miracles is the miracle of
science. That is, they say: We accept that Moses, Jesus and other
Prophets (A.S.) did perform things contrary to the natural proceedings.
Allah had bestowed upon them a power which was the sign of their
prophethood. What they did was extraordinary, but the causes of those
performances were not what others say, they were something else. Allah
has given them the knowledge of knowing the natural causes of those
phenomena, and they utilized their divine and extraordinary knowledge.
It was not a knowledge that could be learnt by whoever liked it. Its
appearance in certain persons was regarded as a miracle, but the effect
was, actually carried out through natural laws.

For example, you do know that in chemistry there are uncountable
actions and reactions with astonishing results. Those who know such
formulae, solutions, pastes and chemical compounds can demonstrate
amazing effects which would surprise the others. Ordinary people think
that fire and water never come together, whereas a chemist can easily
demonstrate an experiment in which we see fire on the surface of water.
Such instances are plenty in chemistry. So, those who know nothing about
such formulae think them to be miracles, but if some illiterate in a
desert performed such demonstrations, they would be miracles, because
the others knew nothing about them and could not do them. Later on, when
the relevant secrets were discovered and everybody could do them, they
could no more be regarded as miracles.

Consequently, a miracle is a proportional matter. Under certain
conditions in a certain place, done by a certain person before a certain
people, it is seen as a miracle, since that people know nothing, cannot
recognize it and incapable of doing it. But the same performance loses
its miraculous nature and becomes an ordinary affair when all the people
can learn it and have all the required means at their disposal to do it.
A hundred years ago if one could have his voice heard on the other side
of the world, it would have been regarded as a miracle, but nowadays,
when everybody can make use of the telephone to hear his friend's voice
overseas, it can be no longer a miracle. So, the first person who can do
it, especially if he lacks all learning and knowledge and is in an
ignorant climate, it is surely regarded as a miracle.

They say that the prophets were like that. They were taught some
scientific formulae by Allah. Others did not know them. But later, after
the development and advancement of science and of people's knowledge,
they ceased to be regarded as miracles.

This was another interpretation of the miracles, and a particular
position towards the Qur'an's declarations about the miraculous
performances of the prophets. But the fact is that all these positions
are false. The first is a denial of the Qur'an, the second is a
distortion of the Qur'an, the third and the fourth are caused by
misunderstanding the Qur'an.

What the Qur'an and the true divine religions say is that there are
phenomena which happen in this world caused not by usual causes, but by
the will of the prophets and Allah's men, on whom He had bestowed a
power and a special knowledge to govern the natural laws. As a matter of
fact, there are happenings which look like miracles and may be mistaken
for miracles, such as the performances of the ascetics. These, however,
are facts, too, other than the deceitful magic. There are also the godly
men who attain, with their strict self-discipline, to certain truths,
which may appear as miracles to the little-informed lookers on, whereas
closer observers realize that such performances can be learnt and
taught, since they have their preliminaries and causes leading to their
appearance. These are not miracles. A miracle is something given by
Allah and has neither causes nor means, nor is it possible to learn or
teach. It is a power granted by Allah's Will to whomever He pleases - a
power to overpower nature. As to what the self-mortifiers do, they are
acts acquired by training and can be performed by others, too, but a
miracle is something else. The truth of the miracles is something beyond
magic, self-mortification, strange sciences and the like.

Miracles are neither learnt nor taught, they are God-given talents,
which are bestowed upon whomever Allah desires and to the extent He
pleases. Now, one. may ask: Does accepting the principle of miracles, as
such, constitute a contradiction to the principle of causation? The
answer is that it does not. According to the principle of causation,
every phenomenon and whatever is not self-existent depends in its
appearance into existence on the effect of another factor.

Therefore, the self-existent, i.e. Allah's Holy Essence, is outside the
limits of the principle of causation, that is, Allah is not an effect
and need not to have a cause. As a matter, of course, Allah is at the
head of the principle of causation, since His Holy Essence is the cause
of all things, though He is outside the circle of the caused. Allah
needs no cause, because the principle of causation, according to its
philosophic concept, means that, that which is not self-existent and is
needy, its existence depends on something else which is to satisfy its
needs, while Allah is a needless Being, and thus He is not included in
the causation argument.

Secondly, the causation principle, as an intellectual tenet, says that
the beings which are limited, conditional and needy, there must be
behind them something connected to them and that which fulfils them. But
as to what that "something" is, what shape it has and how it exerts its
effect, they are not explained by the causation principle, i.e. it is
not possible to know the particular cause of each phenomenon from the
causation principle itself. The causation law is a rational one, prior
to experiment and not dependant on it, whereas recognizing the
particular causes is an experimental procedure and determined by
experiments. That is, a scientist sits in his laboratory, changes the
conditions, compounds, and analyzes until he attains to new discoveries.
Then, as soon as a new phenomenon appears in the laboratory, such as the
flushing of a light, the hearing of a sound or the facing of a new
material phenomenon, he immediately understands that there must have
been a cause for what had happened, according to reason.

This, however, is understandable by reason without having to do any
experiment. But as regards what was the cause of the appearance of that
phenomenon, the mind, alone, cannot help us in finding out the cause, as
otherwise there would have been no need for, resorting to
experimentation and the mind would have told us what caused the
so-and-so phenomenon. Science and experiment can tell us about the
particular causes, whereas the causation law is a - philosophic one.
Detailed discussion of this subject comes in its place. Here I just
wanted to show how far experimentation can help us in respect to finding
out the cause of a happening. Experiment can tell us that under the
conditions of the experiment what connection there is between the (A)
phenomenon and the (B) phenomenon, such that whenever (A) is present (B)
appears, too, and whenever (A) disappears, (B) disappears, too. Only
experiment can demonstrate the connection.

However, can the experiment show us that (B) can never appear except
through (A)? What experiment can answer such questions? To make a fire,
man used for years a particular way. Had he the right to say that there
was no other way to make it? It would have been childish to say so. He
had no right to say there was no way to make a fire other than that. We
usually obtain heat from fire, but do we have the right to say that heat
can never be obtained except through this way? The only right we have is
to say that, according to our so far acquired knowledge, the causes that
make fire are so and so, but we have no right to exclusively confine the
ways of making fire only to those which we know and that there can never
be other factors producing fire, as only an ignorant can say so, and it
is not expected from a researcher to disregard and deny the effect of an
unnoticeable factor.

Experimentation can prove what is within the scope of its function,
supported by man's senses, but it has no right to deny what lies beyond
that. So, alleging that science denies such procedures as claimed by the
prophets is nonsense. Science cannot deny them. It only can say that
experiment shows that a human being appears by means of its parents, but
it has no right to say that it is impossible otherwise. Principally,
experiment cannot prove impossibility. Impossibility is not an
experimental concept, it is a philosophical one. If impossibility can be
proved it can be proved only through reasoning. What experiment can
prove is the non-happening, not the impossibility. So, no science,
however advanced it may be, can deny miracles and say that they are
impossible. What science proves does not contradict the existence of
miracles. Consequently, confirming miracles does not mean denying
causation in the happening of miracles. Actually, they confirm the
existence of a cause beyond all causes known to people - a cause which
is supernatural and extraordinary. They do not absolutely deny all
causes. Therefore, causation principle, as a necessary and general one,
can meet miracles and extraordinary events, without creating any
problem.


