Prompt and Gradual Acts of Allah
================================

One of the discussions about Allah's acts is whether He does His acts
gradually along the time, or promptly and on the spot. The reason behind
this question may be the declarations of some ayahs in the Qur'an. It
can be understood from certain ayahs that Allah's acts, or some of them
at least, are done gradually, such as the ayahs concerning the creation
of the heaven and the earth, as well as man who is created first from a
semen and then he gradually grows up to perfection.

There are, on the other hand, a group of ayahs which give us to
understand that when Allah wants something He tells it to be, and there
it will be on the spot. The outer meanings of such ayahs denote that
Allah's acts, in certain instances, are immediately fulfilled, and they
need no time. The Qur'an says: "His command, when He wills anything, is
only to say to it: 'Be!' so it is."[^132] This concept is repeated many
times in the Qur'an. so, how is it possible to join these two groups of
ayahs? A question arises in this respect: are Allah's acts gradual or
prompt, or are some done gradually and some done on the spot? Many of
the commentators have chosen the third version. They say that if a
phenomenon appears gradually and takes time to become grown up and
complete, Allah's relevant act will similarly be gradual, such as the
creation of man who starts from a semen and takes some nine months to
become a complete embryo. In this respect, Allah's act takes nine
months, too, to be fulfilled. But if it was an immediate affair
unconditioned by time, that is, if the creature was to wear the apparel
of existence in no time, it would not, of course, be a gradually
created. In this respect, it seems that to say: "prompt" or "all at
once", is not quite correct. Nevertheless, anything which has nothing to
do with time cannot be described as "gradual".

Now let us forsake whether this division of Allah's acts as gradual and
immediate conforms with the ayahs revealed in relation to either of
them, and what the opinions of the critics in this respect are. We
intend now to present the third suggested opinion, which, besides
solving this problem, also solves a number of complicated questions
related to theology. To do so, we must first explain that when we say
that an act is gradual or immediate, do we mean that the relevant result
of the act happens immediately or gradually? Or is there a different
meaning? For example, when we say that the creation of the world was
immediate or gradual, do we mean that the world itself is immediate or
gradual? This is very clear. Creation can be of two kinds: what is
materialistic takes time and thus its creation is gradual, and what is
not materialistic is abstract and its existence is not connected to
time, and thus it is immediate, or, better to say: not gradual. So,
there can be no question whether Allah's acts are immediate or gradual.
Yet, the problem does not end by this.

**The Infinitive and the Gerund**

A verbal noun can have two moods:

1. As an infinitive
2. As a gerund

In the Persian language the verb is sometimes interpreted as an act and
sometimes as the performance of the act. But in the Arabic language it
seems that the word denoting the infinitive and the gerund is the same
in many instances. It should be noted, however, that such words have two
aspects, they are either infinitive or gerund. The basic difference
between them is that as regards the infinitive it has a sort of
connection with the subject, i.e. it has an additional meaning, which is
a kind of verbal meaning: to do, besides denoting the act which is to be
done, it always attracts our attention to the subject, the doer of the
act.

So, to eat, to sleep, to go, to talk, denote some connection between
the subject and the action. As regards the gerund, such a connection is
not noticeable. Actually, an obstruction and non-connection are noted,
such as: trying and to try. In the first the subject is not obvious,
while it is in the second, as it denotes the one who tries, the subject.
Similar are: creating and to create. When we say that creation is
gradual or immediate, we must make it clear whether we mean "to create"
or "creating", whether we mean the creation of this world, disregarding
who created it, or the creation including our concern about the creator.
More precisely, we realize that this verbal noun does not speak of a
concrete fact, but of an abstract matter.

By way of explanation, we may say that an action depends on two
elements:

1. The doer himself, who is real, i.e. he is an entity in the
outside.
2. The act which is to be fulfilled and implemented. It can also be an
entity.

For instance, Allah, Who creates the world, is a real entity that gives
entity to all things. There is no entity higher than Allah.[^133] The
world, being created, is also a real entity, because, having been
created by Allah and got its entity in the outside, it could no longer
be regarded as a mental image.

But what about creating? Is it an entity, too? Is it, like the subject
and the object of a verb, an entity? Can we find in the outside
something named "creating"? Or is "creating" an abstract mental concept,
a proportion which we consider to exist between two things (from a
certain view, of course)? Undoubtedly, there is nothing in the outside
named "creating". What is outside is the subject and the verb meaning
the object. But the verbal noun related to the subject cannot be an
entity. It can only be a relation which we admit to be between the
subject and its dependent. When I write something, a letter, I myself am
an entity, the letter is an entity, too. Similarly are the movements of
my hand, the paper and the pen. But the "writing" as something related
to the writer, is not an entity. So, "writing' is an abstract concept
taken from these entities. The hand which moves on the paper at the
command of the writer's will result in the appearance of writings on the
paper, from which we extract a concept and name it "writing", but it is
not a separate entity beside these. All such concepts are abstract ones
extracted from the relation between the subject and the object.

So, as regards the creation of the world, instead of having three
things: Allah, to create and creating, we only have the creator and the
created. When it is recognized by the mind that the world did not come
into existence by itself, but was created by Allah, we, then, say that
Allah is the creator and the world is the created.

Of the other clear "annexed concepts" is the concept of "brotherhood".
You may be given a son by Allah. As long as this is your only son, we
cannot describe him to be a "brother" - whose brother? When Allah grants
you your second son, only then you can say that it is the first's
brother - Hasan is Husayn's brother. This "brotherhood" is nothing but
Hasan and Husayn. We have nothing in the outside except Hasan and
Husayn. There is no third entity named "brotherhood". Brotherhood is an
annexed concept, a correlation between two things. It is not a real
thing and has no entity. What has entity, in this respect, is Hasan and
Husayn. As long as Hasan was the only son he was not a brother. The
concept of brotherhood appeared only when Husayn was born. Did the birth
of Husayn add something to Hasan? Did Hasan find a thing called
"brotherhood" which he did not have in his existence? Hasan did not
change at all. But when another son was born to Hasan's parents, you
extracted from this incident a concept which you called "brotherhood".

Such are the annexed concepts - they are concepts that come true
between two things, without adding anything to either of them. "To
create" and "being created" can similarly be explained. When Allah
created the world nothing was added to Him as a creative. Likewise when
the world was brought into existence, we got nothing in the name of
"creating" along with the world itself, so as to say we have got four
things: "Allah", "creating", "the world" and "being created". In the
outside we have Allah and the world, to create and being created, while
the correlation between these two, the creating, is an extracted
abstract concept.

**Temporal and Non-Temporal Beings**

When the two sides of a correlative matter are controlled by time, the
extracted abstract concept related to the said two sides will also be a
temporal one. That is, when you say: "I wrote a letter", your being will
be controlled by time, because it happened in a materialistic condition
related to a material. The letter, being written in a period of time, is
also temporal. The writing (that relation between you and the letter,
whose accepted infinitive is "to write") is also temporal. The writing
is temporal because the writer is temporal, as well as what is written.
This annexed abstract matter happens in time, too. But when the two
sides of this correlation are non-temporal, the correlation will, of
course, be non-temporal too, since the correlation itself has no
independence of its own. So, if its two sides were non-temporal, the
very concept would not be temporal. So far no problem. Whoever can
correctly recognize the concepts of this proposition and predicate, will
admit that the case is as has been explained.

But if there was a correlation between a non-temporal and a temporal
being, such as is between Allah, who is non-temporal and the world, or
man, who is temporal, there would be a correlation of creating and
createdness. This abstract concept, which consists of correlation and
annexation, is connected from one side to a non-temporal being, Allah,
and from the other side to a temporal being, the world or man. What kind
of correlation can this be? Does it follow the temporal or the
non-temporal being. Naturally, there can be two standpoints, depending
on your own point of view. If you consider its connection to the
non-temporal being, then it is non-temporal, and if you consider its
connection to the temporal being, then it is temporal. But since we are
not well-informed about the non-temporal and cannot quite explicitly
imagine a being that is not conditioned by time, we press our intellect
hard to imagine a mental picture of a being that is outside the limits
of time.

It is the intellectual proof that takes us so far, as otherwise we
cannot by ourselves imagine a being that is outside time, the same as we
cannot imagine a being that is outside place. In which case we shall
continually ask ourselves: if it is in neither time nor place, where is
it then? Perhaps you have, within your argument with yourself about
abstract things, felt that a question keeps pressing upon your mind: How
can an abstract and non-material being be in no need of place? To ask
"where" actually belongs to a being that is in a place, but if it has no
place, we cannot ask "where"?, or "when"? it was, since this is used in
respect to something that is conditioned by time. If a verb can have no
time, no tense, there will be no meaning in asking about the time of its
being carried out.

But this is how our minds are. According to Avicenna, the nature of
imagination is such that we understand what is within time and place,
while we are unable to comprehend what is outside time and place. At any
rate, having understood, through mental reasoning, that Allah is outside
time, and that it is He who creates the time. He is not in a place, but
it is He who creates the place, while all the things of this world are
in time and place. The relation which takes place between Allah and the
things of time and place, is it temporal or non-temporal?

We said that in respect to the creator it is non-temporal, and in
respect to the created it is temporal. But as our mind cannot perceive
the being that does not belong to time and place, it commonly is
inclined to think of its relation with the created, the temporal, and
talk about it as temporal, too.

**The Verb and Its Three Tenses**

A notable point is that in our language, as in many other languages, in
respect to the verb, we observe its main tenses, the past, the present
and the future. Now, if we wanted to speak of something which is not
connected to time, what verb should we use? Suppose we want to say that
Allah, who is non-temporal, had created a being which is also
non-temporal, what verb could we use to denote creation. If we said
"created" we would be using the past tense, that is, a time in the past.
But our supposition was that neither the creator nor the created belongs
to time. So, how can we express such an idea. We know of no vocabulary
in our language to express it, because all the tenses denote a certain
time. Every act must be related to time. So, how are we to tell that a
non-temporal being had been brought to existence by the non-temporal
Allah? We lack such a word. We have but to use the ordinary words used
for temporary acts.

**The Timeless Verb**

Men of literature use a noteworthy expression in this respect. They say
that verbs ascribed to Allah are timeless. For example: ...and Allah is
ever Knowing, Wise".[^134] They say that this "is" is timeless [the
English commentator had added "ever" to denote this meaning, although it
is not in the original Arabic text. trans.]. Probably those who are
acquainted with the Arabic syntax and grammar know this expression to
mean so. That is, the verb, as it is, and according to its position,
requires to denote time. But in this very instance it is timeless.

No time is observed in respect to Allah's acts. The indication of time
is to be omitted from them. When we say that this verb is timeless we
mean that time has been omitted from it, i.e. past tense minus its past
time. What is observed here is its relation with the subject,
disregarding time, since it has no place, too, for the simple reason
that neither its creator nor the created is temporal.

Consequently, the relation is also not temporal. But when Allah creates
a temporal thing, it is created with the limits of time, while Allah,
who is non-temporal and who encompasses all times, His relations to the
past, the present and the future are equal. He is not subject to any
time - dimension to be bound by a certain limit of time. He encircles
all times.

When we want to ascribe a temporal verb to the non-temporal, what kind
of a verb must we use? Will it denote time or not? Being ascribed to the
non-temporal Allah, it should be non-temporal, too, and being ascribed
to a created thing, it should be related to time. To throw more light on
this, imagine a piece of a string or a rope, of which one end is
connected to the supernatural which has no time, and its other end is
connected to the temporal nature. It seems that this example cannot
incarnate the truth, yet it will do as an example. Or you may imagine a
cone whose base is in the infinitive and whose head is placed on a
concrete thing. It is possible for man to imagine such a thing.

The base which is in the infinitive has no limit, no distinct point and
no time, but the cone's head connected to the world of limits must
inevitably rest on a particular spot, where the limits, time and place
are distinct. Similar are the acts of Allah. They are of two ends, one
is connected to the limitless Allah, while the other end is connected to
the created which is captured by the bounds of time and place. At one
end it is connected to the world of constancy, eternity, infinity and
divinity, and at the other end it is connected to the world of the
limits, bounds, time and place.

**Allah's Timed Acts**

Consequently, it can be said that Allah's acts which are connected to
temporal and material things, have two aspects, one is that which is
connected to Allah, it is non-temporal. The act that is issued by Him
does not happen in a frame of time. The other aspect connection to this
world would be temporal. As a matter of course, this connection is an
abstract one. We imagine the existence of such a connection between
Allah and the creation, and say that the end with Allah is timeless, and
the end with the creation is timed. Such an act, therefore, is, on the
one side, untimed and not gradual, while, on the other side, it is
timed. Why? Because it is issued by Allah who is beyond gradualness,
since gradualness is twin to time. Because of this we say that all
things, even the materialistic ones, are created by Allah without
time.

On His part, He just says: Bet It is a will of Him. When Allah's Will
decides that there should be a world and human beings, this Will happen
in no time. He, of course, does not need to move, as it were, any hand
or limb to "make" something. So, when Allah wants to create something,
He has but to will, and there the thing is. But the created thing is
governed by time.

**Time as a Dimension of a Corporeal Being**

It had already been proved that length, width and size are dimensions
of the material being, likewise is time. It is another of its
dimensions. Everything has its particular time, as it has its particular
length, width and size. This had been proved by Sadrul Muta'allihin of
Shiraz (may Allah be pleased with him). This is other than that problem
which Albert Einstein said to have solved concerning time being the
fourth dimension. The former idea is much wider than the latter.
However, we are not to discuss it at this instance. If it is solved to
us that time is originally the dimension of the very world, not a vessel
in which the world is placed, and that it appeared simultaneously with
the appearance of the world itself, we will very well understand that
Allah's act does not happen in time, since there was no time yet.

. It was with the creation of the world that time appeared, just as the
world's length, width and depth, which also appeared together with its
creation. If we could understand that time is another dimension of this
being, we would come to the conclusion that to create a thing means
creating its time, since time is not something separate from the things.
Therefore, Allah's acts, so far as connected to Him, are not
characterised by time. When He creates a temporal thing, its time is
also created with it, because time is one of that thing's dimensions,
just as when a table is made its size is simultaniously made, too. The
size is not made separately. Wherever there is a table there is its
size, too. Similar is time.

Therefore, as the world is temporal, its creation is temporal, too, but
as it had been issued by the non-temporal Allah its creation is
non-temporal, too. But how? Like this: It is Allah alone who, when
willing to create the world, says: Be! and there it is. But what kind of
a world it would be? A world of a billion years old, and of, say, a
billion km. long.

When Allah wanted to create the length' of the world, had He to go
along the length while creating it? Had He to be present in the place?
When He wants to create a being with length or size, has He, like an
architect, who wants to draw a line on the ground, to walk along the
line? Is He to be with the length? Certainly not! Allah is non-spatial.
Likewise, He need not go along the time when He creates a temporal
creation, since He is never simultanious with time. Neither Allah nor
His act, as far as it is ascribed to Him, has time, but if the act is
ascribed to a temporal creation, it will be temporal, too. Therefore, if
we consider an act as relevant to Allah, none of His acts are temporal:
"His command, when He wills anything, is only to say to it: Be! so it
is[^135] What command? No matter what it is. Material or non-material
"when He intends anything".

The opinion of some commentators that this ayah belongs to non-material
thing is not in conformity with the ayah's generalization. The Qur'an
does not say that when Allah wants to create any non-material thing, He
says to it "Be!". It says "When He intends anything He says to it 'Be!'
so it is.". This is because Allah is non-temporal, and similar is His
act. But what about the created? All the material creations have
temporal and spatial dimensions. We say that the creation of the earth
and the heavens was completed in six periods: "And he it is Who created
the heavens and the earth in six days"[^136] or the creation of man which
takes nine months. But it does not mean that Allah accompanies these
events along the time of their fulfillment and development, such as to
be present at the time of ejaculating the semen, then at the time of its
becoming a clot, then a lump of flesh, and so on. No, Allah does not
move along time. All the times are in Him.

So, how is it that a human being is created in nine months, i.e. He
creates something whose temporal dimension is nine months, and it has,
at the same time, its particular length, width and depth. Taking these
facts into consideration, the ayah, in its generality, comes true in
respect to all things. Even in respect to a thing whose creation
requires billions of years, we can say that Allah tells it to be, and
there it is. What does it mean to say to something: "Be!"? It means: "O
you whose age is six million year, come to existence!" What is it? It is
a being which had been continuous for six million years, but not that
Allah had been moving along those six million years, from one point to
another (temporal point). A million light year or a single minute makes
no difference to Him. Similarly being spatial is the characteristic of
the created, not the Creator.

In short, Allah's acts, taken as issued from Him, are non-temporal
because Allah Himself is non-temporal, but taken as belonging to
material and temporal beings. They have their temporal dimension, as
well as the acts issued from them.

**Allah's Will and Talk**

In the previous discussion concerning whether Allah's acts are prompt
or gradual, we referred to some ayahs which denoted that when Allah
willed to create something He just said to it "Be!" and there it was.
Such ayahs spoke of Allah's Will and talk. Here also arises the
following question: Does Allah's Will, or speech, take time to be
fulfilled? Taking into consideration what has already been said, the
answer will be easy. Considering Allah's Will and speech as being
ascribed to Him, they are neither gradual nor temporal. But considering
them belonging to a gradual and temporal matter, they can be regarded
so. However, to expound this subject, which is extensively handled in
the theological and philosophical writings, we shall touch upon it a
little.

**Attributes of Essence and of Acts** Firstly, we must say that Allah's
attributes are divided into two groups: the Attributes of Essence, and
the Attributes of Acts. The Attributes of Essence are those which the
mind independently comprehends, without having to consider any of His
creations. For example, life is of Allah's Attributes of Essence: Allah,
there is no god save Him, the everliving."[^137] The divine life is a
divine attribute, and it has nothing to do with the existence or
non-existence of any other living being. Allah is a living Being. He is
not a dead thing like stone.

Life is an attribute which we ascribe to Allah's Essence as far as the
very Essence is concerned, not that something comes forth from the
Essence. Similarly Allah's Knowledge of Himself is an attribute of
Essence. Allah is Knowing. Allah's Knowledge of Himself is nothing but
His Essence. Similarly the attribute of power, which means He is a
powerful being. Even if we take the concept of power to include the
concept of free will and explain power as to be something that can be
used whenever wanted. He is not compelled, and no one can force Him to
do anything. However, power is an abstract concept extracted from His
sacred and divine state.

On the other hand, there are attributes which are ascribed to Allah
only with connection to a creature. Such attributes are called
"Attributes of Acts", or the attributes abstracted from the divine acts,
such as: The Creator, the Provider, the Manager, and the like, which
denote Allah's acts. Without thinking of a created thing we cannot say:
Allah is the Creator, or He is the Provider without there being someone
needing to be provided for. This is unlike the Attributes of Essence,
such as life. When we say: Allah is alive, no object is needed here.
Yet, if we consider the concept of "the Creator" to include "Power",
i.e. the one who has "Power" to create, then it would be referring to an
Attribute of Essence. Allah is the potential Creator of the world before
its appearance. That is, in Him is the "Power" to create it. But when
there is no creating, there can be no attribute as Creator. The
existence of the two is simultaneous. Whenever there is a created there
is a creator, too. When there is no creator there can be no creating and
created, and the concept of Creator cannot be abstracted, too, unless
our intention is directed to His "Power" of creating, in which case it
means an Attribute of Essence. That is why the divine and theological
books divide the attributes into Attributes of Essence and Attributes of
Acts. After this dividing there were discussions about some other
attributes, whether they were among the attributes of Essence or of
Acts, such as: to want, to will, to talk, etc.

One of the earliest subjects discussed by the theologians is Allah's
words. It is said the 'Ilmul Kalam [theology] began with discussing
whether Allah's 'Kalam [talk] is eternal or new. Is Allah's talk to be
abstract from His Essence, or from His creation? A group, Ash'aris,
believed that the Qur'an, Allah's words, was eternal and one of Allah's
Attributes.

On the other end, the Mu'tazilahs insisted on saying that the Qur'an
was new and created, and it was not eternal. The situation was so grave
between the two groups that they began to accuse one another of
infidelity.

However, the dispute about whether Allah's words and His Will are of
the Attributes of Essence or of Acts, continued till the blooming of the
Islamic philosophy. Even the philosophers who used to consider the
philosophic questions through the Islamic standpoint had their disputes
and differences, until the matters ripened and became more acceptable.
The philosophers used to say that Allah's Will is His Knowledge of what
is good. When we say that Allah has willed to do an act, we mean that He
knew that that act was the best and the most advisable, and since they
believed that Allah's knowledge was an Attribute of Essence, it was
natural to regard His Will also to be of the Attributes of Essence. They
would sometimes take Allah's Words to be an Attribute of Essence, too.

**The Attribute of Will as an Act**

If one wanted to disregard the purely philosophic way of handling such
a question, and study it from the Qur'anic standpoint, what should one
say? If "will" is taken to mean "knowledge", then it is an Attribute of
Essence because "knowledge" is an Attribute of Essence. If the reality
of "speech" is Allah's knowledge, it will also be an Attribute of
Essence. But as regards the will and the words stated in the Qur'an, are
they to be taken as such, or are they differently regarded by the
Qur'an? Disregarding the mental arguments of the philosophers, and
resorting, instead, to the method of the exegeses of the Qur'an and the
study of its concepts, we realize that the "will" is undoubtedly
regarded by the Qur'an as an act, and thus it should be of the
Attributes of Acts: His command, when He wills anything, is only to say
to it: Be!" so it is!"[^138]

Is it possible to speak of the Attributes of Essence in the conditional
or temporal moods? Can we say: during Allah's life, or when He was
living, He did a certain act? No, of course not, because life is the
very Essence of Allah, and cannot be expressed in conditional or
temporal speech forms. It is true that we do not regard as temporal what
is ascribed to Allah, though temporal, i.e. we do omit the time from it,
but the style of speaking of Attributes of Essence is different from the
style of speaking of Attributes of Acts. There should be a justification
for using a conditional or temporal sentence.

Therefore, according to the Qur'an, willing and talking are two
attributes of acts. Allah says: "And Allah spoke to Moses direct".[^140]
Allah's speaking to Moses, to the prophets or to the angels, is
abstracted from the state of act, i.e. there must be angels or else so
as to may receive Allah's words and understand them. In this case we can
say: "He said to them, spoke to them". As long as there is no listener,
there will be no talking. So, talking is an attribute of acts.

But here is a point worthy of noting. All these attributes stem from
the single Attributes of Essence. For example, creating stems from
Power. If there was no Power of creation there could be no creating.
Will is also Allah's acts, and its source, as a matter of fact, is an
Attribute of Essence. Which one? Is it, as the philosophers say, the
will of knowing what is best? To extensively handle this subject is out
of our concern here. But those who have some studies of this subject are
to pay . attention to the fact that the origin of will is "to love",
which is of Allah's Attributes of Essence. Actually, the very word
"will" or "want" is used in the Qur'an to mean "love": "you want the
vanities of this world, while Allah wants (for you) the
Hereafter".[^141]

"To will" and "to want" are the same in meaning, though "will" has
another meaning that denotes taking decision, in which case it refers to
a "work" that is willed by the doer. If the will mentioned in the ayah
denotes decision on doing a work, then it must belong to work. But it
says that you want this world, which is not your "work". So, "will" here
means something else, i.e. you like and want it. "Want" in the Persian
language has, like its Arabic equivalent, two meanings, too: one
denoting decision to do something, such as when you say: "I wanted to
get up but I could not." So, "I wanted" means here "I willed". But
sometimes we say: "I want" to mean "I like" or "I desire". Willing, in
the Arabic language, also has two meanings: to like, to accept, to
approve, to be pleased with, and another meaning is to decide, which,
after all, also denotes liking doing something, to assent. Consequently,
there is a kind of connection between "to decide" and "to like".

The origin of willing to act is not only knowledge. Knowledge is, of
course, necessary. Without knowledge one would not voluntarily carry out
an act. But the concept of wanting and willing is proportionate to
loving and desiring, not to knowing, because desire results in deciding
to perform the act. However, I think that to will is an attribute of the
act, though its origin is self-willing, meaning love. In other words,
the will can, from one aspect, be regarded as an Attribute of Act,
while, from another aspect, it can be regarded as an Attribute of
Essence. If it denotes deciding on doing something, it is of the
Attributes of Act, but if it refers to its origin, the Divine Essence,
denoting love, then it is of the Attributes of Essence.

This idea is inferred from the writings of Sadrul Muta'llihin and the
late 'Allama at-Tabataba'i (may Allah be pleased with him). They
explicitly said that the will can sometimes be of the Attributes of Act,
and sometimes of the Attributes of Essence-from a certain point it is of
the Attributes of Act, and from another point it is of the Attributes of
Essence. Now, let us see what Allah's Will, as an Attribute of Act,
means. Our decision to do something is usually preceded by some
preliminary steps. When we want to decide upon doing something we first
think it over, count its prons and cons, and accordingly we make one
decision to do or not to do it. This would be our will to do or not to
do something. But in respect to Allah, the Exalted, Who says: "His
command, when He Wills anything, is only to say to it: 'Be!' so it is",
words like "when" have no meaning, since Allah's acts are detached from
time, and, as long as they are ascribed to His sacred Being, they are
non-temporal. So, how is it that we say: "When He wills"? We had already
said that if the attributes of act are looked at as being abstracted
from a temporal act, they can be regarded as temporal. Allah's Will,
when abstracted from a temporal act referring to a connection between
Him and His act, will be temporal, too.

Seeing that the act was not implemented contrary to Allah's Will, and
that during its implementation it received His contention and pleasure,
we regard the will to act as an additional attribute, as, actually, the
time limitation belongs to the act, not to its doer.

But if it is looked at through its connection to Allah, the act is to
be detached from time limits, as we had formerly explained. So, what is
the truth about Allah's Will? His Will means that His Acts are not
carried out under the pressure and force of any subduer, and He likes
doing them.

Later on we shall have discussions about the things Allah loves to do,
and that the events that happen in the world belong to His Will. Now we
turn to the Divine Talking When one talks the air quivers, that is, by
passing the air through the respiratory tract to the vocal cords,
sound-waves will be produced. When these sound waves enter the ear, they
vibrate the tympanic membrance, and they will be translated, according
to a certain process, into intelligible signs to be understood by the
brain. So, if Allah produced a sound exactly like human voices,
producing sound-waves transforming intelligible concepts to the hearer,
there would be grounds to say that He talked.

Moses (A.S.), when on Mount Tur, heard a voice coming from the tree -
the tree from which a light was glowing - telling him: "O Moses! Surely,
I am Allah, the Lord of the worlds".[^142] Supposing that Allah had
produced the voice from it, and it was heard by Moses (A.S.), then it
would be right to say that Allah talked to Moses (A.S.). But if there
were other beings whose means of hearing are not the ear and the
sound-waves - such as if the angels way of hearing is not through
corporeal ears and air - talking with them would be in a different way,
of which we have no idea.

We just know that Allah expresses Himself to everybody through "an act"
understood by him, and this "act" is called "talking". In such cases,
however, there must be a hearer with the ability to understand the
subject under certain conditions, before being allowed to say that Allah
talked and the hearer heard: "And when your Lord said to the angels: 'I
am going to place in the earth a vicegerent'"[^143] He talked to the
angels and they heard Him. But we know nothing about the mode of that
conversation. We only know that Allah made them understand His
intention. As to a non-existent being which Allah wants to bring into
existence, how does He tell it: "Be!"? His command, when He wants
something, is only to say to it: 'Be!' so it is."[^144]

Undoubtedly, Allah's talk here is different from other talks.

As far as Allah's talk with the angels, Moses (A.S.) or other prophets
is considered disregarding the mode of the conversation, there was an
addressee who understood the meaning intended by the speaker. But when
there is no being yet, in what mode will Allah's talk to it be? Should
there actually be any talk, there must also be a hearer. But as it is
supposed that there is no hearer yet, talking in common meaning will not
fit in. In such cases the talking, in fact, is a kind of metaphor, i.e.
there is no interim of time between Allah's willing and the
implementation of the thing. No sooner had the command been issued than
the thing was implemented. This is a metaphor denoting that when Allah
intends to do something, there will be no delaying and no hindering
condition. Allah's act, being His own, is never conditional, since, as a
Creator, He is in need of nothing. It is the created who is in need all
the time.

**The Effectiveness of the Factor and the Receptivity of the
Recipient**

Here a question arises: Does Allah create the things of the world with
or without an agent? There is no doubt that the creation of the things
of this world are governed by a system of causation, cause and effect.
The sun is the cause of heat, the rain comes from the clouds. When there
is no cloud there can be no rain. The cloud is moved by the wind, and so
on. All the phenomena of the world appear only through causes and means.
So, are they not conditional on these causes? Without father and mother
no human being can be brought into existence, except a single instance
in which Allah had caused Jesus (A.S.) to be born without having a
father, and another exception in which Adam (A.S.) was created without
any father and mother. Except in those two instances, all human beings
exist by means of mothers and fathers. Do fathers and mothers have no
effect on the existence of their children? Of course, they have.

Through the mother and father Allah brings their children into
existence. So, this act of Allah is conditional on the existence of a
father and a mother. Heat is conditional on the existence of the sun and
light. If it is so, then Allah's acts cannot be implemented without
means. So, Allah's acts are conditional, too. What answer can be given
to this? Here is the answer: The conditions needed for the appearance of
an effect are divided into two groups: One covers the conditions of the
effectiveness of the factor, that it, without carrying out the given
condition. The factor will not have the power to be effective. The other
group covers the conditions of the receptivity of the recipient.

The first condition for a teacher to be efficient is to have good
knowledge of the subject he is to teach. He is to know it well. In this
case the teacher is the "factor", the one who "gives" his knowledge. The
teaching is the "act", which is implemented only when the teacher knows
his subject. So, the condition for a teacher to be a qualified one is
that he must have prepared himself to be a good teacher. This is called
the effectiveness of the factor.

But sometimes it happens that there can be too many students in a
class, in which case a loudspeaker should be used by the teacher, as
otherwise some of the back benchers may not hear the teacher's voice.
But this loudspeaker does not increase his ability. His ability is to
know the lesson and explain it. That is what is related to the teacher.
But there must be a means for the student to be benefitted by the
lesson. This means increases the receptivity of the recipient, the
student, but not the effectiveness of the factor, as it adds no
perfection to it. The means offers a condition for the perfection of the
listener, not the speaker. There is no deficit in the teacher. It is the
recipient who is in need of a means to receive the lesson.

As a matter of fact, this example does not, all in all, fit in our
argument. An example, we may say, brings nearer on one side and keeps at
a distance on other sides.

**The Conditions of the Recipient's Receptivity**

If earth is to be changed into man, it must undergo certain stages
under certain conditions. If food (vegetables, meat, etc.) is to turn
into blood, it must undergo some stages of certain changes until at last
it changes into blood, and later into a muscle. This condition belongs
to matter. The condition for a matter to reach this last stage, is to go
through the middle stages, similarly, when you want to reach a certain
town, you will have to cover the distance to that town, whether on foot,
by car or by any other means of transport.

This condition is connected to matter. The changes in matter are
subject to these conditions, and this is not a deficiency in Allah's
Power. If He wills to turn earth into man, the earth must undergo some
stages before turning into man. If Allah wanted to take you from Tehran
to Qum He must pass you through stages of transport to take you there.
If somebody objectingly says that Allah is capable of taking us there
without having to pass through any stages, he is mistaken. If there is
moving, journeying or taking someone to somewhere, the common steps are
to be taken, as without passing through the middle stages no goal can be
reached. Therefore, supposing that Allah turns a being into another, or
moving from one place to another, requires that certain stages should be
passed through, and this is not a deficiency in Allah's Power. In other
words, Allah may, in an instance, want to create a being, which is not
preceded by past nor present conditions, since it is free from matter
and not subject temporal and special conditions, He has the power to
create it. But such a being would not be made of matter, because a
materialistic being cannot come into existence without passing through
all the stages prescribed for it, in which case such a being would be an
abstract, of which uncountable ones had been created by Allah.

In "Nahjul Balaghah" you read that the heavens are crowded with angels
created by Allah, such that there is no room even for a foot, unless an
angel is engaged in genuflection or kneeling in worship. They are unlike
the beings of this world which we know to be made of matter that under
go many stages of changing. They exist all at once and their perfections
are in their inner potentiality. But if Allah wants to create a world of
matter, it must be created accompanied with movement, time and place.
The conditions of this world's phenomena are of the kind of the
receptivity of the recipient, not of the kind of effectiveness of the
factor. Thus, Allah's act, when ascribed to the Divine Potency and His
limitless Power, is unconditional.


