The Extent of Divine Potency and Will
=====================================

**The Relation Between Power and Will**

Among the theological discussions concerning Divine Power and Will,
there is the question whether everything does fall within the circle of
the Divine Power, or whether the Divine Power covers only certain
things, or whether the things which belong to Divine Power also belong
to His Will. That is, is not there any limitation of Divine Power, as we
frequently read in the Qur'an: "Surely Allah is capable of (doing)
everything."[^145] Regarding the Divine Will there are many ayahs to the
effect that Allah does whatever He wills. It is not that if Allah willed
something it may not be implemented.

The Divine Will is ever-effective, and whenever the implementation of
something is willed by Allah it would be carried out. The following are
examples of such ayahs: "...Allah does what He Wills"[^146] and:
"...surely Allah does what He Wills"[^147]

**Allah Does not Will the Impossible**

In this respect many questions are put forth. For example: Can Allah
produce impossible things? Can He create another Allah like Himself? Can
He grant to one of His creatures all that He has, such that He loses
everything? Can He contain a mountain into an atom or, say, in a hen's
egg? and so on. That is, are we to imagine that the meaning of saying:
He is capable of doing everything, is that He must be able to do all
such things, and that if He could not, it would mean that His ability is
limited? In order to give a logical answer to these questions, a brief
explanation of the concept of ability would be necessary. By saying that
somebody is capable of doing something, or creating something, we mean
that something is creatable or can be done, but it only needs a power to
bring to existence this existable and implementable thing. To put it in
a technical term we say that a power-dependent must be a possible being.
Ability means doing what is possible to be done.

The conclusion is that ability does not cover the impossible. To ask:
"Is it possible to create the impossible?" is a wrong question, because
it contradicts itself. If it is impossible to exist, how can it be
expected to exist? In other words, ability is dependant on the "thing".
The impossible is not a "a thing", it is "nothing". Thus, when we say
that Allah is able to do "everything", we must remember that the
impossible is not a "thing". A thing is that which is doable possible to
do. Here another question may be asked: There are many things, which are
thought to be impossible and not power-dependent, yet we see or hear
that they had been done by Allah. For example, if it is said that a huge
heap of fire had been turned into a cool garden of flowers, we would
say: impossible! Fire burns the flower, never turns to flower. How can a
heap of kindled fire change into flowers? This is impossible, but we do
know that Allah had turned the fire, in which Prophet Abraham (A.S.) was
thrown, into a garden of flowers. To answer this, we must explain the
kinds of the impossible.

**Kinds of the Impossible**

Things which are regarded, in the arguments of the gnostics as "the
impossible", are divided into three kinds: Self-impossible,
occurance-impossible and common-impossible.

The self-impossible is that which is supposed to bear in itself its
contradiction, such as to say that the light which is dark, or the light
which has no light, the black which is white or the black which is not
black. This very supposition is impossible, i.e. the very supposition is
self-contradicting. (If we ask: a light which is like darkness in
proportion to another light, it is a different subject. But the
supposition that a light, though being a light, is not a light, is a
contradiction.) So, the supposition which contradicts itself is called
self-impossible.

Occurance-impossible means that the supposition in itself is not
impossible, but that we have added to it another supposition which made
it impossible, such as supposing the appearance of an effect without its
exclusive cause. In this case the appearance of this effect is not
impossible in itself, because it certainly comes into existence when its
exclusive cause is there. But we added the supposition that its cause
was not there. So, the occurance of such an effect without its exclusive
cause is .impossible.

Furthermore, this is not a power - dependant case, since it is
contradictory. By saying that this effect has an exclusive cause we mean
that without its exclusive cause it cannot come into existence. So, to
suppose that it can be implemented without its exclusive cause is but a
contradiction. Therefore, ability covers neither the self-impossible nor
the occurence-impossible. It belongs to common-impossible. Miracles are
of the common-impossible kind, that is, the appearance of something not
from its common outlet. For example, when somebody is dead, he would not
commonly come to life again, but the mind does not see it impossible to
find one way or another to bring it into life once again, and there will
be no contradiction in it. But the people, commonly believe that there
is only one cause for that.

So, when an extraordinary event happened they thought that an
impossible event had happened! All miracles are imagined to be of the
impossibles, since no other cause is thought for them. But, on a second
thought, we realize that the mind does not regard them to be impossible.
In other words, people think that every event has a single exclusive
cause which cannot be replaced by another cause. Consequently, they
think that without that very cause it will be impossible for the event
to happen.

Where does a flower grow? It grows in a soil with almost a fixed
temperature, together with moisture.. Then the flower's seed is sowed.
If there is no water; if the temperature is higher or lower then
necessary, no flower will grow. If there is no flower - seed no flower
will appear. So as far as we know, flowers grow in this way. But is
there any other way of growing flowers since we have never heard in our
whole life of other than this common way, we say that it is impossible.
But when we see another way of growing flowers, we realize that it is
not impossible, and that it is possible to grow flowers in a way
different from the common one. Even a man with a will overcoming natural
forces can, to some extent, perform it, let alone Allah's Will intending
to perform something not through its natural causes and common way.
Here, of course, is an unknown cause, not that an effect appears without
any cause. This effect has another cause which is unknown to us.

To bring the idea nearer, we give an example: There are many phenomena
whose causes are still unknown to man who thought them impossible to
happen. Then he discovered that they can happen through other ways. The
new inventions, which were possible by using the discoveries of the
covered secrets of nature, are of this category. If somebody said, years
ago, that he could talk to you from several thousand kilometers and you
would hear him, you would have certainly told him that it was
impossible, while now everybody knows that it is possible.

The supernatural causes are also one way of the implementation of
phenomena, though we do not know them or cannot get to them. But it is
not that there is no such ways. So, the common-impossibles (i.e. what
people think to be impossible, which actually they are not) are power
dependant, and Allah is, was and will be, able to carry them out. They
are the very extraordinary events, miracles and wonders performed by the
prophets and godly men.

**The Connection Between Ability and Will**

When we say that Allah is able to do everything, we mean that if He
willed He would do it, if not He would not do it. So, when we compare
the concept of ability with the concept of will, we realize that the
scale of will is more limited than the scale of ability.

A simple example: you can talk or keep silent in a given moment, that
is, you have the ability to do both. If you want to speak you speak, and
if you did not want to speak you keep silent. So, your power covers
both. But which one do you will? You will one of them. You either will
to speak or to remain silent. So, your power is wider than your will,
because ability covers both action and non-action, while the will covers
only one of them, either action or non-action. Man has the ability to do
something or not to do it in the same moment, but he cannot will the
existence and non-existence of a thing in the same time. Thus, if we
compare between ability and will, we realize that the range of will is
more limited than that of ability.

Similarly, Allah does not will all that He is able to do. So many thing
He is able to do, but He does not want to. Here one may ask: what is it
that limits Allah's Will such that He does not will everything?
Sometimes it happens that the will has nothing to do with doing or not
doing an act, for the simple reason that to put these two together would
produce a contradiction and an impossible, such as to will the existence
of the sun and to will it not to exist at the very same time. It is
obvious that such a thing is impossible. Yet, there are other things,
which though not impossible, Allah would not will them. Why? What
prevents Allah's Will from willing certain things?

Probably you had already heard that some scholars of theology say that
"The issuance of ugly acts from Allah is impossible". This is exactly
what we have been saying. But the principal question is: "Is Allah
unable to produce an ugly act?" We do know that His ability is
unlimited, and that He is able to do whatever is possible to do. But not
all that is within the ability is willed. Allah's will does not cover
particular things. He does not want to do certain acts. He does not want
to send the wrongdoers to Paradise. Why? If He did what would happen?
Why Allah's Will does not cover this act? There are many other things
which are not willed by Allah.

The simple answer given in this respect is that reason says that this
act is bad, therefore Allah would not want to do it, nor would He will
it. As a matter of course, an obvious objection can be raised here: Does
Allah take orders from reason? Reason is one of His creatures; did He
create it to issue its orders to Him, and to write down a list of
instructions for Him?

**Does Reason Rule Allah?**

Some say that, in order to stop this problem, we claim that by reason
we do not mean the human intellect, but it is Allah's intellect itself
that tells Him not to do this. So, He is not ruled by a created being,
but by His own mind. This answer can, to some extent, be acceptable to
the layman and convincing. But upon a deeper thought we realize that it
cannot be a correct answer, firstly because Allah is a Simple Being in
whom there is no entity called mind so that another entity may obey it.
Knowledge, power, life and all the Attributes of Essence are His very
Essence - a single and simple one and with only a single entity. But to
say that Allah's mind issues orders to Him would mean that there are two
entities in His Essence: a commanding mind and an obeying one, while
such a thing is impossible in respect of Allah.

Furthermore, mind's function is to understand the concepts through
acquiring knowledge. The mind which understands the good and bad, and
enjoins what to do and not to do, is a mind which understands the
concepts, and the concepts are of acquired knowledge, while Allah's is
intuitive, not acquired knowledge. In other words, to use the word
"mind" in respect to Allah is a mistake. What are we to say, then? What
does it mean to say that the act which is disapproved by the mind is
impossible to be done by Allah? It neither means that the act in itself
is impossible, nor that there is a ruler whose orders Allah is to obey,
nor that there is a power which stops the act, as in which case Allah
would be affected by a factor which blocks His act, preventing Him from
willing. Whatever the factor may be, it would mean that Allah is under
the effect of that factor, while Allah is a Being who would not be under
any effect. Actually it is He Who has His effect on everything, and will
never be effected at all.

By way of answering this question, we must first study the "will". What
does it mean to say that somebody "wills" to do something? When we want
to carry out an act, how do we will it? Inside us there are factors that
attract us. They crystalize through our desires and change into special
forms, such as the desire for food, for talking, for self-assertion and
many other desires known of man. These desires and inclination take
shape under certain material conditions and interactions. When we feel
hungry a strong desire for food appears in us. The same is true with our
other desires which are connected to our different instincts. When a
desire starts inside us, we think it over to see if there is anything
preventing us from meeting it and that it brings no harm to us, in this
world or in the Hereafter, then that desire can be satisfied. In this
way our will is implemented. So, the truth of the will is that it is a
crystalized inner desire, under particular conditions, accompanied with
the usual ways of reasoning, finding out its pros and cons, its good and
bad sides etc. Finding out that it is profitable and harmless, or its
loss is less than its interest, it takes shape into a will leading to
its being carried out. Thus, there can be no will without there being a
desire cherished by the willer.

There are inside every being certain desires which cause the appearance
of his will to satisfy them. For example, a hen does not will to have
babies and never thinks of it (we, of course, have no knowledge of a
hen's thinking, but we only guess), or the sparrow which builds its nest
attached to the ceiling or near it, in a corridor, in a certain shape,
but never hexagonal, contrary to the bees which build their hives in a
hexagonal shape, and they never think of building them in, say, the
cubic shape. The sparrow, too, never wills to have its nest in a
hexagonal shape.

A special instinct in this creature appears, under particular
conditions, in the form of a desire, and ends the performance of an act.
Our will also stems from a desire deep inside us, i.e. coincides with
our being and psychological disposition. There are creatures which live
on certain food which we never desire to have them and we even feel
repulsion on seeing such foods being eaten. You may have seen the pigs
eating filth and stinking food, with such a good appetite that is quite
disgusting to us. Some other animals find it very delicious to feed on
rotten and bad smelling food.

Had we known their language, we would have heard them smack their lips,
saying: "How delicious this is!" whereas we would be filled with nausea
at the sight of it. We would never wish to have such food, though it is
palotable to those animals. Why do we never will to eat a rotten, filthy
and stinking food, nor to do any disgraceful and disapproved act?
Because these are not in harmony with our beings. We are not
instinctively attracted to such acts. There is a will when there is
drive, though this remains vague until particular conditions obtain and
the will appears. If we feel no inclination towards something, we will
never will to do it, the same as we will never will to share with a pig
its meal.

**Matching Factor of the Will**

Consequently, no will can take place without a preparation and a cause.
The will has an instinctive element, an inner traction, which, under
particular conditions, takes shape and turns into a desire, causing us
to will to do something.

In short, no will is possible without the act matching the actor. There
must be a sort of aptness between the willer and the thing he wills.
This aptness appears in the form of an inclination, which, in its turn
and under certain conditions, changes into a will. But, in respect to
Allah, when we say that He, the Exalted, wills to do something, the act
must be suitable to be done by Him. Yet, it is not that there should be
first an inclination in Him, and then it gets stronger and stronger
until it becomes an eagerness, then He considers it over to deem it
advisable or not, as such methods belong to the possible beings - a
being that is ill-informed, weak, poor, etc. Allah is above being
affected by events and outside factors, or being under any effect, or
unknowingness, so that He may want to understand something by way of
thinking it over. These notions are inappropriate in respect to Allah.

Allah's Will is connected to an act that is appropriate and agreeable
to Him - a fact which is an aspect of His perfection, i.e. any act that
is perfect is of Allah's Absolute Perfection, since He is the Unlimited
Perfect One. Everything that has an aspect of perfection is proportional
to Allah's Essence, and enjoys His consent in proportion to its amount
of perfection. But as for the aspects of imperfection, fault, defect,
vice and nothingness (all of which actually stem from nothingness),
because of their being so, are not willed by Allah. Allah is perfect,
likes perfection and His Will belongs to something which has an aspect
of perfection. "Allah is beautiful and likes beauty".[^148] Allah does
not like any ugly act, and thus, His Will never belongs to an ugly act.
Why? Because it is not inproportion to Him. This answer makes it clear
why Allah does not will to do everything. It is because it has no aspect
of perfection. If an act has an aspect of perfection, it may be, because
of that aspect, willed by Allah.

**The Best System**

Here we are to consider another point in order to completely solve this
question: Allah may create a being in a particular way that it would not
be dependent on anything from outside itself, such as the abstracts. It
is not to appear from anything, nor to live on anything. It will be
self-sufficient being. Allah creates such beings endowed with
perfection, according to a speech of Amirul Mu'minin [Ali ibn Abi Talib]
(A.S.) in which he said: "There is no footing in the heavens without
being occupied by an angel created by Allah - no shortage of them. They
are so many that they are uncountable. Their number is out of my or your
reckoning, nor can we, even with an astrologic scales, count the numbers
of the beings, their quantity or their quality."

But, on this earth, the appearance of a being cannot happen isolated
from other things. It is the nature of this world to be dependent, and
that every being should be in need of the others. The human being
existing on this earth is created from semen. Without the semen no human
being is created. Once he is created he is to live on other things to
stay alive: he is to breathe the air, to drink water, etc. and to digest
and assimilate them in order to live. So, the existence of a being in
this world equals the vanishing of other things from it. This is a
characteristic of the world of matter. It is a world of struggle,
limitedness, communication and consolidation. In such a world, the
survival and perfection of a being means the imperfection and
destruction of other beings.

Now, if Allah wills to create this world, a world containing
imperfections while principally Allah's Will does not cover
imperfection - it means that He actually wants the perfect beings to
come to existence, but these perfect beings depend on the imperfections
of other beings. Those imperfections are called, in the terms of
philosophy, "corollarial objectives". That is, since our principal
objectives cannot be fulfilled except through some other unintended
requisites, we have but to approve and accept them , though they are not
wanted for themselves. For example, man eats meat and vegetables in
order to grow. From this point of view, Allah wants these to be eaten,
but as corollarial objectives not as direct ones. Therefore, we are to
look at the world as a whole. If there are any interactions in the world
of matter, they must be in a way leading to the appearance of valuable
perfections. It is this world that belongs to Allah's Will.

On counting all the imperfections and perfections, adding and
subtracting the pros and cons, and seeing that the perfections are
heavier in weight, we say that such a world is willed by Allah. But if
these interactions result in the abolishing of even the preliminary
perfections, such a world would not be willed by Allah. Thus, Allah's
Will originally belongs to perfection. However, when the perfection of a
thing encounters the imperfection of another on a competition ground, if
the perfection is triumphant, that imperfection will be willed by Allah
as a corollary.

Consequently, we conclude that the system of this world is the best.
That is, Allah had created it in such a way that its good overcomes its
bad, leading to its perfection and procuring His pleasure. As to the
world's deficiencies, shortcomings, faults, defects, weaknesses and
abnormalities, they are not originally intended for themselves. They are
as preliminaries required for the development of another being.

By referring to the Qur'anic ayahs we realize that it declares that the
world of nature is entirely intended for the development of man. That
is, the original intention is that great perfection to which man can
attain, should he press on proceeding along the right path. But what
perfection could it be, we leave it now. One thing man can find which is
more valuable than the whole world of nature. It is the very secret
about which Allah says: "what you do not know!""[^149] i.e. there is a
secret in the creation of man which you do not comprehend, that is, man
can attain to a sort of perfection the knowing of which is above your
capacity. It is the perfection which was obtained by the holy Prophet
and the [^12] pure Imams (A.S.).

It is so invaluable, so precious, that the whole world of nature is
nothing in comparison. It is like a piece of diamond excavated by
throwing away tons of rocks and earth. It is a perfection whose
greatness and value we cannot estimate. The Qur'an says: "He it is Who
created for you all that is in the earth."[^150] In another ayah He says:
And He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six days - and His
dominion (extends) on the water - that He might try you which of you is
best in action."[^151] This means that the creation of all the heavens
and the earth was a preliminary step towards the creation of the human
being - the being who is free to choose and whose perfection is to be
looked for by his own free will. You are placed at a crossroad and asked
to choose for yourselves. Then you are watched to see which one of you
chooses the best and acts the best.

So, compared with the whole world of nature, the perfection obtained by
the ideal and perfect people is more valuable and preferable. The whole
world, with all its fruits, is run by the best order. Had it not been
for the fact that this world was made of matter, this choosing being and
those perfections which he is to get by choosing, would not have come
into existence. The sun and the planets on their orbits must all be
there, the order must function, so that the conditions for the
appearance and the development of such an aware, free, choosing, of free
will and evaluating man, can obtain. So, generally speaking, this order
is the best, and there can be no better. The insignificant deficiencies
are purposely intended for significant aims.

As to other beings, each is so created, in its own particular existing
conditions, that it, considering all the conditions of the world of
matter, is also the best and perfect. The Qur'an says: "Who made good
everything He has created"."[^152] That is, every creature, according to
its particular existing conditions, and the situation it has in the
world of matter, is the best. So, Allah only wills the good and the
perfect.

The deficiencies of some creatures are not originally intended by
Allah, they are only wanted because of the perfections that depend upon
them.

Thus, the correct answer to the question: "Why Allah's Will never
pertains to an ugly act?" is that the ugly act is no match for Allah's
perfections. The divine will has nothing to do with any act that has no
relation with His Holy Essence and unlimited perfections.

**The Targets of Divine Acts**

One of the questions asked about the divine acts is whether Allah aims
at any targets through His acts. In order to give an explicit answer we
should give some explanatory preliminaries:

First: What Does "a Target" mean?

The word "target" in the Arabic language means some mark to be aimed at
in shooting. The point at which the shooter shoots is called "target" or
"objective". These two words are synonyms in the Arabic language.

Idiomatically, the target is the objective which is freely chosen by
the concerned person for his act. He takes into his consideration the
advantage expected from the intended act, before starting it, deeming
that by that act his objective will be fulfilled, the same as the
shooter who, by aiming at a target and shooting at it, expects to get a
benefit. That advantage or benefit is regarded to be the target or the
objective of an act. Besides, sometimes another intention is also
foreseen in the concept of "objective". It concerns the advantage which
is required to be valuable and reasonable - something worthy of the many
troubles and pains taken in the performance of that act, and reason
approves carrying out that act to attain to the objective aimed at.
According to this latter consideration, if an act is not performed for a
worthy and becoming objective, though with an advantage, it will be said
that it is an aimless act, a useless and frivolous one, i.e. it is an
act which has no valuable objective.

**Second: Man's objective - Satisfying the Needs**

The second point to be considered is that man, by doing some act, wants
to meet a need (whether physical, emotional, mental or else). We eat to
satisfy our bodies' need for food. We associate with a friend or a
beloved to satisfy our emotional needs. We set on acquiring knowledge to
meet our mental needs. Thus, the objectives of our acts are always to
satisfy a need. Probably one may imagine that man may do something which
meets none of his needs, yet it meets somebody else's. One may help a
poor, a needy, a sick or a troubled person. He decides to help him and
remove his affliction by giving him money, guiding him, taking him to a
hospital. He may even give up his own needs for the sake of meeting the
others, such as giving out the money he himself needs. So, this act was
not intended to meet one's own need. Such instances are true, but if we
study them more carefully we will realize that when the said man sees
the touching conditions of the afflicted person he will pity him. This
special state of sympathy and emotion is to be responded to. Here there
is no question of bodily need. It is an emotional need, a psychological
state which needs to be satisfied.

The mother who gets up in the depth of the night to attend to her
child, relinquishes her sleep just to comfort her child. She does this
in order to respond to her child's need. Yet beyond meeting her child's
need, there is her own need, too, which she meets through meeting her
child's - it is the call of maternity which requires to be responded to,
too. If she does not do it, she will feel uncomfortable. Actually, two
objectives are met here, one is apparent and obvious - meeting the
others' needs - the other is deeply concealed behind the first one,
which is, actually, one's real motive to do the act.

This is true even in respect to the acts performed by pious people for
the sake of Allah. If you ask anyone of them: "What was your objective
for doing that?" He would reply: "Nothing, it was just for Allah's
pleasure. I had no materialistic target, I only wanted to have Allah's
pleasure." This pleasure of Allah is not always clear in its meaning. By
Allah's pleasure they think of what comes as a result of Allah's
pleasure, such as the reward in the Hereafter, or being delivered from
torture in the next world, which is usually the motive of the middle
pious persons. Weren't they afraid of the Hereafter torture, or hoping
for a reward, the pleasure of Allah would have been no concern of
theirs. So, by saying that they do it for Allah's pleasure, they mean
that since the act is approved by Allah, they do it to get His reward or
to be delivered from His punishment. The original aim, therefore, is
deliverance from chastisement or getting a reward. If this is the case,
then it is clear. The motive is to satisfy one's need, since we do need
going to Paradise and avoiding Hell. So, the ultimate objective is also
to satisfy the needs of man himself.

Now suppose that somebody had attained to a position of faith in which
he regards Allah's pleasure to be his original objective, i.e. as he
loves Allah he wants His pleasure. In ordinary affectionate relations,
when somebody greatly loves someone else and knows that his beloved
likes a certain act, he would certainly do his best to do it in order to
please his beloved one, with no other objective, as he finds his
ultimate happiness in seeing his beloved pleased with the act which
caused so much toiling and difficulties to perform, and receives from
him a nice smile of content. He wants nothing else. It is childish that
somebody like him should expect any reward from his beloved.

Now, if somebody loves Allah like this, he will have no concern for
this world nor the Hereafter. He thinks neither of worldly pleasures,
nor of the rewards of the Hereafter. His world here and afterwards is
Allah. Allah is his original objective. In one of the supplications of
the Imam As-Sajjad [the 4th Imam] (A.S.) he says: "O my blessings and
Paradise! O my world here and Hereafter!" That is, instead of thinking
about the blessings of this world or the next world, or thinking of how
to deserve Paradise, I only think of You. My goal is to reach You, to
acquire Your pleasure. When somebody attains to this position, it is
observed that, as long as he thinks of himself, his personal needs are
hidden behind all those apparently lofty goals and desires, i.e. if you
ask him: "Why do you want to reach Allah? Why do you want to acquire His
pleasure?" His answer would be: "What can be a higher perfection than
getting to Allah?" This is an unconscious confession that behind the
goal of reaching Allah there is one's personal goal of getting to the
highest position of perfection, unless he may get, in his knowledge, to
a position where he becomes no more interested in his own self, as if
there is no "self" in between.

Probably we may be able to imagine such a state of mind, but its
reality is too sublime and lofty to be attained to by people like us. If
there happens to be such persons who could attain to this state of
selflessness in life, and be so absorbed in remembering Allah and in His
Lordship that they lose and forget themselves, the case is different
with them, since we have not attained to that state, and cannot have a
correct picture of it. Therefore, we leave it to its people. But as to
the ordinary people, when they do something for the sake of Allah out of
love, still they have behind that their own objective of attaining to
their own perfection. Thus, as long as man thinks of himself, whatever
he does he cares, afterall, for his own interest. He satisfies his own
needs even indirectly through meeting other people's needs, or, through
getting Allah's pleasure, he ensures his own perfection.

**Third: Middle and Final Objectives**

The Third preliminary note is that we sometimes think of an objective,
and our motive for action will be our desire to get to that objective.
But when we start we find out that we cannot get to it without getting
first to another goal. That is, our principal objective requires a
preliminary step to be performed before being able to get to our
objective. So, besides the original motive for the final objective there
will be another motive and another want as a preliminary act. For
example, when somebody wants to ascend to the roof of a house, he uses a
step ladder. Here are two objectives. If you ask him when he is on his
way to bring the ladder. "Where are you going?" He would say: "I am
going to bring a ladder." Or he could say: "My intention is to get to
the roof". So, there are two parallel objectives - first a mid-way
objective as a means of attaining to a higher and final objective.

Or suppose you want to visit the holy shrine of the Imam ar-Rida
(A.S.), with the objective of receiving Allah's reward for that visit.
But carrying out this intention necessitates preliminary arrangements,
such as getting an air-ticket or a train-ticket, going to the airport or
the railway station, providing for some food for the journey and some
money. When you leave your house in the morning, if you are asked:
"Where are you going?" You may tell him you were going to buy the
ticket, or get some food. But these are middle objectives which are not
so important in themselves. You do them because you want to travel to
Mash'had.

Here also you have two objectives which go longitudinally. One of them
is preliminary to the other. It is both an objective and a means an
objective for the first movement, and a means for attaining to the final
objective. Such objectives, which are both goals and means at the same
time, can be recognized by certain signs. As you may ask yourself about
the act: "Why are you doing this?" You may also ask yourself about the
objective: "Why do you aim at this very objective?" and repeat this
question at each objective until you reach to an objective about which
you cannot ask "Why?", since no rational person may ask why. In the same
above example, when you ask: "Where are you going?" he says: "I am going
to buy a ticket?", you ask: "Why?" he says: "I want to go to Mashhad".
You ask: "Why do you want to go to Mashhad?" "I want to visit the holy
shrine of Imam Rida (A.S.)," he replies. "Why do you want to visit his
shrine?" you continue asking him. He may reply: "For its reward."

Still you can ask: "What for do you want the reward?" He says: "Because
it brings happiness, and as I seek happiness, I do what brings it". Now,
is it reasonable to ask: "Why do you want to be happy?" No, here we
cannot ask such a question. It is in man's nature to seek his happiness.
No normal person rejects happiness, since it is an inborn desire. It is
without cause. It is the final objective. The final objective is that
about which one cannot ask "Why?". We reach a state which is
philosophically termed as intrinsic, and "the intrinsic is
inexplicable". The one who loves Allah, if asked: "Why do you leave your
bed in the heart of the night?" he says: "I want to have supplication
with my Lord." We ask: "What for do you want to supplicate Him?" "I want
to be intimate with my beloved," he replies. "Why do you want to be
intimate with Him?" you ask. Probably he would answer: "Because I feel
pleased with that", or, if he had reached the stage of
self-forgetfulness, there would be no mention of his own pleasure.

The final objective of a lover is his intimation with his beloved.
There is no "why" in this case. He cannot but do it. The one who loves
Allah cannot but proceed to Him, be intimate with Him; unless something
keeps him back. This will be his final objective. Therefore, an
objective can pass through many stages, even in a single act. As long as
one has not yet attained to one's final objective, one can be asked
about the objectives of one's acts.

**Conclusion**

Taking the afore-mentioned points into our consideration, we conclude
that what we regard as the objectives of our acts, especially the final
ones, are actually a number of movements and activities through which we
can ensure our interests. Ensuring our interest and attaining to our
perfection are innately demanded as final objectives.

**The Objectives of Allah and of Man - The Differences**

Now we present our principal question: Does Allah aim at any objectives
by His acts? If we try to speak of such objectives, with the certain
characteristics as we find in ourselves, and ascribe them to Allah, we
will have first to say that Allah lacks particular perfections which He
wants to obtain through His acts, just as we do to acquire the
perfections which we do not have, the interests which we try to ensure
by doing certain acts.

If Allah aims through His acts at objectives like ours, then He must
lack something which He, by certain acts, tries to obtain. But Allah is
not so. Allah is absolutely in need of nothing. He is the Absolute
Perfection. Therefore, He lacks nothing at all, as otherwise He must be
subject to limitations. We cannot even think that Allah, before creating
the world, was displeased with His loneliness and that He wished to come
out of His solitude. So, He created the world so that He may no more be
alone, and do away with His loneliness by keeping company with His
creatures. No. Allah remains Alone in His Essence even after creating
the world. This state of being alone is perfection and wanted. We cannot
comprehend that Allah's loneliness is not a deficiency in Him, and He
Himself is not displeased with His solitude, actually He is very pleased
with it.

At any rate, let us start from this point which says that Allah is in
need of nothing. So, if He disliked His loneliness, He must be regarded
as a needy being, and there should be an outside factor to do away with
that need. But Allah is far above being in need of anyone of His
creatures, even the prophets, the godly men or the favourite angels. It
is they who are nothing but needs.

Therefore, as far as the objectives, which we recognize in ourselves,
are concerned, it is impossible that similar ones should be Allah's,
too. He is in need of nothing. Otherwise it sometimes leads to speak of
Allah's incapability. In our example about our intention to ascend to
the roof, we knew that we could not ascend without a ladder, so we had
to find one. Why had we to carry out some preliminary acts with middle
objectives? Because without them we could not implement our final and
principal objective. If we could jump with one leap to the roof we would
not have needed the ladder. If Allah has to do some middle acts before
attaining to His final objective, He will be an important Allah, while
Allah is powerful and capable of doing everything.

Consequently, Allah has no objective like ours in his acts. But if we
look carefully at the matter, we will see that we are stating the
characteristics of our own objectives. The meaning of "objective" does
not indicate these things. It does not mean that I must be needy. Being
needy is coincident with our acts. It is a characteristic of man's
objectives. The absence of such characteristic of man's objectives does
not mean that there is no objective at all. There can even be middle and
final objectives, but without such characteristics as are in man. How
can this be explained? An object is a matter resulting from a voluntary
act, and receives the doer's attention, acceptance and pleasure, no
matter whether he needs it or not. The doer does the act in order to
fulfill the objective. But to be in need of that objective or not to be,
is not part of its meaning. It is of the characteristics proving a human
objective. If it is said that the need is a part of the meaning of the
objective, we say that it should be omitted in respect to Allah. Haven't
we already said that the things which we see in ourselves accompanied
with fault and deficiencies, must be omitted when we ascribe them to
Allah? We even said that the concept of acting is accompanied with time
when ascribed to human beings, but when ascribed to Allah, time is to
omitted from it, since He has no time. Here it is the same.

Even if we suppose that the meaning of the objective includes an
indication of need, it must be omitted, as it does not befit Allah's
sacred position. Yet, originally the meaning of need is not implied in
an objective, though it can be applicable to our understanding of an
objective. When we had to do different acts with longitudinal goals,
this was because we could not attain to our final objective without
carrying out acts with middle objectives. But is it inevitable that the
middle objectives should always mean that the doer can never attain to
his final objective without them, or can the middle and final objectives
be imposed without implying the doer's impotency and inability?

In a previous discussion it was stated that there can be certain
conditions for the implementation of the divine and holy people's acts,
but these are, in fact, conditions for the suseptibility of the
suseptible, not the effectiveness of the agent. Here it is the same. It
is possible that the act cannot be done without preliminaries which are
the conditions of the suseptibiltiy of the agent. If an actual tree is
to exist, it cannot exist without soil and water. The prerequisite of a
materialistic being is to come to existence through another phenomenon,
and to be in need of other simultaneous phenomena.

If we supposes that there is a being which is not like that, then, it
must not be a material being. Owing to the fact that this world is
materialistic, the acts that take place therein require some
preliminaries. Nevertheless, these preliminaries belong to the condition
of the suseptibility of the suseptible, not the effectiveness of the
agent. That is it does not mean that Allah cannot do the act except
through this way. It actually means that to suppose an act is to suppose
its preliminaries and conditions, too.

Suppose that someone does not need food and air, that he is not
begotten by a father and mother, that he has no children, no growth, no
development and no change at all. Such a person cannot be material. You
may suppose that the person is of the Barzakh. [The intervening state
between death and the Day of Judgement]. He would be a more human being
affected by no change. But if you suppose that Allah has created a
corporeal man, this man must be material, must be affected by changes
and developments - these are inseparable requisites of the material.

These requisites do not mean that if Allah created a non-material man
in a different way it would mean that His power had decreased. No, it is
not that. It is your own supposition that implies these conditions.

If we say: "Couldn't Allah create man without using earth? Why did He
create him from earth? The answer is that man means an earthy being. If
man was not made of earth, he would not have been man. If, for example,
he were made of light, he would have been, according to our belief, an
angel. Or if he were made of fire, he would have been a jinn, and no
more a man. So, to say that Allah does this act in this particular way;
or supposing some middle objectives in His acts, does not mean that He
is in need of these objectives. It, in fact, means that the nature of
the job is such that it cannot be done in a different way.

Therefore, we may say that Allah does aim at certain objectives, but
not in the meaning that they satisfy His needs, nor that He has to
resort to middle objectives, without which He cannot do. Actually, the
disposition of the act demands that it should be performed through a
certain channel, and passing through each of its stages represents an
objective for the doer, but not an objective which He needed, though
needed by the job itself.

Now, we reach at the point where we have to ask: "What can Allah's
objective of creating the world be?" Since we know that He is in no need
of the world, we can say that Allah's objective of creating the world is
to bestow His favour upon the people, to bless them with His mercy. This
is expressed in poetry by Mawlana Rumi, who says:

I did not create the people to get a profit, But to show my generosity
to the servants.

If we say that Allah's objective is not for his own interest, but for
His servants', we are not wrong, though not precise, because by
admitting that we would mean that we have ascribed to Allah an objective
outside His Essence. One may still ask: "Why does Allah want to bestow
His favours on His servants?" We had already said that as long as we
could ask "why?" the final objective would have not been reached yet. We
say that Allah had created the world as well as the favours in order to
bestow upon me and you a benefit, a mercy. Still one can ask: "Why does
Allah want to do us these favours?" Unless the question is returned to a
matter inside His Essence, the asking will never stop. Is there any need
in His Divine Self? Never! He is never in need of any thing. So, how can
the objectives of His acts be returned to His Divine Self?


