Chapter 12: Einstein's Paradox
==============================

God’s Omniscience and Man’s Freedom
-----------------------------------

### Introduction

Many people when they fail in their lives, they relate it to their
destiny. They don’t want to admit they made a mistake and hence, they
failed in their exams, or marriage, business, etc. The concept of
determinism or free will plays a central role in our thinking about the
world particularly in our apportioning praise and blame.

Quantum theory explains in principle how to calculate what will happen
in any experiment involving physical or biological systems, and how to
understand how our world works.

We can, for instance, determine the exact time of the solar eclipse on 4
December 2002 in which 72% of the Sun will be covered and is visible in
Australia. This foreknowledge lead us to the fact that determinism rules
in the physical world.

The question that this article is dealing with is ‘can we predetermine
the human behaviour’ and if his behaviour is foreknown whether by other
humans or a divine knowledge, how can we hold him responsible for
his/her action?

Nothing has been more terrible for humans throughout the history than
admitting that his destiny is predetermined and he has no choice in it.
Freedom has been and will be always the most pleasant word for mankind.
Hence, nothing can disturb his mind that knowing that all his actions
are subdued by a superpower.

This is the secret why the issue of determinism versus free will has
been always and issue of concerns for philosophers and thinkers
throughout the history.

Albert Einstein (1879-1955) is perhaps the best well-known scientist of
the 20th century. His theory of ‘General Relativity’; the most
accurately tested theory known to science, lead him to acknowledge that
God brought the universe into existence and that He is Intelligent. Yet,
he was still puzzled with the paradox that” if God is Omniscient then
how is it possible to hold man responsible for his deeds?!”

When the rabbis and persists came to congratulate him on his discovery
of God, he said to them:

“If this being is Omnipotent then every occurrence, including every
human action, every human thought, and every human feeling and
aspiration is also His work; how is it possible to think of holding men
responsible for their deeds and thoughts before such an almighty Being?

In giving out punishment and rewards He would to a certain extent be
passing judgment on Himself. How can this be combined with the goodness
and righteousness ascribed to Him?”

Unfortunately, none of the clergy Einstein encountered ever gave him a
satisfactory answer to his objection. Typically, they responded by
saying that God has not yet revealed the answer. They encouraged him to
endure patiently and blindly trust the All-Knowing One.

Being puzzled with this question, Einstein, like many other powerful
intellects through the centuries, ruled out the existence of God,
despite believing in a Creator.

The aim of this chapter is to suggest an answer to this on going debate
about one of the most fundamental questions of human nature in a unique
style presented by prominent Muslim philosophers.

### Definition

The question is whether man’s behaviour, thinking, and feeling are
driven by something called free will, or everything is predestined and
determined. In other words, is the human behaviour like other objects
and events in the world determined under certain cause/s and once the
cause/s being given, the event follows invariably, or human behaviour is
exempted from this law for human mind has the power or ability to choose
a course of action or make a decision without being subject to
restraints imposed by antecedent causes, by necessity, or by divine
predetermination.

On the one hand, we feel so strongly that we have behavioural choice. On
the other hand, modern biology describes humans as mechanisms that
follow all of the same deterministic rules as other objects in the
universe. How can reconcile our feeling of Free Will with the idea that
we are mechanical components of a mechanical universe?

Is none of us really responsible for his/her action? Is freedom to
choose an illusion, a myth?

### Scope

The validity of either of free will and determinism play a vital role
for people and scientists in all different walks of life; from an
average man on the street to psychology, sociology, ethics, religion,
law and philosophy.

### Psychology

There is a clear dilemma in explaining human behaviour through
psychological principles. On the one, hand if psychology is a science of
behaviour, then there should be laws allowing the prediction of
behaviour, just as there are gravitational laws to predict the behaviour
of a falling object. On the other hand, objects have been raised by
individuals who believe that humans control their own behaviours and
possess free will.

The behaviourists, for instance, are the most obvious proponents of
determinism, dating back to Jon B. Watson who made one of the most
deterministic assertions ever: “Give *me a dozen healthy infants… and my
own specified world to bring them up in and I’ll guarantee to take
anyone at random and train him to become any type of specialist I might
select-doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant, chief, and yes, even beggar man
and thief*.”

Other psychologists like William James, who was interested in religion
and believed in free will, was reluctant to abandon the concept that
behaviours were not free. At one point, he suggested that mind and body
operated in tandem, whereas on another occasion he concluded that they
interacted. Clearly, James struggled with the issue, and like others was
unable to resolve it.

### Ethics

The validity of free will has also been a subject of considerable
debating among ethical philosophers. It would appear that a system of
ethics must imply free will, for the denial of the ability to choose a
course of action would seem to negate the possibility of moral judgment.

A person without moral judgment is not responsible for his or her
actions. In an attempt to resolve this problem, ethical philosophers
have taken a great variety of position, ranging from absolute
determinism to absolute libertarianism.

### Law

Determinism has its impact on the court cases as well. The most famous
American trial lawyer of the 20th century, Clarence Darrow, was engaged
to defend the murderers who had confessed. With the following speech he
convinced every jury that his clients were not morally responsible for
their actions and hence they don’t deserve the death penalty.

 *Every one knows that the heavenly bodies move in certain paths in
relation to each other with seeming consistency and regularity which we
call [physical] law. ... No one attributes freewill or motive to the
material world. Is the conduct of man or the other animals any more
subject to whim or choice than the action of the planets? ...*

*We know that man's every act is induced by motives that led or urged
him here or there; that the sequence of cause and effect runs through
the whole universe, and is nowhere more compelling than with man."*

 *"[Man's] legs are levers with which he walks. His back is a lever, by
which he is able to lift things, through the contraction of the muscles.
His arms are levers which he uses in all the activities of life. There
is nothing about him that anybody can find ... which isn't mechanical."*

 *"The principal thing to remember is that we are all the products of
heredity and environment; that we have little or no control, as
individuals, over ourselves, and that criminals are like the rest of us
in that regard."*

Prof. Norman Swartz: Free will and Determinism:
<http://www.sfu.ca/philosophy/swartz/freewill1.htm>

The belief that man’s feelings, thoughts and behaviours are all forced
on him by one or more determinants has changed the concept of crimes and
bad behaviour to be seen as a symptom of illness which requires
treatment not punishment. Thus, prisons and jails must be abolished and
locked hospital wards substituted for them as needed.

### Fallacy of Darrow’s argument

If Leopold and Loeb were not morally responsible for their behavior, it
was because of what others had done to them. But these others, in turn,
were not morally responsible for what they had done, since they were the
product of what had earlier been done to them.

And so on, and so on. The argument works like a line of dominos, it is -
in effect - the domino theory of moral non-responsibility. If someone is
to be regarded as not morally responsible for what he does because he is
the product of someone else's actions, then, ultimately, no one is
responsible for anything he/she does.

It is interesting to note that one of Darrow's biographers reports that
although Darrow constantly insisted that his clients did not deserve
blame, he himself was a very vain, prideful, man who thought that he,
himself, deserved high praise. That biographer comments that Darrow
never quite saw, or admitted, this inconsistency in his own views!

Religion
--------

### 1) Christianity

Determinism in Christianity starts with the story of creation of Adam
and Eve as described in the book of Genesis:

*And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me
of the tree, and I did eat. And the LORD God said unto the woman, What
is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled
me, and I did eat* [^1]

Thus, from the biblical point of view from the time the Adam and Eve
were created in the Garden of Eden. God said, "Adam!" Adam said, "Eve."
And, Eve said, "The serpent."! Thus began the pattern of blaming others.

Determinism is important in Christian theology. One of the basic tenets
of traditional Christian theology is that god is Omniscient and
Omnipotent, and that every human action is foreordained by God. This
doctrine seemingly precludes the existence of human free will.

Because morality, duty, and the avoidance of sin are also basic elements
in Christian teaching, how, it is asked, can people be morally
responsible once predestination is accepted? Many attempts have been
made by theologians to explain this paradox. Saint Augustine (350-430),
the great Father and Doctor of the Church, firmly believed in
predestination, holding that only those elected by God would attain
salvation; no one however knows who is among the elect, and therefore
all should lead God-fearing, religious lives.

The celebrated French bishop and pulpit orator; Jacques Bossuet
(1627-1704) offered another approach, which became widely held; he
stated that fee will and divine foreknowledge are certain truths that
must be accepted even though they are not logically connected. (
Extracted from Encyclopedia of Encarta)

### 2) Islam

Mainly two doctrines; Ash’ari and Mo’tazeli. The mainstream of Sunni
Muslim follow the Ash’ari school of thought which is more on
determinism. Mo’tazelists in turn believe in absolute free will.

Abu-Ishaq Esfrayeni (who believed in free will) met Qadhi Abdul-jabbar
(who believed in determinism) and told him: “Glory to He who is free
from committing a sin”. Meaning as a determinist you hold god
responsible for all the sins.

Qadhi turned around and told him with no hesitation: “Glory to he who
nothing happens in his kingdom but what He Wills.”!

Philosophical Justification
---------------------------

If all people have is an illusion of behavioral choice, if people are
just machines behaving in the only way they can, then what about
personal responsibility? How can we hold people responsible for and
punish them for their behaviors if they have no choice in how they
behave?

Prof. Daniel Dennett (lecturer at Tufts University in the USA) in his
book ‘Elbow Room’ gives a two part answer to this question. First, we
hold people responsible for their actions because we know from
historical experience that this is an effective means to make people
behave in a socially acceptable way.

Second, holding people responsible only works when combined with the
fact that people can be informed of the fact that they are being held
responsible and respond to this state of affairs by controlling their
behavior so as to avoid punishment. People who break the rules set by
society and get punished may be behaving in the only way they can, but
if we did not hold them accountable for their actions, people would
behave even worse than they do with the threat of punishment.

This is a totally utilitarian approach to the issue of responsibility.

### Paradoxes of Freedom in a logical argument

#### There is No Moral Responsibility

Premise 1:Every action is either **caused** or **uncaused** (i.e. a
random occurrence).

Premise 2: If an action is caused (recall Darrow), then that action was
not chosen freely and the person who performed that action is not
morally responsible for what he/she has done.

Premise 3: If an action is uncaused (i.e. is a random occurrence), then
the person who performed that action is not morally responsible for what
he/she has done.

Thus, ware not morally responsible for what we do!

#### Norman Swartz

The reality is that modern philosophy has failed to suggest any
convincing answer to the paradox and at the end, they have reached the
same conclusion as the average man on the street if not worse than that,
as some like Dennett suggest at the end that we have no real behavioral
choices, but we continue to behave as if we do! Or to say: God has not
revealed it to us yet. Grin and bare it until I solve the paradox for
you.

The common mistake of thinkers in the paradox of free will and
determinism is that the assumed free will is equal to chaos and if free
will accepted then people become totally unpredictable and chaos reigns.
And also if the action is caused then the action was not chosen freely.
Thus, Swartz put the 2nd premise of the argument in the paradox of
freedom.

As I will explain further in this chapter, we agree with the law of
cause and effect and that every action is caused, and that the person is
also responsible for his/her action without any contradiction involved.
For his freedom of will is one of the factors as well.

Epistemic Determinism (The problem of foreknowledge)
----------------------------------------------------

The following is the standard argument for epistemic determinism. It
alleges to show that foreknowledge is incompatible with free will.

1) Secular version:

 *If x knows that you are going to do (some action) A, then you must do
A.*

 *But if you must do A, then you have no choice in the matter.*

 *Thus if x knows (beforehand) what you are going to do, then you have
no free choice.*

*foreknowledge is incompatible with free will*.

2) Theist version:

• God is Omniscient.

• If God is Omniscient, then I must choose what God knows I am going to
choose.

Thus: I’m not truly choosing.

#### Conclusion

• If I’m not choosing, then I’m not morally responsible for my deeds.

• Believing in Omniscient God leads to the *deterrence theory of
punishment and praise.*

### Discovering the Fallacy

1. Knowledge about the past:

‘Imam Ali (a.s) was murdered by Ibn Moljam.’

Today I ask: Who killed Imam Ali (a.s)?

Mr. A: Shemer

Mr. B: Ma’moon

Ms. K: Ibn Moljam

Ms. D: Wahshi

Did Ms. K’s asserting a truth today somehow or other ‘FORCE’ Ibn Moljam
to kill Imam Ali?!

Obviously not.

2. Knowledge about the future:

‘Imam Ali (a.s) was murdered by Ibn Moljam.’

In the year 10 AH I ask: Who will kill Imam Ali?

Mr. J : Shemer

Mr. M: Ibn Moljam

Ms. C: Ma’moon

Ms. D: Jo’deh

Will Mr. M’s asserting a truth in the year 10 AH somehow or other
‘FORCE’ Ibn Moljam to kill Imam Ali?!

Obviously not.

3. Natural Laws:

‘There will be a lunar eclipse on 30 December 2001.’

Today (10 August 2001) I ask:

“When will be the next lunar eclipse in Australia?

Mr. A: Oct. 12

Mr. B: Dec. 30

Mr. C: Dec. 25

Mr. D: Nov. 1

Will Mr. B’s asserting a truth today about the lunar eclipse somehow or
other ‘FORCE’ the eclipse to occur?!

Obviously not.

Descriptive Laws & Prescriptive Laws
------------------------------------

• Natural Laws are Descriptive.

• Moral & Religious Laws are Prescriptive.

Fallacy Discovered
------------------

(It must be that) if X knows that I’m going to do A, then I must to A.

Answer:

• It is not true that if X knows that I’m going to do A, then I must do
A.

• I will do A whether X knows about it or not.

• X’s knowledge is not the cause of my doing A.

### Conclusion

• Foreknowledge no more ‘forces’ the future to be a certain way, than
true reports in history books ‘force’ the past to have been a certain
way.

• Free will is compatible with believing in Omniscient God.

• Man is determined to have free will and hence, responsible for his/her
deeds.

Compatibility of Determinism & Free Will
----------------------------------------

Points:

1) The law of cause and effect is a universal law both in the physical
world and in human behaviour. Denying this law is equal to chaos and
accidence, which results in no law and reality in the world.

2) Man has a behavioral choice and every healthy person feels this
naturally. Hence, even Darrow expects a high praise. Whereas, if his
clients were not to be blamed due to deterministic factors, he is not to
be praised for the same reason!

3) There is no correlation between the law of cause and effect and man’s
determinism, rather if there is no law of cause and effect man cannot
have any freedom of choice. On the other hand, there is no correlation
between chaos and man’s freedom of choice. If there is no cause for
human behaviours, then it random occurs which means the human himself
also has no control or power over his actions. Then, where is his
freedom of choice?

Free Will & Determinism in the Quran

• Satan; the founder of Determinism: 7:16

• Determinism; the excuse of infidels: 6:148

• A myth called ‘Predestination’ 8:53

• Man’s free will: A Quranic Principle: 18:29

• A Myth called: Societal Determinism:

    • The magicians of Pharaoh: 20:70-72

    • The wife of Pharaoh: 66: 11

    • The son of Noah: 11: 46

If predestination, then…

• Why do we sometimes regret the past?

• Why do we blame the evil-doers?

• Why do we praise the righteous ones?

• Why do we educate our children?

• Why do we strive for moral values?

• Why do we repent?

• Why do we judge the criminals?

• Why do we punish the criminals?

• Why do we protest to transgressors?

• Why do we feel sorrow or happy about the past?

For Further Study
-----------------

• Man & Destiny: The late Ayatollah Motahari

• Talab Wa Eradeh: The late Imam Khomeini

• Elbow Room: Dr. Daniel C. Dennett

• Free Will and Determinism: Dr. Norman Swartz

• The Foundations of Morality ( Chapter 27) : Henry Hazlitt

[^1]: Genesis 3:9-13


