Chapter 13: Monotheism, the Common Word
=======================================

Unity of God is the common word of all prophets. It is the essential
part of all the divine religions. But why there is only One God? Why
can't be a company of gods creating and governing the universe?!

You will also learn that the Christian doctrine of Trinity is
incompatible with Monotheism.

This chapter aims at introducing the most fundamental aspect of all
divine religions, a foundation on which all other religious issues
stands; a touchstone by which everything else must be attested.

As a matter of fact, believing in God, requires His unity. In other
words, if there is a Creator and Sustainer for the universe, He must be
One and only One. Thus, even those who supposedly believe in more than
one god, they attempt to unify them to one godhead, and hence plurality
of god has no logic.

Proofs of unity of God
----------------------

### 1) Infinite Being

This proof is suggested by Mulla Sadra. The similar concept of it is
also suggested by **Aquinas, St Thomas** (1225-1274), the Angelic Doctor
and the Prince of Scholastics Italian philosopher and theologian.

Premise 1: God is necessary infinite.

Premise 2: There is no plurality in an infinite being.

Thus: There is no possible plurality in godhead.

God is necessarily infinite. If several were to exit, none of them would
be really infinite, for, it is impossible to have more than one infinite
being. The reason being, each should have some perfection not possessed
by the others. In other words, there must be an end for the existence of
one of them, so that there would be a room for the other to exist, which
results in finite of them.

For instance, if A & B were to owe a farm, then each one must owe only a
limited piece of land. But if A or B owns a farm which covers the entire
Earth, then there is no room for the other to owe anything.

God is necessarily infinite Being, which means His existence is
limitless and hence no room for any other to exist.

Therefore, the essence of Godhead necessitates His Unity. The Holy Quran
referring to this proof states: “ *Allah bears witness that there is no
god but Him* ” [^1] or: “ *He is the First and the Last, the Appearance,
and the Hidden* ”

#### Why God is necessarily infinite?

At least for the following three reasons, we understand that god is
infinite.

1) Finite means limitation and limitation mean god is limited in
existence, knowledge, power, etc. A limited god like other limited and
finite creatures is just like other creatures and need to depend in his
existence, knowledge and power to an unlimited being.

2) Existence is the opposite of non-existence. A being which is
necessarily Existent, has no possibility of non-existence.

3) The chains of causes and effects in this world must reach the first
Cause whose existence is necessarily and independent from others.

### 2) Universal Unity

Premise 1: The universe is harmonic.

Premise 2: Any harmonic universe needs one conductor.

**The unified universe has One Creator.**

The universe as it initially appeared to us, is the combination of
billions of different objects; from a tiny cell to the super-giant
galaxies. Nonetheless, in spite of this plurality, a closer look
suggests that there is a universal unification linking and joining all
seemingly separate parts of the universe together and the more the
secretes of nature discovered the more this unity is realized.

The most acknowledged theory for the beginning of the universe is the
big Bang theory proposing that the universe was created in a gigantic
explosion and that the various elements observed today were produced
within the first few minutes after the big bang hydrogen and helium
would have been the primary products of the big bang. At 1 microsecond
after the Big Bang, protons and neutrons dissolve into individual
quarks, so the universe was a 'gas' consisting of quarks.

Astronomers assert today that the entire universe we can see is made
from matter of the kind we find near us, and in about the same
abundances of the elements everywhere.

As mentioned in the chapter ‘Finger prints of God' all galaxies
gravitationally interacting and orbiting about ‘a common centre'.

For this reason, a natural law governing an atom is also governing the
entire universe. The same gravitational law governing the fall of an
object here on earth governs all the celestial bodies in the sky.  
 Thus, Newton by observation of the fall of an apple in his orchard
discovered the gravitation and conceived that the same force governed
the motion of the Moon and the apple and hence gravitation is universal.
Similarly, Newton’s laws of motion or optics apply to the earthly
objects as much as the celestial ones.

There are millions of animal species on earth, yet despite this
plurality their structure is quite unified.

The law of cause and effect is also another universal law in the nature,
whether man has discovered all the causes of an effect or not,
philosophically there is a cause/causes for every effect.

Therefore, the operation of the nature is like a harmonic symphony,
which demonstrates the great harmony of creation. Every creature is like
a musical pulse, which is made up of the sum of many pure sine-wave
tones, playing harmonically in the orchestra of the universe. This
universal orchestra proves that there is only one conductor directing
the orchestra in performance.

If there were more than one God, disharmony would prevail.

**Q. Why can't be the company of gods who are wisely governing the
universe?**

If there is more than one god for the universe, either they are all the
same in everything or totally different, or there are some similarity
and some differences amongst them.

Plurality of gods mean that they are not totally same, for, if they were
the same in all aspects then there would be one not more than one. On
the other hand, plurality means there are differences, and if there are
differences there must be disharmony and chaos in the universe.

For instance, God is Omni-wise, and there cannot be two or more
omni-wise, because plurality requires that they are not the same in
their wisdom, which means one is wiser than the other and the one who is
less wise lacks some wisdom and lack of wisdom is insufficiency whereas
there cannot be any insufficiency in God.

### 3) Mathematical distinction

If there were to be two necessary beings, there must be at least one
distinction factor between them so that one possesses something that the
other lacks. That distinction however must be also a necessary being, or
else the two necessary beings cannot be necessary in their essence. Thus
two imagine two necessary being we need another necessary
differentiating being, which results in three necessary beings.  
 Similarly as they are all necessary beings, there must be a different
between then or else they are the same. In order to differentiate
between the three necessary beings we need at least two other necessary
differentiating beings, which result in five necessary beings.

Again to differentiate between five necessary beings, we need at least
three necessary differentiating beings to differentiate between the five
necessarily beings, which results in eight necessarily beings and the
calculating goes on infinitely which results in infinite necessary
beings!

### 4) Unique invitation

God is the source of perfection and blessings. It is not possible for
such Perfect Being to deprive others of that perfection and blessing.
Thus, if there were more than one God, he would have introduced himself
through his messengers or other ways, whereas, all the prophets and
messengers have invited to One Unique God, therefore there is no any
other god than Him.

Trinity
-------

Although all divine religions advocate to the ‘unity of God' Judaism,
Christianity and Islam as the main living divine religions are more
known for the concept of monotheism. Thus, they are sometimes classified
as Abramic Religions for their monotheistic concept.

Among the followers of all the divine religions, however, the mainstream
church formulated in the 4 th century the doctrine of Trinity. The
classical Western formula of Trinity is: “ three persons in one
substance *( homoousios )* not a similar substance ( *homoiousios* ). By
three persons they mean: ‘god, the father, god the son, and god; the
holy spirit. According to this doctrine, God incarnated in the person of
Jesus Christ.

The term Trinity is not used in the Bible and Nazorean Jewish
Christians, who were in the time of Jesus looked upon him not as God but
as a prophet and anointed Messiah. Historically the mysterious term
‘Trinity' was first used in the 2 nd century, by the Latin theologian
Tertullian, but the concept was developed in the course of the debates
on the nature of Christ between Arius and Athanasius in the 4 th
century.

In the words of the Athanasian Creed ‘the Father is God, the Son is God,
and the

Holy Spirit is God, and yet there are not three Gods but one God.”

**Since When Jesus became god?!**

In the first century, after the disappearance of Jesus, those who
followed him continued to affirm the Divine Unity. This is illustrated
by the fact that the Shepherd of Hermas, written in about 90 A.D. was
regarded as a book of Revelation. The first commandment was believing in
One God.

According to Theodore Zahn, the article of faith up0 until about 250 A.D
was, “I believe in God, the Almighty' [^2] Between 180 and 210 A.D. the
word ‘Father' was added before the ‘Almighty'. This was bitterly
contested by a number of the leaders of the church. Bishop Victor and
Bishop Zephysius are on record as condemning this movement.

As the teaching of Jesus was spread, it came into contact with other
cultures and into conflict with those in authority. In Greece ,
especially, it became metamorphosed, both by its being expressed in a
new language for the first time, and by its realignment with the ideas
and philosophy of that culture.

It was the many-gods viewpoint of the Greeks, which largely contributed
to the formulation of this doctrine of the Trinity together with the
gradual elevation of Jesus by some, notably Paul of Tarsus, from a
prophet to God.

It was only in 325 Ad that the doctrine of the Trinity was declared to
be the orthodox Christian belief. Even then, some of those who signed
the creed did not believe in it.

That historic decision was more based on a political expediency shown
mainly by the part played by Constantine, the pagan emperor of Rome, who
presided over the council of Nicea, than on the faculty of Scriptures.

As a result, Rome replaced Jerusalem as the centre of Pauline
Christianity.

The doctrine of Trinity since the time of Constantine became officially
accepted as the basis of Christianity in Europe. But as it soon caused
much confusion among people many were told to believe it without trying
to understand it.

Yet, broadly speaking, these schools of thought developed regarding
trinity to be explained.

The first is associated with St Augustine , who lived in the 4 th
century and was of the view that the doctrine could but be proved but
could be illustrated. St Victor, who lived in the 12 th century, is
associated with the second school, who believed that the doctrine could
both be demonstrated and illustrated. And the 14 th century saw the
growth of the 3 rd school, which believed that the doctrine of Trinity
could be neither illustrated nor proved, but should be blindly accepted
and believed.

The author of the fourth Gospel was the first to identify Jesus with the
Logos or Word who became flesh for the salvation of mankind. In early
Christianity he was also regarded as the ‘image of God', not the eternal
God himself.

The Council of Nicea
--------------------

In early decades of the 4 th century two opposing views, the view held
by the Presbyter Arius that stated Christ was similar in substance
*(homoiousios)* with the Father, whereas the Bishop Athanasius held the
view that Christ was the same substance *(homoousios)* of the Father.

Arius argued that Jesus was the firstborn of the Father, was created by
the Father and thus was a creature, although the first and highest
creature. Arius logically deduced that if the Son was begotten by the
Father, there must have been a time when the Son did not exist, that is,
before his creation by the Father. The Son therefore, had a beginning.

The debate was brought to the attention of Constantine the Great,
emperor of Rome that the controversy might threaten the unity if his
empire. In order for Constantine to settle the dispute concerning the
nature of Jesus Christ he summoned an ecumenical council at Nicaea; an
ancient city now Iznik, in Turkey in 325 AD. Of the 1800 bishops in the
Roman Empire, 318 attended the council.

The Great emperor attended the Council and allowed various debaters to
speak by turns. After an intense controversy a confession of faith was
drawn up at the order of Constantine and was singed by all the bishops
affirming that Jesus Christ was ‘Very God of Very God' and ‘of one
substance with the Father by whom all things were made.'

And all the papers of the Arius' book were burned. All those who refused
to sign the creed were threatened by the Emperor with banishment.
Naturally, all signed. However, some of them regretted what they had
done at the council and wrote a letter to the Emperor stating: “We
committed an impious act, O prince, by subscribing to a blasphemy from
fear of you.” [^3]

It is indeed sad that the creed of faith professed by millions of
Christians since the 4th century was born amidst this sorry scene and
was at one time considered blasphemous.

The earliest draft of the creed known to us today, and the one that was
agreed upon at the council is:

We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, the Maker of all things,
visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the
only begotten of the Father; he is begotten, that is to say, he is of
the substance of God, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God,
begotten and not made, being of one substance with the Father; by whom
all things, both in heaven and on earth, were made.

Who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from heaven, and took
our nature, and became man; he suffered and rose again the third day; he
ascended into heaven, and will come to judge the living and the dead.
And we believe in the Holy Ghost.

The holy catholic and apostolical church condemns all those who say that
there was a period in which the Son of God did not exist; that before he
was begotten, he had no existence; that he was called out of nothing
into being; that he is of a different substance from the Father; and
that he is susceptible of variation or of change.

(<http://www.essene.com/Church/Conspiracy/CouncilOfNicea.html#> The
Council of Nicea )

Do Christians really believe Jesus is God?
------------------------------------------

Yes, apart from the above-mentioned Nicean creed which clearly states
the Deity of Jesus, Christian Doxology is also another proof of that.
Doxology means praising God in glory. Christians they say it not only to
God, the father, but to Jesus as well. [^4]

A mystery called Trinity
------------------------

An eminent scholar of Christian history admits that the present-day
Christianity is a ‘mask' on the face of Jesus. Muslims believe in Jesus
without the mask. This in a nutshell, has been the point of difference
between Islam and the church for the last 1400 years. Even before the
advent of Islam, the Arians, the Paulicians, and the Goths, to mention
only a few accepted Jesus, but rejected the ‘mask'.

The Christina faith contains mysteries and Christian theologians admit
that the doctrine of Trinity is one of them, and hence cannot be
logically explained. Thus, the sole so called proof for so-called the
Blessed Trinity is the Bible mainly the Gospel of John not even the
synoptic. They also attempt in explaining the Trinity in terms of
analogies involving clover leaves, the appearance of water as ice,
liquid and steam.

Trinity Vs Unity
----------------

If you have a Christian background, I suggest you free yourself from the
Councils and Creeds as well as the fear of being labeled a "heretic" by
friends and relatives, and then you will find in the following passages
the chance to confirm what you always suspected, the chance to replace
nonsense with sense, the chance to replace trinity with Monotheism.

### 1) Monotheism, the Chief Commandment

The Ten Commandments is spinal core and the common word of all divine
religions, which presents the main articles of faith. Although the
details of some of the Commandments are not exactly the same in the Old
Testament, New Testament and the Holy Quran, yet at least the very First
Commandment, which deals with the unity of God, is the same in all of
them. The following is the quotation from all the tree scriptures:

a. **The Old Testament:** “You *shall have no other gods before My face.
You shall make for yourself no idol in the likeness of anything in the
heavens above or on the earth below or in the waters under the
earth.*”[^5]

b. **New Testament: When** one of the scribes asked Jesus “which *is the
chief commandment of all”* Jesus answered: “The *chief one is, ‘ Hear O
Israel : The Lord our God is one Lord, and you shall love the Lord your
God with your whole heart, with your whole soul, with your whole mind,
and with your whole strength* .” [^6]

c. **The Holy Quran:** **“Say** ***(O Mohammad): Come I will recite what
your Lord has prohibited you from: Join not anything as equal with
Him”.***[^7]

Therefore, believing in One God is according to the words of Jesus
(peace be on him) the chief of the Ten Commandments and obviously when
he said: “OUR God is one Lord” he included himself. How is it then
possible for him to be of ‘the same substance of God' and ‘very God of
very God'? It is not the most impious act and accusation to Prophet
Jesus? Thus, Trinity is very unscriptural.

### 2) Trinity was blasphemy for the early Christians

### 3) Trinity is plurality of gods!

Christians admit the very differences between the persons of Trinity,
which leaves no shadow of doubt that they are neither equal to each
other nor are they to be identified with one another. The Father begets
and is not begotten; the son is begotten and not a father.

If the three are one, why Christians consider it a sin of heresy to
replace the order of the three; meaning by reversing the formula: ‘In
the name of the holy spirit, and of the son , and of the father'?! For
if they are absolutely equal and coeval, then order of precedence need
not be so scrupulously observed.

### 4) Trinity is illogical

Common sense and logic is the universal means of exchange of opinions
amongst humans. Through the means of logic one even from a different
religious or cultural denomination can convey his opinion and make
others understand it.

Christians say on the one hand that ‘there is only one God', and on the
other hand declare: ‘ Yet in the one name there are three eternal
persons.' The only conclusion is that they have a mathematical problem
that even Einstein could not solve. Because we learned at school that
one person plus another person plus another person are equal to three
persons, and they can never be one person.

In other words, one cannot be equal to three, because one is the third
of the three. In the same way, one is not equal to a third. And vice
versa, three are not equal to one.

Those who maintain the unity of God is the trinity of persons tell us
that ‘each person is omnipotent, omnipresent, eternal and perfect God;
yet there are not three omnipotent, omnipresent, eternal and perfect
god, but one omnipotent … God!

We all- Muslims and Christians- believe that God is Omnipresent, that He
fills and encompasses every space and particle. Is it conceivable that
all the three persons of the Deity at the same time and separately
encompass the universe, or is it only one of them at the time? To say
‘the Deity does this' would be no answer at all. For Deity is not God,
but the state of being god, and therefore a quality.

Despite all the attempts offered by Christian theologians in explaining
the doctrine of Trinity, nothing more than some biblical proofs or
analogies have been ever offered. Even the most prominent Christian
theologians admit that Trinity is another name for mystery. Thus, on
which basis do Christians expect non-Christians to believe it? Isn't
this the God of Bible who says: “ *Come now, let us reason together,
says the Lord”.* [^8]

### Does Trinity have a biblical proof?

No doubt, the term Trinity is never mentioned any where in the Bible.
Rather Prophet Jesus like other Prophets called for One God.

When Jesus (peace be on him) said: “… *Hear O Israel: the Lord our God
is one God”*. [^9]He included himself as a loyal subject of his Lord
God.

When Jesus said: *“I am ascending to my Father and your father, and to
my God and your God'* [^10] he puts himself and people in the same
category before God. Thus, if Jesus was the son of God, so were all
those of his community.  
 But even a man of average intelligence will conclude from the above
passage that he means he is ascending to God of all around him including
himself, and by Father he either means Adam, as his father and their
father, or God but not in a literal meaning, rather as an expression of
kindness and mercy of Him. Whatever meaning, however, one suggests, it
includes his community as well.

Who did Jesus worship?
----------------------

In the year … a debate took place between Imam Redha (peace be on him),
the 8th Imam of Ahlul-bait, and Al-Jatheliq the Christian archbishop at
the royal court of Ma'moon. A part of the debate reads:

- Imam Redha(a.s): “It is very unfortunate that your Jesus did not pray
or fast?”

- Al-Jaetheliq: “This is not true. As a matter of fact, he was praying
all nights and fasting all days”.

- Imam Redha(a.s): “Then, who was he praying to? Himself?! Does God pray
and fast?!”

### All gods died!

The author of Al-menar in his interpretation of the Quran, quotes the
story of three new converts to Christianity. After having studied under
a priest for a while, the teacher brought them to one of his Sunday
services. The father then asked them to explain to the crowd the meaning
of the blessed Trinity! The following is the answer offered by each one
of them:

A: “Father taught us that there is a god in the heaven, and another one
on earth and the third one came to the second in the shape of a pigeon.”

Father whilst being upset with his non-sense explanation, asked him to
sit down.

B: “Well! I think the father taught us that there were three gods. One
of them was crucified and hence we are left with two only.”

The father loosing his temper and hope in them, turned to the third
student whom he trusted his intelligence and asked him to explain the
Trinity.

C: “The blessed Trinity means: God the Father, and God the Son, and god
the Holy Spirit are three in one substance. And God the Son was
crucified which means all were crucified and we ended up with no god!”

[^1]: Refer to Ayah 4:18

[^2]: Articles of the apostolic Creed, Theodore Zahn pp.33-37 from
Jesus, Prophet of Islam p.9

[^3]: Ian Wilson, Jesus the Evidence. P.168

[^4]: See: II Timothy 4:18, Revelations 1:6

[^5]: Exodus 20:3-5

[^6]: Mark 12:29-30

[^7]: 6: 151

[^8]: Isaiah 1:18

[^9]: Mk 12:29

[^10]: Jn 20:17


