Chapter 17: God, & the Problem of Evil
======================================

**SYDNEY, 26 Dec. 2001**

Homes burned to the ground and hundreds of people were evacuated as
firefighters spent Christmas Day battling 70 fires blazing across NSW
and the ACT.

Fanned by winds of up to 90km/h, fires spread across the state from
Ballina in the north, to the lower Blue Mountains, Glenmore Park in
Sydney’s west, Helensburgh in the south and Huskisson on the south
coast.

The Daily Telegraph 26 Dec. 2001

**INDIA , Nov. 10, 1999**

India cyclone death toll estimated at 10,000; epidemic feared

Francis said more than 10 million were estimated to have lost their
homes, livestock or livelihood. Many people were dying of starvation
apart from gastroenteritis, he said. CNN 10 Nov ‘99

**ISTANBUL, Turkey, Aug. 20, 1999**

“Two devastating earthquakes hit Turkey within the space of less than
three months during 1999. The first - with its epicentre at Izmit in
Turkey’s heavily populated northwest - struck at 0302 hours local time
on 17 August. It left some 17,000 people dead and thousands more
homeless. The second struck just 100km away on 12 November, killing
hundreds more.

Voices of Trapped People Still Heard; Death Toll Tops 10,000;

**Police Detain Three Contractors**

Workers load the bodies of earthquake victims on a container truck after
pulling them from beneath the rubble in Sakarya , Turkey . With so many
corpses not yet buried, officials fear an epidemic of disease may follow
Tuesday's earthquake. U.N. officials were quoted as saying as many as
35,000 were still buried beneath rubble, but Turkish officials refused
to confirm that figure. There were, no doubt, thousands still buried.”  
*ABCNEWS*

Every now and then we come across striking news as above. The initial
reaction of many of us is that we immediately sit up on our comfortable
lounges in front of the TV ask: How could this happen? What kind of
world is this? And finally: How could a Benevolent and Almighty God
possibly allow such evil to occur?

You may be in a position to counsel people through their pain and grief,
but you don't really confront the question until you are caught in
tragic circumstances. It is then and only then that many questions will
challenge your mind and test your faith. This chapter aims at helping
you finding the roots of the problem and how to stand up to it
creatively.

From the time that mankind began their life on earth; they have been the
victims of many natural disasters, such as fatal bacteria and viruses,
earthquake, flood, tornado, lightning, fire, draught. This bitter
experience, for many, has made a considerable sense of the topsy-turvy
nature of the world with a conclusion that our world does not seem to
present a single, uniform goodness, under the guidance of a good God,
but rather a distressing mixture of good and evil with no one apparently
in final control.

Historical Background
---------------------

The problem of evil and insufficiencies in the world is one of the most
ancient philosophical problems that man has faced.

In Greek mythology, Mount Olympus believed by ancient Greeks to be the
dwelling place of mischievous bunch of gods. They are forever plotting
against each other and each other's devotees.

Historically, man has been offering animals or even human sacrifices to
please gods of storm, flood, etc. Each god would have also his or her
preferences in sacrifice.

For example, Shango, the Yoruba god of thunder and lightning, has a
taste for cock, sheep, crab, and turtle sacrifices. Some natural
disasters still carry their mythical names. The name hurricane comes
from the mighty storm god Hurikan. Volcano also has its name from
Vulcan, the god of fire in Roman mythology.

In Christian theology evil act began right from the creation of Adam and
Eve when Adam disobeyed God and the original sin was committed.

God and the problem of evil
---------------------------

Atheist philosophers are usually agnostic in that they claim there is no
ample proof for the existence of God without any claim of proof for the
non-existence of God.

In a debate between Bertrand Russell and father F. Copleston which was
broadcast in 1948 on BBC, Copleston asked Russell: “*Would* *you say
that the non-existence of God can be proven?”* Russell answers: “*No*,
*I should not say that. My position is agnostic.”* [^1]56

As a challenge to theism, however, the problem of evil has been posed in
the form of one of the following dilemmas:

**1) Proving the non-existence of God:** The topsy-turvy nature of the
world as we experience it, is inconsistent with the existence of God. In
order for God to exist, there must be a perfectly good world and if
there is an evil in the world, which obviously is, it proves that there
is no deity and final control over the world.

**2) Proving the duality of deity:** another dilemma that the problem of
evil poses is a dualist approach to the universe. Dualism suggests that
there are two major forces in the world. One is the creator of all that
is good and the other is the creator of evil.

In the history of development of religion there has been some religions
classified as forms of religious dualism. Manichæism for instance is a
religion founded by the Persian Mani in the latter half of the third
century and Zoroastrianism are regarded classic examples of dualism.

**3) Limiting Divine Attributes:** A very famous challenge to theism is
that the existence of evil limits at least one of the three divine
attributes of God. God is Omnipotent, Omniscient and Most Merciful and
Benevolent. The argument as propound by the Scottish philosopher; David
Hume (1711-1776) is:

*“Is God willing to prevent evil, but not able? Then He is impotent.*

*Is He able, but not willing? Then He is malevolent.*

*Is He both able and willing? Whence there is evil?”*[^2]

In other words, 1) either God is able to abolish all evil and He wills
to do so, 2) or He wills but is unable to do so, 3) or He is able but
doesn't want to, 4) or He doesn't want and is unable to abolish the
evil. The first hypnosis is against our findings and the rest result in
limiting God's attributes.

This challenge suggests that unless one of the divine attributes is
limited the problem of evil cannot be solved[^3]. Theists however
disagree on limiting God's attributes, and hence they need to find a
solution for Hume's argument.

**4) Insufficiency of Wisdom:** Finally that last but not the least
challenge for theism posed by the problem of evil is that existence of
evil proves that there is

no sufficient wisdom governing the world. They argue as why the wise God
has not created the world in a way that no evil exist or is empowered?
Why one has to be born blind, another deaf and the third disabled?
Insufficiency is not consistent with wisdom.

Definition
----------

In order for us to look for a solution for the problem of evil, we ought
to firstly find out what the evil is all about. We usually label
something evil when we assume its the cause of a harm any harm to us.
Thus, ***Evil*** is that which is morally bad or wrong, or that which
causes harm, pain, or misery. An earthquake is regarded an evil due to
its devastating harms and pain to humankind, so is a bloody war and a
fatal bacteria.

Initial Evil & Real Evil
------------------------

Many things may also initially appear evil and bad to us but a closer
and more precise look suggests that they are very useful and good.
Similarly, we may consider certain things good for us in the beginning,
but after a professional consultation we conclude that it is evil and
hence must be avoided.

Imagine a very tempting food when you are ill in comparison to a bitter
medication with a disgusting taste. Initially, your temptation desirous
towards the food, and refrains from taking the medicine, in spite of the
fact that the first is really harmful and hence evil for your body and
the latter is good.

Therefore, we need to be very careful of which basis are we attributing
an action or an event to be good or evil. Is it solely due to it’s
seemingly harm or benefit to me? Is it because it appears to be good or
evil to me? Is it only harmful to me or to every body? Have I thoroughly
examined all different impacts of it and then concluded that it’s evil?

Therefore, in the realm of humankind, the real good is what eventually
beneficial for mankind, and bad is what eventually harmful. Thus, if
there be a volcano or earthquake or lighting with absolutely no harms to
humans, is not regarded as evil.

Similarly, if there were no difference physically or mentally between a
disabled child and an able one, and they were both regarded normal,
there would be no pain and hence no evil would be concluded.

Types of Evil
-------------

Another key point to arrive at the best answer for the problem of evil
is to identify and distinguish between different types of evil.

Leibniz (1646-1716) the German philosopher and mathematician in his
famous book ‘ *Essays in Theodicy* [^4] *on the Goodness of God'* has
divided the examples of evil into three categories:

1. *Metaphysical evil:* This is an evil, which has prevailed the present
world. This is due to the limitation possessed by the world, which makes
it by nature unable to be possibly any better.

2. *Physical evil* , which includes all physical phenomena that causes
harm to man, from bacteria, viruses to natural disasters like
earthquake, volcano, and hurricane.

3. *Moral evil:* all pain and suffering caused by man's misuse of the
gift of free will, such as all criminal acts.

Out of all the three different types of evil, what has been really the
major concern of the theologians, are the last two. Also, as the third
type of evil is more of a moral discussion, is beyond the scope of this
chapter. Thus, I shall be dealing mainly with what is called natural
evil that is by and large has no human cause behind it.

Suggested Answers
-----------------

As old as the problem of evil is, there has been, and is a considerable
diversity of opinions suggested about it. The following the major ones.

### Christian Responses

According to John hick; the contemporary theologian, there are three
main Christian responses to the problem of evil: “The Augustinian
response, hinging upon the concept of the fall of man from an original
state of righteousness; the Irenaean response hinging upon the idea of
the gradual creation of a perfect humanity through life in a highly
imperfect world; and the response of modern process theology, hinging
upon the idea of a God who is not all-powerful and not in fact able to
prevent the evils arising either in human beings or in the processes of
nature.” [^5]

The main traditional Christian response to the problem of evil was first
formulated by St. Augustine (354-430) and has constituted the majority
report of the Christian mind through the centuries, although it has been
much criticized in recent times.

According to Augustine, evil always consists of the malfunctioning of
something that is in itself good. He gives the example of blindness that
is the lack of the proper functioning of the eye.

As for moral sins, he argues that the fall of angelic and human beings
were the origin or moral evil and sin. And natural evils are the
punishment of human sins. Thus, according to Augustine, “*All* *evil is
either sin or the punishment for sin.”*

As for physical evils, we know now that they existed long before human
beings came upon the scene. Today signs of arthritis have been found in
the bones of some prehistoric animals; that is hundred of millions of
years before Homo sapiens emerged.

In short, Augustinian response, represent the Christian and Hebrew
traditional philosophy according to which man has himself brought about
the evil from which he suffers by transgressing the law of God, on
obedience to which his happiness depended.

*The second* Christian response is that of Saint Irenaeus.

*The third* response is a modern development in which a number of
Christian theologians have adopted known as process theodicy.

Process theodicy holds that God cannot be unlimited in power but
interacts with the process of the universe, which God has not created
but is nevertheless able to influence.

A systematic version of this theology is offered by a leading
contemporary Christian theologian David Ray Griffin's publication:
**God, Power and Evil: A Process Theodicy:** ***“*** *God does not
refrain from controlling the creatures simply because it is better for
God to use persuasion, but because it is necessarily the case that God
cannot completely control the creatures* ***.”*** [^6]

According to Process Theodicy God is a part -though a uniquely basic
part- of the universe itself, unable to either barrier its fundamental
structure or to intervene directly in its evil, since it is not within
God's power to prevent it. According to this, all evils are just part of
the actual process of the universe.

Obviously this is a free ticket to ancient Zoroastrianism and
Manichaeism of dualism, which is far from the God of the Bible let alone
the Quran. Process' God is not worthy of worship and praise since he is
not an omnipotent deity.

[^1]: Why I am not a Christian, p.144

[^2]: Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, 1779

[^3]: One of the most famous novels on the subject of God and evil is “
When bad things happen to good people” [3] by Rabbi Harold Kushner. His
son's long illness inspired him to write a book on the subject to help
many who have been in the similar predicament as his. Yet, in spite of
confirming that God is indeed all-good, he fails to affirm that God is
also all-powerful

[^4]: Theodicy (justice of God) is a technical term formulated by
Leibniz for attempts to solve the theological problem of evil.

[^5]: Philosophy of Religion, p.41

[^6]: p.276


