Chapter 3: Tools of Knowledge 1
===============================

***And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and
the difference of your languages and colours. Verily, in that are indeed
Signs for men of Sound knowledge. The Holy Qur'an*** **[30:22]**

Knowing that we really do exist and there is an existing world around
us, the next question arises as to what the reality of knowledge is and
how can we gain knowledge about ourselves and the world around us? What
types of Tools of Knowledge do we have? What is the relation between the
knower and the object known? How much of the real world is accessible to
us?

Types of Knowledge
------------------

Human knowledge is divided solely into two types:

1. Knowledge by presence. Like the knowledge everyone has about one's
self. Such as the knowledge you yourself have about your feelings. In
this type of knowledge the knower and the known object are unified.

2. Acquired knowledge. This is most types of human knowledge and is also
the one that we will mainly deal with in this chapter.

Definition of Knowledge
-----------------------

Imagine a picture of a natural scene is shown to you. The size of the
picture is 10 X 15 cm. In the picture you see a landscape that you know
is about 5 square kilometers surrounded by tall mountains.

A river which you approximate it's width to be fifty meters is crossing
the middle of the view. At the river's bank from both sides you can see
tall white silver firs lined up. Your family is also seated under the
trees having their lunch. I could go on more, describing further details
of the picture.

Now, if your friend were to ask you if the picture you have at hand
contains all the length, width, depth and physical characteristics of
that landscape, how would you reply?

“Obviously not”, you will reply without hesitation. All that would not
fit in such a small space. What are really on the paper are some
colourful spots. Yet, it is the image of the landscape.

The function of our mind is similar to a camera, or a mirror, which
reflects the image of the object known.

Although knowledge does not really need any definition, it is sometimes
defined as:

“*The presence of the image of an object in mind*.” [al-modhaffar:
Al-manteq] Therefore, knowledge is the bridge of converting a real
external object, in its true form, to its reflection in one's mind.

Differences between Mind and Mirror
-----------------------------------

Despite similarities between the function of the mind and that of the
mirror, there are at least five differences, which uniquely characterise
the function of mind.

1. ***Reflection of meaning:*** *A* Mirror reflects solely optical
images. In other words, if a man is standing in front of the mirror, it
will show his body shape, colour and size. The mirror under no
circumstances reflects his knowledge, feelings, hatred or love for
others etc. However, the mind can reflect not only the sensible objects
but emotion and feelings as well.

2. ***Non-correction power:*** If the mirror is concave it shows the
object bigger than its real size, and smaller if it is convex. It has no
power of knowing its mistakes or any ability to correct them. However,
the human mind can uncover the mistakes of illusions and is also able to
correct them explaining why and how the illusions and delusions occur.

3. ***Self-reflecting:*** no mirror in the world can reflect its own
image to itself, whereas the mind is capable of reflecting others images
as well as its own. Rather the mind's own reflection is far more
accurate, a phenomenon called ‘knowledge by presence'.

4. ***Generalization:*** A mirror will only reflect objects put in front
of it. It has no power of reflecting any other object around it.
However, the human mind recognizes and reflects sighted objects as well
as being capable of linking them to numerous similar objects and
applying the same rules to them. Scientific laws are derived from the
means of this characteristic of the mind.

5. ***Deepening:*** Any mirror will only reflect the object in front of
it. It cannot convert the reflected object to another mirror to reflect
another object. By contrast, our mind is able to change an object known
to another reflective object reflecting the reality of a third known
object. This is called a ‘ *Sign Knowledge* ', which will be explained
later in this chapter.

Ignorance and its types
-----------------------

Before we proceed any further to discover the sources of human
knowledge, let me share with you the meaning of ignorance and two types
of it.

*Ignorance* by definition is **‘*****lack*** ***of knowledge on the part
of one who is able to obtain knowledge.'*** Thus, a piece of wood or a
rock, are not ignorant as they are not capable of obtaining knowledge.

Ignorance is also divided into two types:

1. ***Simple Ignorance:*** This means a type of ignorance where the
person is aware of his ignorance. The famous saying of Socrates
“*Wisest* *is he who knows what he does not know”* refers to this first
type of ignorance.

2. ***Compound Ignorance:*** Is a type of ignorance where the ignorant
is unaware of his ignorance and moreover assumes that he does know.
Compound ignorance is the combination of two types of ignorance; firstly
ignorance about the truth and secondly, ignorance of the fact that he
does not know the truth. The example of compound ignorance is optical
illusions such as mirage.

Tools for Acquiring Knowledge
-----------------------------

### Sense experience

Nature is the first human source of knowledge and our five external
senses are the tools of accessing this source.

From the time we are born, we hear sounds around us, we see objects and
people around us, we touch and taste and smell things and through each
we gain some knowledge accordingly.

Human beings are similar to animals at this level, with the only
difference being in the level of perception between humans and some
animals. For instance, the sense of smell in dogs and ants is stronger
than in humans, as are the navigational skills of a bat stronger than a
human. Dogs see are only able to see the colour gray etc.

In spite of the differences in depth of sensory perception between
humans and animals, it is common-sensical that for a healthy human
being, external senses are the first tools of obtaining knowledge to the
extend that it is said in Arabic: *“One who misses a sense misses a
knowledge”.*

However, there are different opinions among philosophers from ancient
times to the present about the validity of our sense of perception.
Plato, for instance, did not accept nature as a source of knowledge; his
reason being the relationship between mankind and nature is interlinked
and therefore cannot bring about knowledge.

Descartes and Kant also hold the view that sensory perception is good
for daily life experiences yet it is not a reliable tool for obtaining
knowledge. [^1]

In contrast, empiricists assert that human knowledge arises from what is
provided to the mind by the senses or by introspective awareness through
experience. John Locke, the English philosopher of the 18th and 19th
century, was the first to give this systematic expression to empiricism
followed by George Berkeley and David Hume.

According to empiricism sensory and sensational experience are the only
tools to feed the human mind with knowledge. Thus, we can only
understand what we can physically perceive. Even when one imagines a
mountain of gold, is it because you have already seen a mountain of
gold? Or rather because you have seen a mountain and you have seen gold?
Your mind then combines these two sensational perceptions into one.

Positivists, such as French mathematician and philosopher Auguste Comte
of the 19th century, further developed the idea of empiricists and based
their philosophy on experience and empirical knowledge of natural
phenomena, in which metaphysics and theology are regarded as inadequate
and imperfect systems of knowledge.

During the early 20th century a group of philosophers who were concerned
with developments in modern science, rejected the traditional positivist
ideas that held personal experience to be the basis of true knowledge
and emphasized the importance of scientific verification. In short, the
main theory of empiricists is that without sensory perception, we have
no knowledge about the world.

#### Characteristics of Sensory Perception

a. ***Individualist:*** The first characteristic of sensory perception
is that it is obtained individually. For instance, a child gradually
gets to know her mother, then father then brothers and sisters and so
on. She has no idea of human kind in general.

b. ***Appearance:*** Sensory perception also shares with us the
appearance of the objects. For instance, your eyes can only bring
knowledge about colours and shape and size of an object. It cannot show
us the depth and the nature of it.

c. ***The Present:*** Sensory perception belongs only to the present
time. It cannot show us the past or the future. In other words, you
cannot observe the events prior to your birth. (remember the film of
past events is not the event itself.)

d. ***Regional:*** Sensory perception is also limited by place. Human
and animals can obtain sensational knowledge of the area, which is
within their vision or hearing. For instance, as far as sensory
perception is concerned, we have no sensational knowledge about the
surface of the moon, for in order to do so, one would have to have had
personal sensational experience of it.

### Comments on Empiricism

Although it is agreed that sensory experience is the first and foremost
elementary tool of knowledge for humans and animals, we do not limit the
tools for which to gain knowledge, to the senses for the following
reasons:

1) Senses can only show us objects. The relationship between them is
uncovered by the means of rational thinking. For instance, our eyes can
see the key and the lock, but the functioning relationship between them
is known by the rational law of cause and effect. In other words, no
scientific law could be possibly obtained without rational analysis
attached to the sensory experience.

Unfortunately some of the empiricists such as Hume have denied the law
of cause and effect, as it would not be compatible with the theory of
empiricism. He explained that the relation between the unlocking by
means of a key exists by what he calls ‘mere association' which makes us
believe the relation is permanent.

His point is that all human knowledge is based on the theory that ‘if A
therefore B' and includes his hypothesis ‘or else'. He cannot, however,
suggest a certain idea either. (Pay attention!)

It is important however to note that in addition to linking objects by
cause and effect, so many objects of natural phenomena come into
association with each other such as day and night, pen and pencil, book
and library, yet we never relate them to each other as cause and effect.

2) Sensory experience cannot denote the impossibility of the impossible.
For example, sensory experience cannot denote the existence of a
triangle with four angles, simply because the senses have no ability to
experience such things.

3) Mathematics is the most certain science yet it is not experimental.
In fact, many of its concepts cannot be experienced by the senses. For
example, there is no circle in the real world where the distance between
its perimeter and the centre is exactly the same from any point.

### Rational perception

In light of the above explanation, it is obvious that reasoning and
rational analysis are the second necessary tools for obtaining knowledge
in humans. In addition to this, there are certain types of mathematical
knowledge such as geometry, which is considered the ideal for all
sciences and philosophy.

However it is important to note that there are certain geometrical rules
that are universally agreed upon as to their certainty by the means of
reasoning alone.

This fact has obligated some philosophers such as Rene Descartes and
Immanuel Kant, to form the doctrine of Rationalism, which emphasises the
unique role of reasoning in obtaining knowledge, in contrast to
empiricism, which emphasises the role of sensory perception to obtain
knowledge.

We believe reasoning is the higher tool of obtaining knowledge and is
the very tool, which distinguishes the realm of humans from the kingdom
of animals.

Nonetheless, we do not agree that reasoning is the sole tool of
obtaining knowledge. In fact, the main problem of empiricists as well as
rationalists is that each one tries to generalize a tool beyond its own
world.

Empiricists are correct in a sense that most natural knowledge cannot be
obtained without enjoying sensory experience, just as it is impossible
to explain to a born blind the difference between the different colours.
Thus, it amazes us to learn that Beethoven, one of the greatest
musicians of all time, had lost the sense that he would have relied on
most, his sense of hearing. However, he was not **born** deaf.

### Sign

One of the greatest tools of obtaining knowledge is what is introduced
to mankind by the Holy Quran, named ‘ *the tool of Sign'.*

The contemporary Iranian Muslim philosopher; Motahari is perhaps the
first who discovered this as a tool of human knowledge. Most human
knowledge is in fact obtained by the means of signs. According to
Motahari and other Muslim philosophers “epistemologically there is no
difference between knowing about Napoleon Bonaparte and knowing God in a
sense that we people of the 21st century have not eye witnessed any of
them.

Therefore, since we know about Napoleon by means of some historical
signs affirming his existence and life, similarly we know about the
existence of God by the means of natural, rational and other types of
signs glorifying His existence. The Holy Qur'an considers the entire
world “Divine Signs”. For instance, consider the Ayat of 20-22 in
chapter 30 of the Holy Qur'an:

**“** ***And of His signs is that He created you from dust, then lo! Ye
are human beings scattering (in the world). And of his signs is that he
created for you from your selves, mates that ye may dwell (inclined)
unto them, and caused between you love and compassion: Verily in this
are signs for a people who reflect. And of His signs is the creation of
the heavens and the earth and the variety of your languages and your
complexions; verily in this are signs for the learned (ones).”***

When your teacher gives you a lesson, how would you know about his
knowledge level? Is it that his eyes, face, height, or any other part of
his appearance reflect his knowledge, or is it that the subject he is
sharing with you is like a sign (secondary mirror as explained in the
beginning of this chapter) reflecting his knowledge to you?

When you really pay more careful attention to most human knowledge, you
will agree that most of our knowledge is in fact obtained in such a
manner. Therefore, the one who is limits his knowledge to whatever he
can experience by his surgical knife instead of the library has already
closed his eyes to most human knowledge.

[^1]: This, incidentally is in spite of the fact that when Descartes was
asked about his library by one of his friends he took him to his
backyard showing him the dissection of a calf as being his library.


