Chapter 9: The Blueprint of Life
================================

Evolution or/and Creation
-------------------------

Throughout history, philosophers, religious thinkers and scientists have
attempted to explain the history and variety of life on Earth. During
the rise of modern science in Western Europe in the 17th and 18th
centuries, a predominant view held among Christians was that God created
every organism on Earth more or less as it now exists.

But in that time the study of fossils and natural history, a modern
evolutionary theory began to take shape. Early evolutionary theories
proposed that all of life on Earth evolved gradually from simple
organisms. Today this has become the cornerstone of modern biology.

Since ancient time man has been trying to develop explanations for the
origins of life. Different cultures have attempted this in different
ways. These are some of the mysterious questions that have been asked:

1) Does life exist elsewhere in the universe?

2) Is earth the only planet where life has developed?

3) Is the present human evolved from the Chimpanzee?

Evolution; the Cornerstone of Modern Biology
--------------------------------------------

Today, evolution is recognized as the cornerstone of modern biology.
Usually every student who chooses a unit in biology at high school is
taught about the theory of evolution. It is also assumed that evolution
is in conflict with believing in God as a creator.

The objective of this chapter is to unmask this myth and to show to you
that:

1) Evolution is nothing more than a theory not a scientific fact.

2) It stands in no conflict with the Islamic conception of creation.

Historical background
---------------------

The Greek philosopher Anaximander, who lived in the 500s BC, is
generally credited as the earliest evolutionist. He believed that humans
evolved from fishlike aquatic beings that left the water once they had
developed sufficiently to survive on land.

Nonetheless, the modern concept of evolution is credited to Darwin and
Wallace; the British scientists of 19 th century. Charles Darwin by
publishing his book ‘ On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural
Selection' on November 24, 1859, set off a storm of controversy.
According to Darwin:

“All *living organisms, from microscopic bacteria to plants, insects,
birds, and mammals, share a common ancestor”*.

The animal most closely related to humans, for example, is the
chimpanzee. The common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees is believed to
have lived approximately 6 million to 7 million years ago. On the other
hand an ancestor common to humans and reptiles lived some 300 million
years ago.

Fossil records suggest that the modern groups of vertebrates appeared in
the following order:

Jawless fish: 500 million years ago

Bony fish: 400 million years ago

Amphibians: 360 million years ago

Reptiles: 300 million years ago

Birds: 190 million years ago

Mammals: 150 million years ago

(Ref: “Biology” pp275. Kate Mudie & Judith Brotherton)

The Roots of the Theory of Evolution
------------------------------------

### 1. Paleontology (the study of fossils)

Fossils are ant preserved remains or traces of past life found in rocks
of different ages. Biologists by measuring radioactivity in the rocks in
which a fossil is embedded, can determine the age of that fossil.

### 2. Distribution of Species

Scientists also learn about evolution by studying how different species
of plants and animals are geographically distributed in nature, and how
they relate to their environment and to each other. Darwin visited New
South Wales, staying in Sydney in 1836 and took examples of plants and
animals to compare how they are related to animals and plants in the
rest of the world.

### 3. Anatomical Similarities

### 4. Molecular Similarities

That almost all living organisms have DNA.

### 5. Direct Observation

Insects have short life spans and therefore enable the biologists to
observe their reproduction in the laboratory. Fruit flies are the
example of such observation for evolutionary process.

### 6. Determining Life's Origins

In 1953 two American chemists Miller and Urey attempted to produce the
atmosphere of primitive Earth nearly 4 billion years previously. With
the mixture of hydrogen, methane, ammonia and water vapour they managed
to produce amino acids, which are the basic components for life.

Comments on the roots of the theory of evolution
------------------------------------------------

1. Similarities between species do not necessarily prove they are
evolved from each other. It rather suggests their unique Source of
Creation as well as their unique design in the cosmos. After visiting
Australia, Darwin writes the following in his diary:

*“Earlier in the evening I had been lying on a sunny bank reflecting on
the strange character of the Animals in this country as compared to the
rest of the World.”*

A Disbeliever in everything beyond his own reason, might exclaim,
‘*Surely two distinct creators must have been at work; their object
however has been the same and certainly in each case the end is
complete* .” [^1]

2. ‘ Darwin 's Black Box'. ‘Darwin’s Black Box' is the name of a book
written by Michael J. Behe, a biochemist at Lehigh University in the USA
. Black box refers to a device that functions but whose inner workings
are a mystery. This book is a biochemical challenge to evolution. In his
book, Behe argues that the idea of Darwinism is being pushed to its
limits by discoveries in biochemistry.

Behe asserts that research has shown that life is based on machines, and
machines on molecules. He claims that molecule machines cannot be
explained by random mutation or natural selection. Thus, he says, in
ancient times, all biology was a black box; that is none of the workings
of life were known. Later on, scientific experimentation and observation
led to greater understanding. But this greater understanding led to even
more black boxes on a smaller scale.

“The Question of how life works still remains- it is the ultimate black
box.”

3. ‘ Not By Chance'

‘Not By Chance' is the name of a book written by Dr. Lee Spetner in
which he shatters the modern theory of evolution. Unlike Darwin,
neo-Darwinism claims that evolution works by accumulating random
mutations. For example, according to a neo-Darwinist called Stebbins, it
is estimated that to get to a new species would take about 500 steps
(point mutations).

Dr. Spetner shattering this theory, calculates the probability of this
and concludes that it is impossible for a new species to ever originate
in this way for the available time (of the Earth) is not enough to
produce new species. He further adds that the only way to explain
evolution without a trial or error process, is magic ‘set up' of the
genome, or as theists say ‘designing'.

4. Conflict with the second law of thermodynamics

The second law is a straightforward law of physics with the consequence
that, in a closed system, one cannot finish any real physical process
with as much useful energy as you had to start with — some is always
wasted. This means that a perpetual motion machine is an impossibility.

*Life is organization.* From prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells,
tissues, and organs, to plants and animals, families, communities,
ecosystems, and living planets, life is organization, at every scale.
The evolution of life is the increase of biological organization, if it
is anything.

Clearly, if life originates and makes evolutionary progress without any
*external organizing input* , then something has organized itself. This
is in conflict with the second law of thermodynamics.

There is a well documented, well illustrated on line article about two
types of entropy [^2]and their relation with evolution. The article is
‘The Second Law of Thermodynamics' by Brig Klyce and can be found online
at: <http://www.panspermia.org/seconlaw.htm>

Conclusions to be drawn from this discussion
--------------------------------------------

1. Evolution is not a scientific law as it is taught to us at school.

2. Evolution, even as a theory, is another proof for the existence of a
unique Designer and Creator of the universe.

3. There is no evidence that life has developed, or even could have
developed, by a purely natural process. Even Miller and Urey could never
produce a living organism.

4. The question of the origin of life is still an ultimate ‘black box '
for contemporary scientists.

[^1]: Ibid, p.176

[^2]: A quantity expressing how much of a system's thermal energy is
unavailable for conversion into mechanical work.


