Themes 1: Our Youth In the Light of The Qur’an
==============================================

Our Youth in the Light of the Qur’an
------------------------------------

The issue of education is subject to many influences arising from the
various dimensions of human perception - regardless of whether the forum
of education is intellectual, emotional, or pertains to the general
environment of the person. Therefore, it is natural that the word -
which is the medium that communicates the idea from one human being to
another - should be significant and dynamic enough to convey thought,
spirit, and work.

Throughout the history of human communication, words have often been
suggestive of things which are not immediately apparent from the
language itself. This is because the word becomes associated with
certain references which either widen the focus from or narrow it to the
core meaning.

Hence, the word has been the divine medium of instruction, God having
sent His prophets with sacred books, which He revealed to them. We see
that the movement of human education is the long path of the word in
human history, embracing every negative and positive effect in this
history.

Exhortation by Words
--------------------

In light of the above, let us continue in the same general framework
with respect to words. The words of exhortation used in the Qur’an,
wherein Luqman counsels his son, are designed to expand his horizons on
matters of doctrine and life.

We notice that the exhortation concerns ideas which carry aspects
related to the senses and the perceptions. Ideas are not mere
abstractions to be contemplated purely for their intellectual content,
but contain aspects grasped by sensory experience.

Combining Intellect and Emotions
--------------------------------

Exhortation carries along with its ideational aspect, certain elements
of human sentiment and feeling, so that the issue becomes one of
combining the intellect and the emotions. In this manner it penetrates
into the heart and mind of the person. For mixing the intellect with the
emotions causes a state which grips and transforms the person. The
various dimensions involved make a given concept something that tugs at
the innermost core of the person.

This is what we observe in every exhortation where the intellectual
aspect is in concert with the sensory and emotional facet. When applied
to exhortation or nurturing, this method is probably the most effective
in transforming a person. This is because the error committed by many in
planting an idea is to focus on the purely cerebral aspect of their
concept, rendering it much like a lifeless engineering formula which
addresses the human intellect without in any way harnessing the other
dimensions of the human perception.

On the other hand, there are those who deal only with the emotional
aspect which does not spur a person to intellectual contemplation. This
leaves a gap between the concept and faith. And so we find that many
have an idea, but do not really believe in it, since the aspect of faith
requires that an idea change itself into something sensory, and then is
transformed into action based on perception.

Qur’anic Method of Exhortation
------------------------------

The value of the Qur'anic method is that it attempts to articulate life
issues. Therefore, we see that it pushes the idea closer to the mind, in
respect of what a person sees, hears, and touches. It implants the
concept in the deepest and sincerest parts of the person's being, by
process of fear, hope, hate, etc.

When we contemplate this, we find that the most successful and effective
exhortation is that which is well planned, which is delivered by those
who use the forcefulness of the intellect and emotion, and which uses
all that appeals to cerebral and emotional faculties.

Exhortation by Example
----------------------

A point which needs to be elaborated upon is that speech may form the
greater part of exhortation, but that the two may in fact be far apart.
There is the saying that he who does not have an exhorter within
himself, cannot benefit from an exhorter. This means that a person can
exhort himself by himself, in terms of his experience.

This is what Imam ‘Ali spoke about in *Nahj al-Balagha: "*The best of
what you experience is that which exhorts you." For your experience is
what may teach you a lesson, concept, and contemplation of your current
situation, with respect to what intellectual and sentimental aspects it
possesses. On this basis, therefore, we find that one type of homily is
when a person preaches by his actions before words.

In this fashion, we can put exhortation as an umbrella term,
encompassing every means of intellectual or behavioural experience, or
that which is related to the reactions of others. All this shows that
there is a broad outline for the process of exhortation. Briefly, it is
a functional method, different in its means of delivery, which puts the
concept to the person and corrects what is corrupt in his life,
straightens out what needs to be in his character, or opens up to
horizons hitherto closed to him in his life.

Addressee's Role
----------------

Homiletic address is the purpose of the preacher, in that he presents
his arguments to the best of his *efforts in* order to push the idea he
intended to stress. As such, the person who accepts exhortation must
have the ability, responsibility, and desire to do everything mentioned
in this homily.

This is because exhortation is a response by words, by action, by
example, by any means that reaches the intellect. A person who does not
react to exhortation is no different from a corpse which has lost all
the sense faculties. Loss of the sensory faculties may be a natural
state in a dead person; it may be that a living person has frozen all
sensation in his being.

God speaks about this repeatedly in the Qur’an:

***"They have hearts with which they think not, they have eyes that see
not, as they have ears that hear not"*** ***(al-A'raf, 7:179).***

This means that the human being may paralyse his sensory faculties and
perception, emotions or ambitions in his personality, thus becoming as a
living dead:

***"It is the same whether you warn them or do not warn them: they do
not believe"*** ***(al-Baqara, 2:6);***

***“God has placed a seal on their hearts and hearing, and in their
sight a blindness” (al-Baqara, 2: 7)***

*i.e.*, how can you incite a person to act on exhortation from within
himself when he rejects good preaching?

Abrahamic Education
-------------------

***O my father! Do as you are commanded!*** ***(Al-Saffat, 37:102)***

These are the words uttered by Ismael as he was submitting to the divine
will. Is it possible to emulate this submission and obedience?

When we study the personality of Abraham from his early rearing, we find
a personality of human responsiveness to God. This typified his reaction
to every truth in life. When we wish to study the noble Qur’an
rhetorically, we find that Abraham was a man who challenged corrupt
ideas, whether of non-belief or of polytheism. His challenges emerged
directly from the disquiet he felt when he learned about the people
around him.

This is what we observe in him in his innermost thoughts, when
reflecting upon the personality of those who worshipped the stars, moon,
or sun. He expressed awe before the stars, the moon, and the sun in all
their glory. Challenging the idea of worshipping them, however, he
declared that they could not be gods, for God is present in every aspect
of life.

In our view, this indicates how his function of guiding the community
towards faith had caused a shock wave in the midst of the community. It
is demonstrated by his act of breaking the idols and blaming the largest
of these idols. His action was based on the principle of forcing them to
admit that the idols could not speak:

***"Certainly you know that they do not speak"*** ***(al Anbiya,***
***21:65).***

In the course of his reaction, he debated their doctrine and ideology,
and showed these to be baseless. This indicated where he stood with
respect to his father, whom he dared in words which sometimes evince
empathy, sometimes reflect harsh reality.

His attitude is equally reflected in his opposition to the tyrant of his
time, when the latter declared, "I give life and I cause to die."

***My Lord is He who gives life and causes to die . . . Abraham said:
God causes the sun to rise from the east, then make it rise from the
west. And so the one who disbelieved was confounded*****.
(*****Al-Baqara,*** **2:258)**

The Man of God
--------------

We may note - from the foregoing - the condition which makes Abraham a
man of God, someone intensely aware of his responsibility that he should
live for God and far from every other attachment, every difficulty, in
order to find himself a servant of God. So much so that he felt it
incumbent upon him to dedicate his entire life to God. This is what we
infer from God's words,

***"And God took Abraham as a friend" (al-Nisa',*** ***4:125).***

God's friendship for Abraham was due to Abraham's friendship for God,
being reciprocal in kind:

***"He loves them and they love Him" (al Ma'ida, 5:54).***

This relationship of worship is the highest connection that a mortal can
have with his Lord. This expands and develops into friendship.

The friendship between Abraham and God, an inevitable result of active
worship, led to the realization that Abraham's presence depended on God.
Concomitant with this is the knowledge, too, that the entire universe is
dependent on God. This made Abraham perceive one of the ways towards God
when he asked Him to bring the dead back to life:

***Show me how You give life to the dead. [God] said: Do you not
believe? [Abraham] said: Most certainly! But only that my heart be at
ease.*** ***(Al-Baqarah, 2:260)***

This shows that when Abraham spoke to his Lord, when he lived with Him,
he perceived a life of spontaneity and inspiration, mixed with the
observation of faith in worship, on the one hand, and love and
obedience, on the other.

From this perspective, we find that Abraham lived Islam for God, and we
are likely to understand from the Qur’an that he was the first to use
the term *al-Islam:*

***The milla of your father Abraham, who called you Muslims from before
. . .(Al-Hajj, 22:78)***

***When his Lord told him: Submit [aslim], he said: I submit to the Lord
of all the Worlds. And Abraham left a legacy to his children, as did
Jacob, saying thus: O my children! God has chosen for you the religion,
and die only as Muslims!*** ***(al-Baqarah, 2:131-32)***

It was Abraham who coined the word Islam ["submission to God"] after
hearing it from God (Exalted). As a result of this, every Abrahamic
prophethood - if this term can be used - took the name of Islam in its
inclusive sense:

***"Verily the religion with God is al-Islam" (al-Imran, 3:19);***

***"And whoever follows other than Islam, it will not be accepted from
him" (al-Imran, 3:85).***

 It is this comprehensive Islam which is carried in every prophethood;
it is the line of tawhid.

Naturally, we may note that Abraham was a man who lived with God in his
entire being and in all his actions. He worked to establish an
instructional modus in his particular environment. This was so he could
transmit to his descendants this realized, elevated Islam which he lived
with God. He also worked towards transmitting this Islam to all of
humankind. This is the message of the glorious verse:

***"And Abraham left as a legacy to his children, as did Jacob, saying
thus: O my children! God has chosen for you the religion, and die only
as Muslims!"(al-Baqarah, 2:132).***

Islam as a Medium of Instruction
--------------------------------

Islam then was a method of instruction which Abraham wanted his children
to exemplify, religion being part of it. It would appear that this
method of instruction insinuated itself as a practical application in
the case of Ismael and as a policy in the case of Jacob.

When we read the words of God:

***"We gave him tidings of a forbearing son"*** ***(al-Saffat,***
***37:101)***

we see that Abraham had hoped for a son after his trials, and God
granted him a forbearing, mild-tempered son, who was responsive of
heart, and did not reject or shirk any sign, however pressing or
difficult the circumstances. The verse

***"And when he reached the age when he could go forth with his
father"*** ***(al-Saffat,*** ***37:102)***

tells us that Ismael lived in close attachment to his father in the time
that they had spent together. For any man blessed with a handsome son
after enduring suffering, this was only natural. Abraham gave his entire
heart and faith to his Lord, and he taught his son his spiritual
contemplation, which reflected every aspect of thought, spirit, worship,
and deed. Ismael's state was, therefore, transformed into one of Islam -
meaning that he became a Muslim in an absolute sense, as was his father.

The Challenge to Affection and the Self
---------------------------------------

From this comes the experience which God (Exalted) wishes the father and
the son to live in order to give example of Islam in its highest
essence. This was realized in such a way that the affection of the
father was severely tested when Abraham was called to sacrifice his son.
He did not stand by and let others sacrifice his son. He had to subdue
his own sense of affection, mercy, love, and any loving attachment -
sentiments which reside in every father towards an only and beloved
child.

On the other hand, Ismael's love for another human being was also
challenged. The faith of both was challenged. And this dared them to
respond to the subjection of one's affections for one's own child, the
killing of one's feelings. They both succeeded in this, and this is what
we note in God's words, for Abraham said to his son:

***"O my son, I see in my sleep that I sacrifice you, so what do you
think?..." (al-Saffat, 37:102).***

According to the Qur’anic text, Ismael did not stop once to think or
reflect about this matter:

***"…He said: O my fatherl Do as you are commanded; You will find me,
God willing, among the forbearing!"*** ***(al-Saffat,*** ***37:102).***

Fatherhood and Prophethood
--------------------------

The foregoing analysis tells us that Abraham succeeded in rearing his
son to this degree of spiritual Islam, where a human being can subjugate
his own feelings in deference to God's commands. We can equally perceive
that Abraham did not behave as would many fathers whom God has blessed
with a son after trial, by spoiling and giving such a son a twisted and
abused freedom; so much so, the errors of the child come to be seen as
holy, his evil as good - in the light of the doting, blind affection
which does not permit the father to endure the pain of such a child.

We understand that there was some readiness on the part of Ismael, and a
sort of dedication from Abraham in his prophetic test. Abraham did not
see his son through the lens of mortals' sentimentality; he saw him from
a prophetic vantage point. A man like Abraham has to comport himself in
life as a slave of God, absolutely dedicated to Him. It is not for me
then to determine my fatherly or paternal feelings towards my child, or
to make his filial relation to me a pretext for drowning myself in
selfish feelings.

Rather, I must know that the son is a slave of Allah, and I must
emphasize the worship of God. I have to realize that he is a member of
the human community, and that I am obligated to make him a man,
strengthened by the human trials of faith and uprightness.

Blending Humanness and Prophethood
----------------------------------

Abraham was able to blend his human with his prophetic dimension. He did
so from the perspective of fatherhood in relation to prophethood, for he
focused his human sentiments on making his son truly elevated before
God. He created a proximity between the boy and God to achieve the
overwhelming abundance of divine mercy and paradise.

In respect of prophethood, he directed himself to being a prophet as
much for his son as for all of humankind. Abraham did not do as would
have many: making his message one for humankind at the expense of being
distant and isolated from his own family and children, leaving them on
their own.

Indeed, Abraham succeeded in rearing prophetic personalities after him.
While building the House of God, he formed the personality of Ismael by
letting him accompany him in that task:

***"And when Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the House"
(al Baqara,*** ***2:127).***

 He caused Ismael to live in the spiritual atmosphere surrounding the
construction of the House, an undertaking at once spiritual and
physical. Isaac and Jacob were able to perceive things in this same
light:

***Were you not witnesses when Jacob was about to die, as he asked his
children: What will you worship after me? They said: We worship your
God, the God of your fathers, Abraham and Ismael and Isaac, the One God,
and to Him do we submit.*** ***(Al-Baqara, 2:133)***

Jacob, the grandson of Abraham, lived this prophetic life under the
aegis of Islam, and spoke to his children in exactly the same manner as
Abraham had done to his.

We find in the Qur’an no details as to the method of instruction which
Abraham followed with Ismael and Isaac, and which Isaac used with Jacob.
In the spiritual environment which Abraham created for his children and
by which the response of these children was to be influenced, if we
consider legacy as one facet and the example another, and if we follow
the same spiritual path they lived, then all this plainly led to the
efficacious results in the Islam of Ismael, Isaac, and Jacob.

Children of Prophets are Like Any Other Humans
----------------------------------------------

Contrasting with the story of Abraham and Ismael is the Qur’an's story
of Noah and his son. In the former, there is an invitation to sacrifice,
in the latter an invitation to salvation. On the one hand, there is
obedience and submission; on the other, rejection and rebellion. What
can we learn from all this?

The children of prophets, Imams, and the ‘ulama ["religious scholars"]
are all human, like the rest of homo *sapiens,* molded as much by
positive influences as by negative ones. They probably live, too, within
the arena of conflict, where positive forces confront negative ones,
that each may learn and experience internal conflict by wrestling with
powerful external conflict.

On this basis, it is not a foregone conclusion that the child of a
prophet will be righteous, or that the child of an Imam or a 'alim or an
activist will be like the parent. The father forms part of the
environment, and he is simply one of several factors which condition the
personality of the child. The father may live a sort of existence that
is unstable or weak, in the course of which he cannot exert any strong
influence on his family which might offset opposing forces or pressures
impinging on his own activities.

All this may constitute a problem for those who call to Islam, whether
they be prophets, guardians, or 'ulama. This is because the pressure of
belief and challenge in inviting others to Islam (*da'wa*) can engage
man's full attention at the expense of his household. He is open to the
entire world and closed to his family. This is the course required by
this lifestyle; he distances himself from personal matters, on the view
that his family is one of those "personal matters".

Influences of a Corrupt Community
---------------------------------

One thing that deserves mention is that a corrupt community may take
away a prophet's family from him without any resistance. This is because
resistance (by the prophet) is directed against the greater community,
and it may very well be that the force of the opposition represents
enough material strength and challenge to undermine the basic elements
of prophethood, as the mundane circumstances work themselves out.

The prophet - no matter which one - when delivering his message in the
face of this great obstacle, does not possess every medium. Only some
media apply: with respect to personal charisma and ability. The world of
prophethood is not the world of the unseen, but the world of human
abilities, which may be connected with the unseen in some instances or
respects, but not in the full sense suggested by such knowledge.

In this setting, the community may be transformed into a powerful force
even on the household of a prophet, guardian, or scholar. This is
because such a community possesses the influences of a deviant society
which can entice a household, enough to destroy a prophetic message.
Some prophets, scholars, and saints have even been tested through their
spouses who take an opposite stance to the prophetic message, opposing
the actions of the prophet. This is what the Qur’an tells us about the
wives of Noah and Lot:

***God sets forth as an example to the disbelievers the wife of Noah and
the wife of Lot. They were under two of our righteous servants, but they
betrayed them so that they [the husbands] availed them naught against
God. It was said to them: Enter the fire with those who go therein.
(Al-Tahrim, 66:10)***

Betrayal of the Message
-----------------------

We understand from the above that the falseness was not one of sexual
honour and fidelity; but rather of betrayal of the message-betrayal of
the trust of such a message.

Naturally, such a situation had a negative effect on the children of
prophets, Imams, and scholars.

The above verses also show that the influence of the mother is great,
and can be negative if, in both thought and conduct, she follows the
trends and corruption of infidelity. The reason is that she brings her
ideas into the household, where a prophet may be beset by her, much the
same way he is beset in the community. He is unable to protect his home,
since his own wife is a part of that home, and she may have such an
effect from which he cannot rescue himself.

The Qur’an does not provide any biography of Noah's son, but we note
that his father encouraged him to board with them, not to be from among
the losers:

***"Embark with us, and do not be with unbelievers" (Hud,***
***11:42).***

It seems however, that the son was rebellious. He neither respected his
father nor paid heed to his warnings. He did not believe in what his
father was shown of the unseen, nor in his ability to face matters in a
way no one else could. He said,

***"I will go to a mountain which will protect me from the water"
(Hud,*** ***11:43).***

 Noah, at that moment losing all hope in his son, replied,

***"On this day, there is no saving from God's command" (Hud,***
***11:43).***

When Noah called upon his Lord, it was not in confrontation, but in
supplication, for God (Exalted) promised to help his son:

***"He said, "My Lord! My son is from my household and your promise is
true! " God replied, "O Noah! He is not from your household, for his
deeds are unrighteous" (Hud, 11:45-46).***

Influence of the Mother
-----------------------

Why was the son of Noah not among the believers? By asking ourselves
this question, we can, according to the Qur’anic text, relate the son to
the mother. We find that the son was more under his mother's than his
father's influence, for his father was alone. On the other hand, the
mother was very much a part of the community, whether they were
relatives or not. It is natural then for a child to live in this
community and to function according to its conditioning, without his
father being capable of most of his responsibility or of living with a
minority of believers who can influence his son.

We can understand the difference between the case of Ismael and that of
the son of Noah; Ismael lived in an environment where Abraham was able
to remove his son from pressure. Hence, the boy lived in an environment
where the negative influences of society exerted no pressure. At that
time, his mother was also a righteous believer. In the one case, the
boy's learning process was protected, in the other (son of Noah) it was
not.

This is what Islam focuses on in the case of marriage - namely, that the
believer should marry someone who is religiously observant. So much so
that a person, according to a hadith, had once said to the Prophet, "Who
should I marry?" The Prophet replied, "You must marry one who is
religiously observant." This is the issue that concerns the spouse.
Indeed "if there comes to you someone whose character and religion
please you, marry him, for if you do not calamity and great evil will
prevail in the earth."

Islam then focuses on the correctness of the household, that the wife
should be a religious woman, and that the husband should be a man of
religion. An Islamic nursery is primarily for the child, whose senses
and perceptions are molded to such a degree that, in the face of
corruption, he will resort to this primary conditioning as the basis.

However, when there are different forces in the household, where the
father wants the child to incline towards faith, and the mother wants
the child to incline towards non-belief, corruption, or vice versa, then
the issue will normally be one which does affect the harmony of the two
parents. We do not wish to hold that the elements of mother and father
are everything. It must be emphasized that their role is tremendous, in
addition to the other factors in this area.

In the light of this, it is possible for us to learn from the case of
Noah that the father should not be confident that because he is
righteous, his son shall be righteous as well. In fact, it is a duty of
the father to be cautious about the lack of righteousness in his wife,
for that could adversely affect his child. It is the duty of the father
in this respect, not to believe that there are corrupting influences too
powerful for him to fight.

People should also avoid using the corruption of a child as a mirror of
the corruption of the parent, in the manner which some people claim, "Go
and look after your son!" It is true that God charges a man with
responsibility for his family and for himself, along with his relatives
as well. But this does not mean that such responsibility is one hundred
per cent. Rather, it is a responsibility proportional to the abilities
that he possesses in this regard.

Truth Refutes Distortions
-------------------------

Is prophetic influence not negated, or its power undermined, whenever
the house is torn from within?

This issue can leave adverse erects in the eyes of the public against
those who call to God, even for a prophet, guardian, or believer. One
may emphasize the negative aspect, namely, as follows:

This man cannot be truly serious about his call; his undertaking could
be for ulterior motives - probably for recognition, position, or riches.
We see this in what God has told us about the tribes of the prophets who
told God that they wanted influence, as in the case of Pharoah and
Moses. The people said that were he serious, truthful, and believing in
his call, the sign of his belief would have been to invite his people,
to make them believe in him. This is exactly what people say to someone
who calls to certain views and does not abide by them, "Were he serious,
he would have exhorted himself and disciplined himself, and truly
devoted himself to his cause."

This may create a bad influence in the general atmosphere. But in my
view, regardless of whether one is an ‘alim, or a da’i in any field,
when he exudes confidence, allowing people to perceive the seriousness
in his movements, noting that he does not abandon his children to
corruption; nor does he assume any special air for them over others, or
take a lax view in this regard then people realize the seriousness of
his call.

The uncle of the Prophet, Abu Lahab, who opposed the Prophet, was unable
to influence him because all the elements of prophethood were in the
being of the Prophet, who was serious in his undertaking. His preference
for non relatives (if they were Muslim) over his own kin made people see
that his lack of influence on his own family was resulted from no lack
of commitment. Rather, is was because of deep-seated elements present in
the personality of Abu Lahab and other relatives. As a result, Abu Lahab
left no negative influence on him.

I believe that if those who call to God were to concentrate on this
facet of confidence in their sentiments regarding their children, and to
convince the people that they do not stumble in submission to their
personal sentiments regarding their children when the latter go astray,
then any negative effect that this would have on their movement would
effectively be nullified.

Temptation Versus Strength of Character
---------------------------------------

In Sura Yusuf, we find a youth who is pressed by a lady of rank
resisting that temptation. How can we get our youths to understand
Yusuf's resistance?

When we study the position of Yusuf, in his difficult trial, we find
that it was far more difficult than any our youths normally undergo.
This is because the atmosphere of incitement in which youths of today
live has many sources, but there is the option of choice. For the most
part, these incitements are not present in the inner longings of youths,
in the sense of losing all decision in the matter or all freedom of
action.

In the case of Yusuf, we find that he was a slave, bought by the husband
of the woman with whom he resided night and day before that difficult
element in the attractive personality of Yusuf was ever discussed. In
the light of this, we find that Yusuf was not attracted to this woman in
any normal sense, for it is nowhere mentioned that he was attracted by
any aspect of her beauty, or any sexuality which, until then, had been
suppressed in him. This means that Yusuf possessed the inner resistance
against this temptation.

Someone may state that Yusuf was a slave, and as such was unable to know
his lady-owner, since the barriers of class status would have made this
improbable. We note, however, that while these barriers may sometimes
exist, they were not always accepted, especially by the woman, who was
prepared to break those barriers.

Faith as a Barrier to Temptation
--------------------------------

It is probable that the trial of Yusuf faced when the wife of the ‘Aziz
tried to seduce him makes it clear that his refusal to succumb was not
as a result of any psychological barrier, but rather of a barrier of
faith. Consequently, we observe the words of God:

***"And she desired him, and he would have desired her, too, had he not
seen the clear sign of his Lord" (Yusuf, 12:24).***

These words are usually said to signify Yusuf longed to lie with her.
However, the explanation to which we incline is enticement without
feeling. This is exactly as when a man is enticed by food and his body
reacts when he is hungry. This attraction did not last long. It is a
natural reaction, not one of calculated innate desire-had he not seen
the clear sign of his Lord and was his faith not awakened?

Infallibility does not mean lack of attraction to unlawful food, drink,
or desires. Rather, it means not indulging in such unlawful things, for
the instinctive, natural attraction in these cases are not transformed
into action.

The chapter (sura) explains itself further when it puts Yusuf with the
women who said,

***"This is not a mortal but a noble angel!" (Yusuf, 12:31).***

By then, Yusuf had perceived his strength beginning to weaken, impelling
him in a way that he could not ignore, for he had used up all his power
to resist the temptations of this woman. This is why he said:

***"If You do not turn away their snares from me, I should yearn unto
them" (Yusuf, 12:33).***

Fortitude of Character
----------------------

From the foregoing, we know that what saved Yusuf from his predicament
was the dimension of his strong faith. This we may see and understand
when we examine his life with his father, a time during which God was
reflected upon.

Yusuf had lofty spiritual aspirations, and so we see that Jacob, in his
affection and sentiments for him, was able to raise him and to mold him
into a strong human being with fortitude in his character. Perhaps this
is the reason why he loved his child so much, rather than any of the
boy's physical beauty. For when we study the attitude of Jacob towards
his children, we find his pride and joy in them to have been because
they were Muslims.

From this we understand that Jacob found in Yusuf a boy who was unique
in his faith in God and in harmony with prophetic conduct. This so
affected his other sons that it produced jealousy, which caused them to
conspire to rid themselves of Yusuf

The Apostolic Spirit
--------------------

Perhaps what indicates to us the apostolic spirit which permeated
Yusuf's being is that from the time his brothers plotted against him to
the time he was imprisoned, he underwent no instruction in the faith,
learned no apostleship or piety from anyone. Instead, he endured the
schooling of evil, encountering it at home and in the society he lived
in.

When we reflect upon his life in jail, we find that he entered it to
call to the way of God, the Glorious:

***"O my two fellow prisoners! Are many different lords better, or is
God the One, the Irresistible?" (Yusuf, 12:39).***

This indicates that Yusuf possessed the apostolic mentality, which must
not only permeate the apostle himself but also influence those around
him. The apostolic spirit in which Yusuf comported himself in his own
right and in his community is what made him take his stand.

This is what we must emphasize about the necessary steps in an
upbringing that is spiritual, full of faith, and effective. I would
almost say that a dynamic personality can be more effective in teaching
a believer the power of resistance and self-protection from the
influences of others than a believing man who is little concerned about
faith or his community.

Yusuf was certainly a dynamic person in the apostolic path, and I
presume that his effective Islamic upbringing - where the facets of
contemplation of spirituality, action, and the call to God were so
vital - was what made him take the strong position he did. He perceived
within himself that his duty was to guide the people among whom he
lived, rather than be influenced

by them. It was this sterling spirit that enabled him to achieve his
strong resistance.

The Fortitude of a Woman
------------------------

Up to this point, the discourse has been about the strength of character
in a man like Yusuf What about the fortitude of a woman or her role in
strengthening character?

When discussing Yusuf, we did not deal with his fortitude as a man, but
only as a believing, apostolic human being calling towards God and
struggling in His cause. Thus, this discourse may just as well be
directed to a believing Muslim woman, whose heart is open to Islam. For
it is absolutely essential that there be an atmosphere of proper
training and righteousness. And for proper method, appropriate setting,
and dynamic mentality - with the intention of establishing the power to
resist temptation in a believing woman, no less than in a man - one must
realize that the humanness of a person is not the product of instinct.
It is that towards which this person's training guides him.

This agrees with what ‘Ali*, Amir al-mu 'minin,* had taught in his
letter to Ibn Abbas: "You should not regard the attainment of pleasure
and the satisfaction of the desire for revenge as the best that this
world can offer. Rather, it should be the destruction of evil and the
revival of truth. Your pleasure should be in that which you send forth;
your grief that which you leave behind; your desire that which is after
death."

From this, we may conclude emphatically that one should not follow the
path of natural inclination, but rather that of training and education.
This does not mean that instinct is to be totally denied, but that we
should let it take the direction in which God guides it, and that we
should confine it to bounds which Allah has prescribed for it. We must
see ourselves in our role as Muslims, doers, and callers to the path of
God, working in His path to save humankind from the chaos of instincts,
instead of adding to such chaos by letting our own instincts go
unchecked.

The Problem of Envy
-------------------

In Surat Yusuf, there is another point for reflection. Yusuf's brothers
had plotted against him, although they all lived under the same shelter
of the Prophet Jacob. How can we explain their stance against their
brother?

Perhaps the problem for many people, whether they are the children of
prophets, Imams, or ‘ulama, or true believers who live in a special
spiritual environment, is that they live the aspect of faith as some
specific personal trait. Under this condition, their faith is devoid of
many deep-rooted, active motivational dimensions, quite unlike the
situation where their faith constitutes the prime motive, pervading
their innermost being.

Therefore, as far as they are concerned, religion is obviously
restricted to worship, or imitative spirituality.

Morality, however, is an aspect which requires certain self-discipline
and self control in the battle against the animal instincts that rage
between the two elements in the psyche - that of the believer [mu'min]
and that of base self. Their moral and ethical being might not be lived
with any deep-rooted conviction, their instruction in these matters
being an integral part of their personalities.

The Era of the Imams
--------------------

We may find several negative traits associated with the moral values of
many people described above, as seen from the examples of the era of the
Imams. History tells us about the stance of Banu al-Hasan regarding the
Imams from Banu al-Husayn, from which we can perceive a condition that
may be likened to envy or some such vice. We also see that some of the
children of the Imams betrayed Imam al-Kazim to Harun al-Rashid, just as
they did Ja'far b. al-Hadi.

There are some situations where inner workings do not correspond to the
positive responses, but in some cases may reflect negative attitudes.
This is because human beings lose many of their values in certain
situations. Likewise the case with the children of Jacob, for they lived
with selfishness regarding Yusuf and his brother, whose mother was not
theirs. It is possible, too, that the problem was a conflict between the
two mothers, on one hand, and between them and their two brothers, on
the other hand. The others brothers became envious of Yusuf whom Jacob
preferred not for emotional reasons, but because Yusufis righteousness
was so much better than his brothers. This was an issue that caused them
to become envious and to contemplate their attack on him in the manner
it transpired.

If there is one question that must be raised, it is that these
"prophets" - it is not confirmed that they were and the Qur’an
apparently does not present them as such - probably reformed after the
events unfolded and their selfish motives which had influenced them were
obliterated.

The Issue on the Aspect of Dawa
-------------------------------

We would like to present information on this subject relating to the
situation in which we live. We will, therefore, focus on work which
‘*ulama*, believing fathers, and those who guide to the path of Allah
should embark upon. They should not succumb to the atmosphere of faith
in which the believers now live, whether inside or outside the home.

It may appear to them that the presence of Muslim boys and girls
outside, in the broader Islamic context, reflecting an environment of
faith is enough to qualify for an upbringing which possesses all the
elements that will ensure they will take the right path. Rather, there
must be concerted attempts to innovate the method of instruction and the
education of ethics and morals. This should point to different
approaches and perspectives.

We feel that a variety of approaches, renewal, and opportunities for
implementation of the doctrine of faith in this area would be a stark
contrast to the routine that normally causes concepts to stagnate in the
mind of the believer, and thus become ineffective. For, like anything to
which people have become accustomed, there is need for dynamism, which
makes an issue effective in the life of the person.

Envy Does not Produce Working Results
-------------------------------------

We should be able to deduce from Surat Yusuf the milieu of upbringing
where envy produced in envious minds results in enmity towards whoever
is envied. We see that when Yusuf's brothers experienced envy towards
Yusuf and his brother, and plotted to kill him or to lose him, the
outcome was that Yusuf looked after them, adopted them, and cared for
them in a most elevated and lofty spirit. He had this spirit when God
caused him to be reunited with his parents and his brothers after a long
absence and severe complications.

His brothers discovered that he had a broad vision when he assessed
things and that he harboured no vengefulness after reaching this lofty
position. He did not seek to harm them or seek any retribution. Instead,
he took them close to him, keeping them in exile according to the
apostolic spirit which he possessed, asking God (Exalted) to unite his
brothers with himself in the best manner possible.

Whoever then prefers to be jealous of a good person who is a doer and a
facilitator, whether he is a relative or not, should recall that the
desired positive results can still be attained. He should examine
himself in the light of the spirituality of this man from the outset,
without resorting to inimical measures in any way. We see that the
brothers of Yusuf, had they opened up to Yusuf and his brother, and
engaged them in discourse, would have found that the element of
spirituality in Yusuf s personality was abundant. So abundant was this
element that it was enough to ward off most of their negative feelings,
because of the preference Jacob had for Yusuf and his brother.

Every believer must understand that envy does not yield any functional
result of the kind they would like to see afflict the person of whom
they are jealous. This is especially true when the sense of faith
awakens inside, and they realize that the entire matter is with God
(Exalted). For it is God who changes the situation and, as such, the
person of whom they are envious cannot be affected negatively by their
feelings. Moreover, their enmity towards the person can never result in
anything which God does not will, for nothing can take place without His
permission and desire, even indirectly.

The Envious Person Must Take a Position of Contemplation
--------------------------------------------------------

These persons need to reflect on an issue and to realize that God
(Exalted) can perhaps bestow on them what He has bestowed on person of
whom they are envious, without taking anything away from them. This is
because God's bounty is without limit; it is sufficient for them and the
person of whom they are envious. God's storehouses are never depleted,
and this is what is termed "rapture", whereby a person feels that his
Lord will give him as much or even more than He has given others.

Consequently, I think that the story of Yusuf serves as a living
example, when we reflect on it from beginning to end. When we study the
life of Yusuf, we must reflect on his reaction towards his brothers and
on how God paved the way for this weak human, who was pawned and exposed
to death; how God paved his way to becoming a judge in Egypt. This is
what Yusuf was referring to when he said:

***"My Lord, You have given me kingdom, and taught me the interpretation
of sayings. You are my Guardian in this world and the hereafter; make me
die as a Muslim and join me with the righteous" (Yusuf, 12:101).***

For Yusuf showed he was aware that all of this was due to God's bounty
for him.

From this, the person afflicted by envy should think, when plotting
against another, that God (Exalted) will raise the standard of the
sincere so high that the envious person will wish that the other person
had remained in his original position. A person holding such a grudge
will not be spared the rising agitation of viewing this great blessing
that God confers on the target of his envy.

Those who work in the path of God, whether they are *'ulama* or
believers with these negative traits, must open themselves to the
dynamics of faith in God in their life, so that they may realize that
"jealousy consumes faith just as fire eats wood."

Spiritual Weakness
------------------

There are those who believe that the conduct of Yusuf's brothers was due
to a lack of proper understanding. Others assume that their shortcomings
was the result of spiritual emptiness.

Spirituality is the main factor in this issue; whether there is complete
or only partial understanding, the aspect of intellectual contemplation
is not sufficient to motivate the life of human beings to act properly.
This is because motivation stems from a human being's spirituality,
which allows him to endure deprivation in important areas of life, and
to assume the moral obligations which God has imposed on him.

I, therefore, assume that the aspect of spirituality is the basis. From
this perspective, the aspect of imitative religion for the person living
in a complete religious atmosphere makes religion "the roof of the
house," as it were. As such, there are many scholars who, when people
draw their attention to these negative traits of conduct, will pounce on
these people, saying, "You are trying to teach us, when we are the ones
who write the books, the ones who preach, the ones who guide!"

It is as if the were saying, "These things are our specialty, and thus
we understand better than you do." The fact of the matter, however, is
that they may well understand better, but sadly they may not be better
in their spiritual contemplation in respect of function than those they
criticize

Friendship in Its Proper Settings
---------------------------------

For the believing youth, it is absolutely necessary for a human being
who is a believer to select the atmosphere in which to nurture well his
faith. It is as if he were looking after a seedling which, if planted in
an inhospitable environment, would not mature in naturally even if he
were to use every artificial means to encourage its growth, increase its
size and length.

All these would not give it spirit or life. As such, we find that the
plants that grow organically differ in their characteristics from those
that are grown through artificial means in artificial environments.
Likewise, it is essential that a believing person nurture his faith in a
natural atmosphere.

From this starting point, our Islamic focus is on the believing man who
marries a religious woman, and on the girl who marries someone whose
religion and character are pleasing. The marriage union represents a
nursery for the rearing of the faith of the spouses in their private
life. In this vein, Islam repudiates a marriage which "produces dung,"
according to the *hadith: "*Stay away from the production of dung. . .
and the people said, ‘What is the production of dung?' [The Prophet]
replied, ‘A beautiful woman in the hothouse of evil."'

This is because the hothouse of evil can have a negative effect on the
natural nurturing of faith of this woman. Her morals would then reflect
the environment in which she was brought up, exactly as a shoot takes
all its nourishment from the filth in its surroundings by which it is
reared.

This is where a positive role can be played by the companion and the
friend who exemplify the emotional attachments which bind one human to
another. We know that emotions more than thought affect life, for
thought is achieved by that which convinces, and it is difficult to
convince anyone of your ideas without presenting the grounds for
accepting your views. Emotion, on the other hand, may grab the feelings
and sensitivities of a person in such a manner that he becomes heedless
in his thinking. The emotions may even overcome the intellect and
influence another person so overcome by the first that he is drawn into
the same pattern of thinking.

Role of Sentiment in Relations
------------------------------

We observe that many youths are influenced by groups with different
outlooks on thought and faith. This is due to the influence of feelings,
whether these sentiments stem from relations with women, companions,
friendship, or the like. Many people belonging to such groups may
find-when they inquire further-that their affiliation is the result of
feelings they developed during their relationship with a companion or
friend.

A believer, therefore, must choose a friend at his level of faith, with
whom he can develop and improve. Therefore, he must not befriend an
ignoramus, who will lead him astray and cause him to perceive ignorance
as a natural state in its own right, the hub of his fiend's life
revolves. He must avoid befriending the foolish, who cannot see things
in a balanced way; as stated in some sayings, "*He misleads you when he
wants to benefit you."*

He must not befriend the sinful who draw him into sin; the natural
impact of friendship may cause one to admire another's habits, values,
views, and actions. He must not make a non-believer his friend, insofar
as this relationship makes him completely receptive to the latter's
ideas, which are not viewed in any critical light.

Instead, he must choose an intelligent, contemplative, believing friend
who has profound faith and whose outlook is in harmony with his
regarding life. This way, he will not face the problem of conflict
between functioning in the path he has chosen for himself and the
confusing influences of his friend.

Cautioning Against Evil Friends
-------------------------------

The gist of the idea then is that a person exercises influences, both
positive and negative, on the perceptions of his companion. This relates
the issue of friendship to the way a person conducts himself in
different circumstances. We note these in the words of God, when He
relates some images of the Resurrection; these images are as a direct
result of the trials of human beings in life experiences. That day the
wrongdoer will bite his hands, and God shall say,

***"O! Would that I had taken the path with the Messenger! Woe to me!
Would that I had never taken this one as a friend! He did lead me astray
from the Reminder after it had come to me. And Satan is but a traitor to
humankind!" (Furqan, 25:27-29)***

By studying this example which God (Exalted) gives to us, we see that a
human being lives this grief and sorrow in his life as a consequence of
having followed a distorted lifestyle. This is due to being influenced
by his friendships with those who wish only evil for him. They exploit
his compassion, which he acquired after reaching a stage that pushed him
far away from God's mercy.

A Qur’anic Example
------------------

As an example, there is a general topic which the Qur’an speaks of
regarding those who follow and those who are followed-this being in the
form of suggestions to anyone living in the sphere of the arrogant or
the oppressed.

Perhaps we could derive from this a meaning that is comprehensive for
the followers, even from the point of view of feelings-such as a husband
who follows his wife out of affection, or a wife who follows her husband
for the same reason, or a friend who follows his buddy. Those who are
followed will clear themselves of those who followed: they will see the
penalty and all relations between them would be severed. And those who
followed will say:

***"If a return were possible for us, we would disown them as they have
disowned us. Thus will God show them their own deeds as anguish for
them. And they will not escape the fire" (al-Baqara, 2:167).***

We can see that the Qur’an emphasizes that the followers also bear
responsibility, even where there are material or emotional pressures
which cause them to follow their twisted trail. For God draws the
attention of humankind to the fact that they must benefit from this
trial, and extricate themselves from the situations they find themselves
in-wherever they are pressured. We construe this from another verse:

***"As for those whom the angels cause to die while they wrong
themselves, they [the angels] shall say: What was your situation? They
said: We were oppressed in the land The angels said: Was the earth not
wide enough for you to emigrate (elsewhere) in it? The abode of those is
the hellfire. What a horrible ending!" (al-Nisa, 4:97)***

When God cast upon these oppressed people the responsibility for their
own deviance, along with the arrogant and their wrong ways, He wanted
for them to distance themselves from the perverse environment, that they
might be relieved of pressures. This is implicit proof that a person
should not place himself in a situation where there is the pressure of
sentiment and the material things which may cause him to be negatively
influenced. And when he finds himself in such an atmosphere, he must
flee, freeing himself from it.

These educational guidelines, which are generally the Qur’an's point of
departure, relate to the influence of one human over another. A person
must retain his senses in order to avoid others overcoming his mind. He
must extricate himself from pressure situations, and he must function on
the basis of the unadulterated form of his faith.

Friends in the Hereafter
------------------------

There is the verse:

***"Friends on that day will be enemies to one another, except those who
guard (against evil)" (al-Zukhruf, 43:67).***

 From the previous discussion, we equally understand that the friendship
built on everyday life incidents in this world will merit the charge of
responsibility in the hereafter. Those friends who used to gather
together in the world to waste time and to be idle, for deceit,
perversion, or sin, etc., will face an inevitable result, each person
assuming responsibility for having guided the other astray. And it is
normal that friendship should then change to enmity; each person who was
so overcome by the influence of friendship as to deviate from the right
path will discover that his friend was actually an enemy in the guise of
a friend.

But the pious who assisted each other in piety and godliness, mindful of
God and exhorting truth and patience, will normally maintain their
friendship; for it was positive in this world, their path clear which
led to the good of this world as well as the hereafter.

The Rights of Friends
---------------------

In sayings about social relations, we have "A Friend in need" and "In
travel you know your brothers." What are the rights which one friend has
over another?

The meaning here is that friendship is based on a sort of oneness of
sentiment between two friends. When people speak of friendship, they
speak of fidelity and sacrifice. It is probable that the saying "A
friend in time of need" or "You know your friends while on travel"
relates to the difficulties which help display the sterling qualities of
a person. When we reflect on friendship and what it encompasses in terms
of sentiments towards the aspect of faith, we see that Islam exhorts the
believer to open himself up to his believing brother, sharing with him
his distress, overcoming his difficulties, answering his needs, aiding
him in all his affairs, protecting him in body, property, and honor.

The believing person, in a brotherhood of faith strengthened by the
bonds of friendship, recognizes his friend in times of hardship and
travail, and in all times of difficulty in his life.

The Injunction of Prayer
------------------------

The words of God in the Noble Qur’an are:

***"So worship Me and establish prayer for My Remembrance" (Ta Ha,
20:14).***

How is this command to be effected? In other words, is the command the
outcome of the hoped for results of the prayer?

The expression here is not to be taken in any literal, lexical sense; it
implies every action performed to achieve the goal of making one's
family obey God (Exalted). This is based on the view that prayer
represents a distinctive, reified aspect of worship of God and
dedication to Him. Hence, every person must do all that is necessary in
this area, and if words are of no avail, then we may have to resort to
action-encouraging attraction, threat; creating the appropriate
environment; warning about inappropriate places; or any of the normal
human methods.

The expression implies functioning in this sense through every means
possible; it is to be expected that any approach used by a person to
convince another-by deed or word-will not be one hundred percent
effective on its own. No matter how ingenious this person may be, or how
dedicated to the idea he propounds, there is always a unique facet
intrinsic to the person whom we would like to guide, a mindset in
reaction to words or movements, or to the environment, with every
assessment of a weak point and strength in his positive and negative
traits.

Responsibilities of Those Whose Call is to Islam
------------------------------------------------

Islam directs everyone who calls to Islam-the preacher, the guide-thus:
"You must give of everything you have in order to guide another, to
change that person's line of thinking, and to correct his way. When you
do this, you will have fulfilled your obligations in this respect." In
the words of God:

***"O you who believe! Save yourselves and your families from fire whose
fuel is human beings and stones, over which are angels, stern and sever
They do not disobey God in that which they are ordered, but do as they
are commanded" (al-Tahrim,*** ***66:6).***

In the interpretation of this verse, a question was put forward to one
of the *Imams.* It was asked, "How do we save them?" He said,
"Commanding them and prohibiting them." It was said, "We command and we
prohibit, but they do not obey us." He said, "If you have commanded and
prohibited them, you have fulfilled your duties."

The Imam, in his answer with respect to the verse did not intend the
command and the prohibition to have a superficial meaning. In fact, he
meant them as two things achievable by word, deed, or environment.
Therefore, do what you can do to fulfill your obligation and prohibit
what is forbidden. When you have availed yourself of every approach,
then there is no further obligation on you.

This is what God (Exalted) was speaking about to His Prophet, guiding
him, when He said:

***"Indeed you are only a warner, and to every people a guide" (al-R'ad,
13:7).***

***"Remind them for you are only a reminder. You are not the supervisor
of their affairs" (al-Ghashiyah, 88:21).***

***"Will you then compel people until they become believers?" (Yunus,
10:99).***

Your obligation is to ensure that you do all within your power to deal
with the issue, and when you have done this nothing more is required of
you.

On the basis of the above, we say "ordering" implies that functional
aspect which a person puts into practice by every means at his disposal,
directly or indirectly, with the full realization that his influence
must be effective in a normal manner. Acting on these influences would
then be the responsibility of the other person.

Being Good to Parents
---------------------

In the words of God:

***"And if they strive to force you to associate in worship with Me that
concerning which you have no knowledge, obey them not, but be a
companion to them with kindness and justice" (Luqman, 31:15).***

 How is it possible for a believing son to build the bonds of
companionship through good conduct and justice with a father or parents
who are not believers?

When we study the Islamic approach to the relationship with parents, we
do not find that God (Exalted) has charged anyone with obeying his
parents. This is because the bond that connects parent to child is a
good [ihsan] that flows from the parent to the child; it is not a state
which requires a conduct towards the parent which extinguishes the
child's entire being, in deference to the parent's desire.

Thus, the reaction towards this good on the part of the parents is that
the child should be good towards his parents; not that he must always
obey them. We observe in the Noble Qur’an, that God addresses this topic
in Surat al-Isra’, with the words,

***"And God has decreed that you should not worship any but He, and that
you be good to your parents" (Isra’,*** ***17:23).***

In doing so, He referred to the relation of worship between the
worshipper and his Lord, between the created and the Creator, the slave
to his Master, a being to the One who caused him to be. These bonds
require worship and submission, since your presence stems from the fact
that he wants it so. Therefore, it is necessary that your actions and
your very presence be in accordance with His wants.

The Noteworthy Duties of Parents
--------------------------------

On the other hand, the matter is different for the parents, for they are
the means by which you are here. And God (Exalted) is the one who put
the secret of life in the sperm. He is the one who brought into being
all the factors for the development of this sperm which become a
clinging mass, then blood, then bones; then clothes these bones with
flesh; then makes them into a different form of creation.

And when the child is born, it is God who puts the milk in the mother's
breasts. The role of the parents is then that of an intermediary; it is
not their desire which caused your being. On this premise then, their
status is that of anyone who is good towards you, and from here we go to
the verse that states:

***"Is the reward of good anything but good?" (al-Rahman,***
***55:60).***

From this, we see that that your relationship towards your parents is
one of goodness, an example of which God (Exalted) has said:

***"Whether one, or both of them, attain old age in this life, say not a
word of contempt to them, nor repel them. Address them rather in words
of honour." (Isra’,*** ***17:23).***

Here God establishes the manner by which a person can endure every
character flaw that the parents may experience when they become old,
when they become testy, when the parents become a burden on the child.
This is why God has revealed to the son that his position towards his
parents should be one of humility, but not of degrading his humanness or
self-worth. It is exactly how a person gives in to his little child.

In the context of God's discourse on the struggles which the mother
endures, we find that He tells us this in His words:

***"His mother bore him in agony upon agony" (Luqman,*** ***31:14),***

***"His mother bore him in pain, and gave birth to him in pain" (al
Ahqaf,*** ***46:15).***

Thus the child struggles on their behalf and they struggle on his
behalf.

Responsibilities Towards the Parents
------------------------------------

We understand therefore that the relationship is one of doing good-i.e.,
that they did what was best and that now the son must conduct himself in
kind. In this context, when the two parents are non-believers, or
sinners, the child must maintain the view that:

***"And if they strive to force you to associate in worship with Me that
concerning which you have no knowledge, obey them not" (Luqman, 31:15;
Ankabut, 29:8).***

 This is because it is not permissible to follow a person in non-belief,
even when such a person happens to be one's own mother or father.

But their non-belief, polytheism, and sin must not remove you from the
human relations which God has enjoined on you. One facet of this
companionship is revealed by:

***"Say not a word of contempt to them, nor repel them" (Isra’,
17:23).***

It may be that in some situations to spend on them, to yield to them, to
smile and kiss them, to look after them, to care for them medically,
etc. in the caring of a human being in the course of life and with
feelings of compassion.

Transforming Love to Guidance
-----------------------------

In the shadow of this, it is possible for the believer to plan the
transformation of this condition to a method of guidance for his
parents, as we see in the story related from Imam al-Sadiq, where a
Christian came to him and converted to Islam. The man then said to the
*Imam, "I* have a mother who is Christian; how should I behave towards
her when I have become a Muslim and she still remains in non-belief?'
Imam al-Sadiq replied, "See how you used to treat her when you were
still Christian, and then go and improve on that."

The man went and did as the Imam had counseled him, caring ever more for
her in all her ordinary needs. She was astonished at this conduct from
him. She said to him, "What is all this? You used to be good to me, but
you have added in your goodness towards me; what has changed you?" The
son said to her, "I have converted to Islam, and the leader of this
religion has taught me to do thus." She said, "Is he a prophet?" He
said, "No, the offspring of a prophet." She said, "These are the morals
of prophets, O my son! Explain your religion to me!" And so he explained
Islam to her, and she entered the religion.

From this narration, we may infer that the Muslim child, in offering all
his compassion and love, his solicitude towards his non-believing or
sinful parents, can clearly put light into his conduct and feelings that
transform to bring about openness to the path of righteousness.

Pleasing the Parents ... Is There a Limit
-----------------------------------------

In the light of the foregoing, how do we explain the hadith *"Pleasing
God is pleasing the parents?"*

We sometimes hear this adage, and I do not know whether it is a *hadith*
or not. But it is another way of saying that God wants the person to
please his parents. The purpose of pleasing the parents, however, must
be obedience to God (Exalted) wherever the parents bring on no
predicament-for example, ordering their child to do something against
his best interests, detrimental, or leading him away from situations
where he can show obedience to God (as in commendable deeds). For God
does not wish that anyone should be in such a position of control over
another, causing him problems in his religion-by leaving that which is
commendable or committing the abominable, etc.

From here, we understand that pleasing God is pleasing the parents-i.e.,
pleasing them in the sphere of parental relations where God has decreed
the rights of parents over the child. And so, it is essential that the
child conduct himself there at the divine level; for God (Exalted) will
not be pleased until the parents are pleased. This is because if the
child were to stray from the divine path, and to rebuke his parents,
thereby failing to act towards them in a goodly manner, then he has
deviated from the path of God (Exalted).

Harmonizing Words and Deeds
---------------------------

*"**O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not do? It is
most hateful to God that you should say that which you do not do**"*
(al-Saff, 61:2-3).

Is the prohibition in this verse an absolute one with respect to the
words which are not accompanied by deed, or does it refer to the
intention of a speech which is unaccompanied by action?

The verse means that harmony between word and deed is mandatory; or
between faith (on the assumption that words are profession of faith) and
the actual conduct-which the imam makes obligatory on the believing
person. This holds in areas which necessitate harmony with faith. It is
as if God were saying: "You people profess faith. But you do not conduct
yourselves in a manner which such faith makes obligatory on you, in
terms of action which [should] make you struggle in the path of God
(Exalted). Rather your faith is an abstract intellectual concept which
does not translate into action. And God (Exalted) does not like those
who declare their affiliation with Him, His path, and religion, but do
not obey him.

However, if the matter were such that the person utters a word for a
practical purpose in order to safeguard Islamic objectives-to protect
his Islamic position or the safety of an Islamic region, uttering words
which he does not believe or saying something to which he does not lend
credence-then this does not come under the umbrella of the verse. Why?
Because if we understand that it is incumbent on you to balance between
faith and action, in that words are professions of faith, then someone
who makes a declaration in which he does not believe, or takes a stance
he does not believe in, has not distanced himself from the locus of
faith, for his statement was made on grounds that the nature of faith
compelled him to do so.

God (Exalted) wishes for the believing person to conduct himself under
conditions of duress in a manner that protects his higher goal. Here,
the issue of the word that is contrary to the deed differs according to
the scenario to which the word is applied. Is it a scenario with which
God wishes the person to associate, or does God want that person to
utter the words merely for self preservation, although these words do
not reflect that person's actual beliefs?

Social Ostracism
----------------

Were the "Companions of the Cave" fleeing certain conditions or had they
chosen ostracism for a time?

When we meditate on the youths of the Cave, we find that there are two
possibilities in the issue. The first is that the situation was one
where pressure had become so dangerous that they feared the tyrants
would oppress them for their religion, forcing them to commit acts of
infidelity *[kufr];* that they would have to endure this atmosphere so
long that they could no longer stand it.

We have previously considered the words of God regarding the oppressed
who sinned and whom the angels took away in death. We saw how God
(Exalted) wanted them to emigrate and to flee with their religion so
that they would not come under pressure, wronging themselves in the
process. Is it not possible that this was the issue of the people of the
Cave?

The second possibility is that they may have wanted to take time for
themselves in order to prepare for some new undertaking, hiding from the
oppression, and then re-emerging in a new situation. There are few
situations like this. God wanted to make their situation a lesson for
the believers who came afterwards, and to show that He rescues His
servants in different ways and modes, according to His wisdom.

Worship in its Broad Understanding
----------------------------------

*"**And I have not created the Jinn or Humankind except to serve [Me]**"
(al Dhariyat, 51:56).*

What is this worship for which He has created us? The word "worship"
means absolute submission. In other words, God (Exalted) commanded the
*jinn* and humankind only to submit to Him in all that He wished for
them, and that their wants be subordinate to His wishes. Their movements
have to accord with His commands and prohibitions. Their entire life in
this world should be structured upon what God wants from them in respect
of the responsibility of the viceregency of human beings on this earth.

In the light of the foregoing, we find that "worship" covers everything
covered by the commands and prohibitions of God (Exalted). The term
includes everything that comes under the rubric of that which is done
for God's pleasure and love in this life. This is what we understand
from the narrative which state: "Worship is seventy parts, the best of
which is seeking that which is lawful" ; "The best worship is virtue";
"The servant of God can be no more than virtuous in thought and in
chastity"-the *hadiths* speak of the pursuit of knowledge as worship.
Indeed "to reflect for an hour is better than to worship for a year"; a
reflection is a form of worship which is better than a year's
worship-namely, prayer without contemplation.

Comprehending God's Desires
---------------------------

In this manner, we may affirm that the worship of God, which God
requires of both *jinn* and man, is a life goal which consists of the
realization of God's desires for the universe. We may construe this from
the words of God regarding the wisdom of sending the prophets and the
revelation of the scriptures:

"***We sent Our messengers with clear proofs and revealed unto them the
Book and the Balance, that humankind may conduct itself with
righteousness**" (al-Hadid, 57:25).*

 This tells us that the purpose behind sending the messengers was to let
humankind stand for justice. For this reason, the messengers were sent
to the human race to explain clearly what God wanted from us-namely, to
conduct ourselves with righteousness and justice.

Achieving Justice in the Universe
---------------------------------

It is possible to state that standing in righteousness and achieving
justice in the universe is one form of functional worship to which God
wants His servants to apply themselves. For the verse (mentioned
earlier) does not give the well-known *vox populi* meaning of worship,
i.e., that God made the *jinn* and humankind perform the prayer or fast,
for worship transcends those. As we know, the jurists state that any
action by a worshipper intended for the pleasure of God and nearness to
Him is considered worship.

The Qur’anic Youth
------------------

**"We need** **Qur’anic Youth ...a Qur’anic generation..."**

How can we bring this about?

When you use the phrases "Qur’anic generation" and "Qur’anic youth", you
refer to the concepts of the Qur’an which one desires to reflect on with
respect to the actions of youth, whether these are doctrinal concepts,
notions of worship, ethical concepts, or basic action concepts. For
this, we require that the youth open themselves to the Qur’an through
contemplative study, in such a manner that there are Qur’anic directives
based on motivational, reflective study, not barren directives based on
imitation which seek a literal understanding of the text.

Our youth who live in the path of Islam, and that of propagation of the
religion, are able to live anew the trials experienced by the active
youths of the first era of the Islamic Call-the time of the revelation
of the Qur’an. They do this from the perspective that the Qur’an was the
divine, active element which motivated the outlook and deeds of youth;
enough to face the task of the call to God with all its attendant
responsibilities and to face the entire world.

The issue then is that the generation of Muslims make the understanding
of the Qur’an part of their cerebral makeup, emotionally and through
actions, in their sphere of activities, so that the Messenger of God
could become an example for them in this endeavor. We saw that one of
Prophet's wives described his morals thus: "His character was the
Qur’an." Our character then should be the Qur’an, so that it will be
possible for the people to see in our lives and conduct, the functional
embodiment of it.

Addendum on Narrations (1)
--------------------------

### On Longing

Imam ‘Ali said:

• "Longing is the ruin of the intellect." "Base desires are lethal
poisons."

• "The sweetness of lust is spoiled into the baseness of humiliation."

• "Heaven welcomes calamities, and Hell welcomes base desires."

• "Depravity is commensurate with the level of delight."

The Messenger of God said:

• "It is possible that an hour of lust gains long lasting grief."

Imam ‘Ali said:

• "God will grant a legacy of abasement unto those who delighted in
disobeying Him."

• "Lust is a god worshipped, the intellect a praiseworthy friend."

• "If you bow to your lust, it will make you deaf and blind, and spoil
your hereafter."

• "The first part of lust is happiness, its last part is destruction."

• "Tame your lusts for they are loose; if you submit to them, they will
pull you to the greatest depths."

Imam al-Sadiq said:

• "Beware of your lusts as much as your enemies, for there is nothing
more inimical to men than those who follow their lusts and speak
emptily."

Imam ‘Ali said:

• "Ridding the soul of its base desires is the greatest jihad."

### On Getting Together ("Hanging Out")

The Messenger of God said:

• "The totality of evil is comparable to the mate of evil."

Jesus was asked by his disciples:

• "O spirit of God, whom do we take as friends then?" He said: "He who,
when you see him, makes you remember God, and his logic helps you in
your work, and his works make you long for the hereafter."

Imam ‘Ali said:

• "A good friend is a blessing; an evil companion is an affliction."

Imam Zayn al-Abidin said:

• "Sitting with the righteous is an invitation to propriety. Luqman said
to his son: "O my son, sit with the scholars, and touch knees, for
surely God enlivens the hearts with the light of wisdom, the same way
that the earth is enlivened by the torrents from the sky."

Imam ‘Ali said:

• "Sitting with the scholars brings joy.

The Messenger of God said:

• "Befriend the pious, for if you do good, they will praise you, and if
you err, they will not be harsh with you."

Imam ‘Ali said:

• "Sit with the poor, you will receive more thanks."

The noble Prophet said:

• "Ask the scholars, address the sages, and sit with the poor."

From ‘Ali:

• "The company of the people of lust is the abandonment of faith and a
nursery for the devil."

He also said:

• "Eschew the evil ones, and sit with the good ones."

### On Shyness or Shame

The Messenger of God said:

• "Shyness comes only with good."

And he said:

• "Shyness is from the ways of Islam."

And he said:

• "God loves the shy, moderate person, and detests the lewd, demanding,
forward boor."

Imam ‘Ali said:

• "Shyness is a way to everything beautiful."

And he said:

• "He who takes shyness as a garment has his faults hidden from view."

And he said:

• "Shyness lowers the eyes."

And he said:

• "The best garment in this world is that of shyness."

The noble Prophet said:

• "Lewdness is only what disgraces; shyness is only what beautifies."

And he said:

• "Were shyness a person, he would be righteous."

Imam al-Kazim said:

• "Shyness is from faith, faith from heaven, lewdness from
loathsomeness, and loathsomeness from the hellfire."

### On Social Relations

The Messenger of God said:

• "Someone who follows the religion of his friend, observe carefully
whom you befriend."

Imam ‘Ali said:

• "Grant your blood and property to your brother, justice and
objectivity to your enemy, and your good deeds and participation to the
general public."

He also said:

• "Love your friend only so much, for perhaps one day he will be someone
you hate; hate your enemy only so much, for perhaps one day he will be
someone you love."

• "Deal with your brothers by being good to them, and cover their sins
with forgiveness."

• "To show love to people is the height of intelligence."

• "Affection emphasizes love."

• "Excellence in social relations eternalizes love."

• "Never send your friend away with a farewell that expels him from your
friendship, but strive to show him a friendship to which he is certain
to return."

• "The heart is structured on social relations with wise people."

• "Companionship with those who are virtuous gives life to the heart."

• Social relationships uncover the hidden aspects of character.

Imam ‘Ali counselled his son Hasan thus:

• "Love for your brother what you love for yourself, and hate for him
what you hate for yourself."


