Themes 2:  Our Youth .... The Essential Model
=============================================

The World of Happiness and Suffering
------------------------------------

"The happy one is happy from the womb of his mother, and the sufferer
suffers from the womb of his mother." This *hadith* implies that certain
inherited characteristics are transferred from the father and the
mother. What is the rebuttal to one who claims that children, according
to this concept, are programmed in what they do?

Firstly, the concept of the spirit of thought suggested by this *hadith
is* not connected to the issue of the inheritance of positive or
negative characteristics by the personality of a human being-who may be
happy due to the positive attributes which his parents possess and pass
on to their children, or he may suffer from the negative attributes.

It is more probable that the idea is that God (Exalted) knows the future
of human the happiness or sadness according to the influences on the
person's life before he even begins his life activities. This means that
God (Exalted) knows the happy one well before this person starts on the
path of happiness, and He knows the sufferer well before that persons
starts on the path of suffering.

There is No Predistination
--------------------------

If the issue of predestination is suggested by this *hadith,* then it is
necessary to recognize that the knowledge of God regarding the happy
person, while that person is still in his mother's womb-and likewise the
sufferer-is as a result of the desires and choices of humankind.

Therefore a person is happy when he wants truth, goodness, and justice.
He knows the sufferer who will choose suffering in the course of his
deviant desire for evil and wrongdoing. The divine knowledge in this
regard does not negate the (human) desire for happiness and suffering.
God both knows things and knows how He wants them to function according
to natural laws, which He has imposed on human beings. He has dictated
the functions of life.

God, for example, knows when it will rain. This does not mean that the
rain falls as a direct result of the desire of God; rather it refers to
the knowledge of God of incidents prior to their occurrence. The
incident occurs as a result of the effect of causality which God has
decreed in the universe.

If we understand then that a person's happiness and suffering stem from
his own choices, from the factors which are the elements in cause and
result, the *hadith* does not negate desire and choice in the life of a
human being.

Inherited Characteristics and the Desire of the Human Being
-----------------------------------------------------------

Secondly, were we to construe from the *hadith a* connection between
inherited characteristics and the happiness or suffering of a person,
this certainly does not erase his freedom in the face of the inherited
elements, for they form the circumstances the person creates, where the
responses are specific actions. But these do not obliterate his ability
to work in the other direction and acceptance of the other ends. The
inherited elements then in the character of a person creates a mental or
judgmental climate, which transform into a specific action. From this,
they can cause some pressure on the self, or thought, or function of the
individual.

But God (Exalted) created the human intellect, where He placed desires.
And He created for human beings an environment, whose horizons offer
various positions from which to choose. This is exactly like health, for
a person may be born with an unhealthy environment, but he can overcome
this by vigorous antidotes which transform the situation into something
positive. So too, when he comes from a positive healthy setting, it is
very possible to transform it, by evil conduct, into a negative
environment.

Hence, we do not believe that inherited characteristics can negate the
wants of the person or destroy his capacity for choice. But it can cause
him problems when taking another path. This is why problems which might
afflict a person in his physical or emotional makeup resemble other
external difficulties.

A person may live in an evil environment, which offers every temptation
to evil, but he is able to overcome these evil factors and to transform
them into something good. The same thing may be said of a person who
lives in a good environment. For then personal conflict may afflict him
through the instincts, overwhelming his good qualities despite the
environment in which he lives, and transforming them into evil.

The Ability of a Person to Change the Atmosphere
------------------------------------------------

The inner workings of a person which stem from conditioning and
inherited traits do not differ from the external climate in which the
person may dwell. In both situations, the power to change both the
internal and external rests with him. This is what we understand by the
words of God:

"***Allah does not change a people's situation until they [first] change
that which is in their hearts**" (al-Ra'd,* 13:11).

This means that a person is able to change his situation, whether this
is due to inherited characteristics imposed on him, physical elements
which influence him, or external factors which surround him.

God has made changing the situation subject to the person's doing so
himself in thought, feelings, traits, and the elements of inherited
characteristics. This means that it is within the ability of a person
not to stumble before any of the elements which may attach themselves to
him, either as part of his makeup or as unforeseen developments.

This is in addition to Islam's focus on the struggle of the inner self,
which God called "The Greater Struggle *(al-Jihad al-Akbar)",* pointing
to the great difficulties a person faces in this struggle. This means
that it is within the power of a human being to overcome the negative
factors in his inner being, in exactly the same manner that he can
overcome the negative factors in life situations.

Environmental Oppression
------------------------

With respect to those who are born in a bad environment, devoid of
goodness, where the social setting does not absolve the father or the
mother for their evil conduct, what is the responsibility of the youth?

In the Islamic concept of responsibility, there is the term "oppressed",
which may apply to thought, in association with creed, politics, or
social affairs. It may also apply to external situations, which may
negate the functional wants under the influence of other wants.

In the first case, we note that the person lives in a setting filled
with the weapons and sentiments which contradict the outlook of truth
and justice. This setting signifies a closed environment which does not
permit the person living in it to perceive the possibility of other
ideas or values. The person becomes overcome by it, not seeing anything
else. He is exactly like the person who is confined to a room in which
the doors and windows are sealed shut. He cannot do good except within
this enclosed space, and never considers any other world than the one
which surrounds him.

Certainly persons to whom all other outlooks are closed, who fail to
open up through reflection or are incapable of an outlook which might
yield positive educational results, are known in the terminology of the
Islamic law as "oppressed ignorant". In other words, an ignorant person
has personal concepts in his outlook, or his area of functional truth,
but does not have the tools to understand because the doors of
possibility are closed to him.

The Excused and the Non-Excused
-------------------------------

The man who sallies forth in quest of knowledge has several ideas,
unlike the one who has a single idea and no other concept in his normal
ideational and mental outlook by which to operate. This person, whom we
said belonged to the "oppressed ignorant" is to be excused, and the
Qurâ€™an indicates this:

"***Except those who are weak and oppressed from the men, women, and
children, who have not in their power the means and are not shown a way
(to escape)**" (al-Nisa,* 4:98).

They have no way of learning, either because of personal or functional
shortcomings. In other circumstance, however, a person lives in a
setting where he possesses the media by which he can think. A person who
lives in a Christian or a Sunni society may hear about a Shi'a; someone
who lives in a Marxist society may hear about democracy, capitalism, or
Islam. In these cases, the thought knows variety and such a person is
not considered as one to be excused when he stultifies at one idea, and
does not search out for other ideologies.

This is because conviction in any issue comes from two things: a
positive and a negative pole. The positive is that which creates for you
an element of certitude in the concept to which you subscribe. The
negative creates for you the elements of rejection of other concepts. In
order to believe in any idea, it is obligatory that you fulfill this
maxim to your satisfaction-this idea is true and the other idea is
without foundation. You can convince yourself that this is the truth
only when the other is perceived as baseless. And this cannot be done
unless you embark upon a tireless quest in the path of human thought and
its media to learn everything possible in order to arrive as a result at
the reality.

Expending Effort
----------------

When you expend your efforts to arrive at a specific conclusion, which
may or may not be the truth, then you are excused. However, if you shirk
the efforts to learn different ideologies, then you become an oppressed
ignorant. The oppressed ignorant person is not excused in either
intellect or Law, because when God (Exalted) created the media for
learning the truth He wanted to take humankind far away, not to petrify
themselves.

The sole assumption is that the media had not reached them in a normal
manner. In some *hadiths,* it is narrated that when a person is
resurrected on the Day of Judgment, he will be asked: "Why did you not
work?" He will say: "I did not know how." And it will be said to him:
"Did you not learn?" And this is God's word:

"***And God has the convincing argument**" (al-Anam, 6:149).*

This point which deserves to be looked at is that the human being who
possesses the media of learning, but not the ability to travel,
emigrate, correspond, or learn, then this person is acknowledged by God
for the doctrinal issues of which he is free in thought. This is like
"the oneness of God." It is possible for a person to examine this in the
normal course of his reflection, which sets off with its first steps. As
for the things which are learnt only through education, then such a
person is excused when he loses the media to assist him in learning such
concepts.

Imitation in Doctrine
---------------------

What can be said about blindly following a doctrine which requires
investigation and research?

Based on the answer to the previous question, a person might be of the
lackadaisical type who totally submits himself to the setting in which
he lives, never expends any effort in research and investigation, and
may reach a point where he does not consider for himself any chance-even
one-percent-that other ideologies may be correct.

The Qurâ€™an most emphatically rejected the prevailing doctrinal precepts
to which the Arabs subscribed in the *jahiliya* milieu [shirk] when they
used to declare:

"***We found our forefathers with a belief system, and we will certainly
follow them in their footsteps**" (al-Zukhruf,* 43:23).

God directed them to His words:

"***Even though I bring you better guidance than that which you found
your forefathers following?**" (al-Zukhruf,* 43:24),

"***Even if their forefathers understood nothing and were not rightly
guided?**" (al-Baqarah,* 2:170).

God did not set any condition to be blindly accepted or any doctrine to
be blindly followed. He wants for the human being to structure doctrine
according to his own analysis; He made the other concept an argument to
be contended with. This means that when one accepts a concept in an
intelligent, functional manner, he works towards it, despite mental
reservations that may hinder him from doing so.

We see, therefore, that many people live in a specific environment with
a specific *Weltanschauung,* and then they leave for another
environment, subscribing to another *Weltanschauung,* revolutionary in
regards to the previous one. This shows us the reality of the idea which
places the responsibility on the shoulders of someone who submits to his
environment and does not rise against it.

The Islamic Perspective on Adolescence
--------------------------------------

The essential stage in biological life, and the stage at which Islamic
legal liability is assumed, is adolescence. On this subject, the doctors
of education, psychology, sociology, have averred that it is the most
important stage in life. How should we regard the state of adolescence?

When Islam directs the human being, it directs the kinetics of his
being, emphasizing the elements of "practical anxiety" in his inner
self. When God speaks of Adam as an example to humankind, He says:

"***And we had taken the covenant of Adam, but he forgot and We found in
him no firm resolve**" (Ta Ha, 20:115).*

The discourse here is about Adam as an example, in his role as a person
who does not possess the strong resolve of God's words:

"***The human being is created in haste, I will show you My signs, but
ask Me not to hasten**" (al-Anbiya, 21:37); "**And the human was ever
hasty**" (al-Israâ€™, 17:11);*

*"**Man was created weak**" (al-Nisa, 4:28);*

*"**God is He who shaped you out of weakness**" (al Rum, 30:54);*

"***Neither do I absolve myself of blame for the human self is prone to
evil except that on which my Lord has bestowed His Mercy**" (Yusuf,
12:53).*

We see, then, in more than one verse, that the emphasis is on the fact
that, when created, the human being was not cast with monolithic
strength, but that there are elements of weakness residing in his being.

When we study these elements of weakness, we see that they reside in the
personality of the human being, just as we see the function of the
positive instincts which he demonstrates during the course of his life
in the inevitable situations to which his instincts propel him.

Moreover, there are the negative elements in the workings of the
instincts impelling towards deviant things which mar human life when one
loses balance and perspective. So, the human being in fact stands
between these two poles: the negative and the positive instincts, for
which God (Exalted) emphasizes the intellect as an element among the
elements of internal motivation ensuring the balance of perspective
against the assistance of desire.

Adolescence is a Normal State
-----------------------------

On contemplating all of the above, we see adolescence as a normal state
in the life of a person, being a condition to which one enters
spontaneously. The process of physical growth begins with vague
impulses, then places the person in an environment of rejection and
revolution, propelling him from a stage of submissiveness and
acquiescence to others, to one of realization of individuality and
independence. This occurs without clear or proper guidelines for him to
establish his individuality and independence.

The stage of adolescence is exactly like regulating the waves of the
sea. In the same manner, a person enters the second wave in a new being
which prepares him to be another person, setting the rule for a new
stage. The role of (adolescent) education is to prevent the person from
being lost, because the influence of the instincts entails the awakening
of revolution in the person, the examination of new horizons not yet
understood. All this can cause the person to lose his balance of
perspective, since he has not acquired the necessary experience on which
he can rely to establish a balance.

The Islamic Nurturing of the Adolescent
---------------------------------------

Islam encourages child rearing in the manner described in the following
*hadith: "*Leave him free for seven years, discipline him for seven, and
be his companion for seven." Instruction between 7-14 years of age
determine how the person will move towards the right guiding principles
by focusing on the inner person, the natural elements of his
personality, until adolescence comes along in the fourteenth year, or
thereabouts. When it does, there is subjection to established controls.
From 14 to 20 years of age, supervision over the adolescent tendencies
of the individual personality continues until the person behaves in a
normal manner, with a view to the future.

I do not wish to downplay the dangers of the stage of adolescence in the
personality of the youth, but I do not perceive the issue as being of
the danger as claimed by some, except that it is compulsory that the
nurturing at this stage be done in a manner whereby the child does not
mature with restrictions which strangle him within himself, warping his
mind and he becomes psychologically sick. Nor should he be given such
total liberty that he takes absolute license, distancing himself from
the balanced principles of human activities. Nurturing then must take
place between the two extremes; there should be discipline without
harshness and freedom without licentiousness.

Adolescent Misbehaviour
-----------------------

The stage of adolescence is marked by lack of experience and incomplete
maturity. Hence, we see many aspects of misbehaviour. Does Islam provide
any guidelines to correct adolescent misconduct and to protect it from
the pitfalls?

Islam wants the parents to shepherd the spiritual aspect in the
character of the child before he gets to the stage of adolescence. This
may be done by accustoming the child to worship and by creating
situations where he gradually becomes conscious of God. Islam has imbued
the child with self-confidence, be it male or female, by giving it the
right to be an independent and legally recognized entity. When the child
reaches the age of mental maturity, when he can conduct his own affairs,
Islam relieves him from his guardianship:

"***And test the orphans until, at adulthood, if you see maturity in
them, then give them their property**" (al-Nisa, 4:6)*

*-* i.e., the guardianship of the elders is removed from a mentally
mature boy or girl.

Maturity is a mental state stemming from the intelligent examination and
contemplation of things, sothat the person is able to behave in a
proper, balanced manner, in the normal way that people conduct their
affairs and relations. This means that adolescence is not an unnatural
stage, rather merely a state by which the person goes from a stage of
development to the stage of maturity.

Adolescence and Maturity
------------------------

Islam makes a person legally liable at maturity, so that he has
responsibilities both in negative and in positive conditions. This means
that Islam does not treat the stage of adolescence as one where the
person lets up on responsibilities and obligations. For adolescence may
persist until the last stages of life. This implies that the workings of
the instincts which influence the negative side of a person through
internal or external factors remain forever with that person-from the
time of puberty to the end of his life.

We know that there are adolescents in their forties, fifties, or even
sixties; puberty is not a clearly defined age, but rather a stage, the
effects of which begin at puberty and the mental and physical influences
of which continue with the progression in life of the person who
undergoes the awakening of instincts, in one form or another.

Counsel and Guidance
--------------------

Therefore, we must begin the work of spiritual, mental, and social
instruction and all the other forms before puberty, so that we could
prevent the conflict which the youth faces when he is faced with any
impulse which might arise at this stage.

This nurturing must continue at every stage, and we must apply the
principles of instruction and care in such a manner that this new person
does not retain the concept of the former one with respect to the issues
that will emerge later in life. We should not seek to constrain him
within a closed mind, but rather to open his "thinking and spiritual"
lungs to breathe the clear air of life.

Masturbation ... The Perpetrator and the Victim
-----------------------------------------------

In order that we do not digress from the topic, the main matter that
needs explanation in the light of the *Shariah* and instruction is the
"secret practice," or what is known as masturbation.

"The secret practice" is forbidden Islamically, since Islam wants that
sexual matters be satisfied through spousal relations only. This is
removed from the strange situations where sexual relations occur purely
as something negative, a physical joining of the bodies bereft of any
supporting spiritual thought. This is in addition to the negative
results on the mind and the outlook.

Thus, masturbation is forbidden in every way, shape, or form-including
the sexual imagination that leads to the orgasm. But when we face this
prohibited act (haram), we must understand the normal, natural
circumstances that push pubescent boys and girls to indulge in this evil
practice.

For the call of impulse and passion, and the resorting to this practice
as a habit intended to satisfy these impulses, make masturbation oneof
the easiest methods to fall back to, especially under social pressures
which prevent any interaction between man and woman outside the limits
of permanent marriage.

Another influencing factor too is the economic pressure preventing the
youth from early marriage; or the aspect of imitation which prevents the
girl from welcoming an early marriage, and similar factors placed by
social restrictions.

Early Marriage
--------------

Islam has dealt with the issue of early marriage, and rates marriage as
a natural state. It is far removed from the pitfalls which others have
placed in its path, in terms of mental maturity, society, financial
means, etc. Islam sees one of the benefits of marriage is to provide a
means of satisfying the sexual appetite of man and woman. It recognizes
that other issues may develop and grow with this bond, which may be
nurtured in exactly the same way as in other relations.

As for the problem of pregnancy and child rearing, adequate solutions
are possible, on the realization that we live the problem outside of
early marriage and in it. Islam, however, emphasizes early marriage for
youths, regards the marital gift (*mahr*) as a mere formality, focuses
on making marriage easy in respect of the economical or financial
requirements imposed by the community.

When we understand the general Islamic outlook, we can see that it is
possible for students to marry and pursue their studies, to live in
their parental homes or a single room which they rent while at
university. They can focus on this event in their life with the same
ease that they do the university milieu.

We see that imitating society by placing economic and societal
restrictions or iron curtains on marriage-to the point where marriage is
not entered into until one is in his thirties or later, while early
marriage-with all its problems-is one basic solution in Islam.

Temporary Marriage and Registered Sexual Activity
-------------------------------------------------

From the *Imamiya* point of view, there is another solution, and that is
"temporary marriage", or the "breakable contract", which may have
*Shariah* or non-*Shariah* limits on it, specifically in relation to
virgins. With respect to widows and divorcees, however, there is no
difficulty.

Islam does not regard the issue of sexual relations between the two
genders for the purpose of satisfying the sexual appetite as a
reprehensible contract, or that it assails the honour of a woman, for
Islam regards sex as a natural need, in exactly the same way it does
food and drink. When the human being wants to sate this carnal hunger by
going to another human being it does not impugn the honor of that
person. But, when we see sex only in light of the pitfalls which an air
of excessive restriction create, then we go very far from the
naturalness of sex.

Sex is a natural condition, indeed, and it is possible for a woman to
seek the satisfaction of her impulses, in a natural manner, with a man
with whom she reaches an agreement in all candor. So, too, it is
possible for a man to do this with candor, without any party hurting the
other, since it is a practice allowed by God. If they cannot enter into
permanent marriage, they will instead enter a temporary one according to
*Shariah* guidelines, under certain social control and when society
reaches a level where it is convinced of the validity of this marriage.

We may face the issue of the children born unexpectedly, in view of the
fact that they are legitimate children. The problem stems from the fact
that society may bar its youths every opportunity by which they can sate
their hunger, which comes to light at this time and which drives them to
masturbation, whether the society realizes it or not.

Sex Education and Societal Norms
--------------------------------

In view of the difficult societal stance, how can a proper understanding
of sex be had, devoid of distortions and misconceptions?

A proper understanding can only come about when the persistent social
outlook on sex is changed, and the idea that it is something dirty or an
affront to the dignity of the woman is abandoned. A social revolution
must change the general views on marriage in such a way as to make us
see that this institution provides the means to establish a simple and
natural bond, without inviting the social pitfalls which we have
inherited from non-Islamic cultures. This is because Islam considers
that marriage is essential between man and woman.

The crux of the matter is that the marriage contract does not need
religious authority, nor does it require any societal convention to fall
within the scope of the *Shariah.* With the requisite *Shariah*
conditions regarding the man and the woman, it is sufficient for the
woman to say to the man: "I marry myself to you, with the marital gift
*(mahr)* value of so and so"; and that he say to her, "I accept this
marriage according to the agreed *mahr* or the agreed conditions." With
this, they are regarded as mates before God (Exalted).

In the *Imami Shia madhab,* we notice that it is not stipulated that
there should be two witnesses in marriage, but that it is commendable;
since people may need to be married in circumstances where there are not
two witnesses. Recording the marriage in an official or *Shariah*
registrar is exactly like registering any other contract or agreement-it
may be deemed legally established, but has no impact on the *Shariah*
marriage. The *Shariah* status of the bond is by virtue of the agreement
between the two people as something specific between them, exactly as in
the case of a business transaction, incorporation, etc.

The solution to the sex problem, free of deviancy, obliges us to
facilitate the matter of marriage and to abandon this pile of
bugbears-the product of a social tradition which has made marriage a
difficult hurdle in the life of our youth. Because of this, our girls
have been driven to deviation through its widest doors.

What is the View of Islam on Love
---------------------------------

What is the view of Islam on love between the two sexes, between boy and
girl; is it something allowed by the *Shariah,* especially if we know
that it can occur sometimes in a non-desirable manner?

Islam wants all of humankind, male and female, to experience human love,
which allows people to feel for one another and thus makes them feel
united within the sphere of humanity. This love leads to nurturing,
guarding, protecting, and taking care of needs, preserving honor,
respecting women, and so forth.

Thus, we see the Messenger of God associating faith with love, for he
said: "None of you is a true believer until he loves for his brother
what he loves for himself, and hates for his brother what he hates for
himself." This makes us understand that-according to this *hadith-*Islam
emphasizes the issue of love which makes you feel with the feelings of
the other.

Consequently, you are not a true believer if your view regarding others
is one of emptiness, unconcern, without any feeling for their affairs.
Hence, we find that the well known *hadith* stipulates this: "Who does
not concern himself with the affairs of the Muslims is not a Muslim."

The issue is that a human must love another in humanness. According to a
*hadith,* when some people asked him about love, Imam Jafar al-Sadiq
replied, "And is religion anything but love?" This then is the issue, in
its separation from humanness.

But there is also the aspect of human impulse which causes a person to
love another in the same way that he loves his food and drink. His love
is directed to the sexuality that drives the person towards others. This
is what most youths experience at the stage of adolescence and
thereafter-an attraction for physical beauty, sexual activity, and so
forth.

We notice that Islam wants humankind (male and female) to experience
this love in a manner that culminates in love. There is no objection
against a man loving a woman, admiring her beauty, and wanting to marry
her. Islam allows a man to look at a woman whom he wants to marry in
order to reflect on his attraction and desire for her from one
perspective or another.

However, love which is a game, an infatuation, or where sex is not
limited to the legal boundaries of marriage, is rejected by Islam. In
fact, everything that leads to sexual aberration, regardless of whether
it is from the heart, the eyes, the tongue, the hands or other organs,
and everything that leads to the sex act, regardless of whether it is
arranging, affecting through petting, is repudiated by Islam, for it
leads to moral problems, wherein a person distances himself from the
proper path prescribed by God.

When we speak of love as a mental state, not by choice, then we cannot
dictate any law regarding this emotion, for God does not hold a person
liable for that of which he is incapable or that which is beyond his
understanding. However, Islam wants emotions to be kept under control,
and therefore pushes the person, carefully and intelligently focusing
his emotions, to think things deeply, rather than dealing only with the
surface. Islam tries to inculcate in its youth the ability to prevent
them from acting solely after first impressions, or on the basis of
skin-deep ideas. Islam did not propound this solely for spousal
relations, but for every human relation, such as friendship, etc.

From another perspective, Islam has put controls on this love and does
not push the two parties to remain alone in private; it does not permit
them to express their love through petting or other forms which lead to
the influence of impulses which we indicated earlier. On the other hand,
Islam does not prohibit innocent talk, which expresses the emotion in a
way that accords with a *Shariah*-based relationship.

Instinctive Love and Platonic Love
----------------------------------

Is it possible for us, with respect to love, to speak of what is termed
"platonic love" or virtuous, sentimental love?

When you speak of love as an emotion, you cannot categorize it as
"platonic", on the one hand, and "instinctive", on the other. But we may
say that there is a state of sexual impulse which some people may term
"love"-i.e., a state where there is a physical attraction between one
*body* and another *body,* not a state where one *person* loves another
*person.* The issue of physical attraction represents a physical act
where one body gets close to another without there being any place for
the facet of humanness in it.

But love is a human emotion which attracts you to another person by way
of the beautiful, ideal, functional, or other attributes. The onus is on
us to differentiate between the emotion which plays a role in physical
contact, and that which plays a role in the appreciation of a person, in
a natural relationship structured on the basis of mutual respect.

Sex Education: How do We give it to Our Youth
---------------------------------------------

How may we teach sex education to our youth?

I do not limit the issue to any particular range; we may need books to
explain a particular idea, as we must also tell the people of the
injunctions of the *Shariah* on the issues of sex so that they may know
their responsibilities in the area according to the *Shariah.*

I began an attempt to answer questions directed to me, and I spoke
candidly on some sex issues which affect the community. Sex education is
like any other subject; we have to teach it but with a functional
approach, regardless of whether it is through books or school programs,
conversations at home, or general debate.

Sex is something that affects the body of a person and how he deals with
his impulses. It is normal that one should know all this. What we view
as socially forbidden may be a result of imitation or traditional
baggage. Therefore, confronting custom means that we must substitute
wisdom to avoid creating more negative aspects than those we are trying
to rid ourselves of.

Islam Adopts Sex Education
--------------------------

What are the parameters of this education? Is there a specific age at
which we can begin instruction?

Islam has opened the door to sex education for all Muslims with respect
to the sexual relations which the Qurâ€™an discusses somewhat candidly.
Indeed, on the subject of marriage, the Qurâ€™anic terminology employs
linguistic forms which suggest more sexual than contractual
connotations, as in its use of the term "*nikah".*

Indeed, if we want to study the noble *Sunna,* we find that there are
*hadiths* on sexual issues which pertain to relations between a man and
his wife in commendable matters, legal rulings, and ancillary topics. In
more than one *hadith,* sexual organs are so candidly and naturally
covered that one can only infer that the milieu of the (prophetic)
message saw nothing immoral in the topic.

We may find some *hadiths* which deal with the conversation between the
Prophet and someone who came to confess to having committed adultery
*(zina).* We see that the last question directed to the perpetrator
concerning the sex act used a term which people today may shy away from
expressing.

In this manner we find related *hadith* issues pertaining to women in
menstruation, pre-menstruation, the postpartum period, as well as
matters pertaining to the state of man after sexual relationship
*(janabah),* etc.

When we study the books of the jurists and the chapters that relate to
sex, we see that there are clear, candid discussions on the specifics of
sex, regardless of whether they pertain to sexual organs, the sex act,
or some related issue.

We also find that the earlier scholars discussed sex in their books
through rare stories, witticisms, and jokes transmitted in a manner that
may be considered immoral by the present society. We find that some old
books written by pious, ascetic, pure scholars consist of chapters that
describe methods which are not conventional and familiar in the sex act.

Their justification was that they felt books such as these might make
the spouses learn sexual conduct, whereby they would comply their own
natural desires as well as those of their spouses, and would therefore
need not satisfy those desires outside of the marital life.

This confirm that Islam adopts sex education by virtue of its
relationship to the *Shariah* rulings-the commendable, the obligatory,
or the forbidden-which relate to this aspect of the life of the human
being. When we study this issue, however, we focus on it in the light of
the principle that this discussion is not within the sphere of the
forbidden but that of the lawful.

The evolution of cultural and social mores may have helped cultivate
negative attitudes towards sex education or some specific aspect of it.
This is especially true if the circumstances surrounding these mores, in
the reflection of the youth or children, lead to negative results: it
will cause subconscious reactions in the child or youth, leading him to
stray from Islamic guidelines.

From this perspective, the subject has to be studied in much detail and
caution before its thematic associations could be known-relating to the
personality of the human being seeking such instruction or the factors
that influence his life. What I would like to stress is that sex
education did not begin with contemporary developments. Islam did so
earlier on every issue so far discussed.

The Mandatory Steps in Sex Education
------------------------------------

On the issue of instructing the coming generation in this regard, steps
must be drawn up for this in terms of the methods, issues, and milieus,
so that the emphasis remains on the education technique, with no
elementfrom the old concepts. This means stressing to the child or youth
that his sex organ is not something odd, but that it is quite natural;
it does not imply strangeness, deficiency or any such thing.

Rather, there are *Shariah* laws which call for the covering of this
organ, and for using it within a specific scope of activity, as directed
by God-who has spoken about other organs in relation to forbidden
matters, such as not eating this or that, not looking, etc.

Nevertheless, before all this the issue calls for an appropriate
setting, and it is imperative that we structure this setting, because
many social mores rate sex education as a work or subject that is
immoral. If we can undertake this, we will be able to instruct the
coming generation in sex education through a functional, objective
approach, going all the way to subjects like childbirth, where the fetus
comes from. We must be straightforward, but with an approach structured
on gradually divulged details in this area.

The nature of these things may incite some children to experiment, just
as we observe that some of them who watch films of television are quick
to put them into practice, and may be hurt as a result.

There are also those who read books on sex, or watch erotic films, may
attempt to do what they see, living the experience in a twisted form, at
a moment when the person's inner impulses combined with the outer
surroundings are so influenced that they push him to experiment with
whatever he learns.

At the same time, however, I stress that the present mode of instruction
affecting every house, through television, newspapers, disseminate
sexual information which allows youths and children to know much more
about sex than the mother or the father.

A telling instance of this is when some women were speaking to one
another, one said to the other, "My daughter has now attained puberty,
so how can I speak to her about matters related to puberty and sex?" The
other replied that she should give her the impression that she knows as
much as her daughter, since it was possible that the daughter knew more
than her mother!

Sex education may be all the more urgently needed nowadays because it is
given to teenagers by way of films and cheap books, with no controls or
limits. It may, therefore, be necessary for the specialists in Islamic
methodology to draw up a special program to rescue the present
generation from all the distorted information on sex.

The Responsibilities of the Home and the School
-----------------------------------------------

Which is better, teaching sex education in the family or at school?

We are not able to delineate the issue so clearly that we can classify
it to within a particular scope, for children may need one type of
teaching within the home, when they ask about childbirth, become
conscious of their private parts, find siblings who are anatomically
different. In this case, fathers and mothers may certainly teach the
children in a well-balanced manner, giving the child correct but
comprehensible answers.

We also need the school, for the systematic education of schools is
necessary, especially since some school subjects relate to health, the
study of animals and their reproduction, etc. The children are taught
subjects they need to know, and through these they receive detailed
explanations on subjects relating to the body.

The Sexual Atmosphere
---------------------

A problem which we face is that, as a result of western culture, the
general social environment has become quite sex conscious. The issue of
sex has become one of absolute right, as generally with other rights. If
Eastern cultures did not possess some discipline or restraint, this
perverse cultural conditioning could have transformed the Eastern
outlook from an Islamic reality into something more akin to what people
are in the West.

When, therefore, you initiate sex education without strict prudence in
this atmosphere, you could easily pervert sex education. What I say is
not dependent on the type of prudence known in present-day society, but
rather that of ensuring a strong foundation when providing sex
education, so that it may not lead to corruption in practice.

The Concept of Deficiency
-------------------------

The concept of deficiency is the same as its lexical meaning: a flaw in
the character, body, or conduct which may cause a moral or ethical
deviation. Fornication by a youth is considered by the family to be a
deficiency; the public exposure of one's private parts is considered a
deficiency-in view of the *Shariah* prohibition of both actions. This
prohibition makes them deficient in respect of religion and flawed in
respect of social norms.

Islam, however, does not see that a person should suffer the faults of
others, and I do not participate in the deficiency of one of my deviant
relatives, even if he is closely related. This is because Islam avers
that:

"***No bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another**" (al-Anam,
6:164).*

Consequently, targeting the entire family for the sexual transgression
of a woman is indeed a jahili concept, not an Islamic one. Islam charges
the woman or the man who has fornicated, and determines that their moral
depravity is something specific to them, not to the members of their two
families or any other person who may be socially connected to them.

There are those who say that sexual deviation or perversity does not
stem from any error in sex education or lack thereof, but rather results
from the sexual repression prevalent in our society.

I do not say that sex education is the cause of deviancy whenever it is
connected to such practice. I say that it may open the avenues to
deviations by people who have no previous experience in this area.

Sex Issues as Educational Issues
--------------------------------

What is the method for explaining these issues to our sons and
daughters? To what length should we go when discussing these issues with
them?

These issues are exactly like the other educational issues which need to
be explained to children. There may not be a need nor a conducive
atmosphere to offer a detailed analysis to a child; we may explain
childbirth exactly as we do planting or the incubation of an egg.

With respect to the foregoing questions, I have indicated that society
strongly rejects these methods, even though they may be evident. It is
absolutely necessary that we educate society in this respect, and
introduce the matter as a general societal perspective, providing
fathers and mothers with the proper methods of sex education which they
may give their inquisitive children.

What about a special program for sex education in schools?
----------------------------------------------------------

I support that, but it is normal that every subject should be examined
for its positive and negative influences on the students to whom it is
taught, and what these can lead to in society at large.

Sex Films
---------

What is the ruling on looking at sex films and pornographic photos?

The *Shariah* and ethical principles prohibit looking at the private
parts of another person. This fundamentally applies equally to looking
at private parts in pictures or films. The reason is that the negative
aspects of the latter are almost the same as those of the former. We do
not, however, see this as the main criterion in the legal rulings
(*fatawa*); instead specific circumstances dictate the ruling.

For there is a condition which afflicts some people to the point where
looking at such films may save the marriage, as in the case of
frigidity, impotence, or similar dysfunction in either spouse, and
looking at such films may offer a cure. Viewing these films and pictures
beyond these circumstances, however, may lead to spiritual dissolution,
to the point where the viewer becomes obsessed with the ideas of the
film and acting them out, necessitating a prohibition-despite the
situations which warrant a certain amount of license, as in the first
scenario.

Two Differennt Generations: Parents and Children
------------------------------------------------

â€˜Ali b. Abi Talib, *Amir al-Mumineen,* counseled that parents should
rear their children in a different manner than the one in which they
were reared, on the premise that they were born in a different time.
What is the value of rearing from a perspective which respects time
difference? What is the role of past methods and experience here?

What al-Sharif al-Radi related in *Nahj al-Balagha* is*, "*Do not mold
your children's ethics according to yours, for their time is different
from yours." When we wish to analyze this narrative, we must take note
that there is a difference between the principles and the ethics which
form the behavioral aspect of life. If we wish to delve deeper into the
matter, then we must state that ethics is of two categories: morals that
are immutable and morals that change.

Immutable morals comprise the pure morals necessary in thought and deed
for daily living, necessary in every time and place (e.g., truth,
honesty, chastity, and the like) from the best ethical models for
perfectly integrated human life.

The morals that change are manners and methods of interaction which
reflect social interaction and ways of living in the evolution of the
self, etiquette, and protocol. The etiquette of respect, speech,
political or social relations changes from time to time.

Take clothing as an example. What is important is not to wear what the
Prophet wore, or what the Imams and the Companions wore. Every epoch has
its form of dress, and it is possible for us to employ the modern items
people have invented while developing various forms of eating, dress,
and other things. A tradition was reported from Imam al-Sadiq: "The best
dress of the time is the dress of its people"-i.e., a person should wear
what the people wear.

Every Age has Its Morals
------------------------

The morals Imam â€˜Ali referred to, therefore, are those that change and
are reflected in daily relations and manners, and every new horizon. We
find that in the past man had limited horizons. People's values were
limited to their lives and to working in order to reach particular,
limited ends. But life has expanded, and with it knowledge.

Changed also are the ways of instruction and the benefits. Thus, the
Imam wanted to say, You must be aware that temporal values change with
time, to prepare the future for your children, that you may mold them
for the ethics of that future time and that they will not be out of tune
with their time and place.

The Imam did not mean the methods people invented, no matter how little
they are in keeping with the limits imposed by God (Exalted). For there
are types of clothing which are not harmonious with decency. This
changed value may thus clash with an immutable precept. There is no way,
for example, for us to agree on women's fashions in public, since even
where they direr from the changing issues in actuality, they clash with
established morals.

The Imam's position had to do with ethics that change, being the result
of the normal course of life which brings difference and development-on
the condition that temporal values do not clash with immutable,
established morals.

The Desired Balance in the Life of the Youth
--------------------------------------------

During the stage of youth, there is an inclination either towards
frivolity, game playing, and horseplay, or to drowning in spirituality
and worship. How do we balance these two extremes?

Every stage of life needs proper balancing through a personal process of
harmonizing bodily needs with ideals. The person who drowns himself in
the one or the other may either be a believer overcome by faith, which
draws him to spiritual immersion; else his base instincts may pervade
over him and pulls him to sport and frivolity

Therefore, one must contemplate his affiliations, and those involved in
the field of education must work towards directing the youth to reach a
level of balance in the material and spiritual dimensions. If we wish to
deal with the spiritual dimension in someone's personality, we must
stress a spirituality which does not distance itself from the physical
aspect in the existential outlook of the person.

This is because the physical dimension has in its core some aspects of
spirituality. By the same token, the spirit cannot manifest itself
without some external form, which makes the balance between the physical
and the spiritual, something dictated by both dimensions.

Life is Body and Spirit
-----------------------

Those who immerse themselves completely in the physical dimension can
achieve material satisfaction in themselves only by opening up to some
form of spirituality. We find, therefore, that when someone wants to
eat, he chooses a place where the atmosphere is pleasing both mentally
and spiritually; he goes to the green plains, beside running water, or
the mountains.

And there are those who try to have a musical atmosphere or some such
agreeable milieu. The ambiance which a person tries to create around him
when tending to his physical needs reflects a spiritual condition. His
material needs then do not satisfy his spiritual yearning, nor appease
his hunger; rather he must add to them some extra-material essence,
which we may consider as spiritual.

From this perspective, then, a person cannot be without some spiritual
dimension in his physical being. Nor can he be without some physical
dimension in his spiritual being. When he wishes to pray to God he uses
his mind, his tongue, his hands, and his entire body because his
spiritual condition must be manifested in reified form. Whoever wishes
to be spiritual must be physical, and whoever wishes to be physical must
accept the spiritual.

How to Achieve Proper Balance
-----------------------------

In its innermost depths, life contains a spiritual capacity. And
spirituality has at its core a physical capacity, which makes the
possibility of balance easy for a counselor, since he can use
life-experience as a means to explain the balance between higher and
lower issues.

By this last reference, I mean that which pertain to God and the
hereafter, on the one hand, and to worldly life, on the other. This is
what we note in the Qurâ€™anic instruction:

"***Our Lord, Give us the good of this life and the good of the
hereafter!**" (al-Baqarah, 2:201).*

 Elsewhere the Qurâ€™an states:

"**Seek that which God has provided for you in the abode of the
hereafter, and do not forget your share in this world***" (al-Qasas,
28:77).*

 This is also reflected in a *hadith: "*He who gives up his [earthly]
world for the [otherworldly] abode is not one of us, and he who
surrenders his [otherworldly] abode for his [earthly] world is not one
of us."

We can relate to the issue from both an ideational perspective and the
cultural admonition to cultivate a proper balance between the spiritual
and the physical, to permit the person to deal with his instincts and
impulses within the parameters of the permissible *(halal).* He can
likewise deal with his spirituality within the parameters of reality.

Special Aspects of Girl's Education
-----------------------------------

In the majority of cases, parents find great difficulty in rearing their
daughters; what are the special aspects of this nurturing?

We need to understand that a girl is as much a human being as a male or
a son, and it is essential that we nurture her humanness in a way which
does not oppress her spirit, and which does not make her feel that her
conduct is always suspect, or that she must always defend her behavior
every moment or in every situation-as if she were besieged by others'
observations.

Traditionally, nurturing has rested on the principle that the girl
represents either [collective] vice or [collective] virtue, and that she
is to be protected from the males, and that we must put her in a closed
box to which only the father and the brother have the key. Whenever
someone commits lewd acts, Islam views that as an individual flaw; when
the girl commits a lewd act, it is her own blemish. The family does
partake of this fault. When a boy commits a lewd act, it is the boy who
is blemished, not the family-for the breach is his alone, not the
family's.

We must, therefore, raise the girl to know that she is a person with her
own wants and desires in life, and there is a path for her which God has
designed, one that unfolds as she observes the limits of her spirit,
body, mind, and conduct-exactly the same way we must raise the boy.

The Problem of Repression
-------------------------

The problem of discriminating between boy and girl represents a dilemma
for the girl. She suffers *from* the repression of her humanness, by
assuming responsibility for the family's collective virtue in a manner
which is not expected of the boy. Doubtful and accusing glances surround
her whenever she goes out, in her relations or her habit in ways to
which the boy is not subjected.

This kind of rearing is incorrect. Virtue is an Islamic requirement
equally of the male and the female. Individually, chastity is equally
required from the boy and the girl. Maybe the weakness of the female,
compared with the strength of the male, presents us with the problem of
strengthening the girl in her wants. This precludes favoring the
requests of others before hers, that she may strengthen her personality
and morals, and become better able to withstand enticements and
perversities.

The Successful Wife and Righteous Mother
----------------------------------------

We have to educate the girl how to be a successful wife and righteous
mother, just as we must raise the boy to be a successful husband and
righteous father. This is because God (Exalted) did not differentiate
between male and female in righteous deeds, just as He did not
differentiate unrighteous deeds.

He made the penalty the same for a male thief as for a female thief, the
male and the female fornicator. In fact, He made All Muslims, men and
women, equal; believing men and believing women; upright men and upright
women; and such other classifications as are denoted in Surat al
*Ahzab.*

From this, we understand that God did not tax the woman in her morality
any more than He did the man. He did not warn the woman more than He did
the man. If then we want our education to follow the proper method, we
must follow the guidelines of the *Shariah,* and the concepts
established by Islam which treat men and women equally.

Machismo is not Manhood
-----------------------

Machismo and Toughness, in the life of the youths, is associated with
virility, self-assertion, flexing of muscle, and competing with their
peers. . How can we correct this situation in the prime of their youth?

In order to change a warped situation, we must first change the concept
of the issues which suggests corruption, and from there change the
course of the situation in another direction where no negative can
result.

When we speak of the machismo of manhood, which a youth may use to
assert his masculinity and strength, we find that through naive and
impetuous actions he may commit aggression. Examples are showing off his
muscles in front of others, attacking those who are weaker than him,
committing crimes that yield some small reward and give him certain
pleasure. All these actions are typical of adolescents.

In this regard, then, it is possible to suggest to youths that manhood
is not connected to aggression, criminal activity, or showing off. These
personal traits are likely to depend on personal strength. They are
associated with "manhood" in a context that gives the term a meaning
that is far from functional, just as physical strength is associated
with manhood.

This is because it is not important that a man should be physically
strong or weak where strength is taken in its apparent meaning i.e.,
whatever appears in terms of shapes and colors. The important thing is
that physical strength be integrated with the spiritual strength,
political strength, and a society which enriches the meaning of manhood,
putting it on a higher level.

Upbringing focused on a line of reasoning for youths, with respect to
their perceptions of strength, may fill the void for whoever is seeking
to fill it, and prevent distortion in the opposite direction, beyond the
religious suggestions that may assist the Muslim youth to overcome any
aggressive feeling he may have.

We must, therefore, suggest to the Muslim youth that the physical
strength he uses against the weak is actually a condition of weakness in
self-will, before Satan; that it may lead to vulnerability in his
hereafter, when he will face the punishment of God on the Day of
Judgment.

This is understood from some verses of the Qurâ€™an which show that
patience is one of the best attributes, as in

"***Be patient in what afflicts you; truly that is the most steadfast of
affairs**" (Luqman, 31:17).*

This, too, can be understood from the saying of the Holy Prophet: "The
strong is not identified through wrestling; the strong is he who
controls himself when he is angry."

From the Shariah viewpoint, when exactly does Islam permit one to emigrate to a non-Islamic or Western country?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Islam does not, as a matter of principle, prevent any person from
traveling to any country in the world. As a matter of fact, it may
sometimes be obligatory for one to leave the country if staying there
subjects one to the tyrants who hold authority over people there, in
such a way that it leads to corruption in thought and practice, causing
one to be their organ and an oppressor of the people. In this case, it
is not permitted for the person to remain in the country. This is what
God means when He says:

"***As for those whom the angels cause to die while they wrong
themselves, the [the angels] shall say: What was their situation? They
said: We were oppressed in the land. The [angels] said: Was the earth
not wide enough for you to emigrate [elsewhere] in it? The abode of
those is hellfire. What a horrible ending! Except those who are weak and
oppressed from the men, women and children, who have not in their power
the means and are not shown a way [to escape]. For them there is hope
that God will forgive for God is Clement, the Forgiving**. (al-Nisa,*
4:97-99)

We see in these two verses that staying in the lands of the
non-believers which oppress the mind and the body is forbidden, except
for those who have no means or cannot find a way to travel from that
land to another place. In the light of this, emigration is not something
on which Islam has adopted a negative sense. On the contrary, Islama may
take a positive view of it. These are the words of God:

"***Whoever emigrates in the way of God finds haven in the earth,
plentiful and spacious**" (al-Nisa, 4:100).*

This means that when a person is living under harsh circumstances which
dictate that he become corrupted in his country, or go to another, then
it is normal in such a situation to flee from his country with his
religion-but he must not flee with his religion to fall into a situation
that is worse.

Emigration at the Expense of Religion is Forbidden
--------------------------------------------------

On the other hand, Islam takes a negative stance on emigration,
forbidding it if it leads to a weakening of the religion-be it in
personal or family observance, in any non-Islamic country he goes to
where the essential conditions for Islam are non-existent. The
conditions which run distinctly against an Islamic upbringing abound. In
this situation, emigration may mean "assimilation after
immigration"-which is rejected by the *Shariah,* for Islam does not
intend Muslims to put themselves in a position of vulnerability in
respect of culture, religious conduct, after they have enjoyed both,
along with other factors that render them superior in thought and deed.

If emigration leads to a person falling into the clutches of the
oppressors, either through the intelligence agents or the like who will
exploit his needs and his weaknesses in the host country, forcing him to
become a member of their group or to spy on his coreligionists, to
establish espionage activity among the Muslims on behalf of the
oppressors, then emigration is forbidden.

Analysis of Refugee-Status Emigration
-------------------------------------

In the light of the foregoing discussion, what is termed "political
asylum," to which many of our Muslim coreligionists who live in
countries under despotic rule have resorted, needs be studied from
several perspectives.

The first perspective: Because of the methods often used to initiate the
process of political asylum, or at different stages of this process, the
fleeing Muslim believer may be reduced to a state of degradation, by
having to resort to forbidden *(haram)* activities-e.g., forced by
circumstance to take *haram* food and drink, and other illicit deeds. In
cases such as these, the emigration is not permissible, since it is
forbidden for a person to abase himself, just as it is forbidden for him
to go to a place where he knows beforehand that he will be compelled to
commit illicit acts. The exception to the ruling is where the situation
wherever he now lives is such that he will encounter more evil by
staying than by emigrating.

Is it up to the individual to assess what constitutes oppression?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

If the individual has the appropriate knowledge and experience, then he
is capable of assessing his position, since the issue relates to his
personal responsibilities and satisfaction. However, if he has none of
the requisite knowledge and experience, he must seek recourse to the
experts who can clarify and assess the matter for him.

The second perspective: Political asylum may lead to a state where the
refugee lives in a morally licentious society which discourages worship,
in which respect he has no freedom; or he does not possess the outlets
that would protect him from falling into the temptations of this
society. Society may not see fornication, homosexuality, or any form of
moral depravity as being wrong. Seeking asylum in such a place is
forbidden.

Associated with this is whether his staying in the country will lead to
his children having an upbringing that is not Islamic. So much so, he is
forced to leave them in schools which misguide them in terms of beliefs
and conduct; or where they live in a situation where he has no authority
over them before adolescence, or after adolescence. This is especially
true of those places where the child who reaches adolescence is entitled
to complain to specific authorities and lodge against his own father or
mother, and can have their parental authority revoked on the grounds
that they are too severe towards him, or some such reason.

The third perspective: Where remaining in this country may cause him to
join the espionage apparatus operating against Islam and the Muslims, or
to engage in the commerce of illegal commodities like drugs-and in such
a situation, emigration is seen as a prohibited (haram) action.

If however, we are able to find in the country of political asylum
Islamic nurseries which allow the child or youth to establish a life
where he can develop Islamically, then there is nothing against
emigration. In fact, such emigration may be a commendable act, or
better, according to the Shariah-when the Muslim's search for asylum in
this country leads to calling to the path of God, and to serving in
God's cause in the areas of freedom that one or another country allows,
or similar activity which rate as service to Islam and the Muslims.

From this, it is obligatory for those who are forced by Islamic
considerations to flee-whether it be for reasons of doctrine, politics,
or function (autocratic ruling or oppressive authority)-to study the
proposed country of asylum, to see if it offers a milieu for calling to
the path of God; to see how well it could incorporate Islam in thought,
conduct, ethics, and practice. They also have to respond to the words of
God:

"***O you who Believe! Protect yourselves and your families from a fire,
the fuel of which is people and stones**" (al-Tahrim, 66:6).*

They must work on the principle of maintaining themselves, their
children, their families by embarking on their own education projects
and religion, by creating an attractive Islamic atmosphere for the
immigrants and their children to live an Islamic life with the proper
development. They also have to call to the way of God, in conduct, so
that people who go to them will find them exemplary in their productive
life, enriching the country through a fruitful contact with Islam-thanks
to how Islam deals with life, freedom, justice, and (other) human
issues.

They must work on the principle that they have to be outstanding in
truth, trust, piety, and harmonious interaction with the people there.
They must do so until people there recognize that upright conduct is
what Islam calls its followers to adopt in order to be exemplary in
righteousness, the best of people living the human experience before God
in a manner that enriches others and enriches life.

It is incumbent on those Muslims who emigrate, to protect themselves
against the threat to their security in their homeland, not to disturb
the order of things. They may find that the people have certain ideas,
concepts, or habits which do not agree with Islamic principles. In this
case, they must stay away, without creating a negative, tense atmosphere
which causes them to be rejected in that country. This is because, on
the one hand, such conduct detracts from being perceived by the people
of that country as being compatible with the general order; and on the
other hand, it may lead the country in which they now reside to opt for
their expulsion or deportation, thereby returning them to the original
problem.

I invite my emigrating brethren in the way of God to the saying of Imam
al-Sadiq, when he said: "Be to us as the callers to the path of God,
without using your tongues, so that honesty, goodness, and piety may be
evident in you."

I say to you, with all the love and affection, that you have fled with
your religion from oppression, corruption, tyranny, and non-belief; so
do not, in the places you now live, abandon your religion. Rather, count
on your religion to be the primary personal standard, the main cause for
your getting together, the reason for your existence-for the pureness of
this life and the hereafter put it on that level.

We wait for you to become the callers to Islam over there, to open for
us a new place, and by Islam, to create new horizons for us.

According to the response to the first question, the Muslim who seeks
asylum must not degrade himself.

**There are those refugees who say: "In the place of refuge to which
they have gone, there is more respect and honor than in the Islamic
countries." What is the response to this?**  
 The issue may appear to be thus long after the search for refuge has
begun-when the refugees are crowded into confined places and treated
very badly-which may give them the impression that there is degradation.
If they suffer degradation from another perspective in the country in
which they were, they must compare between the degradation here and the
degradation in the other country, to determine their position according
to the *Shariah* with respect to what is *halal* and what is *haram.*

When I spoke of degradation, it was in objective terms, not subjective
ones. A person may perceive degradation where there is none, or may not
recognize degradation where there is every sign of it-because he is
looking ahead to what will happen afterwards, knowing that the
humbleness of a Muslim before a non-believer is different from the
humbleness of a Muslim before another Muslim.

Police Authority
----------------

What about the authority of the police, which is recognized in the West
as an alternative authority to that of the father, in the case where the
son or daughter lodges a complaint against the father?

When we analyze the matter from an objective, human viewpoint, we may
find some mitigating points for protecting the children from the abuse
of authority. I believe that something of this sort is within our
capacity in the Islamic countries.

We hasten to protect the child from its parents. The father is a
protector of the children in their rearing, good to them, and can
interact with them. If, however, paternal authority or guardianship
changes into oppression of the child, and you cannot protect the child
from its parents as long as the child remain with them, then legal
authority has the right to take the child to protect him from his
parents, and to put him in the custody of someone who can nurture him.
The issue that raises itself here concerns the standards which the West
places for judging harshness and gentleness towards children, which may
differ from our own standards.

Consequently, we may differ with the Westerners in cases where they see
that the father and mother are abusive towards the children, enough for
the authorities to take the child in order to protect it from its
parents. We may also find that the father may have to discipline his
child, sometimes severe, in a way which, while not constituting mental
or physical abuse, may still not be compatible with Western views.

In view of this, we warn our brethren who live in the West, from falling
into these difficult situations. In order to protect themselves, they
should desist from severe methods in dealing with their children, and
instead try other methods of rearing their children, or seek other ways
which will not cause the son or the daughter to lodge complaints with
the state against the family. The reason is that when the state takes
the child, the child may lose in terms of religion, ethics, etc.

The Problem of Children and Adults
----------------------------------

When we bring up the question of foreign refuge or immigration, the
topic focuses on the loss of the children and their corruption, as if
the adults are somehow exempt in this respect. What is your view?

We do not speak in terms of adults and children. We speak rather in
terms of actual authority, which is not essentially the same as the
*Shariah* authority, where the father has effective authority over his
son and daughter.

The problem which Muslims face in the West is that, if the son or his
daughter become corrupted, they cannot be compelled, because the law
prevents this; the father is not permitted to employ certain means to
order the good and to forbid the evil *(al-amr bi-l-maruf wa-n-nahi
ani-l-munkar)* where his family and children are concerned.

This is what residence in the West-as much for refugees as for
others-causes as a problem in Islam with respect to corrupted children.
In Islam, the father has the right to rid them of corruption, a right he
does not possess in the West. But in that event, it is forbidden for the
father to remain wherever his children will be led astray.

The Double Lives of the Immigrant Youth
---------------------------------------

There is the problem of the double lives which youth experience in the
West-especially with regards to religiously observant families. In the
home, children may be instructed to observe religion, but when they go
outside the home they encounter an opposite reality.

This dichotomy may be a normal state of affairs which children
experience with their fathers, everywhere that society evolves in a
manner different from the way things function at home. The manners and
customs of the society may be different to those of the house, which
puts the student or youth in a state of mental confusion, bewilderment,
and functional dichotomy. This is because this youth does not have
well-founded rules in his mind to balance his actions.

At the same time, if he wants to give in to the pressures of the street,
he will live in a state where he faces pressure at home; or if he is
tempted to give in to the pressures of the house, he will be pressured
in the street. This causes a mental conflict, leading to an inability to
solve the problem-lying around the house if either the street pressure
or the pressure of instinct is stronger. This can lead to him facing
severe problems in the street if he gives in to the pressure of the
household or acts thus.

Therefore, in this situation the family must study the points of
weakness in the life of youth, to rescue them from this problem;
otherwise we will face, here in the Middle East, the same problems faced
by the West, whose manners and customs we are receptive of.

The Child Succumbing to Influences
----------------------------------

There are those immigrant fathers who state: "My children are young,
only one or two years old. And I shall remain relaxed until they become
older," with the assumption that there are no negative influences on the
young.

I do not agree with the thinking of these people, because the child who
is brought up in that environment will retain this environment whenever
he contemplates his childhood. In this manner, he will have emotions and
meanings in his personality, albeit in a childlike manner. This will
have an effect on his future if he goes elsewhere, because we retain the
problems of our childhood after we become adult.

Thus, a child can breathe religion as well as he can infidelity
*(kufr),* good as well as he can evil. This means that this method does
not work in this respect. We do not wish to exacerbate the problem,
insisting that the same influences that affect the child also affect
youth. But we cannot deny such influences, which may greatly conflict
later in the child's future, in that his nurturing may be retarded in
another area. name,

Addendum of Narrations (2)
--------------------------

### Pertaining to the parent and the child

â€¢ The Messenger of God said: "Be kind to your children, and excel in
this kindness."

â€¢ He also said: "Train your children in three things: "The love of your
prophet, the love of the *Ahlul Bayt,* and the recitation of the
Qurâ€™an."

â€¢ He also said: "The child does not inherit anything better from his
father than good manners."

â€¢ Imam â€˜Ali b. Abi Talib said: "Train your children to seek knowledge."

â€¢ Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq said: "The child plays for seven years, learns
the Book for seven years, and learns the *halal* and the *haram* for
seven years."

â€¢ He also said: "Make speed to train them in *hadith* before the
*murji*'*ites* beat you to it."

â€¢ The noble Messenger said: "Command your children to prayer when they
are seven years old; beat them over it when they are ten, and separate
them in the beds."

â€¢ He also said: "The father must observe his obligations to his son; the
son is not forced to observe the rights of his father."

â€¢ He also said: "The parents must not be stubborn with their child, just
as the child must not disobey the parents."

â€¢ He also said: "Among the rights of the child over the parent are
three: To give him a good to teach him writing, and to marry him when he
comes of age."

â€¢ Al-Imam al-Sadiq said: "The child has three claims on the parent: the
choice of a good mother, giving him a good name, and disciplining him
properly when educating him." The Prophet Muhammad said: "When anyone's
son matures, and he has the financial ability to marry him but does not
do so, then that boy will commit sin, and the sin will be on the
father."

â€¢ He also said: "May God be merciful to he who helps his son in piety.
This is to forgive his faults, and to ask God for His guidance."

â€¢ Al-Imam al-Sadiq said: "Disobedience towards the parents is a heinous
sins, for God has made the disobedient one rebellious and hard."

â€¢ He also said: The mildest form of ill conduct towards parents is
"Uff!", and if God knew something lesser than that, He would have
forbidden it."

â€¢ And he said in explanation to God's words: "***And lower unto them the
wing of submission through mercy**"* (17:24)-Do not fill your eyes when
you look at them with anything else but mercy and sympathy, and do not
raise your voice above their voice, and do not put your hand above
theirs, and do not go in front of them?

â€¢ And he also said, in explanation of the verse, "***And say kind words
to them**," "*If they strike you, say to them: May Allah forgive you
both."

â€¢ He also said, in explanation of God's words: "***When they reach old
age with you**", "*If they get annoyed with you, do not say to them
"uff'" and do not rebuke them if they beat you."

â€¢ He also said: "God is merciful towards his slave to the extent of his
love for his child."

â€¢ The noble Prophet said: "A righteous son is one of the delights of a
man."

â€¢ Al-Imam al-Sadiq: "The legacy of God from his believing servant is a
righteous servant who asks forgiveness for him."

â€¢ He also said: "Whoever has a daughter and teaches her good manners,
excelling in that, and teaches her and excels in that, and is generous
to her from that which God has endowed him with, this is a benefit and a
barrier to hellfire."

â€¢ He also said: "Daughters are compassionate, always willing and are
blessings."

â€¢ He also said: "He to whom is born a daughter and does not harm her,
does not deny her, and does not favor his son to her, God will, for her
sake, grant him paradise."

â€¢ AI Imam al-Sadiq said: "Girls are gifts, and boys are bounties; one is
blessed for the gifts, and questioned about the bounties."

â€¢ The noble Prophet said: "God [Exalted and Holy] is more compassionate
to females than to males; there is not a man who brings joy to his
spouse but that God will make him joyful on the Day of Resurrection."

â€¢ He also said: "Fear God and be just among your children in treatment."

â€¢ He also said: "Among their rights over you is that you treat them
equally, and among your rights over them is that they honor you."

â€¢ The Prophet said: "Be just in your treatment of presents for your
children [i.e., gifts], for you love that they should honor you."

â€¢ The Prophet said: "Treat your children with justice in regard to
presents; if I were to give preference to any, it would be the women."

â€¢ He also said: "Whoever is happy to have a long life and bounty should
honor his parents and keep his bond with kin."

â€¢ Imam â€˜Ali said: "Honoring parents is one of the noblest
characteristics."

â€¢ He also said: "Honoring parents is one of the greatest obligations."

â€¢ Imam al-Sadiq said: "Honour your parents and your children will honor
you."

â€¢ It is reported on the authority of Ibn Masud that he said: "I asked
the Messenger of God, 'Which deed is most loved by God?' He answered,
'Prayer on time.' I asked, 'And then which?' He answered, 'Honoring your
parents.'"

â€¢ The Messenger of God said: "Whoever honors his parents, and they bless
him, God will add to his longevity."

â€¢ A man came to the Messenger of God and said: "I came to pledge fealty
to you on the pilgrimage, and I left my two parents crying." The Prophet
said to him: "Return to them, and make them laugh as you have made them
cry."

â€¢ From the Imam Ridhaâ€™: "God Almighty orders that thanks be given to Him
and to parents. Whosoever does not thank his parents does not thank
God."

â€¢ From the Messenger: "The pleasure of God is the pleasure of the
parent, and the anger of God is the anger of a parent."

â€¢ Among the supplications of Imam Zayn al-Abidin was: "O God, cause me
to be in awe of them as of a tyrannical sultan, and to honor them the
honor of a loving mother, make me obedient to my parents and my honor to
them more delightful to my eye than the deepest slumber, a balm to my
chest colder than the drink which slakes the harshest thirst, until I
put their feelings over mine."

â€¢ The Holy Prophet said: "Paradise is under the feet of mothers."

### Spiritual devotion

â€¢ From the Imam â€˜Ali, *Amir al-Muminin: "*Whoever continually observes
spiritual discipline, will benefit therefrom."

â€¢ He also said: "To the wise person, there is spiritual devotion in
every deed."

â€¢ He also said: "I swear by God, and will only go against its terms by
God's will. My devotions will welcome bread, if I am able to eat it, and
I shall be satisfied with salt to go with it. [In my devotions] my tears
will flow so much that my eyes will be like a fountain, the waters of
which have run dry."

â€¢ He also said: "My soul I subdue with the fear of God, so that it may
come on the day of judgment free of the greatest fear and free of
transgression."

â€¢ He also said: "Keep your eyes awake, press your stomachs, take from
your bodies, and struggle therewith against your base desires."

â€¢ He also said: "Spiritual devotion benefits only an alert soul."

â€¢ In his counsel to Ushwan al-Basri, Al-Sadiq said: "As for spiritual
devotion, you should not eat that which is undesirable, for it engenders
stupidity and foolishness. Do not eat except when you are hungry, and if
you eat, eat that which is *halal* in the name of God, and remember the
*hadith* of the Messenger of God: "The human being does not fill a
container that is worse than his stomach."

â€¢ Part of al-Khidr's counsel to Musa was "Train yourself to patience and
you will free yourself from sin."


