Themes 4:  Our Youth and Effective Work
=======================================

The Negative Attitude Towards Politics
--------------------------------------

Despite the popular slogan "Our religion is politics and politics is our
religion", many of our youth take a negative attitude towards politics.
What is our view on this?

Actually, youth do not run away from politics per se, but rather from
politics of a specific nature, or from difficult political situations,
or from a political leadership which has none of the lofty ideals by
which the greater political goals may be realized. The activities of
many political parties and movements, along with their inner
complexities, may be factors that alienate youth from involvement in
this environment.

We may find that a youth refuses to participate in the political
discourse because of his negative conception of the subject, based on
what he has perceived in his environment, on his readings or on a
negative conclusion such as politics is chicanery, prevarication,
hypocrisy, that one should distance himself from it.

It is possible, too, that the issue may stem from a lack of
self-confidence or fear of political complexities. We feel that the
negative attitude may be the result of one or another of these elements.
It is incumbent on those who work in the political arena, on the one
hand, to extend the horizons of youths to greater political issues that
concern the umma; and, on the other, to enhance their outlook on the
positive implications of struggle, sacrifice and of drawing closer to
God (Exalted), such that politics is no longer intimidating or
problematic.

The problem of the negative attitude is probably occasioned by the
chicanery, cheating, and deception that are part-and-parcel of
*Realpolitik,* and which appear as the very antithesis of morality. In
this scenario, politics is reduced to wrangling without any moral
guidelines.

On the other hand is the concept of religion, structured on the value of
high spirituality which carries at its core, the acceptance of God, and
behavior in life according to spiritual, moral, and social values. These
values are based on the guidance of God and His ordained Laws. This
makes for a great difference in the understanding of the outlines of
political function and the guidelines of religion.

The relationship of politics to religion, however, does not correspond
to this prevalent understanding of politics. Nor does it correspond to
the prevalent understanding of religion, which sees the latter as being
restricted to a narrow sphere of worship. This sphere is completely
closed to the realities of life connected to the internal dimensions of
human existence; they are contradictory to the external dimensions in
individual and social conduct, without in any way entering the arena of
life struggles in dealing with any challenges.

The Function of Religion is the Function of Justice
---------------------------------------------------

Certainly the function of religion is the function of justice, for even
the word "justice" summarizes the entire concept of religion. We must,
therefore, coexist in a state of justice with ourselves; we should not
wrong ourselves through things that bring on self-destruction, whether
in this world or the next.

Therefore, the person who believes in the Lord and obeys Him,
harmonizing his knowledge with his daily life, is just with himself
because he has focused his being on attaining the bliss in this life and
the hereafter. In this way, the relationship between a human being and
the Lord is one of justice.

If the person believes that God is His Lord and Creator, who sends down
His bounty, brings into being all that surrounds him, looks after him,
gives him life, is the protector of everything-one will do justice to
God, as he regards Him as the sole deity and attributes no partners to
Him.

He obeys, not disobeys, God; acts in accordance with His wishes, rather
than attempts to go against them; and he seeks ever more to please God,
rather than do the opposite. This is because the right of God over the
servant is for the latter to serve Him in every sense of the word
servitude *[ibada],* relative to the truth about Lordship elucidated in
the following verse:

"***It is not for any believing man or believing woman, when God and His
prophet have decided a matter, that they should have any option about
their decision**" (al-Ahzab, 33:36).*

The right of God over the servant, then, is that the latter must subject
himself to God in everything. And if he should distance himself from
this subjugation, whether it be by rejecting God or by associating
partners with Him, then he wrongs his Lord. This is what we understand
from Luqman's counsel to his son:

"***O my son! Do not associate partners with God; verily, association***
[Ar., "*shirk*"] ***is the worst transgression**" (Luqman, 31:13).*

By the same token, the relationship between one person to another must
be one of justice, because God has decreed that each person has rights
over humankind. Life is a state of mutual rights among human beings, and
none has absolute rights-even the prophets. The prophets' rights over
the rest of humankind is that people should believe in them, accept
their message, and assist them.

The rights of humankind over the prophets are that the latter should
call them to righteousness, guidance, direction, attestation,
instruction, and the like. Therefore, God requests from the Prophet that
he observe the right of the *umma* in propagation. This is derived from
the words: "

***O Messenger, proclaim that which has been revealed to you from your
Lord; for if you do not do, then you have not delivered His message**"
(al Maidah,*5:67).

This means that the call to God's way and the responsibility thereof
constitute the rights of humankind over the Prophet in respect of
guidance, instruction, and attestation. This is equally true of the
*Imams,* saints, and *ulama.* We may even go to the highest limit, for
God who has the absolute rights over humankind and none has rights over
Him-has honored His servants by giving them a right over Him, according
to His words:

"***Observe my covenant, and I will observe yours**" (al-Baqarah,
2:40).*

Based on the above, each one who observes the rights of the other person
is being just with him. And every person who does not observe the rights
of the other is a wrongdoer. It follows that the issue of rights applies
to every aspect of determining justice and wrongdoing. When we direct
the relationship of the human being to life, the environment and the
earth, we find that people are sometimes good, sometimes evil.

This is because there is a responsibility to advance life as God wants
life to advance. This means that life has as much right over humankind,
as humankind has over life, in the aspect of creation. This is what we
understand from the Qurâ€™anic verse:

"***We have sent our messengers with clear proofs, and revealed unto
them the Book, and the Balance so that humankind may persevere in
justice**" (al-Hadid,* 57:25),

as we find that all the religions, scriptures, and the messengers
operate within the guidelines of justice.

The Connection Between Politics and Religious Justice
-----------------------------------------------------

We know, then, that justice attracts the politically-minded person, for
politics represents the administration of the human relationship with
life, by virtue of the discipline which this connection calls for. This
holds regardless of whether a well-structured system is represented in
the legislation stipulating the rights of every person over his brother,
or a changing system is taken into account by the judge and the
citizenry in daily affairs-implying that religion permeates every
concept of the *Shariah.*

When we realize this, the political connection with justice becomes a
religious issue. This implies that religion is present in every concept,
legislation, and function. It stands for the deepest justice; indeed,
represents all justice. On this, we must define justice for the
relationship between the magistrate, the governed; we need rules for the
people in their relationship with the earth, the environment, and the
animals. With this there will be no room for justice without politics,
since the latter regulates its movements, circumstances, struggles, and
challenges.

Politics and Morals
-------------------

There is another issue, which is that the finer workings of politics may
require some positions which are incompatible with the highest morals.
For example, when someone challenges you for a situation to which you
were unable to respond in an ethical fashion. If you do not meet his
challenge, he will use the values you believe in to defeat you and
constrain you during the process.

Islam has a means of dealing with emergencies and unforeseen conditions
of this kind, since the circumstances of pressure may force you to
depart from the guidelines of truth to those of falsehood, if the better
good of Islam demands it or the better good of the people in their
affairs dictates that you do not tell the truth. This is because, in
some situations, telling the truth allows your opponent to use your weak
points to pressure you; and if you disclose the truth, it would place
you at the mercy of the opponents.

You may have to resort to slander under certain conditions, if the
situation so requires. You may have to resort to spying, if advancing
Islam requires agents to provide intelligence to the Muslims and if, in
the absence of espionage activities, the Muslims themselves would be
spied upon and their affairs be known to the other side, leaving Muslims
without any information about the other side. In such a situation, the
Muslims could undergo such a strife that they begin to slay each other,
as when the enemy, in his desire to gain victory over the Muslims, uses
Muslim prisoners-of-war as a shield in his war against them.

The ends in these critical situations justify the means; in civil and
normal personal matters, however, the ends do not justify the means. The
means in critical situations may transform the unlawful into the lawful
and the legally permissible to that which is obligatory.

As such, we believe it is fundamental to Islamic politics to go the fill
length and to be ethically upright. But if a critical situation dictates
that benefits for Islam can be achieved by departing from these lines,
then the ethics of political maneuvering must be determined according to
these new developments.

Politics and Legislation
------------------------

In Islamic legislation, there are some primary and secondary models for
setting the laws. A particular thing may be allowable in the first model
and unlawful in the second. Therefore, we affirm Islam covers politics,
and when this politics requires some amount of license in things
forbidden in Islam, then let the thinker study the particulars of the
situation in the struggle to decide if the solution lies in one model or
the other.

Politics is part of Islam and does not depart from ethical guidelines.
Consequently, we say that our religion is politics insofar as religion
functions to draw up guidelines in their entirety for human beings.
Likewise, we say that politics is religion because it implies human
activity in the field and, as in religion, certain things are permitted
in politics.

Our Youth and Political Affiliation
-----------------------------------

The common practice of parties, movements, and organizations is to
recruit students as soldiers for their cause, as living, active elements
for realizing their goals. How do we regulate the activities of youth in
political movements?

Youth signifies a stage of activity where the person seeks a goal to
strive for, a group with which to associate himself, and a way to be
active. Politics represents an important factor which relates to every
other aspect, whether at the level of government, ruler, law, political
relations, or great challenges dictated by the political reality -like
tyranny and its aggression, or colonialism and its exploitation, etc.

When the umma faces all of these issues in its positive or negative
realities, then it must move to reap the positive aspects, its
developments and advancements at a level which ensures its strength,
foundation, depth, and support to face the negative aspects. It should
work as far as possible to suppress them, to prevent their approach and
their spread. The umma cannot reach these goals without the strength of
its youth; youth represents a force equal to any challenge, because of
the nature of youth. With traits like harshness and machismo, it
welcomes challenge.

The umma, then, must work towards harnessing the strength of youths in
issues of greater concern. When it desires that youth take this role, or
when the youth is inspired to take it up, then he must study the
intellectual, political, and functional manifesto of the party or the
movement in question, with respect, on the one hand, to the youth's
affiliation and intellectual and doctrinal beliefs; and, on the other
hand, to his concern and involvement in the affairs of the umma, on a
level where it realizes its main goals in staying the proper course. A
youth must also study the leadership and the motivations of this
political center. He must do some background research on what its
motives are, and the guidelines within which it operates.

A youth must investigate with a fine-toothed comb every aspect of this
political center-the hidden and the obvious-until he is convinced that
efforts are not being wasted, not merely answering some personal urge in
this or that direction. He must not take a path where elements of truth
are used to foment corruption. All these considerations need to be
considered among the issues that could change sincere, dedicated efforts
into wasted undertakings, merely efforts expended in the wrong
direction.

Therefore, we counsel youth to critical and precise examination of the
issues, in each aspect of the political reality. The political arena is
filled with barriers and deep holes, corridors, caves, and caverns-and
it is necessary that youth feel out the territory carefully when either
going forward or staying put.

Affiliation under Fear
----------------------

Some youths who are members in parties say that their affiliation
resulted from ignorance or fear.

When a person acts on marginal issues rather than social or personal
realities, certainly it is possible that he may adorn a bit here, and
act on personal negative or positive factors there. When the issue is
one of self-determination-i.e., when his actions are associated with
those of others in order to put his efforts in a lawful undertaking
reflecting a matter of importance to the party-whether or not associated
with this or that center of politics, an entry into war here or there,
the establishment of an undertaking for the country according to this or
that pole-then it becomes a matter of self determination for which the
person must accept full responsibility, positive or negative.

With regard to man or to Muslim youth, certainly God calls him to
account for every negative result in proportion to his link with it, and
in terms of his strength and esteem in it. So that he must fear God in
his undertakings, as well as assume responsibility for his people now
and for the future.

The Separation between Religion and Politics
--------------------------------------------

As some people express it, "separation" here entails
specialization-i.e., religion has its role and politics its role. Is it
proper then to separate them?

Religion does not represent a condition that can be detached from life;
likewise, politics does not represent a limited condition in the affairs
of humankind. If religion extends to every aspect of daily life, how can
we restrict it to a specific area? And if religion extends to every
aspect of human life, how can we restrict it to a specific sphere?
Specification and limitation rather are for things which can be indeed
particularized; how can we seek to limit that which does not accept
particularization and which covers every aspect of life?

Yes, it is possible to have specification in religious culture and its
facets, and the same in political culture and its individual spheres.
But cultural specialization is one thing and specialization of the role
of something is another. There is a difference in saying that the role
of religion is a limited one in a particular arena, with no relation at
all to politics; and that the role of politics is limited to a specific
setting which bears no relation at all to religion. The reason is that
religion plays a role in every aspect of life and political facet; and
politics plays a role in every aspect of life and religious facet.

Woman in the Political Theatre
------------------------------

What is our view of those who say that Islam has wronged the woman in
the area of politics, since it has excluded her from the judiciary,
leadership of the country, and other political activities?

We figure that Islam has given women rights in many political arenas,
and when Islam legislated the exclusion of women from the judiciary,
this did not in anyway lessen their right in this sphere. It was rather
a precautionary measure taken for probity, in consideration of emotional
makeup of women, which is a noteworthy female characteristic-something
which motherhood requires but which may become a factor in her issuance
of judgments.

When the judicial dimension dictates that there should be a particular
perspective here (in the judiciary) and another one there (motherhood),
it was a precautionary measure in the interests of probity and not a
blemish on women's honor.

As far as leadership of a country is concerned, it may be found in the
disposition itself; or it may be that specific complications arise from
circumstances associated with a leadership, which may not be in harmony
with the ethical or other limitations needed to distinguish between the
roles of men and women.

The Woman and Leadership Positions
----------------------------------

More precisely, does Islam forbid women from rising to the position of
cabinet ministers or national leaders?

This query may require new research, because of a hadith-though not
recognized by us as relevant to the subject under discussion-which
states that : "The nation that is led by a woman will never succeed."
This *hadith* may have been applicable to the type of rule that was
prevalent in previous eras, based on a type of authority vested
completely in the ruler. However, when the governance is such where the
ruler is under scrutiny and subject to protocol, this ruler cannot break
the judicial principles of lawmaking and governance, both of which
ensure propriety through recourse to knowledgeable people, consultants,
and a parliament.

Therefore, one may put aside the *hadith that* appears on this subject
in favor of the view that new research is needed. We need to ascertain
whether the problem evolves around the role of the woman in office,
implying that such a position is not for her; or it revolves around the
type of functioning of authority for that office based on either
absolute or restricted power.

Job Rivalry and the Difficulties of Stratification
--------------------------------------------------

Is it possible to steer away from this problem of job stratification
which delineates between one rank and another?

If the supervisor and his subordinates come to oppose each other, with
respect to the identification of one thing with another, then it leads
to an unnatural situation. For when a worker assumes that his employer
controls him, and feels coerced, then no matter how much service and
opportunity, rights and good conditions that this employer provides for
him, he will always think of his employer as an exploiter, a controller,
and a tyrant.

If the employer feels that the employee wants to confront him and to
keep him from the positive results which his project has brought, then
the issue here become transformed into something resembling
stratification-in that each party looks at the other from an absurd
viewpoint, or from the point of view of exploitation and
counter-exploitation.

However, when the relationship between the worker and the employer is
structured in a way which allows the worker to work sincerely and
according to conditions that make him feel worthy and independent,
without in any way impinging on the rights of the employer; and when the
employer does not look at the worker merely as part of the means of
production, but rather as a person who has needs and desires similar to
those of the employer himself; then the employer must realize that the
worker can help him achieve his goals and desires.

In this spirit, work must be cooperative. When the workers are in a
cooperative work setting, then no individual should attempt to breach
the conditions which such cooperative working dictates on the employer
whether it be a country, a person or a company. Rather it must be where
the employees can discuss a problem freely with the employer, and have
the right to decide and the right to whatever achieves their good and
that of the employer.

Difference not Destruction
--------------------------

Are our words regarding employment in companies to be taken as specific
to workers and not the other domains; or is it that student societies
and youth groups may be considered under the rubric of the topic?

The professional organizations we are speaking about provide several
positive aspects, for they bring into being actual guidelines for the
development of the relevant field, be it in the area of nurturing,
education, medicine, engineering, or the like. This is because these
organizations may improve the services, or strengthen relations between
one group and another, each complementing the other in one field or the
other.

We are concerned that the process of forming organizations does not lead
to the fragmentation of this society, since establishing such groups is
acknowledgment of the various specialties of this society. This should
reflect the different needs or services in the area of operations of
each group. When these organizations transform themselves into
interactive, complementary bodies, cooperating on mutually agreed terms,
and striving to enrich their common existence, then they are a positive
rather than a negative force.

Each professional organization that has several specialties must
carefully try to establish a program that best achieves its goals and
attains the positive consequence of benefiting the world. It should not
be overcome by political bigotry, but rather operate on the level of
political competition working towards specific political goals. But it
must not isolate itself from the broader issues of society. It must not
focus on itself only when the society wants it to work for a national
goal or some such thing.

Towards International Islamic Student Activity
----------------------------------------------

There are calls for Islamic student bodies and youth groups to form a
foundation that encompasses all Muslim students, regardless of their
affiliations. To what extent is this actually possible?

When we speak of the Islamic vis-a-vis non-Islamic student movements, it
is possible for us to lay down certain general outlines which are
connected to the welfare of Muslim student groups involved in student
activities. This may be done in a manner whereby the Islamic component
dominates the non-Islamic component of the other groups.

In this spirit, perhaps we can consult with each Islamic student body
which we wish to amalgamate into a single student organization, meeting
with Islamic organizations so that the various political viewpoints do
not influence a particular issue, and that unity in diversity or
diversity in unity may reign.

This certainly requires much study and effort, in the course of which we
may take the edge off much of the bigotry, factionalism, and political
disagreement.

The technological age-or the race towards it-is undoubtedly something
positive. However, how can it be relied on? What are the negative
aspects involved?

Striving towards something can be a positive element when it carries
with it the results of humankind's long experimentation. It can do so
when it has an active, dynamic, and rich culture, at a theoretical and
experimental level; or a diverse working background at the level of
assessing things in abstract and practical terms. It may, however, be
negative when it restricts the aspirations of man, restricts his
activities, taxes his resources, and then gets transformed into
something devoid of value, possessing nothing that inspires effort any
longer.

In fact, it may change the work to whatever attracts man's exhausted
efforts and saps his resources. We may find that a long technological
age may drown a person in imitation, by dictating the parameters in
which he lives. The circumstances which mental and intellectual
conditioning has developed has become so deep-rooted that it prevents
any progress that could represent a new thrust at a methodological level
or in the pursuit of goals.

Workaholism
-----------

One may become engrossed in the work one does, the purpose of which is
simply accepted-or accepted through the leadership that initiated a
project and then became stultified in the process. Indeed, the work
itself becomes an object of worship in one's outlook; so much so, it
does not leave room for any other viewpoint, unless it be in agreement
with that of the leadership. The consequence is that people may distance
themselves, perhaps in the hope of benefiting from new developments
under another leadership.

This may occur, too, if the obsession in the initial stages of the
project makes it seem that the other stages necessarily depend on
previous ones; that they could cause revision because of new
developments in the data, changes, and new efforts that bring to light
the errors of past endeavors. As such, we see that many Islamic
movements have become frozen in their sanctifying, at the first stage,
of things that need no such consecration. This is because there is a
difference between respecting a person or a stage, in the light of the
factors which call for such respect-whether they be intellectual or in
terms of work done-and hallowing this person and his position far beyond
what he actually deserves.

Such sanctification is the obsession with a particular personality or
stage; it makes you lose your clarity about the stage, or what you will
encounter in the future.

Therefore, I feel that the time of action may be important in the normal
course of experimentation. But it may become a negative element when
transformed to a state of frozenness, among the other elements of the
undertaking. In this state, an experiment limited to viewing this
person, who has become recognized in the movement he started, now
becomes so far-reaching that its influence is sought on every subsequent
development.

We may feel that some of those involved in movements should retire to
open the opportunity to new people in the movement. I do not mean by
this that the previous elements of the movement should be abandoned. I
state that the old elements may live in the past in a way that makes it
difficult for the Islamic movement to develop people.

If the old elements see that they now have experience, and that
surrendering the leadership to new elements represents a foolhardy
venture, from an intellectual or functional viewpoint, then this may
create a new negative issue. This means that the second and third ranks
of those involved in the movement will remain in a state of
self-sufficiency but with a sense of failing.

This will cause the old elements to be in a position whence they are
unable to extend support, since their abilities do not permit this. Or,
because their minds are not in accord with the new reality in which new
growth have sprouted. Or, one may work on the foundation for entering a
development which had not been considered in terms of the changes,
because they do not possess all the factors that undergo this test.

Along with this problem, the old activists may open the opportunity for
the new people through mentorship and, at some time, providing names
until the new elements become part of the established hierarchy.

In this way, they may hand over the movement, probably with new
initiative, new strength, new elements-especially if we realize that
many historical activists may be afflicted by weariness, which may cause
them to display intellectual and political fatigue. In this way, they
participate in restricting the movement, wishing for the movement to
remain limited to their spent resources. And so, without knowing it,
they thrust the movement towards failure and conclusion.

This is one issue. Another is the sanctified glorification of the
historical leadership of the movement, intellectually or politically.
This unconsciously suggests that development has reached a level beyond
which there is no room for further progress. It may cause a mental
struggle against every new idea, on the grounds that such an idea is
different from the concepts cherished by a hallowed leadership or a
hallowed stage.

There is a difference between respecting those who had initiated the
movement and giving them absolute sanctification. The latter makes idol
worshippers of activists; whereas respect changes them into people who
welcome strength in the interest of newer, more vigorous elements for
the future.

Addendum of Narrations (4)
--------------------------

### On Experience

â€¢ Imam â€˜Ali said: "Issues are by experiment and test, and deeds are by
experience."

â€¢ He also said: "Experience provides beneficial knowledge."

â€¢ He said: "He who has little experience has been misled, and he who has
much experience has been made less inattentive."

â€¢ He said: "Experience is the best disciplinarian."

â€¢ He said: "To learn from experience is the highest of intellect."

### On Groups

â€¢ Imam â€˜Ali said in the last portion of his counsel: "I exhort you to
fear God and to look at your affairs."

â€¢ He also said, "You must stick to the rope and bond of God, be from the
party of God and His Prophet, observe the covenant of God and its hold
on you, for Islam began as a stranger, and shall return to being a
stranger."

â€¢ He also said, "Would it make you happy to belong to the victorious
party of God? Fear God [Exalted] in all your affairs, for certainly God
is with those who fear Him, and those who do good."

### On Politics

â€¢ On the authority of al-Imam al-Sadiq, from the Messenger of God:
"There are two groups from my umma-if they are righteous, the whole umma
will be righteous, and if they are corrupt, then the whole umma will be
corrupt." He was asked, "O Messenger of God, who are these two?" He
said, "The jurists and the rulers."

â€¢ On the authority of al-Sadiq: "The learned of his time are not stumped
by confusion."

â€¢ And from the Messenger: "Whoever rises and does not concern himself
with the affairs of the Muslims is not a Muslim."

â€¢ â€˜Ali, *al-Amir al Mu'minin,* said: "The weakness in politics of those
in authority is their ruin."

â€¢ He also said, "Governance is politics."

â€¢ He said: "Who is deficient in politics is deficient in governance."

â€¢ He said, "The best guide to expanding the intellect is to estimate
things positively."

â€¢ He said, "Justice is the best politician."

â€¢ He said, "The best politics is justice."

â€¢ He said, "Woe to tyrannical policy."

â€¢ He said, "The fundamental requirement of politics is justice."

â€¢ He said, "The politics of the just lies in three things: He is gentle
in firmness, meticulous in justice, and best in intentions."

â€¢ He said, "The essence of politics is to give friendship."

â€¢ He said, "Kindness blunts the sharpness of disagreement."

â€¢ He said, "If you rule, be kind."

â€¢ He said, "Patience is the best of politics."

â€¢ He said, "Controlling the self is the best politics, and leadership
with knowledge is the best leadership."


