Themes 5:  Our Youth ... The Shariah View
=========================================

Fun and Pastime in their True Extent
------------------------------------

What may be said to youths who view the state of youth as a time when
they must engage in fun, chatting into the late hours, horseplay, and
the like?

We would like for youths to meditate deeply on the following questions:

What is pastime?

What is horseplay?

What is lust-be it sexual, related to food, drink, or other bodily
instinct or craving of human beings?

We call on youths to stop at these lusts and to ask themselves: What is
their true scope?

The scope of one of these transitory lusts is a mere moment. Sexual lust
is that moment of sensation. The lust for food is for having it in the
mouth, and so too lust for drink and the other items. For a person may
have cherished visions about these lusts before experiencing them, but
when he starts to do so, he feels himself at a road's end. For these are
the *needs* of a person, and not everything; not his craving or desire.
If, therefore, the person becomes obsessed with sex, then he will
quickly become bored with it, and may even suffer from repulsion after
repetition. And when he is obsessed with food and drink, he becomes
vile-smelling or asphyxiated.

Without exception, all this reflects aspirations which do not enrich the
stage of youth, but rather give this stage sensations of lust and
happiness which, if he were to meditate on them, would in reality have
to eschew them after becoming satiated with them.

Therefore, we say to youths, Your youth represents the strength of life,
responsibility in life, a wonderful bounty from all the bounties of man.
We do not say to them "Do not respond to your needs", but " answer your
needs at the level which your body requires without any negative
effects.

And when responding to these physical needs, you must understand that
the issue of youth in life, and the issue of life in youth, are more
far-reaching, widespread, and responsible than everything you are
obsessed about. In your pursuit of empty activities, there will be
boredom and monotony, meaninglessness, and the feeling that you are
squandering your life."

For life is not simply body and flesh, nor is it without hope and life
and aspirations. For there is God, the Independent, Who-when human
beings stand in front of Him and live for Him-is felt as if there is no
wall or barrier, but a reality which expands and keeps expanding
infinitely. Thus, we say to youth, "Open your hearts to God who has
created you and enriched your youth with every vitality and activity,
and you will find that opening your hearts thus will give you more
spiritual and physical pleasure, as well as the pleasure of life with
all the good, beauty, freedom, and openness in it."

Sports: The Preferred Hobby of Youth
------------------------------------

There are those who consider some types of sport as a waste of time, and
restrict sports activity to javelin throwing, horse-riding, and
swimming. How do we look at this area, which commands the attention of
youth?

Some people freeze before the narrated *hadiths* which show the Prophet
Muhammad ruling on a case of training in youth. One such example is the
*hadith "*No competition except in camels, arrows, or horses" which
speaks of training in archery, and horse and camel-racing, etc. There
are also other *hadiths* which stress horse riding, swimming, and
archery.

On studying these terms, and the normal needs of the situation
prevailing then, we find that the *hadith* indicated an example of needs
in time of war. By extrapolation, the *hadith* shows that training was a
means for waging war. With progress and change, the arrow becomes a gun
or a cannon; the four-legged animal (a horse or a camel) a car, a war
tank, a plane and so on. When we speak of swimming and riding horses, it
is possible to change them, or to add to them that which may strengthen
the body, to develop the mind, and to obtain positive results in the
major issues that fill the spare time of youths.

As such, sport is not merely a means to fill empty time. It is a means
to develop the body. And if we add to a sporting spirit, which controls
the sporting milieu, it may become a means to train the competitive
spirit to the point where it can calmly accept defeat, without adding on
top of that competition a mental struggle.

We must study these issues (sports and other forms of entertainment) in
terms of the positive aspects which they bring; and which may be
developed with the passing of time, either with respect to means, the
event, or the environment created in this area.

The Concern with Sports
-----------------------

In the field of sports, there are those who, encouraging it, pay special
attention to matches and clubs. Some see this as a bad practice. What do
you have to say about this?

I do not find a negative point in any of the above issues, if the
general atmosphere does not become one of such personal veneration,
alien to the results aimed at by organizers in the social field and the
positive effects which they hope to see on youths.

Becoming totally immersed in the games per se may mean that the games
that attract interest surround youths in a way by which the more
important concerns are lost; or more important happenings relating to
societal, political, functional and cultural aspects of reality are
dismissed.

If the interest in sports does not reach the level outlined above, no
negative issue is involved. However, when it changes into an obsession,
we must object, since it becomes larger than human concerns and
surpasses the positive results intended from it.

We notice that many organizations and international organs of corruption
take advantage of this condition to distract youths for their own
political agendas.

This is what we wish to caution against. We have noted that immersion in
this atmosphere, especially in some advanced countries like America and
Europe, people place such great value on these games that that games
demand all their attention, to the point where political and social
concerns are of lesser concern.

Many leaders of Third World countries try to prevent youth from facing
great problems that may have severe repercussions on these rulers.
Society does not pay attention to these problems, since they are so
attentive to games that they are detached from current events.

It is known that horse-racing is used for gambling and betting. What is
the ruling on strictly the entertainment side of the sport, namely,
looking and attending?

One of the things that I would like for horse racing is that it be an
activity that encourages nurturing. Observing its results at several
levels, this sport by nature used to strengthen the faculties of people
in the face of war or similar situations. However, this has changed to
gambling and betting. Thus it touches *haram* and leads to the negative
consequences that gambling usually causes.

There is no doubt that betting is wasteful in this type of sport or
competition. If a person wagers with another that such-and-such a horse
will beat another horse, the situation implies the presence of a
childlike personality which does not reflect on what competition between
one person and another humanly means.

Attending these events and looking at the race in one form or another,
makes it possible for the person to experience this atmosphere. It
encourages him after that to be a participant, seeing wagering and
betting as a natural part of horse-racing. He then takes a very active
part in it.

Therefore, we do not accept that our believing youth should attend these
sports, even if they do not wager. There is a *hadith* which states,
"The forbidden things are the protection of God, and whoever hovers
around a forbidden thing is likely to fall into it."

Many see problems in modern dress and modes. What reliable criteria
allows us to judge the permissibility of this or that style?

I feel that involving the *Shariah* in these matters is to do so in an
area in which no negative view has been given. When the social life of
people is reflected by their form of dress, in this or that shape, Islam
has no problem with that.

Some people may perhaps speak of "*kafir* dress" or of a woman who
dresses in the clothes of *kafirs* [non believers]. Upon careful
consideration of this topic, we find that this idea stems from an
historical period when a way to distinguishing Muslims, who were a tiny
minority, from the non-believers, who were an overwhelming majority.

In *Nahj al-Balagha,* there is a *hadith* where Imam ‘Ali was asked
about the words of the Prophet "Change your gray hairs with dye, and do
not appear like the Jews." ‘Ali had been asked: "Must we dye our gray
hairs?" The Imam responded, "That was when Islam was in a minority."
When the number of Muslims increased, there was no problem in
distinguishing them from others.

Some jurists probably noted that the *hadith* narrated from the
Prophet-"Clip your mustaches and spare the beards, and do not appear
like the Jews"-did not appear in the context of an established legal
ruling for all time, but came at a particular stage when some
demarcation between Muslims and Jews was desired, for social reasons.
Now, however, after the Muslims have become numerous in the world, the
issue is no longer one of appearing like Jews or Magians, but one of
choice, of letting people choose what they wish.

The Woman's Hijab
-----------------

Regarding the woman's *hijab* (the *Shariah* covering), there are those
who do not view that this widely-worn covering these days as adequate.
They say the *hijab* is the *chador* or the *abaya.*

The *hijab* reflects *Shariah* issues, the essence of which consists of
two points:

1. The body which God has forbidden to be revealed to the non-mahram
(i.e. those with whom marriage is allowed).

2. Forbiddance of wanton display and drawing attention.

This means that it is obligatory that the woman's dress be of a type
which, in mixed company, neither shows her body nor signals sexual
license that might expose her to the ogling of a man. Therefore, any
clothing which falls under these two headings is considered within the
limits of the *Shariah.*

We do not stress the *chador, abaya,* or any particular style, because
these are things that the people have made through imitation as a result
of a specific environment or of specific preferences. The issue, then,
is that the woman should, on the one hand, go out in a decent manner
within the limits of the *Shariah;* and, on the other, appear as a
dignified woman, not a sexual object. But there is no stress on any
special form or type of clothes.

Hijab that Matches the Current Modes
------------------------------------

While the *hijab* may fulfill all the conditions of proper covering,
some women mix *hijab* with modern women's fashions.

This may lead the sisters to turn the *hijab* into something intended
for appearance instead of decent dress. Accepting these modern airs in
clothing suggests that something is lacking mentally in this or that
woman; and so for attraction she goes out in a manner that draws the
eyes of youth upon her. This mental and intellectual backwardness,
develops to a stage where the h *jab* is in essence changed rather than
enhanced.

Notorious Clothes
-----------------

What is meant by "notorious clothes" and why are they not allowed?

By "notorious clothes" is dress which people are not accustomed to
wearing-depending on the social situation. A man cannot wear the dress
of a woman or vice versa, according to what is customary for either of
them. Pants now no longer count as solely men's clothing; both men and
women wear them. However, wherever a type of clothing is specific to
women, or to men, then neither one of them should wear the dress of the
opposite sex. This is based on the *hadith* that a man should not wear
woman's clothing and that a woman should not wear man's clothing.

If we inquire into the wisdom of this, it would consist of maintaining
the social balance by preventing the confusion of psychological states.

The Qualities of the Islamic Hijab
----------------------------------

What are the Islamic qualities of the woman's *hijab* (or *Shariah*
covering)?

There are two main purposes for the *hijab.* The first is "to
cover"-that is, the woman must cover her body, save the face and the
hands. Some scholars opine that as a precautionary measure the face and
hands must also be covered. However, we concur with most *‘ulama* that
the permission to show them is based on the words of God: "

***And they should not display of their beauty except that which
ordinarily appears**" (al-Nur, 24:31).*

It is necessary that the woman cover her entire body by wearing clothes
which fill this function, displaying nothing that is covered.

The second purpose is "negation of wanton display." God has said:

"***...and do not display your finery like the displaying of the age of
ignorance**" (al-Ahzab, 33:33).*

 It is impermissible for the woman to go forth in *hijab,* covering
whatever must be covered, and then to appear wanton through makeup
adorning her face or hands, or through other items of beautification she
might wear.

This includes the items of clothing which make the body appear
attractive in a particular manner and so forth. All this is considered
wanton display, which shows the femininity of the woman in a suggestive
manner rather than her normal humanness in public.

We are unable to put any specific limit on beautification; general
custom may determine what is ornamentation and what is wanton display.
The latter is an unnatural appearance whereby the woman displays herself
and her beauty to the stares of the men.

Islam wants the woman to go forth in her specific clothing in the same
way that a man goes forth in his specific clothing. The mixed public
should not be a showroom of fashions, beauty, or suggestiveness.

This is the *Shariah hijab in* its proper context. There is a third
aspect which is related to *hijab* in meaning if not in
appearance-"hijab of the voice", if one may use the expression. Islam
does not forbid the woman from speaking to a man, to converse in front
of a man, to address political or public gatherings which call for some
opening up, to scream in situations which call for screaming.

But Islam does not want the woman to intimate suggestiveness by lowering
her voice, making it musical as to be suggestive and intended to rouse
instincts. This is what the Qur’an says:

"***And do not lower your voices in speech, so that he in whose heart
there is sickness may be filled with desire**" (al Ahzab, 33:32).*

Lowering the voice in speech adds to the quality which seductively
attracts the male, suggesting corruption. As such, the jurists have
said: "It is not permissible to beautify the voice, to make it sweeter,
to soften it in a manner suggesting seduction." This is what we mean
when we say "the *hijab of* the voice".

Societal Hijab
--------------

If we wish truly to understand the Islamic atmosphere surrounding the
*hijab,* we must turn to the social *hijab.* Islam dislikes that a woman
should be with a man in private situations which pose a danger to her
morals and virtue. This is because it may suggest certain fantasies,
notions, or feelings which are incompatible with the morals of man and
woman together.

We know that being in private, especially with romantic settings, may
suggest things that are morally improper, even if virtue should not be
absent. This is what Islam hates for both the man and woman. There may
be a *Shariah* prohibition because such a situation may lead to *haram.*

The *hadith* about the two sexes being in private shows that Islam has
not made the forbiddance of privacy a fundamental principle. Islam
forbids the privacy which leads to corruption and moral decay, and hates
the privacy which may suggest negative connotations at the level of
morality.

Thus, if we do not find the issue of being alone realistic for our
times, believing and observing Muslim society is requested to place
limits which help distinguish between the privacy which leads to corrupt
practices and the privacy which has positive or, at least, not many
negative aspects.

The summary of what we wish to suggest through this discourse is that it
is incumbent on the woman that *hijab* be reflected in her inner
personality, so that she puts in her mind and emotions, her thoughts the
specific guidelines which make her aware of the realities of life or the
reality of man in a manner that disallow any corrupt ideas, or which
might influence her mentality. She must not permit her way of life with
the other group to stray from ethical guidelines.

The Mentality of the Fornicator
-------------------------------

This is what we have observed with expressions like "fornication lies in
the ogling eye," "fornication lies in the receptive ear," or
"fornication is in the roving hand"-all of which suggest that a person
may have a fornicating mentality without actually indulging in the
sexual act. This holds true for many who exercise abstinence from the
sexual act but contradict their abstinence in their ethical conduct.

There are those who live the spirit of the fornicator even if they do
not actually indulge in the sexual act; and there are those who live the
spirit of the deceitful even if they do not actually cheat. For in
dreams and hopes, they function on impulse-a problem they need not
endure-except in conditions of temptation tending towards the
impropriety created by the inner workings of the mind.

Mental Hijab
------------

Hence the man, much like the woman, may require a condition of "mental
*hijab"* to protect him from perverse thoughts. In this sense we may
feel that the functional method of achieving this result is to distance
both of them from every place and every element of possible seduction,
every erotic reading or viewing material.

Here, Islam protects against erotic films, stories, or sights, as they
create a mental state in person who may normally be in control of
himself whereby he can destroy his inner inhibitions. When exposed to an
external incitement around him, his behavior quickly gives way to
perverse acts.

When Hijab Loses its Meaning
----------------------------

The Muslim woman must not perceive the *hijab* in its purely concrete
and imitative sense, restricting it to a matter of form. What we have
observed is that many of those who observe the *hijab* began in a manner
that changed their physical *hijab* to a condition which seems far from
its true meaning.

This is because they select flashy, gaudy, eye-catching colours which
beautify the body in a particular way, which make the woman experience
her sexuality even while in *hijab-*in much the same manner as one who
does not wear it.

Islam then, does not cast aside her sense of femininity, since it is a
normal condition for her. It desires her femininity to be expressed
within a special sphere. This sphere neither, on the one hand,
influences the humanness of the woman at a moral level; nor, on the
other hand, adversely affect the moral values of her society.

The Western Perspective on Hijab
--------------------------------

Western societies accuse Islam of going too far in the matter of the
*hijab,* that the woman who neither observes *hijab* nor make a wanton
display of her charms has no seductive influence on men.

This sort of logic is not realistic perception because of one reason-the
femininity of a woman clearly attracts the man, even in a form that does
not remotely resemble fornication or seduction. By the same token, the
man attracts the woman. This is because the naturalness of the consuming
impulses causes the man to be instinctively attracted to the woman-and
many of these elements which he finds attractive may be focused in
instincts that culminate in a blind rush to express themselves.

We assume, too, that the natural femininity of the woman gives her an
intrinsic beauty, and the same for the manliness of the male. Therefore,
the claim that the matter does not pertain to the *hijab,* but rather to
wantonness is not entirely correct. We feel that wanton display gives
the woman a beauty that is different from the beauty given to her by the
*hijab.* The hair has its own beauty which adds to the beauty of the
body, in the same way that bodily parts like the legs do with their
beauty. They produce a special bodily effect, and this is what we know
from the advertising media, which constantly draw attention to the hair
and the legs.

On the one hand, sentiments go against this. On the other hand, the
matter imposing itself in the West is that belief is expressed as one
value, while another value is practiced. In the Western mind, liberty is
absolute, and may find expression in sexual license between the man and
the woman, in which case the *hijab* is meaningless. This is because the
*hijab* is a means of creating the atmosphere of control and balance, of
circumventing the factors that lead to perversity.

If, however, we operate on the basis of the idea that the man has
freedom over his body and the woman has freedom over her body; and that
the *hijab* in this sense is incidental to the life of both sexes,
because nakedness is the natural state-then, according to the
philosophical notion on freedom, there is no prohibition.

The Principle of Virtue and its Effects
---------------------------------------

The issue for Muslims stems from the principle of virtue enjoined upon
both men and women. This principle is intended to function within the
guidelines of actuality. In this way, it prevents the man, no less than
the woman, from falling under the influence of the "abundant fuel" that
fans the flames of instincts.

Another issue which we must address is the ethical principles of the
East and the West. Does ethical principle give man and woman complete
freedom as to what they could do with their bodies, or does it lay down
certain guidelines for them-and this decides the path of wantonness or
*hijab.*

The problem for many Easterners is probably that they continue to rely
on the value of virtue and honor in their moral relations between man
and woman, at the same time following Western customs with respect to
suggestive display, beautification, and so forth.

This causes them to endure a dichotomous situation that ruins their
lives when they face a perverse man or woman in some such atmosphere. To
save honor, they wash the naked person and perform other similar
practices. In this situation, the words of the poet are appropriate:

They went to sea, and shackled and fettered he was thrown: Don't, don't
let water bother you...

The Hijab and Repression
------------------------

The gist of another misconception indiscriminately included in this
matter is that the *hfjab* creates a state of repression for the man
which subjects him to intense influence by the slightest thing.

When we wish to speak of repression, we must realize that it is not a
result of the *hijab,* but rather of denying the instinctive needs of a
man. It is caused by a situation that runs contrary to his inner mental
and instinctive state, which seeks expression in one form or another.
Reality clashes with it and prevents it from expression. Repression may
result when the woman refuses to observe the *hijab* in the presence of
a man.

The matter then boils down to the fact that there is a difference
between the repression that result from problems and the repression that
stems from the realities of regulated society. We believe that every
social, political, and moral rule may cause problems in the mind of the
human being who is prevented from obeying his inner urges. If we were to
understand the workings of repression negatively for actual society,
with its imposition of limits, then we may as well call for anarchy, so
that no human being may face the problem in any way.

Certainly every society must follow a specific moral model, and this
model may not be related to sexual ethics, but rather to economics or
society. Sexual ethics may not relate to what man or woman wear, but to
what the man wants from the woman and what the woman needs from the man.

If we claim that the *hijab* in its Islamic form causes repression, what
must we say about uncovering in its general social appearance; does it
not cause repression? Does the youth not like to look upon a woman's
chest and different parts of her body? Would a man not feel the pleasure
of beauty of every part of this body, its suggestions, in the same way
that a woman would the male body?

When the issue transcends that of nudity, the discourse-in the West-will
center on the amount of clothes a woman must wear. In this sense, the
proponents of *hijab* simply add another item to the apparel of the
Western woman, who does not wear the *hijab.* And repression is
repression, whether in part or in whole.

That Which Naturally Appears of Beauty
--------------------------------------

What is meant by the words of God, "***What appears thereof***"
*(al-Nur,* 24:31)-i.e., the permissible display of beauty?

"What appears thereof' refers to the face and the two hands, the latter
being essential to social function. Perhaps the clearest proof that God
does not wish for the woman to cover her face and her hands is that it
is forbidden for her to do so in a state of *ihram* during pilgrimage.
However, the state of pilgrimage is one of worship which may necessitate
the *hijab* on the woman to spare the other pilgrims exposure to
suggestive stimuli.

We may add that in some narratives the expression refers also to some
visible ornamentation like rings worn on the hand, light substance over
the eyelids, normally a cosmetic for women.

Based on the above, is beauty that which the woman beautifies herself
with or is it a natural distraction?

It covers both.

What is Forbidden Glance Regarding the Woman
--------------------------------------------

When we study the Qur’anic text which deals with the issue of looking,
we find that the idea we derive from the Book is that God (Exalted)
wishes that the senses and feelings which the believing man has towards
the believing woman, and vice versa, be pure. This means that they do
not have any evil blemish which may distance them from morality.

Senses and feelings must not cause the believing man or woman to be in a
situation which beckons to future corruption. This is because God wants
humankind to live a life without sin in the mind, in thoughts and
concepts; and that this sinlessness should be a way to attain functional
freedom from sin, since deeds spring from ideologies, feelings, and
perceptions.

We read, then, the wonderful verse,

"***Say to the believing men that they cast down their glance, and guard
their private parts; that is purer for them. Indeed God is well aware of
all that they do**" (al-Nur, 24:30).*

We understand from the term "purer for them" that God wants the human
being to have a purity of mind which transforms to purity of action.

Again, the words of God:

"***Say to the believing women that they must lower their gaze and guard
their private parts**" (al-Nur, 24:31).*

And the text on how a woman should speak to a man:

"***Do not lower your voice in speech; perchance he in whose heart is
sickness may cherish a longing**" (al-Ahzab, 33:32).*

 Here we see that God wants woman to speak to the man in a natural
manner. If she were to address him with gentle and melodious tones, that
may suggest to others that they can pursue their own corrupt purposes
towards this woman.

The Deceitful Look
------------------

From all of the above, we see that a man must look at a woman in a
natural manner, so that there is no untoward thought associated with his
look-that is, glancing at the woman in a way that expresses a desire to
do that which *is haram,* etc. This is known as "the deceitful look" and
is mentioned in the Qur’anic verse:

"***He knows the stealthy looks and what the hearts hide**" (Mumin,
40:19);*

and the supplication of the one who says, "O my Lord, purify my heart
from hypocrisy, and my deeds from showing off, my tongue from lies, my
eyes from deceit; for you know the deceitful look, and what the hearts
hide."

The deceitful look is the glance which stems from a feeling which has
deceit at its core. This is another expression for the desire of what is
forbidden, and which starts the person, even afterwards, towards
corruption.

No Passion and No Lust
----------------------

The look, therefore, must not be one of lust, where the man ogles the
woman to enjoy her beauty. It leads to negative results even if it
occurs only ten percent of the time. This is because there is a
difference between looking lustfully at a beautiful woman and looking at
ordinary sights with appreciation.

This is because appreciating the beauty of a woman sets into motion
urges which lead to sexual feelings; these, in turn, spur the man to
pursue the woman. In view of this, it leads to negative results; whereas
appreciating ordinary sights does not cause any of these effects.

For this reason, the jurists have ruled that looking at what is
permissible should not be in lust or passion. The poetic verse of the
prince of poets, Ahmad Shawky, is perhaps one of the most exquisite
attestations on this matter:

*A glance, a smile, and then talk;*

*a greeting, an appointment, a date.*

By those words, he meant the glance which sets into motion what is to
come: the passionate or lecherous look. We may understand from the
expression "the first look is for you, and the second is against you"
that generally, the first glance is something natural and spontaneous.
When it leads to a second and third look, then something in the mind
pushes the person to keep looking again and again, but with different
feelings.

Lowering the Glance is a Preventive Condition
---------------------------------------------

Often the passionate glance may be involuntary, and the person may be in
a situation which forces him to look at his female companion at work or
study. Through personal contact and meetings, feelings are generated.

The familiarity between a man and a woman may create a condition of
close friendship, causing the man to look at her differently from the
way he did at first. There is a difference between looking normally at a
woman in the course of working (which requires that you look at her or
that she should look at you) and the look which stems from your feelings
or desire for her. A glance in that instance is not considered natural,
but a condition which creates a mental state which may change into a
situation leading to something not natural.

From here, God wants the believers to lower their gaze, as a precaution
against negative consequences. By the same token, it is better for a
believing woman to lower her gaze. One may construe from this that it is
necessary for believing man and woman to be in a state of caution when
having to deal under these situations.

Of course, the discourse here has to do with permissible looking. What
is not permissible to look at, Islam has put limits-particularly,
looking at the private parts of a woman-in the same way it has put
limits on woman looking at the private parts of the male. The purpose of
this is to avoid any basis for suggestiveness which, because of mental
conditioning regarding sexual relations, may be in the mind of one of
them. Thus, some sociologists state that platonic friendship between a
man and a woman is unlikely.

The Shariah Limits in the Permitted Look
----------------------------------------

What, then, is the philosophy behind the permissibility of looking at
certain non-*mahram* female?

The *fatwa* which the question raises entails two others. The first
*fatwa* is that the glance is towards those who remain uncovered after
being asked to cover, whether they are Muslims or non-Muslims, although
some *ulama* enjoin that, based on caution, one ought not to look at
such Muslim women.

This is because there is a legal understanding where a *hadith* suggest
that the matter of looking at a woman implies the issue of respect for
the woman. She may cover part of her body, but then the man's glance
seems to undress her and to assault her honor, on the premise that this
is the area she wants to cover. She does not wish anyone to look at that
part, and were she to find a person sneaking a glance at her, she would
rebuke and harshly scold him.

Respecting the Veil Leads to the Respectful Look
------------------------------------------------

A person covers those parts of the body which he/she wishes not to
expose. Therefore, the issue of looking at that which should be covered
is fundamentally alien to any consideration of attraction or lack of
attraction. According to this, if the woman does not place any
restriction on her body, and displays all her charms, then there is no
restricted area on her body which the man should not look at. As such,
it is allowable for him to look at her without any lust or passion.

This is one angle. From another angle, the difficulty is allayed when
the person faces a social situation where the woman goes out without
covering, making it impossible for the man to lower his gaze from her.
The *hadith,* it states, "It is not forbidden to look at the hair of the
women of the protected minorities *(dhimmis)*." In this case, the
stipulation is removed because, in the West, for example, it represents
a hardship for the man. This is because the woman is the one who
abandoned respect for herself in this matter. However, on the condition
that the possibility of passion and lust is absent.

The Glance at the Photo of a Woman
----------------------------------

The second *fatwa* is related to the matter of photographs. There are
*fatwas* which state that it is not forbidden to look at the photograph
of a woman. Some ‘*ulama* deny such permission in the case of a veiled
woman who does not wish that anyone should look at her body, even if it
be through a photograph, since her photogaph was taken by a *mahram*,
for example.

The scholars place a cautionary prohibition on looking at the photograph
of a covered woman, if the person looking knows the identity of the
subject. That would violate her covering, because if she wants to cover
herself, and goes to this length, such a look is tantamount to an
infringement of her freedom and honor.

Beyond the scope of this scenario, however, if the woman were unknown to
us, or is one of those who do not observe the *hijab* and is uncovered,
‘*ulama* hold that the prohibitions about looking applies to looking at
the woman in person, and not through a photograph.

They focus the issue on the fact that there was no passion or lust in
the look. From this we can see that the foregoing *fatwa* does not apply
to looking at pornographic films, since that would enter the realm of
passion and lust, and does not detach itself from a mental state that
could cause a morbid condition in the person who is in the habit of
looking at these films.

The Look in Specific in Medical Situations
------------------------------------------

From the medical point of view, is it possible for the man to look at
the body of a woman?

There is no objection for a man, in such a scenario, to look at the sex
organs of a woman whom he does not know, there being no objection from a
scientific viewpoint. A doctor is allowed to look at the patient, and
the female doctor is allowed to look at any organ of a male patient if
treatment and cure must be decided on such observation.

It has been stated that if a woman can derive more benefit by being
treated by a man than by a woman, she is allowed to expose herself to
him, and he is allowed to look at something otherwise forbidden in
normal situations. In a *hadith* related from Imam al-Baqir-in response
to a question-the narrator said, "I asked him about a Muslim woman whose
body has been injured, either by a fracture or a wound in a place where
it is not allowable to look at. If a man is more qualified than women to
treat it, is he allowed to look at it? He said, 'If she is compelled to
do so, then he may treat her if she wishes.'"

There is a *hadith* from Imam Musa al-Kazim, reported by his brother
‘Ali b. Mar, which states thus, "I asked him about a man, the back of
whose thigh has an injury. Is it allowable for a woman to look at it and
to treat him?" He responded, "If it is not a private part, there is
nothing wrong with that."

Guardianship Over the Female Youths
-----------------------------------

What are the limits of the guardian over his female ward?

There is no guardianship over the girl who is mature, sane, and able to
conduct her affairs; just as there is no guardianship over the youth who
is mature, sane, and able to conduct his affairs. This is because when a
person has attained puberty, and is of sound judgment, then he has the
right to conduct his own affairs:

"***Test the orphans until they reach the age of puberty; then if you
find in them maturity of intellect turn over to them their property**"
(al-Nisa, 4:6).*

 The matter here is not restricted only to the orphans, but to anyone
under such conditions.

According to some jurists, based on some *hadith,* there are
restrictions, which dictate that a virgin must seek the counsel and
permission of her father or grandfather. This is not because
guardianship is implied in the general meaning of the word, since
neither the father nor grandfather has the right to marry her off
without her consent. Nor do they have the right to marry the minor boy
or girl who has not yet attained puberty without her consent.

Rather, the young woman must consent if they are to be allowed to marry
her.

Precaution in the Case of the Virgin Young Lady
-----------------------------------------------

There are some precautions for the virgin in view of her lack of
experience, or the possibility that she may be duped or cheated. From
this perspective, her seeking the permission of her father counts as a
way to protect the young lady in her marriage relation with any man.
Moreover, because of this there is no requirement that permission be
sought from the father or the grandfather, if she is no longer a virgin.

It is likely that some people may not see the issue as being restricted
to this aspect, but as including respect for her father or grandfather,
according to the traditions of Mediterranean Islamic societies. Since
the girl is not married except by the permission of her father or
grandfather, it would seem that the issue includes social respect for
the father or grandfather, who must have a say in the affairs of his
daughter. The premise is that a bad position for her reflects badly on
her father, and a good position for her reflects well on him.

From here, the jurists do not feel that if the father and grandfather is
dead, anyone's permission should be sought, indicating that the matter
is not one of her inability to exercise judgment, but is related to a
precautionary measure for the future of the girl, or to showing respect
to the father and grandfather.

There is another view which says that it is not obligatory for the girl
to seek the permission of her father or grandfather regarding her
spouse, that she is free to make this decision.

The Independent Young Woman
---------------------------

As for my own view, the girl is independent regarding her personal
affairs and property, if she normally exercises good judgment.

Why, then, is the matter restricted to a woman and not a man?

This is because the man in society may have more experience in matters
of marriage and a general understanding of marriage. He has more
opportunity to do so than the young woman.

This is one angle. From another angle, the matter may be explained on
the basis that the man, if he is deceived in marriage, has the right to
issue a divorce; whereas Islam has not given the woman the right of
divorce. This means that the woman must be cautious not to fall into a
situation from which she cannot escape except with great difficulty.

The Young Lady Who May Look After Her Affairs (Raashida)
--------------------------------------------------------

How may we determine the age of maturity and guidance-meaning when can
the young woman look after her own affairs?

There is no specific age, for we may find a responsible young lady who
may be only eleven or twelve years old, and we may find a girl who is in
her twenties and unable to conduct her own affairs.

What is the communal understanding of responsible for conducting her own affairs?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The communal understanding stems from the mental level of the young man
and young lady have which enables them to look after their financial
affairs in a way that is not considered as sign of foolish behavior.

Exhorting to Good (Al-Amr Bi-l-Maruf) is Different From Guardianship
--------------------------------------------------------------------

In a situation where the young lady is married, does her father's
guardianship over her terminate?

Basically, there is no guardianship of the father over his daughter once
she attains puberty and can conduct her own affairs. But as we have
said, it is simply to protect her in the issue of marriage. Except for
this, the father has no guardianship in any other area. If we imagine
that he has a daughter, then he has no guardianship over her education,
her *jihad,* and her financial conduct-except when she becomes corrupt.
In that case, it is not an issue of the father in relation to his
daughter, but one of a believer with respect to a believing woman in
that area where the good must be commanded and evil forbidden *(al-amr
bi-l-maruf wa-n-nahi ani-l-munkar).* Therefore, the father has no
guardianship over his daughter, either before or after marriage.

Is it not the father's right, for example, to force his daughter to observe hijab?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Not in the context of being a father or a husband, but in the context of
his being a Muslim-ordering that which is right and forbidding that
which is wrong. When a young lady obeys her father by observing the
*hijab,* she does not obey him because he is her father or that
fatherhood dictates this, but rather because he exhorts and guides. It
must be realized that the process of coercion may create negative
repercussions which may create a greater problem than the one being
solved. The *Shariah* guidelines then must be followed when commanding
the good and forbidding the evil.

Confusion Between Custom and Shariah Law
----------------------------------------

Custom is sometimes given precedence over *Shariah* law. However, it
cannot be given precedence over *Shariah* in any situation. The role of
custom is based on the understanding drawn from the religious texts of
the Qur’an and *Sunna* in this area. The matter may be one of natural
difference in object per se as opposed to difference in a perceived
custom.

For example, there is a *fatwa* which states that: "*It is not permitted
for a man to wear women's dress, nor is it permitted for a woman to wear
men's clothing."* If we assume that a certain dress was initially male
garb, and its usage has become so widespread that it is an item for both
sexes (such as trousers), then the precedence of customary practice with
respect to the changed status of this garb has changed the issue. When a
woman today wears trousers, she is not seen as imitating a man, since
the trousers are worn by both sexes.

Custom may be applied to the change in particular aspects of the scope
of a *Shariah* ruling, but may not change the *Shariah* ruling itself as
long as the general scope of the subject holds.

The General Customary Perception of Temporary
---------------------------------------------

While we are discussing customary practice, let us go to the subject of
*muta* or temporary marriage-for customary practice in several societies
regards this as putting down the woman, since she is treated sometimes
as a fornicator.

We cannot, as a basic principle, respect the view of customary
perception on this subject. This is because Islam came to change
perceptions. When custom rejects and considers something wrong which
Islam perceives as natural, we cannot yield to custom. However, the
negative view of custom may lead, in cases such as these, to dislike the
act. A hostile view towards the practice may cause it to be seen as
dishonoring the man and the woman, and a person may not wish to put
himself in this dubious position.

Therefore, the position we take is strong dislike of temporary marriage
for virgins, even if the father and grandfather are not present, since
this may lead the woman to be dishonored in social circles.

We may note that custom is quite prevalent in the area of dishonor. Some
tribal societies may consider that a woman who is married outside of her
family, or to someone other than her cousin to be dishonorable. This
negative view may also apply to the marriage of a divorced woman or a
widow.

Islam came to correct the perception of custom. But if custom plays a
role where it is seen as a second criterion of judgment, then the
*Shariah* ruling follows this new criterion, which may regard something
as disliked *[makruh]* or even forbidden *[haram],* etc.

Muta is a Protection Against Corruption
---------------------------------------

Has Islam legislated temporary marriage (*muta*) as a natural right of a
person to whenever he wishes, or is it legislated for a specific
situation or as a solution to a specific problem?

The Qur’anic text which the proponents of muta refer to is:

"***And those of whom you seek content*** **(istamtatum) [by marrying
them],** ***give to them their due**" (al-Nisa, 4:24).*

We find this text unconditional. When we analyze the subject of *muta*,
however, we find that it may be an answer to an emergency; it may deal
with a particular need; or it may deal with a desire. Permanent
marriage, throughout history and in every religion and civilization, did
not solve this problem for humankind, nor restrained people, as in the
case of the people of Lot.

For fornication in illicit relations went side by side with permanent
marriage. This was because permanent marriage may not be the solution
for a man who has a stronger libido that his wife; as such, Islam
allowed him to marry four and allowed him muta, as he wishes in order to
protect himself from corruption. The matter then is not restricted to a
particular time.

Polygyny
--------

Is the plurality of wives natural? Was it intended to solve a problem?
Is it possible for a man to marry, from the outset, four wives, or is it
an opening for him to solve certain marital problems?

It appears the issue is unconditional with respect to pressing problem
or lack thereof, since the requirement for the man who wishes to engage
in polygyny, is that he possess the means of support.

There are those-as in Europe-who problematize the issue of polygyny as
one which causes tension and confusion within the family.

We believe that abundant confusion in married life has become normal in
America and Europe, and in places around the globe; although illicit
relationships are far more frequent than polygyny, with all its
tensions.

Naturally polygyny has negative aspects, just as monogamy has negative
aspects. There is no legislation which does not have a negative side.
The issue, however, is that when the positive aspects outweigh the
negative, it becomes permissible. When the negative aspects outweigh the
positive aspects, it becomes forbidden.

We believe that polygyny, with all its negative aspects, still has
several positive, mitigating factors.

Desirability of Early Marriage
------------------------------

There are several views on early or delayed marriage. There are those
who prefer early marriage and those who prefer later.

In Islam, early marriage is desirable, since a person is required to
protect himself and to avoid falling into *haram*. There is no doubt
that early marriage allows the person to satiate his sexual instincts,
the cravings of which, may otherwise lead to deviant behavior.

We also note that Islam has not presented a clear text on this, but
rather sees marriage as a personal relationship which allows a person to
pursue his desires or to satisfy his instincts, among other things. If
early marriage presents problems for the two spouses, these problems may
be solved by those around them-in the same way that delayed marriage
presents a problem to the community.

Smoking is Forbidden
--------------------

The fundamental rule is that things are permissible if there is no
mention of their prohibition in scriptural text. I, however, lean
towards the view that there is an excellent argument for the prohibition
of smoking, according to what can be derived from the noble verse: "

***They ask you about intoxicants and gambling. Say: In them both is
great evil and good for people, and their evil overcomes their good**"
(al-Baqarah, 2:219).*

If we interpret the term "evil" as "harm", or that which causes harmful
effects-since it is on the principle of prohibition of that which has
more harm than good-then the rule is that everything which causes more
harm than good is forbidden.

As all doctors testify, the harm caused by smoking outweighs its
benefits. Therefore, one may incline towards its prohibition. Even if
the issue is not one of prohibition, it certainly calls for caution.

There is the point that if the person knows that smoking will most
probably cause a terminal illness, even if after twenty years-doctors
show that smoking may cause death-then it becomes *haram.*

We say to any person who wishes to take up any habit that he must study
its nature and particulars, its benefits compared against its harmful
effects. If he sees evil instead of benefits, the logical conclusion is
that he ought not to take up this habit. If he has already taken it up,
he should leave it, since the thinking person does not put himself in
harm's way, nor does he permit himself to continue in that which is
harmful.

When we study the problem of smoking, we see that it is a practice, and
therefore a habit which necessitates that one stay away from it. A
person must resume control of himself if he has already taken up
smoking.

If a person stands in front of a chimney and opens his mouth to inhale
the smoke, don't you see that people will think him crazy? Taking smoke
through the mouth is not normal. There is no difference between this and
inhaling smoke into the body through the use of a cigarette!

What is the Islamic ruling on drugs?
------------------------------------

Drugs are forbidden since their influence on the mind and health is
worse than ordinary intoxicants. The reason for the prohibition of
intoxicating beverages is drunkenness, which causes a person to lose his
mental capacity. This is what happens with drugs, added to which is the
physical, mental, intellectual, and spiritual harm caused in the
person's life.

What about certain types of drugs like opium and the like?
----------------------------------------------------------

I do not have precise information on the drug qualities of these two
items, but if they possess similar effects as the better known drugs,
they are forbidden.

What do the jurists mean by the term "non-liquid intoxicant"?
-------------------------------------------------------------

That the product is from the hashish which the jurists see as an
intoxicant.

What about the issue of cultivating it?
---------------------------------------

If it is forbidden, it is impermissible for selling, trading, and
growing for the purpose of selling.

Cinema and Television
---------------------

What are the limits of permissibility regarding cinema and television?
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Cinema and television are two information media, and judgment as to
their *halal* or *haram* is contingent on the nature of the information
provided. If the material relates to lust, moral corruption, and
incitement to crime, then it is forbidden; if it does not, it is
permissible.

There is No Prohibition on Shaving The Beard
--------------------------------------------

I have concluded that there is no prohibition, since the basis of
prohibition is the *hadith* which states: "Clip the mustache and spare
the beard, and do not appear as the Jews." If then, the ruling is
predicted on a consideration of appearance for the purpose of
differentiating between Muslims and Jews, then this is specific to the
situation where the Muslims are a minority and others a majority which
calls for some demarcation.

When Imam ‘Ali was asked about the words of the Messenger of God:
"Change your gray hairs by dyeing them; do not appear as the Jews do,"
he responded, "He said that when Islam was a minority, but now it has
become known and widespread, so let the person do what he chooses."

It is understood from the *hadith* that the prohibition of shaving the
beard was contingent on a time-related issue at the beginning of the
Islamic message. Afterwards, however, the shaving of the beard became a
matter of appearance. If people wanted to make an example of a person
and ostracize him, it was said: "Shave his beard"-the same way that the
head is now shaved as a form of punishment.

There are some jurists who seek proof in the biographical accounts of
the Prophet and the Imams. But biography is not a proof for prohibition,
since their conduct may have been the result of opinion, or a natural
state of affairs where shaving of the beard was unknown amongst the
Muslims.

Are there jurists who allow its shaving?
----------------------------------------

Al-Sayyid al-Khui disallowed shaving on the basis of obligatory
precaution and not as a prohibition.

Shaking Hands With The Opposite Sex
-----------------------------------

The basic rule is that a man is not allowed to shake hands with a woman
who is not his *mahram.* It was narrated regarding the pledge of
allegiance to the Prophet that when the women came to him, he said "I do
not take the hands of women," and he placed a bowl of water, wherein the
woman would put her hand at one end, and he would place his hand at the
other end, and took the pledge in this manner.

It was narrated from the Ahl al-Bayt that "a man does not shake hands
with a woman who is not his *mahram,* except from behind a piece of
cloth."

If, however, such a situation threatens to cause great harm or to lead
to a crisis that do not normally correspond to the circumstances, then
it is permissible.

The other person may feel that you wish to humiliate him if you do not
return his handshake.

It is possible in this case for a person to clearly understand the
issue. The important thing is that a person must first be in an
extremely difficult situation, whose circumstances he cannot bear; for
God has said,

" ***[God] has not caused you difficulty in your religion**" (al-Hajj,*
22:78).

How one determines what is difficulty differs according to the persons
and the place. One person may be so insecure that, if he does not shake
hands he may be imprisoned; or be accused of belonging to some
particular party, as in the countries which seek to impugn and to test
Islamic activists and followers through this method.

Purity (Taharah) of The People of The Book
------------------------------------------

I rule on the purity *(taharah)* of every human being, regardless of
whether he is a non-believer or a Muslim, for there is no impure
*(najis)* person in his essence. He may be impure in his beliefs, in his
feelings or perceptions, but there is no proof, in my analysis of the
*Shariah,* for the impurity of any person *qua* person. The believer and
the non-believer both become impure by known impurities.

The martyr Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr saw purity in every human being, but
he was cautious about the nonscriptural non-believer because of the
consensus *(ijma)* on this issue.

What about the ritual impurity (najasah) indicated by the Qur’an?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The "impurity" meant here is the impurity of polytheism, the (mental)
defilement of polytheism, and the proof for this is:

"***Verily the polytheists are impure, and they may not come near the
Sacred Mosque**"(al-Tawba, 9:28).*

 If intrinsic uncleanness were intended, the impurity is achieved by
fresh moisture; without this there is no impurity. Even those who
propound the uncleanness of the non-believer, state that we do not use
this verse as proof of uncleanness, since the meaning here is abstract.

Good enough-but what about eating their meat?
---------------------------------------------

No, the premise being that it is stipulated the name of God must be
invoked. The prevalent opinion is that the slaughterer must be a Muslim.
However, we find that the ruling on the legality of meat from a person
of the People of the Book is similar to the view of the Shahid II. We
thus feel that the ruling of prohibition in the assumed scenario is
based more on precaution, as is the position of the martyr Sayyid
al-Sadr.

Music...The Lawful and The Unlawful
-----------------------------------

Views clash concerning music, and it is the same regarding singing. Is
there a juridical view that puts this controversy to rest?

When we study legal texts which count as the basis for the prohibition
of music, we find that they rely on the verse,

"***There are those people who pay for mere pastime of discourse, and
detract from the path of God without knowledge**" (Luqman,* 31:6); or,

"***And shun false talk**" (al-Hajj,* 22:30)-

which are said to corroborate the prohibition on singing. There are also
*hadiths* which classify singing as having no foundation; and another
*hadith* about a man who was listening to some maidservants who were
singing at a corner of his house; he was ordered to seek forgiveness.

We understand from the foregoing that the *Shariah* ruling on singing
and music is based on two issues: First, that the singing should be
distracting, interrupting the remembrance of God, and having some
influence. We do not intend here to present the basic jurisprudential
proof, because that requires long research. Our view is that music which
does not fan the impulses; does not lead to entertainment which alters
the normal state of the person; and has nothing which may lead to lust
must be seen as permissible, by virtue of all this.

If what is called classical music falls within these parameters, it is
permissible; likewise for symbolic or inspirational music, the kinds
that raise spirits, calm the nerves, soothe the mentality, etc.

Perhaps the jurists who had ruled on singing by prohibiting it were
referring to the illicitness, wantonness, and evil of the people of
corruption.

Its Tune or Its Ancillaries?
----------------------------

There are those who explain that singing is prohibited because it is
accompanied by music.

The prohibition of singing-in the prevalent view of the jurists-stems
from the natural melody of song; and if singing covers some illicit
aspects, then those things are another *haram.*

Another jurist (Mulla Muhsin al-Kashani) who ruled that the prohibition
on singing pertains to what singing entails and its ancillaries, not its
melody *per se.* The overwhelming majority of jurists, however, do not
agree with this. When we study the issue of singing, we see that its
influence is due to the melody that underlies it, even though its
ancillaries do enter the picture.

I do rule in favor of abstinence in this area, which perhaps agrees with
what the above mentioned jurist has opined, namely, that when music
deals with prophetic praises, or poetry, or what is close to a melodic
Qur’anic recitation which grabs the attention, then we do not see this
as a waste of time or a wrong. This is because the melody and its
ancillaries in this respect do not convey a meaning in the mind that is
deeper than if it were delivered in a normal way.

Using Musical Instruments in a Halal Manner
-------------------------------------------

What about the prohibitions on musical instruments?

There are *hadiths* which speak about the prohibition on the use of
musical equipment, but they refer to the entertainment and amusement
that are *haram.* There are scholars who view the prohibition of
instruments used predominantly for *haram* purposes, even when they can
be used for halal purposes. However, we see no problem in using these
same instruments for *halal* purposes, whether they are predominantly or
equally used for *haram.*

Instruments of Plaintive Melodies
---------------------------------

What about instruments which produce plaintive notes, such as the flute?

The issue lies not in the joy or the sadness, for a person may be moved
to experience delight in sadness- which causes a type of prohibition in
this field in the prevalent view of some jurists.

The qasidas of knowledge are often love verses-what about their recitation?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

If the *qasida* provides deeper knowledge, but its delivery is that of a
*ghazal* and its general ancillaries, so that people understand only the
*ghazal* content, then it does not fall within the parameters of
*halal*, its intent being to influence the mind.

Classical Music
---------------

I do not have such a music background that I can differentiate between
the types of music. But it is well-known that classical music suggests
intellectual thought more than simple amusement or delight. If this,
indeed, is the case, then one may rule on its permissibility.

In case of doubt concerning a melody-is it halal or haram-what is the solution?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Where there is doubt, the ruling is for permissibility-on the premise
that everything is permissible until you know for certain that it is
forbidden.

Can we define what is meant by "tunes of the people of immorality?"
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The "tunes of the people of immorality" refers to those tunes which
suggest dancing, delight, or lust.

A Woman Singing For Her Husband
-------------------------------

Is it permitted for a woman to sing for her husband?

It is not allowed for her to sing forbidden songs, meaning that if the
song is not permitted, or if it falls within the category of illicit
songs (consisting of lies or deceit) then she is not allowed to sing,
even to herself.

Singing At Weddings
-------------------

It appears that there are *hadith* which make an exception for weddings,
but there is no mention of the use of musical instruments. The *hadith*
which points to the permissibility of singing at weddings is not
restricted to the conditions we have so far mentioned. It is to be
expected that the lyrics should not be *haram*, although they may be
amusing and the tunes delightful.

A Woman's Reciting At Men's Gatherings
--------------------------------------

Is it allowed for a woman to recite Islamic *qasidas* to non-*mahram*?

There is a verse which says**:**

**"Do not lower your voice, for he in whose heart there is sickness may
be moved with desire**" (al-Ahzab, 33:32)-

which means that trilling and lilting the voice by the woman in front of
non-*mahram* men is forbidden according to the *Shariah,* on the premise
that it might lead to the negative consequences indicated by the verse.

The Problem Lies in Influence
-----------------------------

Is this view always unconditional?

The issue is connected to influence-for were the woman to recite poetry
or verses, but non-suggestively, it would not constitute haram. The
problem arises then in respect of the effect of the woman's speech. But
she may recite verses without any suggestiveness. Some women have a
naturally melodious voice, where any rise or drop in tone is suggestive,
and this is what we construe from the verse "***Do not lower your
voice***."

There Is a View That States "The Voice of a Woman Is Private"
-------------------------------------------------------------

We do not say this because women used to speak with the Prophet and the
Imams. Moreover, the biographies show that women sought out and
questioned *‘ulama* without this eliciting a prohibition from any
religious authority regarding the voice of the woman.

The proponents of the above view claim that a woman may speak to a man
only in emergencies. We believe that the biographies referred to issues
which bear little relation to emergencies. On the contrary, they arise
under normal circumstances, for why else would it be transmitted from
the time of the Prophet that the women behaved in straightforward
manner; that they came to him to pledge allegiance and emigrated to
Medina, and God ordered the Muslims to test the women "of their right
hand"? We find no basis for stipulating the condition of emergency in
this area.

The Prophet used to go forth with the women to treat the wounded, to
give water to the thirsty, and so forth. This required mixing and
speaking to them.

The Ruling on Chess
-------------------

### The Hadith that Speak about Chess

When we study the *hadiths* that have surfaced among Shia and Sunnis on
the subject of chess, we find that there are narratives which suggest of
prohibition ("it is sinful"; "do not approach it!"). There is the
*hadith* on this subject where a person asked about chess and was told:
"If God classified it between truth and falsehood, where would it be?"
He replied, "With falsehood." He said: "What is it with you and
falsehood!" Another person asked about chess and he said: "There is no
good in it."

Another *hadith* states: "The one who indulges in chess is like one who
indulges in pork." He asked "What should he do?" The answer was, "He
must wash his hands to cleanse himself of it."

These *hadiths* suggest dislike more than they do prohibition. But we
also find *hadiths* which explain the words of God,

"***Eschew the abominable from the idols**"* (al-Hajj, 22:30).

In some exegetical works [tafsirs] the reference is to chess. What is
clear, however, is that there is no clear proof for the prohibition,
only a scenario where play is wagered in some form. Considering chess as
gambling points to this, and gambling is understood to encompass
wagering.

### Chess in a Halal Setting

Should we refrain from accepting the view on the permissibility of
chess?

Imam Khomeini ruled on the permissibility of chess on the grounds that
the view of its prohibition depended on chess being regarded as a tool
of gambling. He felt that it has come out of this classification and
entered the realm of the permissible. This is confirmed by some
*hadiths* which insist that "certainly chess is gambling" but they do
not attach the meaning of gambling to chess in the absence of specific
features of gambling.

There must be a bet and winnings in gambling. If we are able to
understand from the *hadith* that chess was forbidden, on the view that
it was used as a gambling apparatus, then we must concur with the Imam's
view on permissibility. If we cannot do this, we must reserve judgment
on the position that it is *halal* or *haram,* since the issue calls for
more research. But permissibility does not seem far from the truth.

### And dominoes . . .?

In our scholarly research *(ijtihad),* playing with gambling equipment
or whatever resembles it is not forbidden where there is no gambling
involved. We do not agree with scholars who state that playing with
gambling equipment is *haram*, even in the absence of betting, on the
judgment that mere play is forbidden.

My view is in favor of the permissibility of playing with gambling
equipment and their similar modern inventions; and on this basis, play
money and the like is not forbidden. In this view, I side with the
ruling of a great Iranian scholar, the dear departed Ayatullah Sayyid
Ahmad Khwansari.

What is the view on visiting places where there is gambling and the like?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Visiting these places may be considered under certain aspect-the person
may be attracted to gambling while there; there may be other illicit
activities, the honor of a believer may be sacrificed there or his
reputation tarnished. In all these cases, the ruling is that it is
forbidden.

Yes, if there is some need for him to visiting these places-such as to
speak to a person, without this leading to any accusation or loss of
honor and reputation-then there is no objection.

Fortune Telling and Reading The Future
--------------------------------------

Magazines circulate abundantly among the youth. Some focus on predicting
the future-through the signs of the zodiac, palmistry, and teacup
reading. There are two questions on this subject: What is the view of
Islam on this; and what is the connection between predicting the future
and the unseen through magic?

There is no basis whatsoever that these are a means to know the unseen
future, since there is no relation between them and the actions of
people or cosmic occurrences. It is possible that the issue of the
zodiac and the planets stemmed from some ancient non-Islamic beliefs. In
older times, some people felt that the stars had an effect on human
affairs and the universe. This caused them to associate signs with
certain planets in order to gain some idea of the future-whether in
terms of personality traits, under this or that sign, or some such
thing.

Horoscopes In Newspapers and Magazines
--------------------------------------

This custom has become so dominant in our society that many magazines
and newspapers dedicate special pages for this pastime, where it is
assumed that such-and-such a person under such-and-such a sign has
specific traits and that a particular event may occur at some point in
time. However, we do not find any Islamic basis for this. Rather we see
traditions which forbid learning astrology to predict the fixture.
Indeed, one of the Imams of the AN al-Bayt asked some people who dealt
with this kind of information, "Do you predict?" They said: "Certainly."
He said: "Burn your books."

As for teacup reading or summoning the spirits, those who indulge in
these practices have no basis for associating them with any reality. We
have no wish to deny categorically, nor do we possess any extensive
study for their refutation. However, the experiences which the people
speak about do not suggest any truth in this area. If we have doubts, we
should deem them fantasies and hallucinations.

If some of these predictions have some truth, the truth does not result
from the means, but is coincidental-in exactly the same manner as the
people predict several things at the beginning of every year: some
things come to pass, others prove to be false. The people do not pay
attention to those things that fail to happen but to those that take
place.

In this respect, the *hadith "*The stargazers lied even if they told the
truth" perhaps indicates this point-which is that the truth one finds is
not a truth which stems from the rules attached to truth itself; they
are coincidental.

There are things which these practices discover and they are true, ascertained then and there
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I assume that some people do not think that some of these things are
general and evident for the persons concerned. There are people who have
intuitive perception, realizing things from the personality of a person.
Someone who indulges in this practice may also be experienced in reading
indications and clues relating to this or that type of people, or
whatever can be ascertained from single or married individuals. As such,
the words may be delivered in a way that suggests to the listener some
basis of truth in them.

We do not deny these things-as we have said since denial requires proof,
but in what is before us on this matter we find nothing that could
confirm what the practitioners claim.

Magic Is a State of Delusion
----------------------------

Do you believe that there is a relation between these practices and
magic?

We do not believe that magic represents reality, for God (Exalted) in
the Qur’an spoke negatively of magic:

"***What magic you have brought is deception, certainly God will negate
it**" (Yunus,* 10:81).

God tells us here that magic is a delusion and not reality. There is
also the story of the two angels, Harut and Marut:

"***And they learnt from them magic by which they might separate a man
from his wife**" (al-Baqara,* 2:102).

But it is not necessary that this be magic. Even if it is, who said that
Harut and Marut stayed until those who are known for ignorance and
backwardness in many situations had learnt from them?

Entertainment And The Needed Alternatives
-----------------------------------------

The enemies of Islam employ means for which the human soul
craves-singing, music, intoxicants, mixing between the sexes and the
corruption that goes with that. When, calling towards God, we take a
decisive, negative view of these things, without suggesting any of a
number of alternatives, social consciousness will not accept this. The
question then is: Do you not believe that if this state of affairs
continues, the self-destruction of character and the licentiousness will
move apace?

We believe that Islam does not see any problem with harmlessly filling
the spare time of our youth, creating a relaxed, happy mental state; or
with opening their hearts toward the innocent Western amusements. We
acknowledge that this area is wide in scope, and includes sports,
swimming, symbolism, inspirational music, and whatever the jurists have
ruled on as not being within the purview of immorality and sin. This
means that we have not totally discarded music.

Regarding intoxicants, it is impossible to find in the youth environment
an alternative to this, except certain types of fruit juices prepared in
a way that attracts youths. Intoxicants do not possess special,
intrinsic qualities that lure youths; youths are probably more attracted
to the atmosphere that surrounds these products. Therefore, it is
possible to recreate some of that atmosphere as an alternative to
intoxicating drinks.

Seeking The Positive Aspects of Amusement
-----------------------------------------

Are there alternatives to these types of pastime?

We need to seek out the positive aspects of what may serve as
alternatives, to prevent youth from indulging in their spare time in
activities which will lead to wanton pursuits.

When we speak of music, for example, we say to our youth that it is
*haram*-but we must seek a *fatwa* on allowing soft music which has a
soothing effect on the person, which is a balm for the emotions, a
repose for the nerves; or symbolic, inspirational music and the like.

Therefore, we must find something within *Shariah* parameters for
judging the permissibility of some types of music. Then, when we issue a
fatawa about the prohibition of wanton, sexually explicit material, or
what is termed "the tunes of the people of immorality", we must direct
youths to soft music which deals with living issues, with human values,
culture, and so forth.

When we wish our youth to stay away from things which are liable to
change for the worse, we must seek equivalent forms from a different
direction. We must not create a rift between the youth and his time in
regards to the things that affect his feelings and perceptions. One
needs to appreciate the apt words of Imam ‘Ali, "Do not mold your
children's ethics according to yours, for they are of a different time
than yours."

These words do not address morals which may develop negatively, and
which are contrary to the positive teachings of Islam, but those which
speak of customs relating to a person's pastime, urges, joys, social
activities, manner of eating, drink, public relations, etc.

The Problem of Inducement
-------------------------

Another problem which may present itself on these proposed alternatives
is that they may induce youth to indulge in *haram.*

When you place lines of demarcation between the lawful and the
forbidden, in order to train this person that the lawful is good for him
in this life and that a free life does not mean committing unlawful
deeds, you could set him on the straight path.

There may be people who exploit the issue of rendering things lawful to
give license to some *haram* things. This is a deviation which we must
cure. That does not mean, however, that we must prohibit the lawful out
of fear that some people may use it to move towards *haram.* For we know
there are those who would use religion for commercial exploitation, and
who would sacrifice something of great value to gain a paltry profit.

This, however, is normal in the life of a person; when discussing our
subject, we speak of the positive aspects which replace the negative
ones, so that the person does not live in a void. We do not state that
we must find just any alternative, issuing *fatwas* which are contrary
to what God has revealed.

We state that we must seek always to think of ways which agree with
guidelines of the *Shariah,* because the problem of the Islamic
community is that it is not active enough, but rather thinks of a
problem only when it is confronted by it. The problem may be
misunderstood and the solution lost, since there was no plan for it, and
it was not anticipated.

In this manner, it is possible to invent many permissible methods of
amusement for youth to indulge in. If there is a jurist or a celebrated
scholar who has forbidden play with gambling tools or chess, there are
more recent juridical opinions which allow them. This means that the way
is not closed to innocent forms of amusement which fill the spare time
of our youth and, at the same time, provides them with certain benefits
through play.

Certainly Islam does not wish the human being to be immobile in life.
Several *hadiths* relate: "Let the heart relax hour after hour"; and, "A
Muslim must have three moments: one to plead with his Lord, one to look
after his livelihood, and one to delight in a matter that is not
*haram,* for it is an aid to the other two times." An innocent form of
amusement, then, which provides relaxation for the self-in a manner that
revitalizes his activities and eases the tensions he may at times
experience in worship or in his daily duties-is something required.

Bypassing Custom
----------------

We must seek to bypass social customs to make way for new norms. This
must be done by taking things deemed normal and replacing them with
other things. We feel that Islamic activists-whether in the social,
educational, cultural, or propagation fields-must study in the field all
available options in harmony with the Islamic *Shariah* and is
educational, and must invent new methods in this area. I do not feel
that these new methods can be few in number. But the Islamic workers
have not gone this route, for they have not paid attention to the
negative influences that linger among the younger generation from both
men and women-in this closed field.

Many workers who were brought up under a repressive conditions have
resorted to a life of repression, with narrower social norms than is
generally the case; they may be afraid to indulge in any form of
amusement.

There are those who are religiously very observant and do not see this
as proper or as befitting the dignity of a believer.

We find later scholars from our great religious authorities (*maraji*)
are more open and analytical than these observers of religion, for we
see that al-Sayyid al-Khui permitted men and women to dance with the
same gender provided there is no danger of inciting lust or immoral
acts. In his opinion and scholarly assessment, there was no proof for
the prohibition of amusement, and thus no objection to a person taking
up some form of entertainment-but only as long as there was no specific
proof that it is *haram.*

That which is forbidden is the singing that accompanies immorality; but
the amusement which occurs in society should be considered lawful. It is
the same in the case of hand-clapping. We do not know why many are
troubled when Muslims and those who are religiously observant clap their
hands in praise of a *qasida*, speech, or something of this kind-as if
those who indulge in applause commit some *haram*! It is possible for us
to express our joy and appreciation by clapping, to which lately has
been the blessings on the holy Prophet and so on.

What is important is that no problem arises regarding a matter that is
legal and is seen as good by the community. While it may have several
positive aspects to it, why should we reject it? We may combine the two
facets in this area.

We believe that when we seek to create the opportunities that can
satisfy youths' spirits, feelings, interests, and love for relaxation
and amusement, youths will not depart from the Islamic atmosphere. They
will instead perceive in it a richness for the intellect and the spirit;
they will derive benefit from the amusement, if we may so state it.

Jealousy And The Evil Eye
-------------------------

What does common custom deem jealousy or "the evil eye", concerning
which some supplications and prayers of refuge have been narrated?

I have perceived no detailed proof or actual instances of jealousy in
this sense. Rather, we find that the situation of people of whom others
are jealous do not have any effect on their person. The issue of
jealousy to be analyzed is the evil which the jealous person may cause
for the person of whom he is jealous. In other words, the ill will he
bears towards another may incite him to murder, assault, or confine him,
as did the brothers of Yusuf.

It is possible that the supplications that have surfaced on this subject
represent suggestions, whereby a person turns to his Lord while in fear
regarding the issue of knowledge, or regarding the nightmares he
experienced as a result of the social conditions from which he seeks
protection. The assumption is that these are paranormal events which the
human being cannot get rid of through normal meditation, and so resorts
to his Lord to rid him of his fear. Then, he will feel convinced of
God's help and protected in the entire matter.

Nor can I categorically deny that these things occur; I do not possess
knowledge of every detail of the refutation. Let me state, though, that
I do not find any convincing proof-for example, for the folk view on the
subject. I find only reasons to reject them.

Addendum of Narrations (5)
--------------------------

### On the Hijab

• Imam ‘Ali said: "I was sitting in the Baqee with the Messenger of God
one dark, rainy day. A woman on a donkey passed by, and the foreleg of
the animal stumbled in a hole, as the woman fell. The Prophet turned
away and the people said, "O Messenger of God! She is wearing trousers!"
He said thrice "O God, cover the faults of those who wear trousers. O
people, wear trousers; of all your clothing they cover best. And protect
your women in them when they go out!"

• He said to his son Hasan, "Restrain them from their looks through the
*hijab,* for the sterner *hijab* the better to spare you and them the
blemish-and their going forth is no more severe than their coming in for
those in whom you have no confidence. If you are able not to let them
know anyone but you from the men, then do so!"

### On Looking

• The Messenger of God said: "Beware of excessive looking, for it causes
passion, and gives rise to carelessness."

• He also said: "Whoever fills his eyes with *haram*, Allah will fill
his eyes with fire on the day of judgment, except the one who repents
and does not repeat this."

• He said: "There is no Muslim who looks at a woman and at first glance
lowers his gaze but that God [Exalted] creates for him a worship whose
sweetness he will find in his heart."

• He said: "Every organ has its portion of fornication, and the
fornication of the eye lies in its glance."

• He said, "Lower your gaze when you see that which pleases you."

• Jesus said: "Beware of looking at the forbidden, for they are the seed
of lust and the shoot of immorality."

• Imam ‘Ali said: "The eyes are the snares of Satan."

• He also said, "There is nothing in the body less thankful than the
eye, so do not answer its request, for it will distract you from
remembering God Almighty."

• He said: "If the eyes perceive some lust, the heart becomes blind to
the aftermath."

• He said: "He who looks a lot, regrets a lot."

• Al-Sadiq counselled Abdullah b. Jundab, "O Ibn Jundab, verily Jesus,
son of Mary, said to his disciples: 'Woe betide the glance, for it sows
desire in the heart and causes corruption for its owner. Blessed be he
who put his perception in his heart and not in his eyes.'"

### On Ornamentation

• The Messenger of God said, "Certainly God loves His believing servant
when he goes out to his brother, to appear nicely and to beautify
himself for him."

• He also said, "The best beautification of a man is tranquillity with
faith."

• Imam ‘Ali said: "Woe to you, beautify yourself for people and to
confront God in contumacy."

• He also said: "Ornamentation lies in the goodness of voice not in
clothes."

• He said: "The ornamentation of Islam is to do good deeds."

• He said: "The best dress is that which makes you identify with people,
makes you appear nice among them, and keeps their tongues from wagging
about you."

• He said: "There is no decoration which one resorts to that is better
than that of obedience to God."

• Imam al-Sadiq said: "It is not fitting that a woman should neglect
herself, even if it means putting a garland around her neck."

### On Singing

• The Messenger of God said: "Do not listen to wind instruments and
singing, for they sow hypocrisy in the heart, the way water makes shoots
grow."

• He also said: "Two voices are cursed in this world and the next:
Flutes with joy and singing in calamity."

• Al-Imam al-Sadiq said, "Singing bequeaths hypocrisy."

• A man said to al-Sadiq, "I have neighbors, and they have some girls
who sing, accompanied by the flute. When I go into the vestibule, may I
prolong my sitting there to listen to them?" He said, "Do not do it."
The man then said: "It is not something that I go to by my two feet, but
rather a sound that comes to my ears." He said: "Fear God! Have you not
heard God say**:**

**"*****Verily his hearing, his seeing, and his heart-they will all be
questioned**' (Al-Isra’,* 17:36).

The man said to him: "It is as if I have never heard this verse from the
Book of God from either Arab or foreigner! Certainly I have abandoned
it, and I seek God's forgiveness, Exalted is He."

### On Magic

• From Imam ‘Ali: "The stargazer is like a seer. And the seer is like a
magician, the magician like a non-believer, and the non-believer is in
the fire."

• It was also reported that he said: "The eye is true and the charm is
true, but the contagion is not true."

• From al-Imam al-Sadiq, "Whoever learns anything of magic, a little or
a lot, has committed an act of infidelity *[kufr].* This affair rest
with his Lord, and his sentence is that he should be killed if he does
not repent."

### On Drunkenness

• The Messenger of God said, "Stay away from every intoxicant, for every
intoxicant is forbidden."

• Imam ‘Ali said: "Every thinking person must beware of the intoxication
of money, the intoxication of power, the intoxication of comfort, the
intoxication of youth-for certainly each of these has an evil smell
which destroys the intellect and negates sobriety."

• Al-Imam al-Baqir said, "If a great quantity of something intoxicates,
then even a little of it is *haram*."

• The Messenger of God said, "O Ibn Mas'ud, stay away from erring
intoxication, for there is intoxicant in erring just as the intoxication
of drink; this is more intoxicating than the latter, for God says:
"***Deaf, Dumb, and blind, they will not return to the path**."*

Themes 6: On The Sidelines of Disclosure: The Experience of Allamah Muhammad Husayn Fadlullah, The Youth
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the eventful life of knowledge and work which Ayatollah Fadlullah has lived, what are the best methods of nurturing according to him? How did he take care of himself in his youth?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I used to feel that I had to train myself to be a Muslim who lives his
Islam from within, accepting God, loving Him and fearing Him. I made a
serious effort to gain His pleasure and to be a true Muslim in the
movement of Islam from within and without my life. I used to feel that
the Muslim man has to accept his own time, to deal with it and live with
it, to be part of it, to analyze his mentality and his affairs, until he
is able to express his understanding of Islam in the language,
mentality, and methods of his time.

I used to read everything which could possibly enrich my knowledge and
help me understand my time. I was quick to understand my time; and in
fact feared losing the language of the previous times. But I also sought
to immerse myself in that language.

I believed that the Muslim man must be an activist, that he must think
in the same terms of Islam as an *‘alim*, in order to make his
political, social, and intellectual contribution to Islam. He must be
receptive to the activities of Islamic movements. And I was always
receptive to Islamic movements-all of them-and still am. I had great
hopes for them, despite my differences of opinion with some of them over
certain of their negative aspects, because I have found that we cannot
fill the world with Islam except through an active, dynamic Islam.

I do not wish here to speak of abandoning imitative Islam. We need it,
but with the understanding that imitative Islam must be structured on
the special dynamic qualities of an active Islam. And the opposite is
also true, in terms of the positive aspects of imitative Islam.

The Man of Islam
----------------

I have tried in the course of my life to be a man of Islam, but do not
know if I have stood up to the test. I have found that Muslim man must
behave in society according to the ethics of Islam, not according to his
personal ethics. Whether he calls to Islam or is a scholar, a thinker,
or activist, he must keep within the overall picture of Islam,
especially in ethics.

I did not see myself as being so free that I could impose on others my
own problems, those reflected in the gloominess in my face, the
harshness of my manner, or some other anger. I took it as my duty to
suppress myself when problems impinged on my activities, manner of
speech, facial expression, etc., because I think that the caller to
Islam must leave his moods at home or within himself, and go forth in an
Islamic mood.

This is what I have learnt from the Messenger of God. And he learned
this from the Qur’an, since God taught him well. For the Messenger used
to endure the worst of what a person can undergo. Despite this, he used
to smile and always to be affable with people. He used to deny himself
all the joys, until the members of his household were at ease or people
around him were comfortable. He was not egotistical or selfish in his
manner.

From here, I feel the workers of Islam-whether scholars, students,
activists, or those who invite to Islam-must take the example of the
Prophet's conduct. They must coexist with the people, caring for their
feelings and perceptions. The Messenger of God used to love all of
humankind:

"***Certainly a prophet has come to you from amongst yourselves. It
grieves him that you*** **fall** ***into distress; he cares about you,
and to the believers he is most kind and merciful**" (al-Tawba,* 9:128).

He used to agonize over those people who did not accept his invitation
to Islam. He harbored no ill will towards them, but agonized over them.
Thus, the verse revealed to him stated,

"***Do not let your soul waste away in grief for them**" (Fatir,* 35:8).

I Have Loved All Humankind
--------------------------

I have learnt from the Messenger of God to love all human beings. I love
the believing person and I identify, with him. And I love the
non-believer, empathizing with him on different matters. I have not had
a problem with any person in my life. Rather, I have accepted all
people, whether they agreed or disagreed with me.

I have tried to conduct myself largely within the moral framework of
Islam, whose message enter the hearts of people well before it does
their intellects. Of course, I also underwent many setbacks. But I have
tried to take the right direction, trusting that my brethren will
benefit from my vast experience-in being receptive to people.

In this I have encountered great success and tremendous love even from
non-Muslims. I feel that every person-no matter who-has many good and
pure qualities at the core. But we must tap into his core and cause it
to gush forth into his heart. We must know how to look on the bright
side of his life rather than focus on the dark. We must look at the
redeeming qualities of a person, not at the negative characteristics.
Then we will see that people reject neither God nor Islam, for God has
counseled us to exhort to the truth and patience - although some of us
cannot always handle the truth, nor face challenges with resoluteness.

This Is The Way I Nurture My Sons and Daughters
-----------------------------------------------

I tried to be a friend of, not to impose myself on, my sons or
daughters. When I noted an error on their part, I did not seek their
attention through harshness or beating, but through suggestion and
reference; also directly, with gentle or sharp words that do not injure.

I want them to enjoy their lives, and I have helped them in their life
choices. I used to let them be, without meddling in their affairs, until
they could benefit from the experience of their mistakes, the positive
and negative points of which I discussed with them.

I have attempted largely to nurture them by focusing on their humanness,
rather than the surface. I have been to them-and continue to be-a
friend, and have won their confidence in return; for in my home, I live
in a gentle atmosphere with my older and younger children who speak to
me without any reservation. I make sure that there is never any barrier
between us, the father being a storehouse of the secrets of his
children. They will not share their secrets with anyone else, and he
must create the opportunities of trust in him.

Return To The Meadows of Childhood
----------------------------------

### Does our eminence have any recollections of this which might benefit our youth?

When I go back to my early youth, the last stages of my childhood, I was
that little boy who ran about in the streets of the blessed city of
Najaf, with its mosques and Alid sanctuary, and in the classes of the
scholars. I found myself a boy of eleven planning with friends (and I
particularly remember the martyr Sayyid Mahdi alHakim) the publication
of a magazine to be called *al-Adab*.

It became a handwritten magazine, and we used to prepare the issues
according to the number of subscribers. We actually began writing from
that time onwards, and sought articles from some of the great
personalities in Najaf.

I remember when I was fourteen I recited some *qasidas*, some of which
were distributed. I feel some voids in me, for my childhood was not all
one of play and pleasure. I used to go with my father to learn at a
place in Najaf on the outskirts of the desert, with one of the
tributaries of the Euphrates running through it. There we used to play
in the gardens.

My memories of Najaf include a love for reading the supplications of the
month of Ramadan to the believers, and I used to go-in the most intense
heat-to the Alid sanctuary to sit there. Many of the older folk would
sit around me and I would recite the supplications to them. My family
used to fear for my health because of the intense heat, especially since
I was fasting.

From the very outset, my life has been filled with learning, for I used
to read the magazine al-Risala in that place, along with translated
stories and newspapers. And we used to come and go at that time to the
Publications Assembly, which was the first such cultural establishment
to be opened in a religious circle in blessed Najaf. All my memories
then are related to education and culture, and we used to stay up at
night in gatherings, where students would discuss and debate about their
studies. During that time, we were discovering new ideas, far beyond our
years. This was the result of the abundance of knowledge there.

### Have you done any academic studies?

I have done no academic studies except at one grade. I entered the
"Publications Institution" in the third grade, and left it in the
fourth. My seminary studies were in concord with the education of the
time.

Try To Study Us and Our Past
----------------------------

### The final question: What would you like to say to your children who work in the cause of Islam?

What I would like to say to my brethren and children who work in the
cause of Islam is that we were aware of the actual state of Islam at a
time when many-especially in blessed Najaf- did not come to grips with
current realities. The experience of our generation, which included the
martyr al-Sadr and many *'ulama*, had been filling the needs of Muslims
through a dynamic Islam. We employed the methods of the times, while
guarding the basic gems and intellectual bases of Islam.

Our experience, one in which rivers of blood have been spilled, all
types of injury and suffering endured perhaps an experience itself
weakened by injury-was a pioneering experience, creating the conditions
for the realities of Islam which people now live in. We do not wish to
declare that we are the fathers of this experience, but we did help
bring this experience to fruition. This experience shows that the human
being, when he seeks the future, and trusts in God, has faith in Islam,
expends his every effort, and avails himself of every circumstance, must
succeed, even if it takes a while.

I would like to say to every member of the next generation that we were
at a stage ripe with opportunities. Now you must try to study our
weaknesses and strengths. Do not study us as individual personalities.
Study us rather for what we have done and our ideas. You may not find
the ideas we came up with then to be any longer important; you live a
normal life, because an Islamic atmosphere makes these ideas something
normal- exactly like the man who takes food after others have struggled
to cook it. But these ideas which you take for granted emerged after
much struggle in society.

### Islam Is a Trust Upon Your Shoulders

I would like to say to all my beloved children that Islam is a trust
placed on your shoulders, and that we must not freeze at this stage. Try
to respect your historical leaders, but do not stop with them, since any
leadership, no matter how great, only represents its own stage and
experience. In life, there are more advanced stages and new experiences
to undergo. The experiences of the past are for the past, and you must
have your own experience.

I feel that this generation which you represent is one of suffering in
its confrontation with the global disbelief. We are proud of and honor
this generation, and we hope that it will make as few mistakes as
possible, that it will be wary of the many intrigues that others would
like to sow in its consciousness and its life.

We hope that you will have confidence in God until you no longer fear
anyone; that you will have such a bond with God that you no longer feel
alienated by anyone; and that you will accept the Messenger of God as an
example of strength, character, and for his treatment of all people, an
example in all aspects of life. All this as you accept his message,
which is based on what is from God.

We are the generation of a message that gives each generation something
of its strength and wherewithal. Certainly, Islam needs the strength of
every generation. Say: "***Work and your deeds will be seen by God, His
Prophet, and all the believers..**."*

Gems from the responses of His Eminence Ayatullah al-Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Fadlullah, may God grant no end to his counsel, on youth issues
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question 1

***Is obedience to parents obligatory where they impose limitations on
the type of employment or type of studies*** ***for young males and
females?***

Answer:

This is not obligatory, because the requirement in the bond between
child and parents is kindness and beneficence, not obedience.

### Question 2

***Is obedience to parents obligatory in the choice of a future partner
(a husband or a wife)?***

Answer:

This is not compulsory, but it is commendable to seek their counsel,
especially since not doing so may offend them.

### Question 3

***What is the ruling on such expensive, exorbitant dowers*** (mahr)
***which place a tremendous onus on those who need to marry?***

Answer:

There is no limit on dower in Islam. It is determined at the pleasure of
the two spouses, and there is no room for interference by either family.
The spouses have to decide on what is pleasing to them both, without the
influence of their families.

### Question 4

***Some of the progeny of the purified household (i. e. the descendants
of the Prophet) do not marry their daughters except to sayyids. What is
your opinion on this?***

Answer:

This is in no way Islamic, nor has any study of the life of the Imams of
*Ahlulbayt* shown that it was their practice. In fact, their
biographical studies show quite the opposite, for in Islam, there is no
class-based differentiation or discrimination in marriage.

### Question 5

***Is it wrong for those proposing in marriage that they should
stipulate the degree of beauty of the woman?***

Answer:

The prospective husband has the right to stipulate certain conditions of
beauty in his future wife, over and above that of religious observance,
and there is nothing wrong with that.

### Question 6

***What is the verdict on the marriage of young girls to men who are
older than them; or what is the view of Islam regarding the differences
in age in marriage?***

Answer:

In Islam, marrying age is not specified, for either the bride or the
groom. It is essential that there be objectivity regarding the
compatibility of temperaments and functions between the two parties.

### Question 7

***Several factors pertain to marriage: family, region, nationality, or
tribe, etc. Is it allowable to disregard these factors, since they may
cause problems for the two spouses?***

Answer:

The *Sharjah* gives no special consideration to these types of
differences between husband and wife. In fact, there is a collective
repudiation of such considerations. But it is necessary that the spouses
carefully consider all internal and external factors which make for the
permanency and solid foundation of their married life.

### Question 8

***What are the conditions that must prevail in the bridegroom, and what
are those that must prevail in the bride?***

Answer:

The noble *hadith* tell us that: "If there comes to you someone whose
character and religion pleases you, then marry him. If you do not, there
will be calamity and evildoing in the earth." And in another *hadith,* a
man said to the Prophet: "To whom should I marry?" The Prophet replied,
"To one who is religious." This is over and above the necessary physical
characteristics and intelligence requirements that everyone seeks in a
spouse.

### Question 9

***What is the verdict on birth control on the premise of shortage of
resources, or financial stringency?***

Answer:

According to the prescribed *Shariah* methods, this is permissible, but
it is necessary that the believing Muslim rely, in matters of provision,
on what is with God, and not to commit himself exclusively to material
considerations.

### Question 10

***Is marriage to a woman who does not observe the limits of modesty and
decorum allowed, in the hope that she will reform in the future?***

Answer:

This is allowed in principle, but experience has shown that, in many
cases, that lack of modesty does not give way to propriety after
marriage but persists. This is because the pressure of the wife on her
husband is stronger in such cases. Women differ in this regard, and it
is necessary that the matter be carefully considered with respect to the
actual behavior of the person involved, her characteristics, fidelity,
and promise-keeping.

### Question 11

***What are the*** ***‘Shariah’*** ***limits for temporary marriage
within the parameters of the negative results that can sometimes result
from such allowances?***

Answer:

In such cases, it is absolutely necessary that each society be studied
in light of the pros and cons and in the light of the specific *Shariah*
stipulations that must prevail.

### Question 12

***What is your eminence's view on seeking refuge in or emigrating to
Western countries?***

Answer:

That is not permitted if it leads to the humiliation of the believer or
the weakening of his religion, or if it leads his wife and children to
go astray.

### Question 13

***Is it allowable for a father or mother to investigate the private
affairs of their sons and daughters, such as opening their letters or
searching their drawers, and so forth?***

Answer:

This is not allowed.

### Question 14

***What is the meaning of "uquq al-walidain"?***

Answer:

The term means causing them harm, or injuring them by harsh words or
treatment.

### Question 15

***What is the ruling on masturbation?***

Answer:

It is forbidden for the man and woman if it causes ejaculation. If it
does not, then it is not forbidden, but it is still something which must
be avoided because of its harmful effects.

### Question 16

***What is the ruling on looking at sex videos?***

Answer:

This is not permitted except in cases of necessity.

### Question 17

***What are the*** **Shariah** ***limits of music listening?***

Answer:

That the music should not be accompanied by dancing and its
accompaniments, such as libertinism and sex.

### Question 18

***What are the Shariah requirements for covering on a woman or a girl,
and what are the descriptions of the specific clothing for men or
youth?***

Answer:

The *Shariah* requires that those parts of the female's body which one
is forbidden to expose should be hidden, and that no part should be of
such type that merits the description of immodesty. Men's clothing
should cover the private parts and should not be suggestive.

### Question 19

***What is the ruling on the use of gambling material in its various
forms and methods of play?***

Answer:

It is allowable if no betting is involved.

### Question 20

***What are kutub al-dalal ("books of misguidance'), and what is the
ruling on them? Do contemporary books critical of Islam and Islamic
civilization-both objectively and subjectively-fall under this
classification?***

Answer:

This classification refers to books which have nefarious objectives.
Acquiring them is not forbidden unless it is feared that they will have
harmful effects on the reader.

### Question 21

***What is the ruling on the youths who wear neck chains and bracelets
made of gold or other metals?***

Answer:

Men are prohibited from wearing gold, just as they are prohibited from
imitating women, except in cases where neck chains and bracelets are not
sex-specific. If these ornaments are made of other metals, they are
allowed if there is no forbidden imitation involved.

### Question 22

***Are trousers exposing the private parts allowed?***

Answer:

If this means that the shape of private parts is defined in detail and
the suggestiveness is explicit, then they are not allowed.

### Question 23

***What are the restrictions on corporal punishment of students?***

Answer:

This is permissible if the disciplinary action is administered with the
permission of the guardian. Such discipline is limited to what is
appropriate and does not involve the letting of blood or injury.

### Question 24

***What are the restrictions on corporal punishment of children by their
parents?***

Answer:

The ruling on this is the same as the one on punishment of students.

### Question 25

***Is one allowed to pay dues for Islamic student or youth
activities?***

Answer:

This is allowed with the permission of the proper authorities.

### Question 26

***Is one allowed to regard university students as equal to the students
of the hawzas-i.e-, that the same rights and privileges be given to
both?***

Answer:

This is permitted if the students of the universities are observing
believers, aware of what agrees with the Islamic perspective on their
studies.

### Question 27

***Is it permitted to distribute the zakat al-fitra to Islamic student
activities?***

Answer:

This is permitted, but the better approach is to distribute it to poor
students.

### Question 28

***Is one permitted to listen to religious versification accompanied by
music?***

Answer:

This is allowed.

### Question 29

***What do you say on being affiliated with Islamic groups?***

Answer:

This is permissible if such groups keep to unadulterated Islamic
perspectives in their activities and leadership.

### Question 30

***Is one allowed to take a bad person as a friend with the intention of
correcting him, even if this is not immediate?***

Answer:

This is allowed if there is no fear that the negative influence of this
person will rub off on the other.

### Question 31

***Is a young female permitted to work in a place where all the other
employees are male?***

Answer:

This is permitted in principle, on the condition that there is no
negative influence on her character and reputation.

### Question 32

***Within the parameters of the ruling on the purity of the Scriptuary
(ie., a person from the People of the Book) which you propound, is one
allowed to use the tatter's utensils and other implements while they are
still moist?***

Answer:

This is allowed.

### Question 33

***Is one allowed to engage in temporary marriage (muta) with a
fornicating woman?***

Answer:

If she is known to be so, then the more precautionary measure is to
abstain.

### Question 34

***Leather products manufactured in the West are numerous and sometimes
absolutely necessary. Is there any license for their use, even where the
leather is produced without proper slaughter?***

Answer:

Use of material in which purity is not a prerequisite is permitted.
Animal products regarding which there is doubt about the slaughter are
permitted, even in matters where purity is a condition.

### Question 35

***Are we permitted to ask-in case of doubt-about whether the meat
advertised for sale in a Muslim market has been slaughtered according to
the Islamic*** **Shariah?**

Answer:

If such meat is obtained from the market of the Muslims, or from a
Muslim, then the ruling is on its being properly slaughtered, unless it
is known that the meat was previously handled by a non-believer, and
that there was no way for a Muslim to supervise that specifics of the
*Shariah* had been observed.

### Question 36

***Is one permitted to eat the meat of animals slaughtered by mechanical
means over which the name of God has been mentioned?***

Answer:

This is allowed as long as the conditions of the *Shariah* prevail at
the time of slaughter.

### Question 37

***Is one permitted to observe the congregational prayer behind any imam
(ie., a non-Shia), with the intention of solidarity and unity, without
repeating such prayer in private?***

Answer:

This is allowed as long as the necessary *Shariah* conditions prevail
and such prayer is rewarded.

### Question 38

***Is one permitted to criticize the al-Khulafa alRashideen and the
companions as long as such criticism is objective and not
vituperative?***

Answer:

Objective criticism is allowed in every area open to analysis, but one
must stay away from matter that foments sectarian emotionalism and
damages the unity of the Muslims.

### Question 39

***Who in your opinion is the most learned of the contemporary
scholars*** **(maraji)?**

Answer:

According to me, it is not possible to demonstrate the quality of "most
learned."

### Question 40

***Is one permitted to use legal stratagems in markets, mail, and
telephone orders-in the West-and to steal things under a premise like
the permissibility of the property of the kafir for the Muslim?***

Answer:

This is not permitted. A believing Muslim must always be honest in
dealing with the property of every human being-Muslim or non-Muslim. A
Muslim must also observe the laws of the country to which he immigrates,
and should not contravene them, since the condition of residence
dictates a matter of contractual observation between him and the state.

### Question 41

***Is a youth permitted to deny his parents when seeking refuge in
Western countries?***

Answer:

If the parents fear for his life or religion in such a process, then he
must acknowledge them.

### Question 42

***What must be done if one cannot find a jurist, Islamic law manual or
an authority to inform him of a Shariah ruling pertaining to an urgent
matter?***

Answer

He must take the path that exercises the most caution in the issue at
hand.

### Question 43

***What is the ruling on shaving the beard?***

Answer:

A beard is one of the signs of the believer, and he should not shave it
except in a situation of difficulty or emergency. We have previously
stated that absolute prohibition (on shaving) has not been established.

### Question 44

***Is there anything wrong with listening to a flute?***

Answer:

There is nothing wrong with it if it produces doleful music.

### Question 45

***Is one permitted to listen to sad songs, those which do not cause
lust?***

Answer:

This is permitted if their lyrics are not foul or contain items which
displease God.


