Lesson 36 : the Prophet of Islam (muhammad Al-mustafa)
======================================================

**1. Birth to Bi’that**

The last prophet of God is Muhammad al-Mustafa—upon whom be blessings
and peace. He was born on 17th Rabi’u ‘1- Awwal,

1st Year of ‘Amul Fil in Mecca amidst the family of Banu Hashim (of the
tribe of Quraysh) who were considered the most honoured of the Arab
families. Banu Hashim were descendants of Isma’il, the son of Prophet
Ibrahim.

The Prophet’s grandfather, ‘Abdu 1-Muttalib, was the chief of Banu
Hashim and also the guardian of the Ka’bah. His father was called
‘Abdullah and his mother, Aminah bint Wahab.

His father passed away a few months before his birth. At the age of
six, the Prophet lost his mother as well and was placed under the care
of his paternal grandfather, ‘Abdul Muttalib.

But his grandfather also passed away after four years; and at this time
the Prophet’s uncle, Abu Talib, took charge of him and became his
guardian, taking him to his own house.

Thus the Prophet grew up in his uncle’s house and even before reaching
the age of adolescence used to accompany his uncle on business journeys
by caravan.

The Prophet had not received any schooling; yet, after reaching the age
of maturity he became famous for his wisdom, courtesy, trust-worthiness
and truthfulness.

He soon became famous as “as-sadiq al- amin” (the truthful, the
trustworthy). Abu Talib used to say: “We have never heard any lies from
Muhammad, nor seen him misconduct himself or make mischief. He never
laughs unduly nor talks untimely.”

As a result of his sagacity and trustworthiness, Khadija bint
Khuwaylid, a Qurayshi lady wellknown for her wealth, appointed him as
the custodian of her possessions and left in his hands the task of
conducting her commercial affairs.

The Prophet once journeyed to Damascus with Khadija’s merchandise and
as a result of the ability he displayed was able to make an outstanding
profit. Before long she asked to become his wife and the Prophet
accepted her proposal.

After the marriage, which occurred when he was twentyfive years old,
the Prophet began the life of a manager of his wife’s fortunes, until
the age of forty, gaining meanwhile a widespread reputation for wisdom
and trustworthiness.

He refused to worship idols, as was the common religious practice of
the Arabs of the Hijaz. And occasionally he would make spiritual
retreats to the cave of Hira’ in the mountains of the Tihamah region
near Mecca, in which he prayed and discoursed secretly with God.

**2. The Beginning of the Mission**

At the age of forty, when he was in spiritual retreat in the cave of
Hira’, he was given the mission of propagating the new religion. At that
moment the first five verses of surah 96 were revealed to him.

(This event is known as bi’that — being raised to proclaim God’s
message.) That very day he returned to his house and on the way met his
cousin, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib, who after hearing the account of what had
occurred declared his acceptance of the faith.

After the Prophet entered the house and told his wife of the
revelation, she likewise accepted Islam. Soon after, Zayd ibn
al-Harithah (a loyal slave whom he treated like his own son) also became
a convert.

The first time the Prophet invited people to accept his message, he was
faced with a distressing and painful reaction.

Out of necessity he was forced henceforth to propagate his message
secretly for three years until he was ordered again by God to invite his
very close relatives to accept the message. He organized a family feast
and invited forty of his kinsmen.

At the gathering, Muhammad asked if they had ever found him lying? The
general response was: ‘We have never found you lying.’ Then he asked,
“If I were to tell you that your enemies have gathered beyond. the
sandhills to attack you, would you believe me?” They replied, Yes.’ Then
he said:

I know no man in all Arabia who can offer his kindred a more excellent
thing than I now do. I offer you happiness both in this life and in the
hereafter.

God Almighty has commanded me to call you unto Him. Who, therefore,
among you will assist me herein shall become my brother, my heir and my
successor. But this call was also fruitless and no one heeded it except
‘Ali bin Abi Talib, who in any case had already accepted the faith.

According to the historical documents transmitted from the Imams of
Ahlu 1-bayt and the extant poems composed by Abu Talib, Abu Talib had
also embraced Islam; however, because he was the sole protector of the
Prophet, he hid his faith from the people in order to preserve the
outward power he had with the Quraysh.

After this period, according to Divine instruction, the Prophet began
to propagate his mission openly. With the beginning of open propagation
the people of Mecca reacted most severely because the Islamic message
—of worshipping One God and of equality among the believers without any
distinction of race, colour or wealth— fared completely against the
status quo.

Most painful afflictions and tortures were inflicted upon the Prophet
and the people who had become newly converted to Islam.

For example, Bilal, an Ethiopian slave who had accepted Islam, was
taken by his master Umayya who tied him onto the burning sand of the
Arabian desert and placed a large stone on his chest with the warning
that he will be left in that state until he rejects Islam. But the only
sound heard from Bilal’s lips was: “Ahad! Ahad!” (One God! One God!)

The severe treatment dealt out by the Quraysh reached such a degree
that a group of about 100 Muslims, under leadership of Ja’far bin Abi
Talib, left their homes and belongings, and migrated to Abyssinia.

The Prophet had told them that they would find the Abyssinian king to
be a just ruler. With the intention of stopping the spread of Islam, the
Quraysh pursued them to Abyssinia seeking their extradition. But Ja’far
eloquently presented the Muslims’ case to the Abyssinian king, and the
request of the Quraysh was rejected. Ja’far said:

O King! We were plunged in the depth of ignorance and barbarism; we
worshipped idols, we lived in unchastity, we ate dead bodies and we
spoke abominations; we disregarded every feeling of humanity and the
duties of hospitality and neighbourhood; we knew no law, but of the
strong — when God raised among us a man, of whose noble birth,
truthfulness, honesty and purity we are aware;

and he called us to the Unity of God and taught us not to associate
anything with Him; he forbade us the worship of idols; and enjoined on
us to speak the truth, to be faithful to our trusts, to be merciful and
to regard the rights of neighbours; he forbade us to speak evil of women
or to eat the sustenance of orphans;

he ordered us to fly from vice and to abstain from evil; to offer
prayers, to render alms, to observe the fast. We have believed in him,
we have accepted his teachings and his injunction to worship God and not
associate anything with Him. For this reason our people have risen
against us,

have persecuted us in order to make us forgo the worship of God and
return to the worship of idols of stone and wood and other abominations.
They tortured and injured us, until finding no safety among them, we
have come to your country and hope you will protect us from their
oppression.

Back in Mecca, economic and social boycott was imposed against the
Prophet and his family. Therefore, the Prophet and his uncle,

Abu Talib, along with their relatives from the Banu Hashim, took refuge
for three years in the “mountain pass of Abu Talib,” a fort in one of
the valleys of Mecca. No one had any dealings or transactions with them
and they did not dare to leave their place of refuge.

The idol-worshippers of Mecca, although at the beginning they
considered inflicting all kinds of pressures and tortures such as
striking and beating, insult, ridicule and defamation of the Prophet,
occasionally would also show kindness and courtesy toward him in order
to have him turn away from his mission.

They would promise him great sums of money or leadership and the rule
of the tribe. But for the Prophet their promises and their threats only
resulted in the intensification of his will and determination to carry
out his mission.

Once, when they came to the Prophet promising him wealth and power, the
Prophet told them, using metaphorical language, that if they were to put
the sun in the palm of his right hand and the moon in the palm of his
left hand, he would not turn away from obeying the One God or refrain
from performing his mission.

**3. The Hijrah**

About the tenth year of his prophecy, when the Prophet left the
“mountain pass of Abu Talib,” his uncle Abu Talib, who was also his sole
protector, died, as did also his devoted wife Khadijah. Henceforth there
was no protection for his life nor any place of refuge.

Finally the idol-worshippers of Mecca devised a secret plan to kill the
Prophet. At night they surrounded his house from all sides with the aim
of forcing themselves in at the end of the night and cutting him to
pieces while he was in bed. But God, the Exalted, informed him of the
plan and commanded him to leave for Yathrib.

The Prophet asked ‘Ali to sleep in his bed so that the enemy would not
detect his absence; ‘Ali readily agreed to sacrifice his life for the
Prophet and slept in the Prophet’s bed. Then the Prophet left the house
under Divine protection, passing amidst his enemies, and taking refuge
in a cave near Mecca.

After three days when his enemies, having looked everywhere, gave up
hope of capturing him and returned to Mecca, he left the cave and set
out for Yathrib.

**4. Establishing an Islamic Community**

The people of Yathrib, whose leaders had already accepted the message
of the Prophet and sworn allegiance to him, welcomed him with open arms
and placed their lives and property at his disposal.

In Yathrib, for the first time, the Prophet formed a small Islamic
community and signed treaties with the Jewish tribes in and around the
city as well as with the powerful Arab tribes of the region. He
understood the task of propagating the Islamic message and Yathrib
became famous as “Madinatu ‘r-Rasul” (the city of the Prophet).

Islam began to grow and expand from day to day. The Muslims, who in
Mecca were caught in the mesh of the injustice and inequity of the
Quraysh, gradually left their homes and property and migrated to Medina,
revolving around the Prophet like moths around a candle.

This group became known as the “immigrants” (muhajirin) in the same way
that those who aided the Prophet in Yathrib gained the name of “helpers”
(ansar). The Prophet formulated the society on the basis of justice and
equality among the believers.

Brotherhood —not just in words but in action— was established among the
muhajirin and the ansar. The social system of Islam even extended its
justice and protection to the non-Muslims under its rule.

**5. Encounters on the Battlefields**

Islam was advancing rapidly but at the same time the idolworshippers of
Quraysh, as well as the Jewish tribes of the Hijaz, were unrestrained in
their harassment of the Muslims. With the help of the hypocrites of
Medina who were among the community of Muslims, they created new
misfortunes for the Muslims every day until finally the matter led to
war.

Many battles took place between the Muslims and the Arab polytheists
and Jews, in most of which the Muslims were victorious. There was
altogether over eighty major and minor battles.

In all the major conflicts such as the battles of Badr, Uhud, Khandaq,
Khaybar, Hunayn, etc., the Prophet was personally present on the battle
scene.

Also in all the major battles and many minor ones, victory was gained
especially through the efforts of ‘Ali bin Abi Talib. He was the only
person who never turned away from any of these battles. In all the wars
that occurred during the ten years after the migration from Mecca to
Medina, less than two hundred Muslims and less than a thousand infidels
were killed.

(a) The Battle of Badr:

The Meccans continued their attempt to destroy Islam. They continued to
harass the Muslims who remained in Mecca and also confiscated their
property and belongings. Abu Jahl, the leader of the Meccans, even sent
a letter to the Prophet threatening him of the attack by the Meccans.

It was in response to such aggression that Allah gave the permission to
fight the unbelievers of Mecca. He said, “Permission [for jihad] is
granted to those who are being killed because they have been
oppressed...those who have been expelled from their homes without a just
cause...” (22:39-40) In the second year of the hijra,

the Prophet with about 300 ill-equipped Muslims confronted a
well-equipped Meccan force of 1000 soldiers. Though outnumbered, the
Muslims were able to defeat the unbelievers in their first armed
encounter with the enemy.

**(b) The Battle of Uhud:**

To avenge their defeat at Badr, the Meccans raised another force in the
third year after hijra and marched towards Medina. After reaching the
hills of Uhud, 4 m. outside Medina, the Prophet took up his position
below the hill.

The army arrayed in fighting formations. Fifty archers were posted,
under the command of ‘Abdullah bin Jubayr, at a pass between the hills
to guard the Muslims from any rear attack. They had strict orders not to
leave their post, no matter what the outcome of the battle.

The Muslims initially defeated the Meccans. The enemy, having suffered
a heavy loss, fell back in disorder and the Muslims started gathering
booties.

Thinking that the fight was over, most of the fifty archers guarding
the hill passage left their posts against the orders of their commander.
Khalid bin Walid, a commander of the Meccan forces, seized the
opportunity and led his cavalry through the mountain pass and, after
killing the few remaining archers, launched a furious attack upon the
Muslims from the rear.

Because of the disobedience of a small group, the victory was taken
away from the Muslims. Most fled from the battlefield. A few, especially
‘Ali, stood their ground and fought till the end.

The Muslims finally retreated to the security of the heights of mount
Uhud. Among the 70 Muslims who died in this counter attack of the kuffar
was Hamzah bin ‘Abdul Muttalib, the courageous uncle of the Prophet. He
was, indeed, the Lion of God (asdulldh).

**(c) The Battle ofKhandaq (Ahzab):**

In the fifth year of the hijra, a Jewish tribe formed an alliance with
the Meccans; and together they raised an army of 10,000 soldiers. It is
known as Khandaq (i.e., ditch) because the Muslims had dug a ditch
around their campsite to prevent the enemy from entering the city.

The Allied forces of the non-Muslims besieged Medina for a month.
Except for a few famous soldiers, they were unable to cross the ditch.
The Allied forces finally retreated after ‘Ali, in a one-toone
encounter, killed the most courageous of their fighters.

**(d) The Bani Qurazah Battle:**

The Bani Qurazah had concluded a peace agreement with the Muslims, but
they violated the agreement by joining the Meccans in the Battle of
Ahzab.

So, after the Battle of Ahzab, the Muslims proceeded towards the Bani
Qurazah who finally surrendered to the Muslims. The Prophet proposed to
them to accept the arbitration of Sa’d bin Ma’z. They agreed and were
dealt with by his decision: to kill the fighters and confiscate their
property.

**(e) The Bani Mustalaq War:**

In the sixth year of the hijra, the tribe of Bani Mustalaq violated the
rights of the Muslims. As a result, they had to face the Muslim forces
at a place called Maris’a and were defeated.

**(f) The Battle ofKhaybar:**

A large number of Jewish tribes had settled in Khaybar forts and the
surrounding area of northern Arabia. They had close ties with the
Meccans and had constantly threatened the Muslims. In the seventh year
of hijra, the Prophet decided to face the enemy. The Muslims marched to
Khaybar, put it under siege and, finally, gained victory after ‘Ali
marched forward, conquered the main fort and killed the most brave of
the Jewish soldiers.

**6. The Treaty of Hudaybia & the Fall of Mecca**

In the sixth year of the hijra, the Prophet decided to go for
pilgrimage to Mecca. The Meccans stopped the Muslims at a place called
Hudaybia and did not allow them to enter the city. This encounter ended
in a peace agreement between the Prophet and the Quraysh of Mecca.

This peace agreement created a relatively safe environment for the
Prophet to embark on extending the call of Islam to the tribes and
people far away from Arabia.

As a result of the activity of the Prophet and the selfless effort of
the muhajirin and ansar during that period, Islam spread through the
Arabian peninsula.

There were also letters written to kings of other countries such as
Persia, Byzantine and Abyssinia inviting them to accept Islam. During
this time the Prophet lived in poverty and was proud of it.

He never spent a moment of his life in vain. Rather, his time was
divided into three parts: one spent for God, in worshipping and
remembering Him; a part for himself and his household and domestic
needs; and a part for the people. During this part of his time he was
engaged in spreading and teaching Islam and its sciences, administrating
to the needs of the Islamic society and removing whatever evils existed,
providing for the needs of the Muslims, strengthening domestic and
foreign bonds, and similar matters.

One of the conditions of the peace treaty was that the Quraysh would
not harm the Muslims or any of their confederates. This condition was,
however, violated by the Quraysh when they helped Bani Bakr tribe
against the Khuza’a tribe—the former an ally of the Quraysh and the
latter an ally of the Muslims.

The Prophet asked the Quraysh to respect the treaty, break their
alliance with Bani Bakr and compensate the victims of their
aggression.

The Quraysh refused to abide by the terms of their treaty. The Prophet,
with a well-equipped and well-disciplined force of 10,000 soldiers,
marched to Mecca in the eighth year after the hijrah and conquered it
without much resistance.

The city which has rejected his message, plotted against his followers
and conspired to assassinate him was at his mercy. Prophet Muhammad
asked the Meccans: “What can you expect at my hands?” “Mercy! Generous
and Noble Sire!” they replied.

If he had wished, he could have made them all his slaves. But Muhammad
—”mercy for the universe”— said: “I will speak to you as Joseph spoke to
his brethren. I will not reproach you today; God will forgive you, for
He is Merciful and Loving. Go, you are free!”

With the fall of Mecca, the last barrier in the way of Islam had been
removed. So many people and tribes of the Arabian Peninsula started
accepting the message of Islam that the ninth year of hijrah is known as
the “Year of Delegations” because of the unusual number of delegates
coming to pay their homage to the Prophet at Medina.

**7. The Last Pilgrimage & Death**

In the tenth year of the hijrah, the Prophet decided to go for hajj
(pilgrimage). He invited Muslims to join him and be acquainted with the
hajj rituals. Over a hundred thousand Muslims joined him in the hajj.

Although this was the first and the last hajj of the Prophet, it is
known as “al-Hajjajtu ‘l-urida’ — the Last Pilgrimage.” He seized the
unprecedented gathering to remind the Muslims of many important values
of Islam.

On the way back to Medina, he stopped at Ghadir Khumm and delivered a
lengthy sermon in which he summarized the major teachings of Islam,
informed the Muslims of his approaching death and appointed ‘Ali bin Abi
Talib as his successor.

After ten years of stay in Medina, the Prophet fell ill and died after
a few days of illness. According to existing traditions, the last words
on his lips were advice concerning slaves and women.

**8. Lamartine’s Homage to the Prophet**

An eighteenth century French historian, Lamartine, writes the following
in his Histoire de la Turquie (1854) about the Prophet of Islam:

“Never has man set for himself, voluntarily or involuntarily, a more
sublime, aim, since this aim was superhuman: to subvert superstitions
which had been interposed between man and his Creator, to render God
unto man and man unto God; to restore the rational and sacred idea of
divinity amidst the chaos of the material and disfigured gods of
idolatry, then existing...

“If greatness of purpose, smallness of means, and astounding results
are .the true criteria of human genius, who could dare to compare any
great man in modern history with Muhammad?... “Philosopher, orator,
apostle, legislator, warrior, conqueror of ideas, restorer of rational
dogmas, of a cult without images; the founder of twenty terrestrial
empires and of one spiritual empire, that is Muhammad. As regards all
standards by which human greatness may be measured, we may well ask, is
there any man greater than he?”

This lesson has been compiled and edited by S. M. Rizvi from the
difference sources including the following: The Shi’ite Islam by
Tabataba’i. A Brief History of the Fourteen Infallibles, published by
WOFIS, Tehran. A Glance at the Life of the Prophet of Islam by Par Rah-e
Haq. The Early History of Islam by S. Safdar Husayn.


