Lesson 45 : the Eighth Imam(‘ali Ibn Musa)
==========================================

**1. Birth**

Imam ‘Ali ar-Rida was the son of the seventh Imam and according to
well-known accounts was born in 148/765 and died in 203/817.

**2. Political Circumstances of His Imamate**

Imam ar-Rida (a.s.) became the Imam at the age of thirtyflve, through
Divine Command and the decree of his forefathers. The period of his
imamate coincided with the caliphate of Harun and then his sons Amin and
Ma’mun.

Harun had appointed Amin as his successor with the condition that the
latter would name his brother, Ma’mun, as his successor. But after the
death of Harun in 194, Amin named his own son, Musa, as his successor.
This became a cause of conflict between the brothers which led to bloody
wars and finally the assasination of Amin in 198, after which Ma’mun
became caliph.

Imam ar-Rida took advantage of this chaotic situation and continued the
tradition of his forefathers in educating and teaching his companions
and followers.

Until that day the policy of the.’Abbasid caliphate toward the Shi’ites
had been increasingly harsh and cruel. Every once in a while one of the
supporters of ‘Ali would revolt, causing bloody wars and rebellions
which were of great difficulty and consequence for the caliphate.

The Shiite Imams would not cooperate with those who carried out these
rebellions and would not interfere with their affairs. The Shi’ites of
that day, who comprised a considerable population, continued to consider
the Imams as their religious leaders to whom obedience was obligatory
and believed in them as the real caliphs of the Holy Prophet.

They considered the caliphate to be far from the sacred authority of
their Imams, for the caliphate had come to seem more like the courts of
the Persian kings and Roman emperors, and was being run by a group of
people more interested in worldly rule than in the strict application of
religious principles.
The continuation of such a situation was dangerous for the structure of
the caliphate and was a serious threat to it.

Ma’mun thought of finding a new solution for these difficulties which
the seventy-year old policy of his ‘Abbasid predecessors had not been
able to solve. To accomplish this end he adopted some pro-Shi’ite
policies:

• he openly used to say that Imam ‘Ali bin Abi Talib was better suited
for caliphate than Abu Bakr or ‘Umar ibn Khattab. • he openly used to
curse Mu’awiya bin Abi Sufyan.

• he gave Fadak back to the descendants of ‘Ali and Fatima.

• he chose Imam ‘Ali ar-Rida as his successor, hoping in this way to
overcome two difficulties: first of all to prevent the descendants of
the Prophet from rebelling against the government since ,they would be
involved in the government themselves, and secondly, to cause the people
to lose their spiritual belief and inner attachment to the Imams.

This would be accomplished by having the Imams become engrossed in
worldly matters and politics itself, which had always been considered by
the Shi’ites to be evil and impure. In this way their religious
organization would crumble and they would no longer present any danger
to the caliphate.

Obviously, after accomplishing these ends, the removal of the Imam
would present no difficulties to the ‘Abbasids.

**3. Imam ar-Rida’s Historical Journey to Marw**

In order to have his last decision put into effect, Ma’mun asked Imam
ar-Rida to come to Marw from Medina. This was the longest journey
undertaken by any of the Shi’a Imams: from Medina (north-west of Arabia)
to Marw (in Turkmenistan, north of the Afghan border). The Imam passed
through southern Iraq, into sourthern Persia on to the famous city of
Neshapur and further north into Turkmenistan.

This journey itself availed an opportunity for the Muslim populace to
see the Shi’a Imam (a descendant of the Holy Prophet) in person and hear
his words of wisdom. While the Imam was about to leave Nishapur, the
scholars of the city took hold of his camel’s reign and insisted upon
him to narrate from his forefathers: The Imam obliged as follows:

My father, Musa bin Ja’far, narrated to me from his father, Ja’far bin
Muhammad, who narrated from his father, Muhammad bin ‘Ali, who narrated
from his father, ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, who narrated from his father,
al-Husayn bin ‘Ali, who narrated from his father, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib,
who said, I heard the Prophet (s.a.w.) saying, “I heard Jibrail saying,
The Almighty Allah said, “I surely am the God besides whom there is no
god, so worship Me.

Whoever comes with the testimony of tawhid sincerely, he has surely
entered My castle; and whoever enters My castle, he shall be protected
from My chastisement.”

Then the Imam added that this salvation is guaranteed “with its
conditions; and I am one of its conditions.” That is, together with
tawhid, one must also believe in other fundamentals of Islam like
nubuwwa and imamat in order to gain salvation in the hereafter.

Because of its excellent chain of narrators, this hadith is known as
“hadith silsilatu ‘dh-dhabab — hadith with the golden chain [of
narrators].”

**4. Ma’mun’s Decision & Its Consequences**

Finally Imam ar-Rida arrived at Marw. Ma’mun offered him first the
caliphate and then the succession to the caliphate.

The Imam made his apologies and turned down the proposal, but he was
finally compelled to accept the successorship—the Imam accepted the
successorship with the condition that he would not interfere in
governmental affairs or in the appointment or dismissal of government
agents.

This event occurred in 200/814. But soon Ma’mun realized that he had
committed an error, for there was a rapid spread of Shi’ism, a growth in
the attachment of the populace to the Imam, and an astounding reception
was given to the Imam by the people and even by the army and govenment
agents.

For example, once just a few days before an ‘idd, Ma’mun asked Imam
ar-Rida to lead the ‘idd prayer. The Imam refused at first, but then
Ma’mun insisted.

Finally, the Imam accepted but on the condition that he would lead the
prayer the way the Prophet used to do. On the day of ‘idd, all the high
ranking officials of Ma’mun came to the Imam’s house and waited for him
outside.

There were also many common people waiting for the Imam as well. The
holy Imam came out of the house, barefooted, and started walking calmly
with a walking stick in one hand. The officials stepped down from their
horses and started walking behind the Imam.

After every few steps he would stop and look towards the sky and say
“Allahu Akbar.” The official entourage and the masses followed the Imam
in what he was doing. Soon the entire city of Marw was ringing with the
sound of “Allahu Akbar.

Ma’mun was informed by his spies that if this procession continues to
the prayer area, the masses could easily turn against the ‘Abbasids and
in favour of the Ahlul Bayt. Ma’mun immediately sent an emissary with
the message to the Imam that by insisting that you lead the prayer, we
have put you in difficulty so please return to your residence and the
‘idd prayer will be led by the regular imam.

The Imam ordered that his shoes and horse be brought, he got on it and
returned home. This episode made it clear for the people that Ma’mun was
not sincere in his show of respect towards Imam ar-Rida: he would
respect him as long as that did not endanger his own caliphate.

Unlike other caliphs, Ma’mun displayed great interest in having works
on the intellectual sciences translated into Arabic. He organised
gatherings in which scholars of different religions and sects assembled
and carried out scientific and scholarly debates.

Imam ‘Ali ar-Rida also participated in these assemblies and joined in
the discussions with scholars of other religions. Many of these debates
are recorded in the collections of Shi’ite hadiths.

These debates also gave a high profile to the Imam’s status in
knowledge to the extent that people started making comments that ‘Ali
ar-Rida is more deserving of the caliphate than Ma’mun.

Concerned with the spread of Shi’ism and the popularity of Imam
ar-Rida, Ma’mun sought to find a remedy for this difficulty — he had the
Imam poisoned and martyred. After his death the Imam was buried in the
city of Tus in Iran, which is now called Mashhad.

**5. Words of Wisdom**

Some one asked Imam ar-Rida, “Where is God?”

The Imam: “This is an invalid question because God created space; He
cannot be limited to a place or recognized by the senses; He is unlike
everything.”

“When did God come to exist?”

The Imam: “Tell me when He did not exist, so that I can tell when he
came to exist!”

“What is the proof that the world was created?”

The Imam: “It did not exist, and then came to being. You know that the
world did not create itself.”

“Can you describe God for us?”

The Imam: “Whoever describes God by attributes of other things is
mistaken and misguided. I will describe God the way He has described
Himself without forming any shape or image in my mind:

“He is not perceived by the [five] senses.

“He cannot be compared to people.

“He is wellknown without resemblance to anything.

“He is not unjust in His judgements...”

“What is iman (faith) and what is islam (submission)?”

The Imam: “Iman is superior to islam; taqwa (constant consciousness of
God) is superior to faith; conviction is superior to taqwa...”

“What is conviction?”

The Imam: “Putting your trust in God, and submitting yourself to His
command and wish, and being pleased with His decree, and leaving the
final decision to Him.”

“Why did the people turn away from ‘Ali and accept others as caliphs
while they knew of his exemplary services to Islam and his high status
in the eyes of the Prophet?”

The Imam: “Since ‘Ali had killed many of their fathers, uncles,
brothers and relatives who had come to fight against Islam;

and this created the feeling of animosity in their hearts against ‘Ali
and, consequently, they did not like that ‘Ali should become their
leader.

They did not harbour such feelings against the other [caliphs] since
they did not hold the same [high] position with the Prophet as that of
‘Ali neither did they rank equal to him in defending Islam in jihad.
This is the reason why people turned away from ‘Ali and accepted
others.”

This lesson has been written and compiled by Sayyid M. Rizvi by using
the following sources.

1. Shi’a Islam’ of Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba’i.
2. Pishway-e Hastum: Hazrat ‘Ali ar-Riza (a.s.) by Dar Rah-e Haq,
Qum.

The main sources have been extensively edited in order to fit the
requirements of our course. Also, for the sake of brevity, we have not
included the references quoted by our sources. Those who are interested
to know the sources may refer to those mentioned above.


