Lesson 46 : the Ninth Imam (muhammad Bin ‘ali)
==============================================

**1. Birth & Imamate in Childhood**

Imam Muhammad at-Taqi was born in 195/809 in Medina.

The news of his birth caused extraordinary joy among the Shi’as of that
time. Imam ar-Rida was childless till the age of forty, and some Shi’as
were concerned about the continuation of imamate: who would succeed Imam
ar-Rida? So the birth of the ninth Imam brought about a mood of
festivity among the Shi’as of Ahlul Bayt.

Imam ‘AH ar-Rida died in 203 A.H.; and Muhammad at-Taqi became the Imam
at the age of eight. The age of the Imam caused a concern in the minds
of some elder members of the Shi’a community because no Imam had reached
the position of imamate at this young age.

Mu’alla bin Muhammad narrates that after the death of Imam ar-Rida, he
saw Imam at-Taqi and closely observed his physical size and age in order
to report it to others. At that moment, Imam at-Taqi said, “O Mu’alla,
Allah has argued about imamat just as he argued about nubuwwat when He
said, ‘And We gave prophethood to him [i.e., Yahya] when he was still a
child.”

After the death of Imam ar-Rida, a group of eighty scholars from
Baghdad and other places came to Mecca for hajj. On the way, they
stopped at Medina and met Imam at-Taqi. They were particularly
interested in meeting the young Imam and wanted to satisfy themselves
about his capabilities. The meeting went on for a long time with the
visitors asking him questions and the Imam replying in a convincing and
satisfying manner. All left fully convinced that he truly was the Imam
appointed by Allah, subhanahu wa ta’ala, and endowed with knowledge.

Ishaq was one of the eighty persons in that meeting. He narrates his
impression as follows: I had written ten questions in a letter for the
Imam and had decided that if he answers my questions, then I will ask
him to pray for me that the child that my wife is carrying be a male
child.

The meeting, however, went on for a long time so I decided to present
my letter to him the next day. But as I was about to leave, the Imam
called me and said, “O Ishaq! Allah has accepted my prayer; therefore,
name your son ‘Ahmad’.”

The answer to his prayer without even stating it to the Imam fully
convinced Ishaq that Muhammad at-Taqi, inspite of his young age, was the
Imam!

**2. Ma’mun & Imam at-Taqi (a.s.)**

Caliph Ma’mun ar-Rashid, in pursuing the same policies as mentioned in
the previous lesson, asked that Imam Muhammad at- Taqi (a.s.) be brought
from Medina to Baghdad. This journey took place in 204 A.H., a year
after the death of the eighth Imam.

When Ma’mun met the young Imam, he was impressed with the latter’s
knowledge; and he proposed to marry his daughter Ummul Fazl to the Imam.
When the elders of the ‘Abbasid clan learned of this decision, they
tried to change Ma’mun’s views: they reminded him of dangers in
promoting the decendants of ‘Ali, and the possible loss of power.

Realizing that their words had no effect on Ma’mun, they finally said,
“Although you are impressed by this child; but he is still a child. Wait
till he grows up and gets educated, then you may marry your daughter to
him.”

Ma’mun: “Woe unto you! I know this child better than you; he comes from
a family which is bestowed with knowledge by God. His ancestors were
never in need of knowledge and character from others. If you wish, you
may examine him.”

The elders of the ‘Abbasid agreed to examine him. They approached Yahya
bin Aktham, the chief judge (qazi) of the ‘Abbasid court, and asked him
to prepare some difficult questions which the Imam would not be able to
answer.

At an appointed time, the meeting between Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (a.s.)
and Yahya bin Aktham took place in the presence of Ma’mun and the elders
of the ‘Abbasid clan. After the formalities, Yahya asked: “What is your
view about a person who hunts while he is in the ihram?” (Ihram means
pilgrim’s garment; a person in ihram is not allowed to hunt.) Imam
at-Taqi: “This question has many facets:

“Was the person outside the boundary of the holy territory or inside?

“Did he know that it was forbidden to hunt while in ihram or he did
not?

“Did he do it intentionally or was it an accident?

“Was he a free man or a slave?

“Was he minor or an adult?

“Was this his first hunting in the state of ihram or a second time?

“Was the hunted creature a bird or something else?

“Was it big or small?

“Was the person sorry that he committed the offence or was he careless
about such issues?

“Was it in the night or during the day?

“Was he in the state of ihram for the minor pilgrimage or for the major
pilgrimage?”

Yahya bin Aktham was dumbfounded by this thorough analysis of the
question by the ten year old Imam Muhammad at- Taqi! He could not even
utter a word, and the audience clearly saw the signs of defeat on his
face!

Ma’mun broke the silence by saying, “Praise be to Allah who proved me
right in my estimation of this young man.” Then he faced the elders of
the ‘Abbasids and rebuked them: “Now do you realize what I was saying?”
.

Then he proposed the marriage of his daughter to the Imam, and the Imam
accepted it. The young Imam also recited the khutba (sermon) before the
actual marriage which has become a common khutba in the Shi’a marriage
ceremonies. The khutba is as follows:

“All praise is due to Allah, in recognition of His blessings. [I
declare that) there is no god but Allah, in sincere belief in His
oneness. And may Allah send His blessings upon Muhammad, the leader of
His creatures, and upon the chosen one of his family.

“It is Allah’s grace upon the people that He has made them free from
the forbidden [means of fulfilling sexual urge] by the permissible
[institution of marriage].

He, the Exalted, said: ‘And marry the single among you (those who are
good ones from among your slaves and maids)—if they are poor, Allah will
make them free from need from His grace; Allah, indeed, is Generous,
All- Knowing.’”

After the marriage ceremony, when only a few people had remained in the
gathering, Ma’mun requested the Imam to provide the answer for the
various situations that he had derived from Yahya’s single question. The
holy Imam gave -a detailed answer to all those situations.

Then Ma’mun proposed that now the Imam should ask a question to Yahya
bin Aktham. The latter replied, “If I know the answer, I will reply;
otherwise, I will learn from you.”

Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (a.s.) asked: “Can you describe the situation in
which a man looked at a woman at dawn while it was forbidden (haram) for
him to do so; but then at sunrise, it was permissible (halal) for him to
look at her?

Then at noon hour, it became haram for him to look at that woman; but
in the afternoon, it became permissible for him to look at her? Then at
sunset, it became haram for him to look at that woman; but at night, it
became halal for him to look at her? Then at midnight, it became haram
for him to look at her; but at dawn, it became halal for him to do
so?”

Yahya bin Aktham said, “By Allah! I do not know the answer to this
question. We would, however, benefit from your answer.”

The Imam explained the answer as follows:

“At dawn, the woman was the slave of someone else;

however, by sunrise, the man had already bought her for himself and so
it became halal for him to look at her.

“At noon, he made her free, and so she became haram for him; but by
afternoon, he had married her, so she became halal for him.

“At sunset, he did zihar8 by which one’s wife becomes haram for a
person; but by night time he paid the penalty for zihar, and so she
became halal for him again.

8 When the husband says to his wife, “You are to me like the back of my
mother,” it is not permissible for him to have sexual relationship with
his wife “At midnight, he divorced her; but by next morning, he revoked
his divorce, and so she became halal for him.”

Thus the ten year old Imam, from the descendants of ‘Ali and Fatimah,
proved to the caliph and his entourage that God had endowed them with
the knowledge to guide the Muslim ummah as the Prophet had truly said,
“Do not try to teach them, because they are- not in need of your
teaching.”

One must remember that Ma’mun was a very shrewd politician. This
marriage between his daughter and Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (a.s.) should
not be taken as proof that he was a Shi’a. As mentioned in the previous
lesson, these actions were all politically motivated by Ma’mun to calm
the opposition of the Shi’a masses. Other motives for the marriage can
be described as follows:

• By having his daughter as Imam’s wife, Ma’mun was guaranteed a
continuous flow of information about the Imam’s activities.

• By becoming the son-in-law of Ma’mun at this young age, the caliph
hoped that the personality of the Imam would be tarnished with worldly
luxuries and entertainment of the establishment, and thus lose the
respect in the eyes of his Shi’as.

• By this marriage, prove to the Shi’a masses that he respects the
Ahlul Bayt, and thus neutralize their opposition to his rule.

• Ma’mun was hoping that if Imam at-Taqi gets a child through his
daughter, he can claim to be the grandfather of a child from the
descendants of Imam ‘Ali and Fatimah (a.s.). But Allah, until he atones
by fasting for two successive months, or if that is not possible, then
feeding sixty poor people, littering such a statement is known as
zihar.

subhanahu wa ta’ala, did not fulfill this hope because none of the
children of the Imam were born from Ma’mun’s daughter! Imam Muhammad
at-Taqi (a.s.) did not stay for long in Baghdad. He insisted on
returning to Medina with his wife, the daughter of Ma’mun.

His return to Medina where he stayed till the year 220 A.H. foiled the
plans of Ma’mun ar-Rashid.

**3. Mu’tasim’s Rule**

Ma’mun ar-Rashid died in the year 218 A.H. He was succeeded by his
brother, Mu’tasim billah. In the year 220, Mu’tasim ordered that Imam
Muhammad at-Taqi be brought from Medina to Baghdad.

One day a person came to the court of Mu’tasim and confessed that he
had committed theft and would like to be punished so that he could be
free from the guilt and punishment in the hereafter.

The Qur’an says that the punishment for theft (with some conditions) is
cutting off the thief’s yad. Yad means: hand, forearm and elbow. So the
caliph called all the prominent religious scholars, including Imam
Muhammad at-Taqi (a.s.), and asked:

“From where should the yad of the thief be cut?” (The Qur’an is asking
for the definition of “yad”.)

Ibn Abi Da’ud, the chief judge, said, “From the wrist.” Mu’tasim: “What
is your proof for that?”

Ibn Abi Da’ud: “The word ‘yad’ has been used in the verse of tayammum
—so wipe your faces and your hands(5:5)— for the hand.”

Some scholars agreed with Ibn Abi Da’ud but others disagreed and said:
“Cut the thief’s yad from the elbow.” Mu’tasim: “What is your proof?”

The scholars: “The word ‘yad’ has been used in the verse of wudhu —
wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows(5:5)— for the
fore-arm.”

Then Mu’tasim turned towards Imam Muhammad at-Taqi (a.s.) and asked his
opinion. The Imam first declined to give his view because he was aware
of the court’s politics. But when Mu’tasim insisted, the Imam finally
said, “All these gentlemen are mistaken because only the [four] fingers
have to be cut.” Mu’tasim: “What is your proof?”

The Imam (a.s.): “The Prophet (s.a.w.) has said that sajdah is done on
seven parts of the body: forehead, palms, knees and two big toes [of the
feet). If a thief’s hand or forearm is cut, then it would not be
possible for him to do the sajdah whereas Allah has said, ‘And verily
the masajid [the body parts on which sajdah is done] belong to
Allah...;’ and what belongs to Allah should not be cut.”

The caliph liked the answer of the Imam and ordered that the four
fingers of the thief be cut.

This extraordinary event, in the public’s view at Mu’tasim’s court,
proved the superiority of the Imams of Ahlu ‘1-Bayt. It, however, also
created an extreme feeling of jealousy and hatred in the heart of Ibn
Abi Da’ud.

On finding an appropriate moment, Ibn Abi Da’ud cautioned the caliph
against inadvertantly promoting Imam Muhammad at- Taqi (a.s.) by
publicly following his view and rejecting those of the other scholars.
He filled the caliph’s ears to the extent that the caliph started
looking at the Imam as a threat to his own caliphate.

During the last days of Dhul Qa’dah 220 A.M., the Imam was poisoned by
his wife, the niece of Mu’tasim, and he died as a martyr. His body was
buried next to his grandfather’s grave in the Qurayshi cemetary in
Baghdad which is now known as Kadhimayn.

This lesson has been written and compiled by Sayyid M. Rizvi by using
the following sources.

1. Shi’a Islam’ of Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba’i.
2. Pishway-e Nahum: Hazrat Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s.) by Dar Rah-e
Haq, Qum.

The main sources have been extensively edited in order to fit the
requirements of our course. Also, for the sake of brevity, we have not
included the references quoted by our sources. Those who are interested
to know the sources may refer to those mentioned above.


