Lesson 48 : the Eleventh Imam (hasan Bin ‘ali)
==============================================

**1. Birth & Early Years**

Imam Hasan al-’Askari was born in the year 232 A.H. in Samarra, Iraq
during the tenth Imam’s stay in that city. “Al- ’Askari” is from
al-’askar which means “the army”. Our eleventh Imam is known as
al-’Askari because he lived in al-’Askar neighbourhood which was the
military garrison of the Turkish troops of the ‘Abbasids.

His imamate began at the age of twentytwo, and continued for just six
years when he was poisoned in 260 A.H.

**2. Political Circumstances of His Imamate**

The short period of Imam al-’Askari’s imamate coincided with the
caliphate of Mu’tazz, Muhtadi and Mu’tamid. Mu’tazz is the same caliph
during whose reign Imam ‘Ali an-Naqi was martyred.

More than seventy members of the Hashimites were arrested on his orders
and brought from Hijaz to Samarra. The Shi’as were truly suffering under
the tyranny of Mu’tazz; but soon he was deposed from his caliphate by
the Turkish troops.

Muhtadi assumed the pretence of a pious caliph, forbade the presence of
female singers in the court and even fixed a time to hear the grievances
of the people.

But when it came to the Shi’as and their Imam, he was no different from
the other rulers. Imam Hasan al-’Askari was even imprisoned for a short
while during Muhtadi’s caliphate. But even Muhtadi’s rule was ended by
the Turkish troops who rebelled against him and killed him.

Mu’tamid led a promiscuous lifestyle and left the management of the
state to his brother Muwaffaq. After the death of Muwaffaq, the control
of the state came into the hands of his son, Mu’tazid who succeeded his
uncle, Mu’tamid, in the year 279 A.H.

Mu’tamid’s reign was full of civil strife and tyranny; thousands of
people were killed, especially the descendants of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) whose
bodies were mutilated. Imam Hasan al- ’Askari was put in the prison of
Nahrir who used to mistreat the Imam in whatever way he could.

**3. The Miracle of Rain**

Once there was a severe famine in Samarra. Mu’tamid ordered the people
to organize a salat known as salatu ‘l-istisqa’ (the prayer for rain).
For three days, people went outside the city to take part in the
istisqa’ prayer but there was no sign of any rain.

On the fourth day, the Christian high priest went to the desert and
prayed for rain; and lo! heavy rain started to fall. The same thing was
repeated the next day.

The Muslims were surprised; doubts started occuring in their minds
about the truth of Islam vis-a-vis Christianity. Mu’tamid realized the
danger and ordered that Imam Hasan al-’Askari be brought from the
prison. After explaining his problem, the caliph asked the Shi’a Imam to
rescue Islam!

The Imam said, “Ask the Christian priests and monks to go to the desert
tomorrow on Tuesday.”

Caliph: “Enough rain has come; so why should we ask them to go to the
desert tomorrow?”

The Imam: “So that I may dispell the doubt by the will of God.”

The caliph issued the order. The priests and the monks gathered in the
desert, and the Imam and Muslims also were present there. The Christians
lifted their hands in prayer for rain; the sky became cloudy and rain
started to fall.

“ Imam al-’Askari pointed at one of the monks and ordered the soldiers
to take whatever they found in his hand. They discovered that the monk
was holding a piece of human bone in his hand. The Imam placed that bone
in a piece of cloth and covered it. Then he asked the priests and the
monks to pray again. But this time there was no sign of any cloud or
rain!

Everyone was surprised at this turn of events. The caliph asked the
Imam: “What bone is this?”

The Imam (a.s.): “This is a bone of one of the prophets of God which
they have taken from his grave; and one of the miracles of a prophet’s
bone is that whenever it is exposed from the grave, it will start to
rain.”

The caliph’s people examined the bone and found that what our Imam was
saying was the truth. Thus, a descendant of ‘Ali and Fatima, rescued the
ummah of his grandfather from the enemies of Islam!

**4. Ishaq al-Kindi & the Qur’an**

Ishaq al-Kindi was a famous philosopher known for materialistic views
about the world and religion. Once he started writing a book in which he
intended to show the contradictions in the holy Qur’an.

One day, some students of his came to visit Imam Hasan al- ’Askari
(a.s.). The Imam: “Isn’t there anyone among you who can stop your
teacher from such a useless task?”

The student: “We are his students; how can we stop him from what he is
doing?”

The Imam: “Are you prepared to convey to him the argument that I would
teach you?”

The students: “Yes, of course.”

The Imam: “Be courteous towards him and gain his confidence. Then tell
him that you have a question about his work. When he permits you to ask
the question, say: If the Writer of the Qur’an comes to you; is there a
possibility that what He intends by His words was different from what
you have understood?”

“He [i.e., Ishaq Kindi] will obviously say, Yes, it is quite possible.’
Then you should say, With that possibility in mind, how can you be sure
that what you have understood from the Qur’an is really the intent of
the Qur’an? Isn’t it possible that the Writer of the Qur’an means
something different from what you have understood?”

Having learnt this argument from the Imam, the students went to
al-Kindi. At the right moment, one of the students presented the
argument they had learnt from Imam al-’Askari (a.s.). Ishaq al-Kindi
asked the student to repeat the question. After thinking for a while,
al-Kindi replied, “What you say is quite possible.”

Ishaq al-Kindi knew the intellectual level of his students. So he
asked, “How did this idea come to you?”

The student: “It just came to my mind, and so I asked you.” Al-Kindi:
“You are incapable to get such ideas; now, tell me the truth where did
you get this idea?”

The student: “Abu Muhammad (al-’Askari) has taught us this.” Al-Kindi:
“Now you have uttered the truth. Such ideas cannot emerge from anywhere
but that family!” Then al-Kindi got rid of whatever he had written on
the contradictions in the Qur’an.

**5. Imam’s Letter to Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi**

‘Ali bin Husayn bin Babawayh al-Qummi, the father of the famous scholar
Shaykh Saduq, was a prominent scholar of his time. Imam Hasan al-’Askari
(a.s.) sent a letter which is enough to show his honour and dignity in
the eyes of the Ahlul Bayt. After the preliminary text about praising
Allah and the Prophet, the Imam wrote:

“...O respected and reliable Shaykh, and O faqih (jurist) of my
followers, Abul Hasan ‘Ali bin Husayn al-Qummi, may Allah bless you with
what He pleases and may He bring forth worthy sons from you.

“I advise you to fear [displeasing] Allah, to establish prayer and pay
alms—because the prayer of one who does not pay alms is not accepted.

I advise you to forgive the mistakes of others and control your anger,
and to be kind and generous to your relatives, and to be helpful and
concerned for your brethren, and to be patient in response to the deeds
of the ignorant people.

“[I advise you] to be learned in religion, steadfast in your work,
familiar with the Qur’an, and to acquire the noble character, bid the
good and forbid the evil.

Allah, the Almighty, says: There is no use in much of your whispering
except [in case of] one who recommends [others) to give charity or do
good deeds or make peace between people.’

“Refrain from all bad deeds; and be diligent about the night vigil
prayer (namaz-e shab/salatul layl) because the Prophet (s.a.w.)
recommended it to ‘Ali (a.s.) and said, ‘O ‘Ali, be diligent about the
salatul layl; be diligent about the salatul layl; be diligent about the
salatul layl. Whoever considers salatul layl as worthless is not one of
us.’

“Therefore, follow my advice, and advise my Shi’as what I have advised
you with. You should have forebearance and be patient; verily the
Prophet said, The best deed of my Ummah is waiting for the
deliverance.’

Our Shi’as will constantly be sad and anxious until my son [Imam
al-Mahdi] makes his appearance, the one about whom the Prophet had given
good tidings that he will fill the earth with justice and equality just
as it would be filled with injustice and tyranny.

“So O my trustworthy Shaykh, Abul Hasan, be patient, and advise my
Shi’as to be patient because surely the earth belongs to Allah and He
will make his virtuous servants its masters—the final victory will be
for the God-fearing people!

“May peace, mercy and blessings of Allah be upon you and upon my
Shi’as. Indeed, Allah is sufficient for us and He is the best of agents,
the best Master and the best Helper.”

**6. Words of Wisdom**

Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari narrates that once a person asked Imam Hasan
al-’Askari (a.s.) the following question:

“Why does a woman get half of the share of a man in inheritance?” The
question is about a son and a daughter inheriting from their father or
mother: the son gets twice the share of the daughter.

The Imam: “Because jihad and maintenance of the family is not among the
responsibilities of a woman. Even payment of the monetary compensation
in case of an accidental homocide is upon the male members of the
murderer, not the female members.”

When he heard this answer, Abu Hashim said to himself: ‘I have heard
that Ibn Abil ‘Awja’ asked the same question from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
and he received the same answer.’

Imam Hasan al-’Askari looked at Abu Hashim and said, “Yes! The question
of Ibn Abil ‘Awja’ was the same; and when the question is same, our
answer is also the same...The first and the last of us [i.e., Imams of
Ahlul Bayt] are equal in knowledge and position; of course, the
Messenger of God and ‘Ali, the Leader of the Faithfuls, have their own
privileged status.”

“I advise you to be moderate and refrain from extravagance.”

“To be humble means to greet whoever you pass by, and to sit wherever
you find room [without waiting for the seat of your ‘status’].” He also
said, “Humility is a blessing of which no one will be envious.”

“One who admonishes his brother in private has decorated him; and one
who admonishes him in public has disgraced him.”

“The best self-discipline is to refrain [from doing to others] what you
would dislike from others.”

“Beauty of the face is an apparent beauty, and beauty of intelligence
is a hidden beauty.”

“All evil has been placed in a house whose key is lying.”

“Generosity has a limit; when one exceeds it, it becomes
extravagance.”

This lesson has been written and compiled by Sayyid M. Rizvi by using
the following source: Pishway-e Yazdahurn: Hazrat Imam Hasan ‘Askari
(a.s.) by Dar Rah-e Haq, Qum.

The main source has been extensively edited in order to fit the
requirements of our course. Also, for the sake of brevity, we have not
included the references quoted by our sources. Those who are interested
to know the sources may refer to the source mentioned above.


