Lesson 49 : the Twelfth Imam (muhammad Al-mahdi)
================================================

**1. Birth & Early Life**

Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.s.) was born on 15th Sha’ban 255 A.H. (868
CE) in Samarra to Narjis, the wife of the eleventh Imam. Lady Narjis’s
lineage goes back to Sham’un, one of the disciples of Prophet ‘Isa
(a.s.); and she was highly respected by Hakima, the sister of Imam
an-Naqi and leader of the Hashimite ladies.

Since the reports about the anticipated birth of Mahdi, the Messiah who
will put an end to injustice and tyranny was widespread, the ‘Abbasids
were closely watching the family of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

The situation was not unlike the days prior to the birth of Prophet
Musa (a.s.) when Pharoah had ordered that the male children of the
Israelites be killed. Just as Musa’s birth was concealed from the public
by Allah’s power, Muhammad al- Mahdi’s birth was also concealed from the
public.

For five years, Imam al-Mahdi lived under the loving care of his
father. He was seen only by some family members and a few selected
companions of his father. This was all done to protect him from the
‘Abbasid agents. Some of thoseWho had seen the Imam during this period
are mentioned below:

1. Lady Hakima, aunt of Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s.).

2. Nasim, the servant of Imam al-’Askari.

3. Muhammad bin ‘Uthman al-’Amri.

4. Husayn bin al-Hasan al-’Alawi.

5. Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik and his group.

6. Ahmad bin Ishaq.

Here we shall only narrate the event in which Ahmad bin Ishaq saw Imam
al-Mahdi. Ahmad, a prominent Shi’a of the time, once visited Imam Hasan
al-’Askari (a.s.) and wanted to ask him about his successor.

Before Ahmad asked his question, the Imam said, “O Ahmad! From the day
He created Adam, Allah has not left the earth without a representative
(hujjat), nor will He leave it without a representative till the day of
judgement.

It is because of the hujjat that Allah averts the chastisement from the
people, sends down the rain and brings forth the blessings from the
earth.” Ahmad: “O son of the Prophet! Who is the successor and the Imam
after you?”

Imam Hasan al-’Askari immediately went inside the house and returned
with a three year old child in his hands, and said, “O Ahmad bin Ishaq,
if you were not honourable in the sight of Allah and His
representatives, I would not have shown this son of mine to you.

His name and agnomen is the same as that of the Prophet; he is the one
who will fill the earth with justice and equality just as it would be
filled with injustice and tyranny.

“O Ahmad, his example is that of Khizr and Dhul Qarnayn [who are
believed by Muslims to be still living]. By Allah, he will go into
Occultation in such a manner that none will gain salvation except the
one whom Allah blesses with the belief in his imamate...”

**2. The Imamat & Ghaybat**

After the martyrdom of Imam Hasan al-’Askari in 260 A.H., the imamate
of Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi (may Allah hasten his appearance) began. His
imamate is divided into two parts:

1. The first 69 years which is known as the period of “al-Ghaybatu. }s-
Sughra — the Minor Occultation”.

2. The period after 329 A.H. which is known as “al-Ghaybatu ‘l-Kubra —
the Major Occultation” The imamate of Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) began with
Occultation (ghaybat) which has continued till the present time.

However, during the first 69 years, the Shi’as could get in touch with
the Imam only through his specially appointed agents; whereas after 329
A.H., no such agents were appointed.

To explain the difference in the intensity of the Occultation, the
first period is described as “minor, lesser, sughra or qasira” whereas
the second period is described as “major, greater, kubra or tawila.”

If the Occultation had taken its “major” form from day one, the Shi’a
community could not have adjusted to the situation easily; there would
have been great chaos and confusion. The gradual intensification in the
Occultation made the Shi’as used to the idea of not dealing with the
Imam directly.10

**3. The Ghaybat Sughra**

During the Ghaybat Sughra, Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) had appointed four
special agents, one after another, as a link between himself and his
Shi’as. Of course, there were other agents also but with limited
jurisdiction or limited duties.

The four special agents were as follows:

1. ‘Uthman bin Said al-’Amri, known as Abu Amr.

2. Muhammad bin ‘Uthman bin Sa’id, known as Abu Ja’far.

3. Husayn bin Rawh an-Nawbakhti, known as Abul Qasim.

4. ‘Ali bin Muhammad Samary, known as Abul Hasan.

‘Uthman bin Sa’id was also a prominent companion and agent of Imam ‘Ali
an-Naqi (a.s.) and Imam Hasan al-’Askari (a.s.). He was resident of
Samarra. In order to hide his link and 10 For this explanation of the
shorter and longer Occultation, see the introduction by Sayyid S. Akhtar
Rizvi to Ibn Shadhan, The Return of al-Mahdi.

work with Imam Hasan al-’Askari from government informers, ‘Uthman bin
Sa’id changed his profession—he became a vendor selling cooking oil on a
cart.

When the government’s surveillance on the Imam’s house made it almost
impossible for the Shi’as to visit him freely, ‘Uthman would put the
letters and religious dues from the Shi’as in the oil containers and
take them to the Imam’s house under the pretext of delivering cooking
oil!

Ahmad bin Ishaq narrates that Imam al-’Askari (a.s.) told him that
‘Uthman bin Sa’id was “trustworthy, and reliable in the eyes of the past
Imam as well as myself in my life as well as after my death. Whatever he
says to you is from me, and whatever he brings to you is from me.”

Wheti ‘Uthman bin Said died, Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) wrote a letter of
condolence to his son, Muhammad bin ‘Uthman, as follows: “We belong to
Allah, and to Him we shall return. Your father lived a graceful life and
died as an honourable man.

May Allah shower His mercy on him and join him with his Masters. He was
diligent in his work for the Masters, and worked hard in what pleased
the Almighty and the Imams. May Allah shower His grace on him and
forgive his faults.”

Muhammad bin ‘Uthman was the second special agent of the period of
Minor Occultation. ‘Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari says that when
‘Uthman died, we received a letter from the Imam, in the same
handwriting that we recognized from his previous communications, stating
that Muhammad bin ‘Uthman was appointed in the place of his late father
as the new special agent of the Imam.

‘Abdullah bin Ja’far once asked Muhammad bin ‘Uthman, “Have you seen
the Master of Affairs (Sahib al-Amr)?” He answered, “Yes; my last
meeting with him was by the holy House of Allah (i.e., Ka’ba) where I
heard him praying, ‘O Allah! Fulfill for me what You have promised
me.’...”

Muhammad bin ‘Uthman also said that Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) is present
every year at the hajj ceremonies; he sees the people and recognizes
them, they also see him but do not recognize him.

Kusayn bin Rawh was the third special agent of the Imam.

He was greatly respected by all Muslims; he closely worked with ‘Uthman
bin Sa’id.

A few days before his death, Muhammad bin Uthman had introduced Husayn
bin Rawh to the elders of the Shi’a community as the next special agent
of the Imam.

Ja’far bin Ahmad al-Qummi was the closest of all companions to Muhammad
bin ‘Uthman, and many Shi’as thought that he might succeed Muhammad as
the next special agent. At the time of Muhammad’s death, Ja’far was
sitting by the head of his bed while Husayn bin Rawh was sitting by his
feet.

(In that cultural context, sitting by the head was a more honourable
position.) Muhammad bin ‘Uthman turned his face towards Ja’far and said,
“I have been ordered to hand over the affairs to Abul Qasim Husayn bin
Rawh.”

When Ja’far heard this, he stood up, went to Husayn, took hold of his
hand and made him sit by the head of the bed while he himself sat at the
feet of Muhammad.

In a letter dated 6th Shawwal 305, Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) wrote about
Husayn bin Rawh: “We know him; may Allah acquaint him with all that is
good for him, and may He help him. We are aware of his letter and have
confidence and trust in him.

He has a position in our eyes which pleases him; and may Allah add to
His blessings upon him for He is indeed the Master and has power over
everything. All praise is for Allah who has no partner, and blessings
and peace of Allah upon His messenger, Muhammad, and his progeny.”

When Abu Sahl an-Nawbakhti, a prominent Shi’a theologian of the time,
was asked as to why he was superceded by Husayn bin Rawh in attaining
the position of the special agency of the Imam, he replied: “They (i.e.,
the Imams) know better as to whom should represent them. I am a person
who debates against the opponent with temperment.

If I had been the special deputy of the Imam and had been aware of
Imam’s whereabouts —just as Husayn bin Rawh is aware of it— I might have
disclosed it in the heat of debate [if cornered to disclose the Imam’s
whereabouts]. But Abul Qasim [Husayn bin Rawh] is such that if the Imam
was hiding under his robes, he would not lift it’ even if he is cut into
pieces by sharp knives.”

Husayn bin Rawh served in this position for 21 years till his death in
326 A.H. in Baghdad.

‘Ali bin Muhammad as-Samary became the fourth special deputy of the
Imam. His deputyship was comparatively short. He died in 329 A.H. Before
his death, when some prominent Shi’as asked about the next special
deputy, he replied, “I have not been ordered to appoint anyone after
me.”

Six days before the death of as-Samary, he received the following
letter from Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.):

“O ‘Ali bin Muhammad as-Samary. May Allah reward your brethren in
observing grief for you. You shall leave this world after six days.

Finalize your affairs and do not appoint anyone as your successor.

Indeed, the Major Occultation has begun. There will be no appearance
for me until Allah the Almighty commands me; and that will be after a
long time, after the hearts have hardened and the world is filled with
injustice.

Shortly, some persons will claim to have seen me [and claim the status
of special deputyship]. Beware that whoever makes such a claim before
the appearance of Sufyani and the Sayha is a liar and a fraud. And there
is no power and strength except with Allah, the High, the Great.”

**4. The Ghaybat Kubra**

Unlike the Ghaybat Sughra where the Shi’as could communicate with their
Imam through the special deputies, in the Ghaybat Kubra, there is no
special deputy. The Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) will appear from the
Occultation whenever Allah allows him to do so in order to establish the
Kingdom of God on earth, and to eradicate injustice and tyranny once and
for all.

During the Ghaybat Kubra, those Shi’as who do not have the expertise to
derive the laws from the Qur’an and the sunna of the Infallibles, should
follow the guidance provided by those who are experts.

A person known as Ishaq bin ‘Ammar asked in a letter to Imam al-Mahdi
(a.s.) about the guidance during the Ghaybat Kubra. The holy Imam wrote:
“And as for the newly occurring circumstances [which have not been
mentioned in the Qur’an and sunna], refer to those who narrate our
ahadith for they are my hujjat upon you as I am Allah’s hujjat upon
them.” (To refresh your memory, see the lesson on Ijtihad, Taqlid &
Ihtiyat.)

**5. Appearance of al-Mahdi**

As mentioned above, even Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) himself is waiting for
Allah’s permission for his appearance. This means that no one knows the
time of the appearance of the Imam. We have clear ahadith stating that
those who speak about the time when the Imam will make his appearance
are to be declared as liars.

In the letter mentioned earlier, Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) wrote, “As for
the appearance of deliverance [by me], it’s mentioning is with Almighty
Allah and those who fix the time are liars.”

However, there are many ahadith which describe the signs before the
appearance of Imam al-Mahdi. Some of these signs are as follows:

1. Injustice, tyranny, and sinful acts will become very common all over
the world.

2. Appearance of Sufyani and the destruction of his army. Sufyani has
been described as a Syrian by the name of ‘Uthman bin ‘Anbasa from the
descendants of Yazid bin Mu’awiyah.

3. An uprising will take place by a Hasani sayyid in Iran. He will form
a just Islamic government and call people towards Islam. He will be in
Kufa when the news of Imam al-Mahdi’s appearance in Mecca will spread
world-wide. The Hasani sayyid will come to Mecca and pledge allegiance
to Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.).

4. Soon after the appearance of Imam al-Mahdi in Mecca, a heavenly
sound will be heard all over the world which will introduce Imam
al-Mahdi to all people.

5. Descent of Prophet ‘Isa (a.s.) from heaven to the city of Damascus.
He will pray behind Imam al-Mahdi.

After a very long Occultation, on Allah’s command, Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.)
will make his appearance known at the Holy Mosque in Mecca and start his
mission of establishing the Kingdom of God on the earth.

Three hundred and thirteen people will pledge allegiance to him, and
then he will move towards Medina. From Medina, al- Mahdi will proceed to
Kufa, Iraq. After that Prophet ‘Isa will descend in Damascus and join
Imam al-Mahdi.

The headquarters of Imam al-Mahdi will be Kufa from where he will rule
over the whole world. During the Imam’s reign, the blessings of Allah
will be abundant; there will be no poverty; peace and security will be
the rule of the day.

O Allah, send your blessings upon Muhammad & his progeny.

O Allah, be the Master, the Guardian, the Guide and the Eye for your
vicegerent, the Hujjat, son ofHasan al-’Askari, at this hour, and at
every hour until You establish him on the earth for a long time.

This lesson has been written and compiled by Sayyid M. Rizvi by using
the Pishway-e Duwazdahum: Hazrat Imam Hujjat ibn al-Hasan al-’Askari
(a.s.) by Dar Rah-e Haq, Qum.

The main source has been extensively edited in order to fit the
requirements of our course. Also, for the sake of brevity, we have not
included the references quoted by our source.


