Lesson 37 : the Best of All Women (fatimatu -zahra’) Lesson 37 : the Best of All Women (fatimatu -zahra’))
==========================================================================================================

**1. Birth to Hijra**

Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra’ was born in the fifth year of the bi’that and she
was the only child who survived from among the children of Khadija.

Fatima’s birth and the fact that only she gave the Prophet
grandchildren is itself a revolutionary statement: in the pre-Islamic
society, the birth of a baby girl was considered a disgrace for the
family; and lineage was only recognized through male children.

When the male children of the Prophet and Khadija died in infancy, some
of the unbelievers of Mecca taunted the Prophet saying that he is an
“abtar— a person who is cut off, that is, he has no progeny.”

In response to this taunting, Allah revealed chapter 108 of the Qur’an:
“We have verily given to you (O Muhammad) plentiful [i.e., in the form
of Fatima and her progeny]; therefore, pray to your Lord and offer
sacrifice. Surely the one who taunts you is an abtar.”

Fatima’s life is intertwined with the emergence and growth of the
Islamic movement. She was just three years old when her parents —the
Prophet and Khadija— had to go with other family members to Abu Talib’s
castle outside Mecca when the Quraysh imposed an economic and social
boycott against them.

Soon after the boycott ended, at the age of five, Fatima lost her
mother. She was thereafter brought up by the Prophet himself.

A famous incident from the Meccan period shows that Fatima, even in
childhood, was part of her father’s struggle. Once the Prophet was
praying near the Ka’bah while a group of Qurayshi unbelievers were
sitting and watching him.

Abu Jahl, their leader, said, “Who amongst you can go and bring the
intestine of a slaughtered camel and put it on Muhammad when he is in
prostration?” Uqba bin Abi Mu’it complied with the suggestion of Abu
Jahl and placed the filthy intestine of a camel on the Prophet’s
shoulder when he was in the state of sajdah.

The Prophet remained in that position while the unbelievers laughed so
much so that they fell on each other. A passerby went to the Prophet’s
home and informed Fatima. Fatima, though still in her childhood, came
running to the Ka’bah and removed the filth from the Prophet and cursed
the unbelievers on their faces.

After the death of Khadija and Abu Talib, life became most constrained
and difficult for the Prophet and his followers in Mecca. When the
Quraysh planned to kill the Prophet, he left Mecca and migrated to
Medina, and thus began a new era in the history of Islam.

‘Ali bin Abi Talib had been left behind by the Prophet to mislead the
enemies, to return the property of others entrusted to the Prophet, and
also to bring the remaining members of the Prophet’s immediate family to
Medina.

After accomplishing the tasks given to him, ‘Ali started the journey
towards Medina with three Fatimas: Fatima bint Asad (‘Ali’s mother),
Fatima bint Zubayr ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib (aunt of Ali and the Prophet),
and Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra’.

The Prophet, who had left Mecca earlier, waited for ‘Ali and his family
at Quba on the outskirts of Medina. When Abu Bakr suggested that they
enter the city of Medina, the Prophet refused to do so until his cousin
and his beloved daughter reached him in Quba.

And, indeed, the Prophet entered Medina only after those closest to him
in family ties as well as in spiritual affiliation had joined him from
Mecca!

**2. Father & Daughter**

After Khadija’s death, the Prophet used to pay special attention to his
daughter Fatima. Whenever he went on a journey, the last person to whom
he would bade farewell was Fatima; and when he returned to Medina, the
first person whom he would meet would be Fatima. Every day before going
to bed, the Prophet would kiss the cheeks of his daughter and say a
prayer for her.

When the verse “Do not call the Prophet like the way you call one
another”(24:63) was revealed, even Fatima, like everyone else, started
to address him as “O the Messenger of Allah” instead of saying “O
Father!”

After hearing Fatima calling him in this very formal manner, the
Prophet said, “O Fatima, this verse does not apply to you or your
children...You should still call me ‘O Father’ because it brightens my
heart and pleases Allah.”

**3. Marriage to ‘Ali**

Many proposals came for Fatima to the Prophet but he always rejected
them saying that he was waiting for the divine commandment. Finally,
‘Ali bin Abi Talib approached the Prophet for Fatima’s hand in
marriage.

The Prophet went inside the house and asked Fatima about ‘Ali’s
proposal. Fatima just bowed her head in modesty. According to Umm
Salama, the Prophet’s wife, “The face of Fatima bloomed with joy and her
silence was so suggestive that the Prophet stood up saying ‘Allahu
Akbar, Fatima’s silence is her acceptance.”

The Prophet asked ‘Ali about the mahr (dowry; marriage gift given by
the groom to the bride). ‘Ali said he just had three things from the
possessions of this world: a sword, a shield and a camel which he used
for watering the farms.

The Prophet said that you need your sword for jihad and your camel for
your livelihood, so go and sell the shield. ‘Ali sold the shield for
about 500 dirhams and gave the money to the Prophet as mahr. The Prophet
used a portion of the mahr to buy jahiz (the household necessities given
to the bride by her family).

The jahiz of the Mistress of the Women consisted of the following: 1. a
shirt, 2. a large veil, 3. a black plush cloak, 4. a bed, 5. two
mattresses, one filled with wool and another with palm tree fiber, 6.

four cushions stuffed with good smelling leaves, 7. a curtain made of
wool, 8. a mat, 9. a few jugs and bowls, 10. waterbag made of leather,
and a few other simple items. This is how simple the marriage of ‘Ali
and Fatima was! It should serve as a lesson for those who think that one
must have “all” before making the decision of marriage!

4. Fatima’s Status in the Qur’an & the Sunnah Our Lady Fatimatu
‘z-Zahra’ (a.s.) stands on the highest pedestal of spiritual ranks. She
is an integral part of many verses in the Qur’an. The most important of
those verses are the following: 1. The verse of purity: This is the
verse in which Allah says:

“Verily Allah intends to keep off from you, O Ahlu ‘l-bayt, all kinds
of abomination, and to purify you (spiritually) a thorough
purification.” (33:33) In spite of all the differences among the Muslims
about those on whom this verse can be applied, no one has ever disputed
the fact that Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra’ is part of it.

She has been kept away from all abomination and impurities, thus
rendering her an infallible and sinless person by the will of Allah,
subhanahu wa ta’ala.

2. Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra, ‘Ali, Hasan, Husayn and, their servant, Fizza,
fasted for three days. At sunset on the first day, a beggar came to the
door; next day, an orphan came to the door; and on the third day, a
captive came to the door all asking for food. On all three days ‘Ali
gave away his food —which consisted of one loaf of bread only— and
others also followed his example even though they had nothing left for
themselves.

Allah was so much pleased with the selflessness and sincerity of Fatima
and her family that He revealed Chapter 76 of the Qur’an highly praising
them. “And they give away food, out of love for Him,

to the poor, the orphan and the captive; saying ‘We feed you only for
God’s sake, we do not expect from you any recompense nor gratitude!”’
(76:8-9) After describing their reward in the paradise, Allah says:
“Verily, this is unto you a recompense, and your endeavour is
appreciated.” (76:22)

This verse, in reality, is Allah’s good tiding that Fatima and her
family will surely have an honourable place in Paradise.

3. In the ninth year of the hijrah when the Christian scholars and
leaders from Yemen came to see the Prophet, they refused to agree with
his logical arguments against Jesus being the “Son of God”. Then Allah
ordered (3:54) the Prophet to challenge the Christians for malediction1
and to bring themselves, their women and their children as partners in
this event.

The Prophet of Islam, on his side, took ‘Ali (as representing
“yourselves”), Hasan and Husayn (as representing “your children”), and
Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra’ (as representing “your women”).

Not that there were no other women in Medina; no, there were many: his
wives, relatives and women of his companions. But he just selected
Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra’ because she alone was sufficient to stand by the
Messenger of Allah in praying against the Christians.

There are many sayings from the Prophet about Fatimatu ‘z- Zahra. For
instance, he said, “The best women of Paradise are Khadija bint
Khuwaylid, Fatima bint Muhammad, Maryam bint ‘Imran and Asiya bint
Muzahim the wife of Fir’awn.”

(al-Hakim in Mustadrak ‘ala ‘s-Sahihayn.) ‘Aisha, the wife of the
Prophet, narrates another hadith that once the Prophet welcomed Fatima
and told her a secret which she disclosed only after the Prophet’s
death.

In that statement, the Prophet said to Fatima: “...Do not you like to
be the mistress of all the ladies of Paradise or the mistress of all the
lady believers?” (al-Bukhari in his Sahih.) There a third very famous
saying of the Prophet about Fatima which has also been 1 An event in
which both parties pray to God for sending His curse upon the liars.

26 quoted by al-Bukhari in his Sahih: “Verily Fatima is a part of me;
whosoever makes her angry, makes me angry.”

These remarks cannot be seen just in the context of “fatherdaughter”
relationship; it throws light on the spiritual status of Fatima. After
all, the Prophet “does not talk from his own accord; [whatever he says
is] nothing except a revelation which is revealed to him.” (53:3-4)

**5. After the Prophet**

One of the darkest pages of Muslim history consists of the events which
took place after the Prophet’s death. These events directly affected our
Lady Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra (a.s.).

When Abu Bakr was installed as the caliph, members of the Prophet’s
family and some companions refrained from pledging allegiance to him.

This small group sought refuge with ‘Ali inside his home. The supporter
of the caliph, led by Umar ibn Khattab, forcefully entered the house of
‘Ali and brought the men out to the mosque where they were compelled to
pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr.

In the process of forcing the door open, they broke the door which fell
upon Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra, injuring her severely and causing the loss of
her unborn baby.

Fadak was a property in northern Arabia which the Prophet had gifted to
Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra. But after his death, the caliphate establishment
confiscated the property of Fadak. When Fatima complained against this
injustice, the caliph quoted an alleged saying of the Prophet that, “We
the prophets do not leave anything as inheritance [for our children);
whatever we leave behind is charity.”

Fatima challenged the validity of this so-called hadith by reciting
verses from the Qur’an in which Allah describes how the children of past
prophets inherited their fathers! However, political expediency took
precedence over truth and honesty. This was the first attack on the
rights of women in Islam, and Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra was the first Muslim
woman to stand up for her rights.

Fatima also stood by ‘Ali in defending his right for the caliphate.
‘Ali used to take her at night to the houses of the Ansar where she
would address the women in support for ‘Ali’s right to the caliphate.

The physical hurt of the door falling upon her and the loss of her
unborn baby combined with the emotional pain of ‘Ali’s deprivation and
the confiscation of Fadak took its toll on Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra — she left
this world at the age of 18.

‘Ali, who had just lost the Prophet three months ago, also lost his
faithful wife. These were the loneliest days for ‘Ali bin Abi Talib.
Hasan, Husayn, Zaynab and Umm Kulthum lost their loving and caring
mother. And the Muslim world lost the best of all women.

This lesson has been written by Sayyid M. Rizvi.

Sources used for this lesson are: 1. Bdnu-e Banuiuan of Dar Rah-e Haq.
2. Sahih al-Bukhari. 3. Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra’ of S. M. Kazim al-Qazwini.


