Lesson 4o : the Third Imam (husayn Bin ‘ali)
============================================

**1. Birth & Early Life**

Imam Husayn (Sayyidu ‘sh-Shuhada’, “the lord among martyrs”), the
second child of ‘Ali and Fatimah, was born in the year 4 A.H.; and after
the martyrdom of his brother, Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba, became Imam through
Divine command and his brother’s will.

Imam Husayn was always with his brother during the life of the Prophet
and Imam ‘Ali; he shared in the most important events of that era.

He stood by his brother during the difficult times of the latter’s
imamat. His own imamat was for a period of ten years, all but the last
six months coinciding with the caliphate of Mu’awiyah.

**2. Mu’awiyah’s Rule**

Imam Husayn lived under the most difficult outward conditions of
suppression and persecution. This was due to the fact that, first of
all, religious laws and regulations had lost much of their weight and
credit, and the edicts of the Umayyad government had gained complete
authority and power.

Secondly, Mu’awiyah and his aides made use of every possible means to
put aside and move out of the way the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet and the
Shi’ah, and thus obliterate the name of ‘Ali and his family. And above
all, Mu’awiyah wanted to strengthen the basis of the caliphate of his
son, Yazid, who because of his lack of principles and scruples was
opposed by a large group of Muslims.

Therefore, in order to quell all opposition, Mu’awiyah had undertaken
newer and more severe measures.

By force and necessity Imam Husayn had to endure these days and to
tolerate every kind of mental and spiritual agony and affliction from
Mu’awiyah and his aides—until in the middle of the year 60 A.H.
Mu’awiyah died and his son Yazid took his place.

**3. Yazid’s demand for Bay’ah**

Paying allegiance (bay’ah) was an old Arab practice which was carried
out in important matters such as that of kingship and governorship.
Those who were ruled, and especially the well known among them, would
give their hand in allegiance, agreement and obedience to their king or
prince and in this way would show their support for his actions.

Disagreement after allegiance was considered as disgrace and dishonor
for the people and, like breaking an agreement after having signed it
officially, it was considered as a definite crime. Following the example
of the Holy Prophet, people believed that allegiance, when given by free
will and not through force, carried authority and weight.

Mu’awiyah had asked the wellknown among the people to give their
allegiance to Yazid, but had not imposed this request upon Imam
Husayn.

He had especially told Yazid in his last will that if Husayn refused to
pay allegiance he should pass over it in silence and overlook the
matter, for he had understood correctly the disastrous consequences
which would follow if the issue were to be pressed.

But because of his egoism and recklessness, Yazid neglected his
father’s advice and immediately after the death of his father ordered
the governor of Medina either to force a pledge of allegiance from Imam
Husayn or send his head to Damascus.

After the governor of Medina informed Imam Husayn of this demand, the
Imam refused to accept the demand and overnight started with his family
toward Mecca. He sought refuge in the sanctuary of God which in Islam is
the official place of refuge and security.

This event occurred toward the end of the month of Rajab and the
beginning of Sha’ban of 60 A.H. For nearly four months Imam Husayn
stayed in Mecca in refuge.

This news spread throughout the Islamic world. On the one hand many
people who were tired of the inequities of Mu’awiyah’s rule and even
more dissatisfied when Yazid became caliph, corresponded with Imam
Husayn and expressed their sympathy for him.

On the other hand a flood of letters began to flow, especially from
Iraq and particularly the city of Kufa, inviting the Imam to go to Iraq
and accept the leadership of the populace there with the aim of
beginning an uprising to overcome injustice and inequity.

Naturally such a situation was dangerous for Yazid. The stay of Imam
Husayn in Mecca continued until the season for pilgrimage when Muslims
from all over the world poured in groups into Mecca in order to perform
the rites of the hajj.

The Imam discovered that some of the followers of Yazid had entered
Mecca as pilgrims with the mission to kill the Imam during the rites of
hajj with the arms they carried under their special pilgrimage dress
(ihram).

The Imam shortened the pilgrimage rites and decided to leave. Amidst
the vast crowd of people he stood up and in a short speech announced
that he was setting out for Iraq.

In this short speech he also declared that he would be martyred and
asked Muslims to help him in attaining the goal he had in view and to
offer their lives in the path of God. On the next day he set out with
his family and a group of his companions for Iraq.

Imam Husayn was determined not to give his allegiance to Yazid and knew
full well that he would be killed. He was aware that his death was
inevitable in the face of the awesome military power of the Umayyads,
supported as it was by corruption in certain sectors, spiritual decline,
and lack of will power among the people, especially in Iraq. Some of the
outstanding people of Mecca stood in the way of Imam Husayn and warned
him of the danger of the move he was making. But he answered that he
refused to pay allegiance and give his approval to a government of
injustice and tyranny.

He added that he knew that wherever he turned or went he would be
killed. He would leave in order to preserve the respect for the house of
God and not allow this respect to be destroyed by having his blood
spilled there.

**4. Towards Karbala**

While on the way to Kufa and still a few days’ journey away from the
city, he received news that the agent of Yazid in Kufa had put to death
the representative of the Imam in that city and also one of the Imam’s
determined supporters who was a wellknown man in Kufa.

After their death, their feet had been tied and they had been dragged
through the streets.

The city and its surroundings were placed under strict observation and
countless soldiers of the enemy were awaiting him. There was no way open
to him but to march ahead and to face death. It was here that the Imam
expressed his definitive determination to go ahead and be martyred; and
so he continued on his journey.

Approximately seventy kilometers from Kufa, in a desert named Karbala,
the Imam and his entourage were surrounded by the army of Yazid. For
eight days they stayed in this spot during which the circle narrowed and
the number of the enemy’s army increased.

Finally the Imam, with his household and a small number of companions
were encircled by an army of thirty thousand soldiers. During these days
the Imam fortified his position and made a final selection of his
companions. At night he called his companions and during a short speech
stated that there was nothing ahead but death and martyrdom.

He added that since the enemy was concerned only with his person he
would free them from all obligations so that anyone who wished could
escape in the darkness of the night and save his life.

Then he ordered the light to be turned out and most of those who had
joined him for their own advantage, dispersed. Only a handful of those
who loved the truth and the Banu Hashim remained.

Once again the Imam assembled those who were left and put them to a
test. He addressed his companions and Hashimite relatives, saying again
that the enemy was concerned only with his person. Each could benefit
from the darkness of the night and escape the danger.

But this time the faithful companions of the Imam answered each in his
own way that they would not deviate for a moment from the path of truth
of which the Imam was the leader and would never leave him alone. They
said they would defend his household to the last drop of their blood and
as long as they could carry a sword.

On the ninth day of the month the last challenge to choose between
“allegiance or war” was made by the enemy to the Imam. The Imam asked
for a delay in order to worship overnight and became determined to enter
battle on the next day.

On the tenth day of Muharram of the year 61/680 the Imam lined up
before the enemy with his small band of followers, less than ninety
persons consisting of his companions, thirty some members of the army of
the enemy that joined him during the night and day of war, and his
Hashimite family of children, brothers, nephews, and cousins.

That day they fought from morning until their final breath, and the
Imam, the young Hashimites and the companions were all martyred. Among
those killed were two children of Imam Hasan, who were only thirteen and
eleven years old; and a five-year-old child and a suckling baby of Imam
Husayn.

The army of the enemy, after ending the war, plundered the family of
the Imam and burned his tents. They decapitated the bodies of the
martyrs, denuded them and left them on the ground without burial.

Then they moved the members of the family, all of whom were helpless
women and girls, along the heads of the martyrs, to Kufa. Among the
prisoners there were three male members: a twenty-two year old son of
Imam Husayn who was very ill and unable to move, namely ‘Ali bin Husayn,
the fourth Imam; his four year old son, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who became
the fifth Imam. The enemy took the prisoners to Kufa and from there to
Damascus before Yazid.

**5. The Consequences of Karbala**

The event of Karbala, the capture of the women and children of the Ahlu
1-bayt of the Prophet, their being taken as prisoners from town to town
and the speeches made by the daughter of ‘Ali, Zaynab, and the fourth
Imam who were among the prisoners, disgraced the Umayyads. Such abuse of
the family of the Prophet annulled the propaganda which Mu’awiyah had
carried out for years.

The matter reached such proportions that Yazid was compelled to
publicly disown and condemn the actions of his agents. The event of
Karbala was a major factor in the overthrow of Ummayad rule although its
effect was delayed. It also strengthened the roots of Shi’ism.

Among its immediate results were the revolts and rebellions combined
with bloody wars which continued for twelve years. Among those who were
instrumental in the death of the Imam not one was able to escape revenge
and punishment.

Anyone who studies closely the history of the life of Imam Husayn and
Yazid and the conditions that prevailed at that time, and analyzes this
chapter of Islamic history, will have no doubt that in those
circumstances there was no choice before Imam Husayn but to be killed.

Swearing allegiance to Yazid would have meant publicly showing contempt
for Islam, something which was not possible for the Imam, for Yazid not
only showed no respect for Islam and its injunctions but also made a
public demonstration of impudently, treading under foot its basis and
its laws.

Those before him, even if they opposed religious injunctions, always
did so in the guise of religion, and at least formally respected
religion.

They took pride in being companions of the Holy Prophet and the other
religious figures in whom people believed. From this it can be concluded
that the claim of some interpreters of these events is false when they
say that the two brothers,

Hasan and Husayn, had two different tastes and that one chose the way
of peace and the other the way of war, so that one brother made peace
with Mu’awiyah although he had an army of forty thousand while the other
went to war against Yazid with an army of less than a hundred persons.

For we see that this same Imam Husayn, who refused to pay allegiance to
Yazid for one day, lived for ten years under the rule of Mu’awiyah, in
the same manner as his brother who also had endured for ten years under
Mu’awiyah, without opposing him.

It must be said in truth that if Imam Hasan or Imam Husayn had fought
Mu’awiyah they would have been killed without there being the least
benefit for Islam.

Their deaths would have had no effect before the righteous-appearing
policy of Mu’awiyah, a competent politician who emphasized his being a
companion of the Holy Prophet, the “scribe of the revelation,” and
“uncle of the faithful” and who used every stratagem possible to
preserve a religious guise for his rule.

Moreover, with his ability to set the stage to accomplish his desires
he could have had them killed by their own people and then assumed a
state of mourning and sought to revenge their blood, just as he sought
to give the impression that he was avenging the killing of the third
caliph.

This lesson has been adopted with changes from ‘allamah Sayyid Muhammad
Husayn at-Tabataba’i, Shi’a Islam, Qum. For references, see the original
source.


