Lesson 41 : the Fourth Imam (‘ali Ibn Al-husayn)
================================================

**1. Birth & Early Life**

Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn was the son of the third Imam and his wife, the
queen among women, the daughter of Yazdigird the last Sasanid king of
Iran. He was known as “Zaynu ‘l-‘Abidin — the prince of the worshippers”
and “Sajjad — the one who prostrates most”.

Imam Zaynu ‘l-‘Abidin was two years old when his grandfather was
martyred. In his early teens, he witnessed the situation in which his
uncle Imam Hasan lived.

**2. Karbala & His Imamat**

In his late teens and early twenties, he also observed the suppression
and persecution under which his father lived during the reign of
Mu’awiyah.

As you have already read in the last lesson, Imam Zaynu 1-’Abidin was
the only son of Imam Husayn to survive, for his other two brothers ‘Ali
Akbar and ‘Ali Asghar who was a suckling baby were martyred during the
event of Karbala.

The Imam had also accompanied his father on the journey that terminated
fatally in Karbala, but because of severe illness and the inability to
carry arms or participate in fighting he was prevented from taking part
in the holy war and being martyred.

The Yazidi forces had taken the womenfolk of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) as
captives to Kufa and from there to Damascus with the intent of
humiliating the holy family and also presenting them as an example for
any potential opposition to Yazid’s rule.

But Allah had planned it otherwise: the journey of the captives turned,
instead, into an opportunity for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) to present their
innocence to the people, convey the message of Husayn and enlighten the
masses about the atrocities of the Yazidi regime.

The caravan of the captives from Ahlul Bayt exposed the true face of
Yazid and his establishment. The most important role played in this
awakening of the masses was by Zaynab bint ‘Ali, Husayn’s sister, and
Imam Zaynu l-’Abidin.

The speeches of the holy Imam in the city of Kufa, in the court of Ibn
Ziyad (the governor of Kufa), in Damascus and in the court of Yazid
himself are excellent examples of how Imam Zaynu l-’Abidin was able to
gain victory for Husayn and expose the tyranny of Yazid. And all this
was done while he was a prisoner!

Here we shall just present a part from the speech given by Imam Zaynu
l-’Abidin in the court of Yazid in response to a speech by a speaker of
the establishment who had tried to create hatred in the minds and hearts
of the audience against Imam ‘Ali bin Abi Talib and his family.

The Imam went on the pulpit shackled in chains and introduced himself
as follows: “...Those who know me, they know me...And those who do not
know, then listen:

I am the son of Mecca and Mina; I am the son of zamzam and Safa; I am
the son of the noble one who placed the black stone in the Ka’bah;

I am the son of the one who put on the ihram and did tawaf; I am the
son of the one who was taken from Masjidul Haram to Masjidul Aqsa [in
mi’raj]; I am the son of one on whom Allah sent revelations;

I am the son of Husayn who was killed in Karbala; I am the son of
Muhammad al-Mustafa; I am the son of Fatimah az-Zahra’;

I am the son of Khadija al-Kubra;

I am the son of the one who was killed and left in a pool of his own
blood; I am the son of the one who was left without a shroud and without
burial; I am the son of the one who was killed thirsty...”

He soon turned the tide against Yazid; the entire audience started to
cry in sympathy for the Imam and his family. It was such speeches that
forced Yazid to publicly disown the actions of his own men.

After spending a period in imprisonment, the Imam and the womenfolk of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) were sent with honour to Medina because Yazid wanted
to conciliate public opinion.

**3. Jihad by Knowledge**

The fourth Imam, upon returning to Medina, retired from public life
completely and spent his time in worship and in educating his loyal
followers. He was in contact with the elite among the Shiltes such as
Abu Hamzah Thumali, Abu Khalid Kabuli and the like.

The elite disseminated among the Shi’ah the religious sciences they
learned from the Imam. The number of such students of Imam reached to
170. In this way Shi’ism spread considerably and showed its effects
during the imamate of the fifth Imam.

The high status of knowledge and piety of the companions of Imam Zaynu
l-’Abidin can be seen from one example of Said bin Jubayr. Said was
arrested by Hajjaj bin Yusuf ath-Thaqafi, the governor of the Umayyads
in Iraq and a bitter enemy of Imam ‘Ali and the Shi’as. When Said was
brought to Hajjaj, an interesting conversation took place and we present
part of it below:

Hajjajj: “What is your belief about Abu Bakr and ‘Umar— are they in
Paradise or Hell?” (Hajjajj was looking for an excuse to kill Said.)

Said: “If and when I go to Paradise and see the people over there, then
I will be able to say who is there; and if I go to Hell, only then I
will know who is over there.”

Hajjajj: “What is your belief about the caliphs?”

Said: “I am not responsible for them.”

Hajjajj: “Whom do you like the most among the caliphs?”

Said: “The one with whom God is most pleased.”

Hajjajj: “With whom is God most pleased?”

Said: “God knows best.”

Hajjajj: “How should I kill you.”

Sa’id: “Kill me in whatever way you like, because, by God, you will be
treated in the same way on the day of judgment.”

Hajjajj finally ordered the executioner to kill Sa’id. May Allah bless
his soul and elevate his ranks among the martyrs.

Among the works of the fourth Imam is a book called as- Sahifah
as-Sajjadiyah. It consists of fifty-seven prayers concerning the most
sublime Divine sciences and is known as “The Psalm of the Ahlul Bayt.”

Another famous work of the Imam is Risalatu ‘l- Huquq (the Charter of
Rights) on socio-ethical rights in fifty different cases. Fortunately,
both these works are available in English also.

**4. Attitude of the Rulers**

Although Imam Zaynu ‘l-‘Abidin refrained from any political activity
and dedicated his life to further the knowledge of his followers in
religious and spiritual matters, the caliphs were always uneasy with him
and kept a close watch on his movements and on those who visited him.

The knowledge and character par excellence of the Imam attracted people
of all kinds towards him. This was the main reason that created jealousy
in the hearts of the rulers who thought that this attraction to the Imam
had the potential of turning a political tide against their
establishment. One incident in the life of the Imam clearly shows the
hold he had on the hearts and minds of the common people:

Once, Hisham, son of caliph ‘Abdu ‘1-Malik, entered the Masjidul Haram
in Mecca with his entourage for doing tawaf of the Ka’bah. There were
many people doing the tawaf, but nobody gave any importance to Hisham or
gave room for him to get close to the Black Stone.

While he was waiting on the perimeter for the crowd to become less so
that he may go and kiss the Black Stone, he noticed a sudden movement
among the people who starting making way for a person who had just
entered the mosque. That person went straight to the Black Stone and
kissed it. It was none other than Imam Zaynu ‘l-‘Abidin (a.s.).

Hisham knew him; but, out of jealousy, he asked his entourage: “Who is
this?” Farazdaq, the famous and powerful poet of the time, was standing
close by.

When he heard Hisham’s question filled with jealousy and contempt, he
could not control himself and extemporaneously started to recite a poem
in praise of the Imam. That piece of poetry is of such high eloquence
and clarity that even the modern anthologies of Arabic literature
include it in their collections. It is a long poem, but we shall just
present a few lines:

He is the one whose footsteps are known to the holy land, the Ka’bah
knows him, so does the sanctuary and the land beyond.

He is the best of all Allah’s servants; he is the pious, the pure, and
the knowledgeable.

The father of this person is the chosen Ahmad6, may Allah shower
blessings on him for ever.

If the Black Stone would know who is kissing it, it would fall upon his
footsteps and kiss the ground.

When the Quraysh see him, they say, “With his character, nobility
reached perfection.” Your statement “Who is this?” does not diminish
him, the Arabs and others know him whom you refuse to recognise.

His mother is Fatimah, if you do not know him! 6 Ahmad is one of the
names of the Prophet. In Arabic, it is common to call his grandfather as
“his father’.

And with his grandfather ended the prophethood.

This one incident clearly shows the attitude of the caliphs towards our
Imam. And, therefore, it is not surprising that ‘Abdu ‘1-Malik ordered
him to be arrested, chained and sent from Medina to Damascus and then
again returned to Medina.

It was during the reign of Hisham that the holy Imam was poisoned by
Walid ibn ‘Abdu 1-Malik and died in 95 AH/712 CE after thirty-five years
of imamate.

This lesson has been written and compiled by Sayyid M. Rizvi by using
the following sources.

1. Shi’a Islam’ of Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba’i.

2. Pishway-e Chaharum: Hazrat Imam Sajjad (a.s.) by Dar Rah-e Haq,
Qum.

The main sources have been extensively edited in order to fit the
requirements of our course. Also, for the sake of brevity, we have not
included the references quoted by our sources. Those who are interested
to know the sources may refer mentioned above.


