Lesson 42 : the Fifth Imam (muhammad Ibn ‘ali)
==============================================

**1. Birth & Early Life**

Imam Muhammad bin ‘Ali’s lineage is unique in the sense that he is the
only Imam who was connected to Fatimatu ‘z-Zahra’ through his father as
well as his mother:

his father was son of Imam Husayn bin ‘Ali, and his mother was daughter
of Imam Hasan bin ‘Ali Hence he was known as “Ibnu 1-Khayaratayn — the
son of two virtues”. He was also known as “al-Baqir — the digger [of the
knowledge of the prophets]”.

The first years of his life were blessed with the presence of his
grandfather Imam Husayn bin ‘Ali. He was four years old when the
massacre of Karbala took place;

and the childhood memories of that tragic event stayed with him
forever. He witnessed the thirtyfour years of his father’s imamate and
his contribution in furthering the education of the Muslims in general
and the Shi’as in particular.

**2. Continuation of Jihad by Knowledge**

During the imamate of the fifth Imam, as a result of the injustice of
the Umayyads, revolts and wars broke out in some parts of the Islamic
world every day. Moreover, there were disputes within the Umayyad family
itself which kept the government occupied and, to a certain extent, the
Ahlu 1-Bayt of the Prophet were left alone. From the other side, the
tragedy of Karbala and the oppression suffered by the Ahlu 1-Bayt, of
which the fourth Imam was the most noteworthy embodiment, had attracted
many Muslims to the Imams.

These factors combined to make it possible for people and especially
the Shi’as to go in great numbers to Medina and to come into the
presence of the fifth Imam.

Possibilities for disseminating truth about Islam and the sciences of
the Ahlu 1-Bayt, which had never existed for the Imams before him, were
presented to the fifth Imam.

The proof of this fact is the innumerable traditions recounted from the
fifth Imam and the large number of illustrious men of science and Shi’a
scholars who were trained by him in different Islamic sciences. These
names are listed in books of biographies of famous men in Islam.

‘Abdullah bin ‘Ata’ al-Makki testifies that, “I have never seen
students who are much older than their teacher in age as I have seen in
the audience of Imam Muhammad bin ‘Ali. Hakam bin Utayba, with all his
reputation and prestige, used to sit at his pulpit like a child sitting
in front of his tutor.” ‘Abdullah, son of the second caliph ‘Umar, was a
highly respected scholar for the early Sunni Muslims.

During the days of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.), someone asked
‘Abdullah a question which he was unable to answer. “Ask that young
man,” said ‘Abdullah pointing towards the Imam, “and also narrate to me
his answer to your question.” When the person came back to ‘Abdullah bin
‘Umar with the answer, the latter said, “They belong to a family whose
knowledge comes from God.”

3. Some Distinguished Companions of the Imam Aban bin Taghlib had the
opportunity of seeking knowledge from the fourth, fifth and sixth Imams.
He was an expert in commentary of the Qur’an (tafsir) and hadith. Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) asked him to sit in Masjidu ‘n-Nabi and give
fatwa to the people “because I like to see people like you among my
Shi’ahs.”

Zurarah bin A’yan was a student of the fifth and sixth Imams. He is
counted as one of the six most prominent companions of these two Imams.
His greatest contribution is in spreading the ahadith of these two Imams
among the Shi’ahs.

Kumayt Asadi was a very powerful poet of the later Umayyid period. He
used his talents in the defence of Shi’ism and the Imams of Ahlu 1-Bayt,
and against the rulers of the Umayyads. He was always on the “most
wanted” list of the rulers.

Once during hajj, Kumayt recited poems for Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(a.s.). The Imam became so pleased that he raised ten thousand dirhams
from the Banu Hashim family to reward Kumayt. Kumayt refused to accept
the money, saying: “By God! I did not say the poem for this money; if
you must reward me, then please give me one of your own shirts.” He
wanted to have that shirt with him in the grave for intercession in the
hereafter.

Muhammad bin Muslim, an expert in Shi’a laws, was a prominent student
of both the fifth and the sixth Imam. He was a resident of Kufa, but
went to Medina and stayed for four years studying with the Imams.

Once ‘Abdullah bin Abi Ya’fur asked Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.), “Sometimes I
have questions which I cannot answer and I cannot reach you at all
times. What should I do?” The Imam said, “Why do not you ask Muhammad
bin Muslim?”

**4. Attitude of the Rulers**

The Umayyid rulers during the imamate of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.)
were the following: 1. Walid bin ‘Abdu 1-Malik; 2. Sulayman bin ‘Abdu
1-Malik; 3. ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdu ‘l- Aziz; 4. Yazid bin ‘Abdu 1-Malik; 5.
Hisham bin ‘Abdu 1-Malik.

With the exception of ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdu ‘l-’Aziz, all the rulers were as
cruel and corrupt as their predecessors.

Walid appointed people (like Hajjaj bin Yusuf ath-Thaqafi) to the
various positions in the Muslim empire who had no regard for Islamic
values and were guilty of torturing and oppressing those who did not
accept their views. Sulayman was comparatively less of a tyrant not out
of kindness and a sense of responsibility but because he was deeply
absorbed in the pleasures and excessively luxirious lifestyle at the
expense of the public treasury!

‘Umar ibn ‘Abdu ‘l-’Aziz’s short reign of two years was the best period
in the Umayyid history. He tried to establish justice and equality, and
put an end to quite a few abhorrent practices started by Mu’awiyah:
e.g., the practice of cursing Amiru 1-Mu’minin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.)
in the Friday khutbas.

Then Yazid bin ‘Abdu 1-Malik came to power who is considered to be
morally the most corrupt of all the Umayyad rulers.

He was obsessed with music and dance, and would invite musicians and
dancers from all over to his court in Damascus and reward them heftily.
It was during his reign that pleasure pursuit, chess, playing cards and
other such games became common ways of entertainment among the Arabs.

Hisham bin ‘Abdu 1-Malik was a mean and cruel person. He was insecure
about his own position among the people, and was very jealous of the
popularity and respect accorded by the people to the descendants of Imam
‘Ali (a.s.).

It was during his reign that Zayd bin ‘Ali (son of the fourth Imam)
started an uprising against the Umayyads which, unfortunately, ended in
defeat in which Zayd was killed very cruelly.

**5. Final Days & Death**

During one of the hajj rituals, the Imam gave a speech exholting the
rights of his family and himself. This was reported to Hisham who was
also in Mecca at that time. On his return to Syria, Hisham ordered Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) and his son, Ja’far, to be brought to Damascus.
Hisham tried to intimidate and humiliate the Imam but did not succeed.
After some time, he was forced to let the holy Imam go back to Medina
where he was always under surveillance by the regime’s spies and
informers.

Finally, in the year 114 A.H., the Imam was poisoned by the Umayyad
agents and died on 7th Dhu 1-Hijja, and was buried beside his father in
the Jannatu 1-Baqi‘ graveyard.

This lesson has been written and compiled by Sayyid M. Rizvi using the
following sources.

1. Shi’a Islam3 of Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba’i.

2. Pishway-e Panjum: Hazrat Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) by Dar Rah-e
Haq.

3. Zindagani-e Imaman be Zaban-e Sadeh by Ayaullah Ja’far Subhani. The
main sources have been extensively edited in order to fit the
requirements of our course. Also, for the sake of brevity, we have not
included the references quoted by our sources. Those who are interested
to know the sources may refer to the aforementioned sources.


