Lesson 43 : the Sixth Imam (ja‘far Bin Muhammad)
================================================

**1. Birth & Early Days**

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq, son of the fifth Imam, was born in 83 A.H./702
C.E. After the death of his father in 114 A.H., he became Imam by Divine
Command and decree of the Imam who came before him.

**2. His Imamate: Continuation of Scholarly Jihad**

During the 34 years of imamate of as-Sadiq (a.s.) greater possibilities
and a more favorable climate existed for him to propagate religious
teachings. This came about as a result of revolts in Islamic lands,
especially the uprising of the Muswaddah to overthrow the Umayyad
caliphate, and the bloody wars which finally led to the fall and
extinction of the Umayyads.

The greater opportunities for Shi’ite teachings were also a result of
the favourable ground the fifth Imam had prepared during the twenty
years of his imamate through the propagation of the true teachings of
Islam and the sciences of the Ahlu 1-Bayt of the Prophet.

Imam as-Sadiq took advantage of the occasion to propagate the religious
sciences until the very end of his imamate, which coincided with the end
of the Umayyad and beginning of the Abbasid caliphates.

He instructed many scholars in different fields of the intellectual and
transmitted sciences, such as Zurarah, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Mu’min
at-Taq, Hisham ibn Hakam, Aban ibn Taghlib, Hisham ibn Salim, Hurayz,
Hisham Kaibi Nassabah, and Jabir ibn Hayyan, the alchemist.

Even some important Sunni scholars such as Sufyan Thawri, Abu Hanifa
(the founder of the Hanafi school of law), Qadi Sukuni, Qadi Abu 1-
Bakhtari and others, had the honor of being his students.

It is said that his classes and sessions of instruction produced four
thousand scholars of hadith and other sciences. Refering to the two
years that he spent as a student of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.), Abu Hanifa
used to say: “If it had not been for those two years, Nu’man7 would have
perished.”

The number of traditions preserved from the fifth and sixth Imams is
more than all the hadith that have been recorded from the Prophet and
the other ten Imams combined. That is why the Shi’a school of laws in
Islam is known as “Ja’fari”.

**3. Students & Companions**

Hamran bin A’yan: Some of the students of Imam Ja’far as- Sadiq (a.s.)
had reached such heights of excellence that they earned the complete
trust of their teacher. Once a Syrian (who those days were usually
against the Ahlu ‘1-Bayt because of the Umayyad propaganda) entered the
gathering of the Imam.

Upon inquiring the purpose of his visit, he said, “I have been told
whatever the people ask you, you have an answer for that. So I have come
to debate with you.”

Imam (a.s.): “On what issue would you like to debate with me?”

Syrian: “About the Qur’an.”

7 Nu’man was the first name of Imam Abu Hanifa.

Imam pointed towards Hamran bin A’yan and said, “Go and debate with
him.”

Syrian: “I have come to challenge you and debate with you, not with
him.”

Imam (a.s.): “Defeating Hamram would be like defeating me!”

So the Syrian went to Hamran and had a debate with him about the
Qur’an. Hamran answered all questions satisfactorily until the Syrian
ran out of them. He finally conceded his own defeat.

Mufazzal bin ‘Umar: He is well known for a treatise which the Imam
dictated for him on the subject of tawhid. Here we will just mention one
incident which shows that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq was also actively working
for peace and social harmony among his followers.

One day Mufazzal saw that two Shi’as were arguing and fighting with one
another on the division of the estate of their relative. Mufazzal took
both of them home and after discussion, resolved their conflict. In
bringing about the resolution he had to add four hundred dirhams from
himself.

As the two Shi’as were leaving, Mufazzal said, “You should know that
the money I have used to resolve your conflict is not my own money; it
belongs to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) who had given it to me with the
instruction that whenever I see conflict among his followers, I should
try to maintain peace among them by using that money.”

**4. Rulers & their Attitude**

Imam as-Sadiq’s imamate coincided with the rule of the last five
Umayyad rulers (Hisham bin ‘Abdu 1-Malik, Walid bin Yazid, Yazid bin
Walid, Ibrahim bin Walid, and Marwan al- Himar) and the first two
‘Abbasid caliphs (Abu ‘l-’Abbas Saffah and Mansur Dawaniqi).

As mentioned in the previous lesson, the Muslim people were gradually
turning away from the Umayyads. The anti-Umayyad sentiment which had
started with the massacre of Karbala, finally led to the fall of the
Umayyads in 132 A.H.

However, those who were leading the revolt in the name of Ahlu 1-Bayt
could not resist the temptation of power, and seized the seat of
caliphate for themselves. These were the descendants of ‘Abbas bin
‘Abdul Muttalib, the uncle of the Prophet. Hence the next dynasty to
rule the Muslim world was known as Banu ‘Abbas or the ‘Abbasids.

Hisham, the Umayyad caliph, had ordered the sixth Imam to be arrested
and brought to Damascus. The later Umayyad rulers were not strong enough
to harass the Imam. The Imam was then arrested by Saffah, the first
‘Abbasid caliph and brought to Iraq. After some time, he was allowed to
return to Medina.

The reign of Mansur, the second ‘Abbasid caliph, was even worse for the
Shi’as. He ordered such torture and merciless killing of many of the
descendants of the Prophet who were Shi’ite that his actions even
surpassed the cruelty and heedlessness of the Umayyads.

At his order they were arrested in groups, some thrown into deep and
dark prisons, and tortured until they died, while others were beheaded
or buried alive or placed at the base of or between walls of buildings,
and walls were constructed over them.

Once Mansur wrote to Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) asking him why he did not
visit him like other dignitaries. The Imam wrote in reply: “Neither do
we possess any worldly treasure for which we may fear you, nor do you
possess any spiritual virtue for which we may seek your favour. So why
should we come to you?” Mansur replied, “Then come for admonishing us.”
The Imam replied, “Those who seek this world will never admonish you,
and those who seek the hereafter will never come to you.”

**5. Last Days & Death**

Finally, Mansur had Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) arrested and brought to
Samarrah (Iraq) where he had the Imam kept under supervision, was in
every way harsh and discourteous to him, and several times thought of
killing him.

Eventually the Imam was allowed to return to Medina where he spent the
rest of his life under severe restrictions placed upon him by the
Abbasid ruler, until he was poisoned and martyred through the intrigue
of Mansur.

Upon hearing the news of the Imam’s martyrdom, Mansur wrote to the
governor of Medina instructing him to go to the house of the Imam on the
pretext of expressing his condolences to the family, to ask for the
Imam’s will and testament and read it. Whoever was chosen by the Imam as
his inheritor and successor should be beheaded on the spot.

Of course, the aim of Mansur was to put an end to the whole question of
the imamate and to Shi’ite aspirations. When the governor of Medina,
following orders, read the last will and testament, he saw that the Imam
had chosen five people rather than one to administer his last will and
testament: the caliph himself, the governor of Medina, ‘Abdullah Aftah,
the Imam’s older son, Musa, his younger son, and Hamidah, his wife. In
this way the plot of Mansur failed.

Abu Basir, a close companion of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), went to
the Imam’s house for expressing condolences on the death of the Imam.
Umm Hamidah, the wife of the Imam, said, “O Abu Basir, if you had been
at the Imam’s side when he died, you would have been surprised.

In his last moments, the Imam opened his eyes and asked that all family
members come close to his bed. When everyone had gathered around him, he
said, ‘Verily, the person who considers the salat as a trivial issue, he
will not deserve our intercession.”

This lesson has been written and compiled by Sayyid M. Rizvi by using
the following sources.

1. Shi’a Islam’ of Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabataba’i.
2. Hshway-e Shishum: Hazrat Imam Ja’far-e Sadiq (a.s.) by Dar Rah-e
Haq,

The main sources have been extensively edited in order to fit the
requirements of our course. Also, for the sake of brevity, we have not
included the references quoted by our sources. Those who are interested
to know the sources may refer mentioned above.


