Introduction
============

**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

There is no difference of opinion amongst Muslim sects that the
‘religion’ of Allah is Islam; that the only way to know Islam is through
the Book of Allah and the sunnah of the Holy Prophet; and that the Book
of Allah is what is known as the Qur’an, is without any addition or
subtraction.

And what difference is there is in the interpretation of some of the
verses of the Qur’an; and in believing or not believing some of the
sunnah as genuine; or in its interpretation.

This difference of approach has led towards the difference in some basic
principles and some laws of shari’ah.

As the basic principles of Islam are well-known, I do not think it
necessary to enumerate all the beliefs. It will be sufficient if some of
the important differences are described here to give the readers a
fairly comprehensive idea of the main characteristics which distinguish
the Shi’ahs from the Sunnis.

All the Muslims agree that Allah is one, Muhammad is His last Prophet
and that one day Allah will resurrect all the human beings and all will
be answerable to their beliefs and actions.

All of them agree that anyone not believing in any of the above three
basic principles is not a Muslim. Also, they agree that anybody denying
the famous tenets of Islam, like salah (prayers), sawm (fasting), hajj
(pilgrimage to Mecca), zakat (religious tax), etc., or believing that
the famous sins, like drinking wine, adultery, stealing, gambling, lie,
murder, etc., are not sins, is not a Muslim, though he might have been
believing in Allah and His Prophet Muhammad, because to deny such things
is tantamount to deny the Prophethood of Muhammad and his shari’ah
(Divine Law).

When we go further, we come across those subjects which are not agreed
amongst the Muslims, and there the differences between the different
sects of Islam begin.


