Prophethood
===========

Based upon their belief of lutf (Grace), the Shi’ahs believe that it is
incumbent upon Allah to send Prophets or their successors to this world
to guide people towards the right path. The Sunnis say that it is not
incumbent upon Allah, because they do not accept necessity of lutf.

The Shi’ahs and Sunnis in the first instance, and then the Sunnis among
themselves, disagree about the theory of *'*ismah (infallibility) of the
Prophets.

Infallibility
-------------

What is our conception of ‘ismah*?* It is lutf (grace) of Allah which
helps a person to refrain from sins, without effecting in any way his
will and power. A ma’sum (sinless) person has the power to commit sins;
but he does not even think about sins because his spiritual standard is
so high that such inferior things do not enter his mind.

The Sunnis do not speak with one voice upon this subject.

They first differ about the point when ‘ismah begins. Some say it is
after the declaration of Prophethood; others say that it is since
childhood.

Second Difference: The scope of ‘ismah before declaration of
Prophethood: Some say that it covers all sins; majority say that they
are protected from kufr (infidelity) only.

Third Difference: The scope of ‘ismah after declaration of Prophethood;
it is agreed that the Prophets could not tell a lie after Prophethood.
But what about other sins? Some say that they could commit other sins
either intentionally or unintentionally; but the majority say that they
could commit it unintentionally, but not intentionally.

Fourth Difference: About minor sins: They say it was possible for the
prophets to commit minor sins, even intentionally. But that they were
protected from such minor sins which might have degraded them in the
esteem of people.

The Shi'ah Ithna-‘asharis’ stand about *‘*ismah is that all the Prophets
were sinless and infallible; they could not commit any sin, whether
major or minor, whether intentionally or unintentionally; and that they
were ma’sum from the beginning of their life till their last breath.

The Prophets
------------

Ash-Shaykh as-Saduq says about Prophets that:

"Their word is the word of God, their order is the order of God, their
forbidding is the forbidding by God . . . And that the Chiefs of the
Prophets are five - and they are (called) “ulul \`azm” - and they are
Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad (be blessings of Allah upon
them all) and that Muhammad is their Chief and best of all."

Imams
-----

The Shi'ahs say that Imam must be appointed by God; that appointment -
may be known through the declaration of the Prophet or the preceding
Imam.

The Sunnis say that Imam (or Caliph, as they prefer to say) can be
either elected, or nominated by the preceding caliph, or selected by a
committee, or may acquire power through a military coup. If he is
elected, it is enough that one man should do bay’ah (allegiance) to him.

The Shi’ahs say: That Imam must be ma’sum (sinless).

The Sunnis say (including the Mu’tazilites) that ‘ismah is not a
condition for caliphate. Even if he is a tyrant and has sunk himself in
sins, Hanbalites, Shafi’ites and Malikites forbid people to rise against
that caliph. They say that they should preserve.

The Shi’ahs say that Imam must possess above all such qualities as
knowledge, bravery, justice, wisdom, piety, love of God etc. The Sunnis
say it is not necessary. A person inferior in these qualities may be
elected in preference to a person having all these qualities of superior
degree.

The Shi’ahs say that ‘Ali was appointed by Allah to be the successor of
the Prophet, and that the Prophet declared it on several occasions. The
Sunnis say that the Prophet did not appoint anybody to be his successor.


