Thirty-sixth Greater Sin: Omitting Prayer Intentionally
=======================================================

The thirty-sixth greater sin is to omit prayer intentionally. The
traditions of Imam Taqi (a.s.), Imam Riďa (a.s.) Imam Mūsa Kadhim (a.s.)
and Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) (mentioned in Abdul Azīm’s Sahifa)
support this view. This fact is also confirmed by the tradition of Amir
ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.). In Islam prayer is an obligatory duty which has to
be performed without fail. Anyone who does not offer prayer considering
it non-obligatory is an infidel and outside the pale of Islam. To deny
prayer is to deny the Holy Prophet (S) and to deny the Holy Qur’an and
such a person is an unbeliever. Many traditions have been recorded in
this connection[^1]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

A person came to the Holy Prophet (S) and begged him for a moral lesson.
The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “Do not omit prayer intentionally
because whoever leaves prayer voluntarily has exited from the pale of
Islam.[^2]

The Messenger of Allah (S) says:

“The thing that turns a Muslim into Kafir is to omit prayer
intentionally or to offer prayer considering it insignificant and
unimportant.”[^3]

The Holy Prophet (S) also says,

“There is no difference between faith and infidelity except the omitting
of prayer[^4]

Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) writes in the commentary of al-Kāfi that some of
these traditions emphasise that to omit all or some obligatory acts is
infidelity. This itself is one of the connotations of ‘Kufr’ as recorded
in ayats and traditions. It is mentioned, ‘One who intentionally omits
prayer is a Kafir, one who doesn’t pay Zakat is a Kafir one who omits
Hajj is a Kafir.’

In the traditions omitting obligatory acts is not separately mentioned
as a greater sin. This is perhaps so, because when a person commits an
act which is Harām, he is under some compulsion, either emotional or
physical or social or of some other need which he seeks to fulfil. For
example a person may commit fornication due to a physical urge; or under
the influence of anger he may use foul language or may even commit
murder and do injustice to others in many other ways. But in the case of
omitting obligatory acts and particular prayers, there are no such
compulsions. Obligatory acts are avoided by those who consider religious
commands insignificant and attach no importance to them; and this
amounts to denial of the Almighty.

In the tradition which equates omitting prayers to infidelity it may be
argued that a person may avoid Hajj and Zakat for being a miser, or he
may not fast out of concern for his health or because the idea of hunger
and thirst deters him. But as far as prayer is concerned, there is not a
single factor that can come in the way of a person offering prayer to
the Creator, except that he considers religion insignificant and takes
prayers lightly.

Sadūq (r.a.) quotes a tradition from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) wherein
it was asked from the Imam (a.s.) why adulterers and drunkards are not
called Kafirs while one who omits prayer is labelled so? Imam (a.s.)
said, “Adultery etc. are committed when a person is subdued with
sensuality but prayer is not omitted except that it was considered
insignificant because one who commits adultery, does so to derive
pleasure but one who leaves prayer does not get any pleasure.”

The above hadith proves that if one leaves an obligatory duty
considering religion unimportant one is a kafir. The Messenger of Allah
(S) says,

“One who considers prayers light (insignificant) is not from us.”
Another hadith mentions that such a person will not get the intercession
of Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.). “And one who consumes intoxicants is not from us
and by Allah one who drinks wine will not be able to arrive at the Pool
of Kawthar.”[^5]

In his last moments, Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) has been recorded to
have said,

“Our intercession will not reach those who consider prayer light
(insignificant).”[^6]

It may be mentioned that a person who accepts that prayer has been
prescribed by the Almighty and he believes in the prophethood and in the
message of the Seal of the prophets (S), but fails to offer prayers due
to sheer laziness, is not considered an unbeliever, but a transgressor.

Misunderstanding of some stupid people
--------------------------------------

When those who do not pray are warned and exhorted to pray and asked why
they do not pray, they say that the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) is not in
need of their prayer. These thoughts are inspired by Shaitan. The fact
is that these people believe that they are not in need of Allah
(S.w.T.). They do not realize that they owe their very existence to
Allah (S.w.T.)’s mercy and they function because they are always
surrounded by divine favours. This attitude prompts them to give up all
acts of thankfulness and service to their Benefactor. Their refusal to
pray is due to hard heartedness, stubbornness and injustice. Accordingly
Allah (S.w.T.) will also give them the destination they deserve (hell)
and reward the obedient in the abode of peace.

Promise of chastisement in the Qur’an
-------------------------------------

There are numerous Qur’anic Verses that emphasise the importance of
Prayer and the certainty of Divine chastisement for neglect. A few of
these ayats are given below:

***“In gardens, they shall ask each other. About the guilty: What has
brought you into hell? They shall say: We were not of those who prayed;
And we used not to feed the poor; And we used to enter into vain
discourse with those who entered into vain discourses. And we used to
call the day of judgment a lie.”*** ***(Surah al-Muddaththir
74:40-46)***

***“So he did not accept the truth, nor did he pray, But called the
truth a lie and turned back, Then he went to his followers, walking away
in haughtiness.”*** ***(Surah al-Qiyāma 75:31-33)***

***“Nearer to you (is destruction) and nearer, Again (consider how)
nearer to you and nearer.”*** ***(Surah al-Qiyāma 75:34-35)***

Some commentators of Qur’an explain that ‘destruction’ is ‘wael’ (a
place in hell). And the repetition of word ‘nearer’ four times is for
emphasis. Or the four repetitions may signify four stages of
destruction: Once in this world, second the punishment of grave, terror
in Qiyāma and fourth the everlasting stay in Hell.

In Surah al-Mā’ūn, the Almighty remarks,

***“And wael (woe) to the praying ones, who are unmindful of their
prayers, who do (good) to be seen.”*** ***(Surah al-Mā’ūn 107: 4–6)***

‘Waelun’ (terrible punishment) is for those who are unmindful about
prayers; prayer which is a pillar of faith and the dividing line between
belief and disbelief. ‘Waelun’ is one of the sections of Hell, or a well
situated in Hell. It is also used as a word denoting terrible punishment
the ‘Un’ which is added at the end makes it a superlative.

The Almighty Lord says in Surah Maryam,

***“But there came after them an evil generation, who neglected prayers
and followed sensual desires, so they will meet perdition.”*** ***(Surah
Maryam 19: 59)***

The word ‘gayya’ which is translated as ‘perdition’ above is a valley in
Hell where the punishment is far more severe than other areas. Even the
inmates of Hell seek Allah (S.w.T.)’s refuge from this punishment. Ibn
Abbas has related that, ‘There is a serpent in this valley which is
sixty day’s journey long and thirty day’s journey wide. Since the day it
was created it has opened it’s mouth only to swallow those who neglect
prayer and those who drink.” Allah (S.w.T.) the Almighty remarks in
Surah ar-Rūm,

***“…And keep up prayer and be not of the polytheists…”*** ***(Surah
ar-Rūm 30: 31)***

This verse implies that a person who neglects prayer is at par with the
idol worshippers and polytheists.

Fifteen terrible Consequences in the life and the Hereafter for those who neglect prayer
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Messenger of Allah (S) says that a person who neglects prayer and
is lazy in its fulfilment is punished with fifteen calamities by Allah.
Of these, six are related to this life, Three are with regard to the
time of death, Three occur in the grave and Three calamities strike him
in Qiyāma. That is when he will emerge from his grave (for the final
accounting). The six calamites with regard to this life are:*

1. The Almighty Allah reduces his life span.

2. And He terminates his sustenance.

3. He makes the signs of righteousness to disappear from his face.

4. None of his good deeds will be accepted and he will not be rewarded
for them.

5. His invocations will not be accepted.

6. The supplications of righteous people will not benefit him.

The Three calamities to befall him at the time of death are:

1. He will die a death of degradation and disgrace.

2. He will die in hunger

3. He will die in a state of such a terrible thirst that even if he were
to drink all the streams of the earth his thirst will not be quenched.

And the Three punishments that he will suffer in the grave are:

1. An angel will be appointed over him to give him squeeze and chastise
him.

2. His grave will be made narrow.

3. His grave will be dark and horrifying.

And the Three calamities with regard to Qiyāma are as follows:

1. The angel will be dragging him for accounting in such a way that
other people will be a witness to it.

2. His accounting will be very strict.

3. The Almighty Allah will not look at him with mercy, will not purify
him and there is a terrible punishment for him.

The Most Important Religious Obligations
----------------------------------------

Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“In Qiyāma the first thing that one has to account for is one’s prayer.
If it is accepted, his other good deeds will be accepted too. And if it
is rejected his other good deeds will be rejected too.”[^7]

Muawiyah Ibn Wahab asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.), “Which is that
meritorious deed that brings one closer to his Lord?” Imam (a.s.)
replied,

“After the Marefat (recognition) of Allah, the Prophet and Imam no deed
is superior to Prayer. Don’t you see that the righteous slave of
Almighty, Hazrat Isa (a.s.) said, ‘As far as I am alive, the Almighty
Allah has commanded me to pray and pay the poor-rate’? The Holy Prophet
(S) was queried regarding the Best of deeds and he replied: Of all the
good deeds the best is a prayer that is offered at the earliest
hour.”[^8]

Hazrat Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says:

“Prayer is a pillar of faith, it is like the centrepole of the tent. As
far as it is fulfilled, the ropes and pegs remain taut. When this centre
pole does not remain straight or is broken, the other ropes and pegs
also loosen from their places and the tent collapses.”[^9]

In the same way all the good deeds and acts of worship are connected to
Prayers. Such that if this (Prayer) is neglected the other good deeds
will also be wasted.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) comments on the Verse,

***“…and whoever denies faith, his work indeed is of no account…”***
***(Surah al-Mā’ida 5:5)***

Imam (a.s.) says,

“This ayat denotes those who neglect prayer without any disability or
problem.”[^10]

Hazrat Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says,

“The foundation of Islam is based on five things: Upon the prayer and
Zakat and Hajj and Fasting and Wilāyat.”[^11]

Zurarah asked Imam (a.s.) which of these were the most superior. Imam
(a.s.) replied,

“It is Wilāyat, Because Wilāyat of Āle Muhammad (a.s.) is the key to
other things. And after Wilāyat the most superior is Prayer. Because the
Messenger of Allah (S) has said, ‘The Prayer is the Pillar of your
religion.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said,

“When the day of Judgement is established a serpent of the species of
scorpion will emerge from Hell. Its head will be on the seventh heaven
and its tail will reach lower than the earth. Its mouth will be wide
open from the west to the east. He will say, ‘Where are those who warred
against Allah and his Messenger?’ Then Jibrīl the trustworthy will
descend and ask him as to what people he wanted. The serpent will reply,
“I want five groups of people. Those who neglected prayer, those who
didn’t pay Zakat, those who took usury, the drunkards and those who talk
of worldly things in the Masjids. (Meaning Harām conversation. For
example the backbiting of Muslims and falsely accusing them, or to start
an illegal practice, praising an oppressor or praising a person who
doesn’t deserve this praise, or criticising a person who is free from
blame.)[^12]

The Messenger of Allah (S) also said,

“There is a valley in Hell and the inmates of Hell scream 70000 times
daily due to the severity of its punishment. There is a house of fire
therein and this house has a well of fire. In this well is a casket
which houses a thousand headed snake. Each of the head has a thousand
mouths and each mouth has a thousand fangs and each of the fangs is one
thousand metres long.”

Anas said, “O Messenger of Allah (S), for whom is this punishment
reserved?” The Prophet (S) replied,

“For those who imbibe wine and those who omit Prayers.”

Numerous traditions have reached us describing the severity of the
punishment for neglecting Prayer but we think the above mentioned ones
shall suffice for our purpose.

Helping those who omit Prayer
-----------------------------

Many traditional reports mention terrible consequences for those who
help and assist the people who neglect prayer. As mentioned by the
Messenger of Allah (S),

“One who helps the neglecter of Prayer by giving him food or cloth acts
as if he has murdered 70 prophets, the first of whom being Adam (a.s.)
and the last Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (S).”[^13]

He (S) also said,

“One who gives a draught of water to the neglecter of prayer, acts as if
he has made war against me and battled with all the prophets.”[^14]

The Holy Prophet is also reported to have stated,

“One who laughs with the neglecter of prayer, it is as if he has
demolished the Ka’ba 70 times.”[^15]

Obviously the general implication of these traditions is that if help
and assistance given to a person, who neglects prayers, makes him
complacent about his lapse and he continues to neglect his prayer; or if
this assistance encourages him to be even more neglectful, then such
help should not be given. And indeed whenever helping the sinner induces
him to sin more, it is absolutely Harām. And from the point of view of
Nahy Anil Munkar it is obligatory not to render such a person any help.

It may also be that helping or not helping does not have any effect on
the person who neglects prayers. In this case it is not clear whether
one should withhold help. There is a possibility that some assistance
may in fact encourage a person to start praying or to stop sinning, in
which case, needless to say, helping becomes obligatory.

Different ways of Neglecting Prayer
-----------------------------------

1. As we have already seen there are some who do not offer prayers
because they refuse to believe that it is an article of faith and a
religious obligation, commanded by Allah (S.w.T.). Such denial amounts
to denying Allah (S.w.T.), Allah (S.w.T.)’s Prophet and Allah (S.w.T.)’s
book, the Holy Qur’an. These are the people who shall be in everlasting
chastisement. There is no escape for them.

2. It has also been mentioned that there are others who do not deny
Allah (S.w.T.)’s complete supremacy and accept the fact that prayers
have been made obligatory, but they never pray out of sheer laziness or
due to excessive involvement in worldly affairs. These are the people
who are not condemned as unbelievers but they are transgressors who have
committed a greater sin, for which they will have to undergo severe
punishment. Even if such a person were to die a believer, he can get
salvation only after he has undergone the rigours of punishment. That a
person who omits prayer can die a believer is itself a highly remote
possibility, because sins make a person hard hearted and destroys his
faith; except that the Almighty with His kindness and mercy heeds the
call for help at the time of death and because of the sinner’s love for
Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) allows him to die a believer. It is possible that
intercession by Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) may lighten his punishment or remove
it altogether. On the other hand these divine personalities have
themselves said that their intercession will not reach those who
consider prayer insignificant.

3. A third category of people are those who do not omit prayers
altogether but pray occasionally. These are people whose faith is weak
and lacks the strength of firm conviction. Such people when they do pray
may be inclined to postpone prayers after the time has set it, on the
grounds that they would pray later and may not pray at the earliest
hour.

Certainly this way of neglecting Prayer is different from the previous
two kinds but such a person has also considered Prayers unimportant, so
whatever punishment is promised for those who belittle or omit Prayers
will be applicable to him also. Traditions have made a special mention
of such types of people. In one narration Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.)
says,

“The Messenger of Allah (S) said,

“If one prays after the prescribed time the prayer rises up as the
prayer of one who omits it and in a horrid condition. It tells the
person: You have wasted me. May Allah waste you as you have wasted me.”

*Imam (a.s.) also said that the first deed about which one shall be
questioned in the presence of Allah on the day of Qiyāma is Prayer. If
Prayer is valid the other worship acts shall be considered valid too,
but if it is not correct his other deeds are also invalid.*

In the same way the Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“My intercession shall not reach the person who delays prayer (even)
after its time has arrived and (he delays it) till the time has
expired.”[^16]

He (S) also said,

“As far as one exercises caution and performs the five obligatory
prayers the Shaitan is in awe of him. But if he wastes these prayers,
the Shaitan gets an upper hand and lures him towards more dreadful
sins.[^17]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said,

“If one performs prayer on time keeping in mind its due importance and
does not give preference to anything else, the Almighty writes for him
salvation from punishment (that is Allah (S.w.T.) will not punish him).
And one who recites prayer after its time has lapsed and prefers the
worldly affairs to his prayers, his consequences are in the hands of
Allah (S.w.T.). He may forgive or punish him.”

Emphasis on Reciting at the Earliest time
-----------------------------------------

Traditions have greatly emphasized on punctuality with regard to prayer
times and performing it on time. One should not delay prayer without a
valid excuse. Our guides did not ever miss the best time of prayers even
in the most difficult circumstances.

Thus in the book Irshad ul Quloob a narration states that one day Hazrat
Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) was in the midst of fighting during the
battle of Siffīn. In spite of these circumstances he often glanced at
the sun between the rows of fighters. Ibn Abbas asked him why he kept
glancing at the sun? Imam (a.s.) said, “I am looking towards Zawāl
(decline of sun from its zenith) so that I may perform Prayer.” Ibn
Abbas asked him if there was opportunity to recite prayer in these
trying circumstances? Imam (a.s.) replied, “Why are we fighting these
people? Our aim in fighting these people itself is the establishing of
Prayer.”

Ibn Abbas has related that ‘Ali (a.s.) never omitted the Midnight
Prayer, not even during the battle of Siffīn when it was extreme winter.

It is reported that on the day of Aash-Shūrā at the time of Zawāl, Abu
Thamama Saidawi came to the Chief of Martyrs, Imam Husain (a.s.) and
said, “O my Master! We shall all be killed without any doubt and the
time for noon prayer (Zuhr) has arrived. So you please lead us in
Prayer. This shall be our last Prayer and we hope that on this great
occasion we meet the Lord in the condition of having performed one of
the religious obligations. Imam (a.s.) lifted his head towards the sky
and said,

“You have remembered Prayer, may Allah (S.w.T.) include you among the
praying ones. Yes, it is the time for Prayer.”

Then he said, “Recite Azān (the call for Prayer).”

After Azān he (a.s.) called out, “O son of Sa’ad. Have you forgotten the
Islamic Shari’a? Would you not halt hostilities so that we can offer
Prayer?” Thus Imam (a.s.) offered the ‘prayer under perilous
circumstances (Salāt al-Khauf) in such a way that Zuhair Ibn Qayn and
Saīd bin Abdullah Hanfi stood in front of Imam Husain (a.s.) and
whenever an arrow was shot towards the Chief of Martyrs one of them
acted as a shield and took the arrow upon himself. At last Saīd received
thirteen arrow wounds in addition to the injuries caused by spears and
swords and finally Saīd fell down and breathed his last.

Omitting an Obligatory ritual of Prayer
---------------------------------------

There are some who pray in the manner it has been commanded. They are
heedless of the obligatory rituals essential for the correct fulfilment
of prayers. They may not recite the Qur’anic chapters and other
obligatory recitations, or they may recite them incorrectly, without
making any effort to improve themselves; or they may not remain still
during its recitation. Also, they may pray in clothes which are usurped
or ritually impure; or they may pray at a place belonging to someone
whose permission for use has not been sought or granted, or which has
been usurped.

All such people who do not pay attention to the obligatory rituals of
prayer come under the category of people who take prayer lightly and all
that has been said regarding persons who waste their prayers also
applies to these people.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says:

“One day the Messenger of Allah was sitting in the Mosque when a person
entered and started praying. But he did not perform the Rukū’ and
Sajdahs properly (he did not recite the Wajib formulas or did so
incorrectly, or he might not have remained still or failed to maintain
composure during recitation or movements) The Messenger of Allah (S)
said, He (this man) touches his forehead to the ground like a crow pecks
at the earth and lifts it. If he dies praying like this he would not die
on my religion.”[^18]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said,

“The greatest thief is one who steals in his Prayer.” Someone asked him,
“O Messenger of Allah! How could one steal in his Prayer?” He (S)
replied,

“It is not performing the Rukū’ and Sajdahs of Prayers properly.”[^19]

He (S) also said,

“The prayer of one who does not performs Rukū’ and sajdah properly is
invalid.”[^20]

The Holy Prophet (S) also said,

“The prayer of one who performs Rukū’ and as-Sajda properly goes up in a
condition of illumination and splendour. The doors of heaven open wide
to accept it and the Prayer says, ‘You have protected me, may Allah
(S.w.T.) protect you. The angels say, ‘Mercy and Grace of Allah be on
the one who has performed this prayer. But if the prayer is not
performed properly it rises up in a state of darkness and the door of
heaven slams on it and the prayer says, ‘You have wasted me, may Allah
waste you.’ And the Prayer is thrown at his face.”[^21]

Allah’s Messenger (S) also stated,

“Everything has a face. (The most important part of a body). And the
face of your religion is Prayer. Then none of you should deface and
destroy his Prayer. (Which like the face is to the body, it is to ones
religion).”[^22]

A large number of traditional reports mention this subject. The ones
quoted by us should suffice to emphasise the fact, that is one who skips
even a single Wajib part of prayer is like one who has omitted the
prayer as a whole.

There are other conditions for Acceptance of Prayers
----------------------------------------------------

One who recites Prayer in the proper manner has fulfilled his
obligation. There is no punishment for him. But there are additional
conditions for the acceptance of this Prayer by the Almighty and for
being rewarded. The most important condition for this is to pray with
concentration. One who aims for such a high status while being careful
of these conditions is raised to such a degree that no other doers of
good deeds can reach it. Here we shall be content to mention some of the
traditions with the hope they shall benefit the readers.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“One who performs two units (rakats) of Prayer while being conscious of
what he is reciting, then after he completes the Prayer, Allah will
erase all his sins.”[^23]

Imam (a.s.) has also stated,

“The Prayers that you have offered with concentration are with you but
if one is unmindful in all the Prayer or recites it omitting some
rituals, it is wrapped up and tossed at ones face.”[^24]

Hazrat Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“None of you should recite Prayers in sloth, laziness and sleepy
condition. And neither should you think about yourself or any other
thing. Because in the condition of praying he is in the presence of his
lord and only that prayer of a person is acceptable which is recited
with concentration.[^25]

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“Two rakats (units) of prayers recited with concentration and
consciousness of the meaning of recitation is better than standing up
the whole night in worship.”[^26]

He (S) also stated,

“The Almighty Allah does not accept the prayers of one who does not
recite it with concentration.”[^27]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“When you stand up to pray, prepare your mind for prayers. Because
whenever you step towards prayers and concentrate on it, the Almighty
Allah will also turn His mercy towards you, And whenever you turn your
attention from it, or are unmindful or leave one of its rituals or
necessary condition, Allah will also not glance at you with mercy.
That’s why, sometimes prayer is not accepted, except one third, one
fourth or one sixth part that the person had recited with concentration.
And one who remains absent minded in the whole prayers, will not be
bestowed anything by Allah, the High and Mighty.”[^28]

The Late Aga Naraqi (r.a) says in the book Me’rajus Sadāt: Prayer is a
divine composition that is made up of various aspects, the co-ordination
of which brings the prayer to perfection. An analogy is the human form
with its different external and internal characteristics, the
co-ordination of which makes a complete functioning human being. The
most important is the soul and its relation with the heart and the mind,
which decides the spiritual calibre of the person. Then there are vital
organs like the heart, liver, brain, without which life is not possible;
and their absence is death. Some features like limbs, eye, tongue etc.
live without them, but their absence leaves a person incomplete. Then
there are features like eyebrows, eyelashes, beard, ears etc. which
contribute to the person’s good looks and their absence would make a
person look very unpleasant. For the enhancement and perfection of
physical beauty are characteristics like big eyes, dark hair and a
glowing complexion. In the same way for the divine conditions to be
observed for prayers; the soul is the intention, piety, sincerity and
concentration. Its rituals, Takbīratul Ehram, Ruku, Sajdahs, Tashahud
and Qiyām are the vital organs, omitting even one of which nullifies the
prayer. Other obligatory acts like, Qirāt, Zikr, unhurried Rukū’,
as-Sajda and Tashahud are such that if they are neglected intentionally
the prayer will be invalid. They can be compared to the limbs and
tongues of the human body. A loss of these sometimes results in death
and sometimes the person survives. The recommended rituals like Qunut,
the Mustahab Takbīrs and Mustahab Zikr etc. are like the decorative
features which contribute to good looks and those, whose absence
destroys the perfection of physical elegance.

Therefore concentration is a necessary condition for acceptance of
prayers. It is like the soul in the human body. A prayer bereft of these
conditions will be like a lifeless body. The prayer of the one who
recites it without any concentration is just like a lifeless body,
without any human feeling or consequence. The worshipper is also
deprived of the blessings and rewards of prayers. And one of the most
important consequence of reciting prayer according to the Qur’an is as
follows:

***“Surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil.”***
***(Surah al-’Ankabūt 29:45)***

If a person who recites prayers is prone to sin, it implies that his
prayer was soulless.

What is concentration and attention of mind?
--------------------------------------------

Attention of the mind means that a person should be aware as to what he
is reciting and what he is doing. He should be conscious of the
greatness of the High and Mighty Allah and be in awe of Him and he
should realize that Allah (S.w.T.) deserves total and complete
attention. He should consider himself an accused in the fulfilment of
his duty of worship and slavery of Allah (S.w.T.). He should confess his
mistakes with all humility before Allah (S.w.T.) and be hopeful of His
widespread Mercy and unlimited beneficence. In essence, he should
balance his feelings with both fear and hope; a desperate fear of Allah
(S.w.T.)’s wrath, and yet not despairing of His boundless mercy.

The degree of concentration possible, will of course vary with
individuals but we must mention here, the perfection in concentration
achieved by Amir ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.) and the exceptional example of Ebad
bin Bushr. In the battle of Siffīn an arrow head pierced the thigh of
‘Ali (a.s.). It was not possible to pull it out because of the
unbearable pain it caused. When Imam Hasan (a.s.) was consulted in the
matter, he told the people to just wait till ‘Ali (a.s.) stands for
prayer and to remove the arrow while ‘Ali (a.s.) was praying.
Accordingly the arrow was pulled out while ‘Ali (a.s.) praying and ‘Ali
(a.s.) was totally oblivious of the excruciating pain. When ‘Ali (a.s.)
stood for prayers, the world ceased to exist for him. His entire being
was totally immersed in the contact he had established with his Creator
and his relationship with Him.

In *Safinat’ul-Bihār*, volume 2, Page 145 it is mentioned that on the
way to a battle, the Messenger of Allah (S) encamped at a spot to spend
the night. The night watch was entrusted to Ebad bin Bushr and Ammar
Yasir. It was agreed that Bushr would vigil the first part of the night
and, Ammar the other half. So Ammar Yasir went to sleep and Bushr was
guarding the camp. The infidels decided to attack the sleeping Muslims.
An attacker moved stealthily and came near the camp but he saw Bushr
standing in prayers. However, Bushr was so still that the attacker could
not understand whether it was a tree, an animal or man. To make sure the
infidel shot an arrow towards Bushr. It pierced Bushr but he continued
to recite the prayer with the same composure. The second arrow was shot
but Bushr didn’t show any sign of discomfort. Finally the third arrow
struck and Bushr shortened his prayers and awoke Ammar. Ammar awoke to
find Bushr smeared in blood. He asked why he had not woken him at the
first arrow. Bushr replied, “I was reciting Surah al-Kahf in the prayers
and I didn’t like to discontinue. And if there had been no risk to the
life of Prophet (S) and the Muslims and fear of dereliction of the duty
entrusted to me I would have continued my prayers till I were dead.”

Continuing the topic of concentration it needs to be added that it is
necessary for the worshipper to be in awe of Allah (S.w.T.) and to be
sincere, patient and unhurried with his prayers. Every time a person
offers his prayers he should pray with the intensity of the one who is
offering the last prayer of his life and who will not get another chance
for repentance and seeking forgiveness.

It is also important to bear in mind that the words expressed during
recitation of prayer are not merely a verbal exercise. The words in fact
embody the principles on which our thoughts, actions and philosophy are
to be based. For example when we say: Thee alone we worship, worship
does not imply only rituals; worship is a total commitment to live and
die as would please the Almighty, and not as we would prefer ourselves.
It is a total subjugation to His will, which we express by implicit
obedience to all His commands. With this awareness of Allah (S.w.T.)’s
supremacy, it is only natural that we will seek the fulfilment of our
needs and wishes from Him alone with no expectation from any other
source. Even while our desire remains unfulfilled we can have the
comforting assurance that our appeal lies with the ultimate authority,
Who is the best giver, the best supporter and Who alone knows what is
best for the invoker in his interest.

The Barriers Should be Removed
------------------------------

It is necessary that we distance ourselves from Satanic instigations and
avoid the causes that obstruct the acceptance of Prayer. Some of these
are pride, thinking highly of ones own deed, considering oneself
praiseworthy, showing off, especially not fulfilling the husband’s
rights causes the prayer of wife to remain unaccepted. Non-payment of
Zakat and not fulfilling the rights of others. Similarly, jealousy,
arrogance, eating Harām things and drinking wine.

***“Allah only accepts from those who guard (against evil).”***
***(Surah al-Mā’ida 5:27)***

Thus the Prayer of a transgressor and sinner is not accepted. Some of
the factors that decrease divine rewards for prayers are sloth,
sleepiness, unmindful prayers, or praying in hurry or reciting it while
restraining urine, stool or flatulence. Prayers are to be recited with
due humility, sincerity with the eyes half open. During prayers are some
of the practices that fetch additional divine blessings like applying
perfume, wearing the most ritually pure clothes, wearing a ring of Aqīq
(cornelian), combing hair and brushing eenth before Prayers.

Obligatory Prayers
------------------

Obligatory Prayers are six in number. The details of which are as
follows:

1. Five daily prayers that are 17 rakats in all. Morning, two; Noon,
four; Afternoon, four; Evening, Three; and Night, four.

2. Prayers of Ayāt: It is an obligatory prayer of two rakats, that has
to be offered in case of a natural phenomena like lunar or solar eclipse
or a natural calamity like earthquake or any other natural phenomena
that causes fear in general.

3. Prayer of Tawāf (Circumambulating the Kāba): Anyone performing the
Tawāf of Ka’ba is obliged to perform two rakat prayers at the Maqām
al-Ibrahīm (the standing place of Prophet Ibrahīm).

4. The Prayers that become obligatory on account of vow, oath or promise
or if one accepts compensation for offering prayers of a deceased
person.

5. The prayers missed by the deceased father (and also the deceased
mother on the basis of precaution) are obligatory on the eldest son.

6. The Prayer of Mayyit (Burial Prayer). It is obligatory to bathe and
shroud the dead body of every Muslim and to perform the burial prayer
before burying him. The Prayer of Mayyit is obligatory for all deceased
Muslim children aged six or above.

Qaža Prayers (Prayers that are to be offered after its time has lapsed)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

It is obligatory to offer Qaža prayer of every obligatory prayer that
has been missed, whether it was intentional, or inadvertent or because a
person had slept through the entire prayer time. Qaža prayer is also
Wajib for the prayers missed by being in a state of intoxication. Qaža
is also obligatory for all those obligatory prayers that were rendered
invalid due to flaws and lapses. Like prayers offered without ritual
purification or forgetting a rukn (pillar) or intentionally omitting an
obligatory component.

The Qaža of prayers missed due to lunacy or unconsciousness is not
Wajib. Also, when a person accepts Islam, the new convert is not obliged
to make up for the prayer he has missed as a non-Muslim. Ladies are not
required to perform the Qaža of Prayers they miss during monthly periods
or after childbirth.

Apart from the daily Prayers the Qaža of other obligatory prayers must
be performed as and when they have been missed in accordance with the
detailed practical law encased in the Tauzihul Masael etc.

Qaža of Invalid Prayers is very Important
-----------------------------------------

It is not permitted to be negligent in the fulfilment of the Qaža of
Obligatory prayers. If some Qaža prayers remain pending in a person’s
account he should leave instructions that his omitted prayers be
performed. It is then obligatory on the legatee of this person to use
one-third of the property of the deceased to pay for the performance of
these prayers and also fasts if necessary. If the person does not leave
behind any property it is obligatory on his eldest son to perform the
Qaža prayers or to pay for their performance by someone else. In the
absence of both, instruction and son, there is no obligation on other
inheritors. Yet on the basis of precaution they must perform the Qaža or
each one of them should pay his share so that it can be performed on
payment.

Carrying out duties, left unfulfilled by the deceased or doing good
deeds on their behalf will help the dead earn divine rewards and
alleviate some of the sufferings of chastisement. Authentic traditions
of Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) have been recorded on this subject. The dead can
no longer benefit themselves, but divine mercy has left a door open, a
means still available for those who die believers, to avail themselves
of Allah (S.w.T.)’s blessings through the efforts of those that are
alive.

Traditional reports mention the incident of a companion of the Holy
Prophet (S) who had willed to give in charity all the dates stored in
his store house. After the death of this person the Messenger of Allah
(S) distributed as Sadaqah all the dates and at last only one date
remained fallen on the ground. The Messenger (S) picked up the date and
said,

“Had the deceased given away this single piece in Sadaqah with his own
hands! It would have been better than me giving in Sadaqah the whole lot
on behalf of this person.”

The following incident mentioned in Darus Salām of the late Agha Nūri
(r.a.) proves that the deceased person benefits from the good deeds
performed by the living on his behalf: The most pious and good-fearing
Haji Mulla ‘Ali Tehrani narrates from his father, the late Mirza Khalīl
that he said, “In a public bath of Tehran was a servant named ‘Ali Talib
who never prayed or fasted. The late Mirza Khalīl says that when he was
in Najaf al-Ashraf he saw ‘Ali Talib in his dream and that he had come
to Wadi us-Salam, the valley of peace (a part of Barzakh). He was
surprised and asked, “How did you reach this elevated position while you
neither prayed nor fasted?”

The person replied, “O man! When I died I was tied in iron collar and
chains and was being dragged towards punishment when Mulla Muhammad
Kermanshahi (a Scholar of Tehran), May Allah (S.w.T.) bestow him a good
recompense, appointed someone to perform Hajj in my place and to perform
Prayers and fast on my behalf. He gave Zakat on my behalf and restored
the rights of those whom I had oppressed. He did not leave out any of
the duties that had to be performed on my behalf and saved me from the
divine chastisement. May Allah (S.w.T.) give him a goodly reward.” Mirza
Khalīl woke up from sleep, filled with terror. He was astonished at this
dream. After a few days some people came from Tehran and Mirza Khalīl
asked them regarding ‘Ali Talib. They confirmed that the Mulla had
compensated for all the duties of ‘Ali Talib. In fact even the names of
the persons appointed were identical as the Mirza had seen in his dream.

Needless to add that it would be foolish on our part to be casual about
our obligatory duties, in the belief that they can be fulfilled after
our death. We can obviously not be sure that those we leave behind would
carry out these obligations, nor can we be sure that it would be done
with the same degree of sincerity as we would do it ourselves. Besides
our Wajib duties carried out by someone else may suffice to save us from
the punishment but we will be deprived of the numerous special benefits
reserved for those who carry out their obligations.

[^1]: Layali al-Akhbār page 394, Salāt & Zāsail

[^2]: Salāt, Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 3 page 29

[^3]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 3 page 29

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 3 page 29

[^5]: Furu Kāfi, Vol. 3, page. 271

[^6]: Furu Kāfi, Vol. 3, page. 241

[^7]: Bihār al-Anwār Vol. 18 page 52

[^8]: Furu al-Kāfi Vol. 3 page 264

[^9]: Bihār al-Anwār Vol. 82 page 218

[^10]: Bihār al-Anwār Vol. 82

[^11]: Bihār al-Anwār Vol. 111

[^12]: Layalul Akhbār

[^13]: Layalul Akhbār Vol. 4 page 51

[^14]: Layalul Akhbār page 395

[^15]: Layalul Akhbār Page 395

[^16]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 3 page 81

[^17]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 3 page 81

[^18]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Chapter 8

[^19]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Chap. 8 Hadith no. 18

[^20]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il, Chap. 8, tradition no. 18

[^21]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il Chapter 8, Hadith No. 15

[^22]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il Chapter 6, Hadith No. 5

[^23]: Wasa’il ul-Shia, Vol. 4, page 684

[^24]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^25]: Wasa’il ul-Shia: Vol. 4, page. 687

[^26]: Wasa’il ul-Shia: Vol. 3, page. 54

[^27]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^28]: Wasa’il ul-Shia and Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il


