The Thirty-eighth Greater Sin: Not Giving Importance to Hajj
============================================================

The thirty-eighth of the Greater sins is to consider Hajj insignificant
and not to give it due importance. This has been recorded in the
tradition of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) by Amash and in the tradition
of Imam Riďa (a.s.) by Fazl Ibn Shazān. Since Hajj is also an obligatory
article of faith, what is true of avoiding prayers and zakat also
applies to Hajj, viz. a person who refuses to acknowledge it as an
obligatory duty is a Kafir and the one who does not fulfill this duty,
due to laziness, carelessness or excessive involvement in worldly
affairs has committed a great sin. Hajj is highly emphasised as a
religious duty of tremendous importance. Indifference towards it is
sacrilege.

Delay from the year of Capability is Harām
------------------------------------------

Hajj is from those obligatory duties that must be performed immediately,
if it is possible to do so. Not only is failure to perform Hajj a
greater sin, but postponing it, is also a greater sin, even if it be for
a year. Hajj has to be performed the very year, in which one is capable
of doing so.

Muhaqiq says in *Shariatul Islam* that delay from the year of capability
is a deadly (Great) sin. Shahīd Thani (the second Martyr) says in
*Masālik*, “There is no difference of opinion among the Shia Scholars
regarding this matter and there are sufficient proofs from the Qur’an
and traditions that delay from the year of capability is a Greater Sin.”
It is therefore clear that any delay in performing Hajj amounts to not
giving it the importance which is due to it.

Qur’anic ayats and traditions of Ma’sūmīn (a.s.) equate failure to
perform Hajj with infidelity. It is a denial of Allah (S.w.T.) and a
sort of polytheism. The Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur’an,

***“…and pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for the sake of
Allah, (upon) everyone who is able to undertake the journey to it and
whoever disbelieves, then surely Allah is self-sufficient, above any
need of the worlds.”*** ***(Surah Āli- ‘Imran 3: 97)***

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“By the words ‘whoever disbelieves’ is meant the one who does not
perform it.”

‘Ali Ibn Ja’far records in his *Sahih* that, “My brother Imam Mūsa Ibn
Ja’far (a.s.) says,

‘Indeed, the Almighty Allah has made Hajj incumbent on those who are
capable. That is if they do not perform Hajj in the year of capability
the omitted Hajj will become incumbent on them every year till the end
of their lives.’”

For further explanation of this statement the book *Urwathul Wuthqa* can
be referred.

‘Ali Ibn Ja’far says: I asked Imam (a.s.) whether those of us who did
not perform Hajj would become infidels? Imam (a.s.) said,

“No, but the one who denies Hajj and does not give it due importance. He
shall be a Kafir.”

Zarih Muharibi writes in his Sahih a tradition from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.):

“If a person dies without performing the obligatory Hajj while there was
nothing that prevented him from doing so, that is, he was not having any
need or problem and neither was he sick and nor any strong person stood
in his way, then Allah shall raise him in Qiyāma with the Christians or
Jews.”[^1]

*Imam (a.s.) also said,*

“A person who delays Hajj intentionally till such a time that he dies,
will be raised by Almighty Allah on the day of Qiyāma in the form of a
Jew or a Christian.”[^2]

Muhaddith Faiz says in the book Wafi regarding above tradition that
“need” means a necessity that impoverishes or that which will impoverish
him in the future. Also, Imam (a.s.) has said that a person who fails to
perform Hajj without a valid excuse will die as a Christian or a Jew.
This implies that he has no faith in this important Islamic tenet.
Otherwise in the absence of any obstruction he would have performed it
immediately, considering the possibility that he may not be alive the
next year.

Ishaq Ibn Ammar narrates from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he said,

“One who dies (without performing Hajj) while he was healthy and wealthy
is like the one regarding whom Allah says that, ‘We shall raise him
blind in Qiyāma.’”

Ishaq was surprised and he asked Imam (a.s.) whether that person will be
actually blind in Qiyāma? Imam (a.s.) said,

“Yes! Allah will blind him from seeing the path to Paradise.”[^3]

Muhammad Ibn Fuzail says that he asked Imam Mūsa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.)
regarding the ayat,

***“And whoever is blind in this, he shall (also) be blind in the
hereafter and more erring from the way.”*** ***(Surah al-‘Isrā’, 17:
72)***

Imam (a.s.) said,

“It is the one who delays Hajj even in the event of his being
financially capable. He keeps saying he would perform Hajj the coming
year till he dies without performing Hajj.”[^4]

Ayats that Imply the ones who Neglect Hajj
------------------------------------------

The Almighty Allah says in Surah Munafiqūn,

***“And spend out of what We have given you before death comes to one of
you, so that he should say: My Lord! Why didst Thou not respite me to a
near term, so that I should have given alms and been of the doers of
good deeds?***

***And Allah does not respite a soul when its appointed term has come
and Allah is Aware of what you do.”*** ***(Surah al-Munāfiqūn 63:
10-11)***

After this Imam Mūsa bin Ja’far (a.s.) said,

“I should have given alms”, indicates Sadaqah and “good deeds”, implies
Hajj.”[^5]

Also the following Ayat says,

***“Say: Shall we inform you of the greatest losers in (their) deeds?***

***(These are) they whose labour is lost in this world’s life and they
think that they are well-versed in skill of the hands.”*** ***(Surah
al-Kahf 18: 103-104)***

Imam (a.s.) explains,

“It implies those who neglect Hajj and continue to postpone it saying
they’ll go next year.”

There are many traditions that say neglecting Hajj is a Greater Sin,
however the ones quoted above should suffice our purpose.

Worldly Consequences of Postponing Hajj
---------------------------------------

One of the worldly consequences of postponing Hajj is failure in the
affairs for which Hajj is postponed.

*Imam Baqir (a.s.) says that if a person postpones Hajj in order to
acquire or complete some worldly affair he will see that other people
have gone and come back from Hajj while neither his aim is achieved nor
his work complete.*

Neglecting Hajj causes poverty
------------------------------

*The Messenger of Allah (S) says in the Sermon of Ghadīr:*

“O gathering of People! Perform the Hajj of the Holy House. Those
families who perform Hajj become wealthy and those who neglect Hajj will
be reduced to penury.”

“O gathering of People! The Haji is helped by Allah and whatever they
spent (on Hajj) is restored to them in this world. And Allah does not
waste the recompense of the doers of good (in hereafter).”[^6]

Imam Baqir (a.s.) says,

“Three things are such whose reward is in this life in addition to that
of the Hereafter: Hajj that removes poverty, Sadaqah that removes
calamities and doing good (to others) which increases the life
span.”[^7]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“If people neglect Hajj there will be no delay in the descent of
punishment upon them.”[^8]

Samah says that, “Imam Sadiq (a.s.) asked me why I did not go for Hajj
this year? I said I have entered into a deal with some people and there
were other activities also. I hope that those matters for which I
couldn’t go for Hajj will be beneficial for me. Imam (a.s.) said,

I swear by Allah! Allah has not reposed benefit in any matter that acts
as an obstruction to your Hajj. Every person remains deprived of Hajj
due to the sins that he has committed.”[^9]

Ishaq bin Ammar told Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that, “A person had
sought my advice regarding his intention for going for Hajj because he
was weak (physically and financially), so I urged him not to go for
Hajj.”

Imam (a.s.) said,

“For preventing the person from Hajj you have made yourself eligible for
being involved in some malady for the whole year.”

Ishaq says that as the Imam (a.s.) had predicted, I was sick throughout
the following year. It follows that we must not restrain anyone from
good deeds, especially Hajj. If we do so, we close the way of Allah
(S.w.T.). Our aim should be to motivate others to do good deeds and
encourage them to hasten towards them. Similarly we should never advise
people to give up a good action they wish to perform and substitute it
with another good one of our choice. Because it is possible that he may
not do the latter and even skip the former. Thus, if we do this we will
have performed the divine obligation of Amr bil Ma’rūf.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Beware of discouraging your believing brother from Hajj. If one does
this he shall face worldly calamities in addition to the punishment of
Hereafter.”[^10]

Virtues of Hajj
---------------

Just as neglecting Hajj is severely punished its fulfillment is greatly
rewarded with numerous benefits for this life as well as hereafter.
Traditions mention a great number of benefits some of which are
presented below.

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“People who perform Hajj are of Three kinds. The first kind are those
who have greater position than others, and all their past and future
sins are forgiven, and Allah shall protect them from the chastisement of
the grave. The second group is that whose only past misdeeds are
condoned and the third group is such that their wealth and children will
remain safe till they return from Hajj.”[^11]

Another tradition speaks of a group who go for Hajj but do not fulfill
all the conditions. Their hajj is not accepted and they do not qualify
for any rewards in the hereafter but till the time they return their
families will remain safe.

A person asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) in the Masjidul Harām as to
who is the greatest sinner? Imam (a.s.) replied,

“One who stands at mawquf (Between Arafat and Muzdalifah), walks between
Safa and Marwa and prays at Maqam al- Ibrahīm and even after this he
thinks Allah has not forgiven him. He is the greatest sinner.” (Because
he has despaired of Allah’s Mercy) and as we have stated before
despairing of Allah’s Mercy is a greater sin).

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) relates from his forefathers that a Bedouin
came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said, “O Messenger of Allah (S)! I
started for hajj but could not reach it though I am wealthy. So tell me
how much I should spend to obtain the Tawāb equal to it?”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said,

“Look at Mt. Abu Qubais, If the whole of it turns to gold and comes to
your possession and you spend all of it in the way of Allah you would
still not be able to reach the status of one who has performed Hajj.”

Then he (S) said,

“When a person decides to go for Hajj, after this for every item that he
pick up and puts down he is rewarded ten times and he is raised ten
degrees. When he mounts the camel each of its step is just as stated
before. When he performs the tawaf of Kaba he is purified of all sins.
After he has finished running between Safa and Marwah he is again
cleansed from sins. Again when he stays at Arafat his sins are washed.
When he stays at Masharil Harām he is purified of bad deeds. When he
stones the satans he is again forgiven the sins.”

In this way the Messenger of Allah (S) mentioned each stage and
continued saying that the person is purified of sins. Then he (S) told
the Bedouin,

“How can you reach the level of one who performs Hajj?”

After this Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“His sins are not recorded for four months and if he does not commit a
greater sin, only good deeds are recorded during this period.”[^12]

Muhaddith Faiz commenting on the above tradition of the Holy Prophet (S)
says that, there are different classes of sins, based on their terrible
consequences, their blackening of the heart, their magnitude, etc. and
what the tradition probably implies is that man is purified of
particular kinds of sins at the different stages of Hajj till he is
cleansed of every kind of sin. There are traditions which mention that
there are some sins which are only forgiven when the Haji camps at
Arafat on the day of Arafah.

Another tradition says,

“People who come for Hajj and Umrah are guests of Allah. If they ask
Allah for anything He grants it to them, if they call Him He replies. If
they recommend for others He accepts it. If they remain quiet He gives
without their asking and for each Dirham they spend on it, He shall give
them a thousand.”

The different types of sins are material, mental or physical in nature.
Physical sins may verbal or practical. Of the practical sins, there are
as many sins as can be associated with the different parts of the body.
These sins are of different magnitude. Some invite calamities, some
nullify supplications, some prevent rains, some obstruct sustenance and
others cause sudden death as mentioned in the supplication of Kumayl. So
each of the Hajj rituals is prescribed for a particular kind of sin. The
effect of some sins is not known to anyone except Allah. The sins which
are forgiven in Arafat are probably hard-heartedness, neglect or staying
at the place of sin, etc.[^13]

The narration continues,

“When the pilgrim reaches Makkah, Allah appoints two guardian angels for
him who protect him during Tawaf, Prayer and Say’y. When on the day of
Arafah he camps, they slap his shoulders and say that Allah has forgiven
all his previous sins, now he should worry about his future.”

When does Hajj become Wajib?
----------------------------

The first condition necessary for Hajj is maturity. If a person performs
Hajj, even before reaching maturity, it cannot substitute for obligatory
hajj, even though it may have been correctly performed and is Mustahab
like any other act of worship. After reaching maturity, the person is
obliged to perform Hajj again, provided all the other necessary
conditions apply to him. The second condition is that he should be of a
sound mind, the third that he should be independent (not a slave), the
fourth condition is that by going for Hajj he must not be compelled to
do a Harām act, or to forgo a Wajib act. (For the latter situation some
scholars are of the opinion that, that Wajib act should be carried out,
which is considered more important according to the priorities laid down
by the tenets of our religion, and the fifth condition is that he should
be capable of performing Hajj.

Conditions that make one capable
--------------------------------

Capability is based on the factors mentioned below.

1) He should have the money to cover the expenses to and fro from Hajj.
Should have means of transportation.

2) He should have sufficient physical strength to go for hajj and
return.

3) There should be no obstacles that prevent him from travelling for
Hajj. If he is apprehensive about the safety of his life, property and
honour on the way to Hajj, he is not obliged to go for it.

4) He must have the time to complete the Hajj.

5) He must have sufficient funds to cover the expenses of his household
till he returns. His household constitutes all those who are dependant
on him. Whether their expenses are Wajib on him; like the wife and
children or those whose expenses are not Wajib; like younger or elder
brother who is himself poor and is sustained by him. Also the orphans
that he has undertaken to maintain and the servants who are under his
care.

6) He should not face difficulties regarding his livelihood upon
returning from Hajj. He should have some income or profits from estates
through which it would be possible for him to maintain his household
expenses and not to bear hardships.

If one has missed Hajj due to carelessness he must perform it the next
year, even if he does not have financial capability or has to bear
hardships and problems. If in the subsequent years he is financially
capable but suffers from a malady and there is no hope for its cure, he
must send someone to perform Hajj on his behalf. He should fix a payment
for the substitute and must also bear the expenses of his proxy. Even if
he has not appointed a proxy and dies before it, his successors are
obliged to send someone as a proxy and perform the Hajj of deceased.
Special provision must be made in the property of the departed person
even if he had not made a bequest in this regard. This provision should
be made whether there remains any amount to be distributed among his
inheritors or not and even if his successor is his child. This should be
done, because to pay for the proxy Hajj of the deceased is as important
as paying his debts. It is the foremost duty on the successor. After
that if any amount remains it can be shared among the survivors.

In case the deceased had made a bequest for proxy Hajj the expense of
the same must be deducted from the one-third portion of his wealth
(Regarding which he is allowed to make bequest).

It should be noted that only one Hajj is obligatory in one’s life. After
a person has performed the obligatory Hajj, it is Mustahab (recommended)
for him to perform it every year, if he is capable of doing so. If all
the above six conditions are fulfilled it is obligatory for the person
to perform Hajj the same year. As already mentioned, postponing a Wajib
Hajj for the next year is Harām and a Greater sin.

It is Mustahab to appoint Proxies for living and Deceased Persons
-----------------------------------------------------------------

It is Mustahab to appoint proxies to perform the Mustahab Hajj of living
or deceased people. As mentioned in the tradition of Wasa’il ul-Shia
narrated from Muhammad bin Isa that Imam Riďa (a.s.) sent him some money
and instructed him to perform Hajj as the proxy of Imam (a.s.); along
with his brother Mūsa and Yūnus bin Abdur Rahmān.

Abdullah Ibn Sinan says that I was with Imam Sadiq (a.s.) when a person
came to him and Imam (a.s.) gave him 30 Dinars so that he should perform
the Proxy Hajj and umrah of his deceased son, Ismail. After that, Imam
(a.s.) said,

“If you do so, Ismail will get the reward of a mustahab Hajj because it
is paid from his property and you will get the reward of nine Hajjs
because you shall bear the difficulties and hardships of Hajj.”[^14]

The Proxy of Imam should be Pious
---------------------------------

It is mentioned in Wasa’il ul-Shia that Abu Muhammad Alji had two sons,
one was pious and the other evil. Some Shias had paid him a sum to
appoint a proxy for performing Hajj on behalf of Imam Hujjat Ibnul Hasan
(a.s.). It was one of the acts of worship that Shias used to perform. So
Abu Mahmūd gave the amount to his evil son and performed the Hajj with
him. Abu Muhammad says that on the day of Arafah I saw a
wheat-complexioned, well-dressed and handsome youth. He was engrossed in
supplications and seeking forgiveness more than other people. When it
was time for the people to move from Arafat to Mashar he came to me and
said, “O Shaykh! Aren’t you ashamed of Allah?”

“Why?” I asked.

He said, “You are told to appoint a proxy for a person you knew well for
performing Hajj, and you have entrusted it to a man who drinks and
spends on evil deeds.”

Then he pointed to one of my eye and said,

“Do you not fear becoming blind in the eye?”

I was ashamed and when I recovered from the shock I tried to look for
the youth but he had disappeared from the plains of Arafat. Forty days
had not passed when the eye towards which he had pointed, become
infected and I became blind.

The book al-Kāfi contains a tradition related by Mūsa bin Qasim from
Imam Jawad (a.s.) that he said to Imam (a.s.), “I wish to perform Tawaf
on your behalf and on the behalf of your ancestors. But some people have
told me that it is not allowed.” Imam (a.s.) said,

“Perform as many circumambulations as you can. This is certainly
permitted.”

The narrator says, “After Three years I again went to Imam (a.s.) and
said, “A few years ago I had sought your permission to perform tawaf on
behalf of your respected self and your honoured ancestors. So, I
performed this deed as much as Allah gave me Tawfīq (divine
opportunity). I performed tawaf on behalf of the Holy Prophet (S), Amir
ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) and so on till the end when I did it on your
behalf. And these personalities are so dear to me that I consider their
love a part of my faith.”

Imam (a.s.) said,

“Then you have followed a religion, besides which there is no other
acceptable faith in view of Almighty Allah.”

Imam (a.s.) said,

“You may perform this deed as much as you can. It is the best of deeds
that you perform.”

Reasons why Hajj is made Obligatory
-----------------------------------

The traditions of Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) mention the reasons for making Hajj
obligatory. The traditions also explain the significance and wisdom
underlying each of the rituals.

In Wasa’il ul-Shia is a tradition by Imam Riďa (a.s.), in which the Imam
(a.s.) says that Hajj is made incumbent so that people may derive the
spiritual and material benefits inherent in it. Some benefits of Hajj
are as follows:

Hajj is a unique occasion, to present yourself humbly before the
Almighty and devote yourself entirely to Him in order to gain His
pleasure and seek nearness to Him. It is an occasion for you to set
aside all your worldly cares and concerns and immerse yourself entirely
in worshipping your creator and carrying out His commands. For this you
deny yourself worldly pleasures and comfort, face hardships and the
vagaries of nature. Your sincere efforts in fulfilling the obligations
of Hajj are rewarded with Allah (S.w.T.)’s pleasure and nearness to Him;
untold bounties for this world as well as the hereafter; your repentance
is accepted and your sins forgiven; your supplications are granted, this
is a special divine favour for individuals who are part of a large
gathering at a single place.

Besides Hajj is a unique opportunity for Muslims in general, from all
over the world. It provides a common ground for interaction between
Muslims of different countries at various levels. Individuals benefit
financially be they traders, suppliers, retailers or hirers or beggars
and destitute who receive alms.

People of one country get first hand information of the situations
prevailing in other Muslim countries. Such interaction brings awareness
of the problems and difficulties faced by your brother Muslim and
perhaps open avenues for extending help.

Servitude of Allah (S.w.T.) and Comparison with Angels
------------------------------------------------------

Amir ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.) says in a sermon of Nahjul Balagha:

Allah (S.w.T.) has made obligatory upon you the pilgrimage (hajj) to His
sacred House which is the turning point for the people who go to it as
beasts or pigeons go towards spring water. Allah (S.w.T.) the glorified
made it a sign of their supplication before His Greatness and their
acknowledgement of His Dignity. He selected from among His creation
those who on listening to His call responded to it and testified His
word. They stood in the position of His Prophets and resembled His
angels who surround the Divine Throne securing all the benefits of
performing His worship and hastening towards His promised forgiveness.
Allah (S.w.T.) the glorified made it (His sacred House) an emblem for
Islam and an object of respect for those who turn to it. He made
obligatory its pilgrimage and laid down its claim for which He held you
responsible to discharge it. Thus, Allah (S.w.T.) the glorified said:

***“…And (purely) for Allah, is incumbent upon mankind, the pilgrimage
to the House, for those who can afford to journey thither. And whoever
denieth, then verily, Allah is Self sufficiently independent of the
worlds”*** ***(Surah Āli- ‘Imran 3: 97)***

Allamah Narāqi has described the spiritual and material benefits of Hajj
in eloquent words in his book Me’rajus Sadat. Some of his comments:

The main purpose for which Allah (S.w.T.) has created man is that he
should recognize his Creator, be devoted to Him and remain attached to
Him. [This depends upon the purity of his inner self, which in turn
depends on his control over his sensual desires and his aversion to
evil]. Throughout his life he has to continually remember Allah (S.w.T.)
and direct his efforts in thought and action towards dedication to Allah
(S.w.T.). At all times his priorities are to be clear; that nothing
pertaining to the material world is to have precedence over the pleasure
of Allah (S.w.T.). As a means of attaining this objective the Almighty
desires to be worshipped. The compassionate Allah (S.w.T.) has ordained
that by worshipping Him and supplicating Him man would have fulfilled
the very purpose of his creation and his existence. In His wisdom and
mercy He has made some acts of worship obligatory so that man is
compelled to benefit himself.

Zakat and Khums are compulsory deeds of worship. Acting upon them a
person will be obliged to spend from his wealth in the way of Allah
(S.w.T.). This practice will gradually develop in him a detachment
towards material world. Fasting as an obligatory worship inculcates a
spirit of self-control over desires and self-denial of worldly
pleasures. Prayers encourage us to give our full attention to Allah
(S.w.T.), both with our senses and our bodily movements.

Hajj is such an excellent act of worship that it embraces the
significance and virtues of all other forms of worship. Not only does it
include spending in the way of Allah (S.w.T.), leaving our homeland,
denying ourselves comfort and pleasures; spending time in prayers and
supplications and several other rituals like Tawaf, recanting the oath
we have taken for Allah (S.w.T.). We also have to perform some ritual
like running between Safa and Marwah, which display an extreme form of
humility and helplessness and the stoning of satans which we cannot
fully comprehend. Some rituals can be understood through reason, but
there are some others that defy our intellect and try as we may we
cannot fathom the depths of their significance.

However, keeping their benefits aside we must consider them a form of
service to Almighty and a fulfillment of one of His commands. Indeed,
total submission and true devotion is displayed only through such types
of rituals. Because submission implies that we do whatever we have been
commanded solely for Allah (S.w.T.)’s pleasure. That is why the
Messenger of Allah (S) said regarding Hajj.

“I have heeded your call by performing Hajj by sincere servitude and
obedience.”

He (S) did not utter such words regarding any other act of worship.
Indeed the act of worship the wisdom of which we cannot fathom is the
best form of worship. Those who are surprised at the unusual rituals of
Hajj have not understood the secret of devotion and servitude. One of
the special characteristic of Hajj is to perform all rituals even
without necessarily comprehending the rationale behind them.

Every ritual of Hajj has a significance that relates it to the events of
the hereafter. Besides, it is a necessary requirement of Hajj that all
the people gather at a place which was frequented by the Angels who
brought divine revelation to the Holy Prophet (S). Before the Messenger
of Allah (S), the friend of Allah (Khalīlullah) Hazrat Ibrahīm (a.s.)
stood at this place and it was at that very spot the Angels descended
for him. It is such a purified land that from Adam (a.s.) to the seal of
the Prophets the greatest messengers of Allah have camped here. It is
here that divine revelation and angels have descended through the ages.
It is the birth place of the chief of Prophets (S) and the ground oft
trodden by him and the other prophets (a.s.). The Almighty Allah has
addressed it as “My House” and made it a place of worship for men. He
appointed the surroundings of this House as a Sanctuary. He chose the
plain of Arafat near His House as a place of forgiveness. In order to
maintain the dignity of His House, He prohibited the killing of any
living creature or uprooting of vegetation. He bestowed a special status
to this place, for people to gather from far off places and humble
themselves before the Lord of the House and confess verbally that He is
higher and beyond place and time.

No doubt, gathering at such a place increases love and brotherhood. We
get a chance to meet righteous believers from around the world thus
forming ties of friendship, which results in early acceptance of the
invocations of the people. We are also reminded of the struggles and
difficulties borne by the Messenger of Allah (S) in the establishment
and dissemination of religion. All these factors purify the souls of
those present in Hajj and fill them with tenderness. It is a display of
the magnificence of Islam and the greatness of the founders of Islam.

Last, the high status of the House of Allah was further enhanced by Him
by making it the birth place of Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.), without
allegiance to whom, no act of worship is acceptable to Allah (S.w.T.).

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 8 page 20

[^2]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 8 page 21

[^3]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 8 page 18

[^5]: Faqih Vol. 2 page 220

[^6]: Ihtijaj of Tabarsi

[^7]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^8]: al-Kāfi Vol. 4 page 271

[^9]: al-Kāfi

[^10]: Wafi

[^11]: al-Kāfi

[^12]: Tahzīb, Vol. 5, page. 19

[^13]: Wafi

[^14]: al-Kāfi Vol. 4 page 248


