The Fortieth Greater Sin: Persistence in Minor Sins
===================================================

The fortieth Greater Sin according to Qur’an and the traditions of
Ma’sūmīn (a.s.) is committing a lesser (minor) sin repeatedly. Amash
relates from Imam Sadiq (a.s.): “And consistency upon the smaller sins”
is a greater sin. In the same way Sadūq has narrated that Imam Riďa
(a.s.) considered, “And consistency on sins” a part of greater sin.
Similarly we have a tradition of Imam Sadiq (a.s.),

“A smaller sin which is committed again and again is a greater one. And
a greater sin for which one repents doesn’t remain greater.”[^1]

That is, if one commits a Greater sin and repents sincerely there is no
punishment for it. But if one does a smaller sin again and again, it
assumes the form of greater sin.

Abu Basīr says that I heard Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) saying:

“By Allah! As far as a person continues to sin, Allah does not accept
any of his worship acts.”[^2]

***“If you shun the great sins which you are forbidden, We will do away
with your small sins and cause you to enter an honourable place of
entering.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4: 31)***

This ayat is speaking about those minor sins, which are forgiven in lieu
of avoiding greater sins and performing all *Wajib* duties. These minor
sins can therefore become a barrier in the acceptance of worship and
supplication, only when they are repeated often as a result of which
they assume the magnitude of a greater sin; the consequence of which is
that the other acts of worship are not accepted. There is a tradition
from the Messenger of Allah (S) in *al-Kāfi* that says:

“One of the signs of wretchedness is repeating a sin.”

One of the conditions of forgiveness is that the sin should not be repeated again and again
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the proofs that repetition of smaller sins turns them into
greater sins is, that Allah (S.w.T.) has made the giving up of sin its
forgiveness and a condition for entering Paradise. The Almighty Allah
(S.w.T.) says,

***“And those who when they commit an indecency or do injustice to their
souls remember Allah and ask forgiveness for their faults and who
forgives the faults but Allah and (who) do not knowingly persist in what
they have done.”*** ***(Surah Āli- ‘Imran 3: 135)***

According to *Tafsīrul Mizan* the word *‘Fahesha’* implies an evil deed
and is usually used to connote adultery. Therefore if in this ayat it is
used to mean adultery then the word *‘Zulm’* should definitely mean a
particular smaller sin. And the words “remembrance of Allah” would then
imply that forgiveness and repentance can be achieved only if the sinner
remembers Allah (S.w.T.) and turns his attention towards Him with a
sincere heart. Merely chanting *‘Istighfar’* in a mechanical way will
not avail him. The phrase, “and (who) do not knowingly persist in what
they have done,” clearly indicates that forgiveness is only for those
who do not repeat the sins.

The consequences of committing a sin repeatedly is that the sinner
develops a disregard for Divine commandments and gradually reaches a
stage when he thinks them to be unimportant. Under these conditions he
has no desire to submit himself to the will and pleasure of Allah
(S.w.T.) and remembrance of Allah (S.w.T.) does not affect him. However,
this occurs only when one persists in sins intentionally. That’s why the
word ‘knowingly’ is used.

The Greatest Sin
----------------

Hazrat Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“Beware of persistence on sins, for it is the greatest of the greater
sins and a serious crime.”[^3]

Imam (a.s.) has also said,

“The greatest sin is one that the doer repeats again and again.”[^4]

He (a.s.) also says,

“Persistence in sins is the Greatest sin.”

Muhaqqiq Khwansari (a.r.) explains the above statement of Amir
ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) in the following words:

It is clear from these that the magnitude of a sin increases until its
repetition and persistence in sin is a greater sin than all the greater
sins. Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) has also quoted the following
tradition:

“I swear by Allah! Worship and obedience of one who persists in sin is
not accepted.”

What does Persistence Mean?
---------------------------

There is unanimity among scholars that persistently committing a smaller
sin makes it a greater sin. A widely accepted view is that persistence
is that a person commits a sin, is not repentant, and continues to
indulge in it. For example wearing gold or silver (which is *Harām* for
men but is not a confirmed greater sin in Islam) or to look at
Non-mahram or to enter another’s house without permission. The Martyr
writes in *Qawaid* that, persistence is not restricted to committing one
particular sin repeatedly but it also includes committing different
types of lesser sins like a person may wear gold or silk; look at
Non-mahram or shake hands with her or embrace her, and not be repentant
for any of these acts.

According to some scholars committing a lesser sin with the intention of
repeating it again makes it a greater sin. Also, the mere intention of
committing a smaller sin twice renders it greater. Shahīd has termed it
Isrār al-Hukmi (Implied persistence) in his book, *Qawaid.*

A group of scholars maintain that not being repentant for a sin and not
seeking forgiveness for it is persistence, even if there is no intention
to do it again. However, according to my research the last two cases are
very unlikely because they do not conform to any of the several meanings
of the word, ‘Persistence’.

Two traditional reports in this connection are given. One of them is
related by Jabir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) in which he is
explaining the word “persist” as mentioned in the ayat of Surah Āli-
‘Imran. Imam (a.s.) says,

“Persistence means that a person commits a sin, does not seek
forgiveness for it and has no intention to discontinue it.”[^5]

So, it is possible that in this ayat Imam (a.s.) has explained the
meaning of ‘persistence’ as mentioned in this ayat and not the
persistence that is considered a Greater sin.

The second tradition is narrated by Ibn Umair from Imam Baqir (a.s.) and
a part of it is presented below to illustrate our view.

“Every believer shall receive the punishment for the sin that he has
committed except that he repents for it. And when he is repentant and
discontinues the sin he will be eligible for intercession. And one who
is not repentant for his sin is one who is persistent on it and one who
is persistent is not eligible for salvation. Because actually he has no
faith in that which Allah has promised. If at all he had believed in
Allah’s promise he would have been repentant.”[^6]

In this tradition, like in the tradition of Jabir, Imam (a.s.) has
considered the unrepentant attitude and failure to seek repentance as
persistence.

Since the subject of Imam’s discussion is greater it is possible that
not seeking forgiveness for greater sin amounts to persistence. But
repeating a smaller sin is also a greater sin. Besides Imam (a.s.) is
speaking about the case where not seeking forgiveness is due to
carelessness, heedlessness of Divine commands and feeling safe from
Divine anger. And it is clear that if a person does not fear the wrath
of Allah he does not seek forgiveness, which is a greater sin.

It is also possible that his failure to repent and seek forgiveness is
‘persistence’ is metaphorical. Thus there is a saying from Imam Baqir
(a.s.),

“Indeed, persistence in sins is the consequence of heedlessness of
Divine chastisement and only those people are the losers who are
heedless (of Divine chastisement)”[^7]

To consider a sin small
-----------------------

According to some jurists, repeating a smaller sin makes it a greater
one. But there are some other factors that also render the smaller sin
into a bigger one. The very fact that a person who commits a smaller
sin, considers it small and insignificant, and thinks that he is not
liable to be punished for such a trivial sin, itself makes his sin a
greater one and brings down the wrath of Allah (S.w.T.) upon him. His
thinking reveals that he does not give importance to the prohibitions
laid down by the Almighty and is not in total submission to the will and
pleasure of Allah (S.w.T.). According to traditions such a sin is
unpardonable.

Scholastic theology maintains that forgiveness of smaller sins for those
who abstain from greater ones is due to Divine mercy and grace.
Otherwise according to reason every disobedience of Allah (S.w.T.),
whether small or great makes one deserving of punishment. It is clear
that Divine grace is only for those who do not leave the path of His
obedience and servitude. One who is vain and proud and does not realize
his insignificance and magnificence of Allah (S.w.T.) can never receive
Allah (S.w.T.)’s Grace, instead he would be disgraced and humiliated.

Allah (S.w.T.) will remit the smaller sins of those who abstain from
greater sins and do not consider their smaller sins, small.

Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“The greatest sin is one, the doer of which considers it little.”[^8]

Hazrat Imam Baqir (a.s.) states,

“Among the unpardonable sins is the saying of a person, “I wish that
except for this sin which I have committed other sins had not been
accountable.” [He considered this sin insignificant.][^9]

Beware of the sin that are considered small and insignificant. Indeed,
they are ones that shall be questioned by Allah and these (small sins)
will be heaped upon the person till it (becomes a great sin and)
destroys him.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Seek (Allah’s) refuge and save yourself from the sins that are
considered small and insignificant.”

The narrator asked, “Which of the sins are small?”

Imam (a.s.) said,

“A person commits a sin and then says: How lucky would I have been if I
had not any sin except this one. (Because) this sin is small and
insignificant.”

Being Pleased with a Sinful Act
-------------------------------

One of the things that magnify a sin (make the smaller sin great) is
that one feels good and is pleased after committing it. A necessary
condition of faith in Allah (S.w.T.) and Qiyāma is repenting for ones
sin, even though it may be small. As the Messenger of Allah, (S) says,

“One, whose good deeds please him and sins make him aggrieved is a
believer.”[^10]

Allah is High and Mighty, and disobedience to His commands and
prohibitions is a great sin. It is related from Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali
(a.s.) that at the time of sinning do not consider the smallness of your
sin but consider the greatness and Might of Allah Whose (law) command
you are breaking.”[^11]

Just as regret and repentance erase the sin and cleanse the sinner in
the same way feeling happy after committing a sin reinforces it.

The Messenger of Allah (S) says:

“One who is laughing (happy) while committing a sin will enter Hell
weeping.”[^12]

He (S) also said,

“Four things regarding sins are more severe than the sin itself:
considering the sin small, being proud of it, being happy about it,
being persistent in it.”[^13]

Making it Public
----------------

Informing others of one’s sins and relating about them to other people
is a greater sin. Also announcing a sin is an insult to Allah (S.w.T.)’s
command. The Messenger of Allah (S) has said,

“One who performs a good deed and keeps it a secret will be rewarded
seventy times (than if he has announced it). And one who commits a sin
and makes it public (due to shamelessness or ignorance of religious law)
will be disgraced by Allah. (That is, he will not get the Tawfīq of
repentance and he will remain deprived of Allah’s kindness and Mercy)
but if he keeps it secret (due to shame) he will be forgiven.”[^14]

Making a sin public is not harmful in two cases: One when it is
necessary to do so, for example, its admission before a doctor for
treatment or to a religious scholar for learning about an Islamic law.

Secondly when it is an expression of servitude and helplessness before
Allah (S.w.T.) and confession of one’s sins. For example, a person can
make a general statement: “O Allah! I am your sinful slave! I am a
disgraced one! I am drowned in the sea of evils. I have committed mortal
sins! Please forgive me.” However, it is appropriate to mention the
particular sin. Like ‘I have imbibed wine,’ etc. Confessing ones sins
before Allah (S.w.T.) and imploring forgiveness is the best act of
worship and is very beneficial for the acceptance of repentance,
illumination of one’s heart by the light of faith and raising of one’s
status.

In other words, a general confession of sins and acceptance of ones
mistakes is the opposite of pride and arrogance. It is the favourite
habit of our religious leaders. So much so, that even in their letters
and books they mention themselves as disobedient, sinners, lowly, wrong
doers, the most lowly slaves etc.

Sin and Social position
-----------------------

According to our religious tenets, a person with knowledge, piety and
purity is to be highly honoured and respected. When such a person, who
is held in high esteem by the people, commits a small sin the very
foundation of their faith and belief may be shaken. Just as a higher
status is accorded to religious personalities by religion, so also their
smaller sins are considered equivalent to greater sins of ignorant
people.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Seventy sins of ignorant one will be forgiven before one sin of an
Ālim.”[^15]

Misdeed of an Ālim corrupts many worlds
---------------------------------------

Muhaqqiq Khwansari comments on the above statement made by Amir
ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) in the following way. Misdeed of an Ālim could
be the sin he commits himself or the mistake that he commits in the
discharge of his duty as a jurisprudent. Both these mistakes are not
restricted to the scholar himself but have far-reaching consequences
involving a large number of people and several spheres of activity,
spreading corruption and disorder. When people see a knowledgeable
person committing a sin, the severity and evil of the sin is lost on
them, they think it to be insignificant and begin to indulge in it. If
he makes a mistake in promulgating a law of *Shari’a*, many people can
be adversely affected by a law which is defective. Also the validity of
many acts may be dependant upon this faulty command.

Therefore the responsibilities of an Ālim are tremendous and he has to
be cautious and vigilant in refraining from sins and mistakes.

In the same strain is the following statement:

“The sin of an Ālim is like the wrecking of ship. That takes others with
it (when it sinks).”[^16]

Persistence is really a greater sin
-----------------------------------

As we have already seen, lesser sins assume the proportions of greater
ones under the following conditions:

1) When they are committed due to heedlessness.

2) When they are considered insignificant and not punishable.

3) When the person who commits them is pleased and happy with himself.

4) To commit them again and again without feeling any remorse and
repenting for them.

5) Being aware of the fact that doing them again and again makes them a
greater sin.

Another point of contention is that when an Ālim commits smaller sins
which take the magnitude of greater sins, is his reliability as an Ālim
maintained? The answer is not clear, but apparently his reliability is
maintained.

Persistence is established by common parlance
---------------------------------------------

As we have already explained before, persistence implies committing a
particular sin again and again or different types of sins, without
regretting it or seeking forgiveness for it. Or to commit different
types of sins together. But the number of times a person must commit the
sin that makes it ‘persistent’ depends upon how it is generally
considered. So, there is no fixed standard because of the wide
variations in smaller sins and their proximity to greater sins. Some
smaller sins become great only by committing them thrice and some more
than Three times and some in less than that. It all depends upon what is
generally accepted.

An Important Point
------------------

The forty greater sins discussed so far are those which have been
clearly named in authentic traditions.

There are two traditions in *Wasa’il ul-Shia* in the chapter of Taīnul
Kabair. These two traditions are without chains of narrators and they
have been taken from the book of Jihad. One of them is considering the
property permissible for ourselves, which shall be discussed later.

Here we shall study the second one in brief. This is, depriving ones
lawful heirs of their rights. By this we desire to ensure that all
greater sins that are clearly mentioned in traditions have been
discussed by us.

Depriving in will
-----------------

It is an injustice not to include in the will some or all the heirs such
that they stand to lose their lawful share. The Tafsīr of Qummi explains
the verse,

***“Whoever then alters it after he has heard it, the sin of it then is
only upon those who alter it; Surely Allah is Hearing, Knowing.”***
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2: 181)***

Regarding this ayat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“‘Haif’ in will is that one bestows more on some heirs and deprives
others and ‘Ithm’ (sin) denotes preparing place of worship or to give
order to prepare intoxicant (meaning will for unlawful activities).”

In the above two cases the legatee should disregard the instructions.

The poor heir must be kept in mind
----------------------------------

If the heir is self-sufficient the maker of the will can bequeath one
third of his property in the way he desires and he can also exceed this
limit if the heir permits. If the heirs are poor or extremely pious the
will-maker can give them some share even from this one third part to
ensure that he is not giving more than the share of heirs which shall be
derived from the two-third portion.

If the heir is poor it is better not to make a will (for the 1/3 part),
or to bequeath only 1/6, 1/5 or 1/4 of ones property, because one of the
best utilization of this wealth is in fulfilling the needs of a poor
heir. This would constitute an act of *Silet ar-Rahm*, especially when
the heir is yet to reach puberty.

Hazrat Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“I prefer a bequest for one-fifth over that of one-fourth and the
bequest of one-fourth over that of one-third. And one who makes a
bequest for (full) one-third is as if he has not left behind anything.”
That is, he has fully exercised his right to bequeath one-third and in
this way deprived the poor heirs who might have benefited if it had been
to the contrary.[^17]

Imam Riďa (a.s.) said,

“It is Mustahab to bequeath some share to those relatives who are not
ones heirs and if one does not make such a will his action will end in
Allah’s disobedience”[^18]

Such a person is regarded as sinful because he has not taken care of the
rights of relatives, which is one of the obligatory religious duties.
Particularly, if a rich man disregards his very poor relatives who are
not his heirs and does not bequeath them anything, it amounts to Qat
al-Raham, which is *Harām* and a greater sin.

The Heir Precedes others
------------------------

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says that a man from Ansar died leaving many
young children. He left no property except six slaves. At the time of
death he be had freed all of them. When the Messenger of Allah (S) was
informed of this, he asked,

“What have you done with him?”

“We have buried him”, replied the people

The Messenger of Allah (S) said,

“If I had known it, I would not have allowed him to be interred with
Muslims because this man has compelled his children to beg from the
people.”

Division of legacy according to Shariah
---------------------------------------

It is not permitted for a person to bequeath more than a third of his
property. If he does so the executor of the will is not obliged to act
upon it but he should give the heir to use his discretion in the matter.

Moreover, making a will for unlawful purposes is not allowed and the
executor of the will is obliged to disregard it. He should, instead,
utilize the funds in lawful ways. It is also not allowed to deprive any
of the heirs of their share. And the executor of will must give the
share of those who are eligible for it. (Please refer to books of
jurisprudences, *Tauzihul Masael* for more information about making
bequests).

If the heirs of the first level (ones children or parents) are present
but the heirs of the second level (Paternal and Maternal Uncles and
Aunts) are poor the rich will-maker should make some provision for them.
If he does not make such a will it would generally be regarded as an act
of *Qat’a ar-Rahm*, which is a greater sin.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) had willed that seventy Ashrafis (gold
coins) be given to Hasan al-Aqtas, the son of his paternal uncle. Imam
(a.s.) had also made similar bequests for a number of his relatives.
Someone expressed surprise and said, “O Master! You have made a bequest
for a person who has attacked you and wanted to slay you with a knife?
Imam (a.s.) said,

“Do you not want me to be included among those who are praised by the
Almighty for their Sil al-Raham in the following words?”

***“And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be joined and have
awe of their Lord and fear the evil reckoning.”*** ***(Surah ar-Ra’d
13:21)***

The full text of this tradition has passed in the chapter of *Qat’a
ar-Rahm*.

Part Two: Greater sins regarding whom there is no clear ‘nass’
--------------------------------------------------------------

Greater sins regarding whom there is no clear ‘nass’ (ayat or
tradition).

As stated in the introduction of this book, a sin is considered a
greater sin under four conditions:

(1) There is clear mention of it in ayat or tradition of Ma’sūmīn
(a.s.).

(2) Its punishment is mentioned to be damnation in Hell in Qur’an or an
authentic tradition, whether in unequivocal words or indication.

(3) It is mentioned to be greater than one of the great sins proved by
other Three methods.

(4) The sin, which is considered great by a group of religious people.

The greater sins which come under condition

(1) have received full treatment in part one. The remaining Three shall
be discussed in Three sections in part two. Before we start listing the
sins that are promised divine punishment i.e. condition

(2) we must know that this condition itself is clearly mentioned in a
number of traditions. Some of them are given below. A hadith recorded in
the Sahih of Ibn Abi Yafur from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“The Adalat (reliability) of some people can be understood from their
neglect of sins that are promised Hell.”[^19]

This tradition clearly indicates that sins for which Hell is destined
are indeed greater sins. In Sahih of ‘Ali Ibn Ja’far it is mentioned
that he asked his brother Imam Mūsa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) regarding the sins
which are denounced in Qur’an.

Imam (a.s.) said,

“Those sins are great for which Allah has made Hell incumbent.”[^20]

A tradition is recorded from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) in *al-Kāfi.* Abu Basīr
says that when Imam (a.s.) was queried regarding this matter he (a.s.)
recited the following ayat:

***“…and whoever is granted wisdom, he indeed is given a great good and
none but men of understanding mind.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2: 269)***

Imam (a.s.) explains the meaning of wisdom:

“Marefat (recognition) of Imam, abstinence from Greater sins (those who
fail in this) Allah has made Hell as their abode.”[^21]

Muhammad Ibn Muslim relates from the same Imam (a.s.):

“Of whichever sin Allah has prescribed Hell is a Greater Sin.”

According to some traditions, specially, the one mentioned in the Sahih
of Abdul Azīm, every sin which is specially promised Hell fire in Qur’an
or Sunnah (traditions) of the Holy Prophet (S) and Imams (a.s.) is a
greater sin, whether it is unequivocal like that for the one who does
not pray:

***“But there came after them an evil generation, who neglected prayers
and followed sensual desires, so they will meet perdition.”*** ***(Surah
Maryam 19: 59)***

Or the sinner is described as an inmate of Hell. For example in the
tradition, *“The one who leaves prayers is a polytheist*,

***“and the abode of polytheists is Hell.”**,* ***So be steadfast in
prayers and do not be of the polytheist,”**(30:31)*

Similarly Qur’an says,

***“So woe (Hell) to the praying ones, who are unmindful of their
prayers…”*** ***(Surah Ma’ūn 107: 4-5)***

Or as mentioned in the tradition of the Holy Prophet (S),

“One who leaves prayers wilfully will go out of the refuge of Allah and
the Messenger of Allah (S).”[^22]

According to Ibn Abbas the number of sins that are mentioned in ayats
and authentic traditions are very many. If all of them are enumerated
they will exceed seven hundred. This would be a very time consuming job.
So we shall discuss only some of the most common sins that people are
prone to commit.

[^1]: al-Kāfi Vol. 4 page 288

[^2]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 288

[^3]: Ghurarul Hikam Vol. 1 page 151

[^4]: Ghurarul Hikam Vol. 1 page 203

[^5]: al-Kāfi Vol. 1 page 288

[^6]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 11 page 266

[^7]: Tohafful Uqūl

[^8]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 11 page 246

[^9]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 11 page 247

[^10]: Wasa’il ul-Shia, Vol. 11 page 266

[^11]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 11 page 247

[^12]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 11 page 240

[^13]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^14]: al-Kāfi Vol. 1, page 428

[^15]: al-Kāfi Vol. 1 page 48

[^16]: Amali Vol. 4 page 109

[^17]: Beharul Anwar Vol. 23 page 46

[^18]: Bihār al-Anwār Vol. 103 page 199

[^19]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^20]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 276

[^21]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 284

[^22]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 3 page 29


