The Forty-first Greater Sin: Backbiting
=======================================

The foremost great sin for which Qur’an and hadith have promised
chastisement is back-biting. As mentioned by Allah (S.w.T.) in Qur’an,

***“Surely (as for) those who love that scandal should circulate
respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in
this world and the hereafter.”*** ***(Surah an-Nūr 24: 19)***

Ibn Abi Umayr narrates from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.),

“One who reports about a believer, everything he has himself seen and
heard is from those about whom Allah (S.w.T.) says, “There is grievous
chastisement for those who like undesirable things regarding the
believers becoming public.”[^1]

According to this tradition, *Ghiība* (backbiting) is included in the
ayat where clear punishment is mentioned. Therefore, the Qur’an states,

***“…nor let some of you backbite others. Does one of you like to eat
the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor it…”*** ***(Surah
al-Hujurāt 49: 12)***

The above ayat describes the condition of the backbiter in the
hereafter. He will be raised in a condition similar to the person who
eats dead meat. A tradition of the Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“On the night of Miraj (ascension) I saw some people in Hell who were
eating dead meat. I asked Jibrīl (a.s.) who those people were. He
replied. ‘They used to eat human flesh in their worldly life (that is,
they used to backbite about other people).”[^2]

It appears therefore that one who backbites about a person deserves the
punishment he would have had if he had eaten the same person’s flesh.

Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) says,

“Know that! Ghiība of your believing brother, who is the Shia of Āli
Muhammad is worst than eating dead meat, regarding which Allah (S.w.T.)
says, ‘do not back-bite for each other.”

Allah (S.w.T.) says in Surah al-Humaza,

***“Wael (Hell) is for every Slanderer, defamer,”*** ***(Surah al-Humaza
104: 1)***

According to Tafsīr Majmaul Bayan this Divine statement is a decree of
punishment for every back-biter and slanderer who causes separation
between friends. Some others have stated that, it is slander when
uttered in the presence of the person and defaming when speaking in his
absence.

Wael is one of the compartments of Hell. There is a well in it which is
a symbol of terrible punishment. *Ghiība* is a sin that is promised
penalty at a number of places in the Qur’an.

Traditions on Ghiība
--------------------

There are a large number of traditions that speak of *Ghiība* as a sin,
which is promised divine punishment. We quote a tradition of Makasib
where Shaykh Ansari has recorded a tradition of the Holy Prophet of
Islam (S):

“Ghiība is worse than fornication because if a fornicator repents, Allah
(S.w.T.) forgives him but He does not forgive the back-biter till the
person about whom he has back-bited forgives.”[^3]

One day the Messenger of Allah (S) describing the evil aspects of usury
said that taking a Dirham as usury was worst than committing adultery
thirty six times. Then he said that the worst kind usury is revealing
the defects of a Muslim and insulting him.[^4]

In the light of the above traditions *Ghiība* is proved to be a greater
sin also because it is worse than Adultery and Usury and we have already
proved in the earlier chapters that Adultery and Usury are greater sins.
The Holy Prophet (S) also said,

“Allah will not keep a person who reveals the fault of a Mu’min, along
with him in Paradise, and if he accuses him of faults the Mu’min does
not have, the pure relationship of their faith will be destroyed and the
back biter will forever dwell in Hell, which is a dreadful place.”[^5]

The below tradition is sufficient for a person with insight.

“One who thinks that he is legitimately born is wrong, because by doing
Ghiība of people he is consuming their flesh. Beware of Ghiība because
it is the diet of the dogs of Hell.”[^6]

“One who moves from his place with the intention of back-biting about
his brother in faith, you should know that he has taken the first step
towards Hell.”[^7]

“Even if the back-biter repents he will be the last to enter Paradise,
and one who dies without repenting will be first in Hell.”[^8]

The Second Martyr (Shahīd al-Thani) narrates from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and
the Messenger of Allah (S) that the thing nearest to infidelity is that
a person listens to a word from a person and remembers it for using it
later to insult him by telling it to others. Such people can never make
a gain in the hereafter.[^9]

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“Ghiība affects the religion of a person faster than leprosy spreads in
human body.”[^10]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Ghiība is Harām for all Muslims and there is no doubt that Ghiība
destroys good deeds like fire destroys wood.”[^11]

The Shaykh says, “*Ghiība* eats good deeds”, means that *Ghiība*
invalidates all the good actions that one has performed or that the sin
of *Ghiība* exceeds the rewards he has accumulated from the past good
deeds, or that the deeds of back-biter are transferred to the scroll of
deeds of the one about whom he has back-bited. These points are
mentioned in a number of traditions. The Messenger of Allah (S) is
reported saying that a person will be brought for accounting in Qiyāma
and handed his scroll of deeds. When he sees the good deeds performed by
him missing from his record he would say, ‘O Allah! This is not my
record because I cannot find the good deeds performed by me in it.’ He
will be told, ‘Your Lord does not err or forget, your good deeds have
disappeared due to backbiting about the people.’ Then another person
will be brought and given his record of deeds. When he finds therein
good deeds that he had never performed he shall say, ‘O Allah! This is
not my scroll of deeds. Because I find recorded therein such good deeds
as I had never performed’. So he shall be informed, “These are the good
deeds of that certain person who back-bited about you and as a
recompense his good deeds have been given to you.”

The Shaykh concludes that *Ghiība* is indeed a greater sin, and in fact
it is more serious than some greater sins like Adultery and Usury.

Moreover, Khayanat discussed in the earlier chapters is confirmed to be
a greater sin, and *Ghiība* can be considered a form of Khayanat; which
Khayanat can surpass the action of betraying the confidential things of
a believing brother? One proceeds to gobble the flesh of ones brother in
faith while the latter is completely unaware.

Please take note, that *Ghiība* is *Harām* only in the case of
believers. That is, the believers in all the tenets of faith the
foremost of which is the belief in the Imamat of the twelve Imams
(a.s.). Therefore, *Ghiība* of those who opposes this belief is not
*Harām*.

However by way of precaution, we must not backbite any person belonging
to any of the sects of Islam. Especially those who are not the enemies
of truth and are just deficient in knowledge. We should also know that
*Ghiība* is *Harām* not only when told to adults, it is not permitted to
speak words of back biting even to a child who is old enough to
understand them and be affected by them. Some scholars have stated that
*Ghiība* is not allowed even to children who have not yet reached the
age of understanding.

Meaning and Occasions of Ghiība
-------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) explains *Ghiība* in the following words,

“Ghiība is remembering your brother in a way he dislikes.”[^12]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Ghiība is exposing that aspect of your brother which Allah had
concealed.”[^13]

Imam Mūsa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) says,

“If one speaks of a person in his absence about those of his traits
which are actually present in him and people are also aware of it, it is
not Ghiība. But if he mentions something which is present in the person
but people are unaware of it, it would be Ghiība. Moreover if what he is
says is not present in the man, it is allegation (Bukhtān).”

On the basis of these two traditions mentioning the defects of a person
which are well-known to those who are being told and also other people
is not *Ghiība*, even if it could be construed as criticism, scolding,
causing hurt and insult, which is also *Harām* as will be discussed
later.

After taking into account the meaning of word *Ghiība* by dictionary
experts and the different implications of *Ghiība* according to
traditional reports the Shaykh concludes that *Ghiība* is of Three
types: Absolute *Ghiība*, Apparent *Ghiība* and Implied *Ghiība*.

In the first instance it is backbiting for sure. The defect be according
to *Shari’a* or according to what is generally accepted as defect in a
person and also that if it is mentioned in the absence of the person and
were he to know about it he would not like it. Besides, one who indulges
in this *Ghiība* should be doing it with the intention of exposing him
or in trying to find defects in him. In short if one exposes the defect
of a believer with a clear intention of defaming, it would be *Ghiība*.

In the second category is *Ghiība* which is not done for exposing a
person but for some other purpose. For example in jest or to prove ones
point, or for expressing ones concern, or to cite it as an example. In
all such cases also if one is revealing the hidden defect of a believer
it is *Ghiība* and *Harām* according to *Shari’a*.

The third kind is to mention the defects to a person who is already
aware of it. Regarding this some traditions say it is not *Ghiība* but
other traditions have included it among backbiting, particularly when
the person is scolding with vehemence and insult. Such a *Ghiība* is
absolutely *Harām* even though it is doubtful whether it is *Ghiība* in
the real sense, since this will cause grief to a believer and
humiliation. Also if a person uses nicknames that will invite criticism,
saying: he is a son of a Jew, or ‘His mother was of loose character’.
All such things are *Harām* as mentioned in the verse of Surah
al-Hujurāt.

***“…nor call one another by nicknames; evil is a bad name after
faith…”*** ***(Surah al-Hujurāt 49: 11)***

Types of Ghiība
---------------

According to clear traditions and opinion of religious scholars it makes
no difference whether the defect mentioned is of a physical nature,
pertains to ones descent, a trait of ones character or with regard to
ones speech or actions, or whether it is with regard to religion or
worldly aspects. Special mention is made of defects pertaining to ones
dress, house, vehicle etc. Examples are cited for each of these. A
physical defect is mentioned that, such and such is cockeyed, one-eyed,
bald, short, tall, dark complexioned, yellow skinned etc.

If these characteristics are mentioned in a manner that he will be
unhappy if he heard about it, it is *Ghiība*. *Ghiība* of ones family
origin is saying, ‘His father was a sinner, evil, miser, libertine,
weaver, low caste etc. *Ghiība* of character is saying such and such is
bad-character, miser, arrogant, coward, weak, hypocrite, thief or an
oppressor. *Ghiība* with regard to religious matters is saying that a
person is a liar, a drunkard, he neglects prayers, he is bad mannered,
ungrateful, he doesn’t realize his low position, he’s talkative, a
glutton, an excessive sleeper. *Ghiība* in relation to dress is saying
his dress is dirty, torn, old, long or short. If these are mentioned in
a manner that a person wouldn’t like to hear about himself, it is
*Ghiība*.

It should be clear that it makes no difference whether the defect is
mentioned verbally or expressed in action or gestures. Even if one makes
an allusion and it is understood in the sense he intends, it is
*Ghiība*. Sometimes allusion is worse than *Ghiība*. For example,
saying, ‘Alhamdolillah (Praise to be Allah), Allah has not made us covet
rulership, or made us supporters of oppressors or did not make us greedy
of wealth. Or if one says, we seek refuge of Allah from jealousy,
niggardliness or shamelessness, May Allah protect us from the mischief
of Shaitan; and by saying all this he desires to indicate the person who
has these traits.

Often times when someone intends to do *Ghiība* of a person, he
initially heaps praises upon him. For example saying: He is so nice!
It’s a pity he’s caught in Satan’s trap and became such and such.
Another example is to be aggrieved in a hypocritical way: I am really
aggrieved and my heart has burnt in the sorrow for such and such person.
This is not true because if he were really sincere and a true friend he
would not have criticized him and exposed his defects.

Ghiība of Specified Persons and Ghiība of General People
--------------------------------------------------------

It is *Ghiība* only if it is with respect to a particular person. If
there is no mention of name or special traits of a person it is not
termed *Ghiība*. For example, one says, ‘I saw a person in such and such
way.’ This would not be *Ghiība*. But if at the same time he indicates a
distinguishing feature of this person, it is *Ghiība*. Like for example
saying that the person has such and such type of son or daughter. It is
*Harām* because in this way he has caused grief to all the concerned
people. If one mentions the genre like he says. ‘A person from Isfahan
or Shiraz has done that. This is allowed. It is also allowed to say some
people of Isfahan are such and such.’ But saying that all the people of
Isfahan or Shiraz are like that, is *Harām* without any doubt. This is
because it would amount to be the *Ghiība* of all the people of these
cites. If one says that majority of the people of that city are like
that, it is against precaution. In fact there is a strong indication of
its illegality.

Expiation and Repentance for Ghiība
-----------------------------------

As *Ghiība* is a greater sin anyone falling into it, is obliged to feel
remorse for having disobeyed Allah (S.w.T.). After sincere repentance he
must seek forgiveness, with the intention of never repeating it in the
future. As mentioned in some of the traditions, if possible one must
apologize to the person whose *Ghiība* he had done. He must beg him for
forgiveness and somehow obtain his satisfaction. Also he must make up
for it by speaking well of the person in proportion to the *Ghiība* he
has committed with regard to this person.

This is more appropriate when the person is already dead and it is not
possible to contact him. Or there is a good chance, the person will be
more angry and would distance himself further. For example when he is
ignorant of what was said about him and by hearing about the *Ghiība* he
would be infuriated. The aim of seeking his forgiveness would not be
achieved. In such cases we should ask Allah (S.w.T.)’s forgiveness for
him and beseech Allah (S.w.T.) to make this person happy, as mentioned
in the 39th Du’a of Sahifa Sajjadiya. It is also mentioned in the
supplication of Monday.

Occasions when Ghiība is Permitted
----------------------------------

Scholars permit *Ghiība* in some cases. We shall mention the opinion of
Shaykh in this matter as given in his book Makasib Muhrima.

(1) *Ghiība* of a person whose defect is not hidden. It is known to all.
Like the one who roams the streets with a bottle of wine on his lips.

“One who sins openly is not worthy of respect and his Ghība is not
Harām.[^14]

A tradition also says,

“(The Ghiība of) one who has thrown away the robe of shame (and commits
sins openly) is not Ghiība.[^15]

It should be noted that, *Ghiība* is allowed only for those sins that
are committed openly. There is no proof of the legality of *Ghiība* for
the sins committed secretly, though according to the Shaykh, if his
visible sins are more severe than his concealed defects, there is no
harm in relating them. However, one should abstain from it as a matter
of precaution.

*Ghiība* is allowed only in the case of a person who has himself
announced his sins openly. But if he presents an excuse for this action,
his *Ghiība* is not allowed. For example, he says, ‘I drink wine for
medicinal purpose and I am in Taqlid of a person who allows it.’ Or one
who eats during daytime in the month of Ramadhan says that he is sick or
on a journey, or he may be having other acceptable reason. Similarly in
the case of one who oppresses or cooperates with the oppressors, and
then justifies his act. However, it should not be a blatant act. As a
matter of precaution, *Ghiība* should not be done about a person who
commits sins openly but in an alien town or locality.

(2) If an oppressed person complains about the oppressor and mentions
his acts of injustice, it is not *Ghiība*. As the Almighty Allah
(S.w.T.) says,

***“And whoever defends himself after his being oppressed these it is
against whom there is no way (to blame). The way (to blame) is only
against those who oppress into and revolt in the earth unjustly, these
shall have a painful punishment.”*** ***(Surah Ash-Shūrā 42: 41-42)***

In Surah an-Nisā’, the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) Says,

***“Allah does not love the public utterance of hurtful speech unless
(it be) by one to whom injustice has been done.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’
4: 148)***

Precaution demands that we must complain of injustice to someone who is
capable of redressing it. It is not permitted to complain to someone who
is not capable of getting justice for you.

(3) Advice to those who ask for it. When a Muslim approaches for advice
in a particular deal that he intends to enter with a person and the
person approached knows about a defect of that person which, if he does
not reveal the person who enters into contract will suffer loss and have
problems; in this case there is no harm in passing such information.

One must pay attention to two things in this case: The defect should be
mentioned only if there is harm in not informing about it. If the
defamation or insult caused by revealing the defect is more serious than
the loss caused to the other person, one should abstain from *Ghiība*.
Secondly, *Ghiība* is allowed only if by doing so the person is warned.
If he can be cautioned without doing *Ghiība*, *Ghiība* is not allowed.
For example he says, “I don’t see benefit in this matter” and the person
who sought advice obeys him. Then one should stop at this.

(4) *Ghiība* is allowed with the intention of Nahy Anil Munkar. For
example you see a Muslim prone to an evil way and think that by doing
*Ghiība* he’ll give it up. *Ghiība* is allowed in this case provided one
is sure that it will have the desired effect. If there is doubt that the
person has already given it up his *Ghiība* is not permitted. As in the
previous case, we should take into consideration the harm of doing his
*Ghiība* in comparison to the harm caused by his bad deed. That is, if
the exposure of this Muslim is more serious than the sin he his
committing, his *Ghiība* is not allowed, even if we are sure that by
doing his *Ghiība* he would give up the act.

Conclusive remarks from the foregone discussions
------------------------------------------------

When one sees a Muslim doing something wrong one must study all its
aspects. If the person has already given up the sin his *Ghiība* is
*Harām*. By the same token he must not be scolded or criticised because
Nahy Anil Munkar is to wean him away from sin; if he himself has given
it up there is no sense in reprimanding him. If he has not discontinued
it and he does it secretly then his sin comes in the ambit of secret
sins and it is *Harām* to mention them to others. What is required in
this case is to do Nahy Anil Munkar with all necessary conditions and if
in spite of this he does not reform himself and we know that he will
forgo it only if it is made public, we can do his *Ghība*. But we must
be sure that his sin is more serious than his *Ghiība*.

Therefore *Ghiība* for the purpose of Nahy Anil Munkar is allowed only
when the person is persistent in his sin, and refuses to heed
admonitions, when the evil of his sin is greater than exposing him; and
we must be sure that he will forgo it if he is exposed. However, if any
one of the four conditions are missing his *Ghiība* is *Harām*.

(5) *Ghiība* of a person is allowed if in addition to committing the sin
himself he is instrumental in instigating others to follow him. For
example he introduces an innovation in Allah (S.w.T.)’s religion. In
order to warn the people of his deceit his *Ghiība* is permitted.

(6) *Ghiība* is allowed in connection with a person who narrates a false
hadith or gives a false testimony. It should be to ensure that people
are not misled by his falsehood.

(7) It is allowed to mention the defect of a person by which he is
well-known. For example blind, cock-eyed, lame etc. Our intention must
not be to point out his defect but by way of indication. Also one must
bear in mind that the person himself not feel irked by these titles.
Only in such circumstances is it allowed, otherwise we must use some
other means to indicate towards him.

(8) One is allowed to expose the false claims of a person’s lineage,
because the harm caused by this exposure is less than the harm to
families and clans if he relates himself to them.

(9) If two people are eyewitness to a sin. Later one of them mentions it
to others. There is no harm in it because the one who is spoken to is
not hearing something unknown to him, Shahīd Thani says it is better to
refrain from mentioning something which the other person has forgotten
or when there is a risk of scandal.

(10) According to Shaykh Ansari the discussion between two people who
are eyewitnesses is allowed, if they do not do it with the intention of
criticizing or denouncing the person. In all cases, *Ghiība* is allowed
when the harm it causes is less serious than the insult or defamation
incurred by the person.

Listening to Ghiība is also Harām
---------------------------------

Lending ear to *Ghiība* is *Harām* just as uttering *Ghiība* is *Harām*.
The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“The one who listens to Ghiība is one of those who do Ghiība.”[^16]

He (S) also says,

“One who lends ear to back-biting is one of the back-biters.”[^17]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Ghiība is equal to infidelity (One who does it is Kafir) and listening
to and being pleased with it is like polytheism.”[^18]

Traditions that describe the respect due to believers, indicate that the
honour of a Mu’min is more than the respect of Kaba. His dishonour is
same as his murder. His exposure will bring upon the guilty severe
chastisement. It is obvious that the main pillar of *Ghība* is the one
who listens to backbiting. Because if the listener is not there or he
refuses to listen to it, there is no *Ghiība*.

Therefore all Muslims are obliged not to hear the *Ghiība* of a
believer. They must restrain the back biter so that the honour of the
Mu’min is preserved. They should help the Mu’min in saving his honour.

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“If the Ghiība of ones believing brother is being done in ones presence
and it is possible to defend him, one must defend him and Allah will
help such a person in Hereafter. If in spite of being able he does not
defend him, Allah will leave him on his own in the Hereafter and He
shall not help him.”

(Al-Majalis)

He (S) has also said,

“If one defends his believer brother’s honour while back-biting is done
about him in a way that he proves him faultless, Allah shall remove from
him thousands of mischiefs from the world and the hereafter. But if he
does not dispel them in spite of being able to do so, his sin shall be
seventy times that of the back-biter.”

After quoting the above tradition, the Shaykh says that the sin of the
listener is more than that of the back-biter because, but for him the
back-biter would not have dared to back-bite. And listening to *Ghiība*
mutely implies support of the back biter.

So if it is a worldly defect that is pointed out, he must say there is
nothing of the sort. Faults are those which are described as faults by
Allah (S.w.T.) and those that Allah (S.w.T.) has prohibited. So if you
say anything that is not a fault in Allah (S.w.T.)’s view, it is not a
*Ghiība*. The real mistake is the mention of this imaginary fault.

If the defect mentioned is according to religious law, one should try to
absolve the Mu’min in whatever way possible. One can present a valid
excuse for his actions or if this is not possible, one should draw the
attention of the criticizer that after all a Mu’min is not infallible;
if a Mu’min falls into sin we should pray for his forgiveness, instead
of exposing and defaming him. We should also make him realize that his
revelation can be more serious sin than the one committed by the Mu’min.

As a corollary to the discussion on what constitutes *Ghiība* according
to the condition described, it is not obligatory to restrain the
backbiter. At times it may happen that one may not be sure whether the
criticism is of the permissible kind or not. In this case one should
weigh the pros and cons of the situation. It is possible that the
criticism is of the permissible type and by restraining the backbiter or
by refuting his statements, we may do more harm, either to an individual
or to a cause.

Hell and the two Tongues
------------------------

Upon the conclusion of his discussion on *Ghiība* Shaykh Ansari writes
in Makasib: If a person back-bites about a person but heaps excessive
praises on him in his presence, the sin of his backbiting is double. In
religious language he is termed ‘Zul lisānīn’, one having two tongues.
It is absolutely *Harām* and according to traditions, “The man with two
tongues will be brought on the day of Qiyāma in such a way that two
tongues of fire shall be there for him.”[^19]

[^1]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 357

[^2]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^3]: Makasibe Muhrima Vol. 3 page 310

[^4]: Makasibul Muharima

[^5]: Makasibul Muharima

[^6]: Makasibul Muharima

[^7]: Makasibul Muharima

[^8]: Makasibul Muharima

[^9]: Kashful Rabi of Shahīd al-Thani

[^10]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 357

[^11]: al-Kāfi

[^12]: Makasib Muhrima

[^13]: Makasib, al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 358

[^14]: Makasib Muhrima page 27, Vol. 4

[^15]: Makasib Muhrima page 27 Vol. 4

[^16]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^17]: Kashful Rabi

[^18]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^19]: (Makasib Muhrima)


