The Forty-third Greater Sin: Insulting a Believer
=================================================

The forty-third sin promised Divine Chastisement is insulting a
believer, degrading him, defaming him, abusing or taunting him.
Insulting a believer in any manner is *Harām* whether it is in jest or
by way of abuse or criticism, or in relation with his defects; or by
scolding or reprimanding him or considering him lowly and debasing him,
denouncing him, taunting him or hurting his feelings in any way.

A Believer is Deserving of Honour and Respect
---------------------------------------------

In the ayats and traditions recorded on the subject of a believer’s
honour, Allah (S.w.T.) has made a special mention of utmost honour and
respect that a believer deserves and which has to be accorded to him.

His dishonour is equated with murder. Allah (S.w.T.) has given a high
status to the believer by associating him with Himself as seen from the
following ayats.

***“Allah is the guardian of those who believe.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah
2: 257)***

***“That is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe.”***
***(Surah Muhammad 47: 11)***

***“and helping the believers is ever incumbent on Us.”*** ***(Surah
ar-Rūm 30: 47)***

Allah (S.w.T.) has exalted the honour of the believer by mentioning him
with His honourable Prophet (S),

***“and to Allah belongs the might and to His Apostle and to the
believers.”*** ***(Surah al-Munāfiqūn 63: 8)***

Allah (S.w.T.) has considered a believer the best of men,

***“(As for) those who believe and do good, surely they are the-best of
men.”*** ***(Surah al-Bayyina 98: 7)***

The chief of the Messengers (S) is commanded to deal with them with
respect,

***“And be kind to him who follows you of the believers.”*** ***(Surah
Ash-Shūrā 26: 215)***

Allah (S.w.T.) has also commanded the Prophet (S),

***“And when those who believe in Our communications come to you, say:
Peace be on you”*** ***(Surah al-An’ām 6: 54)***

Allah (S.w.T.) has made His mercy incumbent for the believers,

***“Your Lord has ordained mercy on Himself,”*** ***(Surah al-An’ām 6:
54)***

Allah (S.w.T.) has mentioned Himself to be the buyer of the life and
property of believers,

***“Surely Allah has bought of the believers their persons and their
property.”*** ***(Surah at-Tawba 9: 111)***

Allah (S.w.T.) has called a believer His friend,

***“He shall love them and they shall love Him.”*** ***(Surah al-Mā’ida
5: 54)***

***“and those who believe are stronger in love for Allah.”*** (Surah
al-Baqarah 2: 165)

Since Allah (S.w.T.) associates Himself with a believer, anyone who
insults a believer has shown disrespect to Allah (S.w.T.). According to
Tafsīr it means not only to love Allah (S.w.T.), but also to love what
Allah (S.w.T.) loves and to hate what Allah (S.w.T.) hates, for the sake
of Allah (S.w.T.) and in the cause of Allah (S.w.T.).

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“Indeed Allah has made the believer an example of His Greatness and
Power. So one who taunts a believer or rejects his request, he has
actually rejected the command of Allah.”[^1]

Imam Mūsa al-Kadhim (a.s.) stood before the Ka’ba and said,

“O Ka’ba! How great is your right. By Allah the right of a believer
exceeds yours.”[^2]

This shows how serious a crime it is to insult a believer. Given below
are some ayats and traditions on this subject.

Making Fun
----------

It is a serious sin to make fun of a believer’s actions, traits or
habits in a manner that people find it funny and laugh. Whether it is
done verbally or by actions or gestures, there is no doubt that such a
behaviour will be severely punished.

Allah (S.w.T.) says in Surah at-*Tawba*,

***“They who taunt those of the faithful who give their alms freely, and
those who give to the extent of their earnings and scoff at them; Allah
will pay them back their scoffings and they shall have a painful
chastisement.”*** ***(Surah at-Tawba 9: 79)***

According to traditions the circumstances of revelation (Shān al-Nuzūl)
of this ayat are as follows: During the Battle of Tabuk the Holy Prophet
(S) announced that people should donate as much as they can to cover the
cost of this Battle. The affluent people donated large amounts and the
poor gave whatever little they could. A companion by the name of Abu
Aqīl Ansari brought 1.75 sīr of dates and said, “I have laboured from
last night till morning and received 3.5 sīr of dates. Half I left for
my family and the other half for Allah.” The hypocrites began to make
fun of both the types of people and began to find faults with them. For
those who donated more, they said that they have given such large
amounts to show off their wealth and for those who could contribute
little, they said: They want to be included among the philanthropist, or
they wanted people to consider them at the time of giving charity.

Those who have made fun of believers in this world will be laughed at in
the hereafter and their abode will be hell. After the accounting all the
believers will be bestowed their places in paradise and the unbelievers
will be lying in Hell. Then a door will open towards Paradise and the
unbelievers and hypocrites will rush towards it and see the believers in
luxurious surroundings. They shall try to enter but the door would slam
abruptly and the believers will burst out laughing. This is their
recompense for making fun of the believers in the world.

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“Those who make fun will be brought on the day of Qiyāma and a door will
be opened towards Paradise. He would be told to enter it fast. Full of
grief and misery, as soon as he tries to enter it the door will slam
shut and another door will open on the other side. He would be told
enter quickly, but as soon as he reaches it they will shut that door
also. He will continue in this struggle but he would not be able to
enter any of the doors. At last he would lose all hope and now when he
is called, he shall decline.”[^3]

The Almighty Allah says,

***“Surely they who are guilty used to laugh at those who believe.***

***And when they passed by them, they winked at one another. And when
they returned to their own followers they returned exulting. And when
they saw them, they said: Most surely these are in error; And they were
not sent to be keepers over them. So today those who believe shall laugh
at the unbelievers.”*** ***(Surah al-Mutaffifin 83: 29-34)***

***“O you who believe! Let not (one) people laugh at (another) people
perchance they may be better than they, nor let women (laugh) at (other)
women, perchance they may be better than they; and do not find fault
with your own people nor call one another by nick names.”*** ***(Surah
al-Hujurāt 49: 11)***

It is quoted in *Tafsīr Majmaul Bayan* that whenever Thabit bin Qays
came to the Holy Prophet’s assembly people used to make way for him and
allow him to sit nearest to the Prophet (a.s.) because he was hard of
hearing. One day in morning payers he managed to get a place only in the
last row. After the prayers he got up and stepping over other people
went towards the Messenger of Allah (S) when there remained only one
person between him and the Prophet, he said, “Let me go, so that I can
sit near the Messenger (S).” The man in between told him to sit where he
was. Thabit was angry but he sat down and when it was light he saw the
man’s face he asked him who he was. When the man told him his name
Thabit said, “So and so, son of so and so’ and mentioned the name of his
mother who was notorious for her loose morals before the advent of
Islam.

The person was very much ashamed at this and he lowered his head in
disgrace. It was then that the above verse was revealed.

Regarding women, the verse was revealed because Ayesha used to make fun
of Umm Salama who had a loose cummerbund which dragged behind as she
walked saying, “the loose end is like the dog rolling out his tongue”.
Also the women used to taunt the wife of the Holy Prophet (S), Safiya,
daughter of Huyy Ibn Akhtab calling her “daughter of a Jew.”

Abuse and Taunt
---------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) said,

“Abusing a believer is like throwing oneself into destruction.”[^4]

Abusing is associating evil things with the believers and using
inappropriate language with respect to them. In legal terminology
accusing someone falsely of adultery or illegitimacy is Qažaf, which has
been dealt with in the previous part. Other evil allegations like
calling him usurer, drunkard, accursed, betrayer of trust, donkey, dog,
pig, transgressor, evil doer etc. with the intention of disgracing him,
is abuse.

The Prophet (S) also said,

“Abusing a believer is transgression. Fighting him is infidelity and
devouring his flesh (doing his Ghiība) is a sin and his wealth has the
sanctity like his blood.”[^5]

This hadith indicates that the sin of abusing a Mu’min is more serious
than *Ghiība*. This is so because abuse is more hurtful than *Ghiība*.
*Ghiība* is done behind a person’s back but abuse in his presence shows
contempt and humiliates him.

The Worst Death
---------------

Imam Baqir (a.s.) says,

“One who taunts a believer on his face will die the most terrible death.
And he has moved in such a direction from where there is no return to
goodness.”[^6]

Allamah Majlisi explains that the worst death could be with regard to
this world, like death by drowning, by fire or getting killed in house
collapse, or being devoured by wild animals etc. With respect to the
Hereafter it could be dying as an infidel, or to die without repenting
for ones sins. According to Allamah Majlisi the word “goodness” in the
tradition indicates the act of seeking forgiveness or doing good deeds
while one is a believer.

Sometimes the Oppressed one Becomes an Oppressor
------------------------------------------------

Two people were abusing each other. Imam Mūsa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) said,

“The one who initiates abuse is the greater oppressor, carrying the sin
of himself and the other person around his neck, till the time the
oppressed does not exceed the limit. If he exceeds the first abuser in
replying to his abusing he would himself be responsible for the
sin.”[^7]

Explaining this tradition, Allamah Majlisi says that the sin of both the
persons is carried by the one who initiates abusing, because he was the
first one to commit the sin which led to the other person also follow
his footsteps. If he had not initiated it in the first place the other
person would have remained silent. Abusing in retaliation is a sin, but
the guilt is borne by the first person, if the second one does not
exceed the limit. If he does so, he becomes as much a sinner as the
first one.

Exceeding the Limit in abusing
------------------------------

Exceeding the limit may be uttering the bad word twice. For example the
first person says, O, Dog! And the others says ‘O Dog! O Dog!’ Sometimes
excess is reached by using a more serious abuse. For Example, in reply
to ‘O Donkey’ he say, ‘O Dog!’ Both sins are upon the first person only
when the second one retaliates with the same or similar type of abuse.
It is not unlikely that it could be with regard to the case when a
person abuses with words like O Adulterer! Or O thief! Now when the
person uttering abuse first of all is not a thief, naturally he cannot
be called as such in reply. Thus, in abusing the other person should
limit himself to words like ‘Stupid, ‘ignorant’, ‘unjust’ and
‘misguided’ etc.

Paradise is not Allowed for the Sharp-tongued
---------------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“Indeed Allah has not permitted Paradise for any shameless abuser who
has no qualms about saying anything or what is being said to him,
because if investigation is conducted he shall be found to be
illegitimately born or Satan was involved in his origin”.

People asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah, how can Shaitan get a share in
their birth?”

He (S) replied,

“Have you not read the words of Allah,

‘(O Satan!) Share with them in wealth and children.” (Surah al-‘Isrā’,
17: 64)

Allamah Majlisi has related from Shaykh Bahai that it implies that for a
time Paradise is prohibited for him or a particular Paradise is
prohibited for him, a Paradise which is denied to him but available for
those believers who do not abuse. The following traditions are also
narrated on this subject.

Sama says that he came to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq who began the
conversation, *“O Sama!” what is it that I have heard between you and
your camel driver? See that you do not become an abuser and curser.”*

Sama replied, “Yes! What you have heard is correct. He had been unjust
on me.”

Imam (a.s.) said,

“If he has oppressed you, you have also become his equal and you
oppressed more. Indeed this action is not from my behaviour and neither
do I advise my Shias to do like that. Ask your Lord for forgiveness and
do not repeat this act.”[^8]

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“If one taunts a Muslim even with a single word, Allah prohibits the
fragrance of Paradise for him. Though the fragrance of Paradise is
perceived even at a distance of 500 years travel.”[^9]

It is necessary to mention a couple of points here. One is that when a
person curses a believer and hurts his feelings, in addition to the
punishment he would receive in the hereafter, the Mu’min can complain
about him to the religious judge who would punish him at his discretion
for the abuse he had uttered against the Mu’min. As mentioned in the
discussion of Qažaf if the abuser pleads to the one he had abused to
forgive him and makes him happy, there is no penal action against him.
Secondly, if he regrets his deed and begs for Divine forgiveness the
punishment of the Hereafter shall be condoned for him.

Abusing Anyone
--------------

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Cursing and abusing is from cruelty and cruelty is punishable by
hell.”[^10]

The Late Muhaqqiq Muhammad Taqi Shirazi (r.a.) writes on the margins of
Makasib: According to traditions obscene abuse is *Harām*. No matter to
whom it is addressed. Whether to a Muslim and Mu’min or to a Kafir and a
Sinner, whether young or old. Even if he is a child unable to
understand. In fact, some traditions prohibit cursing and abusing the
beasts of burden also.

Prohibition of Retaliating to an Abuse with Abuse
-------------------------------------------------

It is explained in Tafsīrul Mizan, that we should show respect for the
sacred objects and personalities of other religions. If we vilify the
idols of the polytheists, they will retaliate by insulting the holy
aspects of Islam. In such a case the Mu’min who had initiated the abuse
will be responsible for the disrespect shown to Islam and Allah
(S.w.T.).

Also it is *Harām* to abuse a non-Shia or Kafir, because he may respond
by abusing and cursing you, or any other believer.

This is clearly prohibited in Qur’an,

***“And do not abuse those whom they call upon besides Allah, lest
exceeding the limits they should abuse Allah out of ignorance.”***
***(Surah al-An’ām 6: 108)***

Insulting and Degrading a Believer
----------------------------------

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“One who considers a Mu’min lowly due to his poverty and destitution
will be degraded before the people by Allah on the day of Qiyāma.”[^11]

The Imam (a.s.) also said,

“One who belittles a Mu’min, whether poor or rich, will be considered
disgraceful and an enemy by Allah till he does not refrain from it.”

(al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 351)

Imam (a.s.) has also mentioned that on the day of Qiyāma an announcer
will call out: where are those who turned away their faces from My
friend? Upon this, some people will stand up, who would not have flesh
on their faces. It will be said: They are the ones who troubled the
believers and opposed them, they bore enmity to them and because of
their faith they oppressed them. After this they shall be ordered to be
tossed into Hell.[^12]

Another tradition says,

“Allah indeed says that one who insults a friend of Mine has raised a
standard of revolt against Me and I am the most efficient in helping My
friends.”[^13]

Abu Harūn says that I was sitting in the assembly of Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) when Imam (a.s.) asked the people sitting there, *“Why
do you insult me?”* A man from Khorasan stood up and said, “We seek
Allah’s refuge from this! That we insult your respected self or anything
connected with you.” Imam (a.s.) said,

“Yes! Indeed, you are one of those who have insulted me.”

“Refuge of Allah! I have never insulted your respected self.”

Imam (a.s.) continued,

“I pity you. Is it not true that when we were near Juhfa a man had
approached you and requested you to carry him on your animal for some
distance because he was dead tired and unable to walk anymore? And you
did not even raise your head to look at him and neither did you pay any
heed! You considered him lowly and one who considers a believer lowly
has insulted me and has not accorded respect to the Almighty.”[^14]

Criticising and Exposing a Believer
-----------------------------------

Imam Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.) have said,

“The deed that brings one very close to infidelity is that a person
considers someone his brother in faith but he keeps track of his defects
and misdeeds so that one day he can use them to criticise the
believer.”[^15]

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“O those people! Who have accepted Islam (become Muslims) by tongue but
sincere belief (Imān) has not entered your hearts. Do not criticise the
Muslims and do not search for their faults, because Allah will search
for the faults of those who search for defects in the believers. And
whoever’s faults He searches, will be degraded by Him, even if he had
committed the bad deed in his house.”

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) remarked,

“Allah will denounce and degrade one who denounces and degrades a
believer.”[^16]

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“One who exposes an indecency is like the one who has committed it and
one who curses and criticises a believer for a bad deed will himself
fall into the same sin before he leaves this world.”[^17]

It should be clear that prohibition on criticism and Nahy Anil Munkar
are not contradictory. Nahy Anil Munkar is constructive criticism which
is actually good advice given to a believer in faith, out of concern for
him, and in order to help him get rid of his bad traits. Whereas
malicious criticism only serves to degrade and expose the believer.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“One who relates something about a believer to expose his defects and
insults him so that he falls in the estimation of people will be
deprived of Allah’s friendship and guardianship. Allah will push him
under the guardianship of Shaitan but Shaitan will also refuse to accept
him.”[^18]

Commenting on this tradition Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) says that it may be
relating an incident which proves the lack of intelligence or weakness
of judgement of the believer, or Shaitan’s refusal to accept him, means
that Shaitan is no longer interested in this person. Shaitan’s aim is to
deviate the people, so that they lose the guardianship (love and
friendship) of Allah (S.w.T.). Since this purpose is already
accomplished, Shaitan has no further interest.

Muhammad Ibn Fuzail says that he asked Imam Mūsa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.), “May
I be sacrificed for you, I hear a thing about my believing brother that
is unpleasant. After this I ask my brother that I heard such and such
thing regarding him, if it was true, and he denies it. Whereas a very
reliable person had informed me about it?”

Imam (a.s.) said,

“Belie your eyes and your ears with regard to your brother, that is
ignore it by saying: My eyes and ears have fooled me, even if fifty
people report something about your brother and he denies it. You must
accept his veracity and belie them. That is, say, ‘They may be
mistaken’, and do not say anything that will expose his defects and
degrade him. Because if you do so, you shall be included among the
people about whom the Qur’an says: “Those who like scandal to spread
among the believers. There is severe chastisement for them in the world
and the Hereafter.”[^19]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said,

“One who moves out to expose the defects of his brother has taken the
first step towards Hell. And Allah will expose his hidden defects on the
day of Qiyāma.”[^20]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Allah will keep in a place of Hell where there is blood and puss a
person who relates an anecdote regarding his believing brother which
exposes his faults and degrades him.”

(It is the place in Hell where blood and puss from the organs of
fornication collect.)[^21]

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“If one is aware of a sinful act of a believer and instead of concealing
it, he reveals it to the people and does not pray for the believer’s
forgiveness, he shall be in the view of Allah same as one who has
himself committed that sin and is eligible for its punishment. The
actual sinner will receive salvation because the worldly degradation was
enough as an expiation of his sin and he will not suffer humiliation in
the hereafter because Allah is very kind, He does not punish twice for
the same sin, and neither can he humiliate someone twice.”[^22]

In effect the punishment of the hereafter will be transferred to the
account of those who expose this evil act. Many more traditions are
quoted in this connection but the above mentioned should suffice.

Insulting a Mu’min in Prose or Poetry
-------------------------------------

Shaykh Ansari says that insulting a believer is *Harām* in the light of
Qur’an, hadith, Ijma and Aql (reason), because in it are included
exposure of defects, taunts, *Ghība*, criticism and betraying of
secrets; and each of them is a mortal sin. Therefore the evils of all
those deeds are included in it. If one mentions something bad that is
not present in the believer it is also ‘*Bukhtān*’ (allegation).

It does not matter whether the believer is sinful or sinless, it is
*Harām* to criticise a believer. The traditions which are narrated
regarding the criticism of the transgressors apply to unbelievers or
those who commit indecencies openly. Criticising a defect of the one who
introduces an innovation with the intention, that this should serve as a
warning to people not to be fooled by him, is allowed.

Hurting the Feelings of a Believer
----------------------------------

Allah (S.w.T.) says in Surah al-Ahzāb,

***“And those who annoy believing men and women undeservedly, bear (on
themselves) a calumny and a glaring sin.”*** ***(Surah al-Ahzāb 33:
58)***

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) remarks that Allah (S.w.T.) says,

“One who hurts My believing slave has actually declared war against Me
and one who honours My believing servant remains safe from My anger.”
(al-Kāfi)

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“One who annoys a believer annoys me and one who annoys me annoys Allah
and one who annoys Allah is accursed according to Taurat, Injīl, Zabūr
and Qur’an.” And according to another tradition, “He is cursed by Allah,
the Angels and all the people.”[^23]

He (S) also says,

“One who aggrieves a believer but later desires to atone for it by
offering the whole world it will not compensate for the hurt he had
caused and the donor will also not be rewarded.”

Also mentioned by the Prophet (S) is,

“One who hurts a Mu’min for no fault of his, it is as if he has
demolished the Holy Ka’ba and Baitul Ma’mūr ten times and slaughter
Allah’s 1000 proximate angels.”[^24]

This hadith indicates that the honour of a believer is ten times that of
the Ka’ba and Baitul Ma’mūr and a thousand times that of the Angels.

Terrible Punishment for Annoying the Neighbours
-----------------------------------------------

Another group of people, hurting whom is most sinful are neighbours.
Annoying them is *Harām* and deserving of chastisement in the world and
the hereafter.

An Ansar (emigrant) came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said that he has
recently purchased a house in a particular area and that his nearest
person was such that he had no hope of any goodness from him and that he
felt unsafe from his mischief. The Messenger of Allah (S) told ‘Ali
(a.s.), Salman, Abu Zar and Miqdad to go to the Mosque and announce: “He
is not a believer whose neighbour is unsafe from his mischief.” They
announced it thrice and then the Messenger of Allah (S) pointed towards
forty doors to his right and forty to the left indicating that forty
houses in every direction constitute ones neighbourhood. One is obliged
to observe their rights.[^25]

The following tradition is mentioned in the Mushaf of Fatemah Zahra (S):

“One who believes in Allah and the last day will not hurt his neighbour,
he honours the guest and either he speaks good or remains silent.”[^26]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“One who does not behave well with his neighbours is not one of
us.”[^27]

The Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“Allah will deprive from the fragrance of Paradise one who hurts his
neighbour. His abode shall be Hell and what terrible abode it is! And
one who fails to fulfill the rights of a neighbour is not one of us.
Jibrīl has emphasized so often on the rights of the neighbours that I
thought they shall be included among one’s inheritors.”[^28]

The Holy Prophet (S) has also said that one who annoys his neighbour and
whose neighbour is not safe from his mischief will not be able to enter
Paradise. The Prophet (S) said during the expedition of Tabuk,

“Those who cause harm to their neighbours should not accompany us.”[^29]

One day the companions told the Messenger of Allah (S) that such and
such woman fasts during the day and prays during the night, gives alms
but hurts her neighbour by her sharp tongue. The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“There is no virtue in this woman. She is from the inmates of Hell.”

Then the people said, “Such and such woman just prays the *Wajib*
prayers and fasts during the month of Ramadhan but she never troubles
her neighbours.” The Prophet (S) said,

“She is among those who deserve Paradise.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said,

“There are Three categories of neighbours. First: one who has Three
rights upon you. This is the one who is a Muslim and also a relative.
Second: One who has two rights. A Muslim neighbour and third: The Kafir
neighbour who has only the rights of a neighbour.”[^30]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Accursed! Accursed is the one who hurts his neighbour.”[^31]

Imam (a.s.) also says that when Benjamin went away from Hazrat Yaqūb
(a.s.) he said to Allah (S.w.T.): O Allah! You have not dealt with
Mercy! That you have taken away my son and rendered me visually
impaired. Allah revealed to him: If I have killed him I make alive once
more and unite him to you. But you also recall the sheep that you had
roasted for dinner while your neighbour had fasted and was in hunger.
You did not give him anything.[^32]

Another tradition says that after this it was the practice of Yaqūb
(a.s.) to announce every morning through a caller within a radius of
Three miles around his house that whosoever wanted breakfast can have it
from his house and similarly in the evening it was announced that
whosoever wanted dinner could have it from the house of Yaqūb (a.s.).

There are many more traditions dealing with this topic, but traditions
already mentioned clearly indicate the extreme significance of the
rights that neighbours have over us.

Rights of Neighbours
--------------------

We must behave with them with kindness. Do not delay doing a good deed
towards him. Do not be miserly in fulfilling his needs. Consider him a
partner in your wealth. Say salām to him. Do not pry into his secrets.
Visit him when he is sick. Comfort him in calamities and share his
sorrow. Wish him on auspicious occasions. If you learn of any of his
defects, keep it confidential. Forgive him his mistakes. Do not object
if he wants to do something on the partition wall. If he wants to lay
some pipe or drain through the neighbouring field, do not restrain him.
Do not fall short in giving him anything for the household needs. Do not
eye the spouse and family of your neighbour.

Do not neglect his house in his absence. Be kind to his children. Guide
them by teaching the good things of the life and the hereafter. Help if
he requests for help. Lend him money if he needs it. Do not raise the
height of your house without his permission, due to which the airy
atmosphere of his house will suffer. You must send him something from
the delicacies purchased by you for your own family. If you cannot give
them, consume it secretly so that the neighbour’s children do not become
aware of it and desire it.

Troubling the spouse
--------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) says that Allah (S.w.T.) does not accept the
Prayers and good deeds of a wife who troubles her husband, till the time
she fulfils the rights of her husband and makes him happy. Even if she
fasts everyday, frees slaves and donates millions in charity she will be
the first one to enter Hell. After this he (S) said the same will be the
fate of the husband who troubles his wife. A husband who bears the bad
behaviour of his wife and seeks Allah (S.w.T.)’s help in bearing it is
rewarded with the reward of Ayyub’s (a.s.) patience, every time he is
patient with his wife. As regards the wife she would be accumulating
sins equal to the particles of sand in a desert, every twenty four
hours. If she dies without making up with her husband and earning his
satisfaction, she would be thrown headlong into the lowest level of Hell
with the hypocrites. A wife who does not agree with her husband, is not
content with the expenses he gives her, pressurizes him and forces him
for something he is not capable of, the Almighty will not accept even
her deeds which can save her from the fire of Hell. Allah (S.w.T.) will
continue to be wrathful with her till she reforms herself.[^33]

Annoying a Beggar
-----------------

The Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) says in Surah al-Baqarah,

***“O you who believe! Do not make your charity worthless by reproach
and injury.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2: 264)***

Allah (S.w.T.) also says,

***“Kind speech and forgiveness is better than charity followed by
injury.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2: 263)***

Like hurting the person by turning ones face away or behaving curtly, or
in return for the alms, to force a person to do some labour; or make the
charity public and cause him humiliation. Tradition says,

“Those who boast of favours after they have done kindness will not enter
Paradise.”[^34]

In another tradition it is mentioned that,

“Those who boast for being kind on deprived people are cursed in the
world and the hereafter. One who does good to his siblings and parents
and thinks it as a favour and mentions it, is far from the mercy of
Allah (S.w.T.) and His angels and he is near Hell-fire. His
supplications are not accepted. His desires are not fulfilled and Allah
(S.w.T.) does not look at him with mercy in the life and the hereafter.”

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia, vol. 8 page 612

[^2]: Safinatun Behar Vol. 1 page 290

[^3]: Muhajjatul Baiza Vol. 5 page 326

[^4]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 359

[^5]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 360

[^6]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 360

[^7]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 359

[^8]: al-Kāfi

[^9]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^10]: al-Kāfi

[^11]: al-Kāfi

[^12]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 352

[^13]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 351

[^14]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^15]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 354

[^16]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 356

[^17]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 356

[^18]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 359

[^19]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 7 page 609

[^20]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 7. page 602

[^21]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^22]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^23]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^24]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^25]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 666

[^26]: al-Kāfi Vol. 6 page 667

[^27]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 668

[^28]: Wasa’il ul-Shia vol. 8 page 488

[^29]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^30]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^31]: al-Kāfi

[^32]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^33]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^34]: Layali al-Akhbar


