The Forty-fourth Greater Sin: Intrigue, Deception and Breaking Covenants
========================================================================

The forty-fourth sin which will be punished by damnation in Hell is
intrigue, deception and failure to observe covenants etc. In the book
al-Kāfi, Book of Imān and Kufr, six traditions are mentioned under the
chapter, ‘Intrigue, Deception and Breaking covenants.’ Here we shall
quote two of them.

*Hazrat Amir ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.) says,*

“If the punishment for intrigue and deception had not been Hell, I would
have been the greatest plotter (of intrigue) among the people.” [^1]

He (a.s.) also said,

“Indeed, breaking covenants, sinfulness, misappropriation; all of them
are punished by Hell.”[^2]

*Wasa’il ul-Shia* records a prophetic tradition saying that we must
never cheat or deceive Muslims. According to Jibrīl (a.s.) a cheater and
deceiver belongs to Hell. Then the Messenger of Allah (S) says,

“One who cheats a Muslim or misappropriates his property is not from
us.”

Other traditions on the topic are also mentioned in the books, *Wasa’il
ul-Shia* and *Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il*. When people suggested to Amir
ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.) that he should allow Muawiyah the post of governor
till he (‘Ali) was Caliph so that there would be no danger from
Muawiyah, ‘Ali (a.s.) said,

“Those who deceive, cheat and break covenants; all of them belong to
Hell.”[^3]

Meanings of Intrigue, Cheating and Breaking Covenant
----------------------------------------------------

Breaking Covenants has been dealt with in detail in the chapter of the
Twenty-first Greater Sin. Intrigue and cheating both mean to do some
evil to a person in such a way that he is not able to understand. That
is a person apparently does good to another but in reality works to his
detriment. Or the person pretends to love and have regard for another
but in reality bears enmity and malice for him in his heart. Or the
person acts as if he has nothing to do with another but as soon as he
gets the chance he causes harm. Cheating and deception are hypocritical,
two-coloured, double crossing acts, with an outward show of goodness but
concealed evil. Cheating and deception can be practised with regard to
Allah (S.w.T.), His Messenger (S) and the Imam (a.s.) and secondly, with
respect to the people.

Cheating and Tricking with Allah (S.w.T.)
-----------------------------------------

The worst type of cheating is that which the hypocrites do against Allah
(S.w.T.). These people make an outward appearance of accepting Islam and
having Imān but inwardly they conceal their kufr. Allah (S.w.T.) says
about them,

***“They desire to deceive Allah and those who believe, and they deceive
only themselves and they do not perceive.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah
2:9)***

Obviously no one can deceive Allah (S.w.T.), as He is aware of all
things. Deceiving Allah (S.w.T.) means, deceiving the Holy Prophet (S)
and the believers, is equivalent to deceiving Allah (S.w.T.). Or it may
be said that the hypocrites think that they can fool Allah (S.w.T.) by
merely repeating the formula of faith, verbally, while they carry Kufr
in their hearts. By doing so they are not harming the Holy Prophet (S)
or the believers, but depriving themselves of righteousness and
salvation. They invite upon themselves disgrace in this life and
chastisement in the hereafter. Another way by which the hypocrites think
they can fool Allah (S.w.T.) is by praying to show off. This subject has
been discussed in detail in the chapter on ‘Shirk’.

False Claims of Spiritual Status
--------------------------------

Included in cheating Allah (S.w.T.) is the false claim of having special
spiritual powers and a high religious status, whereas in reality they do
not even have, for example, Patience, thankfulness, reliance, love,
satisfaction, submission, sincerity. For example a person says that he
only worships Allah (S.w.T.), his creator, whereas he follows the path
of Shaitan, or he says ‘Allah is the Greatest’, while at the same time
considering wealth and worldly position more important. If he is told to
give up a sin for the sake of Allah (S.w.T.) or to pay the obligatory
taxes for the sake of Allah (S.w.T.), he will not be ready but he will
give it up if he finds that it comes in the way of his worldly
attainment. Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“When you recite the Takbir (Allahu Akbar) for prayers you should
consider all the things between Tharā and Tharya small in comparison to
Allah’s greatness.”

When a person says Allah is the Greatest and Allah sees that what he is
saying is not true He says, “O Liar! Are you trying to fool Me? By My
Might and Majesty I shall deprive you of the sweetness of My remembrance
and the taste of My nearness and invocation.”[^4]

Cheating the Holy Personalities
-------------------------------

A person claims to have love and respect for Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) and
claims that he is a friend with their friends and enemies towards their
enemy, but in reality there is no sincerity in his claim, because he
does not follow in their footsteps and goes against their teachings.

Tricking the People
-------------------

Cheating, cunning, fraud and deception are different types of qualities
common in those people who are not worried about the hereafter. All of
them are Harām and Greater Sins. The more harmful they are, the more is
the severity of these crimes and the more severe the punishment. The
Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) says in Surah Fāt’ir,

***“and the evil plans shall not beset any save the authors of it.”***
***(Surah Fāt’ir 35: 43)***

Whenever a person plans evil for other, evil befalls him and he himself
will face problems if he desires problems for others. Every kind of
trickery and cheating causes disgrace to the cheater and trickster. The
cheater has to suffer in the lowermost level of Hell due to this crime
and the one whom he cheated receives great rewards for having undergone
hardships and is granted a high position in this world and the
hereafter. Thus we usually see that the cheat is disgraced in the world
and he himself suffers the damage caused by this deed. According to
Tafsīrul Mizan the following saying was common among the Arabs: One who
digs a hole for his brother; Allah (S.w.T.) throws him headlong into it.
A similar proverb is present in Persian also: Do not do evil to anyone
the same evil will turn towards you.

Double Crossing and Treason
---------------------------

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“One who meets the Muslims with a double face and double tongue will
come in Qiyāma in such a way that there will be two tongues of fire for
him.”[^5]

Imam Baqir (a.s.) says,

“How evil is the person who is hypocritical and two-faced. He praises
his brother on the face but maligns him behind his back and eats his
flesh (Does his Ghiība). If his brother is bestowed some bounty he is
jealous, if he is in some calamity he deserts him and does not help
him.”[^6]

The Messenger of Allah (S) says that the double – faced person will come
in Qiyāma in such a way that he would be hanging out his tongue and a
flame of fire protruding from them will be scorching his body. It is
said: This the one who was double faced and double-tongued in the world
and he shall be recognized due to the chastisement that he has to bear.
Similarly the Holy Prophet (S) said that the hypocrite who has two faces
and two tongues in the world will be having two faces and two tongues in
the hereafter.

Bluffing
--------

There is an interesting incident in Tafsīr Minhajus Sadiqīn to
illustrate a person who tries to be a blatant cheat. Two friends had
collected some money. They decided to hide it below a tree lest it is
stolen from them. When night fell one of the two came to the tree and
took away the money. The next morning when both came together and found
the money missing the one who had stolen it caught the collar of the
other and said: You must have stolen it because no one else had seen us
hiding it. The poor fellow swore he was innocent but the thief took him
to court.

The judge asked him if he could provide a witness. He said the tree will
testify for him. That night the thief told his brother to hide in the
hollow of the tree and when the judge comes in the morning he should
blame the other person for having taken the money. So when the judge
came in the morning and asked the tree to testify, the thief’s brother
shouted from inside blaming the other person for stealing the money. The
judge sensed foul play for trees do not usually speak. He ordered that
it should be set afire so that it will not be a cause for mischief. It
was set on fire. The thief was worried but kept quiet. When it was
unbearable he began to scream and shout. The people pulled out the
thief’s brother half-dead from the hollow trunk. When the judge asked
him he confessed the truth. The judge took away the money and gave it to
the falsely accused and the thief was given a tough sentence.

Muhaddith Jazaeri writes in his book Zahra Rabi an interesting anecdote.
There was a man in Isfahan who used to beat his wife but unfortunately
she succumbed to his beating though he had not intended to kill her. But
when she was dead he became fearful of her relatives. In a state of
anxiety he came out of his house and met an acquaintance to whom he
posed his problem. The friend told him to invite a young man to his
house and behead him and put the severed head next to his wife’s corpse.
Then he could tell the wife’s relatives that he had found them together
in bed and was not able to control his ire and slew them both. The man
liked the idea and sat at the doorway in anticipation of a young man.
After some time a handsome youth passed by his house. He invited him
inside and beheaded him. Then he summoned the wife’s relatives and told
them the concocted story. They were satisfied but the person who had
devised this plan had a teenaged son who did not reach home that day.
The man was worried and when the son failed to turn up he came to the
house of the one whom he had offered evil advice and asked him if he
carried out the plan suggested by him. ‘Yes’, said he and took him near
the dead bodies. He was shocked when he saw that the youth he had killed
was his own son. His evil advice caused the death of his own son. The
moral of this story is that one who digs a pit for others falls into it
himself. History is replete with such incidents.

A similar incident is mentioned in the book Mujjatul Baiza. It concerns
jealousy as well as trickery and we have mentioned it in the chapter of
jealousy.

What is the Meaning of Two tongued and Two faced?
-------------------------------------------------

There are many types of hypocrites.

a) It is a person who says two opposite things. He is always on the
look-out for worldly benefits and he makes contradictory statements. For
example after accepting something he rejects it. Or after testifying to
something he changes his testimony. Or he praises someone in his
presence but maligns him behind his back.

b) Double faced and double tongued is the one who meets two opposing
parties and expresses his solidarity with both of them.

c) A person who tells two enemies who speak against one another, what
each has said against another. It is worse than tale-telling, because
tale-telling is one-way. But the one who does this is a two-tongued
person.

d) A person who meets two people who are hostile to each other, and to
each he praises his foe. This is also double tongued behaviour.

e) To promise help and assistance to two opposing parties.

All the above examples are of hypocrites but if one meets two opposing
parties and is friendly to both of them and praises both of them without
conveying what each had said about the other, it is not hypocrisy.

Adulteration is also a type of fraud
------------------------------------

One type of fraud is to resort to adulteration. Adulteration is mixing
two things such that it is not detectable. For example, mixing water in
milk, or to mix the same thing of two different qualities (e.g. fine
rice with coarse rice) and to sell it saying it all of higher quality.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says that one day the Messenger of Allah (S)
was passing through the market. He saw a grain seller selling food
grains (wheat or barley). He said it was of a good quality. But
revelation descended on him and he put his hand deep inside the sack and
drew out grain of low quality. The man had topped the sack with high
quality grain to fool the customers. The Holy Prophet (S) was angry and
he said,

“You have done Khayanat with Muslims and practiced adulteration.”[^7]

He (S) also said,

“One who resorts to adulteration in his dealings with Muslims is not a
Muslim. He shall be raised with the Jews on the day of Judgement.
Because the Jews are the most common adulterators with Muslims.”[^8]

The Prophet of Allah (S) says that one who sleeps with the intention of
practicing adulteration with his brother (the next day), sleeps with the
displeasure of Allah (S.w.T.). He begins his day while Allah (S.w.T.) is
angry with him. Allah (S.w.T.) continues to be wrathful with him till he
does not repent and give up adulteration. If he dies without repenting
he dies a death of a non-Muslim. After this he (S) said thrice,

“Know that! One who adulterates with Muslims is not of Muslim. And Allah
removes barakat from the sustenance of one who adulterates with his
Muslim brother. Allah stops his sustenance and leaves him to
Himself.[^9]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) told a flour seller to keep aloof from
adulteration because one who practiced adulteration will himself be a
victim of adulteration. If he has no wealth to be adulterated there will
be adulteration with his family.

(Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 12 page 210)

There are many traditions on this subject some of which have been
described by us in the chapter of cheating in business.

Selling at Exorbitant Rates is Also Fraud
-----------------------------------------

Like adulteration, selling at a much higher rate to a person who is
ignorant of its actual value, is also a type of fraud.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“To cheat a person who is unaware of the actual value of goods is
soht.”[^10]

As we have seen “Soht” is described in the Twenty-fifth greater sin.
Imam (a.s.) also says,

“Cheating the Muslims is Harām.”

and in another tradition he (a.s.) says,

“Do not cheat one who trusts you because it is not allowed to cheat
him.”[^11]

Adulteration is indeed Harām in dealings but a proper deal with this man
is valid in Shariah. Thus one who has been cheated has the prerogative
to terminate the contract or accept it with some modifications. For
example, if he delivered adulterated gold he can return it and accept
pure silver.

Now we shall quote a few legal rulings about cheating from Tauzihul
Masael of Ayatullah Al-Uzma Agha Sīstani:

2079.\* If a person sells ghee mixed with fat and specifies it, for
example, he says: “I am selling 3 kilos of ghee” – the transaction will
be void if the quantity of fat is more, to the extent that it cannot be
called ghee. But if the quantity of fat is small, so that it can just be
classified as ghee mixed with fat, the transaction will be valid. But
the buyer has a right of refusal, based on the deficiency in the
quality, and can therefore cancel the deal and ask for refund. And if
ghee and fat are distinct from each other, the deal covering the fat
will be void and the seller will have to refund the price of that fat
and keep the fat for himself. But in this case also, the buyer has a
right of cancelling the transaction of pure ghee which is in it. Where
the seller does not say that he is selling a particular thing and just
sells, say, 3 kilos of ghee he possesses, and if it turns out to be ghee
mixed with fat, the buyer can return it and ask for pure ghee.

2133. \* If a buyer does not know the price of the commodity, or was
unconcerned about it at the time of purchase and buys the thing for
higher than usual price, he can cancel the transaction if the difference
of price is substantial and if the difference is established at the time
of abrogation. Otherwise, the buyer cannot cancel the deal. Similarly,
if the seller does not know the price of the commodity, or was heedless
about it at the time of selling and sells the thing at a cheaper price,
he can cancel the deal if the difference is substantial.

2132. \* If one of the parties presents his commodity as better than it
actually is and thereby attracts the buyer, or makes him more
enthusiastic about it. This is called Khiyar tadlis.

[^1]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 336

[^2]: al-Kāfi vol. 2 page 338

[^3]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^4]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^5]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 343

[^6]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2 page 343

[^7]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 12 page 210

[^8]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 12 page 210

[^9]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 12 page 210

[^10]: Wasa’il ul-Shia vol.12 page 363

[^11]: Wasa’il ul-Shia Vol. 12 page 364


