The Forty-seventh Greater Sin: Disrespect of Ka’ba
==================================================

After the Holy Qur’an there is nothing more respected and venerated than
the Holy Ka’ba. Every Muslim is well-aware that not only is the
disrespect of Ka’ba a greater sin, in some cases it tantamounts to Kufr
and apostasy, as mentioned in the chapter of disrespect of Qur’an.

Sadūq (r.a.) narrates from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he said,

“Nothing is more honourable in the eyes of Allah than the following
Three: The Holy Qur’an, which is His wisdom and Light, His House which
He has appointed as the Qibla for men, and the Progeny of his Prophet
(a.s.).”[^1]

He (a.s.) also said,

“Allah has not created any house on the earth more loved by Him than the
Ka’ba and more honoured by Him.”[^2]

Every believer and all the Muslims are well-aware of the fact that
disrespecting the Holy Ka’ba is a very serious crime. In fact it is
obligatory for Muslims to respect the entire sanctuary and the city of
Makkah.

Emphasis on Respecting the Ka’ba
--------------------------------

Nass is available to indicate that it is a Greater sin to show
disrespect to the Ka’ba and the Messenger of Allah (S) has clearly
stated,

“It is a greater sin to consider the disrespect of the Holy House
permissible.”

Allah (S.w.T.) says in Surah al-Mā’ida,

***“O you who believe! Do not violate the signs appointed by Allah.”***
***(Surah al-Mā’ida 5:2)***

According to *Tafsīrul Mizan* the word ‘*Ihlāl*’ (violate) actually
means to consider the disrespect of a sacred thing permissible (Mubah).
It refers to the failure to maintain the sanctity of the signs of Allah
(S.w.T.). There is no doubt that the Holy Ka’ba is a great sign of Allah
(S.w.T.). It is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an that,

***“And whoever respects the sacred ordinances of Allah, it is better
for him with his Lord.”*** ***(Surah Hajj 22: 30)***

Some commentators of Qur’an say that the words “Sacred Ordinances” in
the above verse refer to the Holy Ka’ba. The term also implies the
sacred Mosque, the city of Makkah which is a sacred city; the sacred
months and other sanctified things.

Levels of Disrespect
--------------------

As we have mentioned before, there are different levels of disrespect
like tearing up the Qur’an, throwing it intentionally into Najasat and
making it Najis; all these lead to infidelity and apostasy. But there
are other ways of showing disrespect, some of which are mentioned below.

Defiling the Holy Sanctuary
---------------------------

Every sin and irreligious act committed in the Holy city of Makkah is
actually an act of disrespect to the Ka’ba, because to go there and
commit such illegal acts show that the person has no regard of its
status and sanctity.

According to some traditions any good deed performed in the Holy City
carries a double reward and any sinful act committed there earns double
punishment. The traditions of the Holy Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s.) indicate that
if a person commits an illegal act in Makkah and is penalized for it, he
deserves more than the prescribed punishment, because he has performed
that deed in the sanctuary of Allah (S.w.T.). Therefore any sin
committed within the Holy Sanctuary is a greater sin. According to
Shaykh Ahmad Jazaeri in his book Ayātul Ahkam every sin committed within
the Holy Sanctuary is a greater sin according to the following verse,

***“and whoever shall incline therein to wrong unjustly, We will make
him taste of a painful chastisement.”*** ***(Surah Hajj 22: 25)***

Please note that a sin committed within the boundaries of Makkah is
itself a greater sin. When a sin is committed it causes disrespect to
the Holy Sanctuary and it is an act of defilement. This is a separate
crime. Therefore the one who sins earns the punishment for the illegal
act as well as the punishment of defiling the Holy House.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“Every act of injustice that a person does upon himself, like stealing
or oppressing people, or to cross the boundaries of divine law; is
‘Ilhad’ in my view.”

For this reason extremely pious people refrain from overstaying in the
Holy Sanctuary, lest they fall into some sin and bring down upon
themselves divine punishment. A few more traditions of this kind are
mentioned in the book of *Al Wafi.*

In the exegesis of the above hadith, Allamah Majlisi says that this
tradition indicates that there is no harm in settling down within the
limits of Makkah for one who can protect himself from sins. A person
told Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that there was a ferocious bird in the
sanctuary and the pigeons of that area were not safe from its ferocity.
Imam (a.s.) said,

“Catch this bird and kill it, because it has committed Ilhād in the
Sanctuary.”[^3]

We should know that the boundaries of the sanctuary stretch to a radius
of four farsakhs, which is altogether sixteen farsakh (Each farsakh
equals Three miles). *(Masalik)*

The Sanctuary is an Area of Peace
---------------------------------

No one can touch the person who has committed a crime outside the limits
and then taken refuge within the holy boundaries. He should be boycotted
in such a way that he would be forced to leave the holy boundaries of
his own accord. Then he should be punished for the crime. However, if
one commits a crime for which there are prescribed penalties he can be
punished within the limits of the Sanctuary.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) was queried about the person who murders a
man outside the holy limits and then enters the sanctuary. Imam (a.s.)
said that as long as he was in the sanctuary he cannot be persecuted
(killed). Such a person should be denied food and drink and no sort of
dealing must be conducted with him. He should not be provided any
lodging so that he ultimately leaves the sanctuary. Then he can be
punished.

Then Imam (a.s.) was asked about the person who commits a murder or
steals within the sanctuary. Imam (a.s.) says that he shall be penalized
in the sanctuary itself because he has no respect for the sanctuary.

Sama asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that a person owed him something
but he continued to hide himself from Sama for quite a long time. At
last Sama saw him going around the Ka’ba one day. So could he demand his
money from this person? Imam (a.s.) said,

“No! But do not say salām to him (so that he recognizes you) you must
not threaten him till he leaves the sanctuary.”[^4]

Killing of Animals and Uprooting of Vegetation
----------------------------------------------

Except for camel, cow, sheep/goat and Chicken it is Harām to slaughter
any other animal in the sanctuary. But it is allowed to exterminate
snakes, scorpions, rats, mosquitoes and every other pest to get rid of
its pestilence. In the same way it is Harām to uproot any vegetation
that sprouts in the sanctuary. For details on this topic refer to the
Manasik al-Hajj of Maraja al-Taqlīd.

Entering the sanctuary without Ihram
------------------------------------

It is not allowed to enter Makkah without donning the ritual dress
(Ihram). That is, in whichever part of the year we go to Makkah we have
to tie the Ihram from Miqāt, and enter it. Then after performing the
tawāf and Sa’ay he can take it off. However, those people who have to
frequently enter the limits of miqāt are exempted from this rule. Like
postmen, woodcutters, goatherds and doctors etc. Similar is the rule for
those who have worn the Ihram less than a month ago. For details refer
to the books of Hajj laws. Some scholars consider entering the sanctuary
without Ihram a greater sin that falls within the ambit of ‘Violation of
the Signs’.

Relieving oneself facing the Qibla or with ones back towards it
---------------------------------------------------------------

It is Harām to urinate or defecate facing the Qibla or with ones back
towards it. Whether in solitude or in populated areas. It is Harām even
if one does it inside a building. Precaution dictates that we do not
make even a young child sit facing the Qibla. However, if he does it of
his own accord it is not incumbent to turn him away. Mature people of
sound mind who are unaware of this rule must be made aware of it. Those
who wilfully disobey in spite of knowing the rule should be restrained
according to the dictum of Nahy Anil Munkar, the details of which have
been explained in the previous chapters. If one sits a little to the
left or right such that he is not exactly facing the Qibla or not having
his back exactly to it, there is no harm. More details however are
available in the books of religious laws.

[^1]: Khisāl of Sadūq

[^2]: Man la Yahzarul Faqih

[^3]: al-Kāfi

[^4]: Wafi


