The Forty-eighth Greater Sin: Disrespect to Masajid
===================================================

Every building that is designated as a Mosque by one or other sects of
the Muslims is deserving of respect. Its respect is Wajib and its
disrespect, like demolishing it or making it impure is a Greater Sin.
Every religious person knows that a Mosque is associated with the
Almighty Allah (S.w.T.).

***“And that the mosques are Allah’s,”*** ***(Surah al-Jinn 72: 18)***

Therefore disrespect of a mosque is an act of insult towards Allah, the
blessed and the High.

Abu Basīr the narrator says that he asked Abu Abdillah Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) for the reason why respect of mosques is obligatory?
Imam (a.s.) said that it was because a mosque is the house of Allah on
earth.

According to traditions the Almighty Allah says, that, ‘Mosques are My
houses on the earth. How fortunate are those who perform Wuzu in My
house and they visit Me in My house in a state of ritual purification.
In these circumstances it is Wajib for the master of the house to honour
the guests who visit him. To convey the good news of light (Nūr) that I
will bestow on the day of Qiyāma upon those who leave their homes to go
to the mosques in the darkness of the night.[^1]

All the faithfuls consider disrespect of mosques a Greater Sin. The Holy
Qur’an has mentioned breaking of a Masjid an act of disrespect to it and
considered it one of the serious types of injustices.

***“And who is more unjust than he who prevents (men) from the Masajid
of Allah, that His name should be remembered in them and strives to ruin
them?”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2: 114)***

We shall now explain in brief the various legal rulings with regard to
Masjids.

Polluting a Masjid is Harām
---------------------------

t is Harām to make a Masjid najis. Also it is Harām to take any absolute
Najis thing (Ain al-Najasat) inside a Mosque, lest it pollutes the
Masjid. And even if the Masjid is not polluted it would be an act of
defilement. The same rule applies to things that have become polluted
(Najis) due to their contact with Ain al-Najasat, even if they are dry,
and they will not pollute the mosque, it is Harām in all cases. But if
it neither pollutes the Masjid nor is it an act of disrespect, it is
permissible. However, on the basis of precaution Ain al-Najasat must not
be taken inside the Masjid under any circumstances.

Purification of Masjid is Wajib
-------------------------------

Purifying the Masjid immediately is Wajib, such that it should not be
generally considered as wilful delay or heedlessness. Immediately means
that if there is some time for the prayer it should be purified before
prayers. It should also be clear that purifying the Masjid is incumbent
not only on the person who has polluted it, but it is a Wajib al-Kifai
on all Muslims. It is Wajib to bear the expenses even if it is a costly
matter. If one cannot bear the cost alone it is incumbent on him to ask
help from others.

Staying in the Mosque in a state of Janabat, Haiz or Nifas
----------------------------------------------------------

A Junub person, a woman in haiz or Nifas is not permitted to stay in a
mosque. Thus the Holy Qur’an says:

***“Nor when you are under an obligation to perform a bath — unless (you
are) travelling on the road — until you have washed yourselves.”***
***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4: 43)***

In other words a Junub person is allowed to pass through a mosque from
one door and out of another. He cannot come out from the same door nor
leave anything inside the mosque. However, in the case of Masjidul
Harām, Masjidun Nabi and Masjidul Aqsa the Junub persons and haiz and
Nifas women cannot even pass through them.

Recommended Actions
-------------------

Lighting a lamp in Masjid, keeping it absolutely clean and pure,
entering it with the right foot forward and leaving it with the left
foot first are all recommended (Mustahab) acts. Before entering we must
ensure that our shoes are not najis, lest the Masjid becomes najis due
to it. Enter the Masjid in a state of ritual purification (Ghusl and
Wuzu). Wear the best dress, apply perfume and pray two rakat prayers of
saluting the mosque.

Detestable (Makrūh) Acts
------------------------

assing through a mosque is Makrūh without reciting at least two rakats
of prayers. We must not throw nasal discharge and sputum in the mosque.
Also makrūh are the following acts: sleeping in the mosque, raising ones
voice except in Azan (call for prayer), announcing lost property loudly,
or asking something from a person, reciting poetry that does not contain
any moral lessons. Discussing worldly matters and business transactions
are makrūh in a Masjid. We must not go to the mosque after eating onion,
garlic or anything that creates a foul breath. We must also avoid taking
young children and insane persons inside the mosque.

Different Grades of Mosques
---------------------------

The most sacred and honourable mosque is Masjidul Harām. A prayer inside
this Masjid equals one hundred thousand prayers in ordinary Masjids. The
next in status is Masjidun Nabi (of Madinah). A prayer performed in it
equals ten thousand prayers in ordinary ones. Next in line are Masjids
of Kufa and Aqsa. A single prayer offered in these mosques carry the
reward of one thousand prayers in other Masjids. After this the Jama
Masjids of the city carry great merit. And prayers in Jama Masjids are
hundred times more rewarding than prayers in other places. After Jama
Masjid the main Masjid of the area deserve greater respect because a
single prayer in it equals twenty five prayers. Last of all is the
Masjid in market, wherein prayers earn the worshipper twelve rewards in
comparison to one reward of other prayers.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia


