The Forty-ninth Greater Sin: Disrespect of the Tombs of Ma’sūmīn (a.s.)
=======================================================================

Respect of the tombs of the Messenger of Allah (S) and the Holy Imams is
Wajib in the view of all Muslims because every religious person
considers their disrespect a greater sin. Many traditions speak of the
respect necessary from the *Tahzīb* of Shaykh Mufīd.

The Messenger of Allah (S) addressed Amir ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.) and said,

“O ‘Ali! The Almighty Allah has made your grave and the graves of your
progeny a section (piece of land) of Paradise. And gave it an exalted
position. Allah has made the hearts of his pure-hearted and sincere
servants to incline towards them. Those who bear all kinds of
difficulties and insults for your sake. They shall habitate your
shrines. They shall continue to visit them (do Ziarat) for the pleasure
of Almighty Allah and for the love of His Messenger (S).

O ‘Ali! These very people will deserve my special intercession. On the
day of Qiyāma they will arrive at my pool and shall be my neighbours.
Those who carry out the construction of these tombs and come to visit
them are like those who helped Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) in building the
Baitul Maqdas. The reward of seven non-obligatory Hajjs is there for
those who visit them. His sins will be washed off as if he has just
emerged from the womb.

O ‘Ali! Good news to you! And to your followers of such bounties that
eyes have not yet seen nor ears heard them. They have not even entered
human imagination so far. But there shall be some disgraceful people who
would insult, persecute and criticise the visitors to your graves like
the criticism of a wanton female. They shall be the most mischievous
people of my Ummah who would not receive my intercession and they shall
never be able to reach my pool.”[^1]

For detailed traditions on the subject please refer to *Wafi, Wasa’il
ul-Shia* and *Bihār al-Anwār* Vol. 22.

Disrespect of the Tombs of Ma’sūmīn (a.s.) is Kufr
--------------------------------------------------

The respect of the tombs of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Pure Imams
(a.s.) is Wajib and a necessity of faith and their disrespect is a
greater sin. In fact it is considered the greatest sin to the extent of
Kufr and Shirk. If a tomb gets polluted and no disrespect is evident, on
the basis of precaution, it is necessary to purify them.

According to jurists as in the case of mosques it is not permitted for
Junub person, Haiz and Nifas ladies to stay in the holy Shrines. Some
scholars even maintain that even passing through them is not permitted
for polluted person, just as it is not allowed for Masjidul Harām.

Prayer at the grave of Ma’sūmīn (a.s.)
--------------------------------------

t is not permitted to prostrate on the grave of any Imam (a.s.) during
any Wajib or Mustahab prayer. But one can keep his right cheek on the
grave. While praying near the grave we must keep it ahead of us and
stand behind the head. Prayer is not allowed standing ahead of the grave
because no one has the right to stand ahead of ones Imam. It is allowed
to stand to the left or the right and to pray. That is we must not stand
ahead or parallel to the grave).[^2]

It is related from Hazrat Hujjat Ibn Hasan (a.t.f.s.) that prayers are
not allowed ahead of the grave of a Masūm (a.s.), nor is it valid at the
left or right of the grave because no one has the right to stand ahead
or with the Imam. The writer of Wasa’il ul-Shia has explained the hadith
prohibiting prayers to the left and the right side by saying that it is
makrūh. (detestable).

Some scholars maintain that disrespect is caused only when the follower
stands ahead of his Imam. But it is not a disrespectful act if he stands
to the left or the right. However it is better to act on precaution.

[^1]: Wafi

[^2]: Wasa’il ul-Shia


