Tawba (Part One)
================

‘Tawba’ or repentance is a part of the all compassing mercies of the
Most Merciful Lord. It is one of the avenues of His unbounded indulgence
that He has kept always open for His slaves. Had it been closed, no one
would have ever attained salvation, such is human inclination towards
evil.

The Kind and Wise Lord therefore ordained Tawba (repentance) to be a
cure for diseases of the soul and a means of purifying indecent deeds,
whereby Tawba can wash away man’s sins so that he can obtain eternal
salvation.

Indeed, fortunate is one who appreciates the value of this gate of
Divine Mercy, benefits from it and becomes Allah (S.w.T.)’s most beloved
slave, and is thankful to Allah (S.w.T.) for His limitless bounties; and
highly unfortunate is the one who remains deprived of Divine Mercy even
though the paths leading to it are open to him.

On the Day of Judgement (Qiyāma) man will find excuses and say: O My
Lord! I was unaware and ignorant; was chained by passions and desires
and hence could not remain steadfast in the face of satanic
instigations. In reply to these excuses he will be told: Did We not keep
the doors of Tawba (repentance) always open for you? Were you entrusted
highly difficult tasks and ordered to perform a duty beyond your power?
Were the conditions of Tawba beyond your ability?

Reality of Tawba
----------------

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“To be ashamed of one’s sins is Tawba.”

Imam Baqir (a.s.) says,

“Repenting on one’s deed is enough Tawba.”[^1]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said,

“There is no man who Allah did not forgive who had felt ashamed of his
misdeed. Whenever a man feels ashamed of his fault and then begs pardon
of Allah He forgives all of his sins.”

Repenting over ones sins with heartfelt remorse is Tawba. Man should
understand that Allah (S.w.T.) will be displeased with him if he commits
a sin and he should not forget that his Lord is able to see whatever he
does. It is like a man who, despite being warned by friends, invests all
of his wealth in a bargain and consequently loses everything and becomes
bankrupt and then repents. It is also like a sick person who eats
something that a doctor had prohibited and, as a result becomes serious.
He then gets nothing but disgrace.

Repentance, The cause of giving up of sins
------------------------------------------

The stronger a person’s faith in the Almighty, Qiyāma (Hereafter), Holy
Prophets (a.s.) and the sayings of the Holy Imams (a.s.), the more acute
will be his feelings of guilt and for the sins committed, he will bear
this feeling of repentance continually in his heart.

Together with a feeling of shame and remorse, Tawba also includes a firm
decision to give up sins forever because if a person does not have a
strong will to refrain from sins it only indicates that he was not truly
ashamed. Amir ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.) says,

It cannot so happen that a man has really felt ashamed and yet he did
not give up sins.

When a man repents over his misdeeds it is necessary that he should make
the utmost effort to keep himself away from sins. If the sin is about
non-performance of duties like Salāt (daily prayers), Siyyam (Ramzan
fasting), Zakat (poor tax) and Hajj pilgrimage, then, after expressing
repentance he should perform Qaža (repeat to make good) of those duties.
If the sin was regarding rights of people, like usurping someone’s
property or money, then he should return it immediately to the owner,
and if the owner is not alive then to his heirs.

If he does not know the heirs of the owner, then he should give away the
dues in the path of Allah (S.w.T.) on behalf of the original owner. If
he had shown disrespect to someone he should beg pardon of him and
should try his best to please him. If the matter involves Diyat or Qasās
(blood money or retaliation) he should hand over himself to the
concerned person so that he may either take Qasās or blood money, or
pardon him, if he so pleases. If the sin involves Hadd or punishment,
like Qažaf (wrong allegation against anybody) then he must surrender
himself to the authority so that he may be either punished or pardoned.

But if he is loaded with crimes for which Allah (S.w.T.) Himself has
fixed punishments, like adultery, then it is not necessary for him to
present himself to the Islamic court and to confess. In this case it is
enough to merely repent over his sin and to make a firm decision to give
up the sin forever and to pray for pardon. If the sins are Greater Sins
for which punishment (hadd) is not fixed like listening to songs and
music etc., then according to traditions a person should be sincerely
repentant and beseech Allah (S.w.T.) to pardon and forgive him.

Perfect Repentance
------------------

Once a man came to Amir ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.) and exclaimed loudly:
“Astagfirullah”. The Hazrat said,

“May your mother mourn you! Do you understand what Istighfar is?”

For the word ‘Istighfar’ to be meaningful a person must first undergo a
mental reformation. Which means that he is sorry and shameful about the
earlier misdeeds, and has resolved to give up sin forever. He must pay
the dues (rights) of others so that when he dies he meets his Lord
Almighty without others’ having any claim on him. He must perform all
the duties obligatory on him without fail. If his flesh and blood were
made up of unlawful earning he should be fearful and worry about the
punishments of Hell to such an extent that his body becomes extremely
thin and lean and only thereafter it should be rebuilt on lawful food.
He must worship Allah (S.w.T.) so much that his body experiences
hardships and atones for the unlawful pleasure enjoyed by it.

When these conditions are fulfilled, then you should utter
Astaghfirullah.

All religious scholars have agreed that Tawba is obligatory for all
sins. Muhaqqiq Tusi (r.a.) writes in his *Tajrīd al-Kalām* and Allamah
Hilli (a.r.) writes in its commentary that Tawba is the means of making
up for spiritual losses suffered, and wisdom therefore dictates that
Tawba is compulsory.

Allah Almighty says in Surah Nūr’s verse 31:

***“And turn to Allah all of you, O believers! so that you may be
successful.”***

He also says in Surah Tahrīm (Ayat:8):

***“O you who believe! Turn to Allah a (Tawba of Nasūh) sincere turning;
maybe your Lord will remove from you your evil and cause you to enter
gardens beneath which rivers flow.”***

What is Tawba of Nasūh?
-----------------------

Allamah Majlisi, in Sharhe Kāfi, quotes the commentators about meaning
of Tawbatan Nasūh:

1. To repent purely and piously in the presence of the Lord. Repentance
should not merely be due to a desire of Paradise and fear of Hell, it
should be due to a feeling of shame and remorse for not obeying Allah’s
commands. Tusi (r.a.) writes in *Tajrīd al-Kalam*. “It is not Tawba to
worry about sins for fear of Hell.”

2. The Tawba should be such that it may serve as a lesson even to
others. A person should repent with such sincerity and such persistence
that by observing his repentance other sinners may also be inclined
towards Tawba. In this way he also becomes a means of guidance for
others.

3. Nasīhat (admonition) or advice is like sewing. So the clothing of
religion which was torn into pieces because of sins can be stitched by
the threads of Tawba. Such repentant people are also called Awliyaullah
(Friends of Allah).

4. He should give Nasīhat (admonition) to himself so thoroughly and
honestly and perform such a Tawba that all soot of sins may vanish from
the walls of his heart. His worship should be so intense that the
radiance of Faith removes the darkness of sins totally. He must be so
involved in performing good deeds that his bad deeds are fully
compensated for.

A great religious scholar says: It is not enough to do Tawba, which
would effect only a superficial cleansing of the soul. His worship to
Allah (S.w.T.) should be to such an extent and his obedience to Allah
(S.w.T.) is implicit, such that his sins are totally obliterated, and
his heart and soul is purified with a thorough cleansing. The more his
worship the purer will be his heart. A repentant must necessarily look
at his past so that each and every sin can be repented for. For
instance, if he had enjoyed nonsense songs and maddening music in a
dance party he should now pay more and more attention to the recitation
of Qur’an, Hadith, religious discourses, sermons etc.

He should regularly recite the holy Qur’an. It must be remembered that
the letters (text) of the holy Qur’an must not be touched in a state of
impurity. If he had entered a mosque in a state of impurity, he should
now sit in Ihtikaf in the Masjid by way of compensation. If he had
viewed prohibited scenes earlier now he must try his best to see more
and more those things, the seeing of which draws Divine Reward like the
text of the holy Qur’an, faces of one’s parents, company of good and
pious people. Similarly he should look at the signs of God’s Might and
draw wisdom from it. After doing Tawba he must give people their rights.
He should spend the better portion of his wealth in the path of Allah
(S.w.T.) on the poor and needy. If he has backbited a faithful he must
compensate for it by praising his good points. In short, he must try and
make up for his misdeeds in whatever manner possible and to whatever
extent possible.

Merit of Tawba
--------------

### 1. It makes man a beloved of God

Allah (S.w.T.) says in Surah al-Baqarah, Verse 222:

***Surely Allah loves those who turn much (to Him).***

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said,

Allah becomes pleased with the Tawba of a Mu’min just as you are pleased
on finding your lost thing.[^2]

### 2. Evils are turned into good deeds

Tawba does not only removes the darkness of sins but it also replaces
the darkness with light. The Almighty says,

***“Except him who repents and believes and does a good deed; so these
are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones; and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful. And whoever repents and does good, he surely turns
to Allah a (goodly) turning.”***

(Surah Furqān 25:70-71)

### 3. Praiseworthy Prayer of Angels

Allah Almighty says,

***“Those (angels) who bear the (Arsh) power and those around celebrate
the praise of their Lord and believe in Him and ask protection for those
who believe: Our Lord! Thou embraces all things in mercy and knowledge,
therefore grant protection to those who turn (to Thee) and follow Thy
way, and save them from the punishment of the hell...”*** ***(Surah
Ghāfir, 40:7)***

### 4. The repentant will go to Paradise

Allah Almighty says,

***“And those who when they commit an indecency or do injustice to their
souls remember Allah and ask forgiveness for their faults – And Who
forgives the faults but Allah, and (who) do not knowingly persist in
what they have done. (as for) these – their reward is forgiveness from
their Lord, and gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them, and
excellent is the reward of the*** ***labourers.”*** ***(Surah Āli-
‘Imran 3:135-136)***

### 5. Tawba gives happiness in life

Almighty Allah has said,

***And you that ask forgiveness of your Lord, then turn to Him; He will
provide you with a goodly provision to an appointed term and bestow His
Grace on everyone with Grace).*** ***(Surah Hūd 11:3)***

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“The lifespan of some gets shortened because of their sins and some pass
away at their appointed hour.”

Sins can shorten life span.

### 6. Prayer are accepted by Tawba

This will be discussed at length afterwards. It will be explained in
detail how *Tawba* makes a supplication acceptable.

### 7. Tawba Brings good tidings from God

Allah Almighty says:

***And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons the
evil deeds and He knows what you do.*** ***(Surah Ash-Shūrā 42:25)***

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says,

Allah told Dawūd (a.s.); O Dawūd (a.s.)! Give good tidings to the
sinners and show a ray of hope to the pious people. He said: My Lord!
How shall I give good tidings to the sinners and show hope to the pious?
The Lord said: Give good tidings to the sinners that I will accept their
repentance and give hope to the pious so that they may not become proud
of their piety and may not become self-centred because there is no one
who may not be destroyed if I insist on taking his account.

### 8. Any number of sins will be pardoned through Tawba

Allah Almighty says:

***Say: O My servants! Who have acted extravagantly against their own
souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah; surely Allah forgives the
faults altogether; surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful. And return
to your Lord time after time and submit to Him before there comes to you
the punishment, then you shall not be helped.*** ***(Surah az-Zumar 39:
53-54)***

This Ayat has put much emphasis on repentance.

*It is the Ayat after which the Messenger of Allah (S) was satisfied
regarding the sinners of his Ummah. The faithful should ponder upon the
meaning and the commentary of the above verse.*

Imam Riďa (a.s.) heard his companions say: May Allah curse those who
fought against ‘Ali (a.s.). He said that they should add: Then he did
not reform his soul by repentance.

Then he added,

The sin that someone did not help ‘Ali (a.s.) nor did he regret it is
greater than the sin of one who fought with ‘Ali (a.s.) and felt ashamed
and performed Tawba.

This hadith shows that Tawba can cause even the most serious sin to be
pardoned.

### 9. Breaking of Tawba does not nullify repentance

If a repentant breaks his promise or resolution and goes against it, his
earlier Tawba will not be nullified. So he should take this opportunity
to repent for his later sin and try his utmost to suppress sin and
refrain from it.

Muhammad bin Muslim relates from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that the Imam said,

O Muhammad bin Muslim! Every sin of a Mu’min for which he has repented
is forgiven. For the future after repentance and forgiveness they must
continue good deeds. By Allah no one has this merit except the faithful.

I inquired; what if someone does Tawba and Istighfar and then commits a
sin and again repents? In response, the Imam said,

O Muhammad bin Muslim! You know very well that a Mu’min can honestly be
ashamed for his deeds. Then if he repents, will Allah not accept his
Tawba?

I asked what if he sins a number of times? He said,

Even then his Tawba will be accepted. Allah (S.w.T.) will pardon his
sins because He is very kind. He will surely accept repentance and
overlook our misdeeds. Beware! You may not make a Mu’min disheartened.

Abu Basīr says: I requested Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) to explain what was
‘Tawba Nasūh’ ordered by Allah? He said,

“A repentance after which he never commits that sin again.”

I said, “Master! Is there anybody among us who would not sin ever again?
The Imam replied,

“O Abu Basīr! Verily God loves His slave who gets deceived more and then
repents over it.”

Another Hadith says that begging pardon after an error is the best
course.

### 10. The Door of Tawba is open forever

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said,

Adam (a.s.) requested God Almighty: My Lord! You have imposed Satan on
me. So grant something to me also. Allah Almighty replied: O Adam! Yes,
I have appointed something for you also. It is that if anyone from your
progeny intends to sin, his sin will not be recorded. If he has sinned
actually that sin (one only) will be noted. But when he will intend to
do a good deed a good will instantly be noted in his account. Then if he
will actually do that good deed, ten rewards will be credited to his
account. Adam (a.s.) said: My Lord! Grant me something more. Allah
responded: another bounty for you is that if, after committing a sin,
they will seek pardon from Me, I will forgive them. Adam (a.s.)
requested: My Lord! Add something more. Allah said: I have provided
Tawba for your progeny and it is so vast that even if they beg My pardon
at the last moment of their life, I will forgive them. He said: My Lord!
This is enough.

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“Anyone who does Tawba a year before his death, it will be accepted by
God.”

Then he (S) repeated,

“A year is a long time. If he begs pardon only a month before his end he
will be forgiven.”

Then he said,

“A month is also too much. Even if he begs pardon only a week before his
departure it will be accepted.”

Then he said,

“A week is also much more. If the sinner prays for pardon only a day
before his death, his repentance will be accepted.”

Then he said,

“A day is also a long time. Even if a man repents just before the
arrival of the angel of death, his Tawba will be accepted.”[^3]

Regarding this hadith, Allamah Majlisi (a.r) comments: The stages of
Tawba will depend on perfection and acceptance because a perfect
repentance will wash out all the dirt from the mirror of the soul.
Therefore, make the mirror of your heart shining with weeping before
Allah, with good deeds and with humility. If one is unable to repent in
the last year of his life he can do so in the last month. If not in the
last month then in the last week. If not even in the last week prior to
death then just one day before the final departure. If he cannot repent
even a day before death then he may do so only an hour before his
demise. The Most Merciful Allah will forgive him. But traditions have
pointed out even the particular moment at which it will be of no use.

Shaykh Bahai writes in his book *Arbaīn* that the particular moment is
the time of seeing the angel of death. It maybe the time when one
becomes sure of his death or he may feel that all bonds with life are
breaking off. There is general agreement among religious scholars that
Tawba of the last moment of death will be of no avail.

Verse 17-18 of Surah an-Nisā’ state:

***Repentance with Allah is only for those who do evil in ignorance,
then turn (to Allah) soon, so these it is to whom Allah turns
(mercifully), and Allah is ever Knowing, Wise. And repentance is***
***not for those who go on doing evil deeds, until when death comes to
one of them. He says: Surely now I repent; nor (for) those who die while
they are unbelievers. These are they for whom We have prepared a painful
chastisement.***

Repentance should be Instant
----------------------------

Shaykh Bahai writes in *Arbaīn*: There is no doubt about Tawba being
compulsory because, just as poison destroys man’s body so do sins
(destroy his soul). After consuming poison it becomes essential for one
to go immediately for treatment to save ones life. Likewise it is
compulsory for a sinner to resort to Tawba immediately after sinning so
that his Dīn (religion) may not be destroyed. The sinner who delays
repentance takes a very big risk. The first risk is that if he continues
to remain alive he may indulge in another sin (because a sincere Tawba
implies that he has made a firm resolution not to commit that sin
again). The second danger is that if death takes him suddenly he will
die unrepentant. Allah (S.w.T.) says:

***What! do the people of the towns then feel secure from Our punishment
coming to them by night while they sleep? What! do the people of the
towns feel secure from Our punishment coming to them in the morning
while they play? What! do they then feel secure from Allah's plan? But
none feels secure from Allah's plan except the people who shall
perish.*** ***(Surah Al-A’raaf 7:97-99)***

Elsewehere He says:

***And spend out of what We have given you before death comes to one of
you, so that he should say: My Lord! Why didst Thy not respite me to a
near term, so that I should have given alms and been of the doors of
good deeds. And Allah does not respite a soul when its appointed term
has come, and Allah is Aware of what you do.*** ***(Surah Munāfiqun
63:10-11)***

In the explanation of this verse it is said that a man, at the time of
his death, tells the angel of death: Please give me just one day’s
respite so that I may repent for my sins and be prepared for the journey
to the Hereafter. Izrāīl says: The days of your life are now over. The
person says: Just give me only an hour’s respite. Comes the reply: Even
the moments of your life are over. The door of Tawba is now closed for
you.

Black heart
-----------

When a person sins and does not do Tawba, his heart darkens (polluted)
as he commits more and more sins the dirt accumulates on his heart. It
then becomes a vicious circle, the darkening of the heart leads to
further sins, and the sins lead to further darkening of the heart. A
stage is finally reached when his heart is irreversibly polluted and
cannot be cleansed. Such a heart is referred to in narrations as a black
heart.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says,

For human hearts nothing is more harmful than a sin. When the mirror of
heart becomes black because of sins the blackness covers the entire
soul. Then man tumbles down from his original position and gets
separated from truth.

According to another tradition he also said,

“Such a sinner will not be able to do any good.”

Such a man will not give up sins and hence the wisdom of doing good will
be snatched away from him and he will not be able to perform Tawba till
his last moment. If he will utter Tawba from his mouth it will remain
limited to his lips. His heart will not support his tongue. As it is not
a true Tawba it will not prove effective.

Stages of Tawba
---------------

Tawba means returning toward God. Repentance can be:

1. Turning from Kufr (unbelief) to Imān (Faith), to come out of a state
of doubt into a state of trust and certainty. Similarly to give up Batil
(untrue or false) belief and to accept the doctrine of Haqq (Truth).

2. To leave sinfulness and disobedience and to turn towards obedience.
To give up opposition and accept obedience.

3. To come out of the uncomfortable atmosphere of sins, erring and to
enter the shade of knowing the Lord and then to fulfill the duties of
slavery. To give up carelessness and to remember Allah (S.w.T.) more and
more. To hate injustice and oppression and to love faithfulness.

Tawba is a must for all. Tawba enhances the stage of a person’s Marefat
(recognition) which he can obtain by worship and thanksgiving. Full
Marefat cannot be achieved by any amount of worship, thanksgiving etc.
The holy Prophet (S) who is the highest of all creation, says,

“My Lord! I have not recognised You as is Your right to be recognised. I
have not been able to worship You as was Your right to be worshipped.”

Thus even the Holy Prophet (S), despite his eminent position in virtue,
the purity of his worship and the abundance of his thankfulness. The
Holy Prophet (S) says,

“I recite Istighfar seventy times a day.”

The Method and recommended rituals of Tawba
-------------------------------------------

The fires ignited by sins are fierce and there is no running away from
them. A sinner should realize that disobedience to Allah (S.w.T.) is
showing haughtiness to the Almighty, which brings down Allah (S.w.T.)’s
wrath and punishment, and Allah (S.w.T.)’s wrath and punishment are too
dreadful to bear, even the earth and sky cannot withstand them. Amir
ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.) says,

“The calamities are so severe that they can destroy both the earth and
the sky as the heat of this fire cannot be compared with the heat of the
worldly fire.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“If someone is extracted from the fire of Hell and thrown into a burning
oven of this world (this life before death) he will be able to sleep
with ease in it. It is not difficult to burn in an oven of this world
but the fire of Hell is absolutely intolerable.”

Horrible Punishments
--------------------

***Surely the Might of Your Lord is Great.*** ***(Surah Al-Burūj
85:12)***

And in Surah Muzzammil, the Lord says,

***Surely with Us are heavy fetters and a flaming fire and food that
chokes and a painful punishment.*** ***(Surah Muzzammil 73:12-13)***

These Ayats describe the intensity of our Lord’s anger and the harshness
of His punishment.

As we have mentioned, Tawba is a sincere feeling of shame and remorse
experienced by the heart. The more the grief and sorrow in the heart the
nearer the repentant will be to Divine acceptance of Tawba. The greater
the sin, the deeper should be the sorrow. A man who has sinned is like a
man whose lifetime earnings are burnt away. This realization will create
intense grief and restlessness which will enhance the effectiveness of
his Tawba. Tawba is therefore compulsory for a sinner if he wants to
save himself from the horrible fate that awaits him. The loss will
naturally create intense grief and restlessness. He should weep so much,
remembering his sins, and he should continue to beg pardon of Allah
(S.w.T.) restlessly so that when his end comes, the angel of death give
him good tiding. His tears and entreaties put off the fire of hell.

His crying removes the darkness of his heart.

The Holy Prophet of Allah says,

“A repentant becomes like the one who had never sinned; rather, better
than him.”

The Almighty Allah says,

***Surely Allah loves those who turn much (to Him)…***

This means that by weeping in fear of Allah (S.w.T.)’s chastisement and
by reforming one’s character through good deeds, man can achieve
nearness to Allah (S.w.T.). Allah (S.w.T.) is pleased with such an
attitude.

Imam Sajjad (a.s.) prays to Almighty Allah,

“My Lord! Grant me the Tawfīq of such a repentance which takes me to the
point of Your love.”[^4]

“My Lord! Make me reach You through Tawba.”[^5]

Repentance of Prophets, increase in remorse
-------------------------------------------

Tawba is remorse of the heart. The more the remorse, the more easily
sins are pardoned. Therefore, beg more and more pardon. The best course
is to ponder over the verses of the Holy Qur’an. Especially read the
events of the past prophets like Nuh, Dawūd, Yūnus, Yahya, Ayyub (a.s.).
How much they wept while they were not even sinners like us. They wept
to attain Allah (S.w.T.)’s nearness and to increase their status. As we
have indicated earlier, study the stories of the repentant and obtain
lessons therefrom. We shall narrate some such stories at the end of this
book.

Perfection of Tawba, Siyyam, Ghusl and Salāt
--------------------------------------------

Before doing Tawba the following should be done:

1. Fasting three days: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“The one who wants to do Tawbatan-Nasūh should fast on Wednesday,
Thursday and Friday.”[^6]

2. Ghusl al-Tawba: A man used to enjoy music, songs and dance parties.
He was badly accustomed to this evil. One day he approached Imam Riďa
(a.) and said: I was madly addicted to song and music. Now I want to
repent. Kindly tell me what I should do? The Imam said,

“Get up! Take a bath. The holy Prophet (S) has said: There is no one
whom Allah did not forgive if that man had made a repentance
corresponding to his sins.”

Then he said,

“Get up, take a bath and make a as-Sajda (prostration) for Allah.”[^7]

3. To recite two or four rakat Salāt: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says,

“A man who wants to repent should first perform Wuzu (ablution), then
perform two rakats (units) of prayer and then seek pardon from Allah.
God forgives him because He has said in the Holy Qur’an thus:

“And whosoever does evil or acts unjustly to his soul, then asks
forgiveness of Allah, he shall find Allah forgiving, Merciful.” (Surah
an-Nisā'’ 4:110)

It is written in *Kitab al-Iqbal,* that the Holy Prophet (S) used to ask
his companions on Sundays of Zilqad,

“O people! Who from you wants to do Tawba?”

The companions replied: O Messenger of Allah! All of us want to repent.
Then he used to say,

First perform ablution and Ghusl (bath), then offer four rakats of
prayer. In every rakat recite Surah Ikhlas thrice, and Muawwazatain
(Surah Falaq and Surah Nās) once after Surah Fatiha. Then recite
Istighfar seventy times. Finally recite *Lā Hawla wa lā Quwwata illa
billāhil a’liyyil A’zīm*. Then recite a brief Du’a, preferably this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياعزيز ياغفار اغفرلي ذنوبي وذنوب جميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات فانه لا يغفر
الذنوب الا انت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘Yā A’zīzo, Yā Ghaffāro, Ighfirlī žunūbi Wa žunūbi Jamī’il Mo-minīna
wal Mo-mināt.* *Innahu lā yaghfiruz žunūb illa ant.’*

Then he said,

“Anyone from my Ummah (community) who does this will hear a voice from
the sky that his repentance (Tawba) has been accepted and his/her sins
pardoned. An angel in the Arsh (Throne) will say: “Those who were
displeased with you (in the worldly life) will be pleased with you on
the day of Qiyāma”. Another angel will announce: “O Believing Slave!
Your grave will become wide and bright. Another angel will say: Your
parents are pleased with you and, due to your performance, they too have
entered the Mercy of Allah. Your provision in both this world and the
Hereafter will be abundant. Hazrat Jibrīl (a.s.) says: At the moment of
your death I will come to you along with Izrāel (the angel of death) and
recommend to him to retrieve your soul with ease.”

The companions submitted: O Messenger of Allah! What if somebody
performs this deed in any other month? The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“Yes, he too will get the reward mentioned by me. These are the words
taught to me by Jibrīl during the night of Miraj (ascension).”

Istighfar, Repeated Repentance and the Early Morning Worship
------------------------------------------------------------

Recitation of Istighfar: and one should recite the supplications taught
by the Holy Imams for Tawba, especially the *Sahīfa al-Kamilah,*
particularly its supplication No. 31 that is related to repentance.
Similarly its 15th Munajat (prayer) is also regarding Tawba. One must
ponder over its meaning and implication and should obtain lessons
therefrom, thereby trying to bring conformity between one’s word and
deed.

Repeated Repentance and Istighfar
---------------------------------

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said,

“The Holy Prophet (S) was reciting Istighfar hundred times a day and was
praying for his Maghfirat (salvation) though he had not committed a
single sin.”[^8]

It is also mentioned by him,

“The more one prays for pardoning of his sins the more good deeds will
be credited to his account and on the Day of Judgement his deeds will
appear shining.”[^9]

Imam Riďa (a.s.) says,

“The example of Istighfar is like that of a leaf trembling and making
noise in the air. The one who recites Istighfar but does not stop
sinning makes a mockery of God.”[^10]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) says,

The Holy Prophet (S) never got up even from the smallest meeting without
reciting Istighfar 25 times.[^11]

Another Hadith mentions,

“The Holy Prophet (S) recited ‘Astahghfirullah Wā tūbo ilaih’ seventy
times everyday.”

Saiyyid bin Tawūs, in his book *Nahj ud-Dāwāt* writes that the Holy
Prophet (S) has said that a man who is inflicted by poverty and hardship
should recite *‘Astahghfirullah Wā tūbo ilaih’* thirty thousand times.
The Lord Almighty will surely end his troubles. The narrator says this
has been proved true by experience.

Selecting Morning Hours for Repentance
--------------------------------------

It is highly beneficial if man repents over his past misdeeds at any
time or any place. But if he does so waking up in the last part of the
night before daybreak, the effect is miraculous. All sins of the reciter
will be pardoned, Insha’Allah.

The Holy Qur’an has ordered at several places for such prayers. Allah
(S.w.T.) considers such worshippers as His hallowers and worthy of
Paradise. It is mentioned in verse 17-18 of Surah Zariyat,

***“They used to sleep but little in the night. And in the morning they
asked forgiveness.”***

The 17th Ayat of Surah Āli- ‘Imran says,

***“And those who ask forgiveness in the morning times.”***

Amir ul-Mu’minīn (a.s.) said that Allah (S.w.T.) says,

“Had there not been those who loved My Might and who filled My Mosques
and those who worshipped Me for forgiveness in the early hours of the
dawn, I would certainly have chastised them.”[^12]

Hazrat Luqmān tells his son, “My dear son! Is not the cock wiser than
you? It wakes up before dawn and asks forgiveness but you remain
asleep!”[^13]

There are many traditions regarding the merits of waking up in the early
hours of the morning.

It is preferable (Mustahab) to recite *‘Astahghfirullah’* 70 times and
*Al A’fwa* 300 times in the Qunut of Vatr prayer. Allah Almighty has
granted a Praised Position (Maqame Mahmūd) to His dear Prophet and He
fulfils every aspiration of a believer through this early awakening. It
is said that those who reach a high position reach it only through such
early awakening.

[^1]: (al-Kāfi)

[^2]: (al-Kāfi)

[^3]: Usul al-Kāfi: Chapter of Tawba

[^4]: Sahīfa al-Sajjadiyah

[^5]: Du’a Abu Hamzah Thumali

[^6]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^7]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il

[^8]: Wasa’il ul-Shia, Kitabal Jihad

[^9]: Usul al-Kāfi

[^10]: Usul al-Kāfi

[^11]: Usul al-Kāfi

[^12]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^13]: Mustadrak ul-Wasa’il


