Thirty-third Greater Sin: Pride or Arrogance
============================================

The thirty-third greater sin is Pride; as mentioned in the tradition of
Imam Riďa (a.s.) narrated by Fazl ibn Shazān. Shaykh Ansari has also
verified the authenticity of this tradition in Makasib. A similar
tradition from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) is quoted by Amash to have
said,

*“Arrogance and tyranny is a greater sin.”*

According to the Holy Qur’an, pride is a sin that will most certainly be
severely punished.

The Almighty Allah says in Surah az-Zumar (Verse 60)

***“Is there not in Hell an abode for the proud?”*** ***(Surah az-Zumar
39:60)***

He also says:

**“*****It shall be said: Enter the gates of hell to abide therein; so
evil is the abode of the proud.*****”** ***(Surah az-Zumar 39:72)***

In Surah Ghafīr (Verse 35) Almighty remarks,

***“Thus does Allah set a seal over the heart of every proud, haughty
one.”*** ***(Surah Ghafīr 40: 35)***

The one who considers himself to be the best wants others to know that
he is the best. There are numerous Qur’anic verses against pride and
haughtiness but we shall mention only the one that talks of the
haughtiness of Shaitan; as the result of which he became the accursed
one:

***“He refused and he was proud, and he was one of the Unbelievers.”***
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:34)***

Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says in one of his sermons:

“*You should take a lesson from what Allah did with Shaitan; namely He
nullified his great acts and extensive efforts on account of the vanity
of one moment, although Shaitan had worshipped Allah for six thousand
years - whether by the reckoning of this world or of the next world is
not known. Who now can remain safe from Allah after Shaitan by
committing a similar disobedience? None at all. Allah, the Glorified,
cannot let a human being enter Paradise if he does the same thing for
which Allah turned out from it an angel. His command for the inhabitants
in the sky and of the* *earth is the same. There is no friendship
between Allah and any individual out of His creation so as to give him
licence for an undesirable thing which He has held unlawful for all the
worlds.*” (That is pride and arrogance).[^1]

After a few sentences ‘Ali (a.s.) says about Qabīl:

*“Do not be like him who feigned superiority over the son of his mother
without any distinction given to him by Allah. It was only the feeling
of enmity which created a feeling of greatness in him and the fire of
anger that vanity kindled in his heart. Satan blew into him his own
vanity, after which Allah made him responsible for the sins of all
killers upto the Day of Judgement since he had initiated the crime of
killing.”*[^2]

Thus Qabīl was doomed to eternal perdition due to pride that caused him
to murder his righteous brother.

‘Ali (a.s.) continues:

“Take instruction from how the (Shaitan) brought Allah’s wrath,
calamities, chastisement and punishment on those who were vain among the
past people. Take admonition from their lying on their cheeks and
falling on their sides, and seek Allah’s protection from the dangers of
vanity, as you seek His protection from calamities.”[^3]

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“Allah will not speak to Three kinds of people on the Day of Qiyāma; and
they will not be looked upon kindly by Him; and there is a severe
punishment for them: An aged adulterer, a tyrant ruler and a proud
beggar.”[^4]

From the above hadith we can conclude that the punishment for a youthful
adulterer, a ruler who does not oppress and a proud person who is not a
beggar will be less severe. An old man committing adultery is far more
despicable because unlike a young man he is not fired by an intense
sexual urge, and in spite of this he disobeys the Divine command and
brings upon himself added punishment. The same applies to a ruler whom
Almighty has bestowed a kingdom, wealth and power; and the ruler instead
of being thankful and grateful to Allah (S.w.T.) for His bounties
misuses them to oppress Allah (S.w.T.)’s creatures.

Not only is such a ruler accountable for his oppressive deeds but he
incurs the intense wrath of Allah (S.w.T.) because of his ingratitude
and denial of Allah (S.w.T.)’s blessings. A proud beggar is miserable
creature; he incurs the intense displeasure of Allah (S.w.T.) because he
is vain in spite of the fact that he has nothing that can be the cause
of his vanity.

A man enquired from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.):

“What is the lower level of disbelief?”

Imam (a.s.) said, “It is pride.”

Imam Baqir (a.s.) says:

“Stateliness and superiority, and the expression of a pride are like two
exclusive garments of Allah (S.w.T.). (No one can share it with Him).
Hence if anyone dares to acquire these qualities he will be thrown
headlong into hell by Allah.”[^5]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s.) is also recorded to have remarked:

“Pride and superiority are like two exclusive garments of Allah. So one
who acts proud has made war on Allah.”[^6]

A proud person is mentioned as having made war on Allah (S.w.T.) because
such a person loses all awareness of the reality that he is an
insignificant creature whose very existence and all that he possesses is
only because of Allah (S.w.T.)’s favour on him. He regards himself as
someone very special, in full control of his life, which no other power
can influence. His arrogance can reach a stage where he can even claim
divinity in open defiance of the Almighty, as it happened with Fir’on.
While a man can develop qualities like mercy, kindness etc. which are
also divine qualities, and developing these qualities will in fact help
a person to gain nearness to Allah (S.w.T.), but man, a creature of
Allah (S.w.T.) has no right whatsoever to associate pride and
superiority with himself. These are exclusive for Allah (S.w.T.). The
Almighty says in the Qur’an:

***“And to Him belongs greatness in the heavens and the earth, and He is
the Mighty, the Wise.”*** ***(Surah Jathiyah 45:37)***

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“There is a special section for the arrogant people in the hell. It is
called Saqr. Saqr complained to Allah (S.w.T.) for the intensity of its
heat and sought permission to breathe. It breathed and scorched
hell.”[^7]

Imam (a.s.) also remarked,

“Certainly the haughty people will be raised as peanuts (on the Day of
Qiyāma) and till the accounting of the people is complete they would be
trampled upon.” (by others).[^8]

Allamah Majlisi explains the above tradition: “This hadith proves that
it is possible that some people may be raised in diminutive form,
possessing some or all of the physical characteristics. (It is also
possible) that other additional characteristics may be added to their
bodies and hence be the cause of additional pain. It can also be said
that the arrogant sinner will be raised in such a disgraceful condition
that it would be as if he is utterly small in size. Whatever may be the
form, it is certain that they will be trampled under the feet of other
people.

Pride and its Types
-------------------

Arrogance is the practical expression of pride which develops in a
person who thinks himself to be better than others. Arrogance can be
categorized as:

(1) Arrogance against Allah (S.w.T.)

(2) Arrogance against the Holy Prophet (S) and the Imams (a.s.)

(3) Arrogance towards people.

Arrogance towards the Almighty is expressed in different ways. There are
arrogant people seized by the feeling of being all powerful. They
attribute all their achievements and acquisitions to their own
capabilities and are oblivious of the supremacy and might of the
Almighty. The feeling of self importance is expressed by them in their
actions and speech with words like “I have done this,” and “I will do
that”.

On the basis of his strength and property he refuses to recognise the
supremacy and might of Allah (S.w.T.), with the result that the darkness
of disbelief shrouds his heart. The Holy Qur’an says:

***“...there is naught in their breasts but (a desire) to become great
which they shall never attain to...”*** ***(Surah Ghafīr 40:56)***

These are people who will not achieve greatness either in this world nor
the Hereafter. The Almighty Allah says at another place,

***“...so (as for) those who do not believe in the hereafter, their
hearts are ignorant and they are proud.”*** ***(Surah an-Nahl 16:22)***

As mentioned earlier, sometimes, the haughtiness assumes such high
proportions that the man apart from crediting his own self for
everything also dares to declare his Godhood and supremacy over other
people. He claims that he has absolute control over a section of people
and that they are subservient to him. Like the foolish Fir’on who
alleged:

***“Then he said: I am your lord, the most high.”*** ***(Surah
An-Nāzi’āt 79:24)***

He tries to prove his claim by saying:

***“...is not the Kingdom of Egypt mine? And these rivers flow beneath
me;..”*** ***(Surah Az-Zukhruf 43:51)***

And,

***“...I do not know of any god for you besides myself.”*** ***(Surah
al-Qaŝaŝ 28:38)***

In the same way Namrūd also considered himself the controller of life
and death:

***“he said: I give life and cause death...”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah
2:258)***

Namrūd ordered that two of his prisoners may be presented before him.
And in order to prove that he had control over life and death, ordered
one prisoner to be killed and released the other one!

Then there are individuals who do not deny the existence of Allah
(S.w.T.) but they show their arrogance against Allah (S.w.T.) by not
worshipping Allah (S.w.T.) and by disobeying Allah (S.w.T.)’s orders
regarding obligatory and prohibited acts. Allah (S.w.T.) the Almighty
says:

***“The Messiah does by no means disdains that he should be a servant of
Allah, nor do the angels who are near to Him, and whoever disdains His
service and is proud, He will gather them all together to Himself.***

***Then as for those who believe and do good, He will pay them fully
their rewards and give them more out of His grace, and as for those who
disdain and are proud, He will chastise them with a painful
chastisement.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:172-173)***

Wilful disobedience to Allah (S.w.T.)’s command is insolence and
defiance against Allah (S.w.T.) and sins so committed are unforgivable.
Such a person considers himself so superior that he feels there is no
need to obey Allah (S.w.T.). This attitude amounts to disbelief in Allah
(S.w.T.). The sins committed by a person who believes in the supremacy
of the Almighty are not of the above category. These sins are committed
due to evil desires and foolishness and not due to Kufr. Imam Zainul
Ābedīn (a.s.) says in Du’a of Abu Hamza Thumali:

*“O my Allah! When I committed a sin I was not a disbeliever in You (at
that time) and neither did I consider Your commands unimportant. And I
did not take lightly Your threats of chastisement. Neither I had any
objection against Your punishment. Actually the sin that I had committed
was due to the instigation of my own self which defrauded me and my
carnal desire overcame me.”*[^9]

The disbelief of Iblīs was proved in the same way when he refused to
prostrate before Hazrat Adam (a.s.).

***“He said: I am not such that I should make obeisance to a mortal who
Thou has created of the essence of black mud fashioned in shape.”***
***(Surah al-Hijr 15:33)***

The Almighty Allah replied,

***“...then get forth from this (state), for it does not befit you to
behave proudly therein. Go forth, therefore, surely you are of the
abject ones.”*** ***(Surah al-Ar’āf 7:13)***

The High and Almighty Allah has also said,

***“...and he was proud, and he was one of the unbelievers.”***
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:34)***

“Arrogance overcame Izazīl (Satan), made him liable to be cursed.”[^10]

To Give up Du’a due to Arrogance is Kufr
----------------------------------------

***“And your Lord says, Call upon Me, I will answer you, surely those
who are too proud for My service shall soon enter hell abased.”***
***(Surah Ghafīr 40:60)***

In the above ayat Allah (S.w.T.) has assured that whoever seeks His help
will receive immediate response. According to Tafsīr Kashaf Du’a means
to ask, that is to seek something. Thus the actual purpose of Du’a is to
beg the Almighty with utmost humility and sincerity. This is true
obedience and worship of one God. So whoever does not supplicate is
arrogant. He considers himself self sufficient and independent of Allah
(S.w.T.) and does not consider Allah (S.w.T.) deserving of obeisance;
such a person has committed Kufr and will remain forever in Hell.

Imam Zainul Ābedīn (a.s.) says:

“(O Allah (S.w.T.)) you have named Du’a towards You to be Your worship
and its omission to be arrogance which earns Hell.”[^11]

“The best of Your servants are those who are not arrogant, and who do
not repeat sins insolently, and make repentance their habit and I avoid
to be the one who becomes arrogant and does not call You.”[^12]

Arrogance by Sacrilege
----------------------

One of the types of arrogance with regard to the Almighty is to behave
arrogantly towards whatever is associated with Allah (S.w.T.)’s name.
For example the orders and prohibitions of Allah (S.w.T.), specially the
sacred month of Ramadhan, the Holy Ka’ba, the Holy tombs; and even an
ordinary mosque because Allah (S.w.T.) has said,

***“And (all) the mosques are for Allah.”*** ***(Surah al-Jinn 72:18)***

So if one acts arrogantly with relation to any of the above it means
that he is arrogant towards Allah (S.w.T.). For He (S.w.T.) says,

***“O You who believe! Do not violate the signs appointed by
Allah...”*** ***(Surah al-Mā’ida 5:2)***

It means that one should not insult or disregard anything that is
related to the Almighty.

Arrogance causes degradation in this world as well as the Hereafter
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Arrogance with relation to the Almighty or otherwise brings degradation
and insults in this life as also in the life after death. On the other
hand humility and the expression of lowliness before Allah (S.w.T.)
earns the respect of this world as well as success in the hereafter. The
stations of such a person are raised. The Holy Prophet (S) says,

“One who humbles before Allah is raised by Him in status; and the one
who is arrogant will be degraded by Allah.”[^13]

Umar ibn Shaiba says in the Sharh of Sahīfa that, “I was at the sacred
Mecca, between Safa and Marwah when I saw a stranger on a camel. His
slaves were preventing the people from coming near him. After sometime I
happened to be in Baghdad. There I saw a man in a dishevelled condition
with his hair awry. I stared at him in surprise. He asked as to why I
was staring at him. I said that I find a great resemblance between him
and an arrogant person whom I had seen at Mecca between Safa and Marwah.
At that time he behaved very arrogantly. The man said, “I am the same
person! I had behaved arrogantly at a place where people exhibit
humility, that’s why the Almighty has made me lowly in Baghdad where
people achieve great honours. And thus these people behave arrogantly
towards me.”

Arrogance toward the Holy Prophet (S) and Imams (a.s.)
------------------------------------------------------

To consider oneself as equal to or better than divine personalities is
an act of arrogance. Also to refuse to obey their commands amounts to
being arrogant towards them. This is like the behaviour of the
supporters of Fir’on who considered themselves superior to Hazrat Mūsa
(a.s.) and Harūn (a.s.). They used to say:

***“What! shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves...?***
***(Surah Al-Mum’inūn 23:47)***

Similarly some of the disbelievers used to tell the Holy Prophet (S):
“Why have not angels been sent down upon us, or (why) do we not see our
Lord?” These people considered their status to be on par with that of
the Holy Prophet (S) and wondered why the revelation had not descended
on them.

The Holy Qur’an remarks:

***“Now certainly they are too proud of themselves and have revolted in
great revolt.”***

(Surah al-Furqān 25:21)

The following words of Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) are recorded in the Holy
Qur’an:

***“But my call has only made them flee the more:***

***“And whenever I have called them that Thou mayest forgive them, they
put their fingers in their ears, cover themselves with their garments,
and persist and are puffed up with pride.”*** ***(Surah Nuh 71:6-7)***

The Meccans were similarly puffed with pride whenever they were told to
believe in Islam:

***“And they say: why was not this Qur’an revealed to a man of
importance in the two towns?” (Mecca and Taif)*** ***(Surah Az-Zukhruf
43:31)***

It was unacceptable to the infidels that a mere orphan who had not much
wealth either had been selected for the exalted position of Prophethood.
They would have preferred the Qur’an to have been revealed upon some
influential people like Walid bin Mughaira and Masud Thaqafi etc.

Arrogance towards the Prophet (S) and Imams (a.s.) is actually arrogance
towards the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.). Disobeying the commands of the
Prophet (S) and the Imams (a.s.), the representatives of Allah (S.w.T.)
is an act of arrogance towards the Almighty Himself. Similarly the pious
Mujtahids and the jurists are representatives of Imam az-Zaman (a.s.).
One who considers oneself superior to them, or insults them and is
insolent towards them by disobeying their rulings is guilty of arrogance
towards the Imam (a.s.) himself, and the Prophet (S). Also, according to
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) such arrogance is a kind of polytheism.

Arrogance with an Ālim is arrogance towards the Holy Prophet (S)
----------------------------------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah said:

“Beware! Do not falsify the words of an Ālim. Do not reject his
statements and do not bear enmity towards him. Be cordial with them,
because friendship with the learned is a sign of good morals. And enmity
with them is hypocrisy. Beware! Whoever insults an Ālim insults me and
whoever insults me insults Allah; and whoever insults Allah; his abode
is Hell. And (remember), whoever honours an Ālim, honours me and whoever
honours me honours Allah and whoever honours Allah; his abode shall be
Paradise.”[^14]

The Arrogants are the inmates of Hell
-------------------------------------

We must remember that all the Qur’anic verses that mention eternal
punishment for the proud people are concerned with two types of pride.
The first is with respect to Allah (S.w.T.) and also the Prophet (S) and
the Imams (a.s.). As we stated before, arrogance of these types is a
result of disbelief in the creator of the Universe; and the one who dies
without belief in Allah (S.w.T.) will abide forever in Hell.

Al-Shahīd Al-Awwal Faqih Al-Sarbidaran mentions in *Qawaid* the fact
that pride and arrogance are Greater sins and numerous traditions
testify to this. The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“One who has even an iota of pride will not enter Paradise.”[^15]

Then he says that the pride referred to in the tradition is one that
reaches the level of disbelief, it is the arrogance towards Allah
(S.w.T.), and the Prophet (S) and Imams (a.s.). However if it applies to
arrogance towards people the tradition is construed to mean that those
who have even a bit of pride will not enter Paradise with the humble
believers. They will have to undergo punishment in Hell and only then
allowed to enter Paradise.

The interpretation is in accordance with the narration of Muhammad Ibn
Muslim who quotes Imam Sadiq (a.s.) to have said:

“Even one who has pride equal to a mustard seed in his heart will not be
able to enter Paradise.”

Muhammad Ibn Muslim says, “I said. Certainly we belong to Allah (S.w.T.)
and to Him we shall return.” Imam (a.s.) asked him the reason for
reciting the verse of return. He replied that it was in response to the
Imam’s statement. “It is not what you have understood,”

Imam (a.s.) told him, “Know that I meant disbelief and refusal by it.”

(The arrogance which prevents one to enter Paradise is arrogance based
on the rejection of truth and on the rejection of Allah (S.w.T.), the
Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (a.s.). But if a person is a believer and
is arrogant; he will not have eternal punishment in Hell).

Behaving arrogantly with the people
-----------------------------------

The third type of arrogance is with respect to the fellow-beings. To
consider oneself superior and better than others and to consider others
lowly. To behave in a proud manner with them, and walk ahead of them. To
try to find the best seat in a gathering. To expect others to salute and
show humility. To hate one who offers good advice and to refuse the
advice offered. To feel angry if someone points out one’s mistake. Not
to behave with kindness and benevolence towards those whom one teaches.
To act as if one has done a great favour and expect servitude in return.
In brief, arrogance is the act of considering and believing oneself to
be the most superior person. Just like we consider ourselves superior to
the animals.

The proud people who are rich prefer not to stand besides the ordinary
people during congregational prayers or mix with them in religious
gatherings. In reality an arrogant person has made himself a partner
with the Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) by trying to acquire the Divine
attribute of Pride that belongs exclusively to Him. It is as if the
slave takes away the king’s crown and puts it on his own head and seats
himself on the throne. Such a slave is liable for the worst punishment.
It is wise to avoid such behaviour.

Allah (S.w.T.) is the Creator of all human beings, therefore it is not
proper for one man to behave arrogantly with another and to consider
himself superior and exclusive. The one who behaves proudly has actually
become Allah (S.w.T.)’s rival, because Pride is a quality reserved for
Allah (S.w.T.) alone.

Some of the traditions related to Pride and the proud people have
already been mentioned above in the beginning of the discussion. Imam
Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“*Pride is considering other people lowly and considering the truth as
foolishness*.”[^16]

Allamah Majlisi explains that it denotes making fun of truth, rejecting
it, considering it lowly, and not understanding its importance.

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“The worst kind of Pride is considering the creatures lowly and
considering the truth foolishness.”[^17]

Umar bin Yazid says, I asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.): “I eat well
and wear a good perfume and ride the best horse. I am also accompanied
by my slaves. Is it arrogance on my part? I want to know it so that I
may abstain from such a behaviour.”

Imam (a.s.) bowed his head and then said,

“Remember! The accursed and arrogant is the one who considers other
people lowly and ignores the truth.”

Umar said, “I understand what truth is but what is the meaning of
‘ignoring the Truth’?

Imam (a.s.) said: “One who considers other people inferior and shows his
superiority over them is arrogant.”[^18]

We shall refer to some types of pride and arrogance with people because
the Holy Qur’an has mentioned them in different ayats.

The Qur’anic view of arrogance with people
------------------------------------------

In Surah al-Baqarah we come across the following ayat:

***“And when it is said to him, guard against (the punishment of) Allah;
pride carries him off to sin; therefore hell is sufficient for him; and
certainly it is an evil resting place.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah
2:206)***

According to Abdullah Ibn Masūd the greatest sin is when one is told to
‘Fear Allah’ and he replies, “Mind your own business.”

When someone warns a person of Divine retribution and advises him to
forgo some sins and instead of accepting his advice with humility he
says, ‘It is none of your business. First reform yourself!’, or instead
of giving up a sin the person repeats it with insolence; these are the
types of people who are condemned to Hell according to the above ayat.

The arrogance and pride of such people are obstacles in their moral
development and instead of accepting the truth they try to justify their
actions.

In the same way during a debate a person is confronted with a fact which
his pride hinders him from accepting. He sticks to his stand in
obstinacy. This behaviour is a speciality of the hypocrites.

The Almighty Allah says:

***“And those who disbelieve say do not listen to this Qur’an and make
noise therein, perhaps you may overcome.”*** ***(Surah Fuŝŝilat
41:26)***

And in Surah Luqmān the Qur’an says:

***“And do not turn your face away from people in contempt, nor go about
in the land exulting overmuch; surely Allah does not love any
self-conceited boaster.”*** ***(Surah Luqmān 31:18)***

Similarly another verse says:

***“O you who believe! Let not (one) people laugh at (another) people
perchance they may be better than they, nor let women laugh at (other)
women, perchance they may be better than they; and do not find fault
with your own people nor call one another by nick names; evil is a bad
name after faith, and whoever does not turn, these it is that are the
unjust.”*** ***(Surah al-Hujurāt 49:11)***

The unjust are those who have made themselves liable for Divine anger
and chastisement.

Anyone who looks down upon the Muslims and considers himself superior to
them is like Iblīs who refused to prostrate before Hazrat Adam (a.s.)
because he considered himself superior. He said:

***“I am better than he; Thou hast created me of fine, and him Thou
didst create of dust.”*** ***(Surah Sād 38:76)***

The Almighty replied:

***“That I will most certainly fill hell with you and with those among
them who follows you, all”*** ***(Surah Sād 38:85)***

Show of wealth is also an act of pride
--------------------------------------

Flaunting ones riches and wealth before the less privileged people is an
act of arrogance and pride. The Almighty says regarding this:

***“Surely Qarūn was of the people of Mūsa, but he rebelled against
them, and We had given him of the treasures, so much so that his hoards
of wealth would certainly weigh down a company of men possessed of great
strength. When his people said to him: Do not exult, surely Allah
does*** ***not love the exultant...He said: I have been given this only
on account of the knowledge I have...So he went forth to his people in
his finery... Thus We made the earth to swallow up him and his abode; so
he had no body of helpers to assist him against Allah, nor was he of
those who can defend themselves.”*** ***(Surah al-Qaŝaŝ 28:76-81)***

It is recorded in Bihār al-Anwār that the Holy Prophet (S) prohibited
the people to walk and dress in a proud manner. He said,

“One who wears a nice dress and feels proud of it, will be taken to a
lowest level of Hell and made a companion of Qarūn. Because Qarūn was
the first proud. Due to this the Almighty had caused his house to be
swallowed by the earth. So one who competes in the greatness of the
Almighty has waged war against Him.”

The Prophet (S) also said,

“One who frowns upon a needy person, oppresses him or looks down upon
him, will be raised (in Qiyāma) in the form of an ant. And he will be
assigned to Hell.”[^19]

The Proud people are insane
---------------------------

It is also narrated in Bihār al-Anwār that one day the messenger of
Allah (S) was passing by a group of people intent on watching something.
When he (S) enquired about this they said that they were watching a mad
man perform funny antics. The Prophet (S) said that the man is not mad,
rather he was suffering from a nervous disorder.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) asked the people if they would like to know
who is a mad man. His companions expressed their willingness. The
Prophet (S) said:

“The insane is the one who walks in a proud manner and looks right and
left in exultation; moving his shoulders and sides in a vain fashion;
and at the same time he expects the Almighty to grant him Paradise.
Whereas he is busy in disobeying Allah and people are not safe from his
mischief and neither do they expect any goodness from him. This is the
(real) mad man.”[^20]

To show oneself to be absolutely purified is an act of pride too
----------------------------------------------------------------

To consider oneself the purest and deserving of honour and respect and
to make a show of one’s sanctity is also a kind of haughtiness. The
verse of Surah an-Najm prohibits such behaviour.

***“...Therefore do not attribute purity to your souls; He knows him
best who guards (against evil).”***
***(Surah an-Najm 53:32)***

And in the same way the Almighty Allah has remarked in the following
words:

***“Have you not considered those who attribute purity to themselves?
Nay, Allah purifies whom He pleases; and they shall not be wronged the
husk of a date stone. See how they forge the lie against Allah, (like
the Jew who claim to be the chosen people) and this is sufficient as a
manifest sin.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisā’ 4:49-50)***

A show of one’s knowledge and the claim of having met such and such a
scholar is also an act of pride. Or to say, “I have toiled a lot to
master a particular subject.” Or to flaunt one’s piety. For example to
say that “for years I prayed during the nights and fasted during the
day.” To say, “That person is wealthier than me but I have performed
hajj and Ziarat many times.” All these claims are a show of vainglory.

Even to hint at ones greatness is not allowed. Like to allege that, “So
and so person had oppressed me and thus died an untimely death, or he is
afflicted with a dreadful disease, or has became a destitute.” Because
such statements are an effort to show off ones extraordinary powers.
Similarly to claim that one’s prayers were instantly answered by the
Almighty.

Signs of Pride
--------------

1) When we speak to a person having same social status as us, regarding
a fact, which is difficult for him to accept and he does not express any
pleasure it denotes that he is proud.

2) If in gatherings and social events he finds it difficult to sit in
place which is below his dignity or he dislikes to walk behind, then
this person is proud.

3) If he finds it difficult to salute a person lower than him in social
status, he is proud.

4) If it is difficult for him to accept the invitation of poor people or
to sit with beggars it is a sign of pride.

5) If he feels it is below his dignity to purchase household items and
to carry them home, he is proud. But considering his social status and
the prevailing circumstances if such an action would be the cause of
criticism and backbiting among the people there is no blame on him.

6) If a person is averse to wearing clothes of inferior quality and
desires to wear good clothes considering them to be a sign of greatness,
he is proud. Except, as already mentioned, when inferior dress may be a
cause of disrespect to him.

7) If one does not like to sit together with a servant or the student,
it is a sign of pride.

Remedy for Pride in Theory and Practice
---------------------------------------

The practical remedy for the disease of pride is that man should
contemplate upon his original creation. He must keep it in mind that he
is born from a despicable drop of semen, which is considered dirty by
everyone. It is clearly mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

***“So let man consider of what he is created: He is created of water
pouring forth:”*** ***(Surah Tariq 86: 5-6)***

He should not forget that he was born weak and helpless and whatever
strength he has developed is given by the Almighty. Besides his strength
and power is limited. Allah (S.w.T.) has made him susceptible to hunger,
thirst and sleep. He is needful of clothing, dwelling, and several other
requirements without which he would perish. He is prone to diseases,
calamities and disasters, over which he has no control.

Man carries inside his body dirty substances like urine and stool; and
if the Almighty had not hidden them, their terrible stench would have
made life difficult for him.

It is written in the book “Adadus sin” that when Ayaz became a close
confidante of the king, his detractors began to try to pull him down
from this position. And one day two of the ministers came to the sultan
and said, “Ayaz has stolen a lot of ornaments and treasure and he has
kept all of them in a room which he has locked. Every morning he visits
that room and does not allow anyone else. Thereupon hearing this, the
sultan fell into doubt and said when Ayaz comes to me tomorrow you
people go there, open the door and bring here whatever he has stored in
that room.

The next morning these people took tools and broke the lock of the door
and stepped into the room of Ayaz. They, however, did not find anything
except a cotton sheet and a pair of leather slippers. They thought that
the treasure must be buried underground otherwise what was the need for
him to visit this room everyday if it contained only a torn sheet and
old slippers. They dug the floor of the room but did not find anything.

They informed the ruler and he asked Ayaz that except for a sheet and a
pair of slippers there was nothing else in the room. So, why did he keep
the room locked and pay a private visit everyday? Ayaz said, “Before I
became your slave I had worn that particular garb. But after joining
your service I got everything. Since man is prone to disobedience and
pride, I frequently visit the room and see my old dress so that I may
not fall into vanity. I should always remember that whatever I have is
due to the favour of the king and it is all given to me as a loan. After
that I begin my job of the day.

Indeed, there are countless weaknesses of man that do not allow him to
reach his desires. Just as man desires to have knowledge about a lot of
things, but it is not possible for him. He wants to remember something
but he forgets it. He prefers to forget a particular sin but he could
not do so. He tries to concentrate on something and to get rid of
worries and doubts, but he does not succeed. And he is attracted towards
those things in which there is destruction for him, and dislikes those
things which are beneficial to him.

Apart from this he is in constant dread of losing something which is
dear and precious to him, like wealth or children or his physical
powers.

The Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) says:

***“And they control not for themselves any harm or profit, and they
control not death nor life, nor raising (the dead) to life.”***
***(Surah al-Furqān 25: 3)***

In brief, man is a mortal who has no control over his capabilities or
susceptibilities. It is a fact that he is always in fear of death and
there is none that can save him from death.

After death, What?
------------------

The challenges a man faces during his life do not come to an end with
death. After death, he will have to face divine justice. He would be
interrogated regarding all his major and minor acts. The details of this
questioning are mentioned in the Holy Qur’an and traditions.

It is very likely that the people who occupy a high position from the
worldly aspect will be degraded and lowly there, and the powerful people
of this world will be utterly insignificant in the hereafter. Numerous
beautiful faces will appear horrid in appearance. They will be so
terrible that, dogs and pigs will be better than them.

No individual knows about the Hereafter and the kind of end there is in
store for him; whether he shall be from the evil ones or the righteous,
whether he would be honourable or degraded, whether his face will be
black or shinning bright. Whatever has been described about the
circumstances of the people at that time are applicable equally to all,
whatever their areas of activity or circumstances on earth. If a person
ponders over these facts he will be convinced that it does not befit a
human being to commit sins and be proud and arrogant. How can a man
claim greatness and importance when he is surrounded by all kinds of
uncertainties and susceptibilities? Can there be a bigger farce than the
claim of ones own greatness?

### We should keep in view those who are greater than us

Some elders have given detailed cures for pride. They say that Pride is
a condition which is created when one keeps in sight those who are lower
and ignores those who are higher than us. A person who has a slave is in
a higher position than the slave. He is in command of the situation and
the slave cannot disobey him. The slave has to carry out the commands
given to him. If such a person only thinks of his own superiority over
the slave, he will become proud.

But if the person realizes that with respect to Allah (S.w.T.), his own
position is like that of his slave; Allah (S.w.T.) is the creator and he
is the created. Allah (S.w.T.) has full control over him; in fact
absolute control, which he can never have over his slave. He has to be
subservient to Allah (S.w.T.) and carry out His commands. With this idea
firmly in mind a person is bound to become modest and humble towards the
creatures of Allah (S.w.T.), very much like a person who in a fit of
anger, not only speaks harshly to the person who has caused him
consternation, but also with those who are not responsible for it.

No one is justified in being proud. Allah (S.w.T.) is Supreme. All Might
and Power is with Allah (S.w.T.). Allah (S.w.T.) is not subservient or
indebted to anyone, except for Allah (S.w.T.) it does not befit anyone
to be proud for any reason whatsoever even if they are the carriers of
Arsh like Isra’īl and Israel.

It is also said that one who feels he is having the slightest worth
before Allah (S.w.T.), is actually considering himself superior. The
Almighty Allah says:

***“And that do not exalt yourselves against Allah.”*** ***(Surah
Ad-Dukhān 44: 19)***

### Humility of the Prophet (S)

Some special characteristics of the Holy Prophet (S): He never got angry
with anyone for personal reasons. He sat on the ground and ate on the
ground. It often happened that a maid would come to fetch him for help
needed by anyone anywhere. Whenever he came home he helped his family
members.[^21]

### The basic causes of Pride must be removed

The causes of pride can be the possession of knowledge, wealth,
goodness, beauty, physical power, position, status and lineage.

Any discerning person will realize that being proud of beauty or
physical strength is foolishness, because these can be easily lost with
age, accident or disease. It is wisdom for a person to keep in mind his
final fate, which is death and consider of what use his beauty, physical
strength and elegance will eventually be to him.

Pride over ones lineage is equally senseless. If it is worldly, it has
no significance for the hereafter and if it is truly spiritual, the
ancestors could not have attained that superiority but for being humble
towards Allah (S.w.T.) and His creatures. The progeny that wishes to
associate itself with the superiority of these ancestors can only do so
by being humble to Allah (S.w.T.) and His creatures as exemplified by
their elders; there is no question of being proud of this lineage
whatsoever.

A person of knowledge, whether worldly or religious, who is proud of his
knowledge, is a person without merit. He has not realized the most
important fact, that his knowledge should have taught the limitation of
his knowledge, and how insignificant is what he does know as compared to
what is left to be known. Isaac Newton a famous scientist who formulated
several laws of physics and discovered the force of gravity said this of
himself: “I am like a child collecting pebbles on the sand, while vast
ocean of truth lies undiscovered before me.”

A person with knowledge of religion and the hereafter, in fact will be
extremely humble, because he will realize his own loneliness, he will
know that the accountability of his actions has increased seventy fold
as compared to the actions of a person without knowledge. He will have
the added burden of the responsibility to spread his knowledge and
benefit the ignorant. He will therefore be in awesome fear of Allah
(S.w.T.). The Almighty Allah (S.w.T.) says:

***“Those of His servants only who are possessed of knowledge fear
Allah; surely Allah is Mighty, Forgiving.”*** ***(Surah Fāt’ir 35:28)***

If instead a person with religious knowledge is proud of it, then he has
failed to grasp the essence of the knowledge and the Almighty Allah says
of him:

***“Is as the likeness of the ass bearing books.”*** ***(Sura al-Jumu’a
62: 5)***

Balam Baūr who was a non-practising scholar is compared to a dog. If a
scholar ponders and contemplates, indeed the argument of Allah (S.w.T.)
has been exhausted on him and there is mighty responsibility on his
shoulders. That is seventy sins of an ignorant person will be forgiven
while a single sin of a scholar will be accounted from him. Thus there
should be increase in humility and modesty if his knowledge increases.
And not that he should be a prey for pride and vanity.

What applies to knowledge is also applicable to goodness
--------------------------------------------------------

A deed performed with sincerity and humility is the essence of obedience
and of great value and significance. If it is performed with pride, it
is like a lifeless face, which is not worth anything. A good deed is
beneficial only if the Almighty accepts it. No one knows whether his
good deed has been accepted by Allah (S.w.T.) or it has been rejected
due to lack of sincerity or piety. Therefore, like knowledge, a good
deed must also be a cause for humility instead of pride and vanity.
Regarding the qualities of the believers, the Almighty Allah says:

***“And those who give what they give (in alms) while their hearts are
full of fear that to their Lord*** ***they must return.”*** ***(Surah
Al-Mum’inūn 23: 60)***

Pride on ones wealth is foolishness
-----------------------------------

It is equally stupid to be proud of wealth and position. Like other
worldly acquirements these are also transitory and can be easily lost
overnight. Besides Allah (S.w.T.) may give wealth and position to a
person in order to test him. It is possible that these worldly bounties
given by Allah (S.w.T.) makes the person proud, oblivious of the needs
of the poor and harsh and disrespectful towards others.

It is also possible that such a person in lure of wealth will not care
for his religious obligations. He may earn wealth unlawfully and spend
it unlawfully in wasteful and luxurious ways. All such people have
failed the test to which they were subjected by Allah (S.w.T.). They
have incurred the displeasure of Allah (S.w.T.) and will face severe
chastisement. So wealth is actually a calamity for these people and
certainly not a thing to be proud of. Worldly possessions are a bounty
only for those who realize that these are a trust with them to be
utilized in a manner to gain the pleasure of Allah (S.w.T.). The
Almighty says:

***“Do they think that by what We aid them with of wealth and children,
We are hastening to them of good things? Nay, they do not perceive.”***
***(Surah Al-Mum’inūn 23: 55 – 56)***

***“And know that your property and your children are a temptation.”***
***(Surah al-Anfāl 8: 28)***

### Post, title and status are all Temporal

There are many incidents of the past people illustrating the
unreliability of all these worldly glamour. And an incident is recorded
in the book Habibus Sayr. That when Umrū bin Laith with 70,000 trained
warriors came to confront Amir Ismail Sasanid with his 10,000 soldiers
and when the war cries and the bugle etc. were raised the horse of Umrū
bolted and took him into the rows of the enemies. In this way Amir
Ismail became victorious without fighting. He confined Umrū in a tent.
It is said that Umrū perchance saw one of his past students. Umrū called
him and said that he was very hungry.

The student at once brought for him a piece of meat. Since there was no
vessel he put the meat in the pail of the horse and lit a fire below it.
Then he went away on some errand. By chance a dog passed by. When it put
its head in the pail the steam of stew made its mouth hot. When he tried
to quickly remove its head the handle of the vessel was caught in its
neck and it ran away with all the things together. When Umrū began to
laugh at this scene a sentry asked him why he was amused? Umrū said that
once my commander had complained that your kitchenware could hardly be
carried on 300 horses. And today I am seeing that a dog is easily
carrying it away.

An identical incident is related about Marwan Himar the last of the Bani
Umayyah rulers. In 132 A.H when he came face to face with Saffah at
Ābezāb, the battle lines were already drawn. He got down from his horse
to ease himself and the horse bolted and went to his army. His men
thought that Marwan was killed and his horse had returned. They became
fearful and dispersed from there. Marwan was finally killed and it was
said: His power went out through his urine.”

Apart from this, it is famous about the Abbasid Caliph who used to beg
in the Jame Masjid of Baghdad say: O people! Have mercy on the one who
was ruling over you till yesterday and today he is begging from you.

### Superiority of Humility

The importance and significance of humility as a human characteristic
can be judged by the fact that the Almighty Allah has commanded His
Messenger to practice humility:

***“And make yourself gentle to the believers.”*** ***(Surah al-Hijr
15:88)***

And He praised His servants who have imbibed this quality in the
following words.

***“And the servants of the Beneficent God are they who walk on the
earth in humbleness…”*** ***(Surah al-Furqān 25: 63)***

In the Shiite traditions the Imam has to be superior in every quality,
including humility. Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says:

“If it has befitted Allah to allow some of His creatures to be proud he
would have permitted it for His special servants, the saints and the
prophets.” But the Being of the Almighty is pure from all bad qualities.
He made pride detestable for them and liked humility for them. Thus they
kept their chests near the ground, their foreheads smeared with dust
they continued to bow down before the believers in humility and remained
in a weak condition on the Earth.”

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“The best person near me on the day of Qiyāma and the most proximate to
me will be only one who has the best behaviour and is most humble.”[^22]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

“There are two angels in the heavens who are appointed on the people so
that one who is humble may be exalted in status by them and one who is
proud and arrogant may be degraded and humiliated by them”.[^23]

Amir ul-Mu’minīn ‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“Pride is that from which Allah has protected His believing servants
through Prayer, Zakat and fasts on the appointed days. So that their
organs and body parts may have peace, the glance is cast down by a
feeling of helplessness, humiliates the self, making the hearts humble
it removes ego from them. Because the delicate parts of the body are
smeared with dust during the as-Sajda. And the seven special parts fall
on the earth and express their lowliness. And in fasting the stomach
touches the back in obedience to His command.”[^24]

Worship destroys Pride
----------------------

The primary aim of worship is to create humility and destroy pride in
us. Acts of worship are therefore to be performed in the prescribed
manner to be acceptable to Allah (S.w.T.). Worship which is accompanied
by Pride is never accepted by Allah (S.w.T.). Worship denotes obedience
and submission to Allah (S.w.T.). It is not meant to show oneself to be
great and superior.

The Meaning of Humility and its kinds
-------------------------------------

Humility is a condition of the mind wherein one fully realizes ones own
insignificance and the fact that one is utterly lowly and worthless.

There are three areas of humility: Humility and lowliness towards the
Almighty Allah, humility and lowliness towards the Prophet and the Imams
(a.s.), and humility with people.

Humility with the Almighty Allah
--------------------------------

Humility with the Almighty is the realization that our very existence
and everything associated with it is from Allah (S.w.T.). All the
unlimited bounties that Allah (S.w.T.) has bestowed on us are through
His grace and kindness and not because we deserve them or have any right
on them. This realization creates a feeling of humility and lowliness
towards Allah (S.w.T.) which is to be expressed by continually seeking
Allah (S.w.T.)’s pleasure through sincere obedience, worship and good
actions. To be aware that we are not really able to worship Allah
(S.w.T.) as He deserves to be worshipped and to be aware of our severe
limitations in fulfilling our duties towards the Almighty because of our
ignorance and lapses. Our humility is also expressed by an intense
feeling of gratitude towards our creator, for the many favours He has
bestowed upon us and to be continually thankful to the Almighty.

It is recommended that whenever we are reminded of the past bounties we
should perform prostration of thankfulness. Divine favours should be
regarded as honourable and sacred, as, they are bestowed on us from our
Lord and Creator. Traditions of our Ma’sūmīn (a.s.) emphasise the utmost
respect we should have for the sustenance that we get from our Lord.
When you sit you must sit with humility like a slave and eat like a
slave. The Holy Prophet (S), when eating used to sit in a position of
Tashahhud during prayer. The etiquette according to Ma’sūmīn (a.s.) to
be observed while eating, is, that we do not eat at the table, instead
we remove our shoes and sit with respect on the ground. We pay special
respect to bread. All the members of the household, both men and women
and servants should sit at the same dinner spread (dastarkhan). It is
not advisable that anyone should be served separately. We start to eat
with Bismillah and end with Alhamdolillah, and more important, to be
aware and attentive towards the One Who is the Provider.

The respect we accord to food is such, that even if some food does not
suit somebody’s health, one should not say that the ‘food is harmful’ or
‘the food has made me sick’. He should rather say ‘My health was not
suitable for this food’ or that ‘I consumed it at an inappropriate
time’.

Humility before the Almighty is to show respect and honour for all
things connected with the Almighty. The names of Allah (S.w.T.) are not
to be touched without Wuzu, nor any disrespect shown to them by being
thrown or trampled upon, nor should one sit with the legs stretched
towards them.

Mosques are sacred places of veneration. We should feel the utmost
respect for them and express it in every way possible. As Allah (S.w.T.)
Himself says:

***“Indeed the mosques are for Allah…”*** (Surah al-Jinn 72:18)

Accordingly to spit in the mosques or to enter with foul odour, to speak
loudly and to speak of worldly matters in a mosque are all against the
norms of a respectful attitude.

Humility before the Prophet (S) and the Imam (a.s.)
---------------------------------------------------

The most eloquent expression of humility and helplessness before Allah
(S.w.T.) is humility and a feeling of lowliness before the Holy Prophet
(S) and the Imams (a.s.). They are the great signs of Allah (S.w.T.),
Allah (S.w.T.)’s representatives and Caliphs on the earth. We should
feel the utmost respect for them and express it in every way possible.
Humility before them is humility and helplessness before Allah (S.w.T.).
We must not touch their blessed names without ritual purity. We must not
pray Salāt facing their graves. We must utter their names respectfully
and recite blessings and salāms on them. Some scholars did not even
utter the names of the fourteen Infallibles (Ma’sūmīn) (a.s.) without
being with Wuzu.

It is narrated that when Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) spoke the name of
Hazrat Muhammad (S), he used to bow so much that his face used to reach
to the thighs. In the same way respect and honour to the scholars and
Sadāt is humility to the Imams and the Prophet (a.s.).

Humility with the People
------------------------

All the human beings are equal with respect to their creation. All are
creatures of Allah (S.w.T.), and Allah (S.w.T.) is the One Who sustains
and nurtures us all. All of us are under His protection, His vigilance
and His jurisdiction. So it does not befit any human being both by logic
and rules of Shariah to consider himself superior to any other, and to
feel proud about it. Nor does he have a right to expect anybody to be
humble and submissive to him.

The only superiority that one human being has over another is on the
basis of piety. But some people are superior because of their position
and we have been commanded to show respect and humility towards them.
The most outstanding example is that of parents. Honouring our parents
and being humble before them is honouring Allah (S.w.T.) and being
humble towards Him. Besides parents one has to give due respect to a
believer. A believer has a special dignified position as he has a
special link with the Almighty. Honouring a believer and being humble
towards him is also equivalent to honour and humility for Allah
(S.w.T.). Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says,

“The honour of a believer in the view of Allah (S.w.T.) is greater than
the honour of the Ka’ba.”

The respect and honour for all signs connected with the Almighty like
mosque etc. have already been discussed. In the same way one should show
respect and humility towards scholars, teachers, elders of the community
and guests.

It is not correct to be humble before a disbeliever or a transgressor
---------------------------------------------------------------------

It is not advisable to be respectful and humble towards non-believers.
One should not deal with them at a level of equality or superiority. A
disbeliever is not deserving of respect because he does not acknowledge
Allah (S.w.T.), the Supreme Being and in effect has degraded himself to
a despicable position of those who openly defy Allah (S.w.T.); like the
disbeliever who proclaims his disbelief with impunity, and the sinner
and transgressor who sins openly and brazenly, the oppressor, and the
one who insults the signs of Allah (S.w.T.); these are the people whom
we should treat with anger and harshness, for the sake of Allah
(S.w.T.).

Thus we must be humble and lowly before the believer and high and
arrogant before the disbeliever. If any believer accords respect to a
disbeliever, it is, as if he has preferred disbelief to faith in the
Almighty Allah (S.w.T.). That is he has acted in a contrary manner.
Because honour is for Allah (S.w.T.), the prophet and the believers.
(Surah Munafiqūn).

‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“The Messenger of Allah (S) has commanded us to behave with sinners in
an acerbic way.”[^25]

It is also improper to be humble towards an arrogant person
-----------------------------------------------------------

Doubtlessly we must never be humble towards an arrogant person who
considers everyone else degraded. Because first of all it is a kind of
insult to behave humbly towards a conceited person and it is a
despicable act according to reason and religious law, secondly, humility
towards an arrogant person will increase his conceit. It is possible
that if we are arrogant and break off relation with a conceited person,
avoid business dealings with him he may reform himself and give up his
arrogant behaviour. We would then have executed successfully the
dictates of Nahy Anil Munkar. Our behaviour towards arrogant people
should be as directed by the Holy Prophet (S) in this hadith: *“Whenever
you meet humble people from my Ummah you must meet them with humility
and you must behave arrogantly with the arrogant people. Because your
arrogance towards them will be a cause of their disrespect.*

It is entirely reasonable and understandable that one would not want to
be humble towards an arrogant person, one would in fact be inclined to
reciprocate with arrogance. Such reciprocal arrogance is permissible by
our religious laws, as is evident from the hadith quoted.

There is a difference between not being humble and being Proud
--------------------------------------------------------------

In the present discussion we are commanded by our religious laws to be
arrogant and harsh towards disbelievers, transgressors and conceited
people and not to show any humility or respect to them.

A subtle point of great significance has to be emphasized here. It must
be entirely clear to us that the anger and arrogance that we exhibit is
entirely in obedience to the commands of our religion according to which
we have to be enemies with those who are enemies of Allah (S.w.T.). In
no way do these commands imply that we should really believe ourselves
to be superior to the sinners. At no stage should a personal feeling of
pride and superiority over the sinner ever enter our hearts. At every
stage we have to be aware that both they and we are helpless at the
mercy of Allah (S.w.T.). Salvation is for whomsoever Allah (S.w.T.) may
choose to give Tawfīq. It is possible that Allah (S.w.T.) may give
Tawfīq to the sinners to do Tawba; and they are redeemed. So it must be
amply clear that the arrogance and anger we have to exhibit is only in
obedience to what our religion expects of us and not because of any real
feeling of pride and superiority.

To clarify that there is no difference between being angry and not being
proud we present an example below. Whenever the king orders one of his
servants: “Whenever my son misbehaves you must express displeasure and
beat him.” Thus if the servant finds the son misbehaving it is his duty
to beat him and express his displeasure. If he doesn’t he has not obeyed
the king’s command. Though the servant does not have pride and does not
consider himself greater than the Prince. Rather he knows that the son
is having a higher status and is closer to the king. And if anger and
pride comes together, we must know that it is not for the pleasure of
Allah (S.w.T.). It is due to the selfish desires.

Pride and obedience are not compatible
--------------------------------------

Our aim should be to impress upon them the greatness and supremacy of
Allah (S.w.T.), of which they are oblivious, and to make them realize
that arrogance befits the Almighty only to Whom we are all subservient.
Our arrogance, is then an act of worship and a means to get nearness to
Allah (S.w.T.). But beware, if a slightest element of self importance
and pride gets into our hearts, this very act is directed by Shaitan.
Such is the significant difference between an act performed for Allah
(S.w.T.) and the very same act performed for self.

Another point of caution
------------------------

Sometimes it happens that in the process of preventing evil, the person
himself gets involved in perpetrating evil, either due to selfishness or
an imbalanced approach.

To honour a wealthy person for his wealth is a path to destruction
------------------------------------------------------------------

To show humility towards the rich people because of their wealth and
property is severely prohibited in the Qur’an and traditions. The
Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

***“And do not stretch your eyes after that with which We have provided
different classes of them, (of) the splendour of this world’s life, that
We may thereby try them…”*** ***(Surah Tā Hā 20:131)***

Any person who respects the rich for his riches and belittles himself
before him, considers wealth to be of consequence and is heedless of the
supremacy of Allah (S.w.T.). Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.) says,

“One who goes to a rich man and behaves with him with humility, the
Almighty Allah destroys two third of his faith”.[^26]

Faith has Three aspects: Faith in the heart, faith expressed verbally by
confession of testimonies, faith demonstrated by actions, by fulfilling
obligatory acts and avoiding prohibited ones. In the same way humility
before wealthy people is sometimes with heart and sometimes otherwise,
like with the tongue etc.; and sometimes it is by physical obescience.
Greedy people are more humble to the rich and speak sweet words to them
and show themselves to be inferior. Their two third faith is wasted. If
they express humility by physical obescience, like kissing their hands
and feet etc., their whole faith is destroyed. Because he has done
everything he could do for a human being and has not left anything for
Allah (S.w.T.).

[^1]: Sermon No.192 Nahjul Balagha

[^2]: Nahjul Balagha

[^3]: Nahjul Balagha

[^4]: al-Kāfi

[^5]: al-Kāfi

[^6]: al-Kāfi

[^7]: al-Kāfi

[^8]: al-Kāfi

[^9]: Du’a of Abu Hamza Thumali

[^10]: A Persian Couplet

[^11]: Sahīfa Sajjadiyah

[^12]: Sahīfa Sajjadiyah

[^13]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^14]: Layali al-Akhbār

[^15]: Qawaid

[^16]: al-Kāfi

[^17]: al-Kāfi

[^18]: al-Kāfi

[^19]: Bihār al-Anwār vol. 16

[^20]: Bihār al-Anwār vol. 73

[^21]: Bihār al-Anwār Vol. 6 page no. 204

[^22]: Bihār al-Anwār

[^23]: al-Kāfi Vol. 2, Chapter of Pride

[^24]: Nahjul Balagha, Khutba Qasiya, 92

[^25]: Wasa’il ul-Shia, Kitab Amr bil Ma’rūf

[^26]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 15


