Thirty-fourth Greater Sin: To War against Muslims
=================================================

The thirty fourth greater sin is to fight against the friends of Allah
(S.w.T.) (Muslims).

Amash narrates from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) and Fazl ibn Shazān who
narrated from Imam ‘Ali Riďa (a.s.) that Qur’an has clearly mentioned
chastisement for this sin and indicated the Shari punishment in Surah
al-Mā’ida 33-34:

***The punishment of those who wage war against Allah and His apostle
and strive to make mischief in the land is only this, that they should
be murdered or crucified or their hands and their feet should be cut off
on opposite sides or they should be exiled; this shall be as a disgrace
for them in this world, and in the hereafter they shall have a grievous
chastisement,Except those who repent before you have them in your power;
so know that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.***  
***(Surah al-Mā’ida 5:33-34)***

In *Minhaj* it is written that in the 6th year of Hijrah a group from
Awniyah and Akal came to Holy Prophet (S) and accepted Islam and stayed
on with him (S). But when the climate of Medina did not suit them, they
fell sick. The Holy Prophet (S) was informed about their condition and
he gave them permission to reside on the outskirts of Medina where camel
milk was available in plenty at a place called “Jabalul Eier.” In this
way they may stay there for some time and drink the milk and urine of
camel to cure their disease and become healthy once more.

They left for the valley and stayed for some time and regained health.
One day they hatched a conspiracy and stole 15 camels of the Holy
Prophet (S) and returned to their tribe as *Murtad* (renegades). When
the news reached Medina, Yasar, a servant of Holy Prophet (S) chased
them with a few people and caught up with them. The two groups fought
with each other. Yasar was captured, his hands and legs amputed, and
eyes and tongue were pierced with thorns. At last he achieved martyrdom.
When the Holy Prophet (S) came to know of this he sent Karbaz bin Jabir
after them. He captured all of them and tied their hands and legs and
brought them to the Holy Prophet (S). So Allah, the Most High, revealed
His words: “The punishment of those who wage war…” (Surah al-Maidah,
5:33)

There are various other traditions of Imams (a.s.) on this topic with
slight differences.

Who is an attacker?
-------------------

According to the jurists an attacker *(Muharib)* is one who carries
weapons; like sword, spear, dagger, gun, wood, stone etc. to frighten
the Muslims and rob them of their wealth or shed their blood. It is
immaterial whether he does it alone or with a group of people or whether
he succeeds in his aim or not. That is, whether people get frightened or
not, or whether he takes their wealth or not, whether he kills them or
not, if he carries a weapon he is an attacker. And it makes no
difference whether he is on the seas or land, in a city and a crowded
place, or in a desert like a wanderer; or whether he carries the weapon
during day or at night and whether he enters the Muslims’ houses
forcefully and attacks them, in all cases he is a *Muharib* (attacker)

It is in *Kāfi* that Surat bin Kalīb asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
regarding a person who comes out of his house for mosque or any other
place and suddenly someone catches him from behind and beats him and
snatches his clothes. Imam (a.s.) said such a person is *Muharib*
(attacker) and the verse is applicable to him.

There is no difference if the attacker is a Muslim or a non-Muslim, a
man or a woman, is in an Islamic city or non-Islamic area. We should
note that ‘attacker’ doesn’t mean that he only fights a war against
Muslims. Creating mischief in the land and disturbing peace or spreading
fear or using weapons to kill or threaten people makes one an attacker.

In short a *Muharib* is one who attacks the life and property of Muslims
using weapons and one who destroys peace and harmony.

To war against Allah (S.w.T.) and Prophet (S)
---------------------------------------------

In the Qur’anic verses it is said that fighting against Muslim means
fighting a war against Allah and Prophet (S). This is due to the respect
and high status accorded to Muslims. In fact any dealings with them are
like dealings with Allah (S.w.T.) and Prophet (S). This is because they
are connected with Allah (S.w.T.). It is also possible that it is so
because Muslims are closely linked with Allah (S.w.T.) through the
Prophet and to cause harm to Muslims or to take away their property or
shed their blood is prohibited by Allah (S.w.T.) and His Prophet (S).
Whoever acts against the divine command is an attacker (who has fought
against Allah (S.w.T.) and Prophet).

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Allah (S.w.T.) says: One who hurts My believing servant has declared
war against Me, and one who respects a believer has secured himself from
My wrath.”[^1]

He also said:

“Whoever humiliates my friend has openly waged war against me.”[^2]

Punishment for a Muharib
------------------------

As mentioned in the above verse one of the following four punishments
may be accorded: to kill, to crucify, to cut off hands and legs, or to
exile the attacker/s from the city.

In *Burhan Qur’an* page. 188 it is mentioned that according to religious
terminology ‘attacker’ refers to a person who frightens people, creates
inconvenience in a city or desert, whether he is weak or strong, a man
or a woman. In all cases such a person is a *Muharib* (attacker) and
when the attack is directed against Muslims according to Qur’an it is
equivalent to waging war against Allah (S.w.T.) and Prophet (S) and
Qur’an says regarding it,

***The punishment of those who wage war against Allah and His messenger
and strive to make mischief in the land is only this, that they should
be murdered or crucified or their hands and*** ***their feet should be
cut off on opposite sides or they should be imprisoned; this shall be as
a disgrace for them in this world, and in the hereafter they shall have
a grievous chastisement*** ***(Surah al-Maidah 5:33)***

After this verse the above book says: Respected readers! At this
juncture let us examine the false allegation of the modernized liberal
people who say that the penal code of Islam is barbarous. Why is it that
these people have reserved their sympathy and emotional feelings for
murderers and robbers. Why is it that they do not sympathise with the
victims of these cruel people? In most cases the victims are women and
children, who are targeted by these beasts. Is there any difference in
exterminating such elements to preserve peace and harmony with the
destruction of germs to guard the society from deadly diseases? Would
any sane person criticise a doctor for being cruel if he kills the
disease germs with an injection? There is no doubt that every fair
person would consider this a mercy for the society and an act of
justice. It is also necessary to mention that the Merciful Maker of
Islamic Law has not overlooked mercy and beneficence even with regard to
a criminal offence.

In *Tafsīr Majmaul Bayan* under the explanation of the concerned verse
is a narration from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that the punishment of an
attacker is according to the seriousness of his crime. If he has
committed a murder he is put to death, and if in addition to murder he
has plundered wealth, he is first executed and then crucified. If only
wealth is plundered without killing anyone, his punishment is severing
of hands and legs. If his crime was to spread unrest, or to waylay
people, his punishment is exile. This tradition clearly states that the
law of Islam has prescribed punishment of an attacker according to the
enormity of his sin and this itself shows mercy to a criminal. Moreover
Islam has not restricted itself to this beneficence but also stipulated
that if the attacker repents before being caught, he is exempted from
punishment. He is only responsible for the property he has stolen. And
Surah al-Mā’ida verse-34 proves this.

On page 185 it is mentioned that the aim of heavenly law for human
society is that the five basic and important things like life, faith,
wealth, lineage and honour of people should be protected from any
attack. An attack on these five basics can result in war and bloodshed.
There is no doubt that such discipline cannot be accomplished with
orders and prohibitions *(Amr* and *Nahy)* alone. The only effective
deterrent is the fear of punishment.

The great Muslim philosopher, Abu Raihān Biruni in the book *Tahqīq Ma
Lil hind* writes that according to Hindu and Christian beliefs, violence
of any kind should be avoided and criminals should be dealt with lenient
methods. According to them the philosophy of offering the other cheek,
and praying for the forgiveness of the evil doers is more effective in
reforming them. But practical experience shows that not everyone is
impressed with this philosophical attitude and most criminals can only
be compelled to avoid evil through fear of strict punishment. The
following verse gives the Islamic thoughts regarding retaliation:

***And there is life for you in (the law of) retaliation, O men of
understanding, that you may guard yourselves.(Surah al-Baqarah 2:179)***

This verse is addressed to the men of intellects who are concerned about
the hereafter and who are aware of the value of this life. The verse
says that human life and society is related to law of retaliation.
Knowing the precise nature of punishment prescribed for a particular
crime acts as a deterrent for committing it. Islam has specified
penalties for serious crimes like murder, adultery, stealing, fighting,
drinking, apostasy which are responsible for the decadence and
destruction of civilisations. Whereas there is no prescribed punishment
for minor crimes and it is left at the discretion of the judge (Hākim
al-sharā). He bases his judgement according to the circumstances and
other factors related to the criminal. (End of quotation from *Burhān
al-Qur’an*)

The philosophy of retaliation is further explained as follows: Life is
balanced by discrimination between good and evil and Allah (S.w.T.)’s
law of balance has to be observed and enforced. Therefore the guilty
should be punished and the people against whom the crime has been
committed should know what punishment has been given and how it is
carried out. In this way the boundaries of transgression are clearly
marked and made known.

The details regarding the penal code are mentioned in the traditions.
Regarding this there is a tradition in *al-Kāfi* narrated from Umrū bin
Uthman Madayani that Imam ‘Ali Riďa (a.s.) was asked regarding the 33-34
verses of Surah al-Mā’ida as to which crimes make one liable for
above-mentioned four penalties. Imam (a.s.) said that when one wars
against Allah (S.w.T.) and His Prophet (S), spreads mischief in the
land, kills someone and plunders his wealth, he is to be killed and
crucified. If he robs people without killing his right hand and left leg
or left hand and right leg should be cut off. If he takes up weapons to
war against Allah (S.w.T.) and His Prophet and try to spread mischief in
the land but doesn’t kill anybody nor plunders any wealth he should be
exiled.

Imam (a.s.) was asked how such people can be exiled he (a.s.) said: He
shall be expelled from the city where he has committed the crime and
sent to another town and the people of that city should be informed that
this is an exiled person. They must not associate with him or have any
dealings with him, nor should they eat or drink with him. This should
continue for a year.

As in our age these penalties are not implemented, it is not necessary
to dwell into the details and narrate more traditions on this topic.

When a *Muharib* (attacker) repents sincerely before being arrested the
above-mentioned penalties are not applicable for him. If he is in
possession of plundered wealth it should be returned to its rightful
owner. If he has committed a murder, the law of retaliation should be
applied, except in the case where the victim of the crime himself
pardons him.

Defending from robbers
----------------------

An armed robber is the same as an attacker *(Muharib)* and the owner of
wealth has the right to defend himself. If in this engagement the robber
is killed no compensation is payable. If protecting some property is
*Wajib* or if the robber attacks the honour then it is *Wajib* to defend
to ones utmost capacity except if there is risk of losing ones life. If
the thief has the intention of killing it is Wajib for the owner of the
property to defend himself. If it is not possible he should flee or hide
himself or use any other way so that his life is protected and if it is
the case of a thief without weapon then too the thief is a *Muharib*
(attacker). So whatever rule is prescribed for armed robber will also
apply to him except that the penalty of *Muharib* is not applicable to
him. If all the conditions of an attacker are found in the thief then
the full penalty will be accorded to him, and if all conditions are not
found, then only exemplary punishment should be given to discipline him.
Such a robber is “Mustalib” (one who openly loots people and runs away)
or “Mukhtalis” (One who steals quietly). The religious jurist (Hakim
al-Shara) is authorized to award whatever punishment he considers
suitable. The thief could be beaten or imprisoned.

A man snatched an earring from the ear of a girl and ran away. He was
presented before ‘Ali (a.s.). ‘Ali (a.s.) said: His stealing and robbery
is apparent and not hidden from people, therefore the penalty for
stealing, that is cutting of hand, cannot be applied to him; rather he
should be beaten and given exemplary punishment. Therefore he was beaten
and imprisoned. The third kind is “mukhtāl” means one who betrays and in
a tricky manner takes away the wealth of someone. Like faking
certificates to trick people into parting with their wealth. It is
necessary that all such people be punished with exemplary punishment.

[^1]: Kāfi vol. 2, page. 350

[^2]: Kāfi vol. 2, page. 352


