Thirty-fifth Greater Sin: Eating of Carrion, Pork and Blood
===========================================================

The thirty-fifth of Greater sins is consuming carrion, pork and blood
and all those things on which Allah (S.w.T.)’s name has not been invoked
during its slaughter as reported by Amash from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.) and Fazl ibn Shazān from Imam ‘Ali Riďa (a.s.). This fact is also
mentioned in the Qur’an in Surah al-Baqarah Verse 173, Surah al-An’ām
Verse 145 and Surah an-Nahl Verse 116.

In Surah al-Mā’ida Verse 3 Allah (S.w.T.) says,

***“Forbidden to you is that which dies of itself, and blood, and flesh
of swine, and that on which*** ***any other name than that of Allah has
been invoked, and the strangled (animal) and that beaten to death, and
that killed by a fall and that killed by being smitten with the horn,
and that which wild beast have eaten, except what you slaughter, and
what is sacrificed on stones set up (for idols) and that you divide by
the arrows; that is a transgression.”*** (***Surah al-Mā’ida 5:3)***

Carrion
-------

Every animal that dies without the proper religious procedure is Carrion
and eating of it is prohibited. If it has warm blood then it would also
be *Najis* (ritually impure), but if it is properly slaughtered it is
pure and clean (except dog and pig which will be always *Najis* and
never considered clean and pure).

In a compilation of Anjuman al-Tablighāt Islami it is mentioned that
Islamic Jurisprudence has specified and discussed in detail and
prescribed the animals whose flesh is allowed. Only an expert in Life
science could fully appreciate justification on which these laws are
based.

Islam has prohibited the flesh of all carnivorous animals because there
is dirt in the stomachs of such animals. The flesh is dirty and smelly
and its consumption causes illness. On the other hand herbivorous
animals are mostly considered permissible. Animals having claws are
considered *Harām* and hoofed animals are mostly considered *Halāl*
though some are considered as *Makruh* (unpleasant) such as Horse, Ass
etc. Birds that flap their wings more and glide less while flying are
*Halāl* and those who glide more and flap their wings less are *Harām*.
Islam has also prescribed rules for hunting. Hunting is permissible for
hunters who hunt to feed their family or for their sustenance. Hunting
is not allowed for fun and entertainment. One who goes for hunting just
for fun and play has to recite full prayers (it is not considered Qasr)
he should also observe fast because this journey of his is unIslamic.
(End of quotation from the compilation of Anjuman Tablighat al-Islami)

Animals are of Three types: Terrestrial, aquatic and flying. Terrestrial
animals are of two kinds, domestic and wild.

Terrestrial Animals
-------------------

Among the domestic animals only goats, sheep, cow and camel are *Halāl*,
while flesh of horse, donkey and mule is detestable (Makruh), other than
these six animals all domestic animals are *Harām*, like cat etc.

None of the wild animals are *Halāl* except deers and its kinds like the
mountain goats, (12 horns), wild Cow, wild donkey and mule. Flesh of all
carnivorous animals is *Harām* whether they are strong and powerful like
lions, leopard and jackals etc. or weak like the fox; and in the same
way the flesh of rabbit which is not from wild animals is also *Harām*.

Reptiles like snakes and rats etc., whether domesticated or wild.
Insects and worms and porcupines and lice etc. are also *Harām*.

Birds
-----

Birds like pigeon and all its kind are *Halāl*. For example, ringdove,
partridge, wild duck, ducks and its kinds. Also birds and its kinds like
Bulbul (nightingale), Chandol (name of a bird). Surad (bird with broad
head with a peak half-black and half-white who hunts other birds). Swan
(Greyish with long head, which mostly lives on a date tree) Shagrāq -
Greenish beautiful bird similar to pigeon, it has a red, green and black
lining on its black feather.

Bat, peacocks who have webbed feet or birds strong enough which can tear
apart animal; or hunting birds, like Charkh (one kind of bird) Eagle,
Shahīn, Bāshiq (which is also called as Bāhsā) or a weak bird like
Vulture or crow and its kind should be avoided, also Zāgh (crow which
inhabits cultivated soil, and Baga whose colour is black and white,
those fat and black crows which eat Carrion; all such birds should not
be used for food.

Whatever has been said is available in traditions in explicit terms.
Regarding birds about where there is no express command these can be
considered *Halāl* by applying the criteria mentioned in the beginning
of the chapter: Birds that flap their wings more and glide less during
flight are *Halāl*. Besides they should have Three additional
characteristics: an additional finger below the thigh, crop (craw) and
gizzard.

The egg of a bird has the same order as its flesh. The egg of a *Halāl*
bird is *Halāl* and the egg of *Harām* bird is *Harām*. In order to
determine whether an egg of unknown origin belongs to a *Halāl* bird or
*Harām* we must see its shape. If one end is pointed and the other is
rounded, like the egg of hen or pigeon, it is *Halāl*. If it is exactly
round, or oval having the same shape at both ends it is to be considered
*Harām*.

We should also remember that a permissible animal becomes *Harām* on
account of two things:

1) By eating Najasat

2) By having been sexually assaulted by a man. The details of laws
concerning the same are available in Tauzihul Masael and books of
jurisprudence.

Aquatic Animals
---------------

As regards aquatic animals, only those fishes are *Halāl* which have
scales even though they might have fallen off, like the scales of Kan-at
(a kind of fish) (Qoba fish). This is a very naughty fish and it bangs
itself on everything and loses its scale and only the scales of its tail
remain.


