Purification of Animals
=======================

Warm-blooded animals can be fit for consumption by using any of the two
ways prescribed by Islamic law for its killing; hunting or slaughter.
There are two methods of hunting, one is to hunt by a trained dog who is
obedient; it must move when ordered and stop when commanded. It should
not have the habit of eating its prey. Also the person who releases the
dog on a prey must be a Muslim and he must utter the name of Allah
(S.w.T.) at the time of releasing the dog, and throughout the hunt the
dog must not go out of the sight of the hunter.

The second method of hunting is by pointed iron weapons like sword,
spear or bullet etc. This should pierce the animal’s body. Whether this
weapon is of a ferrous metal or made from some other mineral, it makes
the prey *Halāl* upon condition that the archer should be a Muslim and
at the time of releasing the arrow he must utter ‘Bismillah’. If all
such conditions are fulfilled and the animal is killed during this
process, the flesh of the hunted animal is fit for consumption
(*Halāl*). However, if the hunter finds the animal alive he must
slaughter it according to the prescribed rules of slaughter.

Animals caught in all kinds of traps could only be *Halāl* if the
trapper finds them alive and slaughters them in the prescribed manner.

Apart from this all the *Halāl* flesh animals can be consumed only if
they are capable of running away or flying away. If one shoots at the
young one of a deer incapable of running or the young one of a partridge
that cannot yet fly, their flesh is not *Halāl*. They should be first
caught and then slaughtered with a knife etc.

A Discussion regarding Non-vegetarianism
----------------------------------------

In *Tafsīr al-Mizan* under the exegesis of the 3rd verse of Surah
al-Mā’ida is a Three-part discussion which we present below.

### Different beliefs regarding Non-vegetarianism

Man also possesses a digestive system like other animals therefore
theoretically he can eat anything that he is capable of digesting and
whatever can be absorbed into his body. It is possible for man to eat
anything that he could chew and swallow. But he is selective and would
never consume anything that he feels would harm him or that which is
poisonous. Similarly he also avoids eating things that he considers
harmful for his soul. That is food prohibited according to the religion
that he follows.

Detestable things – If a person considers something Najis he refrains
from consuming it, e.g. a person doesn’t eat his own excreta because he
considers it as dirty and filthy and sometimes he considers it Najis due
to his religious belief. For example Muslims consider Pork Najis but
Christians consider it permissible. Non-Muslims eat frogs, crabs and
mice while Muslims consider them dirty.

Thus it becomes clear that different people have different views
regarding the consumption of meat. Buddhism considers all types of meat
prohibited. This rule was promulgated to put a stop to the practice of
all types of meat eating. The African people and other wild tribes used
to eat every kind of meat even going as far as Cannibalism. The Arabs
used to consume the meat of all kinds of quadrupeds and even animals
like rats and lizards, whether they died of their own or were suffocated
to death. They used to say that you people kill the animal by your hands
but we eat those who are killed by Allah (S.w.T.) (that is the animals
who die a natural death and have not been purified by the prescribed
method of slaughter).

As mentioned in authentic writings the idol worshipping Chinese eat
every type of animals like dogs, cats, insects, snakes, frogs, oysters
etc. But Islam has prescribed the middle path. That is, it has permitted
only that meat which man considers naturally beneficial. The details of
this will be presented below.

Islam has designated as Halāl the quadrupeds like sheep, goat, cow,
camel etc. Some of the quadrupeds like horse, donkey etc is makrūh
(Detestable) according to Islam. Birds, excluding the birds of prey are
permitted if they possess a gizzard, flap their wings during flight and
do not possess claws like that of pigeons. Islam has also permitted some
marine animals. The details of all such animals are given in the books
of jurisprudence. Also prohibited are the blood of animals, carrion and
all those animals that are slaughtered, without reciting upon them the
name of Allah (S.w.T.). The aim of promulgating such rules was to
enlighten man regarding the regulations of meat eating and to permit
only that meat which is considered naturally healthy and beneficial for
man and refrain him from all that could prone harmful for him or that
which is distasteful and dirty.

### 2. Is Killing a living thing against Mercy?

One could claim that animals also possess soul and like humans find
death painful. Then how is it possible that we deprive them of the
sweetness of life and force upon them the bitter taste of death? While
Allah (S.w.T.) Almighty is Beneficent and Merciful. How is it possible
for such a God to order the slaughter of animals so that men can enjoy
their meat? While the soul and feelings of both human and animals are
same. The reply to this question is that whatever has been said against
meat eating is because of sentiments and feelings overpowering reality.
(Remember) Shari’a and legislation is subservient to wisdom and not
prone to sentimentality and emotions.

This could be explained by saying that the material world is a world of
changes. The rule prevalent in the world of matter is that of “the eater
and the eaten one”. The dwellers of the earth feed on the earth and
shape themselves with it. (Like the human beings, animals and birds
etc.). After this the earth eats them up a second time. Earth changes
into vegetation and vegetation is transformed into earth in a continuous
cycle. Moreover, the living things derive benefit from plants and water
and some animals feed on other animals. For example animals of prey hunt
other animals and consume their flesh. Their natural system is such that
they cannot eat anything else. Like the clawed birds that catch birds
like pigeons and other birds and devour them. The smaller birds feed on
grains, grainy substances and insects like flies, fleas and mosquitoes
etc.

Blood sucking insects benefit from the blood of humans and animals and
finally the earth devours all of them. On the basis of this it is proved
that the natural food cycle that is existing on the earth is based on
natural laws without any hindrance. Everything is subservient to this
natural law. The creator of nature has permitted consumption of flesh by
some creatures and has designed their organs to accomplish the task. He
has created man in such a way that he could consume vegetarian as well
as non-vegetarian food. He is not like a sheep who can neither cut with
its eenth nor pick up something with them. Neither does man resemble
carnivorous animals that can neither chew or soften their food. In
addition to these abilities man is equipped with the capacity to taste.
He enjoys the taste of meat. And apart from this the natural make up of
man throws light on the types of foods that his organs could digest and
those that are beneficial for him. Since Islam is the religion of nature
it has permitted all such things that are compatible with the natural
makeup of man.

Also, it has prescribed some other rules formed by the creator of
Nature. That is, all that flesh that could prove harmful to the body or
spirit, all those things that one finds detestable and dirty are to be
compulsorily avoided. In brief all those things that prove harmful to
the body or soul or against the well being of human society like
gambling and distributing of meat through drawing of lots. All such
things are prohibited by Islam. Also banned are filthy things that
normally people find to be disgusting.

Other objections against animal slaughter that are apparently based on
mercy can be answered as follows: Indeed, mercy is a natural and created
feeling that is found in the psychology of human beings and in a large
number of animals. But it does not mean that this mercy has to be
absolute. If it had been such, there wouldn’t have been any kind of
diseases, sorrows and difficulties. Apart from this, mercy and kindness
are not like human justice which is from an accomplished moral quality
encompassing every aspect of life. (That is one must be merciful under
every circumstance). If it had been it would not be correct to arrest
the unjust people and punish the criminals, or to hate the enemies. If
we act upon such type of absolute mercy, the earth and its inhabitants
would be destroyed by corruption and transgression.

Therefore, commonly it is commanded that mercy and kindness be
practiced. That is, animals must not be slaughtered in a cruel and
painful manner. And we must not sever any part of the slaughtered
animal, before its completely dead nor skin it.

Animal that is choked to death or that which is beaten to death is not
allowed. Islamic law also prohibits the slaughtering of an animal before
another beast. The same chapter prescribes watering the animal before it
is led to slaughter. As far as possible we must be kind to the animal
that is about to be slaughtered. Detailed laws regarding slaughter are
present in the books of jurisprudence.

As far as the divine mercy and beneficence is concerned. Divine mercy
does not imply the satisfaction of heart and the perceived effect. It
denotes bestowing benefits to a deserving one to the extent that he
deserves. Therefore, sometimes we consider something harmful and
punishing whereas it is a divine mercy and goodness for one, and
similarly the other way around. Then it is not appropriate for the
divine wisdom that at the time of framing laws our false feelings belie
a divine command and give a decision against established reality. From
the above discussion it is established that Islam has allowed meat and
the rules that make it permissible for us are promulgated in keeping
with the law of nature.

***“The nature made by Allah in which he has made men; there is no
altering of Allah’s creation; that is the right religion…”*** ***(Surah
ar-Rūm 30: 30)***

### 3. Why has Islam prescribed slaughter?

Second objection: We accept that nature and creation permits the
consumption of meat. Then on the basis of mercy why are we not satisfied
with the meat of animals that have died a natural death?

The reply to this question can be found in the second part of the above
discussion. Because to ascribe such a meaning to mercy leads to the
nullification of the very laws that Islam has prescribed. And Islam has
framed laws in order to keep this feeling of mercy in the make up of
man.

Moreover if only dead animals had been permitted instead of being
beneficial in any way it would be harmful to men as eating carrion
causes numerous diseases of the body and is also a bane for human soul.
This would itself be against divine mercy as this would have caused
untold problems to human beings and people would always be waiting for
animals to die so that they may enjoy their meat. (Quoted from Tafhīme
al-Mīzan)

Remember! Slaughtering of an animal to consume its flesh is not cruelty.
In fact it is the completion of the purpose for which it was created.
Because before the slaughter the animal is dumb, unintelligent and
senseless. It does not understand anything. But after it is slaughtered
and consumed by man, it is transformed into a part of human body that
has the power of speech, understanding and reason. For example, no kind
of merit or perfection can emerge from the tongue of a sheep. But when
it becomes a part of human body it unravels realities and chants the
praise of Allah (S.w.T.). In the same way other good actions are
performed by other parts of the human body.

Purification through the Prescribed method of Slaughter
-------------------------------------------------------

The main reason for slaughter is to purify the animal. The procedure is
to completely cut off the four big veins of the neck below the bulge of
the Adam’s apple. (These four pipes are: wind pipe, food pipe and two
big veins near the windpipe). The five additional conditions for
purification are:

1. The person who slaughters must be a Muslim whether man or woman. Even
a child can do it if he is old enough to distinguish good and bad.

2. The neck of the animal must be cut with a sharp iron weapon. But if
an iron weapon is not available and if the animal would die soon if not
slaughtered immediately, then a weapon of any other material is allowed.
For example glass or sharp edged stone.

3. At the time of slaughter the face, all four legs and the stomach of
the animal must face the direction of Qibla. But it does not matter if
one forgets or if one does not know the direction of Qibla or if it is
not possible to lay the animal in that direction.

4. At the time of slaughter one must recite the name of Allah (S.w.T.)
and it is sufficient to say ‘Bismillah’ (In the name of Allah (S.w.T.)).
However, it doesn’t matter if one forgets to do so.

5. After being slaughtered the animal must move somewhat. It is
sufficient if it even moves its eyeballs, or tail or thrash its legs. It
is also a necessary precaution that as much blood must gush from the
animal as it normally does.

In case of camel slaughter in addition to the above five conditions it
is necessary to pierce it with a sharp weapon at a depression between
the neck and the chest. If the animal becomes uncontrollable or it gets
into a situation where it is impossible to slaughter it in the proper
way; for example if it falls into a well and is about to drown, then one
can pierce or wound it with a weapon at any part of its body that would
kill it. It would become permissible. It is not even necessary that it
should face the Qibla. However, the other conditions are applicable.

The purification of fish is that it should be removed alive from the
water. Therefore if a fish with scales is caught alive from the water
and dies out of water, it is tahir (pure) and it is permitted to eat it.
If it dies in water it is nevertheless tahir (pure) because it does not
have warm blood, but it is not permitted to eat it. Also, it is not
necessary that the person who catches fish be a Muslim. Hence it is
allowed to eat fish caught by a non-Muslim. But one must have the
knowledge that the fish has died after coming out of water.

The purification of locust is that it must be caught alive by hand or
other means. And it becomes Halāl to eat after it dies. It is not
necessary that the person catching locust be a Muslim or that the name
of Allah (S.w.T.) be recited upon it. Eating the locust that has not yet
developed wings and is not capable of flying is Harām.

If after hunting or slaughtering an animal one finds a young one in its
belly it is tahir only if its limbs have developed or it has hair or fur
on its body. It is allowed to eat this young one because its mother too
was a Halāl meat animal.

### Purification affected by slaughter

Whatever has been discussed so far shows that except for dog and pig all
other Harām animals if slaughtered in Islamic way are considered tahir,
although eating them is not permitted. And if it has not been correctly
slaughtered, its dead body is najis (impure). But if it doesn’t have
warm blood it cannot be considered najis even if it dies without
purification; its eating is obviously Harām. For example, snake, insects
etc. And every Halāl flesh animal, which dies without purification
becomes najis (impure) and its eating is Harām. If it does not possess
warm blood, eating it is Harām but it is not najis (impure). For example
fish that dies in water. Carrion whose eating is Harām is an animal that
dies without slaughter prescribed by the Shariah. Whether it dies of
some disease or a natural death, or due to external factors, whether it
dies suddenly or a slow death. As animal do not usually die a sudden
death it is possible that people think this kind of death does not make
it a carrion. The Qur’anic verse (Surah al-Mā’ida 5:3) has specially
mentioned it among the five kinds of carrion.

1. Munkhafta, animal that dies due to strangulation whether accidental
or intentional, whether it is strangulated with an instrument like a
rope etc, or by pressing its neck between two sticks. Such and many
other types of methods were prevalent during the period of Jahiliyya
(Pre-Islamic).

2. Mangooza, an animal that is beaten till it dies.

3. Mutaraddiya, animal that falls from a great height or that which
falls into a well.

4. Tatahayya, animal that dies after being wounded by the horns of some
other beast.

5. Mā Akala Bassao, an animal that was hunted by a beast and part of it
was eaten up.

The phrase “and what is sacrificed on stones set up (for idols)…”
prohibits the method of slaughter practiced in Jahiliyya. In the
pre-Islamic era the polytheists used to install stones around the Ka’aba
and consider them sacred. They used to worship these stones and
sacrifice animals upon them. And the phrase, “and that you divide by the
arrows…”, prohibits the consumption of the meat of animal that is
slaughtered and its meat divided into the participants by drawing
arrows. This is also a kind of gambling and it has been explained in
detail in the chapter on gambling.

Why is Carrion Harām?
---------------------

Mufaddal Ibn Umar is quoted in the books al-Kāfi and *Amali* to have
asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.) why Allah (S.w.T.) has prohibited Carrion, blood
and pork? Imam (a.s.) replied,

“Allah has not prohibited anything for men to take it Himself (we seek
refuge in Allah (S.w.T.)). And He has not permitted things that He
Himself didn’t like. (In other words Allah (S.w.T.) has not framed the
rules of Harām and Halāl on the basis of His personal whims and fancies.
The truth is that when Allah (S.w.T.) is Creator of everything, He alone
knows what is good and necessary for the human body. Therefore he made
it permissible due to His grace. He Alone knows what is harmful for the
human body and, therefore prohibited it and made it Harām. But one who
is helpless and there is no other way for survival is allowed to eat the
same (prohibited) things. However, he must eat only as much as is
necessary to save one’s life.”

After that he said, “Eating carrion makes ones body weak and thin. It
destroys ones physical prowess and cuts off his generations. One who
eats carrion dies a sudden death.”

It appears therefore that in the process of slaughtering, the blood
gushes out and the meat is free of the impure blood with its toxic
substances which flow in the veins. When an animal dies naturally or by
any process where the blood remains in the body, the meat is
contaminated with toxic substances, the consumption of which is
injurious to health.

A heretic asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.) why Allah (S.w.T.) had prohibited
carrion?

Imam (a.s.) said,

“Carrion is made Harām so that there should be difference between it and
an animal upon which the name of Allah is recited. Also, the blood of a
dead animal is not expelled from its body. It returns to its organs and
makes its meat heavy and distasteful. Its meat is eaten with its blood.”

The heretic said, “Then the flesh of fish must also be carrion and Harām
because blood is not expelled from it.”

Imam (a.s.) told him,

“The purification of fish is just that it should be removed from water
and left outside to die by itself. It is not necessary to slaughter it
because it does not possess (warm) blood. The same applies to locust.”

In the fourth volume of Bihār al-Anwār it is mentioned that the Imam
also said that it is not necessary to slaughter fish because it doesn’t
have much blood. And the blood that remains in its body is like the
blood that remains in the body of an animal after it is slaughtered,
which is harmless and Halāl.

Blood
-----

Blood is of two kinds, Najis (impure) and tahir (Pure). The blood of man
and all warm-blooded animals is Najis. It is a characteristic feature of
warm-blooded creatures that when the main vein is severed the blood
gushes out with force. If blood is found while milking a cow or buffalo,
however little it may be, it is Najis and the milk is also Najis due to
it. To consume this milk is Harām. On the basis of precaution (Ehtiyat)
one must also refrain from consuming the minute particles of blood in an
egg.

However, two types of blood are tahir (pure). One is the blood of all
cold-blooded animals, like fish and mosquito etc. Secondly, the blood
left over in a slaughtered animal. Hence if an animal is slaughtered
according to the prescribed Islamic manner and some blood flows out, the
blood remaining in its body is tahir. But if due to breathing or due to
its head being placed on a raised spot the blood that has gushed out
again flows back into the body, the remaining blood will not be tahir.

Apart from this it is absolutely Harām to consume blood whether it is
tahir or Najis. However, that tahir blood which is a part of a fish or a
slaughtered animal, and which can be considered as a part of its flesh;
can be consumed. But if it is considered as blood its consumption is
Harām.

Why is blood Harām?
-------------------

In Tafsir of al-Ayyashi Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) is quoted to have
said,

“Drinking blood causes diseases of the dryness of throat and madness and
also makes one stone-hearted and merciless. One who drinks blood can
anytime murder his own parents, relatives or a friend. “

Then Imam (a.s.) said,

“Drinking blood cause production of yellow water in ones body.”
(al-Kāfi) It makes human body to stink and makes a person bad-character.
His descendants inherit a kind of madness and it makes the heart
merciless.”[^1]

The heretic asked Imam Ja’far-as-Sadiq (a.s.) the reason for prohibiting
the consumption of blood.

Imam (a.s.) said,

“Drinking blood causes the hardness of heart and mercilessness. It
causes ones body to stink and changes ones complexion, and mostly causes
leprosy.”[^2]

According to Imam Riďa (a.s.),

“Drinking of blood causes plague, wounds and boils that ultimately lead
to death.”

Pork
----

Pig and dog are two such Najis animals that every part of their body is
Najis. Even those bloodless parts like hair and claws or hooves are
Najis. To slaughter a pig or dog is a useless act. That is, these
animals cannot be purified in any way. To consume their flesh is Harām
and a greater sin.

Imam Riďa (a.s.) mentions regarding the prohibition of pork,

“The Almighty Allah has prohibited (made Harām) Pork. Because it is a
horrible and dreadful animal that Allah has created for men to derive
lessons from. People should also refrain from sensuality and shameless
deeds that cause such a terrible appearance. And that they fear from
being transformed into pigs by Almighty Allah. (in the description of
past nations it is mentioned that people who committed sexual
promiscuity are changed into pigs in Barzakh and they shall be raised as
pigs in Qiyāma.) Also, pigs were allowed to exist so that they are a
reminder of the conversion (Maskh) of previous nations into pigs. The
second reason for prohibiting pork is that the staple diet of pigs
consists of extremely Najis and filthy things, and its blood contains
innumerable harmful germs.”[^3]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said,

“The Almighty Allah converted many nations into animals. Among them are
pigs, monkeys and bears etc. After this these animals were prohibited
from being eaten, so that people derive lessons from them and do not
consider the sin minor.”[^4]

It is mentioned in the book *Islam wa Ilme Imroz* of Anjuman Tablighat
Islami that pig is an animal that is classified by specialists among the
thick-skinned animals. The rhinoceros wild pig and hippopotamus are all
classified in this family. Pork is very harmful for the body but we
mention below only some of its harmful effects.

Details Regarding some harmful effects of Pork
----------------------------------------------

### Spiritual and Moral harms

Pig is known for its shameless and wanton behaviour and for its sexual
perversion. It does not honour its own females and invites other males
to have sexual contact with it, and enjoys it. In addition it is awfully
filthy, it thrives on excreta and has no hesitation in eating its own.
Consumption of pork therefore leads to moral degradation and spiritual
bankruptcy.

It is unbelievable that such a loathsome creature can eventually end up
on the dinner table, where its meat is savoured and eaten with relish
and this in spite of the fact that those who consume it are fully aware
of its filthy and despicable characteristics. In fact many of these
people when they want to abuse somebody in the most vile and insulting
terms, they call him a pig, but pig it is, that they seem to relish and
enjoy the most. The same surprising attitude is shown by Christians.
Whenever Christians depict Satan in religious anecdotes they present him
in the form of a pig. The Gospel of Barnabas mentions that Pig is Satan
personified and that the pig’s body has the spirit of Satan. The present
Bible among the Christians (Matthew 8-32 Marks 5-13, Luke 8: 28-39)
describes how Jesus thrust the soul of Satan inside the herd of swines
and sent them towards the river. In spite of the satanic nature
attributed to the pig by their own religion, the Christians continue to
eat it.

### Physical Harms

Pork is harmful to the body in many ways, but two serious diseases
caused by its consumption are Trichinosis and Dysentery.

**Trichinosis.** This disease is caused by the Trichina worm which
breeds in the flesh of pig. In a period of one month the female lays 10
to 15 thousand eggs. The worms enter the human system only through
consumption of pork. If the individual succumbs to the infection, the
worms attack the walls of the stomach and the walls are weakened.

Three weeks after entering the stomach they enter the blood stream and
spread to the entire body. They multiply at lightning speed in the host
body.

The first symptom is giddiness and a strange kind of fever. This fever
is connected with the digestive system and soon the person is afflicted
with Diarrhoea. Initially there is mild fever which gets severe day by
day. Other symptoms that follow are: Stiffness of the limbs, itch in the
body, tiredness, weakness, pain in various parts of the body.

It is most apparent in the abnormal way of chewing, swallowing and
breathing of the patient. The mild sickness assumes enormous proportions
and finally kills the patient in seven weeks.

A kilogram of pork can harbour as many as 400 million Trichina worms.

**Dysentery.** One of the dreadful diseases that afflict those who eat
pork is dysentery. This dysentery is solely caused by the organism
‘Karam Kadoo’. This worm has a head that has two chains around the head
and four branches with which it attaches itself to the walls of the
stomach. The outer portion of the worm that produces eggs gets separated
from the main body and is expelled along with stool. The eggs that are
expelled with the stools are eaten up by pigs and in this way the eggs
enter the stomach of the pig. These eggs again initiate the reproductive
cycle. If the flesh of this pig is eaten by man there is every
possibility that the germs which enter the stomach of man, will rise to
infection. It has been proved beyond any doubt that these particular
worms are only associated with the consumption of pork and the only way
to be safe from them is by avoiding pork.

This infection is rampant in countries where pork is consumed in large
quantities.

Besides being a source of infection, pork is heavy for digestion and
causes great stress on the digestive system.

Islam prohibited pork 1400 years ago before anyone knew anything about
its harmful effects. It is a pity that 1400 years hence, when the wisdom
of this prohibition has been clearly defined, people still continue to
consume it.

Similarly, Islam has designated dog to be absolutely Najis (Najisul
A’in), and advised against keeping it in the house. Since then
scientific developments have proved that various diseases are
transferred to man from dogs. For example, rashes, baldness and other
skin diseases caused by germs, and diseases caused by lice which breed
in the fur of dog. Rabies, the most dreadful of all diseases that a
human can contract, is transferred to man from dog.

All these diseases are explained in detail in the above-mentioned book.
It is also mentioned that a utensil licked by a dog cannot be purified
except by scrubbing it with mud.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shia

[^2]: Ihtijaj. Vol. 4, Bihār al-Anwār page 250

[^3]: Uyun al-Akhbar ar-Riďa, Wasa’il chap. 1

[^4]: Tafsir Ayyashi, Book of Food and Drink of Wasa’il chapter one page
248


