6. What is the difference between Islam and Iman?
=================================================

In verse 14 of Suratul Hujurat, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتِ الأََعْرَابُ آمَنَّا قُلْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا وَ لٌكِنْ قُولُوا
أَسْلَمْنَا وَ لَمَّا يَدْخُلِ الإِِيْمَانُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The dwellers of the desert say: We believe. Say: You do not believe
but say, We submit; and faith has not yet entered into your hearts.”***

The question that arises here is: What is the difference between 'Islam'
and 'Iman'?

According to this verse, the difference between them lies in that Islam
possesses the external form such that whoever recites the
shahadatayn[^1] enters into the category of Muslims, after which all the
Islamic rulings shall become applicable with respect to him.

But «man is an issue, which is internal (to man), and is associated
neither with his tongue nor his exterior, but rather his heart.

There could be various motives for Islam - even material and personal
benefits, yet Iman always stems from knowledge, awareness and spiritual
motives and it is due to this Iman that taqwa (piety) manifests itself.
This is witnessed in an eloquent statement of the Noble Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلإِسْلاَمُ عَلاَنِيَيَّةٌةُ وَ الإِيـمَانُ فِي الْقَلْبِ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Islam is (a) proclaimed (issue), whereas Iman is housed in the
heart.”[^2]

In another tradition, Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلإِسْلاَمُ يُحْقَنُ بِهِ الدَّمُ وَ تُؤَدَّى بِهِ الأََمَانَةُ وَ
تُسْتَحَلُّ بِهِ الْفُرُوجُ وَ الثَّوَابُ عَلـى الإِِيـمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By means of Islam, the blood (of man) is safeguarded, trusts are
returned, matrimony becomes lawful; but rewards are on account of
«man.”[^3]

And it is for this very reason that in some traditions the concept of
Islam has been confined to the vocal testimony, whereas Iman has been
emphasized as being testimony in conjunction with deeds.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلإِِيـمَانُ إِقْرَارٌ وَ عَمَلٌ وَ الإِِسْلاَمُ إِقْرَارٌ بِلاَ
عَمَلٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“True faith is to testify and to act while submission (al-Islam) is to
testify prior to acting.”[^4]

This meaning is also seen under the discussion 'Islam and Iman'; Fudhail
ibne Yasar states: I heard Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الإِيـمَانَ يُشَارِكُ الإِِسْلاَمَ وَ لاَ يُشَارِكُهُ
الإِِسْلاَمُ إِنَّ الإِِيـمَانَ مَا وَقَرَ فِي الْقُلُوبِ وَ
الإِِسْلاَمَ مَا عَلَيْهِ الْمَنَاكِحُ وَ الْمَوَارِيثُ وَ حِقْنِ
الدِّمَآءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, «man teams up with Islam but Islam does not team up with «man.
Indeed, Iman is that which settles into the heart whereas Islam is that,
which governs the rules of marriage and inheritance, and safeguards the
(shedding of) blood (of man).”[^5]

Nonetheless, this difference in meaning is applicable only when both
these terms are used alongside each other, however if they are used
separately, it is possible that Islam may refer to the same thing, which
is referred to by Iman; i.e. each of these two terms may be used
synonymously.[^6]

[^1]: 'The two testimonies' - testifying to the Unity of Allah (s.w.t.)
and the Prophethood of the Noble Prophet (S). (Tr.)

[^2]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. 9, pg. 138

[^3]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, Chapter Inna al-Islam Yuhqanu bihi al-Damm, no. 1
and 2

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Ibid., no. 3

[^6]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 22, pg. 210


