7. What is meant by ‘Shaytan’ in the Noble Qur’an?
==================================================

The word Shaytan is derived from the roots (شطن) and شاطن means 'impure
and base'.

Shaytan refers to an entity that is rebellious - irrespective of whether
it is of the humans, jinn or animals. It is also said to mean 'a
nefarious soul, who is distanced from Allah (s.w.t.) and Truth'; all of
these meanings, in reality, can be observed to be turning back to one
common element.

It should be noted that Shaytan is a 'common noun' whereas Iblis is a
'proper noun'. In other words, every harmful, deviating and rebellious
entity - human or otherwise - is referred to as Shaytan. Iblis is the
name of that Shaytan, who deceived Adam and even presently, together
with his soldiers and forces, lies in ambush of the humans.

From the usage of this word in the Qur’an, it can also be inferred that
Shaytan is used to denote a harmful being - one who has deviated from
the right path and has embarked upon a mission of distressing others; an
entity that attempts to create division, discord and corruption, just as
we recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَنْ يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ وَ
الْبَغْضَاءَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Shaytan only desires to cause enmity and hatred to spring in
your midst.”***[^1]

The word يُرِيدُ is in the imperfect tense which denotes 'continuity',
indicating that this 'desire' is a continuous and perpetual desire of
the Shaytan.

Furthermore, we observe that in the Qur’an, the use of the term Shaytan
has not been restricted for a specific being; rather it has been used to
refer to wicked and corrupt humans too. The Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ كَذٌلِكَ جَعَلْنَا لِكُلِّ نَبِيٍّ عَدُوًّا شَيَاطِينَ الإِِنْسِ وَ
الْجِنِّنِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And thus did We make for every prophet an enemy, the Shaytans from
among men and jinn.”***[^2]

That Iblis has also been referred to as Shaytan is because of the
evilness and corruption that exists within him.

In addition to this, the word Shaytan has been employed to refer to
microbes too:

For example, the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَشْرَبُوا الْمَآءَ مِنْ ثُلْمَةِ الإِِنَاءِ وَ لاَ مِنْ
عُرْوَتِهِ فَإِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ يَقْعُدُ عَلَى الْعُرْوَةِ وَ
الثُّلْمَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not drink water from the broken portion of the vessel nor from the
portion of the handle, for surely, the Shaytan sits upon the handle and
the broken portion.”[^3]

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لاَ يُشْرَبُ مِنْ أُذُنِ الْكُوزِ وَ لاَ مِنْ كَسْرِهِ إِنْ كَانَ
فِيهِ فَإِنَّهُ مَشْرَبُ الشَّيَاطِينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“(Water) should not be drunk from the handle (side) of a jug and nor
from the broken portion of it, if present, for these are the
drinking-place of the 'Shaytans'.”[^4]

The Noble Prophet (S) has said: “Do not lengthen (the hair of) your
moustaches, for the Shaytan makes it a haven for himself and conceals
himself there!”[^5]

Thus, it becomes clear that one of the meanings of Shaytan is 'harmful
microbes'. Nevertheless, this does not mean that it possesses this
meaning on all occasions and in all instances. Rather, it means that
Shaytan has several meanings, one of the most obvious of them being
'Iblis and his assistants'; another being 'corrupt humans'; while at
times it is also employed to refer to 'harmful bacteria'.[^6]

[^1]: Suratul Maidah (5), Verse 91

[^2]: Suratul An'am (6), Verse 112

[^3]: al-Kafi, vol. 6, Kitab al-Ati'mah wa al-Ashribah, Chapter Bab
al-Awani.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 1, pg. 191


