8. What is the reality of the Jinn?
===================================

It can be deduced from the literal meaning of this word that the Jinn is
an entity that is invisible; numerous characteristics of this being are
mentioned in the Qur’an, such as:

1. It is an entity that has been created from the flames of fire, unlike
man, who has been created from earth:[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ خَلَقَ الْجَآنَّ مِنْ مَارِجٍ مِنْ نَارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. Possesses knowledge, perception, the faculty of logic, the power of
reasoning, and can distinguish between truth and falsehood (various
verses of Suratul Jinn).

3. Possesses (religious) obligations and responsibilities (verses of
Suratul Jinn and al-Waqi'ah).

4. Some of them are believers while others are disbelievers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنَّا مِنَّا الصَّالِحُونَ وَ مِنَّا دُونَ ذٌلِكَ‏…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There are among us some that are righteous, and some the
contrary…”***[^2]

5. They shall be resurrected:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَمَّا الْقَاسِطُونَ فَكَانُوا لِجَهَنَّمَ حَطَباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And as to the deviators, they are fuel of hell.”***[^3]

6. They initially possessed the power to penetrate into the skies,
eavesdrop and procure news but were later prohibited:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنَّا كُنَّا نَقْعُدُ مِنْهَا مَقَاعِدَ لِلسَّمْعِ فَمَنْ
يَسْتَمِعِ الآنَ يَجِدْ لَهُ شِهَاباً رَصَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that we used to sit in some of the sitting-places thereof to
steal a hearing, but, he who would (try to) listen now would find a
flame lying in wait for him.”***[^4]

7. They used to establish contact with some of the people and, by means
of the limited knowledge of the Unseen that they possessed, endeavoured
to misguide the people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنَّهُ كَانَ رِجَــالٌ مِنَ الإِِنْسِ يَعُوذُونَ بِرِجَالٍ مِنَ
الْجِنِّ فَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that persons from among men used to seek refuge with persons
from among jinn, so they increased them in wrongdoing.”***[^5]

8. From amongst them there are those who, like some humans, possess
great powers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ عِفْرِيتٌ مِنَ الْجِنِّ أَنَا آتِيكَ بِهِ قَبْلَ أَنْ تَقُومَ
مِنْ مَقَامِكَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“One audacious among the jinn said: I will bring it to you before you
rise up from your place; and most surely I am strong (and) trusty for
it.”***[^6]

9. They possess the power to perform some of the tasks that are required
by man:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِنَ الْجِنِّ مَنْ يَعْمَلُ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِ وَ
مَنْ يَزِغْ مِنْهُمْ عَنْ أَمْرِنَا نُذِقْهُ مِنْ عَذَابِ السَّعِيرِ
يَعْمَلُونَ لَهُ مَا يَشَآءُ مِنْ مَحَارِيبَ وَ تَمَاثِيلَ وَ جِفَانٍ
كَالْجَوَابِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And of the jinn there were those who worked before him by the
command of his Lord; and whoever turned aside from Our command from
among them, We made him taste of the punishment of burning. They made
for him what he pleased of fortresses and images, and bowls (large) as
watering-troughs and cooking-pots that will not move from their
place.”***[^7]

10. Their creation on the earth was prior to man's creation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْجَآنَّ خَلَقْنَاهُ مِنْ قَبْلُ‏ مِنْ نَّارِ السَّمُوْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the jinn We created before, of intensely hot fire.”***[^8]

In addition, it can be clearly inferred from the verses of the Noble
Qur’an that, contrary to what is popular amongst the common masses,
humans are a species superior to them. This can be concluded by the fact
that all the divine prophets had been chosen from the humans; moreover,
many jinn too had believed in the Noble Prophet (S) - who was a human -
and pledged allegiance to him. Additionally, the obligation upon the
Shaytan of prostrating before Adam at a time when he (the Shaytan),
according to the explicit statements of the Qur’an, had been of the
elders of the Jinn[^9], further reinforces this idea of superiority.

The discussion thus far has revolved around the aspects that can be
inferred about this invisible entity from the Noble Qur’an, which is
devoid of all superstitions and non-scientific issues. However, we do
know that the general and the unaware masses have concocted great
superstitions about this entity which neither conforms with logic nor
intellect, and consequently have imparted an irrational appearance to
this being such that whenever the word 'jinn' is uttered, a handful of
strange ideas immediately come to mind - entities possessing dreadful
appearances, who have horns and tails, are harmful, troublesome,
malicious and ill-mannered, who can set a house on fire by pouring a
cauldron of boiling water in one corner of the house! These are examples
of such fanciful and superstitious beliefs!

If our perspective of the existence of jinn is purified from such
superstitions, the main issue is totally acceptable for, there exists no
reasoning to restrict living entities to only those that can be seen by
us. On the contrary, scholars of natural sciences state: The entities
that man can perceive by means of his senses are marginal in comparison
to those that cannot be perceived by means of them.

Prior to the discovery of microscopic organisms, no one would have
believed that in one drop of water or blood, there existed hundreds of
thousands of living entities that man could not see.

The scientists also state: Our eyes can perceive a limited (range of)
colours and our ears can hear a limited (range of) sound waves; the
colours and sounds that cannot be perceived by means of our eyes and
ears are more numerous than those that can be perceived by them.

When the state of the world is such, why should the existence of a
species of living entities, whom we cannot perceive by means of our
senses, be so fantastic and astonishing? And why should we not accept it
when we have been informed of it by a truthful informer like the Noble
Prophet (S)?

In any event, on the one hand, the Qur’an has informed us of the
existence of the jinn possessing the aforementioned characteristics;
while on the other hand, there exists no rational proofs which deny the
existence of such an entity. Accordingly, we ought to accept their
existence but simultaneously disregard the inappropriate superstitions
of the general public in connection with these beings.

It is important to note that at times, the term jinn is used in a more
expansive meaning - one that tends to encompass a number of invisible
entities, irrespective of whether they possess intellect and perception
or not. In this expanded meaning of the word, even animals that are not
seen by the eyes, usually remaining hidden in their lairs, are included.

This is proved by a tradition of the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.)
wherein he says: “Allah (s.w.t.) has created the jinn in five kinds -
some are like the wind in the air (invisible), some are in the form of
snakes, some in the form of scorpions, some in the form of the insects
of the earth while some are like the humans and they shall be subjected
to Reckoning and punishment.”[^10]

In the light of the above tradition and its expansive meaning, numerous
problems encountered in narratives with respect to the jinn appear to be
solved.

For example, in some of the traditions of the Commander of the Faithful
(a.s.), we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَشْرَبُوا الْمَآءَ مِنْ ثُلْمَةِ الإِِنَاءِ وَ لاَ مِنْ
عُرْوَتِهِ فَإِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ يَقْعُدُ عَلَى الْعُرْوَةِ وَ
الثُّلْمَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not drink water from the broken portion of the vessel nor from the
portion of the handle, for surely, the Shaytan sits upon the handle and
the broken portion.”[^11]

In view of the fact that Shaytan is from the jinn, and knowing the fact
that the broken portion of the vessel and similarly its handle are
places of accumulation of numerous microbes, it does not appear too
far-fetched that jinn and Shaytan, in their expansive meanings, should
also include these entities too, in addition to possessing a specific
meaning, i.e. an entity, who possesses understanding, intelligence and
religious obligation.

And traditions in this regard are numerous.[^12] and [^13]

[^1]: Suratul Rahman (55), Verse 15

[^2]: Suratul Jinn (72), Verse 11

[^3]: Suratul Jinn (72), Verse 15

[^4]: Suratul Jinn (72), Verse 9

[^5]: Suratul Jinn (72), Verse 6

[^6]: Suratul Naml (27), Verse 39

[^7]: Surat Saba (34), Verses 12, 13

[^8]: Suratul Hijr (15), Verse 27

[^9]: Suratul Kahf (18), Verse 50

[^10]: Safinatul Bihar, vol. 1, pg. 186 (under جن)

[^11]: al-Kafi, vol. 6, pg. 385, Kitab al-At'imah wa al-Ashribah,
Chapter Bab al-Awani, no. 5.

[^12]: In vol. 1 of the book Awwalin Danishgah Wa Aakhirin Payam,
approximately 20 traditions have been complied in this regard.

[^13]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 25, pg. 154


