10. What is ‘Raj'at (the Return)? Is its occurrence possible?
=============================================================

*Raja't* is one of the popular Shi'ite beliefs and its explanation,
briefly, is as follows:  
 After the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) and on the threshold of
Resurrection, a group of the sincere mu'mineen and a group of the
immensely wicked disbelievers and rebellious individuals shall return to
this world. The first group shall subsequently advance several ranks
towards perfection whilst the second group would taste a severe
chastisement.

The late Sayyid Murtadha, one of the greatly distinguished scholars,
explains as follows: “After the reappearance of Hadhrat Mahdi (a.s.),
the Exalted Allah (s.w.t.) shall cause group of those, who had
previously departed from the world, to return to this world in order
that they may be partners in the reward and glory of assisting him
(a.s.) and in witnessing Allah's rule over the entire world; He shall
also cause the most obstinate enemies to return in order to extract
revenge from them.”

He then adds: “No intellectual person can ever claim that Allah (s.w.t.)
does not possess the power to cause this occurrence to happen and, since
this cannot be considered to be impossible, it is itself a proof of the
truthfulness of this issue. Nonetheless, our opponents reject this so
vehemently as if they regard it to be an event that is inconceivable.”

He then further adds: “The consensus of the Twelve-Imam Shi'ites proves
this belief, for there is none, from amongst them, who oppose it.”[^1]

Nevertheless, from the statements of some of the scholars and also from
the words of late Tabrisi in his book Majma'ul Bayan, it appears that a
minority from amongst the Shi'ites had opposed this belief, interpreting
Raj'at to mean the return of the rule and government of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) and not the return of the people and coming to life of the dead.
However, they are few in number and accordingly do not injure the
consensus.

There are indeed numerous aspects that need to be discussed which we
shall present here, in a few words, so as not to deviate from the
subject matter:

1. Without any doubt, for a group of dead individuals to come back to
life in this world is entirely possible, just as the coming to life of
all the humans on the Day of Judgment is entirely possible. Astonishment
over such an issue is akin to the disbelief exhibited by the pagan
polytheists over the issue of Resurrection, and mockery with respect to
this issue is analogous to their mockery. This is because the intellect
does not consider such an occurrence to be impossible; indeed the Power
of Allah (s.w.t.) is so extensive and all-embracing that for Him all
these issues are simple.

2. In the Noble Qur’an there are five instances of raj'at, occurring
with respect to past nations:

**A)** Regarding a prophet, who passed by a settlement which lay in
ruins while the bodies of its inhabitants lay scattered. He asked
himself as to how Allah (s.w.t.) would bring them to life after they
have died whereupon Allah (s.w.t.) made him to die for one hundred years
and then, bringing him to life, asked: “How long have you tarried? He
replied: A day or a part of it. He was told: No. A hundred years have
passed by you.”[^2]

Whether this prophet had been 'Uzayr or someone else does not make a
difference. The significant point is the explicit declaration of the
Qur’an about life after death in this world itself.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَاتَهُ اللٌّهُ مِائَةَ عامٍ ثُمَّ بَعَثَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So Allah made him die for a hundred years, then raised him to
life.”***

**B)** In verse 243 of Suratul Baqarah, the Qur’an speaks about a group
of individuals, who, out of fear of death (and according to some
commentators, under the pretext of plague had refrained from
participating in the jihad) had stepped out of their houses, whereupon
Allah (s.w.t.) commanded them to die and then raised them to life again.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ لَهُمُ اللٌّهُ مُوتُوا ثُمَّ أَحْـيَاهُمْ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah said to them: 'Die': Then He restored them to life.”***

Some commentators, who have been unable to digest the occurrence of such
an unusual incident, have regarded it as just a presentation of an
example. However, it is plain that such interpretations, vis-à-vis the
apparent meaning and the explicit statements of the verse in connection
with the occurrence of this issue, are unacceptable.

**C)** In verses 55 and 56 of Suratul Baqarah, which are in connection
with the tribe of Bani Isra’il, we read that a group from amongst them,
desiring to see Allah (s.w.t.), were overcome by a deadly lightning and
died, after which, Allah (s.w.t.) brought them back to life in order
that they may thank Him for His bounties.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَاكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَوْتِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then We raised you up after your death that you may give thanks.”***

**D)** Verse 110 of Suratul Maidah, while enumerating the miracles of
Prophet 'Isa (a.s.), states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِذْ تُخْرِجُ الْمَوْتى‏ بِإِذْنِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when you brought forth the dead by My permission.”***

This expression indicates that 'Isa (a.s.) made use of this miracle
(bringing the dead to life) of his; moreover, the imperfect tense of the
word تَخرُجُ indicates repetition, which itself can be regarded as a
kind of Raj'at (for those whom he (a.s.) brought back to life).

**E)** And finally, in verse 73 of Suratul Baqarah, when there arose a
dispute and disagreement amongst the Bani Isra’il with respect to
unearthing the killer of a murdered person, the Qur’an says that they
were ordered to sacrifice a cow possessing certain specific features,
and to tap a part of its body upon the body of the murdered person in
order that the person may return to life (and disclose the name of his
murderer thereby putting an end to the dispute)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُلْنَا اضْرِبُوهُ بِبَعْضِهَا كَذٌلِكَ يُحْيِ اللٌّهُ الْمَوْتى‏ وَ
يُرِيكُمْ آيَاتِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So We said: Strike the (dead body) with part of the (sacrificed
cow), thus Allah brings the dead to life, and He shows you His signs so
that you may understand.”***

Apart from these five instances, there are other occasions which are
observed in the Noble Qur’an - such as the story of the People of the
Cave which is also something similar to raj'at, and the story of the
four birds of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) that are brought back to life after
being sacrificed in order to demonstrate for him the possibility of the
resurrection of man - an incident, which is very significant when
discussing raj'at.

Accordingly, how is it possible that a person accepts the Noble Qur’an
as a Divine book and, despite all these clear verses, suntil denies the
possibility of raj'at? Essentially, is raj'at something other than a
return to life after death?

Can raj'at not be regarded as a small example of Resurrection, in this
small world? How can one, who accepts Resurrection in that extensive
scale, reject the issue of raj'at? Or ridicule its concept? Or speak
like Ahmad Amin Misri, who, in his book Fajrul Islam, writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
األْيَهُوْدِيَّةُ ظَهَرَتْ بِالتَّشَيُّعِ بِالْقَوْلِ بِالرَّجْعَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Another Judaism has manifested in Shi'ism due to the concept of
raj'at!”[^3]

Honestly, what difference lies between this statement of Ahmad Amin and
the disavowal of physical resurrection by the pagan Arabs?

3. What we have stated up to this point has proved the possibility of
the occurrence of raj'at; and its occurrence is emphasized by numerous
traditions which have been narrated from the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.), and since it is beyond the scope of our discussion to present
them all, it should suffice for us to quote the statistics compiled by
the late 'Allamah Majlisi, who says:

How is it possible that a person believes in the truthfulness of the
words of the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) but (at the same time)
refuses to accept the 'successively transmitted' traditions in
connection with raj'at - explicit traditions, which are almost two
hundred in number and transmitted by forty odd trustworthy transmitters
and eminent scholars in more than fifty books! If these traditions are
not 'successively transmitted', then which tradition can be such?[^4]
and [^5]

[^1]: Safinatul Bihar, vol. 1, pg. 511 (under رجع)

[^2]: Suratul Baqarah (2), Verse 259

[^3]: 'Aqaidul Imamiyyah of Sheikh Muhammad Ridha Mudhaffar, pg. 71

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 53, pg. 122

[^5]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 15, pg. 555


