12. What is the reality of Tawakkul and what is its philosophy?
===============================================================

The word tawakkul[^1] has been derived from وکالت (wakalat), meaning
'taking for oneself a representative', and a good representative
generally possesses the following four characteristics: Awareness,
Trustworthiness, Strength and Sympathy.

It might not appear necessary to mention that one selects a barrister
for a task when the individual lacks the strength to defend himself. He
therefore seeks the strength of another person and uses his assistance
to solve his personal problem.

Accordingly tawakkul means that man, in the face of the difficulties of
life, enmity and troubles of opponents, the tangles of existence which
hinder his journey towards his objectives, and in instances wherein he
finds himself unable to untie the knots, takes Allah (s.w.t.) as his
support but, at the same time, does not stop his own efforts and
endeavours. Rather, in those instances too, wherein he possesses the
strength to perform the work, he looks upon Allah (s.w.t.) as the
fundamental influencing force. This is because in the eyes of a (true)
monotheist, He is the source of all strength and power.

Contrary to the attribute of 'relying on Allah (s.w.t.) ' is 'relying on
other than Him' - meaning living dependently upon someone else and not
possessing self independence.

Scholars of ethics state: Tawakkul is the direct outcome of 'Unity of
Divine acts'; this is because, as we have mentioned previously, in the
eyes of a monotheist every motion, endeavour, movement and occurrence
that takes place in this world eventually finds a connection with the
Primary Cause of this world i.e. Allah (s.w.t.); consequently, a
monotheist regards every strength and power to originate from Him.

The Philosophy of 'Tawakkul'
----------------------------

In the light of our previous statements, it can be inferred that:

Firstly: Relying on Allah (s.w.t.) - the interminable Source of power
and strength - causes man to become more resilient in the face of the
troubles and adversities of life. An example of this is when the Muslims
suffered a severe blow in the battle of Uhud and the enemies, after
having abandoned the battlefield, decided to return once again midway
from their journey (back home) with the aim of inflicting a final blow
upon the Muslims.

The Qur’an states that when the Muslims were informed of this, those who
possessed firm faith were untouched by fright in this extremely
dangerous moment when they had lost most of their active forces. On the
contrary, placing their reliance on Allah (s.w.t.) and seeking
assistance from the power of faith, they increased themselves in
firmness and resistance. As a result the victorious enemies, being
informed of this, hastily retraced their advance.[^2]

Examples of such resistance, under the light of tawakkul, are observed
in numerous verses, amongst them being verse 122 of Surat Ale 'Imran, in
which the Qur’an says that reliance on Allah (s.w.t.) prevented the two
groups of soldiers from being overcome with lassitude, in the
battlefield.

In verse 12 of Surat Ibrahim it has been mentioned that tawakkul should
be accompanied by patience in the face of the attacks of the enemy.

In verse 159 of Surat Ale 'Imran it has been ordered that when intending
to perform an important task, initially consultation should take place;
this should be followed up by a firm decision after which, one should
place one's reliance on Allah (s.w.t.) (and proceed in accordance with
the decision taken).

The Qur’an even says that only those, who possess faith and tawakkul,
shall be able to exhibit resistance vis-à-vis satanic whisperings and
not be influenced by them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلـى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَ عَلـى‏
رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely he has no authority over those who believe and rely on their
Lord.”***[^3]

From the entire collection of these verses it can be concluded that
tawakkul means that man, in the face of problems, does not experience a
feeling of weakness and inferiority, but instead considers himself
victorious by relying on the infinite power of Allah (s.w.t.). Thus,
tawakkul is a hope-inspiring, energy-insuntiling and reinforcing factor
which increases perseverance and resistance.

If the concept of tawakkul meant taking to a corner and sitting idle, it
would be meaningless to attribute it to the soldiers and the likes of
them.

And if some believe that resorting to various means and natural factors
is not in conformity with the spirit of tawakkul, they are mistaken.
This is because endeavouring to separate the effects of natural causes
from the Will of Allah (s.w.t.) is a kind of polytheism. But is it not a
fact that whatever the natural causes possess is from Him alone? And is
it not that everything is in accordance with His Will and command? Yes,
if we were to regard the causes and means to be an independent apparatus
as opposed to Allah's Will, this would be incompatible with the spirit
of tawakkul.

How is it possible to interpret tawakkul in this manner when the Noble
Prophet (S), the leader of those who exhibited tawakkul, had never been
heedless of utilizing every opportunity, appropriate plan and other
exterior means for furthering his aims and objectives; all these only go
to prove that the meaning of tawakkul does not have that negative
dimension attached to it at all.

Secondly: Relying on Allah (s.w.t.) delivers man from being dependent
(on others) - a state, which is the source of humiliation - and imparts
freedom and self-confidence to him.

At this point we present some of the traditions in connection with
tawakkul for the purpose of illuminating its actual meaning.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْغِـنـى وَ الْعِزَّ يَجُولاَنِ فَإِذَا ظَفِرَا بِمَوْضِعِ
التَّوَكُّلِ أَوْطَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, independence and honour are in (a state of) travel and when
they come to the place of 'tawakkul' they take up residence there.”[^4]

In this tradition, tawakkul has been presented as being the actual
dwelling place of independence and honour.

It has been narrated that the Noble Prophet (S) said: I asked Jibrail:
“What is 'tawakkul'?” He replied: “Cognizance (of the fact) that the
creation (of Allah) can neither cause harm nor yield benefit; neither
can it grant nor withhold (a bounty); (one must) sever all expectations
from the creation (of Allah). When a person becomes such, he shall never
work for anyone other than Allah (s.w.t.) and shall never hope and
expect from anyone other than Him, and this is the reality of
'tawakkul'.[^5]

Once someone questioned Imam 'Ali ibne Musa al-Ridha (a.s.)[^6]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا حَدُّ التَّوَكُّلِ؟ فَقَالَ أَنْ لاَ تَخَافَ مَعَ اللٌّهِ أَحَداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“What is the extent of 'tawakkul'? He (a.s.) replied: That you do not
fear anyone once you have relied on Allah!” [^7] and [^8]

[^1]: Relying on Allah (s.w.t.) (Tr.)

[^2]: Surat Ale 'Imran (3), Verse 173

[^3]: Suratul Nahl (16), Verse 99

[^4]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, Chapter al-Tafwidh IlAllah (s.w.t.) Wa
al-Tawakkul 'Alaihi, no. 3

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 15, Part 2 Fi al-Akhlaq, pg. 14 (Old
Publication)

[^6]: Safinatul Bihar, vol. 2, pg. 682

[^7]: For more explanations in connection 'tawakkul' and other such
issues, refer the book Angizah-e-Paidaish-e-Madhhab.

[^8]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 10, pg. 295


