13. What is the philosophy behind Du'a and Invocations?
=======================================================

Those, who have not comprehended the reality of du'a, and its educative
and psychological effects, have levelled various objections against it:

At times they say: Du'a brings about a state of narcosis within people
for, instead of exhorting them towards effort and utilization of
advanced means, it directs them towards supplications and teaches them
that they should pray, rather than exert themselves!

And occasionally they say: Basically, is supplicating not interference
in Allah's (s.w.t.) work? Allah (s.w.t.) performs whatever He deems to
be the best; He loves us and knows better than us what is best for us
and so, why should we seek things from Him at times as we please?

At other times they say: Apart from all these, does du'a not conflict
with the attribute of ridha[^1] and taslim[^2]?

Those who propound these objections are oblivious of the psychological,
social, educative and spiritual effects of supplication. This is because
man, in order to strengthen his determination, and eliminate his
distresses, is occasionally in need of a support, and it is the du'a
that lights up the lamp of hope within him.

People, who neglect du'a and supplication, shall eventually face
undesirable social and psychological effects in the long run.

In the words of a well-known psychologist: “Absence of invocations
amongst a nation is equivalent to the collapse of that nation! A society
that has strangulated within itself the need for invocations is usually
not safeguarded from degradation and degeneration. Of course, it should
not be forgotten that invocating only in the mornings while passing the
entire day akin to barbarians, is futile; supplications ought to be
performed continuously and in every state, and care should be taken to
ensure that its profound influence upon man is not lost.”[^3]

Those, who claim that du'a possesses a narcotic effect, have failed to
comprehend the meaning of du'a. Supplicating to Allah (s.w.t.) does not
mean that we withdraw ourselves from all the natural means that lie at
our disposal and instead, raise our hands and set about praying; rather,
it means that after utilizing all the means available before us to the
best of our abilities and if we fall short, we resort to du'a and, by
turning towards and leaning on Allah (s.w.t.), we invigorate within
ourselves the spirit of hope, seeking succour from the unfailing
assistance of the Great Origin.

Accordingly du'a is confined to inadequacies and dead-ends, and not a
means that acts as a substitute for natural factors.

Although invocations induce serenity, at the same time, they also
stimulate a kind of amazement and internal expansion with respect to
cerebral activities, and occasionally also inspire a spirit of
courageousness and heroism within man. Invocations make manifest our
excellences with unique indications - pure look, composed behaviour,
internal expansion and happiness, firm conviction, ability to accept
guidance and confront the adversities.

These are the things that indicate upon the existence of a concealed
treasure deep within us, and by means of this strength, even those who
are backward and less capable can better utilize their mental and
ethical abilities, and derive greater benefits. However, it is rather
unfortunate that in our present world, those who can comprehend (the
concept of) supplication correctly are very few indeed.[^4]

From what we have stated above, the answer to the objection that the
concept of du'a is inconsistent with ridha and taslim also becomes
clear. This is because du'a, as has been explained above, is a kind of
quest for the ability to acquire a greater share of the infinite grace
and blessings of Allah (s.w.t.).

In other words man, by means of du'a, develops within himself a great
worthiness for acquiring increased blessings of Allah (s.w.t.), and it
is self-evident that exertion towards perfection is, in reality, taslim
in the face of the laws of creation and not something in contrast to it.

Additionally, du'a is a kind of worship, (and an exhibition of)
servitude, and by means of it man achieves a fresh attentiveness towards
Allah (s.w.t.). Therefore, just as all the other acts of worship possess
an educative influence, du'a too possesses such an influence.

And when they say that du'a is interference in Allah's (s.w.t.) work!
Allah (s.w.t.) does whatever is advisable and prudent, they have
overlooked the fact that distribution of Allah's (s.w.t.) bounties is
dictated by capability - the greater the capacity, the greater shall be
the share of the Divine gifts that shall come a person's way.

And it is for this reason that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عِندَ اللٌّهِ مَنْزِلَةً لاَ تُـنَالُ إِِلاَّ بِمَسْأَلَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah (s.w.t.) has ordained ranks, which cannot be achieved except by
means of supplication.”[^5]

A scholar has stated: “When we supplicate, we link and associate
ourselves to the infinite Power, Who has interconnected the entire
universe.”[^6]

He also states: “Today, the most recent science, i.e. psychiatry,
teaches the same things that the prophets used to teach. Why? The reason
being that psychiatrists have discovered that du'a, prayers and
possessing a firm conviction with respect to religion eliminates
worries, anxieties, agitations and fear - factors that are cause for
more than half of our inconveniences.”[^7] and [^8]

[^1]: Satisfaction and pleasure over divine decree. (Tr.)

[^2]: Submission to Allah (s.w.t.). (Tr.)

[^3]: Niyayish - a Persian translation of a book written by the
well-known doctor and psychologist Alexis Carrol.

[^4]: As written by Alexis Carrol.

[^5]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 338, Chapter Fadhl al-Du'a Wa al-Haththu
'Alaihi, no. 3

[^6]: Aain-e-Zindagi, pg. 156

[^7]: Ibid., pg. 152

[^8]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 1, pg. 639


