15. What is Islam’s perspective with regards to Jabr (compulsion) and Ikhtiyar (free-choice)?
=============================================================================================

This problem is an ancient issue that had been the bone of contention of
scholars; a group advocating freedom of will while another supporting
compulsion and each of them presenting proofs to substantiate their
viewpoints.

But interestingly, in practice, both these groups have formally
recognized and accepted the notion of choice and freedom of will. In
other words all these debates are only within the periphery of
theoretical discussion and not in practice, clearly revealing that the
concept of freedom of will is inherent to every person. And were it not
for the various insinuations and whisperings, everybody would have
supported this concept.

This general conscience and universal innate - one of the most lucid of
all the proofs for ikhtiyar (freedom of choice) - manifests itself in
various forms in man's life; if man considered himself to be compelled
in the performance of his deeds and to not possess any choice, why is it
that: At times, as a result of performance or non-performance of an act,
man experiences a sense of regret, and resolves to utilize his
experience in the future. This state of regret occurs numerously for
those who advocate the concept of jabr (compulsion); if there is no
ikhtiyar, why this rue and remorse?

Everyone rebukes and censures the evil-doers; if there is jabr, why
should they be rebuked in such a manner?

Those who do good deeds are praised and commended?  
 Everyone strives to educate their children in order that they become
successful and fortunate; if everyone is compelled (in the performance
of his deeds); what is the point in educating them?  
 All the scholars, without exception, exert themselves for the purpose
of raising the standard of ethics in society?  
 Man expresses repentance over his blunders; if the concept of jabr is
accepted, repentance becomes meaningless.

Man rues his shortcomings; why?

Universally, the criminals are subjected to trials and are exposed to
intense interrogation; are these acts that are beyond one's choice and
free-will and need no interrogation and trials?

All over the world and within all communities - irrespective of whether
they are materialists or Allah-worshippers - punishments have been
prescribed for the criminals. But are these punishments for acts that
they were compelled to perform?!

When someone transgresses upon their interests, even the advocates of
the doctrine of jabr clamour for justice and, considering him to be
guilty, drag him to the courts of law!

In short, if man truly had no choice of his own, what could repentance
possibly mean? Why then the reproach and censure? Can one, whose hands
and feet tremble involuntarily, be rebuked and criticized?

Why are those, who perform good acts, praised and encouraged? But do
they possess choice of their own that they shall continue their good
acts as a result of this encouragement?

Basically, with the acknowledgement of the influence of education, the
concept of jabr breaks down. In addition, issues related to ethics,
without acknowledging the concept of freedom of will, become totally
meaningless.

If we are compelled in our acts, what is the meaning of repentance? Why
should one yearn and rue? Placing a compelled person on trial is one of
the most oppressive of acts, and punishing him is worse.

All these indicate that the concept of freedom of will is inherent to
all humans, and in accordance with the conscience of the entire mankind.
It is not just the general public, but even the learned class, the
philosophers and the proponents of jabr too, in practice, accept
ikhtiyar.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اأَلْجَبَرِرِيُّونَ اإِخْتِيَارِِيُّيُونَ مِنْ حَيْثُ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Those, who profess the doctrine of 'jabr' are, (in practice) the
proponents of the doctrine of 'ikhtiyar', but only they realize it not.”

It is interesting to note that the Noble Qur’an has repeatedly
emphasized this issue too. In verse 39 of Suratul Naba it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ شَآءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلـى‏ رَبِّهِ مَآباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So whoever desires may take refuge with his Lord.”***

In other verses too great emphasis has been laid upon man's will, and
since mentioning all of them would only serve to prolong the discussion,
we shall content ourselves by presenting only two verses below:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِراً وَ إِمَّا كَفُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have shown him the way: he may be thankful or
unthankful.”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ شَاءَ فَلْيُؤْمِنْ وَ مَنْ شَآءَ فَلْيَكْفُرْ إِنَّا
أَعْتَدْنَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ نَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So let him who please believe, and let him who please disbelieve;
surely We have prepared for the iniquitous a fire.”***[^2]

The discussion regarding this issue is a very protracted one with
numerous books and articles having been written in this regard. What has
been mentioned has just been a superficial glance at the issue from the
standpoint of the conscience and the Noble Qur’an. We continue our
discussion by mentioning one important point:

Support for the issue of jabr, on the part of a group of people, did not
arise only due to philosophical problems; rather, important
psychological and social factors undoubtedly contributed to the birth
and continuation of this belief.

Many of those, who have accepted the belief of jabr, predestination or
'qadha and qadr' (fate and destiny, but with the attribute of compulsion
attached to them), have done so in order to escape the burden of
responsibilities or to cover up their failures, which have been a
consequence of their own shortcomings and negligence, or to provide for
themselves a covering for their wild carnal desires (They would state:
Allah (s.w.t.) knew from pre-eternity that we would consume wine; and we
consume wine now in order that Allah's (s.w.t.) knowledge does not
become ignorance!)

At times the colonialist powers, in order to suppress the resistance of
the people and put out the flames of anger of the nations, would make
themselves dominant over the others by making use of this doctrine. They
used to say: 'Your fate, from the very beginning, had been ordained to
be this; where is there any alternative except submission and happiness
(over our dominance)?

By accepting this doctrine all the deeds of the criminals and the sins
of the sinners would become justified and there would be no difference
between an offender and an obedient person.[^3]  
 The verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا رَبُّكَ بِظَلاَّمٍ لِلْعَبِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your Lord is not in the least unjust to the servants”***[^4]

is a clear proof with regards to the issue of ikhtiyar and freedom of
will, and is illustrative of this reality that Allah (s.w.t.) neither
punishes anyone inexplicably nor does He increase the punishment of
anyone unwarrantedly. His work is absolute justice; this is so since
oppression stems from shortcomings, deficiencies, ignorance, unawareness
or carnal desires, and His Holy Essence is free from all of these.

Qur’an, in its manifest verses, simultaneous to pronouncing the doctrine
of jabr - which is a source of dissemination of wickedness, an approval
for various kinds of evils, and a tool for the rejection of every kind
of obligation and responsibility - as being incorrect, considers each
person to be answerable for his own deeds and is of the view that the
consequences of every person's deeds would be directed towards that
person himself.

And hence we read in a tradition that one of companions Imam 'Ali ibne
Musa al-Ridha (a.s.) asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ يَجْبُرُ اللٌّهُ عِبَادَهُ عَلى الْـمَعَاصِي؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Does Allah (s.w.t.) compel His servants to commit sins?”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ: بَلْ يُخَيِّرُهُمْ وَ يُـمَهِّلُهُمْ حَتَّـى يَتُوبُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whereupon he (a.s.) replied: “No. Rather, he gives them the choice and
respites them until they repent.”  
 The companion persisted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَلْ يُكَلِّفُ عِبَادَهُ مَا لاَ يَطِيقُونَ‏؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Does He place upon them obligations that are beyond their ability to
perform?”  
 The Imam (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَيْفَ يَفْعَلُ ذٌلِكَ وَ هُوَ يَقُولُ: وَ مَا رَبُّكَ بِظَلاَّمٍ
لِلْعَبِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“How can He do such a thing when He Himself has said (in the Qur’an)
'And your Lord is not in the least unjust to the servants?'”

The Imam (a.s.) then adds: My father Musa ibne Ja'far (a.s.) narrates
from his father Ja'far ibne Muhammad (a.s.) that: “One, who is of the
belief that Allah (s.w.t.) compels His servants into committing sins or
places upon them obligations that are beyond their ability (to perform),
do not eat the meat of the animal slaughtered by such a person, do not
accept his testimony, do not offer prayers behind him and do not give
him anything from the zakat! (In short, do not apply the laws of Islam
to him).[^5]

The above tradition implicitly alludes to this subtle point that the
doctrine of jabr originates from the concept of 'obligation that cannot
be performed'; this is because if, on the one hand, man is compelled
into committing sins while on the other hand, he is prohibited from it,
this becomes a clear case of placing an obligation that cannot to be
performed.[^6]

In verse 29 of Suratul Insan, we recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هٌذِهِ تَذْكِرَةٌ فَمَنْ شَآءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلـى‏ رَبِّهِ سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely this is a reminder, so whoever pleases takes to his Lord a
way.”***

And since it was possible that narrow-minded individuals might have
interpreted the above expression to mean absolute and unqualified
tafwidh (entrusting to Allah), the next verse goes on to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا تَشَآؤُوْنَ إِلاَّ أَنْ يَشَآءَ اللٌّهُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And you do not please except that Allah please.”

And finally says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ كَانَ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely Allah is Knowing, Wise.”

And this, in reality, is establishing the well-known belief of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلأَمْرُ بَيْنَ الأَمْرَينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The (actual) issue is that which lies between the two (extreme) issues
of total compulsion and total freedom.”

On the one hand it says: “Allah (s.w.t.) has shown the way and selecting
it is upon you. On the other hand it adds: Your selection is dependent
upon the Will of Allah (s.w.t.). This means that you do not possess
absolute freedom and independence; rather, your strength, power and
freedom of will are entirely from Allah (s.w.t.) and by His Will and
permission; the moment He desires, He can take away this strength and
freedom from you.”

As such, neither is it tafwidh and unqualified entrusting, nor is it
compulsion; rather, it is a subtle reality that lies between these two.
In other words it is a kind of freedom, which is related to Allah's
(s.w.t.) Will such that He can take it away as and when He desires so
that the people can carry the burden of responsibility - which is
actually the secret of their achieving perfection - upon their
shoulders, while at the same time, not envisage themselves as being
independent of Allah (s.w.t.).

In short, this expression is for the purpose that the people do not
regard themselves as being independent of the guidance, support, grace
and blessings of Allah (s.w.t.) but, during decision-making, entrust
themselves to Him and place themselves under His support,.

It thus becomes clear that the reason some of the commentators, who
advocate the doctrine of jabr - like Fakhr Razi - have adhered to this
verse is due to the preconceived views which they had harboured in
connection with the issue. Fakhr Razi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اعْلَمْ إِنَّ هَذِهِ الْآيَةَ مِنْ جُمْلَةِ الآيَاتِ الَّتِيْ
تَلاَطَمَتْ فِيْهَا أَمْوَاجُ الْجَبْرِ وَ الْقَدْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do know that this verse is one of the verses which indicate upon 'jabr'
and predestination!”[^7]

Yes, if we were to extricate this verse from the verses previous to it,
there would be room for this delusion; however, in view of the fact that
in one verse the effect of ikhtiyar has been mentioned while in the
other verse the effect of Allah's Will, the issue of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلأَمْرُ بَيْنَ الأَمْرَينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

is quite plainly established.

Incredibly, the advocates of tafwidh cling on to that very verse, which
speaks of total freedom of choice whereas the proponents of jabr adhere
to that very verse, which speaks only of jabr - each of them wanting to
justify their preconceived opinions by means of the respective verses.
However, the correct comprehension of Allah's (s.w.t.) speech (or any
other speech for that matter) demands that all the verses be placed
alongside each other and then, without prejudices and prejudgments, the
judgment should take place.

It is likely that the last part of the verse which states….

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ كَانَ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely Allah (s.w.t.) s Knowing, Wise.”

also alludes to this meaning. This is because the Knowledge and Wisdom
of Allah (s.w.t.) necessitate that the people be left free in journeying
the path towards perfection; for if it were not so, the perfection that
is imposed would not be perfection at all. Besides, His knowledge and
wisdom does not permit Him to compel some into performing good deeds and
others into committing evil acts, and later reward the first group and
punish the second.[^8]

[^1]: Suratul Insan (76), Verse 3

[^2]: Suratul Kahf (18), Verse 29

[^3]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 26, pg. 64

[^4]: Suratul Fussilat (41), Verse 46

[^5]: 'Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha, as quoted in Tafsir Nurul Thaqalain, vol.
4, pg. 555

[^6]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 20, pg. 308

[^7]: Commentary of Fakhr Razi, vol. 30, pg. 262

[^8]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 25, pg. 385


