18. What is the Reality of Dreams?
==================================

It is necessary that we discuss, in a concise manner, the various
opinions that have been propounded in connection with this subject:

There have been numerous interpretations about the reality of the dreams
which can be categorized into two categories:

1. Materialistic Interpretation  
 2. Spiritual Interpretation

The materialists say there could be several causes of dreams:  
 It is possible that dreams are a direct consequence of the daily acts
of man; i.e. whatever has transpired with man over past days becomes
embodied for him in his thoughts, whilst he sleeps.

Possibly, a series of unfulfilled desires become a reason for witnessing
dreams - a thirsty person observes water in his dreams, and a person
awaiting someone, who has gone on a journey, dreams that he has arrived.
(From ancient times, it has been said that a camel witnesses cottonseed
in its dreams!)

It is likely that fear of something causes man to dream about it; it has
been repeatedly observed that those who possess fear of thieves witness
them in their dreams.

Freud and the followers of his ideology have presented another material
explanation for dreams:

In the course of a detailed introduction they define dreams as being the
gratification of repressed tendencies which, with alterations, creep
into the arena of self-consciousness, to deceive the “I” within man.

Explanation: After accepting the fact that the human mind is comprised
of two parts: The self-conscious part (that, which is associated with
the day-to-day thoughts, voluntary knowledge and the freedom of choice
of man) and the sub-conscious part (that, which is concealed within the
inner-self as an unfulfilled tendency and inclination), they go on to
state: It frequently happens that in the state of sleep, when the
'self-conscious' apparatus has shut down, the inclinations and
tendencies which we have been unable to gratify due to certain reasons
and which have accumulated in our inner-self turn to the sub-conscious
in order to achieve a kind of fictitious and imaginary gratification.

At times this is reflected without any change (like an aficionado, who
witnesses his beloved, whom he has lost, in his dreams), while at other
times there occurs a change in form which is reflected in appropriate
appearances, in which case there arises the need for interpretation (of
the dreams).

Accordingly, dreams are always associated with the past and never
informative of the future. It can only be a useful for reading the
unconscious self, and it is for this reason that the dreams of patients
are utilized for the treatment of psychological disorders that rely on
exposing the unconscious mind.

Some of the experts of the field of nutrition believe that there exists
a relationship between 'dreams' and 'the nutritional need of the body',
and are of the opinion that if, for example, a person happens to witness
blood trickling from his gums in his dreams, it means that the quantity
of ascorbic acid in his body has diminished! And if he dreams that his
hair have turned white, it can be inferred that he suffers from an
inadequacy of vitamin B!!

However, spiritual philosophers offer a different explanation for the
occurrence of dreams. They state that dreams are of several kinds:

- Dreams that are related to the bygones, inclinations and desires - and
these constitute a major portion of man's dreams.

- Dreams that are distressing and incoherent; these are an outcome of
delusion and imagination (although it is possible that they could
possess psychological reasons)

- Dreams that are related to the future and provide information in
connection with it.

Undoubtedly, dreams that are related to the past and the embodiment of
the scenarios that man has seen in the course of his life do not possess
any particular interpretation. Similarly, distressing dreams -
technically referred to as أََضْغاَثُ أََحْلاَم - which are an outcome
of disturbing thoughts and are similar to the thoughts that manifest
themselves for man in the state of delirium, too cannot possess any
particular interpretation in connection with the future issues of life.

However, psychologists and psychoanalysts utilize them and consider them
to be a door for the comprehension of the human unconscious self and a
key for the treatment of psychological disorders. As such,
interpretation of these dreams is used for the purpose of uncovering the
mysteries of the mind and the origins of diseases, and not for revealing
future happenings of life.

As for the dreams that are related to the future, they too are of two
kinds: One kind consisting of dreams that are plain, clear and explicit,
and which do not require any interpretation whatsoever; and amazingly
enough, at times, materializing exactly as witnessed either in the near
or distant future - without the slightest of differences.

The second kind are those dreams which prophesize future events but, due
to the influence of certain mental and spiritual factors, have undergone
a change of form and hence need to be interpreted.

There are so many instances for each of these dreams that the existence
of all of them cannot be denied. Not only have they been mentioned in
religious sources and books of history, but these have also been noticed
in our own lives and the lives of those who are known to us, in a
measure that prevents us from considering them to be mere
coincidence.[^1]

[^1]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 9, pg. 312


