20. Does ‘Injury by an Evil Eye’ Possess any Reality?
=====================================================

In verse 51 of Suratul Qalam, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنْ يَكَادُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَيُزْلِقُونَكَ بِأَبْصَارِهِمْ
لَمَّا سَمِعُوا الذِّكْرَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who disbelieve would almost smite you with their eyes when
they hear the reminder…”***

In view of the above verse the question that arises is: Does injury by
means of an evil eye possess any reality?

Many people are of the belief that some kinds of eyes possess a peculiar
influence such that if they happen to look at something in wonder, they
destroy it or break it, and if they happen to look at a person, they can
make him sick or (even) insane.

According to the intellect, this is not something which is impossible.
Many of today's scientists believe that concealed in some eyes lies a
special magnetic force which possesses great utility, such that it can
even be developed by means of training and exercise; the magnetic sleep
is induced by means of this very magnetic force of the eyes.

In a world wherein x-rays are able to perform tasks, the like of which
even the most destructive of weapons are unable to perform,
acknowledging the presence of a force in certain eyes that is capable of
influencing someone by means of some special waves should not appear to
be fantastic.

It has been widely reported that people have personally witnessed
individuals, possessing this mysterious power of the eyes, to have
incapacitated humans, animals and things by injuring them by means of
'evil eye'.

Thus, not only should one not insist on rejecting such issues but
instead acknowledge the possibility of their occurrence - scientifically
and intellectually.

In the Islamic traditions too, various expressions meet the eye which,
to a certain extent, corroborate the existence of such an issue.

In a tradition we read that Asma Bint 'Umays once said to the Noble
Prophet (S): “At times, some people inflict injury to the children of
Ja'far by means of 'evil eyes'. Should I procure a charm for them?”
(Charm means prayers, which people keep in their possessions to protect
themselves from 'evil eyes'; this is also referred to as ta'widh).

The Noble Prophet (S) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ كَانَ شَيْ‏ءٌ يَسْبِقُ الْقَدْرِ لَسَبَقَهُ الْعَيْنَ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Yes (there is no harm in it). Had there been something that could have
superseded Divine fate and destiny, it should have been 'evil eye!'”[^1]

In another tradition it has been reported that the Commander of the
Faithful (a.s.) said: The Noble Prophet (S) secured a charm for Imam
Hasan and Imam Husayn (a.s.) and recited the following supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُعِيذُكُمَا بِكَلِمَاتِ اللٌّهِ التَّامَّةِاتِ وَ أَسْمَائِهِ
الْحُسْنَى كُلِّهَا عَامَّةً مِنْ شَرِّ السَّامَّةِ وَ الْهَامَّةِ وَ
مِنْ شَرِّ كُلِّ عَيْنٍ لاَمَّةٍ وَ مِنْ شَرِّ حَاسِدٍ إِذَا حَسَدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I place you in the refuge of all of the Perfect Words and the Best
Names of Allah (s.w.t.) from death, harmful animals, evil eye and from
the evil of the envious when he envies.”

Then turning to us, he (S) said: “Likewise Prophet Ibrahim did the charm
for Isma'il and Ishaq.”[^2]

In Nahjul Balaghah we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْعَيْنُ حَقٌّ وَ الرُّقَـى حَقٌ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Injury by the evil eye is true and resorting to prayers to ward away
its evils is true too.”[^3] and [^4]

[^1]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. 10, pg. 341

[^2]: Tafsir Nurul Thaqalain, vol. 5, pg. 400

[^3]: Nahjul Balagha, Short Sayings 400. This tradition has also been
narrated as: العين حق in Sahih Bukhari, vol. 7, pg. 171 in the chapter
العين حق. In the book al-Mu'jam al-Mufahhras Li-Alfadh al-Hadith
al-Nabawi, (vol. 4, pg. 451) this same meaning has been reported from
various sources.

[^4]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 24, pg. 426


