24. Were all the Companions of the Noble Prophet (S) Upright and Righteous?
===========================================================================

Some of the Sunni brothers, due to the respect and importance attached
to the 'first of the Muhajirs (Emigrants)' by the Noble Qur’an, have
sought to infer that they had not committed any wrongdoing until the end
of their lives and so, without exception, all of them ought to be looked
upon with great esteem.

They then generalized this issue to include all the 'companions' because
of Qur’an's praise for them in connection with the 'pledge of Ridhwan'
and other events. In practice, without taking into regard the deeds of
the companions, they considered all of them to be exceptional humans and
refused themselves the permission to indulge in any kind of examination
and criticism with respect to their deeds.

One of them, the celebrated commentator and the author of al-Manar, has
vociferously attacked the Shi'ites as to why they single out some of the
initial Muhajirs for criticism… little realizing the great inconsistency
of such beliefs with the spirit of Islam and its history?

Undoubtedly, the companions, especially the initial Muhajirs, possess a
special reverence; however, this would only have been until so long as
they had continued to tread the correct path and exhibit devotion
(towards Islam), but from the day some of the companions deviated from
the true path of Islam, the Noble Qur’an would surely view them
differently.

For example, how can we ever exonerate Talhah and Zubayr for reneging
the pledge and opposing the leader - one, who, apart from the explicit
statements of the Noble Prophet (S) attesting his leadership, had been
elected by all the Muslims, including themselves? How can we clear them
of the deaths of seventeen thousand Muslims, whose blood had been
spilled during the Battle of the Camel? If a person were to shed the
blood of one innocent person, he would have no excuse to present before
Allah, what then to speak of this large multitude!

Basically, is it possible to conceive that 'Ali (a.s.) and his
companions, as well as Talhah, Zubayr and some others of the companions
of the Noble Prophet (S) who had teamed up with them, were both on the
side of truth in the Battle of the Camel?

Does any logic and intellect accept this manifest contrast? Can we, in
the name of 'inviolability of the companions' close our eyes, regard
them as special personalities and shove the entire history of Islam
after the departure of the Noble Prophet (S) into oblivion? And should
we flout the Islamic criterion of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَکْرَمَکُمْ عِنْدَ اللٌّهِ أَتْـقَاکُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily the most honoured of you in the sight of Allah (s.w.t.) s (he
who is) the most righteous of you.”

What kind of irrational and illogical judgement is this?
--------------------------------------------------------

Basically, does there arise any problem if, one day, a person or persons
were to stand in the ranks of the inmates of Paradise and supporters of
truth, while on another day in the ranks of the inmates of Hell and
opponents of truth? Are all the people infallibles? Have we ourselves
not witnessed all these transformations taking place within individuals?

The story of the People of Apostasy - a group of Muslims who had turned
apostates after the departure of the Noble Prophet (S) - has been
narrated by the Sunnites, as well as the Shi'ites in their books, that
the first Caliph initiated a military expedition against them and
suppressed their uprising. Had the People of Apostasy not witnessed the
Noble Prophet (S) and were they not his companions?

More amazing is the fact that in order to escape from this strange
inconsistency some have brought in the pretext of ijtihad (independent
reasoning) and state that individuals such as Talhah, Zubayr, Mua'wiyah
and their supporters had been mujtahids (religious jurists) and although
they had erred in their ijtihad, they had not perpetrated any sin; on
the contrary, for these very acts of theirs they shall receive their
rewards from Allah!!

Honestly, what a disgraceful logic! Is rebelling against the successor
of the Noble Prophet (S), breaking the pledge and shedding the blood of
thousands of innocent people - and that too for the purpose of power,
rank and wealth - so complex an issue that one is unable to perceive its
evils? Does shedding that great measure of innocent blood entitle one to
receive rewards from Allah (s.w.t.) ?

If we were to exonerate a group of companions, who had perpetrated
offences in such a manner, without any doubt not a single offender would
remain in this world, for we would have acquitted all criminals by this
logic. Such unstructured defence of the companions would cause Islam to
be viewed with great cynicism.

Consequently there lies no alternative except to look upon everyone -
especially the companions of the Noble Prophet (S) - with reverence and
esteem, however only for so long as they do not deviate from the path of
truth, justice and the agenda of Islam![^1]

Numerous Sunni commentators have reported this tradition from Hamid ibne
Ziyad, who says: I approached Muhammad ibne Ka'b al-Quradhi and said to
him: What do you have to say in connection with the companions of the
Noble Prophet (S)? He replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَمِيْعُ أَصْحَابِ رَسُوْلِ اللهِ فِي الْجَنَّةِ مُحْسِنُهُمْ وَ
مُسِيْئُهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“All the companions are the inmates of Paradise - the righteous ones as
well as the evil ones!”

I said to him: From where do you state such a thing? Whereupon he
recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ السَّابِقُونَ الأََوَّلُونَ مِنَ الْمُهَاجِرِينَ وَ الأََنْصَارِ وَ
الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُمْ بِإِحْسَانٍ رَضِيَ اللٌّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَ رَضُوا
عَنْهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (as for) the foremost, the first of the Muhajirs and the Ansars,
and those who followed them in goodness, Allah is well pleased with them
and they are well pleased with Him.”***[^2]

And then continued: With respect to the 'Followers' there is a condition
that they ought to have followed only the righteous deeds of the
companions (only in this case would they attain deliverance, but this is
not a condition for the companions to attain deliverance).[^3]

However, this claim is unacceptable for several reasons:

The ruling mentioned in the above verse should also be applicable in the
case of the 'followers', who, as we had alluded previously, are those,
who follow in the footsteps of the initial Muhajirs (Emigrants) and
Ansar (Helpers). Therefore, the entire ummah, without exception, should
be of the delivered ones!

As for the fact that in the tradition of Muhammad ibne Ka'b it has been
said that Allah (s.w.t.) has placed a condition of good deeds with
regards to the 'followers' i.e. they should only follow the righteous
deeds and conduct of the companions, and not their sins, this is an
amazing statement.

This is because if the condition prescribed for the followers in order
to attain deliverance is to follow the righteous deeds of the
companions, then it is all the more necessary for this condition to be
prescribed for the companions too.

In other words Allah (s.w.t.), in the above verse, says that His
pleasure and happiness shall encompass all the initial Muhajirs and
Ansar, who were righteous and treaded the correct path, and all those
who follow them. The verse does not say that He desires to encompass the
Muhajirs and Ansar with His happiness, irrespective of whether they are
good or bad, but as for the 'followers', He shall accept them only on
the basis of that specific condition.

Reason and intellect totally reject this issue; this is because reason
does not consider the companions of the Noble Prophet (S) to possess any
distinction over the others in this regard. Where lies the difference
between the Abu Jahls and those, who initially embraced Islam but later
deviated from it?

And why should those, who came into this world years and centuries after
the Noble Prophet (S) and whose sacrifices and heroisms were no less
than those of the early companions of the Noble Prophet (S), not be
eligible for this Divine mercy? Especially since they possessed this
distinction that despite not witnessing the Noble Prophet (S), they had
accepted him and had brought faith upon him.

How can the Qur’an, which says: Surely the most honourable of you with
Allah (s.w.t.) s the one who is the most righteous amongst you, ever
approve of such irrational discrimination? How can the Qur’an, which in
its various verses, curses the sinners and unjust ones, and regards them
as deserving of Allah's chastisement, approve of this irrational safety
of the companions with respect to Divine punishment? Can there be
exceptions to these threats and curses of the Qur’an such that a
particular group is kept exempted? Why and for what reason?

Apart from these, can such a ruling not be regarded as showing a green
light to them to perpetrate any and every kind of sin and offence?

This ruling does not conform with the history of Islam at all, for there
have been numerous individuals who once had stood in the ranks of
Muhajirs and Ansar, only to later deviate from their paths and find
themselves incurring the anger of the Noble Prophet (S) and consequently
the wrath of Allah. Have we not heard of how Tha'labah ibne Hatib Ansari
deviated and became the object of the Noble Prophet's (S) anger?

To state this more clearly, if what they have intended is that the
companions of the Noble Prophet (S) did not commit any sins, and were
pure and infallible from every kind of disobedience and transgression,
this is tantamount to rejecting the most obvious and self-evident
issues.

And if they meant that the companions did commit offences, but despite
this Allah (s.w.t.) s pleased with them, this claim would mean that
Allah (s.w.t.) has been pleased with sins!

Who is it that can absolve and acquit Talhah and Zubayr, who initially
had been of the special companions of the Noble Prophet (S), and
'Aishah, his wife, of the death of seventeen thousand Muslims in the
Battle of the Camel? Was Allah (s.w.t.) pleased with these killings and
blood-shed?

Would opposition to 'Ali (a.s.), the representative of the Noble Prophet
(S) - who, even assuming that he had not been appointed as the Caliph by
the Noble Prophet (S), at the very least, had been chosen by the
consensus of the ummah - and battling him and his loyal companions be
acts that would obtain the pleasure of Allah (s.w.t.) ?

The truth is that the advocates of the notion of inviolability of the
companions, by their insistence and emphasis for the issue, have
disfigured the pure face of Islam, which has always considered faith and
righteous deeds to be the measure for gauging a person's character.

And finally, the pleasure and happiness of Allah (s.w.t.) that has been
mentioned in the verse under discussion is associated with four titles -
emigration, assistance, faith and righteous deeds. Thus, as long as all
the 'companions' and the 'followers' adhered to these, they would be the
object of Allah's (s.w.t.) grace, but the day they distanced themselves
from these, they also distanced themselves from Allah's (s.w.t.)
pleasure.

From the above discussion it becomes plainly apparent that the
statements of the erudite, albeit prejudiced commentator - the author of
*al-Manar* - in which he criticizes the Shi'ites for their lack of
belief in the purity and uprightness of all the companions, possess no
value and worth. The Shi'ites have not committed any sin save for the
fact that they have accepted the rulings of intellect and reason, and
the testimonies of the Noble Qur’an and history, and disregarded the
unfounded and incorrect distinctions presented by the prejudiced
ones.[^4]

[^1]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 7, pg. 263

[^2]: Suratul Tawbah (9), Verse 100

[^3]: Tafsirul Manar and the commentary of Fakhr Razi, while discussing
the above verse.

[^4]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 8, pg. 108


