26. Why is it that Nations, Devoid of Faith and Belief, Possess a Life of Ease and Comfort?
===========================================================================================

Verse 96 of Suratul A'raf says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَوْ أََنَّ أَهلَ الْقُرَى آمَنُوا وَ التَّقَوْا لَفَتَحْناَ
عَلَيْهِمْ بَرَکاَتٍ مِنَ السَّمَآءِ وَ الأَرضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if the people of the towns had believed and guarded (against
evil) We would certainly have opened up for them blessings from the
heaven and the earth, but they rejected, so We overtook them for what
they had earned.”***

In view of the above verse a question arises that if faith and piety are
the cause for the descent of Divine blessings, why are nations that do
not possess faith seen to be in great ease and luxury?

The answer to this question shall become clear by taking two points into
regard:

The imagination that nations that lack faith and piety are in ease and
comfort is a great error that stems from another error - that of
regarding wealth to be the means of prosperity.

Usually people are given to imagine that the nation that possesses the
maximum wealth and the most advanced industries is the most prosperous
nation whereas if we were to penetrate into such societies and observe
from close the gnawing pains that overwhelm their body and soul, we
would realize that many of them are the most miserable ones on the
earth - notwithstanding the fact that all these very comparative
advancements are a consequence of effort, endeavour, discipline and
sense of responsibility - all of which had been part of the teachings of
the prophets.

Just as we write this portion of the commentary, the newspapers reported
that New York - the most affluent and the advanced region of the
material world - was witness to a very strange scenario arising out of a
sudden blackout. Taking advantage of the situation, innumerable people
rampaged into shops and looted them; the looting was so widespread that
the police arrested three thousand people in connection with this
incident.

The actual pillagers were undoubtedly much more in number for these were
the people who were unable to escape in time. Undeniably these
individuals were not professionals, who had planned the general rampage
beforehand since the incident itself was sudden and unexpected.

Accordingly, we infer that one blackout caused tens of thousands of
people of the inhabitants of an affluent city to be transformed into
pillagers; this not only reveals the moral decadence of a nation but
also reflects the intense lack of social security.

The newspapers carried another report, which served to present a
complete picture of this incident. The report stated that a celebrity,
who had been staying in one of the reputed skyscraper hotels of New York
during this period, said: The blackout made walking in the hotel aisles
a dangerous proposition to the extent that the hotel staff refused to
permit the guests to walk in the aisles alone to proceed to their rooms
lest they be accosted by the plunderers, and so they used to send them
to their rooms in groups of ten or more, under the protection of armed
escorts! The celebrity added that he did not possess the courage to
emerge from his room, until he was overwhelmed with hunger!

However, such blackouts in the backward oriental nations do not cause
such problems indicating that despite possessing wealth and industrial
advancement, they do not possess security in their environments. Apart
from this, eye-witnesses report that murder in these environments is
akin to drinking one mouthful of water.

And we clearly perceive that if one were to be given the entire world
but at the same time made to live in such conditions, he would be of the
most miserable of all men. Besides, the security problem is just one of
their problems; they face numerous other social problems which, by
themselves, are painful and inconveniencing. In the light of these
realities, wealth should not be mistaken and confused with prosperity.

As for what has been said regarding why those, who possess faith and
piety, lagged behind in backwardness, it must be stated that if the
meaning of faith and piety is to merely claim the acceptance of Islam
and maintain adherence to the basic teachings of the prophets, then we
do confess that such individuals have surely remained backward. However
we know that the reality of faith and piety is their penetration into
all acts of life, and this is something which cannot be achieved by mere
claims.

It is unfortunate that in most of the Islamic societies today, the
fundamental teachings of the prophets of Allah (s.w.t.) and Islam remain
forsaken or semi-forsaken, leaving these societies to possess an
appearance which is not that of true Muslims.

Islam invites towards purity, righteousness, trustworthiness, striving
and effort - where is that trustworthiness and effort? Islam invites
towards science, knowledge, awakening and awareness - where is that
profuse knowledge and awareness? Islam invites towards unity, closeness
of ranks and self-sacrifice - do all these dictates prevail over the
Islamic societies today, perfectly and completely? Thus, we ought to
acknowledge that Islam is one thing while we Muslims are something
else.[^1]

[^1]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 6, pg. 268


