29. What is the incident of Fadak?
==================================

Fadak had been one of the villages around Medinah situated at a distance
of 140 kilometres from Khaybar. In the year 7 ah when the forts of
Khaybar fell one after another to the soldiers of Islam and the central
power of the Jews was smashed, the inhabitants of Fadak approached the
Noble Prophet (S) in submission and handed over one half of their land
and gardens to him retaining the other half for themselves. In addition,
they also agreed to shoulder the responsibility of cultivating his share
of the land and used to receive some benefits for this effort of theirs.

In view of the verse of booty (Fai), this land was specific to the Noble
Prophet (S) and he could utilize it for himself or use it in other
instances as stated in verse 7 of Suratul Hashr and accordingly, he
gifted it to his daughter Fatimah (s.a.). This is a fact, which has been
emphasized and stated by numerous Sunnite and Shi'ite historians and
commentators. In the commentary *al-Durrul Manthur*, it has been
narrated from Ibne 'Abbas that when the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ آتِ ذَا الْقُربـى حَقَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then give to the near of kin his due”***[^1]

was revealed, the Noble Prophet (S) gifted Fadak to Fatimah (s.a.)[^2]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَقطَعَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ فَااَطِمَةَ فَدَکٌَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the chapter of silah rahim (establishing bonds of consanguinity) of
the book *Kanz al-'Ummal*, written as annotations for the book *Musnad*
of Ahmad ibne Hanbal, it has been reported from Abu Sa'id Khudri that
when the above verse was revealed, the Noble Prophet (S) sought Fatimah
(s.a.) and said to her:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياَ فاَطِمَةُ لَکِ فَدَکٌُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' Fatimah! Fadak is for you.”[^3]

Hakim Nishaburi has also reported this same meaning in his book, which
deals with history.[^4]

Ibne Abil Hadid too, in his commentary of Nahjul Balaghah, has mentioned
the incident of Fadak in great detail[^5] and so too have numerous other
books.

But after the Noble Prophet (S) those, who perceived this economic power
in the hands of 'Ali's (a.s.) spouse as a danger to their political
power and were determined to isolate his supporters in every respect,
confiscated it on the basis of a fabricated tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ مَعَاشِرَ الأَنْبِيَاءِ لاَ نُوَرِّثُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And despite the fact that Fatimah (s.a.) was in official possession of
the land - and one in possession of something is not asked to present
witnesses - she was asked to present her witnesses (that Fadak belonged
to her). She presented them, who testified that the Noble Prophet (S)
had personally gifted it to her, but they disregarded these witnesses.

In later periods, those Caliphs who desired to express their
inclinations towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), would return Fadak to them
but soon after another would come up and confiscate it once again! This
was repeated on numerous occasions during the time of the Umayyad and
the 'Abbasid caliphs.

The incident of Fadak and the events associated with it during the
initial stages of Islam and in the later eras are of the most painful,
sorrowful but at the same time, the most admonitory portions of the
history of Islam which ought to be placed under meticulous study so that
it illuminates various other incidents of Islam.

Significantly, the Sunni narrator - Muslim ibne Hajjaj Nishaburi - has
reported the incident of Fatimah's (s.a.) demand for Fadak in detail in
his book Sahih Muslim and reports from 'Aishah that after the first
Caliph's refusal to return Fadak to Fatimah (s.a.), she was enraged with
him and did not speak a word to him for as long as she was alive.[^6]
and [^7]

[^1]: Suratul Rum (30), Verse 38

[^2]: al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 4, pg. 177

[^3]: Kanzul 'Ummal, vol. 2, pg. 158

[^4]: Refer the book Fadak, pg. 49

[^5]: Sharh of Nahjul Balagha of Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. 16, pg. 209
onwards

[^6]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 3, pg. 1380, no. 52 of 'The Book of Jihad'

[^7]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 23, pg. 510


