31. What is the Criterion with regards to the Greater Sins?
===========================================================

In connection with the greater sins, reference to which has been made in
several verses of the Noble Qur’an[^1], there have been many views by
commentators on the one hand and the scholars of traditions and the
jurists on the other.

Some have regarded all sins as being greater sins; this is because
against Allah, the Mighty, every sin is enormous.

Others are of the opinion that the concept of lesser and greater,
employed in connection with sins, is relative in nature. Every sin, in
comparison to a more serious sin is looked upon as being lesser while in
comparison to a less serious sin, as great.

Some believe that Allah's (s.w.t.) warning, in the Qur’an, of
chastisement with respect to a sin, serves as a criterion for that sin
to be considered great.

Occasionally it has also been said that every sin which necessitates the
implementation of legal (religious) penalty is a greater sin.

However, in view of the fact that the term 'great' indicates upon the
enormity of the sin, the best description for it would be every sin,
which happens to possess one of the following, can be regarded as a
greater sin:

- The sins with respect to which Allah (s.w.t.) has issued a warning of
chastisement.

- Sins that have been regarded by the Imams and the traditions as being
grave.

- Sins that have been regarded by religious sources to be more severe
than sins that are known to be of the greater sins.

- And finally, sins, which the authentic traditions expressly state to
be great.

The greater sins that are mentioned in the Islamic traditions vary in
number. In some traditions, they are said to be seven in number (killing
a soul, being disowned by the parents, usury, returning to the land of
kufr after emigrating from it, falsely accusing a chaste woman of
adultery, misappropriating the property of orphans and flight from
jihad.)[^2]

Some other traditions have enumerated them to be seven in number with
the difference being that 'being disowned by the parents' has been
substituted by:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ ماَ أَوجَبَ اللٌّهُ عَلَيهِ النَّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“All (those sins) for which Allah (s.w.t.) has made (the punishment of)
Hell mandatory.”

In some, their number is seen to be ten, while in others it is 19 and in
yet others the figure is much higher.[^3]

This difference in their figure stems from the fact that all the greater
sins are not uniform and similar - some are more serious and grave than
the others, or in other words, they are Akbar al-Kabair (greatest of the
greater sins) and thus, there is no conflict or contradiction amongst
them.[^4]

[^1]: Suratul Nisa’ (4), Verse 31; Suratul Shura (42), Verse 37, and the
verses presently under consideration.

[^2]: Wasa’il ash-Shi'a, vol. 11, Chapter Abwabu Jihad al-Nafs, Chapter
46, no. 1

[^3]: For further explanation, refer the above source (Chapter 46 from
Abwabu Jihad al-Nafs). Thirty seven traditions, which enumerate and
specify the Greater sins, have been mentioned there.

[^4]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 22, pg. 541


