33. How does Islam view Monasticism?
====================================

In verse 27 of Suratul Hadid, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ رَهْبَانِيَّةً ابْتَدَعُوهَا مَا كَتَبْنَاهَا عَلَيْهِمْ إِلاَّ
ابْـتِغَآءَ رِضْوَانِ اللٌّهِ فَمَا رَعَوْهَا حَقَّ رِعَايَـتِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (as for) monkery, they innovated it– We did not prescribe it to
them– only to seek Allah's pleasure, but they did not observe it with
its due observance.”***

In view of the above verse, the question that arises is: What is Islam's
viewpoint about monasticism?

The term رَهباَنِيَّة (Monasticism) is derived from رهبة meaning fear
and dread, which, in this case, means fear of Allah (s.w.t.). According
to Raghib, in his book Mufradat, it is a fear, which is in combination
with piety and perturbation. The word تَرَهُّب is in the meaning of
تَعَبُّد, to worship; and رَهباَنِيَّة means intense devotion and
worship.

Monasticism of a desired kind existed amongst the Christians although it
had not been made compulsory in Christianity; however, the followers of
'Isa (a.s.) distorted the concept by hauling it beyond its limits.

And it is for this reason that Islam has vehemently denounced it and the
well-known tradition, which states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ رَهْبَانِيَّةَ فِي الإِسْلاَمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is no (room for) monasticism in Islam”, is witnessed in numerous
Islamic sources.[^1]

One of the ugly innovations of the Christians with respect to
monasticism had been 'prohibition of marriage' for the males and females
who had abandoned the world. Others were 'social seclusion',
disregarding the human responsibilities within a society, selecting
secluded and far-flung monasteries and nunneries for living and worship
in an environment, isolated from society. Later, great evils came into
existence within the monasteries and the living centres of the monks,
some of which - Allah (s.w.t.) Willing - we shall present later as a
concluding portion of this discussion.

Certainly, the monks and nuns did extend positive services too like
nursing individuals suffering from diseases that were dangerous and
difficult to cure such as leprosy; propagation of religion in regions
that were distant and amongst people that were wild and barbaric;
initiating research programmes etc. Nevertheless, these acts in
comparison to the entire system were trivial and insignificant, and on
the whole, its evils were far greater than its benefits.

Fundamentally, man is an entity that has been created for a life within
a society, and his material and spiritual development can only be
achieved within a social life, and it is for this reason that none of
the Divine religions have rejected this concept (of social life). On the
contrary, they have endeavoured to strengthen its foundation.

Allah (s.w.t.) has placed 'sexual desire' within man to preserve
lineage, and every thing that attempts to reject it totally is
absolutely incorrect.

The Islamic abstemiousness (zuhd), which means leading a simple life,
eliminating luxuries and not becoming a captive of wealth and rank, is
in no way related to the issue of monasticism. This is so since
monasticism means segregation and alienation from the society whereas
abstemiousness means liberation for a more social living.  
 In a well-known tradition we read that one day the son of 'Uthman ibne
Maz'un died which so aggrieved him that he declared his house to be a
mosque and (abandoning all other work) engaged himself in worship. When
the Noble Prophet (S) came to know of this, he summoned him and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عُثْمَانَ بْنَ مَظْعُونٍ إِنَّ اللٌّهَ لَمْ يَكْتُبْ عَلَيْنَا
الرَّهْـبَانِيَّةَ إِنَّمَا رَهْـبَانِيَّةُ أُمَّتِي الْجِهَادُ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللٌّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' 'Uthman! Surely, Allah, the Blessed and the Exalted has not ordained
monasticism for us; monasticism of my ummah is only jihad in the way of
Allah.”[^2]

The above tradition is an allusion to the fact that if you desire to
renounce the material life, do not do so negatively and by means of
social seclusion; rather, seek it positively - in jihad in the way of
Allah (s.w.t.).

The Noble Prophet (S) then went on to present a detailed explanation of
the merits of congregational prayers - which itself emphasizes the
rejection of monasticism and seclusion.

In another tradition we read that 'Ali ibne Ja'far asks his brother Imam
Musa ibne Kazim (a.s.): “Does it befit a Muslim to go on a journey or
adopt asceticism, enclose himself in his house and not come out of it?”
The Imam (a.s.) replied: “No.”[^3]

Explanation
-----------

The journey that has been prohibited in this tradition is something
which is akin to monasticism - a kind of itinerant monasticism; some
people, without procuring for themselves a house, engaging themselves in
work or seeking to earn a livelihood, converted themselves into
globetrotters without provisions and supplies.

Constantly on the move from one place to another and fulfilling their
needs by begging from the people, they looked upon this as a kind of
renunciation of the world. But Islam has rejected the stationary as well
as itinerant monasticism; yes, according to the teachings of Islam the
important thing is that man should be abstemious while within the heart
of society and not while secluded and segregated from it!

The Historical Origins of Monasticism
-------------------------------------

The history of Christianity reveals that monasticism, in its present
form, had not existed in the first century of Christianity, but was
rborn after the third century ad during the manifestation of the Roman
emperor Disiyus and his intense drive against the followers of 'Isa
(a.s.), who, as a result of their defeat at the hands of this brutal
emperor, sought refuge in the wilderness.[^4]

The Islamic traditions too report this meaning, albeit more profoundly.
It has been narrated that the Noble Prophet (S) said to Ibne Mas'ud: “Do
you know from where did monasticism originate?”

Ibne Mas'ud replied: “Allah (s.w.t.) and His Messenger know better.”

He (S) said: After 'Isa (a.s.), some tyrants came to the fore on the
scene of leadership. The believers fought them three times and suffered
defeat and so, they fled to the deserts and mountains, and, awaiting the
arrival of the prophet, prophesized (Prophet Muhammad (S) by 'Isa
(a.s.)), engaged themselves in worship in the caves. Some of them
remained on their religion while others followed the path of disbelief.

Then continuing, he (S) said: “Do you know what is the monasticism of my
ummah?”  
 Ibne Mas'ud said: “Allah (s.w.t.) and His Messenger know better.”  
 He (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْهِجْرَةُ وَ الْجِهاَدُ وَ الصَّلاةُ وَ الصَّومُ وَ الحَجُّ وَ
الْعُمرَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Emigration, Jihad, Salat, fasting, Hajj and 'Umrah.”[^5]

Will Durant, the renowned historian, in volume 13 of his well-known
history presents a detailed discussion about monks, and is of the
opinion that it was from the 4th century ad that nuns began to affiliate
themselves with the monks; day by day monasticism was on the increase
until it reached its zenith in the 10th century ad.[^6]

Undoubtedly, this social occurrence, like other occurrences, in addition
to possessing historical roots also possesses psychological ones; one of
the facts which can be alluded to is that the psychological reaction of
different individuals and nations against defeats and failures are
totally different and varied.

Some develop an inclination to adopt seclusion and introversion, totally
withdrawing themselves from society and social activities whereas there
are some, who derive the lesson of endurance from failures, and come to
possess greater firmness and resistance. The former group resorts to
monasticism or something akin to it while the latter, in contrast,
becomes more social.

Ethical and Moral Evils Resulting due to Monasticism
----------------------------------------------------

Swerving from the laws of creation always occasion negative
repercussions and thus, it is not a matter of astonishment that when man
distances himself from a social life, which is inherent and innate to
him, he suffers from intense negative ramifications. And it is for this
reason that monasticism, which is in contrast to the fundamentals of
man's natural disposition, gives birth to great evils, some of which are
as follows:

Man, by nature, is civil and urban, and monasticism is in contradiction
with this spirit of man and thus draws human societies into decadence
and change of direction.

Not only does monasticism not lead to the purification of morals and
perfection of soul, instead it leads to ethical deviation, lethargy,
conceit, vanity, superiority complex and the like. And upon the
supposition that man does manage to acquire an ethical excellence in a
state of seclusion, it would not be regarded as an accomplishment, for
excellence is when man is able to liberate himself from moral
uncleanness while he is within a society.

Renunciation of marriage, which is one of the fundamentals of
monasticism, not only does not bring about any virtue but on the
contrary results in psychological disorders. The book, *Encyclopedia of
the 20th* *Century*, states: Some of the monks considered paying
attention to the female sex to be a Satanic act and harboured this
concept to such an extent that they were unwilling to bring the female
species of animals to their houses, lest its satanic soul cause harm and
detriment to their spirituality!!

Despite this, history is witness to numerous atrocious acts from the
monasteries, such that, according to Will Durant, Pope Innocent III
described one of the monasteries as a brothel![^7]

Some of these monasteries had been transformed into centres of
congregation for the world-loving, gluttonous and licentious ones to
such an extent that the best of the wines could be found in them.

Of course, according to the testimony of history, 'Isa (a.s.) never
married, however this was definitely not because of his opposition to
marriage - rather, his short life-span coupled with his perpetual
journeys to different parts of the world for the propagation of religion
did not permit him this liberty.

The discussion of monasticism befits separate books, devoted entirely to
this topic, and if we were to dwell upon it in detail, we would deviate
from our commentarial discussion.

We conclude this discussion by presenting a tradition from Imam 'Ali
(a.s.), who, while interpreting the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هَلْ نُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِالأََخْسَرِينَ أَعْمالاً الَّذِينَ ضَلَّ
سَعْيُهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَ هُمْ يَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ
يُحْسِنُونَ صُنْعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Shall We inform you of the greatest losers in (their) deeds?
(These are) they whose labour is lost in this world's life and they
think that they are well versed in skill of the work of hands.”***[^8]

said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمُ الرُّهْبَانَ الَّذِينَ حَبِسُوا أََنْفُسَهُم فِي السَّوَارِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One of the manifest examples of this are the monks, who had imprisoned
themselves in the mountains and wilderness, and were under the
impression that they were performing an excellent work.”[^9] and [^10]

[^1]: This tradition has been reported in Majma'ul Bayan under رهب as
also in al-Nihayah of Ibn Kathir.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 70, pg. 114 (Chapter al-Nahi 'an
al-Rahbaniyah), no. 1

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 70, pg. 119, no. 10

[^4]: Dairah al-Ma'arif Qarn Bistum, under رهب.

[^5]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. 9, pg. 243; Another tradition, similar to
this but slightly abridged, has been mentioned in the commentary al-Durr
al-Manthur, (vol. 6, pg. 177)

[^6]: William Durant, vol. 13, pg. 443

[^7]: William Durant, vol. 13, pg. 443

[^8]: Suratul Kahf (18), Verse 103, 104

[^9]: Kanzul 'Ummal, vol. 2, no. 4496

[^10]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 23, pg. 384


