34. What do ‘Spiritual Vision’ and ‘Mystical Intuition’ Mean?
=============================================================

One of the sources of acquiring cognizance is spiritual vision and
mystical intuition.

Primarily it is essential to define this source, which is unfamiliar to
a great number of people, in order that on the one hand, the difference
between this and the issue of revelation, inspiration and innate
disposition becomes clear and the ignorant ones do not consider it to be
a figment of imagination and on the other, the path of misuse that many
have resorted to in connection with this topic and which has compelled
many to look upon it with scepticism, is blocked.

The entities of the world of existence are fundamentally of two kinds:

1. Entities that can be perceived by the senses; these entities are
referred to as the World of Senses.

2. Entities that are concealed from our senses and cannot be perceived
by them; these are referred to as the World of Unseen.

But at times it is possible that man acquires a new perception, enabling
him to witness a portion of the World of Unseen (as per his capability).
In other words, the curtains are drawn aside and some of the realities
of the World of Unseen are made manifest for him as clearly as man
perceives things by his senses - rather, much clearer and in a manner
which imparts much more certainty.

This state is referred to as spiritual vision or mystical intuition.

This is the same thing that the Qur’an mentions in verse 5 and 6 of
Suratul Takathur:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
کَلاَّ لَوْ تَعْلَمُونَ عِلْمَ الْيَقِينِ. لَتَرَوُنَّ الْجَحِيمَمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! if you had known with a certain knowledge, You should most
certainly have seen the hell!”***

In various Islamic sources, regarding both the believers and the
offenders, it has been stated that at the time of death they come to
acquire a spiritual vision as a result of which they are able witness
the angels and the holy souls of Allah's awliya, whereas those around
them lack the ability to perceive these things.

This is that very state which the Noble Prophet (S) came to possess
during the Battle of Khandaq when he said: “In the spark that was
created by the striking of a pickaxe with a stone, I witnessed the
palaces of Khusroe or Caesar or the castles of the Yemeni kings.”[^1]

Similarly, it has been reported about Aminah, the honourable mother of
the Noble Prophet (S), that when she bore the Noble Prophet (S) in her
womb, she said: I saw a light emanate from me and by means of it I
witnessed the palaces of the land of Basri, in Syria. These are neither
revelation nor are they spiritual inspiration but a kind of perception
that differs vastly from sensory vision.

This is that very station which a renowned critic has mentioned, saying:
If an eye of the Unseen opens up for you, the atoms of this universe
shall become intimate and share their secrets with you. It is then that
you shall hear the talks of water and flower. Hearing the hubbub of the
glorification (of Allah) of the entities of the universe, scepticism
shall be erased from within you. The ears of the untrustworthy ones do
not hear these realities and only the person, who has been made
intimate, is worthy of hearing these sounds and secrets.[^2]

Thus, mystical intuition and vision can be defined in one sentence as:
The entry into the meta-sensory world and witnessing its realties by an
inner eye in a manner similar to sensory vision - only more powerful or
listening to those murmurings by the ears of the soul.

Of course, the words of every person who claims such vision cannot be
hastily accepted, nor can the words of every claimant be believed.
Nevertheless, the initial discussion in this topic is concerned with the
actual existence of such a source of (Divine) cognizance[^3], after
which comes the discussion regarding the manner of attaining it, and
finally, the means of distinguishing between the true and false
claimants.

[^1]: Kamil Ibn Kathir, vol. 2, pg. 179

[^2]: A summary of some renowned verses.

[^3]: Tafsir Payam-e-Qur’an, vol. 1, pg. 252


