35. How can ‘Allotment of Sustenance on the Part of Allah’ and ‘Working for One’s Livelihood’ be Consistent with one Another?
=============================================================================================================================

In verse 26 of Suratul Ra'd, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أاََللٌّهُ يَـبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَآءُ وَ يَقْدِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah (s.w.t.) amplifies and straitens the means of subsistence for
whom He pleases.”***

Taking into consideration the above verse, the question, which arises,
is: How can the fact, that Allah (s.w.t.) apportions the sustenance, be
regarded to be consistent with 'expending effort for one's livelihood'?

It is not just this verse which declares the increase and decrease in
sustenance to be dictated by Allah (s.w.t.), but from various other
verses too it can be clearly inferred that Allah (s.w.t.) augments or
diminishes it from whosoever He pleases. However, these words do not
mean, as some ignorant individuals have conjectured, that one should
stop one's efforts and sit down in a corner and wait for Allah (s.w.t.)
to provide the allotted sustenance. Such individuals, whose negative
thoughts provide an excellent excuse for those who look upon religion as
being unconstructive, are oblivious of two fundamental points:

Firstly: The Divine Will and desire referred to in these verses is not
something that is uncalculated; Allah's Will is not separate from His
wisdom and always takes into account ability, competence and worthiness.

Secondly: This issue does not mean that we reject the Realm of Causes.
This is because the Realm of Causes of the world of creation is also a
consequence of Allah's Will and can never be separated from the
Legislative will of Allah (s.w.t.).

Expressing it more clearly, Allah's (s.w.t.) will with respect to
enlarging and straitening sustenance is bound by certain conditions,
which are dominant over man's life - effort, sincerity and
self-sacrifice and conversely, laziness and evil intentions play a
determinative role in this regard. And this is why the Qur’an has
repeatedly regarded man as being governed by his own effort and
activity, and is of the opinion that the benefits which he derives out
of life is in the measure of his endeavour.

It is for this reason that in the book *Wasa'il al-Shi'a*, in the
section of trade, income and work, a chapter has been designated in
connection with expending exertion for the purpose of procuring
sustenance, and numerous traditions have been mentioned in this regard.
In addition, another chapter has been devoted to traditions that
reproach idleness, excessive sleep and laziness in the path of
fulfilling the requirements of life.

In one of the traditions, the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) says: “In
the very beginning, when entities entered into marriage, laziness and
weakness married each other and an offspring, by the name of 'poverty',
was born to them!”[^1]

In a tradition, Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) says: “Do not exhibit indolence
with respect to procuring sustenance and fulfilling the needs of the
life, for our fathers and forefathers used to strive for it and
endeavoured to procure it!”[^2]

In another tradition Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) says: “I abhor the person, who
is slothful with respect to his worldly work, for one who is lazy in his
worldly work (despite the fact that he reaps its returns soon), is
lazier in his work related the Hereafter.”[^3]

It has also been reported that Imam Musa ibne Ja'far (a.s.) said: “Allah
(s.w.t.) detests one who sleeps excessively, and regards one who is idle
(and does not work) as His enemy.” [^4] and [^5]

[^1]: Wasa’il ash-Shi'a, vol. 12, pg. 38

[^2]: Wasa’il ash-Shi'a, vol. 12, pg. 38

[^3]: Wasa’il ash-Shi'a, vol. 12, pg. 37

[^4]: Wasa’il ash-Shi'a, vol. 12, pg. 37

[^5]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 10, pg. 204


