Introduction
============

Throughout the ages, distinguished Shi'ite scholars have authored
numerous commentaries, some of which have been a source of benefit for
the scholars, the Hawza 'Ilmiyyah and those who have been attracted to
the Qur’an. However there was demand for a commentary possessing the
excellences of Tafsir-e-Namunah, in the Persian language, especially in
this period of time wherein there is an ever-increasing focus towards
comprehending the Noble Qur’an.

Ayatullah Al-Uzma Makarim Shirazi, with the co-operation of some
distinguished scholars, has fulfilled this requirement and done an
invaluable service to the Noble Qur’an by authoring this valuable
commentary

Some of the features of this commentary, which have contributed to its
extra-ordinary universality and attraction, are as follows:

1. Although this commentary is in Persian, its scientific and research
aspects have been given such consideration and emphasis that it benefits
not only the common masses, who are interested in comprehending the
Qur’an, but also scholars and men of learning.

2. While interpreting the verses, rather than dwelling on unnecessary
points, particular attention has been paid to those important issues
that could have a great impact upon the lives of individuals and the
society.

3. In connection with the topics that are propounded in the verses,
separate and succinct discussions have been presented in this commentary
in such a manner that a brief study of these would make the reader
independent of the need to refer to other books on these topics.

4. The use of intricate terminology has been avoided; nevertheless,
whenever necessary, explanations have been provided in the footnotes so
that in addition to scholars and people of learning, this commentary is
also useful for the general public.

5. One of the important distinctions of this commentary is that it
presents solutions for present-day issues, and answers for various kinds
of questions and objections pertaining to the Usul and Furu' of
religion, and Islamic sciences and culture.

In view of these salient features, we sought permission from the
reverend teacher for collecting the questions and answers separately,
and presenting them before the general public, especially the dear
youths. Fortunately, he responded positively to our request and so, with
the co-operation of friends, Hujjaj al-Islam Ahmad Ja'fari, Sayyid 'Ali
Riza Ja'fari, Sayyid Murtaza Musawi, Sayyid Asghar Husaini and Muhammad
Husain Muhammadi, the entire Tafsir-e-Namunah and the subjective
commentary Payam-e-Qur’an were subjected to a detailed and meticulous
study. All the instances were extracted and this book, containing 180
questions and answers, was then organized.

At this juncture it is necessary to mention a few points:

1. At times, answers to certain questions have been presented in various
places in the commentaries (Tafsir-e-Namunah and Payam-e-Qur’an) and so
all the instances were collected and correlated in a special manner, and
mentioned in one place in this book.

2. In this collection care has been exercised to refrain from presenting
questions pertaining to the commentary of the verses. This is because
our objective was to compile those questions that are propounded in our
religious society and not questions relating to the commentary of the
verses - for the answers to the latter can be obtained only after a
study of the entire commentary.

3. It may be questioned: 'Is this collection not a repetition of the
book 'Pursish-ha Wa Pasukh-hae Madhhabi', authored by the reverend
teacher and Ayatullah Subhani?' In this regard it should be known that
there are only 30 questions that are common to both of them.

4. Although the compilation of this book may appear to have been a
simple task, however the various stages of the work, whether it be the
studying of the commentaries, the extraction of the questions and
answers, the arrangement and organisation of the repeated portions…
demanded a great deal of time.

5. From the entire collection of 180 questions and answers, 143
questions are from Tafsir-e-Namunah, 35 from the commentary
Payam-e-Qur’an, one from Payam-e-Imam (the commentary on Nahjul Balaghah
by the reverend teacher) and one from the book Afaridegar-e-Jihan (a
collection of the reverend teacher's lectures). It is hoped that this
insignificant service finds acceptance by Hazrat Baqiyatullah - May our
souls be his ransom.

Sayyid Husain Husaini  
 Qum


