36. Is Naskh (Abrogation) Permitted in the Religious Laws?
==========================================================

According to the dictionary, نَسْخ means to efface and to dispel while,
in the terminology of the Shari'ah, it means altering one ruling and
replacing it with another one. For example:

After the emigration to Medinah, the Muslims, for a period of fifteen
months, offered their prayers in the direction of Bayt al-Maqdas after
which the order to change the Qiblah was issued and all of them were
obliged to face the Ka'bah while offering their prayers.

In verse 15 of Suratul Nisa, the punishment stipulated for women, who
committed fornication, was that if four witnesses testified to the crime
they should be imprisoned in the house until death overtook them or
until the time Allah (s.w.t.) decreed another alternative for them.

This verse was abrogated by means of verse 2 of Suratul Nur in which
their punishment was changed to one hundred lashes.

At this juncture, there is a well-known objection, which is propounded
as follows: If the first ruling possessed expediency and common good,
then why was it abrogated? And if not, why was it legislated in the
first place?

In other words: Why was this ruling not legislated from the very
beginning so as to not have needed alteration?

Islamic scholars, since ancient times, have presented the answer to this
question in their books which, together with our explanation, is as
follows:

We do know that at times, with the change in time and conditions of the
environment, man's needs change while at other times they remain stable.
One day a programme guarantees his success while on another day, due to
changes in circumstances, it is likely that the same programme acts as
an obstacle in his path of progress.

One day a particular medicine is extraordinarily effective for a sick
person and so the doctor prescribes it for him, but on another day, due
to a comparative betterment of his state, it is possible that this
medicine could even be detrimental for him and so the doctor orders it
to be discontinued and substitutes it with another medicine.

It is possible that a book is beneficial for a student this year but
useless for him the next. An experienced teacher should adjust the
course such that year after year only those books, which are necessary
for the students and ought to be taught.

This issue, especially in view of the laws regarding the development of
man and societies, becomes clearer; in the course of human development
and perfection, at times a programme is beneficial and constructive
while at times, detrimental and therefore in need of a change. The need
for changing the curriculum at various time-intervals appears to become
more manifest, particularly during the start of social and ideological
revolutions.

Of course, it ought not to be forgotten that the fundamentals of Divine
laws which constitute the basic foundations are the same everywhere;
under no circumstances shall Unity, social justice or hundreds of other
such rulings ever undergo an alteration. The change only occurs in
secondary issues.

Additionally, it should not be forgotten that indeed the development of
religions can reach such a state that the final religion is revealed as
the Seal of the religions, such that there can be no alteration in its
rulings.[^1]

[^1]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 1, pg. 390


