37. Is it Correct to Label Days as Auspicious and Inauspicious?
===============================================================

Among many people, it is a usual practise to consider some days to be
blessed while some others to be inauspicious and sinister - although
great differences prevail amongst man in singling them out.
Nevertheless, the point of discussion is: To what extent is this general
belief accepted in Islam? Or does it have its origins in Islam?

Of course, intellectually, it is not impossible that parts of time
differ from each other - some possessing the characteristics of
auspiciousness while others possessing contrary characteristics -
however, we have no means to either establish or refute the issue. All
we can say is that such a thing is possible despite not having been
proved by means of rational proofs.

Accordingly, if we come to possess religious proofs that reach us by way
of revelation and which serve to illuminate wider horizons for us in
connection with this issue, not only is there no harm in accepting them,
but on the contrary, its acceptance becomes essential.

There are only two instances in the Qur’an which allude to inauspicious
days - verse 19 of Suratul Qamar and verse 16 of Suratul Fussilat - and
which narrate the story of the people of 'Ad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ رِيْحاً صَرْصَراً فِي أََيَّامٍ نَحِسَاتٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So We sent on them a furious wind in unlucky days.”***[^1]

On the other hand, the expression مبارك (blessed) too is observed in
some of the verses of the Qur’an, as is mentioned in connection with the
Night of Qadr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أََنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيلَةٍ مُبَارَكَةٍ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We revealed it on a blessed night…”***[^2]

Originally, نحس means 'extraordinary redness of the horizon', which
makes it appear as نحاس meaning 'a flame of fire that is devoid of
smoke' and then, in this case, it is employed to mean 'inauspicious'.

Thus, the Qur’an does not possess anything more than a vague allusion to
this issue; however, as far as Islamic traditions are concerned, a
number of them mention auspicious and inauspicious days. And although
some of them are weak and, at times, mixed with traditions that have
been fabricated or associated with superstition, nonetheless not all of
them are such for undoubtedly there do exist genuine traditions amongst
them, and the commentators too, whilst interpreting the above verses,
have attested to this fact.

'Allamah Majlisi, the great scholar of traditions has presented many
traditions in this regard in his book *Biharul Anwar*.[^3]

There are a few points that briefly need to be mentioned here: In a
number of traditions, auspicious and inauspicious days have been
interpreted in connection with the events that have transpired on those
days. For example, in a tradition from the Commander of the Faithful
(a.s.) we read that a person sought to know from him, which was the
Wednesday that the people considered to be inauspicious?

The Imam (a.s.) replied: That is the last Wednesday of the month which
occurs during the waning of the moon. It was on this day that Qabil
killed his brother Habil … And on this day of Wednesday, Allah (s.w.t.)
sent the windstorm over the people of 'Ad.[^4]

And therefore, numerous commentators, on the basis of abundant
traditions, have declared the last Wednesday of the month to be
inauspicious and refer to it as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أََلأَرْبِعَاءُ لاَ تَدُورُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Wednesday that shall never recur.”

Some other traditions declare the first day of the month to be
auspicious and blessed since Adam (a.s.) was created on that day, and
similarly for the 26th day of the month, for Allah (s.w.t.) had split
the sea asunder for Musa (a.s.) on that day.[^5]

A few state that the third day of the month is inauspicious for on that
day Adam and Eve were expelled from Paradise, and the clothes of
Paradise were taken away from them.[^6]

Others claim that the seventh day is a blessed one, for on that day Nuh
(a.s.) climbed aboard his ship (and was delivered from the flood).[^7]

Or what we read in connection with Nawroz, in a tradition from Imam
as-Sadiq (a.s.), when he said: “It is a blessed day since it was on this
day that Nuh's (a.s.) ark came to rest upon the (Mount) Judi, Jibra’il
descended upon the Noble Prophet (S), 'Ali (a.s.) climbed upon the
shoulders of the Noble Prophet (S) and destroyed the idols of the
Ka'bah, and the event of Ghadir Khum took place…”[^8]

Such interpretations, which tend to correlate auspicious and
inauspicious days with desirable and undesirable events, are mentioned
many times in narrations. This is especially observed with respect to
the day of 'Ashura because the Umayyads, considering themselves to be
victorious over the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), regarded it as an auspicious
day - a concept that has been prohibited in no uncertain terms in the
traditions. Traditions forbid people to regard it as a blessed day and
also warn them that this day should not be considered to be a day for
hoarding the provisions of the year; in fact, trade should be stopped on
that day and one should practically distance oneself from the scheme of
the Umayyads.

Collectively, these traditions have led some people to be of the opinion
that Islam intends to draw the attention of the Muslims towards these
incidents so that they learn from these events with respect to their
deeds, and distance themselves from destructive episodes and those who
were involved in them.

This interpretation could be true with respect to some traditions, but
undoubtedly this is not so for all of them since, from some of the
traditions, it can be inferred that occasionally, in some of these days,
there exists a mysterious influence of which we are not aware.

Another point which demands attention is that some people carry the
issue of auspicious and inauspicious days to such extremes that before
attempting any task, they wait for such days and, in the process, lag
behind in numerous activities and let golden opportunities slip out of
their hands.

Or that instead of investigating the causes of the successes and
failures of themselves and others, and benefiting from the invaluable
experiences, they thrust the blame of all failures upon the inauspicious
of the days, just as they search for the secret of successes in the
blessed days!

This is a kind of escapism from reality, extremism in the issue and a
superstitious explanation for life's events - something that ought to be
intensely avoided. In such issues, attention should not be paid to the
hearsays amongst the people, the words of the astrologers or the fortune
tellers. If something in this regard is established by means of
authentic traditions, it must be accepted but if not, then, with scant
regard for the words of every Tom, Dick and Harry, one ought to continue
one's life, advance firmly by means of one's efforts and hard work, and
rely upon Allah (s.w.t.) and seek His help.

Attention towards auspicious and inauspicious of days, in addition to
guiding man towards a series of didactic historical events, also serves
to make him mindful of Allah (s.w.t.) and turn to Him for assistance. It
is for this reason we read in the traditions: On the days that have been
branded as inauspicious, you can, after giving charity or reciting
supplications or seeking Allah's (s.w.t.) help or reciting some of the
verses of the Noble Qur’an and placing your reliance on Allah (s.w.t.),
pursue your work and emerge successful.

In a tradition we read that one of the companions of Imam Hasan 'Askari
(a.s.) came to meet him on a Tuesday, whereupon the Imam (a.s.) said: “I
did not see you yesterday.”

The man replied: “Yesterday was a Monday and I was disinclined to move
out on this day!” The Imam (a.s.) replied: “One who desires to remain
protected from the evils of Monday, should recite Surat Hal Ata in the
first rak'at of his morning prayer.” The Imam then recited this verse
from Surat Hal Ata (which bears relation to warding away the evils.)[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَقاَهُمُ اللٌّهُ شَرَّ ذٌلِکَ الْيَوْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Therefore Allah (s.w.t.) will guard them from the evil of that day and
cause them to meet with ease and happiness.”

It has been reported in another tradition that one of the companions of
the sixth Imam (a.s.) asked him: “Is it appropriate to embark upon a
journey on the abominable days like Wednesday or other like days?”

The Imam (a.s.) replied: “Commence your journey by giving charity,
recite Ayatul Kursi when you intend to start out (and then proceed
wherever you desire.”[^10]

It has been reported in a tradition that a companion of Imam 'Ali ibne
Muhammad al-Hadi (a.s.) says: “I arrived in the presence of the Imam
(a.s.) in such a state that while on the way, I had wounded my finger, a
rider had collided with me injuring my shoulder, and I had got entangled
in the midst of a multitude and my garments were torn.” I exclaimed: “O'
Day! May Allah (s.w.t.) protect me from your evil! What an evil day you
are! Having heard this, the Imam (a.s.) admonished him: “You are
associated with us and yet you utter such things? You consider the day
to be an offender when it has committed no offense?”

The narrator says: Hearing these words, I came to my senses and,
realizing my mistake, said to him (a.s.): “O' My Master! I am repentant
and seek Allah's forgiveness. The Imam (a.s.) added: “What crime have
the days committed that you consider them to be inauspicious; it is only
the consequences of your own deeds that come to afflict you in these
days?”

The narrator says: “I shall continually seek forgiveness of Allah
(s.w.t.) and this shall be my repentance, O' Son of the Prophet of
Allah!”

The Imam (a.s.) said: “This shall not prove beneficial for you; Allah
(s.w.t.) shall punish you for reproaching something that did not deserve
reproach. Don't you know that Allah (s.w.t.) rewards and punishes, and
shall recompense the deeds in this world and the Hereafter. He (a.s.)
then added: Henceforth do not repeat this act and do not ascribe any
effects to the days vis-à-vis Allah's rulings!”[^11]

This profound tradition alludes to the fact that even if the days happen
to possess an influence, it is only upon the orders of Allah. Never
should they be looked upon as possessing an independent influence and
never should one be looked upon as being independent of Allah's grace.

Thus, one should not associate the occurrence of events, which mainly
possess an expiatory aspect with respect to man's wrongful deeds, with
the influence of the days and in this manner attempt to exonerate
oneself. This explanation is perhaps the best way to resolve the
conflict between the various traditions that exist in this regard.[^12]

[^1]: It should be noted that the term نحسات, which appears in the
verse, is an adjective for the term ايام, i.e. the mentioned days have
been described as inauspicious, whereas in the verse presently under
discussion (في يوم نحس مستمر), the term يوم has been annexed to نحس and
does not possess the descriptive meaning. However, with reference to the
context of the above verse, we have to admit that in this case, the noun
has been annexed to the adjective.

[^2]: Suratul Dukhan (44), Verse 3

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 59, Chapter al-Sama wa al-A'lam, pg. 1 to 91

[^4]: Tafsir Nurul Thaqalain, vol. 5, pg. 183, no. 25

[^5]: Tafsir Nurul Thaqalain, vol. 5, pg. 105

[^6]: Tafsir Nurul Thaqalain, vol. 5, pg. 58

[^7]: Tafsir Nurul Thaqalain, vol. 5, pg. 61

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 59, pg. 92

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 59, pg. 39, no. 7

[^10]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 59, pg. 28

[^11]: Tuhaf al-'Uqul, as quoted in Biharul Anwar, vol. 59, pg. 2 (with
a slight abridgment).

[^12]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 23, pg. 41


