43. What is the Myth of Gharaniq or ‘The Satanic Verses’?
=========================================================

A story has been narrated in this regard, which has become popular as
the story of Gharaniq. According to this story, the Noble Prophet (S)
had been engaged in reciting Suratul Najm in front of the polytheists.
When he had recited this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَرَأَيْتُمُ اللاَّتَ وَ الْعُزَّى وَ مَنَاةَ الثَّالِثَةَ
الأُُخْرى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you then considered the Lat and the 'Uzza; and Manat, the
third, the last?”***[^1], the Satan caused him (S) to recite the
following two sentences (which were not part of Surah) too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الْغَرَانِيقُ الْعُلْيَ وَ إِنَّ شَفاَعَتَهُنَّ لَتُرْجَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“They are beautiful, high-ranking birds, and their intercession is
anticipated.”[^2]

Hearing this, the polytheists were absolutely thrilled and said:
(Muhammad), until today, had never spoken nicely of our Gods. At that
moment the Noble Prophet (S) went into prostration and they too
prostrated. All the polytheists of the Quraish were ecstatic and then
went their ways, but shortly later Jibra’il descended and informed him
(S): I had not brought for you those two sentences! These were of the
inspirations of the Satan!

The following verse was then revealed which cautioned the Noble Prophet
(S) and the believers[^3]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا أَرْسَلْــنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رَسُولٍ وَ لاَ نَبِيٍّ إِلاَّ
إِذَا تَمَنَّى أَلْقَى الشَّيْطَانُ فِي أُمْنِيَّتِهِ فَيَنْــسَخُ
اللٌّهُ مَا يُلْقِي الشَّيْطَانُ ثُمَّ يُحْكِمُ اللٌّهُ آيَاتِهِ وَ
اللٌّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We did not send before you any messenger or prophet, but when he
desired, the Shaytan made a suggestion respecting his desire; but Allah
(s.w.t.) annuls that which the Shaytan casts, then does Allah (s.w.t.)
establish His communications, and Allah (s.w.t.) s Knowing,
Wise.”***[^4]

If this tradition were to be accepted, it would put a question mark over
the infallibility of the prophets, even with respect to receiving the
revelation, and would serve to erode away the confidence in them.

At this juncture, before we endeavour to study and critically examine
the traditions, we should first separate the text of verse 52 of Suratul
Hajj from the traditions fabricated in connection with it and see what
the verse actually has to say:

Certainly, the text of this verse, disregarding the false annotations,
not only does not taint the infallibility of the prophets but on the
contrary, is one of the proofs of their infallibility. This is because,
it says: Whenever they possessed a positive plan and desire (every kind
of desire is called امنية, but here امنية refers to a positive and
constructive scheme for the advancement of their objectives; if it was
not constructive, the Satan would never seek to put whisperings into it)
the Satan would attack it, but before he could exert an influence upon
their will or acts, Allah (s.w.t.) would nullify the Satanic
inspirations and fortify His verses.

(It should be noted that the “ف” in فَيَنسَخُ اللهُ denotes a sequence
without any intervening time internal, i.e. immediately and without any
time interval, Allah (s.w.t.) would annul and eliminate the inspirations
and the whisperings of the Satan.)

Testifying to this statement is another verse of the Qur’an which
explicitly states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَوْ لاَ أَنْ ثَبَّتْنَاكَ لَقَدْ كِدْتَ تَرْكَنُ إِلَيْهِمْ
شَيْئاً قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And had it not been that We had already established you, (and had
you not been protected from deviation under the shelter of
infallibility) you would certainly have been near to incline to them a
little.”***[^5]

In view of the fact that verse 73 of this same chapter indicates that
the infidels and the polytheists, by means of their evil insinuations,
strived to turn away the Noble Prophet (S) from the Divine revelation,
it becomes clear that Allah (s.w.t.) did not permit them to achieve this
success by employing their diabolical suggestions.

Also, in verse 113 of Suratul Nisa, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَوْ لاَ فَضْلُ اللٌّهِ عَلَيْكَ وَ رَحْمَتُهُ لَهَمَّتْ طَائِفَةٌ
مِنْهُمْ أَنْ يُضِلُّوكَ وَ مَا يُضِلُّونَ إِلاَّ أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَ مَا
يَضُرُّونَكَ مِنْ شَيْ‏ءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And were it not for Allah's grace upon you and His mercy a party of
them had certainly designed to bring you to perdition and they do not
bring (aught) to perdition but their own souls, and they shall not harm
you in any way.”***

All these indicate that Allah, by means of His blessings and succour,
never permitted the sinister suggestions of the devils from amongst the
men and jinn to affect and influence the Noble Prophet (S), and kept him
protected from all kinds of deviation.

All the above is applicable if we take امنية to mean desire, plan and
scheme (since, the original roots of this word are traced to assumption,
supposition and description).

However, most of the commentators have taken امنية to mean recitation,
and some have even sought to corroborate this by presenting poems of
Hasan ibne Thabit.[^6] Fakhr Razi too, in his commentary, has stated:
تَمَنَّی, according to the lexicon, possesses two meanings: The first
meaning is 'the desire of the heart' and the second is 'recitation'.[^7]

If we were to also take امنية to mean recitation, the meaning of the
verse would be that when the divine prophets used to recite the Divine
verses and sermons before the infidels and the polytheists, the devils
and (those possessing satanic attributes) would insert their words
amongst the words of the prophets in order to mislead the people, just
as they used to do with the Noble Prophet (S) too. Verse 26 of Suratul
Fussilat says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قَــالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لاَ تَسْمَعُوا لِهٌذَا الْقُرْْآنِ وَ
الْغَوْا فِيهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَغْلِــبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who disbelieve say: Do not listen to this Quran and make
noise therein, perhaps you may overcome.”***

In the light of this meaning, the meaning of the next verse (53 of
Suratul Hajj) also becomes clear when it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَجْــعَلَ مَا يُلْقِي الشَّيْطَانُ فِتْـنَةً لِلَّذِينَ فِي
قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ وَ الْقَاسِيَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So that He may make what the Shaytan casts a trial for those in
whose hearts is disease and those whose hearts are hard.”***[^8]

Even today, it is a common practice that when reformers of human
societies deliver beneficial and constructive lectures to a section of
the society, at times, those with diseased hearts raise an uproar and by
means of misleading slogans and satanic expressions attempt to make
light of those speeches and obliterate them by means of their futile
utterances.

And this, in reality, is an examination for the people of the society
and it is here that those with diseased hearts swerve away from the path
of truth whereas for the Mu'mins, it becomes a means for acquiring
greater awareness of the truthfulness of the prophets (a.s.). This, in
turn, would make the people humble towards their invitation to the
truth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لِيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ
رَبِّكَ فَيُؤْمِنُوا بِهِ فَتُخْبِتَ لَهُ قُلُوبُهُمْ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that those on whom knowledge has been bestowed may learn that
the (Qur’an) is the Truth from thy Lord, and that they may believe
therein, and their hearts may be made humbly (open) to it.”***[^9]

In any case, from what has been stated above, we have realized that the
verse under consideration does not contain anything which is
inconsistent with the infallibility of the prophets vis-à-vis errors and
deviation. Rather, as has been stated before, the verse emphasizes the
issue of infallibility since it says that Allah (s.w.t.) protects His
prophets while they receive the revelation or when they intend to
perform some other work, from the satanic inspirations and whisperings.

Now let us turn to the traditions and myths that have been mentioned in
this section and deduce their worth, for things have reached such a
stage that lately the devils, for the purpose of creating disturbance in
connection with the Noble Prophet (S), have set about writing the book
Satanic Verses.

Just as it had been previously stated, not only did the text of the
mentioned verses not possess anything which contradicted the
infallibility of the prophets, on the contrary, they prove and establish
their infallibility. However, traditions found in some of the secondary
Sunnite sources state things that are indeed strange in every respect,
and therefore ought to be studied and discussed separately. These
traditions, which we had presented at the start of this discussion, have
been reported, sometimes, from Ibne 'Abbas, at other times from Sa'id
ibne Jubair and occasionally from some other 'companions' or
'followers'.[^10]

However, these traditions are not to be seen in any of the Shiite
sources and, according to some of the Sunni scholars, these are also not
to be found in any of the six Sihah of the Sunni. So much so that
Muraghi, in his commentary, says: These traditions are undoubtedly a
fabrication of the heretics and foreign hands, and have not been found
in any of the authentic books. The fundamentals of the religion of Islam
reject them and sound intellect testifies to their falsehood and
incorrectness…

It is obligatory for all the scholars to disregard them and refrain from
wasting their time in explaining and interpreting them, especially in
view of the fact that trustworthy narrators have explicitly declared
them to be lies and fabrications.[^11]

We observe this same meaning, although in a different form, in *Tafsir
Jawahir* of Tantawi, wherein he says: These traditions have not been
mentioned in any of the Sihah like *Muwatta* of Malik, *Sahih* Bukhari,
*Sahih* Muslim, *Jami'* Tirmidhi, *Sunan* Abi Dawud and *Sunan*
Nisa’i[^12], and it is for this reason that the book, *Tafsir al-Wusul
Li Jami' al-Usul* - a collection of all the interpretive traditions of
the six Sihah - does not report these traditions while interpreting the
verses of Suratul Najm. Thus, it is inappropriate to attach importance
to them and talk about them, let alone debate about them… These
traditions are just manifest lies![^13]

One of the testimonies which Fakhr Razi presents to prove it to be a
fabrication is that in *Sahih Bukhari* it has been reported from the
Noble Prophet (S) that when he recited Suratul Najm, the Muslims and the
polytheists, the men and the jinn, all fell into prostration; and the
tradition bears no mention of the story of gharaniq. Furthermore, this
tradition (which has been reported in *Sahih Bukhari*) has been reported
by several chains of narrators and not the slightest mention of the
story of Gharaniq meets the eye.[^14]

Not only the abovementioned commentators, but even others such as
Qurtubi in his commentary *al-Jami'*, Sayyid Qutb in his commentary *Fi
Dhilal al-Qur’an*, other Sunni scholars and all of the distinguished and
celebrated Shi'ite scholars have branded this tradition as a fabrication
and have attributed it to the enemies of Islam.

As such, it is not strange that the enemies of Islam, especially the
inimical Orientalists, have publicized this tradition and reported it
with a great deal of embellishment. We have also witnessed that recently
they have forced a writer, coming from an evil lineage, to author a book
under the title of *The Satanic Verses* and, by means of extremely
derogatory and vile expressions in the course of a fictitious and
make-believe story, not only question the sanctities of Islam but also
exhibit sacrilege towards the great prophets (like Ibrahim), who are
looked upon with great reverence by all the Divine religions.

And again it is not strange that the English text of this book was
translated with astonishing swiftness into different languages and
distributed all over the world. And when Ayatullah Khomeini R issued his
historical fatwa declaring the author, Salman Rushdie, to have become an
apostate and thereby deserving to be compulsorily killed, there arose in
Rushdie's favour, on the part of the colonial governments and enemies of
Islam, a tidal wave of support, so great that the world had never seen
the like of it before.

This amazing phenomenon revealed the reality that Salman Rushdie was not
acting alone, and the issue is much more than just authoring an
anti-Islamic book. It is, in fact, a conspiracy that has been chalked
out by the Western colonial powers and the Zionists with the objective
of bludgeoning Islam - a conspiracy which they support seriously and in
great earnest.

But the firm resistance and perseverance of Ayatullah Khomeini (r.a.) in
his fatwa, the continuation of his policy on the part of his successors
and the global acceptance of this historical fatwa by the general Muslim
public served to foil the conspiracy of the conspirators.

And until this date, as we write this, the author of the mentioned book
leads his life in total concealment and is scrupulously protected by the
colonial governments; it appears that he shall be forced to lead the
rest of his life in this fashion and probably he might be killed by his
very mentors to extricate themselves from this humiliation.

Thus, the 'creating cause' for this fabricated tradition also acts as
its 'preserving cause', i.e. a conspiracy was initiated on the part of
the enemies of Islam and now, after more than a thousand years, another
group from amongst them strive to continue this conspiracy, although on
a much wider scale.

As such, we do not deem it necessary to present, for this tradition,
explanations and justifications which, for example, appear in great
detail in the commentary *Ruhul Ma'ani* and concisely in other
commentaries. This is because a tradition, which is fundamentally rotten
and which has been emphatically branded as a forgery on the part of
eminent Islamic scholars, does not need to be explained.

However, we only wish to present some points which shall provide some
more clarification:  
 The relentless, uncompromising and perpetual fight of the Noble Prophet
(S) against idolatry, from the beginning of his invitation (to Islam)
until the end of his life, is a fact which is not concealed from friend
and foe alike.

The most important issue for which he was never willing to compromise
and exhibit flexibility was this very issue. Despite this, how could he
have possibly commended and praised the idols of the polytheists by such
words, and spoken of them in good light?

The teachings of Islam declare that the only sin that can never be
forgiven and overlooked is polytheism, and it is for this reason that
Islam has regarded the destruction of centers of idolatry, whatever the
consequence, as obligatory, and the entire Qur’an is a testimony to this
fact. This very fact is clearly indicative of the fabricated nature of
the tradition of Gharaniq, in which idols have been commended!

Apart from this, those who have fabricated the story of Gharaniq have
overlooked the fact that a cursory reading of the verses of Suratul Najm
would be sufficient to prove this myth to be false, and reveal that
there exists no harmony between the commendation of the idols by means
of the sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الْغَرَااَنِيقُ الْعُلْيَ وَ إِنَّ شَفاَعَتَهُنَّ لَتُرْتَجَى‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

and the verses situated before and after it. This is because, in the
beginning of this very chapter, it has been explicitly stated that the
Noble Prophet (S) does not speak of his own desire and whatever he says
in connection with the Islamic beliefs and laws, is Divine revelation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا يَنْطِقُ عَنِ الْهَوى إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ وَحْيٌ يُوْحى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed.”***[^15]

The Qur’an also emphasizes that the Noble Prophet (S) shall never go
astray from the true path and never lose himself:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا ضَلَّ صَاحِبُكُمْ وَ مَا غَوى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your companion does not err, nor does he go astray.”***[^16]

What could be greater deviation than interpolating speeches of
polytheism and praises of idols within the verses of monotheism? And as
for speaking of one's desire, what could be worse than adding satanic
words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الْغَرَااَنِيقُ الْعُلْيَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

to Allah's speech?

Interestingly, the verses following the verses presently under
consideration explicitly criticize and denounce the idols and the
idol-worshippers and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ هِيَ إِلاَّ أَسْمَآءٌ سَمَّيْتُمُوهَا أَنْــتُمْ وَ آبَاؤُكُمْ
مَا أَنْزَلَ اللٌّهُ بِهَا مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ إِنْ يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ
الظَّنَّ وَ مَا تَهْوَى الأََنْفُسُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They are naught but names which you have named, you and your
fathers; Allah (s.w.t.) has not sent for them any authority. They follow
naught but conjecture and the low desires which (their) souls incline
to; and certainly the guidance has come to them from their
Lord.”***[^17]

Which intellect would be given to believe that a wise and intelligent
person, occupying the rank of prophethood and in the process of reciting
Divine revelation would, in one sentence, praise the idols while two
sentences later deprecate them with such vehemence and intensity? How
can this blatant contradiction in two consecutive sentences be explained
and justified?

Here we have to acknowledge that the cohesion of the verses of the Noble
Qur’an are such that any impure addition made to it on the part of
inimical and tendentious individuals is thrown out, and they clearly
reveal it to be a patch which is inharmonious and an addition that is
unrelated. This is the fate which the tradition of Gharaniq suffers from
amidst the verses of the Noble Qur’an.

At this juncture, one question remains to be answered and that is: How
is it that an issue, so baseless and unsubstantiated, has come to
acquire such popularity?

The answer to this question is not very difficult and intricate; the
popularity of this tradition is, to a great extent, indebted to the
efforts of the enemies of Islam, who imagine that they have managed to
lay their hands on a good pretext to blemish the infallibility of the
Noble Prophet (S) and the authenticity of the Noble Qur’an.

Thus, the reason for its popularity amongst the enemies is clearly
comprehended. However, its popularity amongst the Islamic historians,
according to some of the Islamic scholars, stems from the fact that many
of the historians are always on the lookout for new, exciting and
exceptional issues - however much there may exist a question mark over
their historical authenticity - so that they can make their books more
interesting and tumultuous.

And since the myth of gharaniq is unprecedented in the life of the Noble
Prophet (S), they, without examining the weakness of its chain of
narrators and the baseless nature of its contents, record it in their
books of history and traditions; subsequently, others dwell upon it with
the intention of subjecting it to a critical examination and study.

Conclusion
----------

From what has been discussed above, it becomes plain and clear that not
only do the verses of the Qur’an not contain anything which contradicts
the infallibility of the prophets, rather, these very verses, which have
been imagined to be contradicting it, contain clear indications that
accentuate the rank of infallibility for them.[^18]

[^1]: Suratul Najm (53), Verse 19, 20

[^2]: غرانيق is the plural of غرنوق - a kind of water bird that is white
or black in colour. There are other meanings too that have been
mentioned (for this word) (as quoted from Qamus al-Lugah).

[^3]: Most of the distinguished commentators have reported this
tradition although with a little difference, and have subjected it to a
critical examination.

[^4]: Suratul Hajj (22), Verse 52

[^5]: Suratul Isra’ (17), Verse 74

[^6]: تمنی کتاب الله اول ليلة و آخرها لاقی حمام المقادر. In Taj
al-'Arus, the commentary of the book Qamus, and also in the actual text
of the book Qamus, تمنی الکتاب has been stated to mean تلاوة الکتاب
(recitation of the book). Then, quoting from Azhari, it says: تلاوة has
been called امنية because whenever the reciter reaches a verse of mercy,
he desires (Allah's) mercy and whenever he reaches a verse of
chastisement, he desires deliverance from it. However, the book Maqayis
al-Lughah is of the opinion that this word has been made to mean تلاوة
because it is a kind of measurement and placement of every verse it is
own place.

[^7]: The Commentary of Fakhr Razi, vol. 23, pg. 51

[^8]: Of course, the interpretation of the last verse, on the basis of
the first meaning, is not without its objections. This is because the
satanic inspirations in the souls of the Prophets, despite the fact that
they were immediately eliminated and annulled by means of divine succor,
cannot be a means of examination for the hypocrites and those possessing
diseased hearts. This is because these whisperings do not have any
external manifestation and appearance, rather, they are ephemeral
inspirations inside the souls of the Prophets. Except if it is said that
the meaning is that when the divine Prophets desired to implement their
desires and plans, in practice, the devils engaged themselves in
sabotaging and whispering diabolical suggestions - this being the
appropriate occasion for trials and examinations. And with this
explanation, the coherence and relationship between the three verses
(52, 53 and 54 of Suratul Hajj) is preserved and maintained. Strangely
enough, some of the commentators have presented various interpretations
and possibilities for the first verse without endeavouring to preserve
the harmony between it and the two subsequent verses.

[^9]: Suratul Hajj (22), Verse 54

[^10]: For more information regarding the chains of narrators of these
traditions in the books of the Sunnis, refer the book al-Durr
al-Manthur, vol. 4, pg. 366-368, under verse 52 of Suratul Hajj.

[^11]: Tafsir Muraghi, vol. 17, pg. 130, under the abovementioned verse.

[^12]: It should be noted that the book Muwatta of Malik is not regarded
as one of the six Sihah books. The book Sunan Ibn Majah is the sixth
book of the Sihah.

[^13]: Tafsir Jawahir, vol. 6, pg. 46

[^14]: The commentary of Fakhr Razi, vol. 23, pg. 50

[^15]: Suratul Najm (53), Verse 3,4

[^16]: Suratul Najm (53), Verse 2

[^17]: Suratul Najm (53), Verse 23

[^18]: Tafsir Payam-e-Qur’an, vol. 7, pg. 164


