1. What is the purpose of mankind’s creation?
=============================================

It is rare to find someone who has not asked himself or others the
question: “What is the purpose of our creation?” A group of people
continuously come into this world while another group leave it, becoming
extinguished for ever - what is the idea behind this coming and going?

If we humans had not been living on this planet, what difference would
it have made? Is it necessary for us to know why we have come and why we
shall go? If we discover the reason, do we have the ability to acquire
this objective? Subsequent to this question, numerous other questions
loom, plaguing man's mind and thoughts.

Whenever the materialists ask themselves this question, they apparently
cannot answer it since matter does not possess perception and intellect
for it to pursue an objective. Hence, they have put themselves at ease
in this regard by convincing themselves of the insignificance of man's
creation!

Is it not strange that these people envision precise aims and plan
systematic programs for the minute details of life such as education,
job, work, treatment, medication and sports, but, when they view life as
a whole, they considers it to be aimless?

Thus, it is not astonishing that when a group from amongst such people
reflect upon these issues, they become discontented by this vain and
purposeless life and consequently resort to suicide.

However, when a God-worshipping person asks himself this question, he
never finds himself in despair. Primarily, he knows that the Creator of
this world is Wise and therefore His act of creation is undoubtedly
based on wisdom - although some men might not be aware of it; secondly,
viewing every part of himself, he observes that each one possesses an
objective. Not only the brain, heart, blood vessels and the nerves, but
even the nails, eyelashes, fingerprints, the depressions in the palms
and the feet; each has a philosophy attached to its presence which has
been identified and proven today.

How naïvely we reflect when we consider all of these to individually
possess a purpose but to collectively lack an objective!

What kind of absurd judgment it is that identifies an objective for the
construction of each building within a city, yet denies the existence of
any purpose for the city itself!

Is it conceivable that an engineer constructs a great building in which
all the rooms, passages, doors, hatches, ponds, gardens and the décors
have been meticulously built with a particular purpose in mind, whilst
the building itself has been constructed without any objective?

These are the points which provide conviction to a believing person that
this creation pursues a great objective, which he should strive to
comprehend by means of his intellect.

Furthermore, it is amazing that when the advocates of the
purposelessness of creation venture into the fields of physical
sciences, they relentlessly endeavor to uncover the aim of various
phenomena which they happen come across; so much so that they are
unwilling to consider the insignificance of even one small gland
situated in a corner of the body - experimenting for years to uncover
the reason behind its existence. However, when it comes to the creation
of man, they unequivocally claim it to be without an objective! What a
bizarre contradiction!

In any event, belief in the Wisdom of Allah (s.w.t.) and attention
towards the purpose of the various parts of man, imparts a firm
conviction to us that there exists a great significance behind the
creation of man.

Having comprehended this, we ought to strive to understand this purpose
and, to the best of our abilities, set off towards achieving it.

Attention towards one fundamental point might serve to illuminate our
path and thereby make our journey easier:

All of our actions are always motivated by an objective; and this goal
usually involves combating our flaws and fulfilling our requirements.
Even acts such as serving someone, helping a person in distress or
practicing self-sacrifice; each serve to do away with shortcomings and
fulfill our spiritual needs.

Accordingly, in contemplating the attributes and acts of Allah (s.w.t.)
we usually blunder by comparing them with ours, often asking: What flaws
and shortcomings did Allah (s.w.t.) possess that could possibly be
eliminated by creating us? Or, when we read in the Qur’an, which states
that the purpose of man's creation is worshipping Allah (s.w.t.), we
ask: Why does He need our worship? We do not realize that these thoughts
stem from an erroneous comparison of the attributes of the Creator with
the created.

Man indeed is a limited and confined entity which strives to do away
shortcomings and hence concentrates its efforts towards achieving this
objective. However, this concept is meaningless with respect to an
Entity that is unlimited and infinite, and hence we ought to seek the
objective and purpose of His acts in entities other than Him.

He is an abundant overflowing spring and the bounty-creating Originator
who, having taken the entire creation within the canopy of His support,
nourishes and fosters them, leading them from imperfection towards
perfection. This is the actual purpose of our servitude (towards Allah
(s.w.t.) ) and this is the philosophy of our worship and prayers, which
are indeed training classes for leading us towards perfection.

Consequently we conclude that the purpose of our creation is the
(achievement) of perfection of our selves.

Basically, the actual act of creation - that is to move from
non-existence into existence, from a non-entity into an entity, from
zero to a figure - is a huge step towards perfection, subsequent to
which start the other phases that lead towards this goal, including the
entire religious set-up which emphasizes this objective.[^1]

[^1]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 22, pg. 389


