3. What is the purpose of the perfection of man?
================================================

Some ask that although the aim of our creation is human perfection, what
is the purpose of this goal?  
 The answer to this question shall become clear by considering the fact
that perfection is the final aim or in other words, it is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غَايَةُ الْغَايَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Explanation
-----------

If we were to ask a student: Why do you study? He would say: So that I
can gain admission into a university.

If we ask: Why do you desire to get yourself admitted into a university?
He would answer: So that I can become an able doctor or an engineer (for
example).

If we ask again: Why do you desire to possess a medical or an
engineering degree? He shall say: So that I may engage myself in a
productive activity and also that I earn a good income.

If we were to persist and ask: Why do you need a good income? He would
say: So that I can lead a respectable and comfortable life.

Finally if we ask him: Why do you desire to lead a respectable and
comfortable life? At this juncture we shall notice that his tone changes
and he will say: Well, so that I can lead a respectable and comfortable
life.

He repeats his previous answer.

This proves that he has reached his final answer and, technically
speaking, he has reached the **غَايَةُ الْغاَياَت** - the final aim of
his efforts beyond which there exists no answer and which constitutes
his final aim and objective. This is with regard to the material life.

The case is similar in respect to the spiritual life too. When it is
said: What was the purpose of the prophets, the revelation of the Divine
Books, the religious obligations, and the educative set-up? We say: For
achieving human perfection and attaining proximity to Allah (s.w.t.).

Now, if it is said: What is the purpose of achieving human perfection
and attaining proximity to Allah (s.w.t.)? We say: For proximity to
Allah (s.w.t.)!

This is the final aim. Expressing it differently, we desire everything
for the sake of perfection and attaining nearness to Allah (s.w.t.), but
we seek nearness to Allah (s.w.t.) for itself (i.e. nearness to Allah
(s.w.t.) ).[^1]

[^1]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 22, pg. 393


