4. Why does Allah (s.w.t.) test people?
=======================================

The topic of Divine trial is an issue of great debate and discussion.
The first question that comes to mind is: Are trials not for
understanding matters which are obscure, hence eliminating our
ignorance? If so, why does Allah (s.w.t.), Who possesses knowledge of
the hidden and the manifest of everything within the heavens and the
earth, have to examine and test (the people)? Does there exist
something, which is concealed from Him and which may become manifest for
Him by means of examination?

The answer lies in the fact that the concept of examination with respect
to Allah (s.w.t.) is vastly different from that, with respect to us.

Our examinations are that which has been stated above, i.e. for a better
comprehension and for clearing away ambiguity and ignorance, whilst the
Divine trials are, in reality, development and training.

Explanation
-----------

In the Noble Qur’an there are more than twenty instances of examinations
that have been attributed to Allah (s.w.t.). This is a general law (of
conduct) of Allah (s.w.t.), implemented by Him for the development of
man's hidden abilities (and bringing them from potentiality into
actuality), thereby enabling him to progress. Just as iron, for
acquiring greater strength, is put into a furnace to make it tempered,
similarly man is also nurtured within the furnace of adversities in
order that he becomes steadfast.

In reality, the examination of Allah (s.w.t.) resembles the work of an
experienced gardener, who sows the seeds in a fertile soil. These seeds,
benefiting from the natural bounties, begin to grow gradually -
combating adversities, battling unfavourable conditions and enduring
violent storms - until they end up in the form of a spray or a copious
gargantuan tree, capable of continuing their existence in the face of
hardships.

For the purpose of making soldiers tough, militarily, they are made to
participate in numerous different exercises and war games, wherein they
are subjected to various hardships such as hunger, thirst, heat,
chillness, adverse conditions and severe obstacles, in order that they
develop into accomplished, conditioned and proficient soldiers.

And this is the secret of Divine examinations.

The Noble Qur’an has asserted this reality, when it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لِيَبْـتَلِيَ اللٌّهُ مَا فِي صُدُورِكُمْ وَ لِيُمَحِّصَ مَا فِي
قُلُوبِكُمْ وَ اللٌّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that Allah (s.w.t.) might test what was in your chests and that
He might purge what was in your hearts; and Allah (s.w.t.) knows what is
in the hearts.”***[^1]

The Commander of the Faithful (a.s.), in a statement very profound in
meaning regarding the philosophy of Divine trials, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنْ كَانَ سُبْحَانَهُ أَعْلَمَ بِهِمْ مِنْ أَنْـفُسِهِمْ وَ لٌكِنْ
لِتَظْهَرَ الأََفْعَالُ الَّتِي بِهَا يُسْتَحَقُّ الثَّوَابُ وَ
الْعِقَابُ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Although Allah (s.w.t.) s more aware of their souls than they
themselves are, He tries them so that their deeds, which necessitate
reward and punishment, become manifest.”[^2]

Accordingly, the internal attributes of man can only be a measure for
reward or chastisement when they manifest themselves in man's actions.
Allah (s.w.t.) tries man to enable that which he possesses in the
interior to become manifest in deed and, his talents and abilities
emerge from potentiality into actuality.

In the absence of Divine examination, these talents and abilities would
have never flourished, and consequently the fruits of deeds would have
never manifested themselves upon the branches of the tree of human
existence; and this is the philosophy of Divine trials from the Islamic
perspective.[^3]

[^1]: Surat Ale 'Imran (3), Verse 154

[^2]: Nahjul Balagha, Short Saying 93

[^3]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 1, pg. 526


