5. Is the ‘prosperity’ or ‘wretchedness’ of mankind, inherent?
==============================================================

In verse 105 of Surat Hud, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَأْتِ لاَ تَکَلَّمَ نَفْسٌ إِلاَّ بِإِذْنِهِ فَمِنْهُمْ
شَقِيٌّ وَ سَعِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day when it shall come, no soul shall speak except with His
permission, then (some) of them shall be unhappy and (others) happy.”***

The question which arises is: Does this verse indicate that man's
prosperity and wretchedness is inherent?

There are several points that need to be taken into consideration:

1. It as we had mentioned earlier, there are some who, on the basis of
such verses, have sought to prove that man's prosperity and wretchedness
is inherent. However, not only do they fail to prove this point, but
they clearly prove that wretchedness and prosperity are states which are
acquired. This is because the verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا الَّذِينَ شَقَوْا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for those who will be wretched…”***

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا الَّذِينَ سُعِدُوا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for those who are fortunate…”***

indeed, if prosperity and wretchedness were inherent, the verse should
have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا الأَشْقِيَاءُ ءِ وَ أَمَّا السُّعَدَاءُءِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'As for the wretched ones' and 'as for the fortunate ones',***

or something similar to this.

Accordingly, it becomes evident that what Fakhr Razi has said in his
commentary, when he says - In these verses, Allah (s.w.t.) has already
ruled that on the Day of Judgment a group shall be fortunate and blessed
whilst another group shall be wretched; and it is impossible for those,
regarding whom Allah (s.w.t.) has passed this ruling and about whom, He
knows whether they shall be fortunate or wretched, to bring a change
within themselves. This is because, should such a thing ever take place,
it would mean that the words of Allah (s.w.t.) were lies and His
knowledge was (in fact) ignorance - and this is impossible!! - is
totally baseless.

This is the popular 'knowledge of Allah' objection, which is propounded
in connection with the issue of *jabr* (compulsion) and *ikhtiyar*
(choice). The answer to this claim is as follows:

If we desist from imposing our pre-conceived opinions upon the verse,
then its meaning is clear, for it says: On that Day, a group shall be
fortunate as a result of their deeds, while a group shall become
wretched due to their deeds, and Allah (s.w.t.) is aware of those, who
shall traverse the path to prosperity out of their own free will, and
those, who shall advance towards wretchedness, out of their own will and
choice.

Thus, contrary to what Fakhr Razi has said, if the people were compelled
to select a path, His knowledge would in reality be His ignorance since
He had known that all the people would opt for the blessed and wretched
path of out of their own will and choice.

A proof to what has been stated above is the fact that the above verses
are mentioned pursuant to the narratives of the previous nations, a
large number of whom, as a result of deviation from the path of truth
and opposition to the divine leaders, were seized by a painful
chastisement in this world. And the Qur’an, with the objective of
guiding us by distinguishing the paths leading towards prosperity and
wretchedness, has recounted these narratives for us.

Essentially, as Fakhr Razi and other like-minded individuals imagine, if
we were to possess inherent fortunateness and wretchedness, and if it
were to be drawn towards good and evil deeds without any choice, all the
teaching and training would be vain and futile. The coming of the
prophets, the revelation of the Divine books, the advices, admonitions,
encouragements, censures, rebukes, criticisms, remonstrations, Reckoning
and finally, rewards and punishments - all of them - would be looked
upon as either useless, or tyrannical!

Even those, who regard man as being compelled with respect to performing
good or evil acts - irrespective of whether they consider this
compulsion to be Divine compulsion, natural compulsion, economic
compulsion or circumstantial compulsion, only advocate this theory when
speaking or studying; however, when it comes to real life actions, even
they do not profess this opinion.

And it is for this reason that when their rights are trampled they
regard the transgressor as deserving rebuke and punishment, never
willing to condone him on the basis that he had been 'compelled' into
performing this act (on the part of Allah (s.w.t.) ) or regard punishing
him as being unjust, or say: he could not refrain himself from
committing the act, for Allah (s.w.t.) or nature or the environment
forced him into it. This is another proof of the inherent nature of
ikhtiyar (choice).

Furthermore, we do not observe any of those who follow the belief of
jabr (compulsion), adhering to this belief in the course of their daily
activities; rather, in their interaction with the people, they always
look upon them as individuals, who possess freedom and choice.

All the world's inhabitants, by setting up judicial systems for meting
out punishments to the offenders, have practically acknowledged man's
freedom of will.

All the educative institutions of the world too have implicitly accepted
the opinion that man performs actions by means of his own will and
inclination, and it is possible, by means of education, to distance him
from errors, lapses and deviated thinking.

2. Interestingly, in the above verses, the word (شقوا) is in the active
voice whereas the word (سُعِدُوا) is in the passive. This difference in
expression could be a subtle allusion to the point that man advances
upon the path of wretchedness by his own self, yet in order to advance
upon the path of prosperity, he requires Divine assistance, in the
absence of which he shall never be successful.

Undoubtedly, only those who have stepped out in this direction out of
their own choice and will, and have developed within themselves the
worthiness to benefit from such support, shall come to receive it.[^1]

[^1]: Tafsir-e-Namuna, vol. 9, pg. 236


