Introduction
============

In the history of ideas, there is no question that the figure of
al-Ghazali stands out as one of the greatest thinkers of the West.
Touted as the greatest Sunni theologian of all time, his polemic against
the Neoplatonic philosophers, chiefly Ibn Sina, dealt a deadly blow to
philosophy in the Islamic world.[^1] Born in 1058 CE in Tus, a city in
modern day Iran, al-Ghazali began his studies in jurisprudence, moving
on to study theology under the great theologian al-Juwayni.  Al-Ghazali
was fortunate enough to secure a teaching position in the Nizamiya
College of Baghdad, one of a number of seminaries established by Nizam
al-Mulk, the vizier for the Saljuk sultan, for the defense of Sunni
theology against the Isma‘ili Fatimid caliphate in Egypt. Al-Ghazali
soon became a popular teacher and renowned defender of Ash‘arite Sunni
theology.[^2] After five years of teaching in Baghdad, al-Ghazali became
disillusioned with his profession and entered a period of wandering,
monastic-like travels. His disillusionment was founded, no doubt, in an
intellectual and spiritual crisis of skepticism that led him to a study
of philosophy, and then into the mystical practice of sufism.[^3]
Al-Ghazali’s prominence as a legalist, theologian, apologist, and then
mystic, cast him into the role of religious reformer, the Muslim
parallel of Augustine and Aquinas in Christendom. After his travels,
al-Ghazali eventually returned to teaching at the Nizamiya College in
Nishapur, only to die five years later in 1111 CE.

Written after al-Ghazali’s period of private philosophical study, and
finished in January 1094 CE, the*Tahafut al-Falasifa* had the aim of
“pursuing the critique of reason which underlay his bout of skepticism,
and was trying to show that reason is not self-sufficient in the field
of metaphysics and is unable out of itself to produce a complete
world-view.”[^4] Even though, as Montgomery Watt explains, al-Ghazali
personally held certain doctrines that he refuted in the*Tahafut* .[^5]
Al-Ghazali wanted to show that reason itself “cannot prove that the
world has a creator, that two gods are impossible, that God is not a
body, that He knows both others and Himself, and that the soul is a
self-subsistent entity.”[^6]

Al-Ghazali, in a form reminiscent of Plato and Justin Martyr’s
dialogues, created dialogue partners with a group called “the
philosophers.” Whether this representation of the Islamic philosophers
with whom he was in dialogue with is true or not, is a subject for
another essay. This essay will examine al-Ghazali’s argument for the
temporal finiteness of the universe, as found in the first area of
discussion with the philosophers. It will show that the criticisms given
by al-Ghazali’s dialogue partners remain largely unanswered. Given that,
this paper will provide alternative philosophical proofs that allow
al-Ghazali to uphold his central thesis, while maintaining some air of
the orthodoxy he sought to defend.


