Tahafut al-Falasifa: Discussion One, Proofs 1 and 2a
====================================================

Al-Ghazali began his first discussion by noting that there are,
historically, three philosophical views on the world’s past eternity.
The first and most widely held position was that of “upholding [the
world’s] past eternity: that it has never ceased to exist with God,
exalted be He, to be an effect of His, to exist along with Him, not be
posterior to Him in time.”[^7] The second position, related to Plato,
suggested that the world was “generated and originated in time.” The
third position was agnostic in nature, and is found in the works of
Galen; it holds that one can never know “whether the world is
pre-eternal or temporally originated.”[^8]

From these, al-Ghazali turned his polemic to the most widely held
position, believing that this position was heretical and had led many
Muslims away from their religion.[^9] Al-Ghazali accuses the
philosophers of producing confusion by describing creation as
Neoplatonic emanation, instead of a creation*ex nihilo* . “The
philosophers,” comments Watt, “had been adapting Neoplatonic cosmology
to Qur’anic conceptions by equating emanation with creation.”[^10]
Though the philosophers had many proofs for an eternal universe,
al-Ghazali chose to focus on three of the most powerful, considering all
others products of “feeble imagining.” Within this refutation of the
arguments for the eternity of the world, can be discovered the*kalam*
cosmological argument for the finite temporality of the world.[^11]

The cosmological argument, according to Majid Fakhry, is considered the
“classical argument for the existence of God in the West.”[^12] Though
the cosmological argument was found in philosophers such as al-Farabi,
Ibn Sina and Ibn Rushd,[^13] based on an infinite contingency,
al-Ghazali argued that upholding the eternity of the universe makes the
affirmation of a Creator pointless.[^14] This was based on a traditional
rejection of the concept of efficient causality,[^15] seen clearly in
Discussion Seventeen of the*Tahafut* , where al-Ghazali “repudiates the
validity of the causal principle…on the ground that the alleged
necessity of this principle is a mere illusion.”[^16] Efficient
causality was, according to al-Ghazali, an unwarranted inference based
only on an apparent observation of a correlation between temporal
events. It is God; rather, who directly creates each and every action in
the universe in each and every moment.

Therefore, with “nearly a quarter of the*Incoherence* devoted to the
issue of whether the universe had a beginning in time…Ghazali ardently
upholds the traditional*kalam* argument.”[^17] The*kalam* form of the
cosmological argument was based in the traditional Ash‘arite (along with
the Mu‘tazilah[^18] ) arguments for God’s existence - the demonstration
of the universe as a created thing.[^19] Fakhry notes,

The general procedure of the Mutakallims in proving the temporality of
the universe considered in showing that the world, which they defined as
everything other than God, was composed of atoms and accidents.  Now the
accidents, they argued, cannot endure for two instants of time, but are
continually created by God who creates or annihilates them at will.[^20]

Though al-Ghazali did not assert this doctrine explicitly in his first
discussion, it factors into his argument implicitly, along with
appearing explicitly later in the philosopher’s question about an atom
receiving whiteness or blackness from God’s will. This is important to
note, because, for the Ash‘arite theologian, the world of atoms and
accidents was in a continuous state of change.[^21] A change that was
directly actualized by the power and will of God alone.

Al-Ghazali’s*kalam* cosmological argument for finite temporality of the
universe can clearly be found in his*Iqtisad* and*Jerusalem Letter* ,
while it is only found implicitly in the*Tahafut* , and was diagramed by
the following syllogism.

1- Whatever began to exist has a cause for its coming into being.
(Premise)

2- The universe began to exist. (Premise)

Therefore, the universe has a cause for coming into being. (From
1-2)[^22]

Al-Ghazali, in accordance with common sense, perceived that the first
premise is indisputable. Therefore, it became important to demonstrate
the truth of the second premise - that the universe is finite and began
to exist. In order to do so, al-Ghazali used two lines of attack: first,
showing that the philosophers had failed to demonstrate the
impossibility of the creation of a temporal entity from an eternal
being; second, that the beginning of the universe is demonstrable.[^23]


