Argument for the Eternity of the Universe
=========================================

Al-Ghazali began his first proof by summarizing the argument between
theologians and philosophers, and started with his over arching premise:
“That it is impossible for the temporal to proceed from an
eternal.”[^24] Al-Ghazali recorded the philosopher’s argument, that
without perceiving that the world proceeded from God co-eternally, the
world would remain in the realm of pure possibility, since “existence
would not have had that which gives [it] preponderance.”[^25] If the
world did come into existence temporally, then the One who gave it
existence would have had to “come into existence anew.” For if such an
Originator did not come into existence anew, then the world would remain
in the realm of possibility. Yet, if the Originator did come into
existence anew, the question arises, “who originated this giver of
preponderance and why did it originate now and not earlier?”[^26] If the
Eternal never changes, consequently, then either nothing ever comes into
existence or “it comes into existence perpetually.” For God cannot exist
in a state of refraining to act, then move into a state of acting. If
this is not so, then the question arises, why was the world created at
one point and not another? Any answer given here, by the theologians,
can only infer “a change in the states of affairs in the Eternal by way
of power, instrument, time, purpose, or nature [that which] is
impossible.”[^27]

Al-Ghazali offered some possible replies to this argument.[^28] William
Lane Craig comments

Al-Ghazali’s first point is a clear repudiation of the notion of perfect
cause. God is not the cause of the world in the sense that a cause is
that which necessarily accompanies its effect. But God is a cause in [a]
second sense, a free agent that precedes its effect. Thus, the effect
(the universe) need not follow upon the heels of the cause (God), but
can appear a finite number of years ago when God willed from eternity
that it should.[^29]

Al-Ghazali’s reply began with the assertion that God willed from all
eternity to create the world at a specific point.[^30] Al-Ghazali admits
that an opponent would respond that this still has the temporal
occurrence of the world being necessitated and caused. And just as it is
impossible to have an event exist without a cause, it is just as
impossible to have a cause delaying an event, when all the conditions
that are needed to cause such an event exist and are ready to actualize
the event. For such preconditions would necessitate the cause of an
event or thing. As applied to God and creation, this means having a
willer, the will, and having the relation to what is willed occur, but
not having the object of will come into existence. This would mean that
there be change within God, because there would be a difference between
states of affairs and being before and after creation, along with the
need for these causes to come into existence anew.[^31]

Actions coming about through human intention are not delayed unless
there is some impediment. “Once intent and ability are realized, [all]
obstacles being removed, the delay of what is intended is not rationally
intelligible.” It is only in the case of “resolve” that a delay can be
considered, for “resolve is not sufficient for the existence of the
act.” Therefore, “if the eternal will belongs to the same category as
that of our intention to act, then, unless there is an impediment,
neither the delay of what was intended nor the [temporal] priority of
the intent are conceivable.” If the eternal will, however, is similar to
human resolve, in that resolve cannot be a cause itself, there would
then need to be a “renewed intentional upsurge” at the time of action to
bring something into existence. Such arising of a new intent within the
Eternal would entail “upholding change in the Eternal.” Furthermore, the
question of why such an upsurge of intention would occur at one point in
time rather than another continues. Therefore, a necessitating cause
with intention to act and no impediment to action, having all conditions
for an action fulfilled, would have an action occur. To say this, and
then affirm that this action was delayed, only to come about at some
future point with no new upsurge in intention or condition is
impossible.[^32]

Al-Ghazali retorted by asking how the philosophers can know that the
impossibility of the eternal will relates to temporal creation. Is it
through “necessity of reason or its theoretical reflection?” Al-Ghazali
wondered if the philosophers have an implied middle term between
“eternal will” and “temporal creation”? If there is a middle term, which
would make it a theoretical reflection, then al-Ghazali asks the
philosophers to show this middle term. If, however, this knowledge is
understood by necessity of reason, then why is it that the vast numbers
of those who affirm temporal creation do not share this knowledge? It
is, therefore, according to al-Ghazali, the burden of the philosopher to
make a “demonstrative proof according to the condition of logic that
would show the impossibility of this.” For, according to al-Ghazali, all
that the philosophers have shown is “an expression of unlikelihood,” and
an analogy between divine and human will. Such an analogy, according to
al-Ghazali, was false, for the eternal will does not resemble the human
will.

Al-Ghazali commented that a philosopher might reply that one knows
through necessity of reason that “a necessitating cause with all its
conditions fulfilled is inconceivable without a necessitated effect.” To
this, al-Ghazali answered that the philosophers resort to saying
something similar, that divine knowledge is different than human
knowledge when it comes to the philosopher’s belief that God’s knowledge
does not necessitate any change in the one divine essence. That is,
there is no multiplicity in knowing multiple universals, or addition
because of knowledge. Al-Ghazali admitted that some philosophers have
seen the impossibility of this theory, which was already denied by
Ash‘arite theology, and have put forth a belief that God thinks of God’s
self alone - making God the apprehender, the intellect, and the
intelligible of divine knowledge.[^33] Al-Ghazali believed that such an
affirmation was foolish, for it would make God into the Creator who is
not aware of his own creation.


