The Remaining Question of Divine Will
=====================================

For al-Ghazali, all of this is to say, that the philosophers cannot
affirm the eternity of the world and thereby deny the connection between
an eternal will and a temporal creation. The philosopher’s question,
however, remained: what “would have differentiated a specific time from
what precedes and succeeds it when it is not impossible for [any of] the
prior and posterior [times] to have been willed [as the beginning of
creation]?”[^49] Another instance was the theological position that an
object receives whiteness or blackness from the divine will, though the
object is equally open to receiving either whiteness or blackness. What
was it within the divine will that determines this object to be either
white or black? How are white and black differentiated in the divine
will, if the object is equally receptive to either and there is
supposedly no difference between the two? Much like in the creation of
the world, what differentiated one time from another, when there is no
difference between periods of time or between the existence and
non-existence of the world?

Craig notes that, in response, al-Ghazali used the “principle of
determination,” which is found in the theology of the*mutakallim* .
“Since prior to the existence of the universe, it was equally possible
for it to be or not-to-be, a determinant whereby the possibility of
being could prevail over non-being was required; and this determinant
was God.”[^50] The problem in understanding what the*mutakallim* mean by
this principle is whether or not it spoke of a determinant as an
efficient cause or reason.[^51] Craig states: “according to al-Ghazali,
the principle of determination, in the sense of sufficient reason, is
simply invalid with regards to God.”[^52] Thus, for al-Ghazali, God as
determinant was believed to be God as an efficient cause of the
existence of the universe.[^53] As such, al-Ghazali replied that the
world came into existence when it did, through the divine will (the
efficient cause).[^54] The will is an attribute of the divine and like
the attribute of knowledge, which possesses particular characteristics,
the will is “an attribute whose function is to differentiate a thing
from its similar.”[^55] This, however, may seem contradictory to the
philosopher, who might respond that the definition of two things being
“similar” is that there is no way to discern between the two.[^56]

Al-Ghazali answered that the philosophers might be confusing the fact
that human will and divine will are not analogous, that in fact, there
may be a problem with language at this point.[^57] Since there is an
attribute of God that is able to choose between two similar things, the
term “will” may be problematic. Since religious law, however, permits
the use of the word “will” to apply to this attribute, it is sufficient
for use.[^58]

Ibn Rushd highlighted this in his response to al-Ghazali; in his*Tahafut
al-Tahafut* , he noted that there is a difference between will and
action.[^59] Providing a possible solution to al-Ghazali’s dilemma, Ibn
Rushd proposed that

To suppose that the world, willed by God eternally, has come into being
after a certain lapse of time is logically admissible, but not that it
has followed His action after such a lapse of time, unless we assume
that He was impeded by some defect or impotence, which is absurd.[^60]

The universe, therefore, was a product of God’s power and action, not a
product of the will. This is important since, Ibn Rushd, according to
Fakhry, stated that the notion of an “eternal will” is contradictory,
just as a square circle or a married bachelor would be a contradiction.
Since “human will” is a force or state of compulsion, and even free will
is a force of desire, God cannot have will, for it would involve change
in the divine essence. As such, one can only speak of an “eternal will”
in an analogous sense.[^61]


