Conclusion
==========

Al-Ghazali’s*kalam* cosmological defense for the world’s finite
existence proved a challenge for Islamic philosophy, one that even Ibn
Rushd was unable to put to rest. In the history of the cosmological
argument in Islam, al-Ghazali’s presentation demonstrates a high point.
Fakhry concludes that

Al-Ghazali’s major contribution to the discussion of the problem was
twofold. In the first place, he brought out in a very forcible way the
radical opposition between the teaching of Islam and the Aristotelian
conception of the universe developing itself eternally and everlasting;
and in the second place, he gave added point to the arguments already
advanced by the Mutakallims, by amplifying and perfecting them.[^95]

Nevertheless, this paper has shown that al-Ghazali did not effectively
answer the charge of divine immutability. That, in fact, his solution of
asserting the timelessness or atemporality of God only served to make
the charge more severe.

As a possible solution, this paper suggests that al-Ghazali needed not
to deny divine mutability or divine temporality. That, in fact, if he
promoted similar positions to the ones outlined above, his argument of
the temporal finiteness of the universe would have laid on a more solid
foundation.

To say this, however, is not to deny al-Ghazali’s powerful impact  on
Western philosophy. As Rahman comments

He was thus destined to prove the first and greatest reformer of Sufism,
for which at the same time he secured a place in the structure of
Islamic orthodoxy. And, what is even more important, he brought the
formal, dogmatic formulation of the orthodox*kalam* into contact with
the living religion, thereby revitalizing them and infusing into them
the original spirit of Revelation. He thus dealt a powerful blow to pure
scholasticism, softened the dogmatic character of the creed and
established a vital nerve between the inner and the exterior aspects of
religion.[^96]

Al-Ghazali, therefore, is highly commended for his ingenious foray into
philosophical arguments in favor of the existence of a finite universe
that responds to the actsof a sovereign God.


