Notes
=====

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Richard C. Martin, Mark R. Woodman, with Dwi S. Atmaja, Defenders
of Reason in Islam: Mu‘tazilism from Medieval School to Modern Symbol
(Oxford: Oneworld, 1997) 1, [^35]:

[^2] For a fuller biography on al-Ghazali, see Majid Fakhry, A History
of Islamic Philosophy (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983)
217-219; and W. Montgomery Watt, Muslim Intellectual: A Study of
Al-Ghazali (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1963). Also see
al-Ghazali’s biography, Deliverance from Error, Richard Joseph McCarthy,
S.J. (ed.) (Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 1980).

[^3] For discussion on al-Ghazali life, works, sufism and religious
reform, see Ignaz Goldziher, Introduction to Islamic Theology and Law
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981) 217-[^233]:

[^4] Watt, Muslim Intellectual, [^58]:

[^5] Watt. Muslim Intellectual, [^59]: Note also that Fazlur Rahman
agreed that although al-Ghazali overall rejected the Neoplatonic and
Aristotelian philosophies, since they could not provide religious
certainty, he did adopt the dualism of body and soul found in sufism.
See Fazlur Rahman, Islam (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979)
95.

[^6] Watt, Muslim Intellectual, [^59]:

[^7] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, Michael E. Marmura
(trans. & ed.) (Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press, 2000) [^12]:

[^8] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^12]:

[^9] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^2]:

[^10] Watt, Muslim Intellectual, [^60]:

[^11] Al-Ghazali also invokes other arguments for the existence of God.
Binyamin Abrahamov writes, “the argument from design figures also in the
writings of al-Ghazali (d.1111). This argument, says al-Ghazali, being
acquired, since it is taught by the Kur’an, shows the right way to know
God and achieve certainty with regard to divine matters.” See Binyamin
Abrahamov, Al-Kasim B. Ibraham on the Proof of God’s Existence (The
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1990) [^5]:

[^12] Majid Fakhry, “Classical Islamic Arguments for the Existence of
God,” Muslim World 47:1957, 133-[^145]: Fakhry points briefly to the
existence of the argument, in two different forms, in philosophers like
Aristotle, Ibn Sina, and Ibn Rushd along with a second formulation found
in Islamic, Jewish and Christian theologians.

[^13] See William Lane Craig, The Cosmological Argument from Plato to
Leibniz (London, Macmillan, 1980).

[^14] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^27]: For a
contemporary defense of the kalam cosmological argument, see William
Lane Craig, “”The Finitude of the Past and the Existence of God,” in
William Lane Craig and Quentin Smith, Theism, Atheism and Big Bang
Cosmology (Oxford: Clarendon, 1993) 3-76.

[^15] For a clear example of the concept of causality in Islamic
philosophy, see Michael E. Marmura, “The Metaphysics of Efficient
Causality in Avincenna,” in Michael E. Marmura (ed.), Islamic Theology
and Philosophy: Studies in Honor of George F. Hourani (Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1984) 172-[^187]: Marmura states that
while rooted in Aristotelian discussions of efficient causality, Ibn
Sina’s theory of efficient causality has been modified and expanded with
a Neoplatonic flavor, since it occurs in his very un-Aristotelian theory
of emanation. For Ibn Sina, divine efficient causality is based in the
otherness of the divine, for it is a cause that bestows existence on
that which differs from itself. It is broader than simply a motion from
potentiality to actuality, which is secondary causality, for it is a
cause coming from something other than itself. Ibn Sina’s theory of
divine efficient causality, therefore, is contingent on his emanation
doctrine, in which the heavens are moved by their souls and the souls
are moved by their reflection on the divine. Thus, God becomes the
supreme cause, being that it is from God that the first emanation
occurs. When emanation occurs in the sub-lunar world, it achieves a
level of plurality unseen in other emanations. Al-Ghazali’s problem with
emanation, and thereby with an infinitely temporal universe, is the
assertion that within this scheme of emanation, cause and effect are
co-existent and co-eternal. God, therefore, is prior to the universe
only in the sense that his essence is prior to the essences that
emanated from him.

[^16] Fakhry, “Classic Islamic Argument” [^136]:

[^17] Craig, The Cosmological Argument from Plato to Leibniz, [^98]:

[^18] The Mu‘tazilah and Ash‘arite were two schools of theologians in
the history of Islam, the former held primacy in early Islam and the
latter held primacy from the eighth century until the present.
Al-Ghazali was an Ash‘arite, a school committed to the divine
sovereignty of God. Some made the claim that Mu’tazilah theology, with
its focus on human reason, is rising to prominence once again in
post-colonial Muslim countries. See Martin, Woodman, with Atmaja,
Defenders of Reason in Islam: Mu‘tazilism from Medieval School to Modern
Symbol (Oxford: Oneworld, 1997)

[^19] William Lane Craig, The Kalam Cosmological Argument (London:
Macmillan, 1979), 7-[^8]:  Craig lists the six arguments typically
employed by the mutakallimun for this demonstration: the argument from
the contrary nature of simple bodies; the argument from experience; the
argument from the finitude of motion, time and temporal objects; the
argument from the world’s composition of finite parts; the argument from
contingency; the argument from temporality. Craig notes that the first
and second arguments were not influential, and that the third and fourth
arguments come from the Alexandria Christian theologian John Philoponus
(Yahya al-Nahwi).  See also Fakhry, “Classical Islamic Arguments,” 135.

[^20] Fakhry, “Classical Islamic Arguments,” [^136]:

[^21] For a further discussion on the mutakallim doctrine of change with
atoms and accidents, see Andrey Smirnov, “Causality in Islamic Thought,”
in E. Deutch and R. Bontekoe, A Companion to World Philosophies (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1997) 493-[^503]:

[^22] Peter Kreeft & Ronald K. Tacelli, Handbook of Christian
Apologetics (Downer’s Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1994) [^58]:  This
syllogism is based from al-Ghazali’s works, the Iqtisad and the
Jerusalem Letter.

[^23] Craig, The Kalam Cosmological Argument, [^44]:

[^24] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^13]:

[^25] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^13]:

[^26] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^13]:

[^27] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^14]:

[^28] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^15]:

[^29] Craig, Kalam Cosmological Argument, [^12]:

[^30] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^15]:

[^31] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^16]: Al-Ghazali
offers the analogy of a man pronouncing divorce from his wife. Once a
man makes the legal pronouncement of divorce, and separation does not
occur, “it is inconceivable for it to occur thereafter.” For the actual
pronouncement is the “cause of the judgment.” The only way a delay in
the affect of the pronouncement could occur is if the man affixes some
condition to the utterance (e.g. the divorce will occur upon the coming
of the next morning), making the judgment relate to a future expected
event.

[^32] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^17]:

[^33] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^18]:

[^34] Craig, Kalam Cosmological Argument, [^45]:

[^35] Craig, Kalam Cosmological Argument, 44-[^46]: Craig concludes that
this is a premise al-Ghazali grants to his opponents for the sake of the
argument.

[^36] Al-Ghazali states, in Incoherence of the Philosophers, 18: “for
the sphere of the sun rotates in one year, whereas Saturn’s rotates in
thirty, so that the rotations of Saturn are a third of a tenth of the
sun. [Again,] the rotations of Jupiter are a half of a sixth of the
rotations of the sun; for it rotates once in every twelve years. [Now,]
just as the number of rotations of Saturn is infinite, the number of
solar rotations, although a third of a tenth [of the latter], is [also]
infinite. Indeed, the rotations of the sphere of the fixed stars, which
rotates [once in] every thirty-six thousand years, are infinite, just as
the sun’s movement from east to west, taking place in a day and a night,
is [likewise] infinite. If one then were to say, ‘This is one of things
whose impossibility is known by the necessity [of reason],’ how would
your [position] differ from his statement?”

[^37] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^19]:

[^38] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^20]:

[^39] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^21]:

[^40] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^27]:

[^41] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^28]:

[^42] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^29]:

[^43] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^30]:

[^44] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^30]:

[^45] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^31]:

[^46] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^31]:

[^47] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^32]:

[^48] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^35]:

[^49] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^21]:

[^50] Craig, Kalam Cosmological Argument, 10ff.

[^51] Craig comments that the problem is linguistic, in that the
mutakallimun use the word “determinant” interchangeably for either cause
or reason. For example, al-Ghazali uses the terms murajjih and takhsis
in three different senses. First, he uses it as a principle, when
determining or choosing without any motive one of two similar objects to
establish a distinction between them through choice. Second, as a
principle that determines or chooses without the motive being known, the
existence of one or two opposites that seem equally purposeful. Third,
some dissimilarity that gives a motive for choice. Craig concludes that
the first and second usages are efficient causes, while the third can be
seen as a sufficient reason. See Craig, Kalam Cosmological Argument,
10-[^11]:

[^52]   Craig, Kalam Cosmological Argument, [^12]:

[^53] Craig, Kalam Cosmological Argument, [^13]: Craig adds that
al-Ghazali’s use of the principle of determination is not simply the
principle of efficient causality, which al-Ghazali rejects.

For the cause of the world to which the argument concludes is conceived
by the Muslim thinkers to be, not just the mechanically operating,
necessary and sufficient conditions for the production of an effect, but
a personal agent who by an act of will chooses which equally possible
alternative will be realized. God is the sabab of the world, but not its
‘illa. Otherwise, the universe would exist from eternity (See Craig,
Kalam Cosmological Argument, 14).

For an explanation on the philosopher’s argument for efficient
causality, see Michael E. Marmura, “The Metaphysics of Efficient
Causality in Avincenna,” in Marmura, Islamic Theology and Philosophy,
172-[^187]:

[^54] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^22]:

[^55] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^22]:  R. M. Frank
comments that al-Ghazali sees God’s eternal attributes as
“distinguishable from His essence and are eternal and are subsistent in
His essence.” According to al-Ghazali, there are no ontologically
distinct “states” for God and his attributes. Rather he follows a
position closer to al-Juwayni. See R. M. Franks, Al-Ghazali and the
Ash‘arite School (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994) 48.

[^56] Al-Ghazali notes that his dialogue partners, the philosophers,
might use the example of a thirsty man who is given the choice between
two similar glasses of water. Each glass is exactly the same, and so the
man chooses one glass over the other through some internal
differentiation (the man is right handed, one glass appears clearer, one
is closer to him, etc.). (Incoherence of the Philosophers, 22).

[^57] Watt explains that al-Ghazali “has little difficulty in showing
that this [analogy] is merely hypothetical. He is, of course, no crude
anthropomorphist. The question at issue between him and the philosopher
is whether the ground of all being is not adequately described by human
analogies or by analogy to natural forces.” See Watt, Muslim
Intellectual, [^60]:

[^58] Al-Ghazali’s idea, however, of the divine making a dispassionate
choice between two similars of existence and non-existence of the world,
or whiteness and blackness, or shape and form of the world, seems
contradictory to his theodicy, where God seems to create particular
forms for a purpose. Al-Ghazali affirms a “best of all possible worlds”
theodicy that states “God has arranged creation so well that not a speck
of dust or the subtraction of a gnat’s wing is undesigned.  All aspects
of the human life, pleasure and pain or sickness and health are given in
justice. This is so that the value of all things might be realized. “For
if it were not for night, the value of day would be unknown. Were it not
for illness, the healthy would not enjoy health. Were it not for hell,
the blessed in paradise would not know the extent of the blessedness.”
See Eric Ormsby (ed.), Theodicy in Islamic Thought: the Dispute over
Al-Ghazali’s “Best of All Possible Worlds (Princeton, N. J.: Princeton
University Press, 1984), 38-[^41]:

[^59] Ibn Rushd, Tahafut al-Tahafut, Simon van der Bergh (trans. & ed.)
(London, Luzac, 1954) [^36]:

[^60] Fakhry, Averroes, [^18]:

[^61] Fakhry, Averroes, [^19]:

[^62] Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, Volume 1 (Allen, TX: Thomas
More, 1941) Q. 9, A. [^1]: “God is altogether immutable. First, because
it was shown above that there is some first being, whom we call God; and
that this first being must be pure act, without admixture of any
potentiality, for the reason that, absolutely, potentiality is posterior
to act. Now everything that is in any way changed is in some way in
potentiality. Hence it is evident that it is impossible for God to be in
any way changeable.  Secondly, because everything which is moved, remain
as it was in part, and passes away in part…thus everything which is
moved, there is some kind of composition to be found. But…in God there
is no composition, for He is altogether simple. Hence it is manifest
that God cannot be moved. Thirdly, because everything which is moved
acquires something by its movement, and attains to what it had not
attained previously. But since God is infinite, comprehending in Himself
all the plenitude of perfection of all being, He cannot acquire anything
new, nor extend Himself to anything whereto He was not extended
previously.”

[^63] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^13]:

[^64] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^16]:

[^65] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^17]:

[^66] Majid Fakhry, Averroes (Ibn Rushd): His Life, Works and Influence
(Oxford: Oneworld, 2001) 14-[^15]:

[^67] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^18]: As stated
above, “Ghazali replies that the philosophers resort to saying that
divine knowledge is different than human knowledge when it comes to the
philosopher’s belief that God’s knowledge does not necessitate any
change in the one divine essence. That is there is no multiplicity in
knowing multiple universals or addition because of knowledge.”

[^68] William Hasker, “A Philosophical Perspective,” in Clark Pinnock et
al, Openness of God (Downer’s Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1994)
[^129]: It is interesting to note that Alfred North Whitehead felt that
if philosophy was true to Plato, that there would be a “philosophy of
organism,” where the temporal participated in the divine. See Alfred
North Whitehead, Process and Reality (New York: Macmillan, 1978) 39-40.

[^69] Hasker, “A Philosophical Perspective,” [^132]:

[^70] Dean Zimmerman puts the problem this way: “God’s infinite past has
been characterized by constant change.  If both God and the other thing
existed during an interval, the change may not have involved God [e.g.
world’s eternal co-existence]. But if there were periods during which
only God existed, then God himself must have been undergoing constant
intrinsic change during those times.” See Dean Zimmerman, “God inside
Time and before Creation,” in Gregory E. Ganssle and David M. Woodruff
(eds.), God and Time: Essays on the Divine Nature (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2001) [^78]:

[^71] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^31]:

[^72] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^31]:

[^73] Michael E. Marmura, "The Logical Role of the Argument from Time in
the Tahafut’s Second Proof for the World’s Pre-Eternity,” Muslim World
49, [^1959]: Since temporal phenomena have an origin, then time itself
must have an origin.

[^74] Brian Leftow, Time and Eternity (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1991) [^79]:

[^75] Leftow, Time and Eternity, [^79]:

[^76] Leftow, Time and Eternity, [^299]:

[^77] Garrett DeWisse, “Atemporal, Sempiternal, or Omnitemporal: God’s
Temporal Mode of Being,” in Gregory E. Ganssle and David M. Woodruff
(eds.), God and Time: Essays on the Divine Nature (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2001) 52-[^53]: DeWisse concludes that timeless, or
atemporal beings contain three characteristics: they are abstract,
unlike concrete temporal entities; they must exist necessarily; and they
are immutable. DeWisse, however, adds that no theologian would want to
uphold that God is abstract.

[^78] Leftow, Time and Eternity, [^302]:

[^79] Leftow, Time and Eternity, [^342]:

[^80] John Cobb and David Ray Griffin, Process Theology (Philadelphia:
Westminster Press, 1976) [^8]:

[^81] William Hasker, “The Absence of a Timeless God,” in Gregory E.
Ganssle and David M. Woodruff (eds.), God and Time: Essays on the Divine
Nature (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001) [^185]:

[^82] Hasker, “The Absence of a Timeless God,” [^186]:

[^83] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, [^18]:

[^84] Al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the Philosophers, Discussions Eleven,
Twelve, and Thirteen. God’s knowledge can never hold a present knowledge
of presently occurring events. God’s knowledge of present events can
only take place in his divine determinism and foreknowledge of said
events from infinite past.

[^85] Gregory E. Ganssle, “Introduction,” in Gregory E. Ganssle and
David M. Woodruff (eds.), God and Time: Essays on the Divine Nature
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001) [^8]:

[^86] DeWisse, “Atemporal, Sempiternal, or Omnitemporal,” 49-[^50]:

[^87] Michael Robinson, Eternity and Freedom: A Critical Analysis of
Divine Timelessness as a Solution to the Foreknowledge / Free Will
Debate (Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1995) [^67]:

[^88] DeWisse, “Atemporal, Sempiternal, or Omnitemporal,” [^56]:

[^89] DeWisse, “Atemporal, Sempiternal, or Omnitemporal,” [^56]:

[^90] Robinson, Eternity and Freedom, [^69]:

[^91] William Lane Craig, “The Elimination of Absolute Time by the
Special Theory of Relativity,” in Gregory E. Ganssle and David M.
Woodruff (eds.), God and Time: Essays on the Divine Nature (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2001) 129-[^152]:

[^92] Craig, “The Elimination of Absolute Time,” [^130]:

[^93] Craig, “The Elimination of Absolute Time,” [^130]:

[^94] Craig, “The Elimination of Absolute Time,” [^131]:  Craig adds
that the scientist and natural philosopher have come to deny absolute
time, because it is empirically unidentifiable.  Einstein’s rejection of
absolute time is based on logical positivism of Machian providence.
Since logical positivism is a defeated philosophical method, the logic
of absolute time can be observed since absolute time transcends physical
measurements of it.

[^95] Fakhry, “Classical Islamic Arguments,” [^139]:

[^96] Rahman, Islam, [^95]:
