I. Forward
==========

This brief paper is part of an overall introduction to Islamic beliefs.
I have tried to indicate both relevant verses of the Quran, and
technical terms, so that the interested reader can pursue further
research on his or her own. A bibliography at the end indicates some of
the English language works which will give a greater insight into these
areas of Islamic belief.

Readers wishing to do further research should note that Arabic has been
romanized in different ways in this century, and that some texts and
reference works are keyed to the Persian or even Urdu equivalents of
Arabic terms. Leaving aside the most extreme variations it should be
noted that words in this paper beginning with "j" is often found with
"dj", and that "q" is often rendered "k", and visa versa. Thus*qadar*
may be found as*kadar* , and*Jinn* as*Djinn.* Names, such as Ash'ari,
are sometimes written with "al" as a prefix, thus*Al Ash'ari.*
Translations of the Quran (*Koran* ) sometimes have variations in the
numbering of the chapters and verses. Normally if the verse being sought
isn't found one should check the same verse, and its immediate
neighbors, in the previous and subsequent chapter.

In this paper I have referred to God as God, whether in a Islamic or
Christian context. The usual Islamic word for God, Allah, is used only
when necessary to clearly distinguish a Muslim usage. As is always the
case with translation a certain controversy surrounds the use of these
terms. There are those who maintain that the English word "God" has
theological overtones from Christian culture which do not make it an
appropriate translation for the word "Allah". However, numerous English
works by Muslim authors freely use God as the equivalent for Allah, and
I have followed this pattern.


