II. Introduction
================

Questions about human nature and destiny appeared among humans at almost
the dawn of civilization, and may be definitive of humanity itself.
However, the universality of these questions should not blind us to the
fact that they have been formulated in very different ways by different
cultures and different religions. In Christianity and Islam there is the
shared assumption that both the nature and destiny of humanity are found
in the purposes of God. Both Christianity and Islam place the question
of humanity in its relationship to the one transcendent God at the
center of religion. And both see that relationship as problematic. Yet
profound differences arise between them.

For the Christian religious tradition that problematic relationship
arises when humanity grasps for itself the prerogatives of God. The
essence of idolatry is God*remade* in a human image, or something even
lower, and is rooted in humanity's rebellion against God's command. In
the Christian tradition the sin of humanity is more than just specific
acts, it is a fundamental characteristic of humanity after the Fall,
dominating the whole life of a humanity powerless to overcome it or deny
it its bitter fruits of death and evil. The first followers of Jesus
were anxiously awaiting a Messiah, a Savior who could deliver them from
sin. The salvation which they awaited was conditioned by an extensive
tradition of Jewish reflection on sin, on Israel's history, on the
position of the individual, the nation, and the world in relation to
God, and on God's plan for human history. Christian theology was
determined by the ways in which Jewish hopes were met, redefined, and
extended by the person of Jesus and the content of his preaching. The
followers of Jesus discovered that the destiny of humanity is to be
restored to full humanness by the eradication of sin and the
re-establishment of God as God in human life through faith in Jesus as
the Christ. Both the pervasiveness of sin, and the comprehensiveness of
the grace required to destroy it, are reflected in the Christian
theology of atonement through God's sacrifice of the Son, and the
eschatological images of the Kingdom of God found at the center of the
message of Jesus Christ. Jesus as the sinless man capable of making and
being the sacrifice on the cross is also the image of authentic
humanity, the new Adam. While the New Testament authors looked forward
to both a day of judgement and a new creation by God, they asserted that
the possibility of freedom from sin and authentic human life were
instituted by the atonement, and the sending of the Holy Spirit to the
church, the Body of Christ. Any Christian understanding of anthropology
reckons with Jesus as the new Adam, the crucifixion of Christ on the
cross which conquers the human fear of sin and death, the Spirit of
Christ which makes his followers holy, and the nature of faith which
makes it possible for humans to enjoy these gifts of God's mercy. Any
Christian soteriology is rooted in God's own sacrifice of his Son on the
cross to pay the price of sin, the Christian hope for eternal life, the
strength of the Holy Spirit to persevere in the face of evil and
temptation, and the promised reign of God.

In Islam the essential problematic of the human relationship with God
arises when the first humans, tempted by the Devil (*Iblis* ), grasp
after the created order as the ultimate reality, choosing the fruit of
the tree rather than the command of God. As a result humans are exiled
to the earth, away from the Garden which was to be their home and away
from their stature as the highest of all creatures. As a conscious
choice this sin of choosing the created order is infidelity to God's
command, making a person a*kafir* . When reflected in the elevating of
the created order to the status of God this is the sin of*shirk* . The
human condition which makes such infidelity possible is
ignorance,*jahiliyya* , a condition which becomes pervasive in some
times and places but which is never a necessary part of human nature.
Infidelity, idolatry, and ignorance were the primary characteristics
which Muhammed found in his own time and culture. The first revelations
which Muhammed received placed the reality of Allah, and Allah's
judgement upon those who were idolatrous and unfaithful, powerfully
before those who heard them. They called on people to know, and
acknowledge, the one God, and to abandon immorality in order to be saved
at the judgement day and to attain the lost Paradise. This called for
repentance, a change of heart. Yet in Islam the human heart, which is
the seat of knowing rather than feeling, is always an isthmus,*barzakh*
, which separates, but also potentially joins, the earthly and the
divine.[^1] The fulfillment of human destiny which Muhammed announced
was a return to the Garden and the resumption of the status which God
originally intended for humanity. This occurs first with*Islam* , humans
submitting to the perfect and final revelation of Allah and Allah's will
which came through Muhammed. Ultimately it is realized when Allah
destroys the Earth (which is not intrinsically corrupt, but has simply
served its purpose) and after the final judgement brings all of those
who have been faithful back into the Garden (which was always the
destiny of humankind.) While it is by Allah's grace alone that humans
are continually reminded of their nature and destiny through the
prophets, and are called into Islam, it is up to each individual to make
the choices which will lead them ultimately back to the Garden. (25:70).

It is too much to say of course, that Christianity and Islam were
determined by their cultural and human contexts. Their founders not only
answered, but helped define, the question of the nature and destiny of
humanity. Both claim that revelation provides not just the answer to a
generic human question, but frames that question properly in the face of
human ignorance or sin. So it is important, as we look for shared
experiences and categories of theological reflection which allow
authentic dialogue, to realize that our Christian questions are not
necessarily generic human questions. This may mean that we have no ready
answer for the central concerns of our neighbors in a pluralistic
society. And it may mean that we will discover in dialogue dimensions of
human existence before God that our own particular tradition of
Christian theological reflection has passed by.


