III. The Creatures of Allah
===========================

Islamic accounts of the created order recognize several realms, each of
which can be defined in terms of relation to its creator. The first two
of realms are that of inanimate and animate creatures. The inanimate
realm is governed with absolute consistency by natural law, which is
nothing other than God's will for inanimate creation. Animate creatures
such as animals live, breed, act, and react according to the traits of
their distinctive species, as these have been determined by God. While
their actions may appear irregular because they live in relation to a
changing environment, they have no ability to reflect on their actions
and no free will. Whether one regards a mineral being slowly compressed
into a new form in the bowels of the earth, or a tree budding, or a wolf
hunting, one sees the same thing: a creature carrying out unreflectively
God's will. (87:2-3, 20:49-50, 17:44) Philosophers would subsequently
debate whether God's will was innate in the creature, or represented
God's immediate creation of all events as well as things. In either case
the creature's submission to God's will was total.

The third and by far most important realm is that of humans, who are
distinguished from other creatures by their ability to consciously grasp
God's will and then choose to implement it or not. Again, philosophers
and theologians would debate the relation of human freedom to divine
power. Yet Islam always agreed that humans were responsible for their
actions, and for implementing God's will, in a way that set them apart
from all other creatures.

The forth and fifth realm consist of spiritual creatures, the*jinn* and
*mala'ikah* (angels). Unlike humans, who were created of clay animated
when God breathed his spirit into them, the *jinn* are created of fire
and the angels of light (21:19 onward, 35, 55:15). Like humans these
creatures are created to worship God through submission to God's will.
Both the Quran and Muslim theologians have traditionally regarded the
*jinn* as like humans in their ability to choose submission to God. Thus
they have had their prophets and religions, and can be subject to God's
punishment or converted to Islam. Despite injunctions in the Quran and
Hadith (the collected sayings attributed to Muhammed) against pursuing
relations with the *jinn,* Muslims have always been fascinated with
them. Legal scholars worked out complete guidelines to relations between
*jinn* and humans, and their existence is accepted by all Muslims. [^2]
The situation of angels is more complex. The Quran suggests that they
are utterly submissive to God's will, and possess no freedom of choice.
(21:19, 20, 27, 46:6). Yet the Quran also tells of the rebellion of the
angel Iblis (2:34, 15:31, etc.). These accounts are complicated by the
fact that Iblis seems also to be characterized as a *jinn* in the Quran
*.* Despite controversies among commentators over the status of Iblis in
relation to the impeccability of angels, belief in angels as impeccable
servants of Allah is a fundamental belief for Muslims. The Quran names
and defines the roles of many of the angels, and Islamic theological
tradition, not to mention folklore, has a highly developed and complex
angelology.


