IV. Human Nature
================

The first revelation to Muhammed contained the central theme of
subsequent Muslim reflection on humanity. "Recite, O man, whom Allah
created from a blood clot". Humans are creatures, this first and
foremost, and they are recipients of revelation from their creator,
Allah. From this basic beginning Islamic reflections on human nature can
be said to derive from four sources: the stories about Adam and Eve as
they are found in the Quran and Arab traditions contemporary with the
Quran, the life of Muhammed as it came to be told in the Muslim
community, various statements and terms found in the Quran and Hadith,
and Greek philosophy as understood and developed in Muslim circles.
These are not necessarily integrated into a coherent anthropology, but
present rather a spectrum of ideas which theologians and ordinary
Muslims draw on in expressing their own understanding of humanity. The
story of Adam and his companion Hawa speak primarily to the issue of
God's purpose for humankind and its destiny. These stories relate to
soteriology by placing humanity in a temporal framework whose beginning,
descent from the Garden to earth, is complimented by its end, the
restoration of the faithful to the Garden. The stories of Muhammed not
only flesh out the details of an exemplary human life, they address
through the concept of Prophethood the spiritual mystery of how a finite
creature can be immutably linked with the transcendent God. They give a
concrete basis for reflection on the quality of humanity which makes it
possible to conceive of an eternity of perfect obedience and communion
with God. Finally the Muslim discovery of Greek philosophy provided a
detailed view of the metaphysical world which would and could stimulate
mystical reflection on the path to oneness with God that complimented
the temporal account of human ends. As importantly it provided the basis
for an Islamic psychology which explains the human in relation to the
divine mind on one hand, and in relation to other animate creatures on
the other.

A. The Creation and Fall of Humankind
-------------------------------------

The earliest Muslim understanding of the human nature was based on the
Quran, especially in its account of the creation of Adam and Eve (*Adam*
and*Hawa* ), a story which was current in Arabia in several elaborated
forms, both Jewish and Christian. The Quranic story is distinctive in
several respects. Adam is created in order to consciously and willingly
worships God, not because God needs worship, but because this gives Adam
his unique identity. Adam was the highest of all creatures. He possessed
the knowledge of all things in creation (and hence the ability to name
them, which the angels lacked). In recognition of this the Quran says
that God required the angels to bow down to Adam, precipitating the
rebellion of Iblis. Adam is also the first of the prophets (*nabi* ),
for he received the first revelation from God. Adam is called in the
Quran*khalifah* , or vice-regent, meaning that it belongs to him and his
progeny to both use creation for their benefit and to develop it
according to God's will (2:30).

In some*hadith* Adam is said to be made "in the image of God". This has
been suggestive for Muslims, especially for mystics, of the spiritual
journey each person should undertake. Orthodox Muslim commentators are
clear in saying that unlike God Adam has no creative power, only the
power to submit to or to disrupt God's created order. Perhaps most
critically Adam and his progeny are characterized with the term*fitrah*
, a word which suggests that their whole being is in accord with God's
creative purpose. Although there are differences of opinion among Muslim
commentators as to the spiritual and legal implications of*fitrah* , all
emphasize that humans are by nature capable of knowing and obeying the
will of God. Indeed one Quranic verse (7:172), which also emphasizes
human responsibility, states that God confronted all of the souls of all
potential humans, and that they acknowledged Allah as their Creator,
thus they have no excuse at the judgement for having failed to recognize
him as such.

The story of the temptation of Adam and Eve in Paradise, and their
subsequent eating of the forbidden fruit, is interpreted as a mistake
(*dhanb* ) in the Islamic tradition (2:35, 7:1-ff). Significantly when
the pair is confronted by Allah they say, "We have wronged ourselves."
(7:23) It is Iblis who bears responsibility for their loss of Paradise,
while they suffer the consequence of their mistake by being cast down to
the Earth. This leads to their punishment, and equally to their
repentance, and then a more mature understanding of Allah as the
ultimate reality. The event defines what Muslims see as the fundamental
human fault, which is forgetting Allah's command. But while this
forgetfulness is regarded as a universal human tendency, it is not the
definitive human trait. It is human nature, encouraged by Allah's
manifold signs in creation and the near endless succession of prophets,
to remember ( *dhikr)* that Allah has created everything and that every
thing should bow before Allah.

B. Human Purpose
----------------

The word*Islam,* which means "to submit", reveals the central purpose of
human life, which is to submit to the revealed purposes of the creator.
This*Islam,* along with faith and works of righteousness, are the*din* ,
or religion in the broadest sense, of Muslims. While the exact meaning
of*din* in the Quran is complex, and the subject of much discussion by
commentators, more recent Muslim theologians have used it to mark the
definitive difference between*Islam* and all other religions. They
take*din* to indicate the absolute fullness of God's purpose for humans
in the world. Thus*Islam* is*din,* a "way of life" which indicates
everything from personal manners, to social interactions, to political
systems, to international relations. It includes architecture and all of
the arts as well, and ultimately embraces God's entire plan for the
creation, so that it includes God's final judgement of humanity, one of
the distinctive meanings of the word*din* as found in the Quran.

While this full elaboration of*Islam* as*din* belongs to our era, in
which Islam defines itself over against the retreat of Christianity into
a form of private piety in the face of secularization, it is justified
historically. Very early on Muslims saw every choice in every situation
as an opportunity to either submit to God's plan or abandon it. They
sought guidance in the most minute and greatest of human affairs in the
Quran and the traditions of the prophet, and later in the ever expanding
body of*fikh* or Islamic law.[^3]

While this traditional rules-based approach to Islam as a complete way
of life continues to have a powerful attraction for Muslims, there has
been a growing consensus that*ijtihad* , or the reasoning out of God's
will in specific instances is necessary for any Muslim in a responsible
decision making position. The challenge of *ijtihad* , as well as the
desire to awaken Muslims to think more deeply about their religion, and
the desire of Muslims to speak convincingly to a non-Muslim audience,
have led to a great deal of modern discussion on the first principles of
human responsibility in the Islamic *din* .

### 1. Ibadah

###

The Quran teaches that humans were made for*ibadah* , or conscious,
intentional, worship of God (51:56).Â  This is the active means by which
humans fulfill their divinely given vocation. Formally this means
carrying out the daily prayers prescribed in the Quran, observing the
fasting month, making the pilgrimage to Mecca, and paying the*zakat*
tax. It was also extended in early Islam to include personal prayers and
other acts of conventional worship. Islamic reflection on the broader
obligations of human beings has stressed that all conscious action
should be seen as*ibadah* , and should be governed by reflection on
God's laws, the intention to fulfill them, and action in bringing them
to fulfillment.

### 2. Khalifa and Abd

###

A two terms*khalifah* and*abd,* or vice-regent and slave define two
important understandings of the human relationship to the earth. This
title*khalifah* was originally applied to Adam, as sovereign of the
earth. It is taken by many Muslims as a broad description of humanity's
specific relationship with the natural world. The Earth is given to
humans for their free use according to the Quran. Yet the human's
"highest achievement is to obey without question his Master's Will... so
that the Divine Will may operate through him without impediment", so
humans are also*abd* .[^4] Islamic thinkers thus claim to have a tool
for reflection on humans and the world which transcends a supposed
western emphasis on domination and exploitation.

### 3. Ilm, Adl, Dawa, Jihad

###

Together*ibadah* and*khalifa* describe the human responsibility to God
on one hand and the created order on the other. The Quran and Hadith
also emphasize narrower goals of human life which in various ways have
inspired Muslims. The search for*ilm,* or knowledge, is enjoined on all
humans according to their capacity, and is clearly the antidote to the
ignorance which is humankind's most besetting shortcoming. This quest
for knowledge is first directed to religious knowledge. Yet it also
includes knowledge of the natural world - which is regarded as a sign of
Allah - and of the human/social world in which humans must strive to
implement God's will.*Adl* , or justice, is also enjoined upon Muslims
as an essential sign of God's intention for creation.*Da'wa* , or
striving to both extend Islam and strengthen it from within, is part of
the human vice-regency which seeks to bring all creatures into
conformity with Allah's plan.*Jihad,* or struggle to defend Islam, is
likewise part of this human obligation. This short list of principals of
human has been extended as Muslims have, at different times, tried to
answer the particular challenges facing themselves or their societies.
Whether it is through extensive lawmaking or articulation of fundamental
principles, Islam strives to guide every aspect of human life in the
world and hereafter.

C. The Ideal Human
------------------

Adam and Eve are the prototypes of humanity, and the stories of their
creation and life in the garden are reminders to Muslims of the glory of
humanity intended by God. However, the world of Adam and Eve, however
fully elucidated in myth and story, is necessarily distant from the
personal and social reality of Muslims. Both, the Quran and the Hadith,
as well as numerous subsequent traditions, point to Muhammed himself as
the exemplar of human life (33:21, 68:4) And literature about the
prophets life,*sirah* , is the most widely read of Islamic literature
and plays a key role in shaping Muslim understandings of the human
ideal. Muslim writing about Muhammed rarely spares any superlative in
speaking of the perfection of his qualities, and his life, emerging amid
the ignorance and debasement of 7th century Arabic culture, is taken as
a miraculous proof of his status as God's prophet.[^5]

Among most orthodox Muslims Muhammed is the ideal in terms of behavior,
receptivity to God's will, and knowledge. This does not necessarily
imply, however, that he has a particular metaphysical status which
distinguishes him from the rest of humanity. However, there are widely
accepted traditions which go a step further and state the Muhammed was
without sin, because God removed it all from his heart, a tradition
which for many Muslims allows the claim that Muhammed is equal to Jesus
as understood within Islam. Finally, among Sufis in particular, Muhammed
is the "Prophetic Substance" incarnate, and thus the origin of all
Islamic spirituality.[^6] He isn't merely an example of total obedience
in external behavior, he is the door to God, the "concrete and
semi-sacramental presence that prefigures the state of salvation or of
deliverance and that invites one not to legality or to the social
virtues but to self-transcendence and transformation-hence to extinction
and to a second birth."[^7] This exalted understanding of Muhammed
underscores the fact that in Islam prophethood, which is the abiding
link between God and humanity, is central to any understanding of either
humankind or salvation.

19thand early 20 thcentury Christian apologists to Islam recognized that
the Muslim understanding of Muhammed was crucial to the Muslim reception
of teaching about Jesus. In some cases Christians tried to sully the
character of Muhammed, hoping to turn Muslims to the supposedly better
example of Jesus. In other cases Christians recognized Muhammed's
outstanding character, but insisted that his moral flaws disqualified
him to be an example. A third approach was to leave aside details of
Muhammed's life and simply to stress that his life, unlike that of
Jesus, was not perfect, and thus he could not bear the burden of human
sin. More recently Kenneth Craig and others have explored the idea that
Christians should see Muhammed as a true prophet, and through the
exploration of the meaning of prophethood find common ground for
discussion between Christians and Muslims. It is certain that so long as
the fundamental declaration of Islamic faith is articulated "there is no
God but Allah, and Muhammed is his prophet", the person and character of
Muhammed will be central not only to discussions of prophecy, but human
nature as well.

D. Body, Soul, and Spirit
-------------------------

In the Quran Adam was created when God breathed his spirit (*ruh* ) into
the dirt which he had fashioned into a human form. (15:29, 37:72, 32:9)
Jesus was similarly conceived in Mary.(21:91, 66:12) This created
a*nafs,* the word used in the Quran for the human self or soul. This
self is portrayed as transcending its bodily existence, and survives
after the death of the body awaiting God's final judgement and its
future in paradise of hell.

For most Muslims this understanding of their own humanity is sufficient,
and it is the basis of all orthodox Muslim belief. In the history of
Islam, however, both philosophical speculation and efforts to fully
understand statements in the Quran about human life led to the
development of more complex understandings of human nature. For mystics
and others the Quranic suggestion of a link between the human soul and
the Divine spirit was elaborated for the purpose of both better
understanding human nature and the mystic pilgrimage into oneness with
God. Thus the*nafs* and *ruh* of the human, representing the horizontal
and vertical planes of human existence, can be regarded as competitors
for the *qalb* or heart, wherein the possibility of good and evil lies.
Greek philosophy also provided a resource for speculation. Aristotle's
distinction between the nutritive, sensitive, and the rational aspects
of the soul was used, for example, to help clarify the differences
between plants, animals, and humans and *jinn* Neo-Platonic ideas of the
emanation of the soul were used to clarify the understanding of *nafs*
and *ruh* in terms of the emanation of the soul from Prime Mover or One
Absolute Cause. The concept of the animal soul (passively obedient to
natural impulses) could complement Quranic references to the "soul which
commands", the "soul which blames", and the "soul at peace" to develop a
theory of personality and personal decision making. [^8] Al-Sharastani
and al-Ghazzali succeeded in integrating Greek ideas with Quranic
interpretation in such a way as to have a lasting impact on Islamic
thought. However, the dominant Muslim position has been to identify
*ruh* with *nafs* , seeing humans as sensible bodies interpenetrated by
the soul, which is eternal and separable from the body after death. [^9]
More elaborate theories of the origin and place of the human soul or
spirit have been confined primarily to Islamic mysticism and philosophy.

E. Predestination and Free Will
-------------------------------

Like other religions, Islamic philosophy and theology have developed in
response to both intrinsic internal questions, and questions posed by
the external environment. Due to the apparent contradiction between the
Quranic emphasis on Allah's omniscience and omnipotence and complete
human responsibility in the face of God's judgement, the issue of human
free will became one of the earliest sources of theological debate in
Islam. This debate extended naturally into the eternal qualities of
Allah, the eternal and changeless Allah's relationship to an apparently
changing creation, the meaning of justice, and human psychology.

The relationship between*qada'* (Allah's will, knowledge, or decision)
and*qadar* (its implementation) was central to the debate. The two
extremes in the debate; the insistence on complete freedom of the human
will (associated with the*Mutalizites* or sometimes*Qadarians* ), and
the*Djabriya* insistence than humans had no part at all in their
actions, were eventually excluded as heretical. The mediating view of
al-Ash'ari, which came to be regarded as orthodox, maintained that
humans bore responsibility for their actions despite the fact that they
represent Allah's*qada'* and*qadar* . This was by virtue of their having
accepted or become conscious of these actions as their own (*iktisab*
)*.* Â For al-Ash'ari even this consciousness was created by God, but
within orthodox Islam there was room for continued debate over how
acceptance of God's fore-ordained will as one's own came about.

Some modern Islamic scholars downplay belief in predestination. Abdul
Ala Mawdudi, who was one of the most influential Muslim teachers of this
century, doesn't mention it as part of Islamic doctrine in his popular
book*Towards Understanding Islam* , and other modernist thinkers have
revived*Mutalizite* arguments on for free will. But virtually all
classical books on Islamic belief, and most modern presentations of
Islamic doctrine, list belief in predestination according to the
Ash'arite understanding as a*fundamental Islamic belief* , as important
as belief in God, the angels, the books of prophecy, the prophets, and
the final judgement and life after death.

In some modern Islamic movements*iktisab* is regarded as almost a
conversion experience, in which a person who thought he or she was
acting freely finally submits to the reality of Allah's Lordship, and
with this submits to God's revealed law as his or her way of life. It is
common in Malaysia, for example, that a convert from nominal to
committed Islam to say "I understood *the qada' qadar* of Allah". The
questions which this raises about the psychological meaning of
conversion within a deterministic system are no less vexing than those
which led to the great Armenian - Calvinist debates in Christianity. Yet
for those involved there seems to be a psychological satisfaction which
defies armenian reasoning.

F. Human Social Realities
-------------------------

While the Quran vividly awakens its hearers to the reality of God's
judgement on their lives, it does not foretell an*imminent* end to the
world. It has a wealth of material related to regulating family and
social relations. Particularly in the*surahs* revealed later in
Muhammed's life it emphasizes the maintenance of Muslim families and the
development of the Islamic community. The*sunnah* (traditions concerning
Muhammed's words and acts) greatly extended this teaching, and the
subsequent development of Islamic law gave the Muslim community
extensive guidance for the forming of human communities which lived
within God's will. The details of that guidance are beyond the scope of
this essay. More relevant to understanding modern Islam is the challenge
which modernity and the globalization of certain social norms has posed
to Muslims. Some Muslims have opted for seeking to maintain or recreate
traditional Muslim lifestyles, and others have simply adopted to modern
lifestyles while reducing Islam to a private religious orientation. The
majority, however, have tried to both defend and re-evaluate Islamic
teaching on authentic patterns of human life in a way which shows its
value and relevance in a contemporary setting. In particular they have
addressed contemporary issues of pluralism, gender roles, the family,
the breakdown of morality, economic justice, and nationalism.[^10]

### 1. Pluralism

###

A central claim of modern Muslims is that Islam's traditional approach
to society acknowledged and valued religious, ethnic, and cultural
pluralism, while maintaining the essential equality of all humans.
(49:13, 5:48) The principle that there is no compulsion in religion
(2:256) and the traditional tolerance of Muslim societies for religious
minorities is often cited as evidence that Islamic principals should be
the basis of a modern pluralistic society. However, these traditional
values worked most effectively when different communities could maintain
their integrity by isolating a relatively large part of their lives from
the larger society. The intrusiveness of the modern state on every
aspect of human life, and the globalization of economic and cultural
forces seems to make this impossible. While some Muslims seek to use the
fundamental value of pluralism to develop new social systems for a
modern world, others argue that modernity itself is the problem. Rather
than accepting it as inevitable, they believe Muslim should oppose it by
re-instituting God's plan for social life as revealed in the Quran and
Hadith. They invite non-Muslims to accept their efforts on the basis of
what they present as Islam's essentially pluralist outlook.

### 2. Gender

###

In the face of criticism that Islamic teaching about gender roles is
oppressive to women, modern Muslims have offered two answers. Some have
simply affirmed that the traditional Islamic way is, when properly
implemented, both fairer and better for women than modern standards for
treatment of women. Others have sought to undermine traditionalist
Islamic teaching and discover in the Quran and Hadith a basis for
equality and justice which is superior to a modern understanding of
gender and gender relations.

What sets both groups apart from non-Islamic discussions is the
affirmation that relationships between men and women are determined by
covenants of rights and responsibilities, and that the marriage covenant
is the central realm of sexual relations. Islam, particularly seen in
its historical context, is asserted to be revolutionary in the rights
and protection offered to women through these covenants. Thus, for
example, modern apologists for Islam (including many women) interpret
Islamic requirements that women dress modestly not as evidence of male
subjugation, but as a means by which women take a responsible attitude
towards men's natural sexual urges. Similarly the respectful distance
men are enjoined to keep from women outside their family gives women the
freedom to be regarded as human beings rather than sex objects. It is
precisely these values of mutual respect and responsibility, and these
as the basis for developing human relations, which Muslims would like to
see replace the emphasis on power as the key determinate of human
relations in modern social analysis.[^11]

### 3. The Family

###

Probably no issue troubles Muslims more than the breakdown of the family
in modern world. In light of this they are astounded at the frequent
western accusation that somehow Islam itself is inimical to stable
family relations. As in gender relations, they assert that the Islamic
provisions are based on rights and responsibilities which realistically
meet universal human needs. Marriage itself is a contract in which both
parties have specific obligations and rights, and thus there are
provisions for maintaining the relationship when these cannot be met, or
for breaking it off without either partner being left defenseless and
destitute. The provision for polygamy, dowry, and divorce fit into this
framework. Modernist Muslims also maintain that Islamic law is flexible
enough to deal with changing circumstances. Thus polygamy was allowed as
a means of bringing all women into the protective relationship of the
family in earlier times, but is sufficiently restricted to prevent
modern women from being abused by it. And indeed Muslim states such as
Malaysia have greatly restricted polygamy on basically Islamic grounds.

The major emphasis of modern Muslim interpretations of marriage is that
it should provide a secure environment for every member of the family.
Muslims believe that Islamic teaching accomplishes this better than
secular laws precisely because it acknowledges fundamental gender and
generation differences, and insists on mutual responsibility among
family members. The Islamic system is said to secure each individual in
concentric networks of responsibility, beginning with the nuclear family
and extending outward through the extended family, local community, and
to the entire*ummah* or Islamic society. This, Muslims would say, is
superior to the Western system of autonomous individuals reliant on
either themselves or the state. While the Islamic viewpoint is certainly
open to debate at many levels, it cannot be denied that it has shown a
strong appeal for many post-Christian Europeans and Americans, and has
given Islamic minorities an enviable solidarity. [^12]

### 4. Morality and Political structures

###

For Muslims morality is fundamentally submission to God's laws. The
strength necessary to act morally comes from the knowledge of that law,
and of the consequences for obedience and disobedience. The willful
ignorance of modern people towards the existence of God and God's way
for humans destroys the possibility for moral action. True religion
generally (for Islam acknowledges that many religions reliably taught
God's existence and ways) and Islam specifically are the only answer to
this dilemma. Revelation is the only source of religion, and thus the
Revelation of Muhammed, the last and most complete, is the way back to
individual and social morality.

On these points there is universal assent among Muslims, in the face of
any claims that morality emerges out of either enlightened
self-interest, consensual agreements on social behavior, or innate human
altruism. Muslims recognize the problem of competing claims stemming
from different revelations, but argue that in such a case the last and
fullest revelation must take precedence. At the same time Islam does
recognize the role of both individual judgement (*ra'y* ) and consensus
( *ijma* ) in resolving moral problems not directly addressed by God's
revelation. The great political issue for modern Islam is determining
the line between God's clear revelation and the realm of human decision
making, and to suggest public institutions in which a consensus can be
reached.

### 5. Economic Justice

###

One of the great demands Allah makes in the Quran is for*adl* , justice,
particularly in economic relations. Historically a great attraction of
Islam was the uniformity and fairness of its laws regulating trade.
These, with a certain flexibility added by legal devices called*hiyal* ,
allowed Muslims to create the widest system of trade relations in the
world prior to the age of European colonialism, and to enjoy
unprecedented economic prosperity. Imperialism and colonialism, driven
by European economic, social, and religious theories which in one way or
another justified exploitation of conquered peoples, left much of the
Muslim world deeply impoverished, even as they introduced rapid
technological change and eventually democratic social theory. To many
Muslims twentieth century economic structures have only deepened the
poverty of the mass of Muslims, even if a tiny Muslim elite has grown
rich on the exploitation of oil and other natural resources. While some
Muslims have been attracted to socialism and Marxism as alternatives,
the essentially secular and atheist foundations of both are unattractive
to most Muslims. Not surprisingly there has been a major movement to
re-discover and articulate the principles of Islamic economics in order
to offer an alternative to the systems under which Muslims have suffered
so terribly. Islamic economics is now a flourishing field of academic
inquiry, and in many Muslim nations the government is publicly committed
to putting Islamic economic institutions and structures in place.
Describing either the principles of Islamic economics or its
institutions goes beyond the scope of this essay. However, should Muslim
nations gain the power to resist the force of global free-for-all
capitalism, or close their doors to it in frustration, Islamic economic
systems will become more significant in the future.

### 6. Ummah and Nation

###

The Islamic ideal normally distinguishes only between the Islamic and
non-Islamic world, the*dar a-Islam* and*dar al-harb.* The former is the
unified world of Islam; the latter is the realm of struggle to implement
Islam. Classically these distinguished geographical realms under Muslim
political and military control from those which were not. Such nations
as existed in the*dar al-Islam* were regarded as units of political and
administrative expediency and in theory the whole of the*dar al-Islam*
was ruled by the Caliph. As late as the 1920's Muslims around the world
looked hopefully at the prospect of Islam and its believers united under
some type of political structure. The pan-Islamic movement did not
achieve this goal, and the debate over how the world-wide unity of
Muslim believers, the*ummah* , should be achieved in an era of
nation-states goes on. In part this debate centers on how to create an
Islamic state. While some purists among Muslims argue that no modern
state can realize Islamic ideals apart from the unity of the*ummah* ,
there are nonetheless active political movements throughout the Muslim
world to transform existing nations into Islamic states under the rule
of*sharia* law. At the same time dominantly Muslim states have formed
organizations and alliances which attempt at some level to foster the
overall unity of the*ummah* , and intellectuals continue to theorize
about how actual political unity can be attained.

### 7. The Realization of Islam

###

We cannot understand modern Muslims if we do not understand that the
drive to realize the ideals sketched above is central to their
understanding of human fulfillment. Paradise (see below) is the reward
for a life of submission to God's will. But for Muslims the authentic
fulfillment of that submission should come here on earth, not a distant
afterlife. Muslims have never been taught to push their hopes for human
authenticity to a future eschaton. And this human authenticity, although
it has a distinctive inner dimension, is for Muslims inextricably linked
with the implementation of particular personal roles, and family,
community, political, and economic structures. Unless Islam changes
dramatically Muslims will never be content with less than*din* , an
all-embracing pattern of life, ordered according to God's or law.
