V. The End of Creation
======================

Islam is a way of life. But this way of life was always a way*to*
eternal victory, reward, and success in the form of promised*al-Jannah*
, paradise, or literally "Garden". This way leads through death and the
grave, and God's judgement, before reaching its end with either eternal
bliss or eternal suffering.

A. Death and the Grave
----------------------

The continued existence of the soul after death is central to Islamic
teaching. The Arabs believed that life continued, after a fashion, in
the grave. The Quran makes only indirect reference to punishment in the
grave (47:27, 6:93). However, the traditions of the prophet affirm the
importance of the grave ("the grave is the first stage of the journey to
eternity") and address directly the fears of life in the grave. By the
time Islamic theologians developed the first creeds Islam had a highly
developed doctrine of punishment in the grave (*adhab al-kabr* ). The
tradition states that two angels,*Munkar* and*Nakir* , will examine each
person after death regarding Muhammed (or in a more elaborate form, God,
Muhammed, religion, and direction of prayer). The faithful will give a
satisfactory answer, and will be left to await the Resurrection. Some
traditions suggest that the graves of the faithful will be mystically in
communion with the*Kaba'* or the grave of Muhammed, and that in this way
they will find comfort and even bliss as they await the resurrection.
Those without a satisfactory answer will be beaten continually in the
grave until the resurrection, (except on Fridays). Some traditions
excuse the righteous unbelievers from this punishment. Regardless of the
specific elaboration of tradition, the primary emphasis is on correct
belief as the hope for avoiding immediate punishment in the grave. It is
a tradition in Islam that as a person dies they whisper the*Shahada* ,
or basic belief in Allah and Muhammed.

In addition to the hope of avoiding punishment, and finding some comfort
in the grave, Islam holds out the possibility of avoiding both the grave
and God's final judgement. The prophets are taken directly to paradise
upon their death. For ordinary Muslims this privilege is obtained when
death comes through martyrdom, primarily when fighting on behalf of
Islam. Women who die in childbirth, and those who die in the holy land
on a pilgrimage, are also martyrs who obtain the entry into paradise
directly after death. This hope has motivated many Muslims to embrace
death for Islamic causes, with the modern suicide bombers of Hamas
providing a notable recent example. A more benign effect has been to
encourage elderly Muslims to put off making their pilgrimage until they
are quite feeble in the hope of dying in the holy land, where many who
have the means remain illegally after the pilgrimage is over.

B. The Final Judgement
----------------------

The earliest revelations in the Quran emphasize the unity and majesty of
God, and the certainty of God's judgement on those who have not
acknowledged God as their creator and submitted to God's will.
Muhammed's earliest preaching focused on the day of judgement which
would mark the end of the world, and salvation from hell was a dominant
theme. Belief in a day of reckoning (*qiyamah* ) and a resurrection of
the dead to judgement (*hashr* ) is found in earliest Islamic creeds,
and is universally regarded as an essential doctrine. The earliest
revelations to Muhammed stress the certainty of God's judgement and of
punishment in hell-fire for wrong-doers and paradise for the righteous.
(88, 99, 101, and many others) Later revelations and traditions greatly
expanded the Islamic picture of the last judgement. The most basic
elements are:

the last day when the present creation will be annihilated,

the resurrection of the dead,

their presentation before God and the reading out of the complete record
of all their good and evil deeds,

the rewarding and punishing of each person strictly according to the
balance off their good and evil deeds,

the intercession of Muhammed on behalf of the faithful.

the sending of the successful to Paradise, and the losers to the fire
and torment of Hell.

Muslims learn of these through accounts of the final judgement which are
portrayed with vivid imagery. Most accept these accounts as literal
portrayals of what they will personally face. Avoiding the terrors of
hell, and indeed the uncertainty of the judgement day, both motivates
Muslims to obedience in God's law, and to seeking to mitigate the
effects of their sins.

C. Salvation
------------

Within the Islamic tradition the specific Arabic word for
salvation,*hajat,* is not often used. Instead humans at the final
judgement are characterized as "winners" and "losers", as those who have
succeeded and those who have failed. Salvation is moving from being a
loser to being a winner, and thus obtaining paradise in the end. And
this salvation is accomplished by taking the concrete steps, provided by
God, which insure that at the final judgement a human life will have
more good deeds than bad when weighed in the balance. Islam stresses
that these steps are God's provision for human failure, so that while
the immediate cause of salvation may be human actions, the possibility
of that actions will lead to salvation comes from God's grace and mercy.

### 1. Sin and its Remedies

###

The Quran does not present a formal theory of sin (*krait's* is the
general quranic term), but recognizes a difference between faults
(*dhanb* ) and intentional sins (*ithm* ) The Quran suggests that those
who avoid intentional sins will find forgiveness in Allah (53:111), and
also offers forgiveness to those who repent of such sins or infidelity.
Later Muslim theologians discussed extensively both the distinction
between light (*sagha'dir* ) and heavy (*kaba'ir* ) sins, which acts
belonged to each category, and how they could be remedied so as to avoid
eternal punishment. One of the first divisions in Islam was the
withdrawal of the*Kharidjites,* who insisted that not only*shirk*
(making something or someone equal to God), but heavy sins rendered a
person an infidel (*kafir* ) and required repentance. The*Mutalizites*
also insisted that punishment for heavy sins on the last day could be
avoided only through repentance. The controversy centered around the
importance of personal deeds versus the importance of belief in both
maintaining membership in the community, and in achieving paradise at
the final judgement.

The orthodox view, developed by the*Murdji'ies* , gave priority to
belief for both membership in the community and attaining paradise. They
stressed that each person is responsible for his or her own sins, and
that no person can pay the price for the sins of another. (4:111, 6:164)
Yet they were equally forceful in asserting that God is merciful and
forgiving, and that no one should despair because of their sin. (12:87,
15:56, 39:53) A system of classification of sins then provided
guidelines to specific remedies for sinful acts.[^13]

In the orthodox view thoughts are not sins, or are the lightest of sins,
unless they are put into action. They are not taken into account on the
judgement day. One tradition of the prophet states: "Allah does not take
into account what the members of my community think, as long as they do
not pronounce it or carry it out."[^14]

*Dhanb* , mistakes or faults, are overcome by removing the fault which
caused them through knowledge and good works. One tradition (often
quoted on the television in Malaysia at the time of evening prayers)
stresses that "each footstep on the way to evening worship at the mosque
overcomes 10,000 sins." For the believer there was no need to seek
special forgiveness for such mistakes.

Heavy sins, normally those which involved consciously breaking God's
commands, could be remedied through formally asking for forgiveness
(*istighfar* ), and through restitution if a person had been wronged.
Such sins, although avoidable, were regarded as ubiquitous in humans and
necessary so that humans would rely on God for mercy and forgiveness.
One tradition states that Allah would eliminate his community if it
didn't sin, and create another people who would commit sins, ask
forgiveness, and be forgiven.[^15] Another states that the prophet
prayed for forgiveness several times a day, indicating that no one
should think themselves above the possibility of committing heavy sins.

The ultimate sin, s*hirk,* required repentance ( *tawbah* ), and the
embracing of Islam through the confession of the one God, Allah, and the
prophet-hood of Muhammed.

### 2. Intercession (shafa'a).

###

The concept of intercession (s*hafa'a* ) is found in the Quran, but
primarily in the denial that anyone can intercede for another on the day
of judgement (2:48, 2:254). However, an elaborate tradition developed
supporting the idea that Muhammed would intercede on behalf of the
faithful who had committed heavy sins and been cast into hell, and would
then lead them into paradise. In some traditions this power to intercede
was extended to others, with some maintaining that the followers of all
the genuine prophets would have their prophet to intercede for them on
the day of judgement. In many parts of the Muslim world intercessory
prayers are offered on behalf of the dead, although this has been a
matter of great controversy between traditionalist Muslims and those
seeking to restore a purer Islam based on only the original teaching of
the Quran and Hadith.[^16]

### 3. Cleanliness

###

Islam recognizes that religion is not merely a matter of good and bad
deeds, but of a relationship with or toward God which has a
psychological dimension as well. Muslims may feel distanced or alienated
from God not only by sins which can lead to hell, but by unintentional
acts or circumstances (such as being touched by an unclean animal, or
having impure thoughts about a person of the opposite sex). These make a
person unfit to worship, and thus cut off from the primary means by
which they live in obedience to God. As in Judaism these actions are
circumstances are associated with cleanliness, and indeed in many
Islamic languages holiness and cleanliness are interchangeable terms.
The Quran and Hadith make many provisions for situations of
uncleanliness, primarily through special forms of ritual washing in
addition to those prescribed before prayer.

D. Conclusion
-------------

In the end Islam seeks to offer a way of life in which, by God's mercy,
success at the final judgement is obtainable by all humans, and for the
faithful is certain. The life which leads to success follows a way
clearly revealed by God, trodden and further explained by God's prophet,
and minutely analyzed by generations of Muslim scholars. For every
possible misdeed along that way there is (by God's mercy) a
corresponding act which will mitigate its ultimate effects. For every
misstep there is a way back on track. There are Muslims who are racked
with doubt and guilt, and who feel that nothing they do can overcome the
burden of their sins. When no Islamic solution meets their psychological
and spiritual needs many have found peace in the message of the gospel.
However, the history of missions among Muslims has shown that the
majority find within their own religion provisions for living toward
God's end for the world which give them both confidence in their present
life, and hope for the future. Finding ways to present the truth of the
gospel, without denigrating the claims of Islamic teaching or offending
against Muhammed, remains one of the great challenges of Christian
mission.
