Notes
=====

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Islamic Spirituality I, p. [^359]:

[^2] During the period when the author lived in Malaysia (1985-1992) it
was not uncommon to hear stories about jinn being involved in human
affairs. Politicians were sometimes accused of enlisting jinn to attack
their opponents, cases of mass hysteria were attributed to jinn, and
more girls who became pregnant, and their families, would attribute the
child to a jinn, to whom the girl was said to be legitimately married.

[^3] An oft told anecdote tells how one famous teacher would not eat
watermelon, because although the melon itself was an allowed food, he
could not determine whether Muhammed had spit or swallowed the seeds,
and thus had no guidance in the matter.

[^4] Islamic Spirituality, p.359

[^5] See, for example, Mawdudi's account of Muhammed's life in his
Towards Understanding Islam.

[^6] Islamic Spirituality, Vol 1, p. 48-[^49]:

[^7] Ibid, p.[^49]:

[^8] Islamic Spirituality, Vol [^1]: 295.

[^9] Shorter Encylopedia of Islam, H.A.R Gibbs and J.H. Kraemer, E.J.
Brill, Leiden, 1961, p.[^435]: Students of Islam should exercise care in
taking any presentation of Islamic beliefs in this area as
authoritative. The systems of al-Shastarani, al-Ghazzali, and al-Baidawi
in particular are sometimes presented as representing the orthodox
Muslim viewpoint, when in fact their systems, although not rejected as
heretical, are not necessarily representative of all orthodox opinion.

[^10] Ziauddin Sardar's books, Islamic Futures and The Future of Islamic
Civilization, (Pelanduk Press, Kuala Lumpur, 1988) present an overview
of one strand of popular modern Muslim thinking on these issues. Of
particular interest is a model Islamic constitution (Islamic Futures,
pp. 327-345) which seeks to codify Islamic teaching in a form useful to
the creation of a modern state.

[^11] "Religious Ideology, Women and the Family: the Islamic Paradigm,
Barbara Freyer Stowasser, in The Islamic Impulse, ed. Barbara Freyer
Stowasser, Washington D.C. 1987, pp. 262-296

[^12] Mahmoud Abu-Saud, Concept of Islam, American Trust Publications,
[^1990]: pp. 121-127. Abu-Saud's presentation wouldn't necessarily find
agreement with all Muslims, but represents one typical apologetic
approach for Muslim views of the family.

[^13] See Muslim Devotions, Constance Padwick, OneWorld, Oxford, 1997,
pp. 173-208 for a full account of Muslim prayer related to seeking
forgiveness for sins.

[^14] Shorter Encylopedia of Islam, H.A.R Gibbs and J.H. Kraemer, E.J.
Brill, Leiden, 1961, p.251

[^15] Salvation through Repentance,Â  Abu Ameenah Bilil Philips, Tawheed
Publications, 1990, p.4

[^16] As is the case in Christian tradition, the chronological
experience of the soul after death is not always clear, or agreed, in
the Islamic tradition.
