Supplication and the Divine Decree and Destiny
==============================================

Indeed there is a Divine decree (*qadar*) and destiny (*qada’*) with
regard to each and every thing in the universe, such that there is no
way for man to refrain from it, as it is an irrevocable Divine will
(*iradah*).

In this case, what is the position of supplication in relation to this
Divine will? Can supplication change something which has been subjected
to the invariable will of Allah and is already in His knowledge? What is
the benefit of supplication if it cannot alter the definite Divine
decree and destiny? And if supplication has a role in changing the
Divine decree and destiny, then how is this accomplished?

In order to answer this question, it is necessary to enter into the
issue of the Divine decree and destiny, and also the issue of *bada’*.
Since addressing this issue might take us away from our current
discussion on prayer (*du’a’*) to a philosophical discussion, we will
try to avoid the philosophical complexities of the issue, talking about
it lightly and briefly to the extent that it is related to the answer.

The Law of Causality in History and the Universe
------------------------------------------------

The law of causality (*‘illiyyah*) operates in the course of history as
well as in the universe in form of a general and an irrevocable law,
without there being any exception to it. Some of the Qur’anic verses
pertaining to this fact are:

• ***“To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He
creates whatever He wishes.”***[^1]

• ***“Indeed Allah does what He desires.”***[^2]

• ***“Indeed your Lord does whatever He desires.”***[^3]

• ***“All that We say to a thing, when We will it, is to say to it ‘Be!’
and it is.”***[^4]

• ***“Had Allah willed, He would have taken away their hearing and
sight.”***[^5]

• ***“But Allah singles out for His mercy whomever He wishes.”***[^6]

• ***“Allah provides whomever He wishes without any reckoning.”***[^7]

• ***“And Allah gives His kingdom to whomever He wishes.”***[^8]

• ***“Say, ‘O Allah, Master of all sovereignty! You give sovereignty to
whomever You wish, and strip sovereignty of whomever You wish; You make
mighty whomever You wish, and You abase whomever You wish; all good is
in Your hand. Indeed You have power over all things.’”***[^9]

• ***“If He wishes, He will take you away, O mankind, and bring others
{in your place}.”***[^10]

The Qur’an is replete with these verses and the like of them. They are
clear in that Allah, the Exalted, has the absolute power over the
universe, nothing can delimit Him, render Him incapable, or stop Him
from doing what He wishes. He has power over everything; He does what He
wants and He is not questioned about anything, but they are questioned.

The Jews had a belief that the will (*iradah*) of Allah is subject to
the general system of causality which reigns over the universe and
history. According to them, Allah has no control on the universe or
history after He has created them. Referring to this view, the Qur’an
says:

***“The Jews say, ‘Allah’s hand is tied up.’ Tied up be their hands, and
cursed be they for what they say! Rather, His hands are wide
open.”***[^11]

Hence, there is no doubt in whatever we have mentioned above, and the
Qur’an is clear in all that and in condemning the Jews for what they
believe in.

The Relation between the Divine Will and the Law of Causality
-------------------------------------------------------------

In the light of this power which the Qur’an affirms for the Divine will
in the universe, history, and society, it is natural for us to ask about
the relation of the Divine will to the law of causality. Does it mean
suspension (*ta’til*), in the sense that the will of Allah suspends the
law of causality whenever He wills that?

The answer to this is of course negative; for it is He who is the
creator of the cause (*‘illah*) and none other than Him. Creating the
‘cause’ is necessarily creating its causality (*‘illiyyah*). If He
creates fire, then He has created the heat also.

The creation of fire without heat is similar to the creation of an even
number without its being even![^12] Accordingly, it is not possible that
Allah creates the fire without it being the cause of heat, unless if He
changes its entity to something other than fire but which resembles
fire.

Therefore, there is no way to entertain the opinion that the dominion of
the will of Allah over the universe and history implies the suspension
of the law of causality.  
 In this case, what then can be the relation between the Divine will and
the principle of causality?

The Reign of the Divine Will over the Law of Causality by Itself
----------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur’an elucidates this relation and defines it in many places,
stating that Allah, the Exalted, has absolute control and power over the
law of causality by the very law of causality, without suspending or
nullifying it.

The Qur’an does not suspend the will (*iradah*) of Allah as the Jews do,
nor does it nullify the law of causality as the Ash‘arite do; rather it
affirms the sovereignty of Allah over the universe by the very law of
causality.

As a result, when He, the Exalted, wills to bestow His blessings on a
people, He sends the winds as a glad tiding before His mercy:

***“It is*** **He** ***who*** **sends** ***forth the winds as harbingers
of His mercy”***[^13]***,***

***“It is*** **Allah** ***who*** **sends** ***the winds and they raise a
cloud”***[^14]***,***

***“And*** **We send** ***the fertilizing wind and send down water from
the sky.”***[^15]

Thus, He is the one who sends down water from the sky, but by sending
{first} the fertilizing winds. When He wills to give good news of His
mercy to a people, He would send to them winds as sign of His mercy so
that they may raise the clouds. Thereafter, He would send to them
rainfall which would cause their lands to produce what Allah has
deposited in it of His mercy.

In conclusion, when Allah intends to shower His blessings on a people,
He blesses them through its means (*asbab*). Similarly, when He decides
to punish a people, He does so through its means.

With regard to His punishment on the people of Fir’awn, Allah says:

***“Certainly We afflicted Pharaoh’s clan with droughts (sinin) and loss
of produce, so that they may take admonition.”***[^16]

According to this verse, the punishment on the people of Pharoah and
their admonition was accomplished through the drought. ‘*Sinin*’ in the
above verse is the plural of ‘*sanat*’ which means drought

In brief, if Allah willed to bless a community, He would do so by
employing its means, such as the winds and the clouds. On the contrary,
if He intended to punish a people, He would do so through its specified
means, such as drought and shortage of rainfall.

The Law of Mediate Causation
----------------------------

The law of mediate causation (*Qanun at-Tasbib*) implies that Allah, the
Exalted, in order to achieve what He desires, employs means which would
actualize His will (*iradah*). The following verses of the Qur’an point
out to this fact:

1. ***“Whomever Allah desires to guide, He opens his breast to Islam,
and whomever He desires to lead astray, He makes his breast narrow and
straitened as if he were climbing to a height.”***[^17]

This verse has clear indication to the point we have just mentioned.
Allah, the Exalted, guides a people or misleads them by means of their
own deeds. Therefore, when He wills to guide a given community, He will
employ for this purpose a means (*sabab*) which would actualize what He
has willed, thus He opens their breasts to Islam. In contrast, if He
desires a people to go astray, He will employ means which would
actualize what He has desired; accordingly He makes their breasts narrow
and straitened.

2***. “And when We desire to destroy a town, We command its affluent
ones {to obey Allah}, but they commit transgression in it, and so the
word becomes due against it, and We destroy it utterly.”***[^18]

According to this verse, when Allah intends to annihilate a nation
because of their own actions, He would take up a means (*sabab*) which
would lead to their corruption. Thus, He would make them affluent, and
this affluency (*tarf*) would lead the affluent ones to transgression
(*fisq*); as a result, the word would become due against them.

3. ***“When Allah promised you {victory over} one of the two companies,
{saying}, ‘It is for you’, you were eager that it should be the one that
was unarmed. But Allah desires to confirm the truth with His words, and
to root out the faithless.”***[^19]

When Allah had willed to establish the truth (*haqq*) and wipe off the
infidels through those of the Muslims who stood by the Holy Prophet (S)
, He chose for them the way of ‘arms’ as a means to actualize this aim.

In the same manner that Allah has made the way of arms and munitions a
means for the perfection of the Muslims, their guardianship and
leadership over the people on the face of this earth, similarly He has
made the affliction with comfort (*lin*) and affluency (*tarf*) a means
for the eradication of a nation whose destruction Allah has already
ordained.

4. ***“So let not their wealth and children impress you; Allah only
desires to punish them with these in the life of this world, and that
their souls may depart while they are faithless.”***[^20]

Thus Allah takes up from among their wealth and offspring a means
(*sabab*) to punish and destroy them.

The Law of Facilitation
-----------------------

The law of facilitation (*tawfiq*) is very close to that of mediate
causation (*tasbib*). This law implies that Allah places his servant in
the course of means (*asbab*) leading toward the good (*khayr*).

For instance, when Allah wills the well being of a sick person, He would
direct him to a physician who is able to diagnose his illness, and
direct him to consume a medicine which would cure his ailment. Likewise,
if Allah desires good for His servant, He leads him to the means of good
(*khayr*) and guidance. And if He wills to bestow upon him a provision
(*rizq*), He would lead him to the means of provision; and if He decides
the opposite of this, then He would keep the servant away from its
means.

The Absolute Reign of Allah’s Will in the Universe
--------------------------------------------------

All that we have said above is in the hand of Allah and subject to his
command and power. The following verses attest to this fact:

• ***“Whatever mercy Allah unfolds for the people, no one can withhold
it; and whatever He withholds, no one can release it after Him, and He
is the All-mighty, the All-wise.”***[^21]

• ***“Indeed Allah carries through His command.”***[^22]

• ***“If Allah helps you, no one can overcome you, but if He forsakes
you, who will help you after Him?”***[^23]

• ***“And when Allah wishes to visit ill on a people, there is nothing
that can avert it, and they have no protector besides Him.”***[^24]

• ***“Indeed your Lord does whatever He desires.”***[^25]

• ***“Indeed Allah does whatever He desires.”***[^26]

This is what exactly the meaning of Allah’s dominion over the universe
means,

***“…the Sovereign, the All-holy, All-benign, the Securer, the
Dominant…”***[^27]

The Relation between the Will of Allah and the Law of Causality
---------------------------------------------------------------

The last word with regard to the relation between the will (*iradah*) of
Allah and the law of causation is that there is no doubt that this law
is operative in the universe in an all-inclusive and a definite manner.
However, this law is subject to the will (*mashi’ah*) of Allah, and not
dominant over it; rather it is the *iradah* of Allah which is dominant
over this law.

Nonetheless, the command of the will of Allah over the law of causation
does not mean the annulment or suspension of this law, and how can this
be possible when this law is among the creations of Allah, as mentioned
earlier. Rather, it means that Allah, the Exalted, suspends what He
wills out of these means (*asbab*) and makes effectual what He desires
of them. He freely acts in the universe and thus gives sovereignty to
whomever He wishes, and strips sovereignty of whomever He wishes, but
through its specified means.

It is due to this very reason that man is unable to predict the future
of the universe and history in respect to their causes, as the will of
Allah may intervene in the affair, changing the means and causes
according to His desire.

For instance, if anyone of us were to predict the future of a battle
between a powerful and a weak army, he would foresee victory for the
strong army and defeat for the weaker side. But if Allah wills the
weaker side to triumph over the powerful side, He would arrange for that
causes (*asbab*) which are normally unexpected. Thus, He would cast fear
in the hearts of the stronger side, and strength and resolution in the
hearts of the smaller army. He would make the move of the smaller side
steady and sound, causing their affairs to run to their benefit; and the
move of the other side unsteady, causing them to commit military errors.
Accordingly, the smaller army would overpower the larger army by the
will of Allah.

A large or small number is not the only factor which determines the fate
of a battle. However, this does not mean that a large number is not
among the factors of victory, or the ‘small number’ is not among the
factors of defeat; rather what we mean is that victory has other factors
as well, as ‘defeat’ has different factors.

Accordingly, when Allah wills the triumph of the smaller party, He would
prepare for them its factors, as they are in His hand; similarly, if He
wills the larger party to get defeated, He would pave the way for their
defeat, as this also is in His hand. He, the Exalted, says:

***“Those who were certain they will encounter Allah said, ‘How many a
small party has overcome a larger party by Allah’s will! And Allah is
with the patient.’”***[^28]

Change in Allah’s Decree in Creation
------------------------------------

This is exactly the meaning of ‘change in Allah’s decree’ (*bada’*) in
respect to the creation. *Bada’* is the change in the course of events
in the universe and history in accordance with the will (*iradah*) of
Allah.

How many a times has mankind been on the brink of falling -if the law of
causation were to be operative in the lives of the people, but the will
(*mashi’ah*) of Allah intervened in the appropriate moment and rescued
mankind from falling, in contrary to the course required by the law of
causation.

Nonetheless, this does not imply the suspension or the nullification of
the law of causality, rather the will (*iradah*) of Allah, the
All-mighty, overrides the law of causality by itself. This overriding
and the implications it involves run against the understanding of the
people and their perception of the chain of causes and effects.

Now, this Divine overruling of the law of causality which takes the
people by surprise and makes them err in their calculations is what is
known as *bada’*, about which there are many narrations from the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a).

With *bada’* there occurs an unexpected change in the universe, history
and society. Thus, those whom people did not expect to triumph would
become triumphant, and those whom they could not think of being defeated
would get defeated; the oppressed would come to power, and the kings
would be humiliated.

Obliteration and Affirmation
----------------------------

*Bada’* as explained above is the very phenomenon of obliteration
(*mahw*) and affirmation (*ithbat*) which has appeared in the Qur’an:

***“Allah effaces and confirms whatever He wishes, and with Him is the
Mother of the Book.”***[^29]

The Mother of the Book (*umm al-kitab*) is the knowledge of Allah, known
in the tongue of the traditions as *al-lawh al-mahfuz* (the guarded
tablet). There does not occur any obliteration or change in it, nor does
Allah come to know of something after being ignorant of it.

Shaykh as-Saduq narrates in *Ikmal ad-din* from Abu Basir and Suma‘ah,
who reported from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “Whoever thinks that Allah, the
All-mighty, the Majestic, comes to realize something which He did not
know of yesterday, then you should dissociate yourselves from him.”[^30]

It is worthy of note here that the obliteration (*mahw*) takes place in
the book of creation (*kitab* *at-Takwin*) and not in the Mother of the
Book (*umm al-kitab*), which denotes the knowledge of Allah; for the
knowledge of Allah is unchangeable. The change and alteration occurs in
affairs related to the universe, society and history, in respect to the
causes that Allah employs for them.

‘Ayyashi relates from Ibn Sinan who narrated from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a),
“Allah sends forth what He wishes, and delays what He wishes; He effaces
what He wishes and confirms what He wishes, and with Him is the Mother
of the Book.” He (‘a) then said, “Anything which is willed by Allah is
there in His knowledge before He creates it. Nothing appears to Him
(*yabdu lahu*) except that it is in His knowledge {from before}. Indeed
Allah does not come to know {something} after being ignorant of
it.”[^31]

‘Ammar bin Musa narrates that once Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) was asked about
the verse, “Allah effaces and confirms whatever He wishes…” He (‘a)
answered, “Indeed that book is a book {from} which Allah effaces and
confirms whatever He wishes. It is from it that supplication (*du‘a’*)
averts the Divine destiny (*qada’*). It is written on such a *du‘a’*
that this is the one through which the *qada’* is averted. But when the
matter ends up to the Mother of the Book (*umm al-kitab*), then the
supplication will have no effect on it.”[^32]

Therefore, Allah establishes whatever He desires from this universal
system which is operating by His command based on the law of causation,
and obliterates from it whatever He wishes.

For example, the natural course of causes may require a person to die of
a particular illness. Here, Allah may confirm it, and accordingly the
course of causes would lead to his death by His will and command; or He
may efface it if He wishes, hence He would pave the way for his
well-being through its specified means.

Consequently, the phenomenon of obliteration (*mahw*) would come to
transpire in the universe. But with regard to the Mother of the Book,
there does not occur any obliteration or change in it, as it is not
possible that Allah would come to know of something He was initially
unaware of it.

The obliteration occurs in the world of creation (*takwin*) -which is
functioning based on the system of cause and effect- according to the
Divine wisdom (*hikmah*) and mercy (*rahmah*).

Hence, when the wisdom and mercy of Allah necessitates a change in the
course of events in the universe or a society, He would prepare for this
change its specified means, and efface what was to transpire in the
universe or a society based on the law of causation, were it not for the
will of Allah.

This system is subject to the command of Allah both at times of
obliteration and affirmation, and the power of Allah is in force within
it. Thus, if Allah confirms something in it, it will come to take place
by His will and order; and if He alters and effaces it, it shall change
by His command and power.

The Effect of Belief in Bada’
-----------------------------

Belief in *bada’* comes after the belief in *tawhid* in importance. This
is because disbelief in *bada’* is tantamount to dissociating the will
(*iradah*) of Allah from the running of the universe, and dismissing His
dominance over the course of the universe and society, and giving an
upper hand to the law of causality over the will of Allah, as believed
by the Jews, “***Allah’s hand is tied up***.”[^33]

The correct view which the Qur’an presents is, “***Rather His hands are
wide open***”, and there is nothing to delimit His power and His hand is
stretched out over the universe and the society.

This is the first effect of the belief in *bada’*, which is in fact
related to one’s belief in Allah, the Exalted. The second effect is with
respect to one’s relation with Allah. The reason being that belief in
the open-handedness of Allah, in all situations, in changing and
altering what has been necessitated by the cause-and-effect system,
prompts a person to take resort to Allah in all his needs and affairs.
And the most effective way in attracting man to Allah and tying him to
Him is supplication to Allah for his needs and requirements, at times of
difficulties.

In contrast, if man finds no way to change the Divine decree and
destiny, and does not see any advantage or benefit in supplication with
respect to changing the course of events, he would not take resort to
Allah for his needs and requirements.

The reason people take refuge in Allah is because they believe that
there are two kinds of Divine destiny (*qada’*); a definite destiny
which has been written by Allah in the Mother of the Book, and which in
no way can change or alter; and an indefinite destiny which is subject
to change and alteration by the will of Allah. Thus, people take resort
to Allah for His response (*ijabah*) to their needs and prayers.

Supplication and Bada’
----------------------

There are numerous factors which lead to the intervention of the Divine
will (*iradah*) in changing the course of causes and events. Some of
them are as follows:

1. Faith (*Iman*) and God-wariness (*taqwa*). He, the Exalted, says:

***“If*** ***the people of the towns had been faithful and Godwary, We
would have opened to them blessings from the heaven and the
earth.”***[^34]

2. Gratitude to Allah (*shukr*):

***“If you are grateful, I will surely enhance you {in
blessing}.”***[^35]

3. Asking for forgiveness (*istighfar*):

***“But Allah will not punish them while you are in their midst, nor
will Allah punish them while they plead for forgiveness.”***[^36]

4. Supplication (*du’a’*) and calling out to Allah:

a. ***“And before that Nuh, when he called out, We responded to him and
delivered him and his family from the great agony.”***[^37]

b. ***“And Ayyub, when he called out to his Lord, ‘Indeed distress has
befallen me, and You are the most merciful of the merciful.’ So We
answered his prayer and removed his distress, and We gave him {back} his
family along with others like them, as a mercy from Us, and an
admonition for the devout.”***[^38]

c. ***“And the Man of the Fish, when he left in a rage, thinking that We
would not put him to hardship. Then he cried out in the darkness, ‘There
is no God except You! You are immaculate! I have indeed been among the
wrongdoers!’ So We answered his prayer and delivered him from the agony,
and thus do We deliver the faithful.”***[^39]

In conclusion, the rule of Allah, the Exalted, extends all over the
universe, and there is nothing in it which can limit His dominion or
render Him incapable. However, this dominion prevails through the very
chain of causes (*asbab*) without suspending the cause-and-effect
system.

Moreover, Allah effaces from this system whatever He wishes by His power
and command, and confirms whatever He desires by His will. The phenomena
of obliteration (*mahw*) and affirmation (*ithbat*) take place only in
the book of creation (*kitab at-Takwin*), and not in the Mother of the
Book (*umm al-kitab*).

If He obliterates something in creation, it is according to His wisdom
and mercy. This obliteration is the very phenomenon of *bada’* regarding
which there are many traditions from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).  
 Allah, the Exalted, brings about *bada’* due to many reasons, among
them being *istighfar*, *taqwa*, *Iman*, *shukr*, and *du‘a’*. And
supplication is among the most important factors which cause *bada’*, as
Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“Call Me, I will answer you.”***[^40]

[^1]: Qur’an, 42:49.

[^2]: Qur’an, 22:14.

[^3]: Qur’an, 11:107.

[^4]: Qur’an, 16:40.

[^5]: Qur’an, 2:20.

[^6]: Qur’an, 3:37.

[^7]: Qur’an, 2:105.

[^8]: Qur’an, 2:247.

[^9]: Qur’an, 3:26.

[^10]: Qur’an, 4:133.

[^11]: Qur’an, 5:64.

[^12]: With a slight difference that the first is among the requirements
of existence (wujud), while the second of quiddity (mahiyyah).

[^13]: Qur’an, 7:57.

[^14]: Qur’an, 35:9.

[^15]: Qur’an, 15:22.

[^16]: Qur’an, 7:130.

[^17]: Qur’an, 6:125.

[^18]: Qur’an, 17:16.

[^19]: Qur’an, 8:7.

[^20]: Qur’an, 9:55.

[^21]: Qur’an, 65:3.

[^22]: Qur’an, 65:3.

[^23]: Qur’an, 3:160.

[^24]: Qur’an, 13:11.

[^25]: Qur’an, 11:107.

[^26]: Qur’an, 22:14.

[^27]: Qur’an, 59:23.

[^28]: Qur’an, 2:249.

[^29]: Qur’an, 13:39.

[^30]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.4, pg.111.

[^31]: Ibid, pg.121.

[^32]: Ibid.

[^33]: Qur’an, 5:64.

[^34]: Qur’an, 7:96.

[^35]: Qur’an, 14:7

[^36]: Qur’an, 8:33.

[^37]: Qur’an, 21:76.

[^38]: Qur’an, 21:83 84.

[^39]: Qur’an, 21:87 88.

[^40]: Qur’an, 40:60.


