Definition of Prayer
====================

The Meaning of Prayer
---------------------

Prayer (*du’a’*) means the asking of a servant for his needs from Allah,
the Exalted. On analyzing this definition, we find that it can be
reduced to the following four elements:

1. The One called upon (*al-mad’uww*), i.e. Allah, the Exalted.

2. The Supplicant (*ud-Da’i*), i.e. a human being.

3. Prayer (*ad-du’a’*), i.e. the act of asking from Allah.

4. The Object of Prayer (*al-maduww lahu*), i.e. the need which one
presents before Allah by means of prayer.

The following is an explanation of each of the above four elements.

### 1. The One called upon (al-mad’uww)

The one called upon during prayer is Allah, the Exalted; the One who is:

a. Absolutely Self-sufficient and to whom belongs the kingdom of the
heavens and the earth.

***“Do you not know that to Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and
the earth.”***[^1]

***“To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and
whatever is between them. He creates whatever He wishes.”***[^2]

b. Whose kingdom does not diminish by His bestowal.

***“This is indeed Our provision, which will never be exhausted.”***[^3]

***“To these and to those- to all We extend the bounty of your Lord. All
do We help, these as well as those, out of the bounty of your Lord, and
the bounty of your Lord is not confined.”***[^4]

A phrase in the supplication of *al-iftitah* reads, “And the frequency
of giving increases Him not but in generosity and kindness.”

c. In whose divinity there is no stinginess. He is not miser in
answering the needs of His servants.  
 Therefore, there is no reason that He should not answer the prayer of
His servants when they pray to Him regarding that which is of importance
to them, be it great or small, as He {himself} has said,

***“Call Me, I will answer you”***[^5]***;***

except if the response (*istijabah*) is not to the benefit of the
supplicant, as he is not aware of what is beneficial to him in reality
and what is not, whilst Allah is All-knowing.

With regard to this, a phrase in the supplication of *al-iftitah* reads:

“If there was a delay {in Your response}, I would blame You, due to my
ignorance; while perhaps that which has {been} delayed is good for me,
as You know the outcome of all affairs. I have not seen a more generous
master, so patient with a wretched slave, than You are with me.”

### 2. The Supplicant (ud-Da’i)

The supplicant is the servant who is needy (*faqir*) in all respects,
even in his awareness of being needy to Allah:

***“O mankind! You are the ones who stand in need of Allah, and Allah
–He is the All-sufficient, the All-laudable.”***[^6]

***“…Allah is the All-sufficient, and you are all-needy.”***[^7]

Nothing can elevate a person to Allah, the Exalted, better than his
neediness (*faqr*) to Him. ‘Neediness to Allah’ is among the stations
(*manazil*) of the mercy of Allah.

The more a person is aware of his neediness to Allah, the closer he is
to His mercy. On the contrary, the more arrogant he becomes, not
realizing his neediness and dependency on Allah, the farther he shall be
from His mercy.

### 3. The Act of Asking (ad-Du’a’)

The more persistent a person is in his petition to Allah, the closer he
shall be to His mercy. The climax of asking from Allah is when one is in
need of Him desperately (*idtirar*), such that he has no other choice
but that Allah should answer his prayer.

By *idtirar* we mean a state in which a person loses all other means of
attaining his wish, and there remains for him only one choice; a choice
whose affair lies solely in the hand of Allah and not in his hand.
Subsequently, he turns to Allah, the Exalted, in desperation. It is in
such a condition that a servant is the nearest of all things to Allah’s
mercy:

***“Is He not who answers {the call of} the distressed {person} when he
invokes Him and removes his distress…?”***[^8]

In fact, there is no separation (*fasl*) at all between the supplication
of the distressed and the response from Allah in removing his distress.

This state of being in desperate need of Allah (*idtirar*) during
supplication implies detachment (*inqita’*) from all other than Allah,
and turning to Him alone; otherwise the act of supplicating and asking
from Allah would no longer be considered as stemming from desperate need
toward Him.

However, prayer does not dispense with the need for effort and action,
as the endeavour by the supplicant for attaining his wish does not
dispense with prayer and petition to Allah.

### 4. The Object of Prayer (al-mad’uww lahu)

The object of supplication is anything that a supplicant prays to his
Lord for, of his needs and wishes. And there is absolutely no objection
in that a supplicant should ask from Allah whatever he wants, however
great it might be; as this does not render Allah incapable, nor does His
kingdom diminish because of this, nor is there any miserliness in His
divinity.

Similarly, it does not matter if he were to pray to Allah even for the
smallest of his wishes, “even for the band of his shoes, the fodder of
his cattle, and the salt of his bread”, as it has appeared in a Divine
Narration (*hadith al-qudsi*).

For Allah loves His servant to be constantly in contact with Him with
respect to everything, small or big, of his needs, and that his small
needs should not veil him from Allah due to their insignificance, nor
should the enormity of his needs separate him from Allah. He, the
Exalted, likes to see the hands of His servant stretched toward Him for
every need, and his heart continuously in remembrance of Him, in every
state, in ease and in adversity.

Beside this, there is nothing like prayer and need in interlocking a
human being with Allah.

The Value of Prayer
-------------------

The Qur’an says:

***“Your Lord has said, ‘Call Me, I will answer you. Indeed those who
are disdainful of My worship will enter hell in utter humility.”***[^9]

Prayer implies the turning (*iqbal*) of a servant toward Allah. Turning
toward Allah constitutes the essence (*ruh*) of worship (*‘ibadah*),
whilst worshipping Allah is the goal of the creation of mankind.  
 These three points mentioned above reveal to us the value of prayer as
well as its reality. So let us start with the third point and work our
way upward to the first one.

The Qur’an is very clear in that worship (*‘ibadah*) is the aim behind
the creation of the human beings. He, the Exalted, says:

***“I did not create the jinn and the humans except that they may
worship Me.”***[^10]

This is precisely what the third point entails; a concept which is of
utmost importance in Islam.

The value of worship lies in that it ties and links the human being to
Allah. It is due to this very reason that the intention of getting
closer to Allah (*qasd at-Taqarrub*) is an essential element in the
realization of *‘ibadah*, without which the action performed would not
be considered as ‘*ibadah*.

Hence, the reality of *‘ibadah* is the journey toward Allah, turning to
Him, aspiring His face, and seeking His pleasure. This is the second
point which is, in fact, an illustration of the first point.

The first point implied that prayer is a state of turning toward Allah,
as it is one of the most distinct instances of connection and link with
Allah. Among the different acts of devotion (*‘ibadah*), there is no act
which can take man closer to Allah than *du’a’*.

Sayf at-Tammar is narrated to have said, “I heard Abu ‘Abdillah as-Sadiq
(‘a) saying, ‘I enjoin prayer (*du’a’*) upon you, for there is nothing
which will get you closer to Allah than *du’a’*.’”[^11]

The greater one’s need (*hajat*), desperation (*idtirar*) and dependency
(*faqr*) on Allah, the more profound is his state of turning (*iqbal*)
toward Him. There is a proportional relation between one’s feeling of
dependency and his being in need of Allah desperately, and one’s turning
toward Allah; for need and desperation prompts one to take resort in
Him. And the *iqbal* of a person toward Allah, the Exalted, would be
according to the degree of his perception of his own neediness, as the
opposite is also correct.

He, the Exalted, says in this regard:

***“Indeed man becomes rebellious when he considers himself without
need.”***[^12]

Indeed man rebels and turns away from Allah as much as he sees himself
to be needless. On the contrary, he turns toward Allah as much as he
perceives his indigence and need toward Him. The Qur’an is precise in
its words, ***‘when he considers himself without need’.***

In actual fact, no human being is needless of Allah, rather the whole of
man’s existence is absolute neediness (*faqr*) to Allah:

***“O mankind! You are the ones who stand in need of Allah, and Allah
–He is the All-sufficient, All-laudable.”***[^13]

Nevertheless, it seems to him that he has become needless, and it is the
arrogance (*ghurur*) of man that creates this impression in him.

When it appears to him that he is needless, he becomes disregardful and
turns aside and transgresses. But when distress touches him and he feels
himself to be in need of Allah, then he comes back and turns toward Him.

In conclusion, the reality of prayer is ‘turning toward Allah’
(*iqbal*). Whoever wishes to call on Allah and implore Him, he must turn
toward Him earnestly. And it is this state of ‘turning’ which
constitutes the reality and essence of prayer and makes it valuable.

Four Ways of Reaching Allah in the Qur’an
-----------------------------------------

Supplication is among the most important ways ordained by Allah for His
servants in order for them to arrive at Him.

Apart from this, Allah, the Exalted, has stated in the Qur’an four ways
of arrival at Him.

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said, “There are four things in
favour of man, and not against him; faith (*Iman*) and thankfulness
(*shukr*), for Allah, the Exalted, says: ***‘Why should Allah punish you
if you give thanks and be faithful?’***[^14]; seeking forgiveness
(*istighfar*), as He, the Exalted, says: ***‘But Allah will not punish
them while you are in their midst, nor will Allah punish them while they
plead for forgiveness’***[^15]; and prayer (*du’a’*), for He, the
Exalted, says: ***‘Say, ‘My Lord would not care for you were it not for
your supplication?’***[^16]”[^17]

Mu‘awiyah bin Wahab narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah as-Sadiq (‘a), “O
Mu‘awiyah! Whosoever is given three {things} shall not be deprived of
the {other} three. Whoever is given prayer (*du’a’*) shall {also} be
given the response (*ijabah*). Whoever is endowed with thankfulness
(*shukr*) shall {also} be endowed with enhancement (*ziyadah*). And
whoever is granted reliance on Allah (*tawakkul*) shall {also} be
granted sufficiency (*kifayah*), for Allah, the Exalted, says in His
Book, ‘***And whoever puts his trust in Allah, He will suffice
him’***[^18]; and He says: ***‘If you are grateful, I will surely
enhance you {in blessing}’***[^19]; and He says: ***‘Call Me, I will
answer you.’***[^20]”[^21]

‘Abdullah bin Walid al-Wasafi reports from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “{There
are} three things with which nothing can cause harm {to a person};
prayer (*du’a’*) during hardships, seeking forgiveness (*istighfar*)
after committing a sin, and thankfulness (*shukr*) when one is given a
blessing.”[^22]

These are in fact channels of communication with Allah. Nonetheless, the
channels of communication with Allah are many, such as repentance
(*tawbah*), fear (*khawf*) and awe (*khashyah*) of Allah, love (*hubb*)
and yearning (*shawq*) for Allah, and hope in Allah (*raja’*).

However, man’s relation with Allah must be structured on a well-arranged
collection of the above elements, as Islam does not approve the theory
of there being only a single way of communication with Allah.

Prayer is one of the most significant means of communication with Allah
and turning toward Him. This is because nothing inspires people to take
resort to Allah the way their neediness (*hajat*) and indigence (*faqr*)
prompt them to do so. Hence, *du’a’* is among the widest of the doors of
communication with Allah.

In his supplication at dawn, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says: “All praise
is due to Allah whom I call for my need whenever I wish, and confide to
Him my secrets whenever I will -without a mediator, and He fulfills my
need.”

Prayer: the Essence of Worship
------------------------------

*Du’a’* is the essence and spirit of *ibadah*. This is because the
purpose behind the creation of mankind is to worship Allah, and the goal
of worship is to tie man to Allah, the Exalted, and prayer actualizes
this goal in an extensive manner and through the strongest of means.

The Holy Prophet (S) is related to have said, “Supplication is the
essence (*mukkh*) of worship. One who maintains supplication shall never
perish.”[^23]

He (S) has also said, “Flee to Allah for your needs, and take refuge
with Him in your calamities, and entreat Him and call on Him; for
*du’a’* is the kernel of *‘ibadah*. There is no believer (*mu’min*) who
calls on Allah except that He answers him; He will either speed up {in
granting him} his request in this world, or He will delay it for him to
the Hereafter, or He will expiate of his sins as much as he has implored
Him, so long as he does not pray for a wrong deed.”[^24]

The above narration illustrates for us the path of the journey of man
toward Allah in prayer, and the manner in which he should turn toward
Him. Just ponder on these statements: ‘Flee to Allah for your needs’,
‘take refuge with Him in your calamities’ and ‘entreat (*tadarru’*)
Him’.

In another tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) says: “Supplication is the
weapon (*silah*) of a believer and the pillar (*‘imad*) of
religion.”[^25]

The reason behind prayer being the pillar of religion is that the
foundation of religion is the journey toward Allah, whilst prayer is
turning toward Him, and commencing this journey. And since the reality
of prayer is turning toward Allah, it is the most liked and the most
revered of things in the eyes of Allah.

The Holy Prophet (S) says: “There is no thing more honourable (*akram*)
in the eyes of Allah than *du’a*.”[^26]

Hannan bin Sudair relates from his father, “I said to al-Baqir (‘a),
‘Which act of worship is the best?’ He (‘a) replied, ‘Nothing is more
lovable to Allah than that He should be asked and besought of what He
possesses. There is no one more disliked by Allah, the All-mighty, the
Majestic, than him who is disdainful of His worship and does not ask Him
of what He possesses.”[^27]

In his supplication for the day of Wednesday, Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali bin
Abi Talib (‘a) says: “All praise is due to Allah whose pleasure
(*mardat*) is in petition to Him and begging for what is with Him, and
whose anger is in lack of insistence in imploring Him.”

A phrase in the supplication of *kumayl* reads, “…For you have decreed
upon your servants to worship You, and have commanded them to supplicate
You and assured them that they would be answered; so to You, O my Lord,
I have turned my face, and toward You, O my Lord, I have extended my
hand…”

Disregard for Prayer is to Turn Away from Allah
-----------------------------------------------

Allah, the Exalted, says:

 ***“Your Lord has said, ‘Call Me, I will answer you. Indeed those who
are disdainful of My worship will enter hell in utter humility.”***[^28]

According to this verse, being disdainful (*istikbar*) of worship
(*‘ibadah*) implies disregard for prayer, as the context of the verse
exhorts to prayer when it says: ***‘Call on Me’***, and immediately
after this it says: ***‘those who are disdainful of My worship will
enter hell in utter humility.***’

Hence, disregard of prayer according to the above verse is tantamount to
being arrogant in worship; as it implies turning away (*i’rad*) from
Allah. The same has been reported from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) regarding the
interpretation of the above verse. He (‘a) says: ***“{Supplication} is,
by Allah, the worship (‘ibadah), it is -by Allah- the worship!***”

Hammad bin ‘Isa reports from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “Supplication is indeed
the worship (*‘ibadah*). Allah, the Exalted, says: ***‘Those who are
disdainful of My worship will enter hell in utter humility.’***”[^29]
[^30]

Man holds no status in the eyes of Allah but by virtue of supplication
and to the extent that he prays to Allah. And Allah, the Exalted, cares
for His servant as much as he implores Him and turns toward Him,

***“Say, ‘What store my Lord would set by you were it not for your
supplication?”***[^31]

This is because the reality of supplication is equivalent to turning
toward Allah (*iqbal*), as disregard for it is turning away (*i’rad*)
from Him. And Allah does not care for one who turns away from Him, nor
will he hold any status in His eyes.

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) says in a narration, “No one is more hated by Allah,
the All-mighty, the Majestic, than he who shows arrogance in worshipping
Him and does not ask Him for that which lies with Him.”[^32]

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said, “You must implore Allah
or else He will be wrathful at you. Indeed Allah has servants who do
{righteous} deeds, so He gives them {of His mercy}; and there are others
who sincerely ask Him, so He grants them. Thereafter, He will gather all
of them in the Heaven. So those who performed {good} deeds shall say,
‘Our Lord, You gave us because we acted {righteously}, but why did You
give to these {people}?’ He will say, ‘These are my servants. I gave you
your reward without wasting anything of your deeds. These people
besought Me, hence I gave them and enriched them; this is My grace, I
give it to whomsoever I desire.”[^33]

Allah Yearns for the Supplication of His Servant
------------------------------------------------

When a servant turns toward Allah by way of supplication, then he is
loved by Allah. And if he turns away from Him, He is disliked by him.

Nevertheless, Allah, the Exalted, may delay in responding to the prayer
of his servant so that his standing before Him, his turning toward Him,
and his entreating Him may be prolonged; for Allah loves to hear the
imploration of His servant and yearns for his prayer and secret
conversation with Him (*munajat*).

Imam al-Kazim (‘a) is reported to have said, “Verily, Allah, the
All-mighty, the Majestic, delays in answering a believer out of desire
for his imploration and says: ‘This is a voice I love to hear.’ And He
quickly responds to the prayer of a hypocrite and says: ‘This is a voice
I hate.’”[^34]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “Pray to Allah frequently, for Allah loves His
believing servants to call on Him and He has indeed promised them the
response.”[^35]

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is related to have said, “The most lovable of acts to
Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, on this earth is
supplication.”[^36]

It has been reported that Imam al-Baqir (‘a) used to say, “When a
believer entreats Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, for a need, He
delays in responding to him quickly, out of love for {hearing} his voice
and listening to his lamentation.”[^37]

Abu ‘Abdillah as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “{It so happens that} a servant makes
supplication and Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, says to the two
angels, ‘I have indeed answered him, but confine him to his need, for I
love listening to his voice.’ And {at times} a servant makes a petition
and Allah, the Blessed, the Exalted, says: ‘Grant his need quickly, for
I hate his voice.”[^38]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said, “When a servant -who is a
friend of Allah, implores Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, for a
matter which concerns him, then it is said to the angel appointed over
him, ‘Fulfill the need of My servant, but do not hurry, for I long to
listen to his voice and call.’ And when a servant -who is a foe of
Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, calls on Allah regarding a matter
which concerns him, it is said to the angel appointed over him, ‘Fulfill
his need and make haste, as I dislike to listen to his voice and
call.”[^39]

Asking one’s Needs from Other than Allah
----------------------------------------

Allah, the Exalted, dislikes the pleading of people with one another for
their needs, as He loves a believer to honour his self and his hand by
refraining from begging from others. Besides, He, the Exalted, loves to
be beseeched by the believers, and loves their imploration and
supplication to Him.

The Holy Prophet (S) says: “Indeed Allah has loved one thing for Himself
and has abhorred it for His creatures. He has disliked for His creatures
{their} pleading {with one another}, and has loved for Himself to be
entreated {by them}. There is nothing more beloved to Allah than that He
should be besought. Hence, none of you should be ashamed of asking Allah
of His bounties, even if it is for the strap of a sandal.”[^40]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said, “Allah loves a servant to
ask from Him {even} for {commiting} a great sin, and He hates a servant
who takes lightly the smaller sins.”[^41]

Muhammad bin ‘Ajlan relates:  
 “I was caught in a great poverty and constraint, and he who is in
constraint has no friend. I was also in a great and heavy debt and was
under pressure to repay it. So I set out toward the house of Hasan bin
Zayd –who was then the governer of Madinah, as we used to know each
other. Muhammad bin ‘Abdillah bin ‘Ali bin al-Husain (‘a) –whom I knew
well for long- realized from my condition where I was heading toward. He
met me on the way and took hold of my hand and said, ‘I have come to
know of what you are intending to do. Who do you entertain hope in to
remove what has befallen you?’

‘Hasan bin Zayd’, I replied.

He said, ‘In this case, he is not going to fulfill your need, nor will
your request be granted. You must ask One who is capable of doing that,
One who is the Most Generous of those who are generous. Seek from Him
what you are hoping for; for I have heard my cousin, Ja’far bin
Muhammad, narrating from his father, who related from his grandfather,
who reported from his father Husain bin ‘Ali (‘a), who narrated from his
father ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (‘a), who reported the Holy Prophet (S)
saying:

‘Allah revealed to some of His prophets in some of His revelations
saying, ‘By My might and majesty, I will indeed sever the hope of one
who entertains hope in other than Me with despair, and I will clothe him
with the dress of humiliation among the people, and I will distance him
from My salvation and bounties. Does My servant entertain hope in other
than Me during hardships, while all the hardships are in My hand?

And does he anticipate from other than Me, while I am the All-sufficient
and the Generous? In my hand are the keys of the closed doors, and My
door is open for one who calls on Me. Do you not know that when one is
afflicted with a calamity, then none other than Me has the ability to
remove it from him? Then how come I find him hoping for its removal by
turning away from Me, while I have given him out of My generosity and
grace what he did not ask from Me?

Still he turned away from Me and did not beseech Me, rather he beseeched
other than Me during his hardships, while I am *Allah*, I begin
endowment before request (*mas’alah*). Can it be that I am asked but I
do not give generously? Never. Are not generosity and kindness
particular to Me? Are not this world and the Hereafter in My hand?

If all the inhabitants of the seven heavens and the earth were to ask Me
and I were to grant each of them his request, this would not diminish My
kingdom by the like of a fly’s wing! And how can a kingdom whose
custodian is Me diminish? So wretched be he who disobeys Me and is not
conscious of Me.’

So I said to him, ‘O son of the Prophet of Allah! Repeat this narration
for me.’ So he repeated it three times. Then I said, ‘By Allah, I am not
going to ask anyone for a need after this.’ And it was not long before
Allah granted me a provision (*rizq*) from Him.”[^42]

[^1]: Qur’an, 2:107.

[^2]: Qur’an, 5:17.

[^3]: Qur’an, 38:54.

[^4]: Qur’an, 17:20.

[^5]: Qur’an, 40:60.

[^6]: Qur’an, 35:15.

[^7]: Qur’an, 47:38.

[^8]: Qur’an, 27:62.

[^9]: Qur’an, 40:60.

[^10]: Qur’an, 51:56.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.293.

[^12]: Qur’an, 96:6 7.

[^13]: Qur’an, 35:15.

[^14]: Qur’an, 4:147.

[^15]: Qur’an, 8:33.

[^16]: Qur’an, 25:77.

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.291.

[^18]: Qur’an, 65:3.

[^19]: Qur’an, 14:7.

[^20]: Qur’an, 40:60.

[^21]: See: al-Khisal-of as-Saduq, vol.1, pg.50; al-Mahasin of al-Barqi,
pg.3; and al-Kafi, vol.2, pg.65.

[^22]: Al-Amali of at-Tusi, pg.127.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.300.

[^24]: Ibid., pg. 302.

[^25]: Ibid., pg. 288.

[^26]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, pg. 311.

[^27]: Ibid, pg.311. See also al-Mahasin of al-Barqi, pg.292.

[^28]: Qur’an, 40:60.

[^29]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1083.

[^30]: Imam as-Sajjad (‘a) says in Sahifat as-Sajjadiyyah, supplication
no.45, “And You have said, ‘Call Me, I will answer you. Indeed those who
are disdainful of My worship will enter hell in utter humility.’ Hence
You have named supplicating You ‘worship’ and refraining from it
‘disdain’, and You have threatened that the refraining from it would
yield entrance into hell in utter humility.” {Trns.}

[^31]: Qur’an, 25:77.

[^32]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1084, hadith no.8604.

[^33]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1084, hadith no.8609.

[^34]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.97, pg.296.

[^35]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1086, hadith no.8616.

[^36]: Ibid, pg.1089, hadith no.8639.

[^37]: Qurb al-Asnad, pg.171; and Usul al-Kafi, pg.526.

[^38]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1112, hadith no.8731; and Usul
al-Kafi, pg.526.

[^39]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.527; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1112,
hadith no.8732.

[^40]: Furu’ al-Kafi, vol.1, pg.196; and Man la Yahduruhu al-Faqih,
vol.1, pg.23.

[^41]: Al-Mahasin of al-Barqi, pg.293; and Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93,
pg.292.

[^42]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.303 304.


