Etiquettes and Requisites of Supplication
=========================================

Some of our associates (*ashabuna*) have narrated from Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (‘a) saying, “I said to him, ‘There are two verses in the Book
of Allah whose interpretation I do not know.’  
 He said, ‘Which verses are they?’

I said, ‘The verse which says: ***“Call Me, I will answer you”;*** I
pray but I do not see the response.’  
 So he said to me, ‘Do you think that Allah did not keep His word?’  
 ‘No’, I replied.  
 He said, ‘Why is it so then?’  
 I replied, ‘I do not know.’

Then he said, ‘Which is the other verse?’  
 I said, ‘The verse “…And He will repay whatever you may spend”[^1], I
spend but I do not see any repay.’  
 He said, ‘Do you think that Allah did not fulfill His promise?’  
 I replied, ‘No.’  
 He asked me, ‘Why is it so then?’  
 I answered, ‘I do not know.’

Then he said, ‘I will inform you, by the will of Allah. Had you been
obedient to Him in that which He has commanded you, and then you were to
pray to Him, He would have indeed answered you. But you violate His
commands and disobey Him, so He does not answer you.

As for your saying that you spend but do not see any repay, had you
acquired wealth through lawful means and spent it in the right way, then
no one would spend a penny except that Allah would repay it to him.

And had you called on Him in the appropriate manner, He would answer
you, even if you are disobedient.’

I said, ‘What is the appropriate manner of supplicating {Him}?’  
 He said, ‘After you have performed your {daily} obligatory prayers,
praise Allah and extol Him, lauding Him as far as you can. {Then} send
blessings on the Prophet (S) and exert yourself in sending blessings on
him, and testify that he accomplished his mission. Send blessings on him
as much as you can.

{Then} recall His bounties with you and those with which He has blessed
you, and what He did {of good} to you, praising and thanking Him for
that.

{Then} confess all your sins and admit them, or those which you remember
and summarize those which have remained unnoticed by you.

{Then} repent to Allah for all your sins, with the intention of not
repeating them again. Seek Allah’s forgiveness from them by regretting,
with true intention, and with fear and hope.

{Then} say, ‘O Allah, I apologize to you for my wrong deeds. I ask for
your forgiveness and repent to you. So assist me in obeying You, and
grant me success in fulfilling what You have made incumbent upon me of
all that which pleases You. Indeed I have seen no one who has been able
to attain {even} part of Your obedience except that it was through your
blessing on him before his obedience. So endow me with a blessing
through which I may attain your pleasure and Heaven.’

Thereafter, pray for your need, I hope that He will not disappoint you,
by His will.”[^2]

With regard to the etiquettes (*adab*) of supplication, Imam as-Sadiq
(‘a) says:  
 “Observe the etiquettes of prayer (*du’a’*), and see who you are
calling and how you are calling, and why you are calling. Realize the
greatness of Allah and His magnificence, and know from the bottom of
your heart that He is aware of what is in your conscience, knows your
innermost secret, and what transpires in it of the right and wrong.

Know the ways of your salvation and destruction, so that you may not
pray to Allah for something in which there is your perdition, thinking
that your salvation lies in it. Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic,
says: ***‘Man prays for ill as {avidly as} he prays for good, and man is
overhasty.’***[^3] Ponder on what you are asking for, and why are you
asking for it.

Prayer (*du’a’*) is the responding of your whole to Allah (*al-haqq*),
and the annihilation of the self in gazing at the Lord, and leaving the
choice (*ikhtiyar*) altogether {to Him}, and the submission of all
affairs to Allah, the manifest of it and the occult.

If you do not fulfill the requisites of prayer, then do not wait for the
response, for indeed He knows the secret and what is still more hidden;
and you may pray for something the contrary of which He has come to know
from your innermost secret.”[^4]

These two narrations point to the requisites (*shurut*) of the
acceptance of a prayer and its etiquettes (*adab*).

I was intending to initially talk about the requisites of prayer and
thereafter about its etiquettes. But I encountered some difficulties in
the demarcation between the requisites (*shurut*) and the etiquettes
(*adab*), hence, I chose to merge the two together.

Here, I will quickly point to a set of requisites and etiquettes related
to prayer in the light of the Islamic narrations.

1. Recognition of Allah
-----------------------

One of the most significant requisites for the acceptance of a prayer is
the knowledge of Allah, and belief in His absolute power and strength in
actualizing what His servant asks from Him.

The author of *ad-durr al-Manthur* reports from Ma’adh bin Jabal that
the Holy Prophet (S) said, “Had you recognized Allah with the
recognition due to Him, your prayers would have dislodged the
mountains.”[^5]

Regarding the verse ‘So let them respond to Me, and let them have faith
in Me…’[^6], al-’Ayyashi narrates a tradition in his *Tafsir* from Imam
as-Sadiq (‘a), “They should know that I am capable of granting them what
they ask from Me.”[^7]

At-Tabrasi relates a narration from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) in *Majma’
al-Bayan* under the above verse to the effect that, “‘…and let them have
faith in Me’[^8] {means} that they should be convinced that I am capable
to give them what they have asked for, ‘so that they may fare
rightly.’[^9]”

It is reported that once Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) recited the verse, “Is not
He the one who answers the call of the distressed {person} when he
invokes Him…”[^10]  
 So he was asked, “Why is it that we invoke but are not answered?”  
 Imam (‘a) replied, “Because you invoke one whom you do not recognize,
and you pray for what you do not know.”[^11]

This tradition emphasizes on the importance of the role of the
supplicant’s awareness of ‘the object of prayer’ and of ‘the one asked
from’ in the acceptance of a prayer.

In another tradition, Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “The Holy Prophet (S) has
said, ‘Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, says: ***‘Whoever asks Me,
knowing that I am the {only} One who harms and benefits, then I will
surely answer him.***”[^12]

In one of his supplications, Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn Zayn al-’Abidin
(‘a) says: “You have lauded Yourself for having no need for Your
creatures, and it suits You to have no need for them, and You have
attributed to them poverty, and it suits them to be poor toward You. So
he who strives to remedy his lack through what is with You and wishes to
turn poverty away from himself through You, has sought his need in the
most likely place and come to his request from the right quarter.” [^13]

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says in a whispered prayer (*munajat*), “Immaculate is He
on whom relies every believer, and of whom every denier (*jahid*) is in
need; and no one can become needless except by the grace of what is with
Him.”[^14]

Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says in a supplication, “We rise in the
morning in Your grasp. Your kingdom and authority contain us and Your
will embraces us. We move about by Your command and turn this way and
that through Your governing. We own nothing of the affair except what
You have decreed and nothing of the good except what You have
given.”[^15]

We read in the *Sahifat al-’Alawiyyah*, “Who can do harm to You, or
fight against You, or be beyond Your reach, or be safe from Your
decree.”

Part of recognition (*ma’rifah*) is that a supplicant should know that
Allah is near to him, nearer than any other thing, and that He is aware
of what his soul tempts him to, and that He is nearer to him than his
jugular vein, and that He intervenes between him and his self.

He, the Exalted, says:

***“When My servants ask you about Me, {tell them that} I am indeed
nearmost.”***[^16]

***“We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.”***[^17]

***“Know that Allah intervenes between between a man and his
heart.”***[^18]

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says in a supplication, “I seek Your proximity through
Your embracing mercy which has embraced all things. My Lord, indeed You
see my position and are aware of what is in my conscience, You know my
innermost secret, and nothing of my affairs is hidden from You, You are
closer to me than my jugular vein.”[^19]

In his supplication for the day of Friday, he (‘a) says: “There is no
god but Allah, who answers (*al-mujib*) the one who invokes Him {even}
with the lowest of his voice, who hears (*as-Sami’*) the one who
whispers to Him {even} from the innermost of his heart, who is most kind
(*ar-ra’uf*) toward him who entertains hope in Him to remove his
distress, who is near (*al-qarib*) to him who calls on Him to relieve
him of his hardship and grief.”[^20]

In one of his sermons, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says: “He has taken precedence in
highness such that nothing is higher than Him, and He is so near that
nothing is nearer than Him. Neither has His highness distanced Him from
any of His creatures, nor has His nearness put them on the same level
with Him.”[^21]

2. Entertaining a Good Opinion of Allah
---------------------------------------

To entertain a good opinion (*husn al-zann*) of Allah is part of the
recognition of Allah. Allah, the Exalted, gives to His servants in
accordance with their good opinion about Him and their confidence in the
vastness of His mercy and generosity.

According to a Divine Narration, “I am as My servant thinks of Me, so
let him not think but good of Me.”[^22]

The Holy Prophet (S) says: “Invoke Allah while you are confident of the
response {from Him}.”  
 Once Allah revealed to Prophet Musa (‘a), “Whenever you call Me and ask
from Me, I am there to listen to you.”[^23]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) is narrated to have said, “When you pray {to Allah},
turn {to Him} with your heart, and think as if your need (*hajat*) were
at the door.”[^24]

He (‘a) has also been reported to have said, “When you pray {to Allah},
turn {to Him} with your heart, and then be confident of the response
(*ijabah*).”[^25]

Contrary to this, there is the state of despair (*qunut*) of Allah’s
mercy and the acceptance of prayer. This is one of the things which
distance man from Allah’s mercy. One may pray to Allah for something and
He, the Exalted, may delay the response because of his own benefit.

But since the supplicant is not aware of that while Allah is, he starts
entertaining a bad opinion (*su’ al-zann*) of Allah and despairs of His
mercy. Hence, this state of despair would veil him from the mercy of
Allah.

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “A servant continues to be in {the state of}
blessing, hope, and mercy of Allah -the All-mighty, the Majestic, so
long as he does not make haste and does not despair and does not discard
prayer.” He was aksed, “How does one make haste?” He (‘a) replied, “By
saying, ‘I have been praying to Allah since such and such time, but I do
not see the response.”[^26]

Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Abi Nasr says: “I said to Abu al-Hasan (‘a), ‘May
I be your ransom! I have been praying to Allah for a need since such and
such a year, but now something {of disappointment} has penetrated my
heart because of the delay {in His response}.’

He (‘a) said, ‘O Ahmad! Be careful that Shaitan should not have a way to
you and make you disappointed. Tell me, if I were to tell you something,
would you trust my word?’

I said, ‘May I be your ransom! If I do not trust your word, then whose
word would I trust, as you are the proof (*hujjah*) of Allah on His
creatures.’

He (‘a) said, ‘Then be more confident in Allah; for you are on a promise
with Him, the All-mighty, the Majestic. Does not Allah say, ‘When My
servants ask you about Me, {tell them that} I am indeed nearmost. I
answer the supplicant’s call when he calls Me’, and He has said, ‘Do not
despair of the mercy of Allah’, and He has said, ‘But Allah promises you
His forgiveness and grace.’ Then be confident in Allah more than you are
in others, and do not put in your hearts (*qulub*) but what is good, for
He is very forgiving to you.’”[^27]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said, “When one hastily {prays to
Allah} and then goes away, Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, says:
‘Does not My servant know that I am the only one who fulfills the
needs?”[^28]

Hisham bin Salim reports from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “There was a gap of
fourty years between Allah’s word, ***‘Your supplication has already
been granted’***[^29] and the seizure of Fir’awn.”[^30]

Ishaq bin ‘Ammar says: “I asked as-Sadiq (‘a), ‘Is it possible that a
person is granted his prayer but then it is delayed?’ ‘Yes, {even as
long as} twenty years’, he replied.”[^31]

**3. Being in Need of Allah Desperately**

One must take shelter with Allah during prayer like a distressed person
who finds none other than Allah to rely upon and place his hope in. If a
supplicant’s hope is divided between Allah and other than Him of His
creatures, then he has not attained a due absorption in Allah
(*inqita’*) and has not experienced in himself the state of being
desperately in need of Allah (*idtirar*), which is a fundamental
requisite for the acceptance of a prayer.

In his will to his son Muhammad al-Hanafiyyah, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says:
“Deliverance (*khalas*) is attained only through sincerity (*ikhlas*).
When the {state of} fear intensifies, then to Allah is the
retreat.”[^32]

This is so because at the time of distress, one loses hope in all other
than Allah and takes due resort to Allah, such that he entertains no
hope in other than Him, the All-mighty, the Majestic.

It is narrated that Allah once revealed to Prophet ‘Isa (‘a), “Call Me
the calling of one who is engrossed in grief and cannot find any helper.
O ‘Isa! Ask Me and do not ask other than Me, so that the prayer from you
would be favourable and so would be the response from Me.”[^33]

In his Whispered Prayer, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says: “O Allah! My request does
not resemble the request of the beggars, for if a beggar is deprived, he
would cease begging, while I cannot do without that which I have asked
from You, in all times. O Allah! Be pleased with me; and if you are not
pleased with me, then forgive me; for a master may forgive his servant
while he is displeased with him. O Allah! How dare I call You while I am
what I am?! And how dare I despair of You while You are what You
are?!”[^34]

This is the state of being in desperate need of Allah in which a servant
has no choice but to take refuge with Allah, the Exalted, and obtain his
need from Him.

As mentioned earlier, the state of being in dire need of Allah
necessitates the state of total absorption in Him. For in such a
condition, a servant knows that his need lies only with Allah and not
with other than Him. Hence, he would turn to Him alone, averting his
face from all other than Him.

Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a) says in a supplication, “Make me among
those who supplicate You with sincerity in ease with the supplication of
those who are in distress.”[^35]

He says in another place, “O Allah, I showed sincerity by cutting myself
off from everything but You. I approached You with my whole self. I
averted my face from everyone who needs Your support. I ceased to ask
from any one who cannot do without Your bounty. I saw that the needy who
seeks from the needy is foolish in his opinion, and misguided in his
intellect.”[^36]

Nevertheless, this in no way means that one should not employ the
material means which Allah Himself has ordained to be the means for the
fulfillment of the needs of His creatures, and has also commanded them
to do that. Rather, it means that these natural causes are in extension
to the will (*mashi’ah*) of Allah and His command.

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) has said, “If anyone of you wishes that he should not
ask his Lord (*rabb*) for anything except that he should grant him, then
let him despair of all the people and not place his hope but in Allah,
the All-mighty, the Majestic. If Allah comes to know of this from his
heart, then he will not ask from Him for anything except that He will
grant him.”[^37]

4. Entering from the Doors Ordained by Allah
--------------------------------------------

Prayer is turning (*iqbal*) toward Allah. Thus, it must take place
through the ways in which Allah, the Exalted, has ordered.  
 It has been narrated that a man from the Banu Isra’il worshipped Allah
for forty nights and thereafter prayed to Allah but his prayer was not
answered. So he complained about this to Prophet ‘Isa (‘a) who, in turn,
inquired from Allah, the Exalted, about this. Allah replied, “O ‘Isa! He
called Me while he had a doubt about you in his heart.”[^38]

5. Turning of the Heart to Allah
--------------------------------

This is among the other most important requisites for the acceptance of
a prayer. This is because the reality of prayer lies in the turning of
the heart to Allah. So if the heart becomes occupied with other than
Allah, of the wordly distractions, then the supplicant has not been able
to actualize the reality of prayer.

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said, “Indeed Allah does not
accept the prayer which rises from the back of a heedless (*sahin*)
heart.”[^39]

He (‘a) has also said, “When you invoke {Allah}, turn {to Him} with your
heart, and then be confident of the response.”[^40]

He (‘a) again says: “Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) has said, ‘Allah, the
All-mighty, the Majestic, does not accept the prayer from the back of a
negligent (*lahin*) heart.’[^41]”

A Divine Narration says: “O Musa! Call Me with a pure heart and a
truthful tongue.”[^42]

In his will to ‘Ali (‘a), the Holy Prophet (S) says: “Allah does not
accept the prayer of a heedless heart.”[^43]

Sulaiman bin ‘Amru says: “I heard Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) saying, ‘Allah does
not answer the prayer from the posterior of a heedless heart. Thus, when
you pray, turn (*aqbil*) with your heart {toward Him} and then be
confident of the response.”[^44]

It is has also been narrated from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) that he said,
“Allah does not answer the prayer from the back of a hardened (*qasin*)
heart.”[^45]

Therefore, the heart of a supplicant must turn toward Allah and be
attentive to Him during prayer. Negligence (*lahw*), heedlessness
(*sahw*) and hardness (*qaswah*) of the heart are all among the hurdles
which stop the heart from attaining the state of turning toward Allah.

While reciting the transmitted supplications[^46] in particular, a
reciter must create the state and ambiance of prayer within himself. He
must also be cautious of his heart falling behind his tongue, as a
result of which his tongue becomes busy with the recitation of the
supplication while his heart is engaged with the worldly distractions.

In his valuable and instructional book, *al-Muraqabat*[^47], the mystic
jurist, Shaykh Jawad Maliki Tabrizi (may Allah have mercy on him) says:

“Know that you cannot attain the good of prayer (*du’a’*) and the
response (*ijabah*) to it unless your innermost secret, your spirit and
your heart are qualified (*ittisaf*) by the properties (*sifat*) of
prayer. Qualification by its properties means that the originator of the
prayer should be your innermost secret, spirit and heart.

For instance, when you say {addressing Allah}, ‘I place my hope
(*raja’*) in You for every good’, your innermost secret, spirit and
heart should entertain hope in Allah. Thereafter, its effects should
become manifest in your actions. He in whose innermost secret and
essence the ‘hope’ is actualized, then it is just as if his whole
becomes {an embodiment of} hope. And if this is actualized in his
spirit, then it is as if he lives with hope. And he who is hopeful with
his heart, then the actions he performs of his own volition shall always
be accompanied by hope.

So beware that none of your affairs should be devoid of hope, and
consider that to be {part of} your actions. Then see, do you find in
your activities the effect of hope, which is the act of seeking
(*talab*), or not?

Have you not heard the speech of the Ma’sum (‘a), “Whoever is hopeful of
something seeks it?” And this is how it is; because you find the people
of this world who are hopeful of the worldly affairs, if they hope for
good from someone or something, they would seek it from that person or
thing to the extent of their hope. Do not you see that a trader never
leaves his trade, or a craftsman his industry? All this is because they
are anticipating good in the trade and industry.

Similarly, every group seeks what it anticipates from that in which they
find their object of hope, and do not leave it until after they have
acquired it, except {surprisingly} for him who is hopeful of the Heaven
(*jannah*) and the Hereafter, and except for him who is hopeful of the
grace and kindness of Allah, as is the case most of the time. But such a
thing is impossible!

The fact that the effects (*athar*) follow their properties[^48] is
among the things ordained by Allah, the Wise; and you will find no
change in the norm (*sunnah*) of Allah. Rather, the violation[^49]
(*takhalluf*) is due to the mistaking of the illusion (*da’wa*) for the
reality (*haqiqah*), otherwise, there is not a little hope except that
there is with it the like of it of the act of asking (*talab*), and so
on.

The same applies to other elements of prayer, apart from hope, such as
*tasbih*[^50], *tahlil*[^51], *tahmid*[^52], *tadarru’*[^53],
*istikanah*[^54], *khawf*[^55], *istighfar*[^56] and *tawbah*[^57]. Each
of these has a reality and an illusion, and the effect belongs to the
reality, without any violation.”

6. Humiliation and Softening the Heart
--------------------------------------

If a supplicant wishes his prayer to be accepted then he must seek
tender-heartedness (*riqqat al-qalb*) and try to soften his heart; for
when the heart becomes tender it opens up, and the veils between the
supplicant and Allah are lifted and he is nearer to Allah.

The mode of prayer and request has an effect on the softening of the
heart. The narrations that put emphasis on self-abasement (*tadhallul*)
during prayer are, in fact, for the purpose of actualizing this end.

In his book *‘Uddat ud-Da’i*, Ahmad bin Fahd al-Hilli narrates that the
Holy Prophet (S) would look like a beggar asking for food when he
invoked Allah and prayed to Him.

It is reported that among the things Allah, the Exalted, revealed to
Prophet Musa (‘a) was, “O Musa! Stretch your hands before Me in humility
like a humble servant calling his master for help. If you did that, you
will be showered with mercy, as I am the Most Kind of those who are kind
and powerful.”[^58]

Muhammad bin Muslim says: “I inquired from Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (‘a)
about the verse ‘…Yet they neither humbled themselves to their Lord, nor
did they entreat Him {for mercy}.’[^59] He (‘a) replied, ‘Humbling
oneself (*istikanah*) means humility (*khudu’*), while entreaty
(*tadarru’*) means raising up the two hands in imploration.”[^60]

Since the purpose behind this particular mode of prayer had not been
clear for the people, the sceptics were putting people in doubt as to
the mode of supplication. They would say: why do we raise our hands
toward the skies? Is Allah in the skies that we should raise our hands
toward it?

For this reason, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) used to explain to them that
Allah, the Exalted, is present everywhere, but we take up this
particular mode of prayer as a mark of our humility and neediness toward
Allah; for raising the two hands is a sign of humility and indigence.
This mark has an inspiring effect in the softening of the heart,
removing hardness from it, clearing it up and drawing its attention to
Allah, the Blessed, the Exalted.

At-Tabrasi narrates in *al-Ihtijaj* that once Abu Qurrah asked Imam
ar-Rida (‘a), “Why is it that when you supplicate you raise your hands
toward the sky? Abu al-Hasan (‘a) replied, ‘Allah has sought servanthood
(*‘ubudiyyah*) from His creatures through different forms of worship…
and He has sought servanthood from His creatures during prayer
(*du’a’*), request and imploration, by {asking them} to stretch their
hands and raise them toward the sky, displaying their humility as a sign
of servanthood and abasement before Him.”[^61]

In fact, the moment of the softening of the heart is the very moment of
the descent of Allah’s mercy. So one should avail such moments by
turning his attention to Allah for supplication; for the mercy of Allah
is without any reckoning during such moments. However, this should not
imply that there is a specified time for the coming down of Allah’s
mercy. Rather, the receiving of this mercy has a specified time and a
particular state, the state of tenderness (*riqqah*).

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said, “Avail yourself of the
opportunity of prayer (*du’a’*) at the softening {of the heart}; for
it[^62] is a mercy.”[^63]

Abu Basir narrates from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “If {the heart of} anyone of
you becomes softened, then let him pray; for the heart does not soften
until it has become pure.”[^64]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) has also said, “When your skin quivers and your eyes
shed tears, then you have drawn closer! Your need has been
considered.”[^65]

This narration is precise; for according to it the acceptance of a
prayer has direct connection with the state (*halat*) of the supplicant.
The more humble and softer the heart becomes, the closer the supplicant
will be to the response. On the contrary, the harsher and harder it
becomes, the further he will be from the response.

The Islamic narrations highlight the importance of availing the moments
of the softening of the heart and when one is broken-hearted -as a
result of the hardships and distress in this world- for turning toward
Allah, the Exalted, through prayer and request.

These moments prepare one to turn toward Allah and receive His mercy.
The secret behind all this lies in the fact that the heart cannot
acquire the state of turning to Allah (*iqbal*) and that of receiving
his mercy (*istiqbal*) except when it softens. Thus, the acquisition of
the state of softening of the heart (*riqqah*) is necessary for one who
desires the face of Allah (*wajh allah*) and wishes to attain the state
of turning toward Him during prayer.

Ishaq bin ‘Ammar narrates, “I said to Abu ‘Abdillah as-Sadiq (‘a), ‘{It
so happens that} I supplicate and desire to weep, but I cannot. At
times, I remember some of my family members who have passed away, so my
heart softens and I weep. Is this allowed?’ He replied, ‘Yes, do
remember {them}; and when your heart becomes tender, do weep and invoke
your Lord, the Blessed, the Exalted.”[^66]

If the state of weeping did not give the supplicant a helping hand to
soften his heart, then he should simulate weeping (*tabaki*); for it
results in weeping, and weeping, in turn, results in the softening of
the heart, which subsequently opens up the heart onto Allah.

Sa’d bin Yasar reports, “I said to Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), ‘I {only}
simulate weeping when I supplicate, I cannot weep.’ He said, ‘Yes {there
is no objection in it.}’”[^67]

Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali narrates that Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) once said to Abu
Basir, “If you feared the occurrence of something or you had a wish,
then begin by glorifying Allah and praise Him as is worthy of Him.
Thereafter, send blessings on the Holy Prophet (S) and pray for your
need; and try to weep…my father used to say, ‘A servant is in the
nearmost position to {his} Lord, the All-mighty, the Majestic, when he
is prostrating (*sajid*) and weeping.’”[^68]

Among the formulas of remembrance (*dhikr*) of Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) in
prostration was, “My lowly face has prostrated before Your Mighty face;
my perishing face has prostrated before Your Eternal and Everlasting
face; my needy face has prostrated before Your Self-sufficient face. My
face, hearing, sight, flesh, blood, skin, bones, and what the earth has
borne of me, have {all} prostrated before Allah, Lord of the
worlds.”[^69]

7. Continuity in Praying in Adversity and Ease
----------------------------------------------

Continuation in invoking Allah during adversity (*shiddah*) and ease
(*rakha’*), and the precedence of supplication in ease over supplication
during hardships, is a matter about which there has been emphasis in the
Islamic sources.

The Holy Prophet (S) is narrated to have said, “Make yourself known to
Allah during ease, He will know you in adversity.”[^70]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “Whoever takes precedence in invoking {Allah},
he will be answered when a calamity befalls {him} and it will be said,
‘{This is} a voice known {to us}’, and he will not be obscured from the
skies. {But} he who takes no precedence in supplicating will not be
answered during affliction, and the angels shall say, ‘We do not
recognize this voice.’”[^71]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said, “Supplication during
ease extract the needs during adversity.”[^72]

He (‘a) is also narrated to have said, “Whoever likes to be answered
during adversity, should increase supplicating during ease.”[^73]

He (‘a) has also said, “My grandfather used to say, “Take precedence in
making supplication; for if a servant consistently invokes {Allah} and
then an affliction befalls him and he prays {to Allah}, it would be
said, ‘{This is} a voice known {to us}. But if he is not consistent in
supplicating and a calamity befalls him, it would be said, ‘Where were
you before this day?”[^74]

The above narrations point to a subtle and profound meaning; for
supplication is ‘turning toward Allah’ (*iqbal*), and the most effective
and closer of it to acceptance is the one in which the *iqbal* is at its
climax. So when the state of ‘turning’ is actualized and the heart
becomes pure and the supplicant turns to Allah wholly, then there would
be no obstacle between the prayer and the response. On the contrary, if
the state of turning to Allah is poor, the similar would be the
response.

The state of turning toward Allah and drawing the attention of the heart
to Him can only be acquired through frequent supplication. This is
exactly like any other act in human life. Thus, the more frequent one’s
invocation, the more easily he would be able to attain the state of
*iqbal* and his heart would yield to him more in being attentive to
Allah.

Consequently, when a calamity befalls him and he turns to Allah at that
time, his heart would easily and swiftly obey him in turning toward
Allah, as his prayer would be nearer to acceptance, and there would be
no hindrance between his supplication and the response from Allah.

Fadl bin ‘Abbas says that the Prophet of Allah (S) said to me, “Be
mindful of Allah, He will be mindful of you. Be mindful of Allah and you
will {always} find Him before you. Make yourself known to Him in ease,
He will know you in adversity.”[^75]

Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a) used to say, “I have not seen the like of
taking precedence in making supplication; for the response (*ijabah*) is
not within the reach of a person at all times.”[^76]

Abu Dharr al-Ghaffari reports that the Holy Prophet (S) said, “O Aba
Dharr! Make yourself known to Allah at times of ease, He will know you
during adversity. If you ask, ask from Allah, and if you seek help, seek
the help of Allah.”[^77]

It is narrated that Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (‘a) used to say, “The prayer of
a believer in ease (*rakha’*) ought to be like his prayer at times of
adversity (*shiddah*). He should not slack off if he is granted {his
request}; so do not get weary of making supplication, for indeed
supplication has a great position with Allah, the All-mighty, the
Majestic.”[^78]

8. Fulfilling the Covenant of Allah
-----------------------------------

It is related in *Tafsir al-Qumi* that Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) was asked,
“Allah, the Exalted, says: ‘Call Me, I will answer you’, we do call Him
but are not answered.” He said, “Because you do not keep the covenant of
Allah; Allah says: ‘…And fulfill My covenant, I will fulfill your
covenant.’[^79] By Allah, had you fulfilled to Allah His, He would have
fulfilled to you yours.”[^80]

9. Simultaneity of Prayer with Efforts
--------------------------------------

One of the conditions for the acceptance of a supplication is to follow
it up with endeavour (*‘amal*). Prayer without putting efforts to attain
one’s need is of no avail, as endeavour does not dispense with prayer.
These are two different points.

**The first point** is that supplication cannot be a substitute for
endeavour.

In his advice to Abu Dharr, the Holy Prophet (S) says: “O Aba Dharr! The
example of one who supplicates without acting[^81] is like he who shoots
{an arrow} without a bow.”[^82]

‘Umar bin Yazid reports, “I said to Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), ‘A person says:
‘I will sit in my house, I will pray and fast and worship Allah. As for
my sustenance, it will come to me.’ He said, ‘This is one of the three
people who would not be answered.”[^83]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) has said, “One who invokes without acting is like he
who shoots without a bow.”[^84]

He (‘a) is also narrated to have said, “The supplication of three people
are rejected; he who sits in his house and says: ‘O my Lord! Give me
provision’; for it is said to him, ‘Did I not ordain for you a way to
obtain your provision? …”[^85]

Hence, if a father was just to pray to Allah for the spiritual well
being and guidance of his child without giving importance to his correct
up-bringing, then his prayer shall not be answered.

Similarly, if a sick person were to pray for his recovery but without
consulting a physician and taking medicine and maintaining the proper
diet necessary for his recovery, then the acceptance of such a prayer
would be hindered.

**The second point** is that putting efforts alone does not suffice.

The Holy Prophet (S) has said, ‘{On the Day of Judgement} two people
will enter the Heaven, both of whom used to perform the same deeds {in
the world}. Upon seeing one above himself, the other will say, ‘O My
Lord! Why did You give him {all this} when our deeds were the same?’
Allah, the Exalted, will reply, ‘He asked Me {for it}, but you did not
ask Me.’ The Prophet then said, ‘Ask Allah for His grace and pray for
His bounties in abundance, for nothing equals this in importance.”[^86]

The Holy Prophet (S) has also said, “Indeed Allah has servants who do
{righteous} deeds, so He gives them {of His mercy}; and there are others
who sincerely ask Him, so He grants them. Thereafter, He will gather all
of them in the Heaven. So those who performed {good} deeds shall say,
‘Our Lord, You gave us because we acted {righteously}, but why did You
give to these {people}?’ He will say, ‘These are my servants. I gave you
your reward without wasting anything of your deeds. These people
besought Me, hence I gave them and enriched them; this is My grace, I
give it to whomsoever I desire.”[^87]

10. Supplication within the Framework of the Divine Norms
---------------------------------------------------------

Supplication is not breaking the ontological laws of Allah operating in
the universe, nature, history, and society. The norms of Allah do not
alter or change.

The supplicant ought not to pray for something which contradicts the
norms of Allah or contrasts His legislative (*tashri’iyyah*) laws.

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) was once asked, “Which prayer is the most erroneous one?”
He replied, “Praying for that which is not possible.”[^88]

He (‘a) is also reported to have said, “O supplicant! Do not ask for
what is not going to happen and is illegal.”

Praying for ‘that which is not going to happen’ (*ma la yakunu*) is to
pray for change in the norms of Allah regarding the society, nature or
universe.

And asking for ‘that which is illegal’ (*ma la yahillu*) is opposing the
legislative system of Allah in human life.

It is to this regard that Allah, the Exalted, says: “…even if you plead
forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah shall never forgive
them…”[^89]

11. Abstinence from Sins
------------------------

Among the other conditions for the acceptance of a prayer is abstinence
from sins and repenting of them. How can a person attain the state of
turning toward Allah (*iqbal*), which is the essence of supplication,
when he is indulged in disobeying Allah, turns away from His commands
and does not repent to Him?

Muhammad bin Muslim narrates from Imam al-Baqir (‘a), “It so happens
that a person asks Allah for a need and He decides to fulfill it sooner
or later, but the person commits a sin during this time, so Allah, the
Exalted, says to the angel, ‘Do not grant his need and deprive him of
it; for he has exposed himself to My wrath and {thus} deserves to be
deprived by Me.’”[^90]

It is reported that the Holy Prophet (S) said, “{One day} Prophet Musa
(‘a) passed by a man who was in a state of prostration. After {Prophet
Musa} finished his work, he found him still prostrating. So he (‘a)
said, ‘If your need was in my hand, I would have surely granted it to
you.’ At this, Allah revealed to him, ‘O Musa! Even if he were to
prostrate to the extent that his head is separated {from his body}, I
will not accept {his prayer}, unless he turns away from what I dislike
to what I like.”[^91]

12. Congregation for Supplication and Asking the Believers to say Amin
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Among the things insisted upon in the Islamic narrations is prayer in
the congregation of the believers (*mu’minin*), for the congregation of
believers before Allah is always among the stations of Allah’s mercy. No
group of believers comes together, provided Allah is pleased with their
gathering, except that their congregation shall be closer to Allah’s
mercy and it will be among the stations of his grace.

Ibn Khalid reports Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) saying, “No group of forty
believers come together and pray to Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic,
for something, except that they shall be answered. If their number does
not reach forty, then {if} four {of them} pray to Allah, the All-mighty,
the Majestic, ten times, Allah will respond to them. And if their number
does not reach four, then if one {of them} were to pray to Allah forty
times, Allah, the All-mighty, the All-compeller, will answer him.”[^92]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) has also said, “Whenever my father would become
grief-stricken because of something, he would call the women and
children, and then he would pray {to Allah} and they would say
*amin*.”[^93]

13. Consistency in Praying to Allah
-----------------------------------

Among the things that a supplicant should be careful about in prayer is
that he should not lose the state of consistency (*tarassul*) in asking
Allah, the Exalted, and demanding from Him. For the essence and spirit
of supplication is constituted by turning toward Allah, beseeching and
entreating Him earnestly, and the recitation of the supplications handed
down to us from the A’immah (‘a).

The supplicant ought not to lose this state, for it is in the state of
consistently praying without constraint (*takalluf*) that one may
experience within himself a turning toward Allah, a sense of humility
and a softening of the heart, which he may not experience even while
reciting the transmitted supplications.

Hence, it is important for a supplicant to preserve the state of prayer
(*halat ad-du’a’*), because of what it entails of the consistence and
ease in being attentive to Allah and imploring Him.

The A’immah (‘a) sometimes used to prefer for a supplicant to supplicate
consistently with whatever came into his mind, rather than supplicating
with the transmitted prayers, so that the supplication may not become
devoid of the consistency and continuity.

Zurarah is reported to have said, “I said to Abu ‘Abdillah (‘a), ‘Teach
me a supplication (*du’a’*). He said, ‘The best of supplications is
indeed that which flows on your tongue.’”[^94]

14. Preparing the Self for Prayer
---------------------------------

Prayer is ‘turning toward Allah’. The soul must be prepared for this
‘turning’.

Among the ways of preparing the soul is to begin with praising and
extolling Allah, thanking Him for His blessings and grace, seeking
forgiveness from sins, and sending salutations and blessings on the
Prophet of Allah (S) and his Progeny (‘a). This preamble prepares the
supplicant to turn to Allah, and to ask and beseech Him.

Praising Allah, thanking Him, seeking forgiveness, and sending blessings
on the Prophet (S) and his Progeny have appeared in the beginning of
most of the supplications, as they pervade many of them.

‘Ays bin Qasim reports Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) to have said, “If anyone among
you sought a need, then let him praise Allah and extol Him… and when you
are about to ask for a need, then glorify Allah, the All-mighty, the
All-compeller; praise and extol Him saying, ‘O Most Generous of those
who give, O Best of those who have been asked from, O Most Merciful of
those who were asked for mercy, O One, O All-embracing, O He who neither
begat nor was begotten, nor has He any equal, O He who has neither taken
any spouse nor son, O He who does whatever He wishes, and consolidates
whatever He decrees, and decides whatever He likes, O He who intervenes
between a man and his heart, O He who is in the highest position, O He
who there is nothing like Him, O All-hearing, All-seeing.’

And remember Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, much by His names, for
the names of Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, are many. And send
blessings on Muhammad (S) and his Progeny, and say, ‘O Allah, enlarge
{my share} from Your lawful (*halal*) provision so that through which I
may hold back my face {from the wrongdoing}, give back the trust with
me, maintain good relations with my relatives, and that it should be an
aid for me in {performing} *hajj* and *‘umrah*.’

Then he said, ‘A man entered the mosque and performed two units of
prayers, and then he {immediately} invoked Allah, the All-mighty, the
Majestic. So the Messenger of Allah (S) said, ‘The servant hastened {in
calling} his Lord’. Another person came {in}, he offered two units of
prayers, then he praised Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, and sent
salutations on the Prophet (S). So the Prophet of Allah (S) said, ‘Ask
and you will be granted.’”[^95]

Abu Kahmas narrates from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “{One day} a man entered
the mosque and began {praying for his need} before praising Allah and
sending salutations on the Prophet (S) . So the Prophet (S) said, ‘The
servant hastened {in calling} his Lord.’ Then came in another {person},
he offered prayers (*salat*), praised Allah, the All-mighty, the
Majestic, and sent blessings on the Messenger of Allah (S) . So the
Prophet of Allah (S) said, ‘Ask and you shall be granted.’”[^96]

Safwan al-Jammal narrates from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “Any supplication by
which Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, is called upon is obscured
(*mahjub*) from the heavens until {the supplicant} sends blessings on
Muhammad (S) and his Progeny.”[^97]

It is also reported from as-Sadiq (‘a), “A prayer remains veiled from
the heavens until {the supplicant} sends blessings on Muhammad (S) and
his Progeny.”[^98]

15. Calling Allah by His Beautiful Names
----------------------------------------

Allah loves His servants to call upon Him with His Beautiful Names
(*asma’ al-husna*). “Say, ‘Invoke ‘Allah’ or invoke ‘the
All-beneficent’. Whichever {of His names} you may invoke, to Him belong
the Best Names…”[^99]

Each of these Beautiful Names of Allah is a key among the keys of His
mercy and grace. There has been great emphasis in the Islamic sources
regarding supplicating with the Beautiful Names of Allah. There are
numerous traditions that if a believer supplicates Allah with His
Beautiful Names ten times, He, the Exalted, would respond to him.

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “Whoever says ‘O Allah’ ten times, it is said
to him, ‘Here I am, what is your need?’”[^100]

Abu Basir reports Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) to have said, “If a person says in
the state of prostration ‘O Allah, O my Lord, O my Master’ three times,
Allah, the Blessed, the Exalted, will answer him saying, ‘Here I am My
servant! Ask for your need.’”[^101]

‘Abdullah bin Ja’far narrates in *Qurb al-Isnad* from Mas’adah bin
Sadaqah who said, “Ja’far {bin Muhammad} told me, ‘{Once} some of the
children of my father complained {to him of an affliction}. So when he
passed by them, he said, ‘Say ten times ‘O Allah, O Allah’, for none of
the believers says this except that the Lord, the Blessed, the Exalted,
says: ‘Here I am My servant! Ask for your need.’”[^102]

Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a) is reported to have said, “The Holy Prophet
(S) heard a man saying, ‘O Most Merciful of the merciful.’ So he laid
his hand on the shoulder of the man and said, ‘The Most Merciful has
turned to you with His face, ask your need.’”[^103]

16. Presenting the Needs before Allah
-------------------------------------

Allah, the Exalted, knows what we want, what we need and what we are
asking for. Although His knowledge suffices Him from our request, He,
the Exalted, loves that we should present our needs to Him, to the
extent that sometimes He even puts us in need so that we may take our
needs to Him.

Nonetheless, if Allah hates a person, He would suffice him and make him
needless so that he may not invoke Him and raise his hands toward Him.

When man presents his needs before Allah, he gets closer to Him,
develops intimacy with Him, and realizes his poverty and neediness
toward Him. And all this is loved by Allah, the Exalted. So when we call
on Him for any of our needs, He loves us to prolong our supplication,
and not to shorten it the way people do when talking to the rulers.

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says in this regard, “Indeed Allah, the Exalted,
knows what His servant wants when he calls on Him, but He loves him to
reveal his needs to Him. So when you supplicate, mention your
needs.”[^104]

17. Persistence in Praying
--------------------------

Persistence (*ilhah*) in supplicating Allah shows the profundity of
one’s confidence and hope in Allah, and the depth of one’s attachment to
Him. The greater one’s confidence in Allah, the greater would be his
persistence in supplicating Him. On the contrary, if the trust of a
person in Allah is weak, then he would naturally desist from
supplication and despair if he does not see response to his prayer.

The way persistence in praying to Allah reveals the depth of one’s
confidence in Allah, similarly it deepens one’s trust in Allah and
consolidates it. Moreover, the proximity of a person to Allah is in
accordance with the degree of his confidence in Allah and his attachment
to Him.

There has appeared great emphasis in the Islamic traditions about
persistence in praying and that one should not despair in any situation.

The Holy Prophet (S) has said, “Indeed Allah loves those who persist
(*mulihhin*) in making supplication.”[^105]

He (S) is also reported to have said, “Verily, Allah loves a persistent
(*lahuh*) petitioner.”[^106]

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says: “Prayer is the shield of a believer. And a door
which is frequently knocked at shall be opened for you.”[^107]

It is narrated from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “Supplication averts the Divine
destiny (*qada’*) after it has been confirmed. So supplicate frequently;
for it is the key of every mercy and the fulfillment of every need. And
that which lies with Allah can only be attained through supplication.
And there is no door which is frequently knocked at except that it will
soon be opened for the one who knocks it.”[^108]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) says: “Allah dislikes the insistence of people in
asking from one another, but He likes to be asked from
insistently.”[^109]

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is reported to have said, “Persist in asking from Him and
the doors of mercy shall be opened for you.”[^110]

Walid bin ‘Uqbah al-Hijri narrates that he heard Imam al-Baqir (‘a)
saying, “By Allah, no believer persists in asking for his need from
Allah except that He would grant it to him.”[^111]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) narrates from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said, “May
Allah have mercy on a person who calls on Allah, the All-mighty, the
Majestic, for a need, and then persists in calling on Him, whether he is
answered or not.” Then he recited this verse, “I will supplicate my
Lord. Hopefully, I will not be disappointed in supplicating my
Lord.”[^112]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) says: “Nay, by Allah, no one persists in asking from
Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, except that He would answer
him.”[^113]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) is also narrated to have said, “Ask your need and
persist in asking; for indeed Allah loves the persistence of the
persistent among His believing servants.”[^114]

18. Prayer for Others and from Others
-------------------------------------

We shall discuss in chapter six of this book about what we should pray
to Allah and what we should not. But at the moment we will talk on this
topic to the extent that it is related to the etiquettes and requisites
of supplication.

If a person opens up before Allah to his brothers in faith, and removes
from his heart the grudge and hatred which may be existing between them
and him, then Allah, the Exalted, will open for him the doors of His
mercy.

This is because the opening up of believers to one another, and their
consolidating the state of mutual love and sympathy between themselves,
is among the keys to Allah’s mercy for the supplicant as well as for the
one for whom the supplicant prays for (*al-mad’uww lahu*).

With regard to the supplicant, Mu‘awiyah bin ‘Ammar reports from Imam
as-Sadiq (‘a), “Praying for your brother in his absence drives
sustenance (*rizq*) to the supplicant and averts calamities from him,
and an angel says: ‘And for you is the like of that.’”[^115]

The Holy Prophet (S) has said, “Whosoever prays for a believer in his
absence, an angel would call out, ‘And for you is the like of
that.’”[^116]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “The prayer of a person for his brother in his
absence increases in sustenance and averts afflictions.”[^117]

Ibn Khalid al-Qammat says: “Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (‘a) said, ‘The quickest
of the prayer to be answered is the prayer of a brother for his his
brother {in faith} in his absence. As he begins to pray for his brother,
the angel appointed over him says: ‘*amin*! And for you is twofold of
that’”[^118]

With regard to the one prayed for (*al-mad’uww lahu*), it has been
narrated that Allah, the Exalted, said to Musa bin ‘Imran, “Call Me with
a tongue with which you have not disobeyed Me.” He said, “O my Lord! How
is that possible for me?” He replied, “Call Me with the tongue of
others.”[^119]

19. Supplication at the Time of the Descent of Mercy
----------------------------------------------------

It is through supplication that man attracts Allah’s mercy. For this
reason, the best time for supplication is the time when the mercy of
Allah descends. At such moments man is closer to Allah and is exposed to
His mercy.

The hours in which Allah’s mercy descends are many, among them is:
during the recitation of the Qur’an, at the time of *adhan*[^120], when
it rains, and when the ranks of the truth and falsehood meet and people
fall as martyrs. The last hour is the best of the times in which the
doors of Allah’s mercy are opened toward the earth.

As-Sakuni narrates from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “Imam ‘Ali (‘a) has said,
‘Avail yourself of the opportunity of supplication at four {times};
during the recitation of the Qur’an, at the time *adhan*, when it rains,
and when the two armies {of truth and falsehood} meet for
martyrdom.’”[^121]

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is reported to have said, “Avail yourself of the
opportunity of supplication at five places; when reciting the Qur’an, at
the time of *adhan*, when it rains, when the two armies meet for
martyrdom, and when the oppressed (*mazlum*) makes supplication, as
there is nothing to impede it from {reaching} the throne
(*‘arsh*).”[^122]

He (‘a) has also said, “Whoever recites a hundred verses of the Qur’an,
any part of the Qur’an he wished, and then says ‘O Allah’ for seven
times, then even if he were to pray against a solid rock, he would
dislodge it, by the will of Allah.”[^123]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “My father used to pray for {his} need at noon
(*zawal ash-Shams*). Whenever he intended do so, he would give charity
(*sadaqah*) and smell a bit of fragrance, then he would go to the mosque
and pray for his need in accordance with the will of Allah.”[^124]

20. Praying in the Middle of the Night
--------------------------------------

The solitude (*khalwah*) of the night has a great effect in the turning
of the soul toward Allah and in receiving His mercy. What one
experiences during the late hours of the night, of the state of turning
to Allah and the ability to acquire His mercy, is hardly experienced by
him at other times.

Furthermore, Allah has kept in the late hours of the night of His
blessings and mercy what He has not kept in other hours of the day and
night.

It is apparent from the Islamic traditions that all hours of the day and
night are not equal. There are times wherein the doors of Allah’s mercy
are opened for man more than other times. Some hours attract the mercy
of Allah more than other hours do. The best of these hours and the ones
which have a greater share of the mercy of Allah are the hours of the
second half of the night.

Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“O you wrapped up in your mantle! Stand vigil through the night,
except a little, a half, or reduce a little from that, or add to it, and
recite the Qur’an in a measured tone. Indeed soon We shall cast on you a
weighty word. Indeed the watch of the night is firmer in tread and more
upright in respect to speech.”***[^125]

Mufaddal bin ‘Amru narrates from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “Some of what Allah
whispered (*naja*) to Musa bin ‘Imran (‘a) was, ‘O son of ‘Imran! He who
assumes that he loves me but when the night falls he does not think of
Me and goes to sleep is a liar. Does not every lover love to be alone
with his beloved? Here I am O son of ‘Imran, I am aware of My lovers;
when the night covers them their eyes go into their hearts, My
punishment is embodied before their eyes, they address Me {as if} they
see Me, and they speak to me {as if} they are in My presence. O son of
‘Imran! Give Me humility from your heart, humbleness from your body, and
tears from your eyes. Call Me in the darkness {of the night}, for you
will indeed find Me Nearmost, Answering.”[^126]

There are several places in this text worth pondering on, though we do
not intend to discuss them in detail.

1. The night serves as a covering for the friends (*awliya’*) of Allah
and guards them against the discomfort of life and its distractions. It
is as if the night pulls him out from the middle of the distractions
that occupies him from turning to Allah and attaining detachment from
everything other than Him. This is the opportunity of the seclusion
(*khalwah*) at night when the face of Allah (*wajh allah*) becomes
exclusive for man, away from all distractions, and he is able to attain
in this seclusion the state of total absorption in Allah.

2. The discomfort of the daytime and its numerous distractions diverge
our power of sight and hearing. But when the night covers us and we come
out of the uneasiness of life, our powers of sight and hearing, which
had been diverged during the daytime, once again converge. They shift
from exterior to interior, and from the uneasiness of the daytime to
inside the heart, the source of light and spiritual insight in man’s
life.

It is at their convergence that Allah, the Exalted, opens the doors of
light and spiritual insight onto the heart of a person, *‘when the night
covers them their eyes go into their hearts’*. It is at this moment that
one sees himself in the presence of Allah and witnesses the wrath and
mercy of Allah before him.

Thus, when he addresses Allah he would address Him as if he sees Him and
is in His presence, not from a distance, *‘they address Me {as if} they
see Me’*. And when he talks to Allah he would talk to Him as if he is in
His presence, and not away from Him, *‘and they speak to me {as if} they
are in My presence’*. And the anger and punishment of Allah would become
embodied before him as the phrase goes *‘My punishment is embodied in
their eyes’*.

Subsequently, the intimacy (*uns*) with the presence of the beloved,
seclusion with Him, and the fear of His punishment seizes from them the
comfort of sleep. How can one sleep when he finds himself in the
presence of the beloved at the seclusion of the night, whispering and
speaking to Him? How can slumber overcome him when he sees the
punishment of Allah embodied in front of him? Such a state is a natural
outcome of the transformation of the power of sight from exterior to
interior.

In his sermon famously known as *al-muttaqin* (the pious ones), Imam
‘Ali (‘a) says: “At night they rise on their feet {for prayers}, reading
parts of the Qur’an in a measured tone, creating through it grief for
themselves and taking counsel with it for the cure of their ailments. If
they come across a verse which arouses desire {for the Heaven}, they
pursue it avidly, and their spirits turn toward it eagerly, and they
feel as if it is in front of them.

And when they come across a verse which fills with fear {of the Fire},
they bend the ears of their hearts toward it, and feel as though the
sound of Hell and its cries are reaching their ears. They bend
themselves from their backs, prostrate on their foreheads, palms, knees
and toes, beseeching Allah, the Exalted, to set {them} free {from the
Fire}. In the daytime, they are enduring, learned, virtuous and
Godwary.”[^127]

In another narration, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) said to Nawf al-Bikali about the
characteristics of the night, “O Nawf! Prophet Dawud once woke up at
such an hour of the night and said: this is indeed the hour in which no
one makes supplication but that he will be answered.”[^128]

The Holy Prophet (S) says: “In the final hours of the night Allah, the
All-mighty, the Majestic, says: ‘Is there any supplicant whom I may
answer? Is there any petitioner so that I may grant his request? Is
there anyone to plead for forgiveness so that I may forgive him? Is
there any repentent so that I may turn toward him clemently?’”

21. Wiping the Face and Head after Supplication
-----------------------------------------------

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “No one stretches his hand toward Allah, the
All-mighty, the All-compeller, except that Allah -the All-mighty, the
Majestic- is ashamed of turning down his request completely, until he
puts in his hand what He wishes of His grace and mercy. So whenever
anyone of you supplicates, then he should not withdraw his hand until
after he has wiped it on his face and head.”[^129]

[^1]: Qur’an, 34:39.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.319; Falah as-Sa’il, pg.38 39; and
‘Uddat ud-Da’i, pg.16.

[^3]: Qur’an, 17:11.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.90, pg.322.

[^5]: Al-Mizan, vol.2, pg.43.

[^6]: Qur’an, 2:186.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Qur’an, 2:185.

[^9]: Qur’an, 2:185.

[^10]: Qur’an, 27:62.

[^11]: Tafsir as-Safi, pg.57, under verse no.86 of Chapter Two; Iran
lithographic edition.

[^12]: Thawab al-A’mal, pg.84.

[^13]: Sahifat As-Sajjadiyyah, supplication no.13.

[^14]: Al-Balad al-Amin, pg.96.

[^15]: Sahifat As-Sajjadiyyah, supplication no.6.

[^16]: Qur’an, 2:186.

[^17]: Qur’an, 50:16.

[^18]: Qur’an, 8:24.

[^19]: Al-Balad al-Amin, pg.96.

[^20]: Ibid, pg.93.

[^21]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon no.49.

[^22]: Al-Mizan, vol.2, pg.37.

[^23]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol.4, pg.1105, hadith no.8703.

[^24]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.519; Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol.4, pg.1105, hadith
no.8700.

[^25]: Usul al-Kafi, bab al-iqbal-‘ala ad-du’a’.

[^26]: Ibid, pg.527; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1107, hadith
no.8711.

[^27]: Qurb al-Isnad, pg.171.

[^28]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1106, hadith no.8709.

[^29]: Qur’an, 10:89.

[^30]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.562.

[^31]: Ibid.

[^32]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol.4, pg.1121, hadith no.8764.

[^33]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol.4, pg.1174, hadith no.8958.

[^34]: Al-Balad al-Amin, pg.316.

[^35]: Sahifat As-Sajjadiyyah, supplication no.22.

[^36]: Ibid, supplication no.28.

[^37]: Tafsir as-Safi, pg.58, Iran lithographic edition; Usul al-Kafi,
pg.382; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1174, hadith no.8956.

[^38]: Kalimat Allah, hadith no.371.

[^39]: Usul al-Kafi, bab al-iqbal-‘ala al-du’a’.

[^40]: Ibid, hadith no.1.

[^41]: Ibid, hadith no.2.

[^42]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.34.

[^43]: Man la Yahduruhu al-faqih, vol.2, pg.339.

[^44]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1105, hadith no.8705.

[^45]: Ibid, vol.4, pg.1106, hadith no.8707.

[^46]: By transmitted supplications, we mean the supplications which
have reached us from the Holy Prophet (S) and the A’immah (‘a). These
supplications are referred to in Arabic as al-ad’iyat al-ma’thurah.

[^47]: Pg.60 61.

[^48]: For instance, the ‘act of seeking’ is the natural consequence of
the property of hope, when it is realized in the heart of a person.
{Trns.}

[^49]: That is, if we find a property without the effect expected of it.

[^50]: Glorification of Allah: subhan allah.

[^51]: Pronouciation of the phrase la ilaha illa allah.

[^52]: Praising Allah: al-hamd li allah.

[^53]: Pleading with Allah.

[^54]: To become lowly before Allah.

[^55]: Fear of Allah.

[^56]: Seeking Allah’s forgiveness.

[^57]: Repenting to Allah.

[^58]: ‘Uddat ud-Da’i, pg.139.

[^59]: Qur’an, 23:76.

[^60]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, pg.348.

[^61]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.522; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1101,
hadith no.8687.

[^62]: The softening of the heart (al-riqqah).

[^63]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.313.

[^64]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1120, hadith no.8761; and Usul
al-Kafi, pg.521.

[^65]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1141, hadith no.8763.

[^66]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.523; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1121,
hadith no.8767.

[^67]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1122, hadith no.8769; and Usul
al-Kafi, pg.523.

[^68]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.524; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1122,
hadith no.8770.

[^69]: Al-Balad al-Amin, pg.331.

[^70]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1097, hadith no.8672.

[^71]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1096, hadith no.8664.

[^72]: Ibid, vol.4, pg.1096, hadith no.8665.

[^73]: Ibid, vol.4, pg.1096, hadith no.8660.

[^74]: Ibid, vol.4, pg.1096, hadith no.8667.

[^75]: Man la Yahduruhu al-Faqih, vol.2, pg.358.

[^76]: Al-Irshad of al-Mufid, pg.277.

[^77]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1098; and ‘Uddat ud-Da’i, pg.127.

[^78]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1111, hadith no.8729.

[^79]: Qur’an, 2:40.

[^80]: Tafsir as-Safi, pg.57, under the exegesis of verse 186 of Chapter
Two, lithographic edition.

[^81]: That is, without putting efforts and employing the means ordained
by Allah to attain his need.

[^82]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, kitab as-Salat, abwab al-du’a’, bab no.32,
hadith no.3.

[^83]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1160, hadith no.8913.

[^84]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1175, hadith no.8965.

[^85]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1175, hadith no.8965.

[^86]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1084, hadith no.8608.

[^87]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1084, hadith no.8609.

[^88]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.324.

[^89]: Qur’an, 9:80.

[^90]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.440.

[^91]: ‘Uddat ud-Da’i, pg.125.

[^92]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.525.

[^93]: Ibid; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1144, hadith no.8863.

[^94]: Al-Aman min al-Akhtar of Sayyid Ibn Tawus, pg.3.

[^95]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.524; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1126,
hadith 8786.

[^96]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.525; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1127,
hadith 8788.

[^97]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.528; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1135,
hadith no.8826.

[^98]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1137, hadith no.8837; and al-Majalis
of al-Mufid, pg.60.

[^99]: Qur’an, 17:110.

[^100]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.541; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1130,
hadith no.8798.

[^101]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1131, hadith no.8802.

[^102]: Qurb al-Isnad, pg.2; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1132,
hadith no.8809.

[^103]: Muhasabat al-Nafs, pg.148; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4,
pg.1132, hadith no.8815.

[^104]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.520; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1091,
hadith no.8642.

[^105]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.300.

[^106]: Ibid, pg.374.

[^107]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol.4, pg.1085, hadith no.8612.

[^108]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol.4, pg.1086, hadith no.8616.

[^109]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.374.

[^110]: Ibid, vol.77, pg.205.

[^111]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.520.

[^112]: Qur’an, 19:47.

[^113]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.520.

[^114]: Qurb al-Asnad, pg.520.

[^115]: Al-Amali of at-Tusi, vol.2, pg.290; and Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93,
pg.387.

[^116]: Ibid, vol.2, pg.95; and Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.384.

[^117]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.435; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1145,
hadith no.8867.

[^118]: Ibid.

[^119]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.342; and ‘Uddat ud-Da’i, pg.128.

[^120]: The call to prayer.

[^121]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.521; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1114,
hadith no.8739.

[^122]: Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4, pg.1115, hadith no.8742.

[^123]: Thawab al-A’mal-of as-Saduq, pg.58.

[^124]: Usul al-Kafi, pg.521.

[^125]: Qur’an, 73:1 6.

[^126]: Al-Majalis of al-Mufid, pg.214; and Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol.4,
pg.1125, hadith no.8781.

[^127]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon no.193.

[^128]: Ibid, saying no.104.

[^129]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, pg.342; Man La Yahduruhu al-Faqih, vol.1,
pg.107; and Bihar al-Anwar, vol.93, pg.307.


