The Means to be Employed when Praying to Allah
==============================================

Since we have been discussing the obstacles and the factors of the
ascension of deeds, it would be appropriate as well to talk about the
means that we must employ when supplicating Allah, the Exalted.

Allah Himself has invited us to take recourse to Him. He says:

***“They {themselves} are the ones who supplicate, seeking a recourse to
their Lord…”***[^1]

He also says:

***“O you who have faith! Be wary of Allah, and seek the means of
recourse to Him…”***[^2]

In fact, these means have been ordained by Allah , out of His mercy, for
those of His creatures whose deeds and prayers are not strong enough to
ascend to Him; as He is the Most Merciful of all merciful.

He, the Exalted, says:

***“To Him ascends the good word and He elevates righteous
conduct.”***[^3]

‘A good word’ and ‘righteous conduct’ are part of human life. The ‘good
word’ is one’s belief in Allah, his sincerity to Him, his confidence and
hope in Him, and his entreating Him. While the ‘righteous conduct’ is
the deed which one performs out of belief, sincerity, confidence, and
hope in Allah.

The ‘good word’ ascends to Allah as per the assertion of the Qur’an, but
it is the ‘righteous deed’ which elevates the ‘good word’ to Allah, as
affirmed also by the Qur’an itself. The ‘good word’ cannot ascend to
Allah without the ‘righteous deed’. Nevertheless, sometimes the
‘righteous deed’ is weak and ineffective, and so it is unable to elevate
the ‘good word’ to Allah. Subsequently, the prayer of a person would
fail to ascend to Allah, and therefore it would not be answered.

For this reason, Allah, out of His mercy for his creatures, has decreed
in human life and kept at his disposal ‘means’ (*wasa’il*) through which
he may seek recourse to Allah and which may assist him to ascend to Him.
Were it not for these means, a person would not have been able to raise
his prayer and imploration to Allah.

The Qur’an has pointed to these means. Among such means is the prayer of
the Holy Prophet (S) and his pleading for forgiveness for his nation
(*ummah*). He, the Exalted, says:

***“… Had they, when they wronged themselves, come to you and pleaded
Allah for forgiveness, and the Apostle had pleaded for forgiveness for
them, they would have surely found Allah all-clement,
all-merciful.”***[^4]

This verse is clear in that the pleading for forgiveness by the Prophet
(S) on behalf of the believers is among the ‘means’ which Allah has
encouraged His servants to seek recourse to when supplicating Him and
seeking His forgiveness.

What has been reported in history of the coming of the believers to the
Holy Prophet (S) during his lifetime and his seeking forgiveness for
them, applies after his demise also; for the Prophet of Allah (S) is
living even after his death and provided for near Allah, the Exalted.

Pleading with the Holy Prophet (S) and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------------------

The Islamic narrations are replete with great emphasis on asking for
help from the Holy Prophet (S) and his Progeny (‘a).

Dawud al-Barqi says: “I used to listen to Abu ‘Abdillah as-Sadiq (‘a),
he mostly used to implore Allah for the sake of the Five, that is the
Prophet of Allah, Amir al-Mu’minin, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn
(peace be upon all of them).”[^5]

Sama’ah is reported to have said, “Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (‘a) said to
me, ‘O Sama’ah! If you sought a need from Allah, then say, ‘O Allah, {I
beseech You} for the sake of Muhammad and ‘Ali, for they enjoy status
and rank with You, and {I implore You} for the sake of that status to
bless Muhammad and his Progeny, and do with me such and such.’”[^6]

Means of Recourse to Allah in the Supplication of Kumayl
--------------------------------------------------------

In the supplication of *kumayl*, we find a set of means by which Imam
‘Ali (‘a) has sought recourse to Allah, the Exalted. Actually, these
means which have appeared in this supplication constitute the second
part of it.

But in order for us to discuss the means which the Imam (‘a) employs in
this supplication and through which he seeks his needs, it is necessary
to give a brief explanation about the structure of this supplication,
the key concepts it entails, and the methodology based on which the key
ideas presented in this supplication have been arranged. In actual fact,
each of the famous supplications that has reached us from the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) entails specific concepts and a particular methodology
based on which those concepts are organized. Each of these supplications
has a specific way to commence it and to bring it to close.

Similarly, each of these supplications has a structure and a layout
peculiar to it. It contains one primary concept embraced by a number of
other secondary concepts. In other words, every prayer has a fundamental
point to convey, and there are other subsidiary points surrounding the
main one. It involves a style of beseeching Allah, the Exalted, and a
way of commencing it and bringing it to close.

Had the scholars devoted enough academic importance to this issue, they
would have come up with positive and remarkable achievements. Anyway, I
do not intend to present here the structure of the supplication of
*kumayl*, nor the primary concepts it entails. Rather, I just intend to
briefly give an explanation about the general framework of this
supplication and the main ideas which have appeared in it, in order for
us to consider -through this general frame- the ‘means’ employed by Imam
‘Ali (‘a) in this prayer for seeking his needs from Allah.

General Frame of the Supplication of Kumayl
-------------------------------------------

The supplication of *kumayl* is among the famous and important prayers
among the believers. It is recited on Thursday nights, collectively and
individually.

This supplication belongs to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) which he taught to Kumayl
bin Ziyad an-nakha’i. Thereafter, the believers received it through this
channel and passed it on generation after generation.

This prayer is rich with such concepts as servanthood (*‘ubudiyyah*),
repentance and submission; and filled with vivid illustrations of
petition, call for help and returning to Allah.

However, I do not intend, by these considerations, to give a commentary
of this supplication and the ideas it entails, as this would take long.
Perhaps Allah will grant me the *tawfiq* to undertake such a work in
future.

This prayer has been particularly arranged in three stages, such that
each stage prepares the ground for the next stage. Comprehending this
structure and the foundations on which it is based helps us a lot in
reading this supplication and in pondering over the concepts and ideas
that have appeared in it, and also in interacting with them.

I hope Allah, the Exalted, will make this endeavour beneficial and
useful for those of the believers who are consistent in reciting this
supplication.

Structure of the Supplication of Kumayl
---------------------------------------

As mentioned above, this prayer consists of three stages.

**The First Stage** is like a preamble to the supplication. It prepares
the supplicant for praying and imploring Allah, the Exalted, and to
stand before Him. The wrongdoings veil a person from Allah and withhold
prayer. In order for one to stand before his Lord entreating Him, he
needs first to put behind him this impediment.

In this introduction, ‘Ali (‘a) begins with two requests from Allah. The
first one is forgiveness from Allah, “O Allah, forgive me those sins
which tear apart protection. O Allah, forgive me those sins which bring
down calamities…”

The second request is His remembrance, thankfulness to Him, and
proximity to Him, “And I beseech You by Your generosity to bring me
closer to Your proximity, and grant me with thankfulness to You, and to
inspire me with Your remembrance.”

Both of the above things are necessary for one who intends to stand
before Allah imploring Him. He has no choice but that Allah should,
first, forgive his sins and remove the veils from his heart, and,
secondly, allow him to get closer to Him, be grateful to Him, and
inspire him with His remembrance.

The second section of the preamble involves the presentation of poverty,
need, and desire (*raghbah*) toward Allah, “O Allah, I ask You with the
asking of one whose indigence is extreme, and who has stated to You in
difficulties his need, and whose yearning for what is with You has
become great…”  
 Here, we come across two realities. Firstly, there is no escape from
Allah, “O Allah, Your power is great, Your position is high, Your
deception is hidden, Your command is manifest, Your domination is
overwhelming, Your power is prevalent.”

Secondly, there is no refuge with other than Him, “O Allah, I find no
one to forgive my sins, no one to conceal my wrongdoings, and no one to
change my bad deeds into good except You, there is no god but You.”

In the third section of the preamble, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) mentions the
wretchedness and misfortune of man, “O Allah, my tribulation is
tremendous, my bad state is excessive, my acts are inadequate, my
fetters have tied me down, my far-fetched hopes have held me back from
my gain, and this world with its delusions, my own soul with its
offences, and my delaying {to act} have deceived me, O my Master.”

This wretchedness and misfortune is undoubtedly the outcome of man’s own
deeds. This is why ‘Ali (‘a) beseeches Allah, the Exalted, to forgive
him his sins and not to let them impede his prayer from Him, “So I ask
You, by Your might, not to let my evil deeds and acts veil my
supplication from You, not to disgrace me because of the hidden things
You have come to know from my innermost secret, not to hasten in
punishing me for what I have done in privacy of my evil acts,
wrongdoings, continuous negligence, my ignorance, my manifold passions,
and my forgetfulness.”

In the fourth section, he emphasizes on a noble concept which we have
just mentioned, and that is, man cannot find shelter during hardships
and misfortune with other than his Master, “O Allah, who do I Have other
than You, so that I may implore him to remove my affliction and to have
regard for my affairs?”

The fifth section of the preamble involves two confessions; confession
of wrongdoings, and the confession that man has no argument against
Allah in transgressing His boundaries, violating His commands, and in
following his lowly desires.

In the sixth and the last section of the preamble, after one has
confessed his disobedience, sins and wretchedness, and after one has
declared that there is no refuge from Allah but with Him, and after one
has sought Allah not to punish him on account of his wrongdoings and
offences, and, in one word, after displaying his humility and indigence
before Allah, the Exalted, the servant declares that he has turned to
his master in confession of his sins, regretting them, broken and
apologizing, out of knowledge that there is no refuge from his
misfortune and hardships except with Allah.

He (‘a) says: “Now I have come to You, O Allah, after my shortcoming and
my immoderation toward myself, proffering my excuse, regretful, broken,
apologizing, pleading for forgiveness, repenting, acknowledging,
submissive and confessing. I find no place to flee from what I have
done, nor any place of escape to which I may turn in my affairs, other
than Your acceptance of my excuse and Your entering me into the compass
of Your mercy.”

With the above phrase, the preamble comes to an end. A servant is now
prepared to stand before Allah, to supplicate and entreat Him. He has
affirmed all this by the statement ‘Now I have come to You, O Allah.’

**The Second Stage** is the one in which the Imam (‘a) mentions the
means (*wasa’il*) by which he seeks recourse to Allah. To my knowledge,
there are four ‘means’.

*The first means* is the previous grace and mercy of Allah toward His
creatures, and His love for them, “O You who gave rise to my creation,
to the remembrance of me, to the nurture of me, to goodness toward me,
and to my nourishment, bestow upon me for the sake of Your having given
rise {to me} with generosity and Your previous goodness to me.”

*The second means* is our love for Him and our confession of His
Oneness, “Can You see Yourself tormenting me with Your fire after I have
professed Your Unity, and after Your cognition my heart has embraced,
Your remembrance my tongue has constantly mentioned, and Your love to
which my mind has clung, after the sincerity of my confession and my
supplication, humble before Your Lordship?”

*The third means* is our weakness in resisting the punishment, the
thinness of our skins and the frailty of our bones, “You know my
weakness before a little of this world’s tribulations and punishments,
and before those ordeals which befall its inhabitants, even though it is
a tribulation whose stay is short, whose subsistence is but little, and
whose period is but fleeting. So how can I endure the tribulations of
the next world and the great ordeals that occur within it?... O Allah,
my Lord, my Master, my Protector, for which things would I complain to
You, and for which of them would I lament and weep; for the pain and
severity of the chastisement, or for the length and period of
tribulation?”

*The fourth means* is the seeking of refuge by a slave who has fled from
his Master and disobeyed Him, and his asking and calling upon Him for
help when he has no way out and does not find any refuge except with his
Master.

The Imam (‘a) illustrates this means remarkably with the following
words, “So by Your might, my Master and my Protector, I swear sincerely,
if You leave me with speech, I will lament to You from the midst of the
Fire’s inhabitants with the lamentation of the hopeful; I will cry to
You with the cry of those crying for help; I will weep to You with the
weeping of the bereft; and I will call upon You, where are You, O Helper
of the believers, O Goal of the hopes of {Your} knowers, O Succor of
those who seek assistance, O Beloved of the hearts of the sincere, and O
Lord of the worlds.”

By putting forth these four means, the second stage of this prayer comes
to the end. The supplicant sought recourse to Allah with these means in
order for him to be able to stand before Allah, supplicating and
beseeching Him.

Now, let us enter together with ‘Ali (‘a) in the third stage of the
prayer. In this final stage, the Imam (‘a) presents his needs to Allah
one after another. The needs begin from the low point related to the
petitioner and his actions, and end at the climax where the supplicant
aspires and craves the infinite mercy of his Master.

At the lowest point, we say, “O Allah, my Master, I beseech You… to
forgive me on this night and at this hour every offence I have
committed, every sin I have perpetrated, every ugly thing I have
concealed…”

At the culmination of the needs, we say, “And make me among the most
excellent of Your slaves in share with You, the nearest of them in
station to You, and the most elected of them in proximity to You…”

It is worthy of note here that the wishes which the Imam (‘a) presents
before Allah through the above phrases can be classified into four
kinds:

*The first kind* is that He may forgive us our sins, not punish us,
overlook the offences we have committed, and what we have perpetrated of
evil, “…to forgive me on this night and at this hour every offence I
have committed, every sin I have perpetrated, every ugly thing I have
concealed, every folly I have enacted -whether I have hidden or
announced it, whether I have concealed it or manifested it, every evil
act which You have commanded the Noble Writers to record, those whom You
have appointed to watch over what appears from me, and whom You have
made, along with my bodily organs, witness against me.”

In *the second kind*, the Imam (‘a) invokes Allah’s mercy in all affairs
and in every provision {from Him}. He prays to Allah to increase his
share of every good that He sends down, “{And I beseech You} to bestow
upon Me an abundant share of every good You send down, goodness You
unfold, provision You spread out…”

This prayer is all embracing such that it does not leave out anything of
Allah’s mercy.

*The third kind* which is the longest part of this supplication is the
one which attracts the attention of the Imam (‘a) most; that is, his
relation with Allah.

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) prays to Allah to make his time filled with His
remembrance and connected to His service, and to grant him seriousness
in his fear of Him, and to take him closer to Himself and give him a
place in His neighbourhood, “I beseech You… to make my times in the
night and the day inhabited by Your remembrance, and joined to Your
service…

Strengthen my bodily parts in Your service, fortify the instruments of
my soul in determination, and bestow upon me earnestness in my fear of
You and continuity in my being joined to Your service, so that I may
move easily toward You in the battlefields of the foremost, hurry to You
among the prominent, desire fervently Your proximity among the fervently
desirous, move nearer to You with the nearness of the sincere, fear You
with the fear of those who have certitude, and gather with the believers
in Your neighbourhood.”

However, it should not go unsaid here that both of the first and the
third types of wishes are peculiar to the relation of a servant with
Allah. The difference is in that the first type of wishes are negative
in nature, that is, a person pleads with Allah to forgive his sins and
overlook them; while the third type of wishes are positive, that is, his
only concern is to establish his relation with Allah on a firm ground of
sincerity, fear, love and yearning for Him.

In *the fourth kind* of wishes, the Imam (‘a) asks Allah to keep him
away from the deception of the tyrants, their trickery and mischief, to
return their trickery to themselves, and to protect him from their
oppression and harm, “O Allah, whosoever intends evil for me, desire
{it} for him, and whoever deceives me, deceive him... and spare me the
evil of my enemies from among the jinn and men.”

This was a quick summary of the structure of this holy supplication.
However, there is need for further explanantion and elaboration.

Four Means of Recourse in the Supplication of Kumayl
----------------------------------------------------

We will now talk in detail about the four means of recourse which have
appeared in this supplication, and which actually constitute the second
part of it, as mentioned earlier.

**The first means** is Allah’s previous goodness (*birr*), kindness
(*karam*), and grace (*fadl*) toward His servants. Should there be any
shortcoming and flaw in the action and endeavour of a person which keeps
him away from Allah, then Allah’s previous grace and mercy toward him
would intercede with Him on his behalf.

His previous grace and mercy toward His servants affirms His love
(*hubb*) for them. This ‘Divine love’ is a means of recourse that one
sends forth before seeking his needs from Allah, the Exalted. In case a
servant does not deserve Allah’s mercy, then His love toward him would
qualify him to attain His mercy and grace, and would place the servant
in the position of being answered. The Imam (‘a) says in this regard, “O
You who gave rise to my creation, to the remembrance of me, to the
nurture of me, to goodness toward me… Bestow upon me for the sake of
Your having given rise {to me} with generosity, and Your previous
goodness to me.”

He, the Exalted, began first with our creation (*khalq*), remembrance
(*dhikr*), nourishment (*tarbiyah*), and showed goodness (*birr*) toward
us before we even asked Him for that, and without we deserving this
goodness and remembrance from Him. If this is the case, then He is more
entitled to do good to us and honour us if we are to pray to Him and ask
from Him for all this. And if our wrongdoings and sins obstruct His
goodness and mercy, then His love for us would indeed mediate between
Him and us, and make us subject to His kindness and mercy.

*The second means* is our love for Him. In the first means, the Imam
(‘a) sought recourse to Allah with His love for us, and thereafter seeks
recourse to Him with our love for Him. And this is as effective a means
as His love for us. This is because the element of love has a great
value that nothing can equal it in the eyes of the beloved. However much
we may doubt in our love for something, we cannot doubt in our love for
Allah and His friends (*awliya’*). Love is a commodity which Allah, the
Exalted, never rejects.). Love is a commodity which Allah, the Exalted,
never rejects.

Parallel to this means is our profession of His Oneness, our humility
before Him, our prayers, our prostrations, our remembrance of Him, and
our testimony that He is our Lord (*rabb*) and we are His servants.
However, all these can be summarized in two things, our love for Him and
our profession of His Oneness (*tawhid*). And we are confident that
‘love’ and ‘Oneness’ are two commodities that would never be rejected by
Allah; the two things we can never doubt even for a moment.

Seeking recourse to Allah with this means, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says: “Can You
see Yourself tormenting me with Your fire after I have professed Your
Unity, and after Your knowledge my heart has embraced, Your remembrance
my tongue has constantly mentioned, Your love to which my mind has
clung? And after the sincerity of my confession and my supplication,
humble before Your Lordship?”

As a comment on these phrases, I recall a story. It is said that after
Allah granted him kingdom and power over Egypt, one day Prophet Yusuf
(‘a) was viewing the city from the balcony of his palace. With him in
the balcony was a righteous servant of Allah whom He had bestowed with
knowledge and light. A young man happened to pass under the balcony, so
that righteous man said to Prophet Yusuf (‘a), “Do you know this young
man?” “No”, he answered. The righteous man said, “This is the infant who
testified to your innocence the day you were accused by the King’s wife.
**‘*****A witness of her own household testified, ‘If his shirt is torn
from the front, she tells the truth and he lies. But if his shirt is
torn from behind, then she lies and he tells the truth.*****’**[^7]

That suckling infant who bore witness in the cradle in favour of you has
{now} grown up to become a young man; here he is.”

So Prophet Yusuf (‘a) called him and seated him beside him. He acclaimed
him and bestowed a robe of honour upon him, whilst the pious servant
looked in amazement at what Prophet Yusuf (‘a) was doing.

“Are you astonished at what I have done with this young man?” asked
Prophet Yusuf (‘a). The pious man said, “No. But this young man did not
do anything except that he testified to your innocence. And it was Allah
who made him to speak, so he does not deserve any credit for it. But in
spite of this, you gave him such respect and bestowed a robe of honour
upon him.”

The moral of the story is that if Prophet Yusuf (‘a) held that young man
in great esteem just because he testified to his innocence, then how can
Allah burn the face of a servant who used to prolong his prostrations
before Him, or burn the heart of a servant after it is filled with His
love, or burn a tongue which frequently remembered Him, testified to His
Oneness, and denied partners to Him.

In this regard, the Imam (‘a) says: “Would that I knew, my Master, my
Lord and my Protector, are You going to inflict Fire over faces that
fell down in prostration before Your greatness, or over tongues voicing
sincerely the profession of Your Oneness and thanking You in praise,
hearts acknowledging Your Divinity through verification, or over minds
encompassing knowledge of You until they have become humble, and upon
the bodily members speeding to the places of Your worship in obedience
and beckoning for Your forgiveness in submission. Such opinion is not
held of You! Nor has such been reported about You, thanks to Your grace,
O All-generous.”

*The third means* is our weakness to bear the torment, the delicacy of
our skin, the frailty of our bones, and our little endurance and
patience; for weakness (*da’f*) is an effective means to seek recourse
with to the Strong (*qawiyy*), as in every weakness there is something
which attracts the Strong, His affection and mercy.

There is some secret in ‘weakness’ that it always seeks the strong, as
there is something in ‘power’ that it always searches for the weak. Each
of them is in pursuit of the other. In its weakness, a suckling infant
searches for the affection of the mother, just as the the sympathy of
the mother seeks the weakness and feebleness of the baby.

In fact, there is no weapon more effective on the Strong than weeping
and {entertaining} hope in His mercy. This is the means and weapon of
the weak.

‘Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) says in this supplication, “O He whose name is a
remedy {for all illnesses}, and whose remembrance is a cure… have mercy
upon him whose only capital is hope, and whose only weapon is
lamentation.”

The hope that a needy entertains of the rich is his asset. The tears of
the weak before the strong are his weapon. Whoever does not understand
the norms (*sunan*) of Allah, the Exalted, in the universe with regard
to the relation of a weak to the strong and vice versa, cannot
comprehend the touching phrases in the speech of the Imam (‘a).

In another whispered prayer (*munajat*) of his, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says:
“You are the Strong and I the weak! Has anyone mercy on the weak but the
Strong?”

Now, in the supplication of *kumayl*, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is seeking recourse
to Allah with the weakness (*da’f*) of the servant, lack of his means,
quick fading of his patience and forebearance, thinness of his skin, and
the frailty of his bones. He says: “O my Lord, have mercy on the
weakness of my body, the thinness of my skin, and the frailty of my
bones…”

Our state in this world is such that if a thorn pricks us, or a burning
coal touches us, or a little illness befalls us, then it strips us of
sleep, comfort and tranquility. This is bearing in mind that these
afflictions are insignificant and their period is normally short, they
are meant for testing the mankind, and, above all, they are a mercy from
Allah. So what shall be our condition if we are to be driven to the
severe torment when it will be said to the angels of punishment, “Seize
him, and fetter him. Then put him into hell. Then, in a chain whose
length is seventy cubits, bind him.”[^8]

The Imam (‘a) says: “You know my weakness before a little of this
world’s tribulations and punishments, and before those ordeals which
befall its inhabitants, even though it is a tribulation and ordeal whose
stay is short, whose subsistence is but little, and whose period is but
fleeting. So how can I endure the tribulations of the next world and the
great ordeals that occur within it? For it is a tribulation whose period
is long, whose station endures, and whose sufferers are given no
respite, since it only occurs as a result of Your wrath, Your vengeance
and Your anger, and these cannot be withstood by the heavens and the
earth. O my Master, so what about me?! For I am Your weak, lowly, base,
wretched, and miserable slave. O Allah, my Lord, my Master, and my
Protector.”

*The fourth means* with which the Imam (‘a) seeks recourse to Allah in
this supplication is the desperate need (*idtirar*) of the servant to
Allah. This is an effective means to someone before whom one presents
his neediness, and does not find any other person to fulfill his wish
but him.

By ‘desperate need’, I mean a state in which a servant does not find
anyone else to fulfill his need apart from Allah, the Exalted, and does
not have any place of refuge except with Allah; the situation in which
one takes flight from Allah, but does not find any shelter to seek
protection with except Him, the Exalted. Such a scene is among the most
effective in attracting Allah’s mercy and clemency.

In her little world, a baby does not see any protector, supporter, or
one who can fulfill her needs other than her father and mother. Thus,
she develops intimacy with them, and finds with them -within her little
horizon- all her wishes, and what she needs of mercy, benevolence and
sympathy.

Subsequently, whenever something befalls her, or she becomes afflicted
by a calamity, or she becomes afraid of something, she immediately takes
refuge with her parents and finds security and mercy with them.

Moreover, if she has done something because of which she deserves to be
punished by her parents, and she fears them for herself, then she would
turn to her right and left looking for refuge. But when she finds no one
to give her protection, then she turns to her parents throwing herself
into their arms, asking for their help, at a time when they are
intending to punish her.

This scene is among those which, most of the time, brings about the
sympathy of her parents, and earns her their love and affection.

Now, in this prayer, the Imam (‘a) points to such a concept. Indeed he
had learned to take refuge with Allah in everything such that if any
affliction or calamity were to befall him, he would turn to Allah and
would not find anyone to fulfill his need but Him.

In such a situation, he also sees a servant of Allah to be subject to
the wrath of Allah and his punishment, the very One whose mercy and
protection he hopes for. Here, he finds no refuge but with Him, no where
to escape but to Him, and no protector other than Him.

So, while the angels of punishment drive him to the hell fire, he
screams to Him, the Exalted, seeking security from Him, taking refuge
from His anger with His mercy, asking and crying for His help, just like
a child who has been subject to the wrath of her parents and does not
flee from them except to them and finds no one to protect her except
them.

Now, let us listen to the Imam’s lucid and sensitive words which express
the spirit of *tawhid* and prayer, “So by Your Might, my Master and my
Protector, I swear sincerely, if You leave me with speech, I will lament
to You from the midst of the Fire’s inhabitants with the lamentation of
the hopeful, I will cry to You with the cry of those crying for help, I
will weep to You with the weeping of the bereft, and I will call on You:
where are You, O Sponsor of the believers, O Goal of the hopes of Your
knowers, O Aid of those who seek assistance, O Friend of the hearts of
the sincere, and O Lord of the worlds.”

This was the first aspect of the issue. The second aspect is similar to
the first one in being clear and evident with regard to the relation of
Allah with His servant. The first aspect can be summed up in the
relation of a servant with Allah, by his being in need of Him and taking
refuge with Him, whilst the other aspect of the issue is denoted by the
relation of a servant with Allah in that he seeks protection in His
security, asks for His help and cries for His mercy and grace whilst he
is exposed to the punishment of Allah.

Is it then possible that Allah, the Most Merciful of all merciful, hears
the cry for help of a servant whose ignorance and heedlessness has
driven him to the fire of hell, whilst he asks and laments for His help,
calls on Him with the tongue of those who profess His Unity and
beseeches Him for delivery from the Fire… but He leaves Him in the
torment to be burnt by its flames, encompassed by its groaning,
convulsed among its levels, and to be tortured by its keepers, while He,
the Exalted, is aware of the sincerity of his love for Him, his
profession of His Oneness, his taking refuge with Him, and his neediness
to Him?

Listen to these words, “Can You see Yourself -glory be to You O Allah,
and Your’s is the praise- hearing from within the Fire the voice of a
slave surrendered to You, imprisoned there because of his violations,
suffering the pangs of its torment because of his disobedience, and
confined within its levels because of his sin and crime, while he
laments before You with the lament of one hopeful of Your mercy, calls
upon You with the tongue of those who profess Your Oneness, and entreats
You by Your Lordship?

O my Protector, so how should he remain in the chastisement while he has
hope for Your previous clemency? Or how should the Fire cause him pain
while he expects Your bounty and mercy? Or how should its flames burn
him while You hear his voice and see his place? Or how should its
groaning encompass him while You know his weakness? Or how should he be
convulsed among its levels while You know his sincerity?

Or how should its keepers torture him while he calls out to You, “O
Lord”? Or how should he have hope of Your bounty in freeing him from it
while You abandon him within it? Far be it from You! That is not what is
expected of You, nor what is well-known of Your bounty, nor is it
similar to the goodness and kindness You have shown to those who
professed Your Oneness.”

[^1]: Qur’an, 17:57.

[^2]: Qur’an, 5:35.

[^3]: Qur’an, 35:10.

[^4]: Qur’an, 4:64.

[^5]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol.4, pg.1139, hadith no.8844.

[^6]: ‘Uddat ud-Da’i, pg.38.

[^7]: Qur’an, 12:26 27.

[^8]: Qur’an, 69:30 32.


