Divine Love in the Supplications of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
========================================================

The Relation with Allah
-----------------------

“Say, ‘If your fathers and your sons, your brethren, your spouses, and
your kinsfolk, the possessions that you have acquired, the business you
fear may suffer, and the dwellings you are fond of, are dearer to you
than Allah and His Apostle and to waging *jihad* in His way, then wait
until Allah issues His edict, and Allah does not guide the transgressing
lot.”[^1]

The correct form of relation (*‘alaqat*) with Allah, the Exalted,
develops as a result of the coming together of a number of harmonious
elements.

The Islamic sources reject the idea that the relation with Allah should
be established based on a single element only, such as fear, hope, love,
or humility. Rather they regard such a relation as one devoid of
equilibrium and harmony.

There is a wide range of elements that make up the correct form of
relation with Allah. Some of these have been mentioned in detail in the
verses of the Qur’an, the traditions and supplications.

Some of these elements are: hope in Allah (*raja’*), fear of Him
(*khawf*), pleading before Him (*tadarru’*), humility toward Him
(*khushu’*), lowliness before Him (*tadhallul*), love of him (*hubb*),
yearning for Him (*shawq*), intimacy with Him (*uns*), returning to Him
(*inabah*), dedication to Him (*tabattul*), pleading for His forgiveness
(*istighfar*), seeking protection from Him (*isti’adhah*), beseeching
His mercy (*istirham*), total absorption in Allah (*inqta’*), extolling
Him (*tamjid*), praising Him (*hamd*), craving for Him (*raghbah*),
obedience to Him (*ta’ah*), His servanthood (*‘ubudiyyah*), His
remembrance (*dhikr*), neediness to Him (*faqr*), and holding fast to
Him (*i‘tisam*).

Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says in a supplication, “O
Allah, I ask You to fill my heart with love of You, awe of You, belief
in You, faith in You, fear of You, and yearning toward You.”[^2]

A harmonious spectrum for establishing a relation with Allah is
constituted of these various elements mentioned above. Each of these
elements is to be considered a key to a door out of the doors of Allah’s
mercy and recognition (*ma‘rifah*). For instance, beseeching Him for His
mercy is the key to His mercy, as pleading for His forgiveness is the
key to His forgiveness.

Moreover, each one of these elements is, in itself, to be regarded as a
path leading toward Allah. Thus, one’s yearning for Him, love for Him
and intimacy with Him, is a path which leads one to Allah. Fear and awe
of Him is another path leading to Him. Humility toward Him (*khushu’*)
is yet a third path to Him. Entertaining hope in Him and invoking Him is
also another path arriving at Him.

Accordingly, one should make his way to Allah through different paths,
not confining himself to one single path. This is because each of the
above mentioned paths has its own kind of aroma, taste, perfection, and
fruition in one’s journey toward Allah which is not be found in other
paths.

As a result, Islam presents a pluralistic basis for the establishment of
relation with Allah, the Exalted. However, this is a very wide topic in
itself which we do not intend to discuss at the moment.

Love of Allah
-------------

The best of these elements, the most powerful, and the most efficient of
them in binding one to Allah and strengthening his relation with Him is
the ‘love of Allah’ (*hubb allah*). Among the different forms of
relation with Allah, there is no form more powerful and effective than
‘love’ in consolidating the relation of a servant with Allah.

A comparison between the elements which make up the relation with Allah
has appeared in a number of Islamic traditions. Some of them are as
follows:

1. It is narrated that Allah, the Exalted, revealed to Prophet Dawud
(‘a) saying, “O Dawud! My remembrance (*dhikr*) is for those who
remember Me (*dhakirin*), My paradise is for the obedient ones
(*muti’in*), My love (*hubb*) is for those who yearn for Me
(*mushtaqin*); while I am specifically for the lovers (*muhibbin*).”[^3]

2. Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “Love is better than fear (*khawf*).”[^4]

3. Muhammad bin Ya’qub al-Kulayni reports from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a),
“There are three types of worshippers (*‘ubbad*); a people who worship
Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, out of fear; this is the worship of
the slaves. A people who worship Allah, the Blessed, the Exalted, for
reward; this is the worship of the merchants. And a people who worship
Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, out of love; this is the worship of
the free people, and it is the best kind of worship (*‘ibadah*).”[^5]

4. Al-Kulayni also narrates from Holy Prophet (S) , “The best of the
people is he who is passionately in love with worship (*‘ibadah*),
embraces it, loves it from his heart, applies his body to it and attends
to it, such that he is not bothered in which condition he is in this
world, in difficulty or in ease.”[^6]

5. Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “The secret conversation of those who have
attained thorough recognition of Allah (*‘arifin*) revolves round three
principles: fear (*khawf*), hope (*raja’*), and love (*hubb*). Fear is
the subsidiary of knowledge (*‘ilm*), hope is a subsidiary of certainty
(*yaqin*), and love is a subsidiary of recognition (*ma’rifah*). The
sign of fear is taking flight (*harab*) {from the anger of Allah}; the
sign of hope is seeking (*talab*); and the sign of love is to give
preference to the Beloved over everything other than Him.

Thus, when knowledge is actualized in the breast (*sadr*), he would have
fear (*khawf*); and when the fear gets firm, he would take flight
(*harab*); and if he takes flight, he would attain salvation (*najat*);
and when the light of certainty shines on his heart, he would witness
the grace (*fadl*), and when he is able to see the grace, he would
become hopeful; and when he experiences the sweetness of {the state of}
hope, he would seek (*talaba*); and if he succeeds in seeking, he would
find (*wajada*).

When the light of recognition (*ma‘rifah*) is disclosed (*tajalla*) to
the heart (*fu’ad*), the breeze of love is stirred up (*haja*); and when
the breeze of love is stirred up, he would become intimate with the
patronage (*dilal*) of the Beloved, and prefer him over everything other
than Him, and carry out His orders.

The parable of these three principles is that of the holy Sanctuary
(*haram*), the sacred Mosque (*al-masjid*), and the *ka‘bah*; whoever
enters the *haram* would be safe from the creatures; and whoever enters
the *masjid* his limbs would be guarded from being employed by him in
sinning; and whoever enters the *ka‘bah* his heart would be protected
from being occupied by him with the remembrance of other than
Allah.”[^7]

6. The Holy Prophet (S) is related to have said, “Prophet Shu’ayb (‘a)
wept out of love of Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, until he lost
his sight…, so Allah revealed onto him saying, ‘O Shu‘ayb! If this was
out of fear of the Fire, then I have protected you from it; and if it
was out of eagerness for the Heaven, then I have permitted you {to enter
it}.’ So he said, ‘O Allah, O my Master, You are aware that I did not
weep out of fear of Your fire, nor out of eagerness for Your heaven, but
{because} Your love has engaged my heart such that I cannot endure {it}
until I see You.’ So Allah, the Majestic, revealed to him saying, ‘If
this is the case, then because of this I will make the one who spoke to
Me (*kalimi*), Musa bin ‘Imran, to be at your service.”[^8]

7. A phrase in the book of Prophet Idris (‘a) read, “Blessed are a
people who worshipped Me out of love, and took Me as {their} lord and
nourisher, and kept awake at night and persisted during daytime in
acquiring My pleasure without fear or eagerness, nor out of fear of the
Fire or aspiration of the Heaven, but due to {their} sincere love, firm
resolution, and detachment from all other Me.”[^9]

Imam al-Husayn (‘a) says in the supplication of *‘arafah*, “Blind is the
eye which does not see You watchful over itself, and the bargain of a
servant for whom You have not allotted a share from Your love is in
loss.”[^10]

Belief and Love
---------------

It has appeared in the Islamic sources that belief is nothing but love.
Imam al-Baqir (‘a) says: “Belief (*Iman*) is love (*hubb*) and hatred
(*bughd*).”[^11]

Fudayl bin Yasar reports, “I asked Abu ‘Abdillah {as-Sadiq} about love
and hatred whether they are part of belief. He replied, ‘And is *Iman*
other than love and hatred?’”[^12]

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) has also said, “Is religion (*din*) other than love?
Allah, the All-mighty, the Majestic, says: ***‘Say, ‘If you love Allah,
then follow me; Allah will love you.***’[^13]”[^14]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said, “Religion is the love, and
love is the religion.”[^15]

The Pleasure of Love
--------------------

If worship is out of love, eagerness and yearning, then there is no
pleasure and sweetness above it. Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a), who is among
those who had tasted the sweetness of love and remembrance of Allah,
says: “O Allah… how pleasant is the taste of Your love, and how sweet is
the drink of Your proximity.”[^16]

Indeed such a sweetness and pleasure dwells in the hearts of the friends
(*awliya’*) of Allah. It is not something which occurs to them at times
and goes away at other times. When the sweetness of the love of Allah
settles in the heart of a person, then such a heart is the one inhabited
by the love of Allah. And Allah shall never punish a heart inhabited by
His love and in which the sweetness of His love has settled.

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says: “O Allah, by Your might and glory, I have loved You
with a love whose sweetness has settled in my heart. And the hearts of
those who confess Your Oneness cannot believe that You hate Your
lovers.”[^17]

Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a) says regarding this steady and established
state of the Divine love, “By Your might, O my Master, even if You drive
me away, I will not leave Your door, and I will not cease to compliment
You, because of what I have come to know of Your generosity and
kindness.”[^18]

This is one of the most eloquent expressions describing the profundity
of love and its abiding in the heart, such that it would not disappear
from it or change even if his Master were to drive him away and distance
him from His proximity. And far it is from Him that He should do that
with a servant in whose heart His love has dwelt.

When one experiences the taste of the love of Allah, and the pleasure of
intimacy with Him, he would not prefer anything over Him. Imam Zayn
al-’Abidin (‘a), the leader of the lovers, says: “O Allah, who can have
tasted the sweetness of Your love, then wanted another in place of You?
And who can have become intimate with Your nearness, then sought removal
from You?”[^19]

The reason behind the difference of the people in relation to their
goals and views about life is that they are deprived of the pleasure of
the love of Allah. Otherwise those who have experienced such a pleasure
do not seek anything else in life after this.

In the supplication of *‘arafah*, Imam Husayn bin ‘Ali (‘a) says: “What
has he found one who has lost You? And what has he lost one who has
found You?”[^20]

Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) seeks forgiveness from Allah for every
pleasure other than the pleasure of the love of Allah, and for every
occupation other than the remembrance of Allah, and from every happiness
other than that of the proximity to Allah; not because Allah has
prohibited His servants from all this, rather because of the fact that
all this is the result of the distraction of one’s heart from Allah, and
of its occupation with other than His remembrance even for a short time;
whereas a heart which has experienced the pleasure of the love of Allah
is never distracted from Him.

In fact, the dynamic force behind every action and endeavour in the life
of the friends of Allah is the love of Allah, the Exalted, His
remembrance and obedience. Anything beside this is seen as diversion
from Allah. Hence, Imam as-Sajjad (‘a) seeks Allah’s forgiveness for all
this and says: “I pray forgiveness from You for every pleasure other
than that of Your remembrance, and for every ease other than that of
intimacy with You, and for every happiness other than that of proximity
to You, and for every occupation other than obeying You.”[^21]

Love Compensates the Deficiency of the Deed
-------------------------------------------

Love is never dissociated from action (*‘amal*). The sign of he who has
fallen in love is action, activity and endeavour. However, on the other
hand, love compensates the inability of a deed and mediates for the
performer of that deed, as love is an effective intercessor before
Allah, the Exalted.

In his lofty supplication at dawn famously known as the supplication of
*abu hamzah ath-thumali*, Imam al-Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says: “My
recognition, O my Master, is that which guides me to You, and my love is
my intercessor to You, and I trust my evidence since You have guided me
{to it}, and I am comfortable with my intercessor since You will accept
it.”[^22]

In fact, the best of evidences (*dalil*) and intercessors (*shafi’*) are
recognition (*ma’rifah*) and love (*hubb*). Accordingly, one whose
evidence to Allah is *ma‘rifah* shall never be misguided, and he whose
intercessor with Allah is *hubb* shall never fail to reach the Divine
presence.

Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn, (‘a) says: “O Allah, You are indeed aware that
though my obedience to you has not been persistent in practice, but it
has endured in love and determination.”

These words are in fact a subtle indication to the fact that one’s
obedience (*ta’ah*) to Allah may at times fall short of the desired
standard, and, as a result, it might not be possible for him to rely
upon his obedience of Allah. But that in which the lovers (*muhibbin*)
never entertain doubt is their certainty (*yaqin*) in that they do love
Allah, the Exalted, and their determination (*‘azm*) on moving on the
path of love and obedience.

And one who has experienced the love of Allah within himself would never
doubt in this fact; for it is possible that a servant may show
negligence in obeying Allah practically, as sometimes he may embark on
something which is disliked by Allah; but that which is not imaginable,
even while he is indulged in the wrongdoing, is his dislike for Allah’s
obedience and his love for sinning.

In short, the bodily parts may slip and fall into sins, as *shaitan* and
one’s own lowly desires (*hawa*) may gradually entice them into it; or
they may fall short of the desired degree of obedience. But what is
certain is that nothing other than the love of Allah, the love of
obeying Him, and the abhorrence of disobedience to Him, enters the heart
of the righteous ones (*salihin*).

The above point is brilliantly reflected in the following phrase of a
supplication, “O Allah, I love obeying You even though I have fallen
short of it; and I dislike disobeying You even though I have embarked on
it; so be gracious to me in granting me the Heaven.”[^23]

And this is in fact the split between the bodily instruments (*jawarih*)
and the instruments of the soul (*jawanih*). The bodily parts sometimes
fail to accompany the instruments of the heart, but the *jawanih* of the
righteous ones solely belong to Allah and always succumb to the love of
Allah.

However, if the heart (*qalb*) attains a higher state of purity and
sincerity, then the bodily parts would have no way but to obey and
submit to it. Rather, in such a case, the bodily instruments would abide
with what the instruments of the soul command them and want from them.
At this point, the split between the *jawarih* and the *jawanih* shall
disappear as a result of the sincerity the heart has attained.

Love of Allah Protects Man from the Punishment
----------------------------------------------

If sins cause a person to fall in the eyes of Allah and expose him to
His punishment, the love of Allah protects one from His chastisement.

Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says in a whispered prayer
(*munajat*), “O Allah, my sins have indeed frightened me, but my love of
You has given me protection.”[^24]

Levels of Love
--------------

The hearts of people are at different levels and stages in relation to
the love of Allah. Among the instances of love is a love which is so
superficial and weak that it remains unnoticed even by the lover
himself. And yet among its instances is the love which fills the heart
of a person such that it does not leave any empty space in it for other
things, things which people take as amusement and which occupy their
time from the remembrance of Allah.

There is another level of love in which one is not satisfied with the
remembrance of Allah and with standing before Him; the thirst of his
heart is not quenched by remembering Him, invoking Him, praying to Him,
and performing good deeds for His sake, however long his standing and
prayer before Him might be.

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says in a supplication, “My Master, I am hungry of
Your love such that I can never feel satiated; and I am thirsty of Your
love such that it cannot be quenched. Oh my yearning for He who sees me
while I am unable to see Him.”

In the whispered prayer of *al-muftaqirin* (the utterly poor), Imam Zayn
al-’Abidin (‘a) says: “Nothing will… cool my burning thirst but reaching
You, quench my ardour but meeting You, damp my yearning but gazing upon
Your face.”[^25]

Among the other signs of the love of Allah is passionate love (*walah*)
and burning thirst (*hiyam*) for Him. A phrase in the *Ziyarat* of
*aminullah* reads, “O Allah, indeed the hearts of those who surrender to
You are full of passionate love.”

In his *munajat* of *adh-dhakirin* (the rememberers), Imam Zayn
al-’Abidin (‘a) says: “O Allah, love-mad hearts are enraptured by You…
hearts find no serenity except in remembering You, souls find no rest
except in seeing You.”[^26]

This is, in fact, the characteristic of the love-mad hearts and those
burning in Allah’s love that they do not find rest and security except
in Allah’s remembrance.

And among the more beautiful and more profound kind of love is what we
find in the words of Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (‘a) in the
supplication of *kumayl*. He says: “…Then suppose, O Allah, my Master,
my Protector and my Lord, that I am able to endure Your chastisement,
how can I endure *separation from You*? And suppose that I am able to
endure the heat of Your Fire, how can I endure not gazing upon Your
generosity? Or how can I dwell in the Fire while my hope is Your
pardon?”

This expression is among the most brilliant gestures of love and the
most sincere of it; assume that a servant could endure the punishment of
the Fire of his Master, how can he bear His separation and anger? A
lover may endure the punishment of his Master, but he cannot endure His
anger and outrage. As he might bear the fire of hell which is the most
severe of the punishments, but he cannot bear separation from Him. And
how can a servant be at rest amidst the fire of hell while he hopes that
his Master would turn to him favourably and rescue him from it?

Of the magnificent picture presented in this lofty supplication is that
‘love’ and ‘hope’ are two things which never part the heart of the
servant of Allah, even at the time when he is being driven into the fire
of hell as a result of the wrath of Allah.

A servant might love his Master while he is drowned amidst His bounties
and grace. This is indeed a form of love. But a love above which there
is no love is the one in which love and hope do not part the heart of a
servant even when he is admitted to the punishment of his Master.

Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says in the supplication of
*abu hamzah ath-thumali*, “By Your might, O my Master, even if You were
to drive me away, I would not leave Your door, and I would not cease to
compliment You, because of what I have come to know of Your generosity
and the vastness of Your mercy. To whom can a servant go apart from his
Master? Whom can a creature seek refuge with other than his Creator?

O Allah, even if You tied me with the chains {of hell}, and deprived me
from among the people {present on that day} Your flowing streams {of
favours}, and pointed out my scandals to the eyes of Your servants, and
ordered me to the Fire, and separated me from the righteous ones,
{still} I would not lose hope in You, nor would I dismiss my
anticipation of Your pardon, nor would Your love depart from my heart…”

This is the most pure and sincere form of love, hope and aspiration
which does not depart from the heart of the servant of Allah even if he
is tied in chains, deprived of the favours of Allah, and his misdeeds
disclosed by Him before the people.

Now let us continue to study the remarkable forms of love and hope
described by Imam ‘Ali (‘a) in the supplication of *Kumayl*:  
 “By Your might, O my Master and Protector, I swear sincerely that if
You were to leave me with speech, I would lament before You, from the
midst of inhabitants of the Fire, with the lamentation of the hopeful; I
would cry to You with the cry of those crying for help; I would weep
before You with the weeping of the bereft; I would call upon You: ‘Where
are You, O Sponsor of the believers, O Goal of the hopes of Your
knowers, O Aid of those who seek assistance, O Friend of the hearts of
the sincere, and O Lord of the worlds.

Tell me -glory be to You O Allah, and Your’s is the praise, can You hear
from the Fire the voice of a slave imprisoned in it because of his
disobedience, suffering the pangs of its torment because of his
wrongdoings, and confined within its levels because of his sin and
crime, while he {still} laments before You with the lament of one
hopeful of Your mercy, calls upon You with the tongue of those who
profess Your Oneness, and entreats You by Your Lordship?

O my Master, so how could he remain in the punishment while he has hope
for Your previous clemency? Or how could the Fire cause him pain while
he expects Your bounty and mercy? Or how could its flames burn him while
You hear his voice and see his place? Or how could its groaning
encompass him while You know his weakness? Or how could he be convulsed
among its levels while You know his sincerity? Or how could its keepers
torture him while he calls out to You: O Lord? Or how could he have hope
of Your grace in freeing him from it while You abandon him in it?

Far it be from You! That is not what is expected of You, nor what is
well-known of Your grace, nor is it similar to the goodness and kindness
You have shown to those who have professed Your Oneness. So I declare
with certainty that were it not for what You have decreed about
punishing Your deniers, and what You have decided about making those who
stubbornly resist You abide {in the Fire} forever, You would have made
the Fire, all of it, cool and safe, and no one would have had a place
and abode in it.”

Once a respected friend of mine told me that heroism and bravery stem
from the very person of ‘Ali (‘a), such that they do not part him even
during prayers before the Lord of the worlds. Here he is, imagining in
the supplication *kumayl* that the Fire has embraced a sinful servant
and surrounded him from all sides, still he does not stay quiet and
submit to the chastisement, as is the case with he who has been
encircled by the punishment and surrounded by its keepers. Rather, he
laments, cries out, shouts and calls out.

Do not you see how he describes this situation while invoking Allah? “By
Your might, O my Master and Protector, I swear sincerely that if You
were to leave me with speech, I would lament before You, from the midst
of inhabitants of the Fire, with the lamentation of the hopeful; I would
cry to You with the cry of those crying for help; I would weep before
You with the weeping of the bereft; I would call upon You: ‘Where are
You, O Sponsor of the believers…”

I said to him that you have not been able to get the right taste of the
speech of ‘Ali (‘a); for if he was intending to say what you have
understood, then he would not have said in the beginning of this part of
his speech “If You leave me with speech...” As for me, I regard the
inner state of ‘Ali (‘a) -while he utters these words before Allah- as
that of a small child who has not known a place of refuge and protection
in this world but the affectionate, kindness, love, and the compassion
of her mother; such that whenever something befalls her or harms her,
she would immediately seek refuge with her mother and call for her help.

Likewise, if she were to make a mistake that would expose her to her
punishment, then she would look around herself for a shelter. And if she
could not find any place of refuge other than her mother, she would take
shelter in her and ask for her help, in the same manner as she would do
in the case when a stranger intends to harm her.

This is precisely the state of ‘Ali (‘a) in this supplication. He (‘a)
had learned with his great heart and the vast horizons of his insight to
take refuge with Allah, the Exalted, and call Him for help; as he (‘a)
did not know anyone other than Him as a refuge and shelter.

He, the Glorious, is his only shelter and refuge, as he does not know
anyone other than Him. Accordingly, when he imagines that Allah has
surrounded him with His punishment, he does not hesitate, even for a
moment, to take refuge and shelter with Him, and ask for His help and
aid, as he used to do every time. Is not He, the Glorious, his only
refuge and shelter? If He is, then why should he be hesitant this time
to ask for His help?!

Describing this point, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a) says
in the *munajat* of *at-Ta’ibin* (the repenters), “O Allah… if You cast
me out from Your door, in whom shall I take shelter? If You repel me
from Your side, in whom shall I seek refuge?...O Allah, does an escaped
slave return but to his Master? Or does anyone other than Him protect
him from His anger?”[^27]

Also in the supplication of *abu hamzah ath-thumali*, he (‘a) says: “And
O my Master, I seek refuge with Your grace, and I escape from You to
You.”[^28] In another place he says: “To whom shall a servant go beside
his Master? And with whom other than his Creator shall a creature take
refuge?”[^29]

“*Escaping from Allah to Allah*” is among the subtle meanings and
concepts in the ‘relation’ of a servant with Allah, as the sensation
described by ‘Ali (‘a) in the relation of a servant with Allah is among
the most subtle and sincere of the ‘feelings’ of love and hope in the
hearts of the lovers.

What is worthy of note here is that in this phrase of the supplication,
‘Ali (‘a) is not employing a poetic language by taking help of the
imagination (*khiyal*) to complete the painting of this beautiful
picture in this supplication. Rather, he is absolutely sincere in
expressing before Allah his feelings and sensations. And it is for this
very reason that immediately after bringing in the concept of the
‘servant’s call for help to his Lord’ he follows it with that of
‘Allah’s help to His servant’.

Based on what we know of Allah’s mercy and grace, it is not possible for
Him to disappoint such a sincere and pure feeling of love and hope of
the servant, rejecting his ‘love’ for Him and dashing his ‘hope’ in Him.
With regard to this, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says: “…How could he remain in the
punishment while he has hope for Your previous clemency?

Or how could the Fire cause him pain while he expects Your bounty and
mercy? Or how could its flames burn him while You hear his voice and see
his place? Or how could its groaning encompass him while You know his
weakness? Or how could he be convulsed among its levels while You know
his sincerity? Or how could its keepers torture him while he calls out
to You ‘O Lord’?”

Is it then possible that the keepers of the hell fire would drive him to
the Fire and torture him in it, while he calls out ‘O Lord’ and seeks
shelter in Him with the tongue of those who profess His Oneness? Nay!
What has preceded in our lives of His clemency and grace sharply and
absolutely negates this.

Interestingly, the Imam (‘a) argues through the clemency of Allah for
His clemency, and through His grace for His grace, “…while he has hope
for Your previous clemency?” The Imam (‘a) is decisive regarding this
side of the issue, that is, the ‘decsending part’ in the relation of
Allah with His servant, as he is equally decisive and assertive
regarding the other side of the issue, that is, the ‘ascending part’ in
the relation of a servant with Allah.

Thus, as he was decisive in the fact that the hearts which have tasted
the sweetness of His love and hope would never part with it, and would
never seek another love and hope in place of the love of Allah and hope
in Him, even if the punishment of Allah were to encircle these hearts;
similarly, he is decisive in the fact that Allah cannot disappoint such
a true love and hope which dwells in the hearts of the truthful ones
(*as-Sadiqin*).

Just contemplate the determination, decisiveness, and clarity in the
speech of ‘Ali (‘a), “Far it be from You! That is not what is expected
of You, nor what is well-known of Your grace, nor is it similar to the
goodness and kindness You have shown to those who have professed Your
Oneness.

So I declare with certainty that were it not for what You have decreed
about punishing Your deniers, and what You have decided about making
those who stubbornly resist You abide {in the Fire} forever, You would
have made the Fire, all of it, cool and safe, and no one would have had
a place and abode in it.”

We find this determination and decisiveness in other words of ‘Ali (‘a)
also when he talks about the ascending order of the relation, that is,
the relation of the servant with his Master, as well as the descending
order of the relation, that is, the relation of the Master with His
servant.

In his famous whispered prayer, he addresses Allah, the Exalted, and
says: “O Allah, by Your might and majesty, I have indeed loved You with
a love whose sweetness has settled in my heart. And the hearts of those
who confess Your Oneness cannot believe that You hate Your lovers.”[^30]

In the *munajat* of *al-kha’ifin*, Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a) says: “O
Allah, a soul which You have exalted by its professing Your unity, how
will You humiliate it with the humiliation of Your separation; and a
heart which is inhibited by Your love, how will You burn it in the heat
of Your fire?”[^31]

In his prayer at dawn during the holy month of Ramadan, famously known
as the supplication *abu hamzah ath-thumali*, Imam as-Sajjad (‘a) says:
“Would You, O Allah, ever disappoint our thoughts or let down our hopes?
Nay, never, O Most Generous, this is not how we think about You, nor is
it what we expect from You. O Allah, we have a greater and ever lasting
hope in You, we have a great hope in You…”

The State of Yearning and Intimacy in Love
------------------------------------------

Love manifests itself in two ways; at times, it manifests itself in form
of ‘yearning’ (*shawq*), and at other times, in form of ‘intimacy’
(*uns*). Both states are a description of ‘love’, with the difference
that the state of *shawq* occurs to the lover when he is away from the
beloved, while the state of *uns* occurs to him when he is in the
presence of the beloved.

The above two states occur to the heart of a person in relation to
Allah, the Exalted. This is because Allah has two kinds of disclosure
(*tajalli*). Sometimes He discloses Himself for a person from a
distance, and at times He does so from a close up:

***“…who is far and thus cannot be seen, but is close and thus witnesses
secret conversations…”***[^32]

If Allah discloses Himself to a person from a distance, the state of
‘yearning’ occurs to him; and if He discloses Himself to him from close
up such that he feels himself in the presence of his Master, as the
Qur’an says:

***“And He is with you wherever you may be”***[^33]***,***

***“And We are nearer to him than his jugular vein”***[^34]***,***

***“When My servants ask You about Me, {tell them that} I am indeed
nearmost”***[^35]***,***

then the state of ‘intimacy’ occurs to him.

In the supplication of *al-iftitah*, which has reached us from Imam
al-Hujjah al-Mahdi (‘aj), there has appeared an accurate portrayal of
the above two states, “All praise is due to Allah whose curtains can
never be opened, and whose doors can never be locked…”

No doubt the one whose curtains can never be opened is the very one
whose door can never be closed. But it makes great difference in
understanding Allah through this perception or that.

Moreover, there are two kinds of veil (*hijab*), the veil of darkness,
and the veil of light. Some of the time, what prevents one from seeing
through is pitch dark and the intensity of the darkness. This is the
veil of darkness (*hijab al-zulmah*).

But at other times, what stops one from seeing through is the intensity
of light and its brilliance, as one cannot see the sun, not because of a
barrier, but due to the intensity of its brilliance. This is the veil of
light (*hijab an-nur*).

The veils of darkness in the relation of man with Allah are love of this
world (*hubb ad-dunya*), committing sins, and that which sullies the
heart; whilst the veil of light within this relation is something
different. This is the veil which, according to Imam al-Hujjah (‘aj) in
the supplication of *al-iftitah*, can never be opened.

It is this veil which stirs up yearning (*shawq*) and longing (*lahfah*)
in the hearts of the servants of Allah. Speaking of this yearning for
Allah, Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says in the
whispered prayer of *al-muridin* (the devotees), “O Allah, nothing will
cool my burning thirst but reaching You, quench my ardour but meeting
You, damp my yearning but gazing upon Your face, settle my settling
place without closeness to You, allay my worry but Your repose, cure my
illness but Your medicine, eliminate my grief but Your nearness, heal my
wound but Your forgiveness, remove the rust on my heart but Your pardon…

O utmost Hope of the hopers, O ultimate demand of the askers, O Highest
desire of the desirers, O patron of the righteous, O Security of the
fearful, O Responder to the supplication of the distressed, O Storehouse
of the destitute, O Treasure of the pitiful…”[^36]

In contrast to this disclosure, there is another type of disclosure,
that is the disclosure of Allah to His servants without closing a door
between them and Him, such that He listens to their secret prayer while
He is nearer to them than their jugular vein, He intervenes between a
man and his heart, and nothing of what enters into their hearts is
concealed from Him.

Here it is that a servant feels that he is in the presence of his
Master, and fears going against His commands and disobeying Him,
develops intimacy with His remembrance, and finds tranquility in
invoking Him and whispering to Him, prolongs His remembrance, secret
prayer to Him, and standing before Him.

In a Divine Narration (*hadith al-qudsi),* Allah, the Exalted, says to
some of His messengers, describing their prayer to Him in the darkness
of the night while people are asleep, “Had you only seen them praying to
Me in the darkness while I have become incarnate before their eyes,
addressing Me while I am far above to be seen, and talking to Me while I
cannot be {physically} present.”[^37]

As a result, a servant would not get wearied of standing before Allah,
nor would he feel the passing of time. Have you not seen a man in the
presence of a beloved whom he is fond of, does he get tired or perceive
the passing of the time? Then what would be the case if a person feels
that he is in the presence of Allah, hearing His speech and seeing Him,
while He is with him, “And He is with you wherever you may be.”[^38]
Thus, he would attain tranquility and rest only in the remembrance of
Allah, “The hearts find rest in Allah’s remembrance.”[^39]

Imam al-Mahdi (‘aj) says in the supplication of *al-iftitah*, “So I
began to call You trustingly, and ask You familiarly, neither fearing
nor scared, pointing out to You that because of which I turned toward
You.”

No doubt that this state of intimacy with Allah, finding rest with Him,
feeling safe under His shelter, is a state which springs forth from the
feeling that one is in the presence, proximity and company of Allah, the
Exalted. This is the best of the states a servant could ever be in
before Allah. However, this state does not represent everything as far
as the relation of man with Allah is concerned; rather the state of
intimacy with Allah must be accompanied by the state of *shawq*
(yearning) so that it may reach completion, be balanced and
well-coordinated.

These two states are distinct in the worship (*‘ibadah*) of the friends
of Allah and the righteous ones, as they are distinct in their relation
with Him. Thus, some of the time the attribute of *shawq* and longing
(*lahfah*) for Allah is dominant over their worship and relation with
Him; while at other times the attribute of intimacy (*uns*) and rest
(*sukun*) becomes dominant over their worship, remembrance, and relation
with Allah. And sometimes both attributes may dominate their worship,
which is in fact the best and the healthiest of states, and the nearmost
to the state of equilibrium and harmony in the relation with Allah.

Hammad bin Habib al-’Attar al-Kufi says: “We came out as pilgrims, and
we left Zubalah at night. We were struck with a dark sandy storm as a
result of which the caravan got dispersed. I lost my way in that desert
and land until I reached an uninhabited valley. When night fell, I took
shelter in an ordinary tree. When it got completely dark, I suddenly saw
a young man coming, wearing white tattered garment, with fragrance of
musk emanating from him.

So I said to myself, ‘This is one of Allah’s friends.’ Whenever he
sensed any movement from me, I feared that he would go away, thus
stopping him from a lot that he intended to do. So I hid myself as much
as I could. He came near to the place and prepared himself for prayers.
Then he stood up praying while he said, ‘O He who has taken everything
under His control, and who has conquered everything by His power; make
the joy of turning toward You enter my heart, and admit me to the domain
of those who obey You…’ Then he began to offer prayers.

In the final hours of the night, he stood up and said, ‘O He whom the
seekers had aspired and found Him to be {their} guide, and the fearful
sought refuge in and found Him to be full of grace, and the worshippers
took shelter in Him and found Him to be the bestower {of favours}. When
did he who erected his body for other than You find ease? And when has
he become happy one who aspired other than You in intention? O Allah,
the darkness is disappearing while I have not been able to accomplish
even a little of Your service, and my whispering to You has been but
inconsiderable. Send {Your} blessings on Muhammad and his Progeny, and
do to me what is worthy of You out of the two things[^40], O Most
Merciful of the merciful.’”

Hammad says: “I feared that his person may escape me and his trace may
remain hidden to me, so I clinged to him and said to him, ‘By him who
has got you rid of the weariness and has bestowed upon you intent
yearning and the pleasure of desire (*raghbah*)… who are you?’ He said,
‘Since you have sworn, I am ‘Ali bin al-Husayn bin ‘Ali bin Abi
Talib.’”[^41]

Al-Asma’i says: “One night I was circumambulating the *ka’bah* when I
suddenly saw a handsome young man, clinging to the cover of the *ka’bah*
saying, ‘The eyes have slept; the stars have risen, and You are the
Sovereign, the Living, and the Self-subsistent. The kings have closed
their doors and kept guards over them, while Your door is open for the
petitioners. I have come to You so that You may look at me with Your
Mercy, O Most Merciful of the merciful.’ Then he began reciting the
following verses:

*O He who answers the distressed in the darkness, O He who removes
adversity and affliction during sickness,*  
*Your visitors around the House have all slept, And You alone, O
Self-subsistent, have not slept,*  
*I call upon You, O my Lord, with a calling You have ordered, Have mercy
on my lamentation for the sake of the House and the haram,*  
*If he who has committed excesses against his own soul should not hope
for Your pardon, Then who else will bestow his bounties upon the
sinfuls?*’”

Al-Asma’i says: “I followed him in his tracks and found him to be Zayn
al-’Abidin (‘a).”[^42]

Tawus al-Faqih narrates:  
 “I saw him worshipping and circumambulating from the evening until
dawn. When he saw that there was no one, he looked at the heavens and
said, ‘O Allah, the stars of Your heavens have fallen in, and the eyes
of Your servants have slept, and Your doors are open for the
petitioners. I have come to You so that You may forgive me, and have
mercy upon me, and show me the countenance of my grandfather Muhammad
(S) in the courtyard of the Day of Judgement.’

Then he wept and said, ‘By Your might and majesty, I did not intend to
violate Your {commands} by committing sins, and I did not disobey You
when I disobeyed out of doubt in You, nor out of ignorance of Your
chastisement, nor exposing myself to Your punishment, but my soul
prompted me, and Your protective veil which made me live in ease
assisted me over that; and now from Your retribution who will rescue me?

And to whose rope do I hold on fast if You were to cut off Your rope
from me? How disgracing it would be to stand before You tomorrow, when
it would be said to those with light weight, ‘Go through’, and to those
burdened {with sins}, ‘Stop’. Will I pass with those whose weight is
light, or will I have to stop with those burdened? Woe unto me, my sins
increased as I lived longer, but I did not repent; has not the time come
for me that I should feel ashamed of my Lord?’

Then he wept and began reciting:  
*Shall You burn me with the Fire -O the Highest Desire, Then what
happened to my hope and what happened to my love {of You}?*  
*I have come to You with disgracing and miserable deeds, As there is not
amidst the creatures one who has committed the like of my crime.*

Then again he wept and said, ‘Immaculate are You, You are disobeyed as
if You do not see, and You are so clement that as if You are not being
disobeyed, You display Your love for Your creation by bestowing upon
them Your favours as if You were in need of them, while You, O my
Master, have no need of them.’ Then he fell to the ground prostrating.”

Tawus says: “I went near him, held his head and put it on my lap. Then I
wept to the extent that my tears flowed over his cheeks, so he sat
upright and said, ‘Who is it who has distracted me from the remembrance
of my Lord?’ I said, ‘It is me, Tawus. O son of the Prophet of Allah,
what is all this fear and fright? Are we required to do the like of
this, as we are disobedient and sinful? Your father is Husayn bin ‘Ali,
your mother is Fatimah al-Zahra’, and your grandfather is the Messenger
of Allah (S) .’

So he turned toward me and said, ‘Never, never, O Tawus! Stop talking
about my father and my mother and my grandfather. Allah has created the
Heaven for he who obeys Him and performs good deeds, even if he were to
be a slave from Abyssinia. And He has created the Fire for he who
disobeys Him, even if he were from the Quraysh.

Have you not heard the word {of Allah,} the Exalted, ***“And when the
trumpet is blown, there will be no ties between them on the day, nor
will they ask {about} each other.”***[^43] By Allah, nothing is going to
benefit you tomorrow except that which you have sent ahead of the good
deeds.’”[^44]

Habbah al-’Arani reports:  
 “While Nawf and I were sleeping in the courtyard of the castle, we
suddenly found ourselves with Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) in the last quarter
of the night. He had put his hand on the wall looking confused, while he
recited, “*Indeed in the creation the heavens and the earth…*”

Then he continued to recite these verses and he walked by as if he had
lost his senses. He said, ‘Are you asleep, O Habbah, or are you awake?’
I said, ‘I am awake; if you do all this then what about us?!’ So he
lowered his gaze and wept, and thereafter he said to me, ‘O Habbah,
indeed Allah has a stand (*mawqif*), and we have a stand before Him; so
nothing of our deeds is hidden from Him. O Habbat, indeed Allah is
nearer to you and me than the jugular vein. O Habbah, nothing can hide
you and me from Allah.’ Then he said, ‘Are you asleep, O Nawf?’ ‘No, O
Amir al-Mu’minin, I am not asleep. I have prolonged my lamentation
tonight’, he replied.

Then he advised and admonished us and said in the end, ‘Beware of
{disobeying} Allah. I have indeed warned you.’ Thereafter, he started
walking and saying, ‘Would that I knew in my state of negligence
(*ghafalati*) whether You have turned away from me, or are looking at
me? Would that I knew what is my condition during my sleep and my being
ungrateful to Your blessings on me?’”  
 Habbah continues, “By Allah, he remained in this state until the rising
of the dawn.”[^45]

In fact, the supplications and whispered prayers transmitted to us from
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are rich in such lively and dynamic illustrations,
describing the the state of intimacy (*uns*) and yearning (*shawq*).
This is true, in particular, about the fifteen whispered prayers that
‘Allamah al-Majlisi has narrated in *al-Bihar* from Imam Zayn al-’Abidin
‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a), which are replete with such concepts as
‘intimacy’ and ‘yearning’. We find in the heritage of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) a treasure of such illustrations and concepts that we seldom find
in the heritage of others.

We will mention here some of these unique illustrations before we
conclude our discussion.

**1)** “O Allah, who can have tasted the sweetness of Your love, then
wanted another in place of You? Who can have become intimate with Your
nearness, then sought removal from You? O Allah, place us with him whom
You have chosen for Your nearness and Your friendship, purified through
Your affection and Your love, given yearning for the meeting with You,
made pleased with Your decree, granted gazing upon Your face, shown the
favour of Your good pleasure,

given refuge from separation from You and Your loathing, settled in a
sure sitting place in Your neighbourhood, singled out for true knowledge
of You, made worthy for worship of You, whose heart You have captivated
with Your will, whom You have picked for contemplating You, whose look
You have made empty for You, whose breast You have freed for Your love,
whom You have made desirous of what is with You, inspired with Your
remembrance, allotted thanksgiving to You, occupied with obeying You,
turned into one of Your righteous creatures, chosen for whispered prayer
to You, and from whom You have cut off all things which cut him off from
You.

O Allah, place us among those whose habit is rejoicing in You and
yearning for You, whose time is spent in sighing and moaning, their
foreheads are bowed down before Your mightiness, their eyes are wakeful
in Your service, their tears flowing in dread of You, their hearts fixed
upon Your love, their cores shaken with awe of You.

O He the lights of whose holiness induce wonder in the eyes of His
lovers, the glories of whose face arouse the longing of the hearts of
His knowers. O Furthest Wish of the hearts of of the yearners, O Utmost
Limit of the hopes of the lovers, I ask from You love for You, love for
those who love You, love for every work which will join me to Your
nearness, and that You make Yourself more beloved to me than anything
other than You, and make my love for You lead to Your good pleasure, and
my yearning for You protect against disobeying You, oblige me by
allowing me to gaze upon You, gaze upon me with the eye of affection and
tenderness, turn not Your face away from me…”[^46]

The verses of this prayer are overflowing with concepts of love,
yearning and intimacy. I do not intend here to comment on this prayer,
for I will never be able to add to its verses any beauty apart from what
they contain, nor an eloquence better than what they entail. I am not
among those either capable of commenting on the master pieces from the
verses of various supplications, and the verses of love or literature.

The first thing which draws our attention in the verses of the above
supplication is the ‘call’ with which the Imam (‘a) is calling out his
Lord, “O Furthest Wish of the hearts of the yearners, O Utmost Limit of
the hopes of the lovers…”, “O He the lights of whose holiness induce
wonder in the eyes of His lovers, the glories of whose face arouse the
longing of the hearts of His knowers…”

The Imam (‘a) has three requests in this prayer; the great three which a
servant asks from his Lord.

1. Firstly he asks from Allah to choose him for Himself, and purify his
heart for His love, make empty his look for His noble face, and make him
desirous of what is with Him, and free his breast for His love, inspire
him with His remembrance, cut off from him all that which cut him off
from Him, and turn from him all that which turn him away from Him.

Such a start is essential for the move that the Imam (‘a) is asking from
Allah, whose goal he defines as gazing upon the face (*wajh*) of Allah.
It is not possible for a person without such a start to move through
this difficult and tedious path to the climax of meeting with Allah and
gazing upon His honourable face, which is indeed the source of ease for
every prophet and friend of Allah.

If looking at the face of Allah is a provision (*rizq*) which Allah
provides for whomsoever He wishes and chooses from among His servants,
then the servant must ask Allah to provide him such a provision together
with its keys; for when Allah provides any of His servants with a
provision, He gives him through its doors and keys, and facilitates for
him its causes and means.

On the contrary, those who pray to Allah to grant them a provision from
other than its doors and without its proper means are in fact beseeching
Him against His norms (*sunan*) and laws which He has ordained for His
servants.

The doors (*abwab*) from which man enters and from which he sets out to
the climax of meeting with Allah (*liqa’ allah*) and gazing at His face
are as follows:

**First:** To free the heart from every sully, want, love and worldy
attachment. This stage is termed by the scholars as that of
*at-Takhliyah* (to empty), that is emptying the heart from every want
and attachment to other than Allah.

The Imam (‘a) says in this regard, “Place us with him whom You
have…purified for Your affection and love…whose look You have made empty
for You, whose heart You have freed for Your love…and from whom You have
cut off all things which cut him off from You.”

This is the first step of the starting point which entails a negative
(*salbi*) meaning.

**Second:** *at-Tahliyah* (embellishment of the soul with good
qualities) as it is termed by the *‘ulama’’* in contrast to
*at-Takhliyah*. This step involves a positive meaning and is referred to
by the Imam (‘a) in his following requests, “Make me among those whom
You have… made pleased with Your decree… singled out for true knowledge
of You…made worthy for worship of You… made desirous of what is with
You, inspired with Your remembrance, allotted thanksgiving to You,
occupied with obeying You, turned into one of Your righteous creatures,
chosen for whispered prayer to You…”, and, “Make us among those… whose
foreheads are bowed down before Your mightiness, their eyes wakeful in
Your service, their tears flowing in dread of You… and their cores
shaken with awe of You.”

This starting point, with both steps, is the key of the movement toward
Allah, the Exalted. It is the point from which man sets out to the
meeting with Allah (*liqa’ allah*) and gazing upon His honoured face and
beauty.

2. The second request follows the first one, as it is the intermediate
stage in one’s ascending movement toward Allah. It is not possible for
one to traverse this path to Allah, nor attain proximity and nearness to
Him, ***“in the abode of truthfulness with an omnipotent King”***[^47],
without passing through this stage.

The means which carry man to this ultimate goal which is desired by
every prophet, friend of Allah, truthful one and martyr, is the love of
Allah, intimacy with Him, and yearning for Him. Without this, it is not
possible for man to ascend such a lofty ascent toward Allah.

Love, yearning and intimacy are undoubtedly a provision from Allah,
which He provides to those He chooses and picks up from His servants.
However, this takes place after traversing the preliminary stages
mentioned by the Imam (‘a) in different verses of the above whispered
prayer.

The Imam (‘a) greatly insists on this request and he employs different
means and expressions in order to attain his request. Thus, he calls out
to Allah with such an impressive calling, “O Furthest Wish of the hearts
of the yearners, O Utmost Limit of the hopes of the lovers…”

Thereafter, he asks from Allah love of Him, love for those who love Him,
and love for every work which would take him to His proximity.

Let us ponder on the words of the Imam (‘a) himself, for commentary of
them would make us miss the opportunity of directly looking at the
horizons of this ‘love’ which the Imam (‘a) is trying to open for us in
this supplication, “I ask from You love of You, love for those who love
You, love for every work which will join me to Your nearness, and that
You make Yourself more beloved to me than anything other than You; and
make my love for You lead to Your good pleasure, and my yearning for You
protect against disobeying You, endow me with gazing upon You, look at
me with the eye of affection and tenderness, and turn not Your face away
from me.”

He also says: “Make us among those… whom You have given yearning for the
meeting with You…whom You have given refuge from separation from You and
Your loathing… and whose heart You have captivated with Your will.”

He then says: “O Allah, make us among those whose habit is rejoicing in
You and yearning for You, whose time is spent in sighing and moaning…
whose hearts are fixed upon Your love, and their cores shaken with awe
of You.”

In short, there are four requests put forth by the Imam (‘a) in the
above verses:

1. He, the Exalted, should give us refuge from being separated from Him
and from His loathing.

2. He should bestow upon us His love and affection.

3. He should provide us with intimacy with Him.

4. He should endow us with yearning for the meeting with Him.

The Imam (‘a) summarizes the concepts of *hubb* and *shawq* in this
beautiful statement, “O Allah, make us among those whose habit is
rejoicing in You and craving for You.”

Rejoicing (*irtiyah*) in Allah is different from craving (*hanin*) for
Him, and the Imam (‘a) asks Allah for both. Rejoicing is the state of
intimacy (*uns*) which stems from the ‘meeting’ (*liqa’*), while craving
(*hanin*) is the state of yearning (*shawq*) which springs from the
movement toward the ‘meeting with Allah’.

3. The third stage of this heavenly journey toward Allah, the Exalted,
as described in this noble whispered prayer, is the ultimate goal and
the noblest of what the prophets and the truthful have been asking from
Allah. It is asking Allah for *gaze* upon His majestic face and His
brilliant beauty. This is a goal which cannot be attained except by the
chosen among the chosen ones whom Allah picks up for His nearness and
neighbourhood.

The Imam (‘a) says with this regard, “Make us among those whom You have
granted gazing upon Your face… and whom You have settled in a sure
sitting place in Your neighbourhood… and whom You have picked for seeing
You… and endow me with gazing upon You.”

What a great wish that man should look at the face of his Lord, see His
majesty and beauty from the close, sit beside Him in the abode of
truthfulness in His neighbourhood, and that His lord should give him to
drink a pure drink.

Another Illustration
--------------------

**2)** Here is another unique portrait of yearning for Allah and
intimacy with Him in the whispered prayer of *al-muridin* (the devotees)
from Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a):

“O Allah, so make us travel on the roads that arrive at You, and set us
into motion on paths nearest to reaching You. Make near for us the far,
and make easy for us the hard and difficult. Join us to Your servants,
those who hurry to You swiftly, knock constantly at Your door, and
worship You by night and by day, while they remain apprehensive in awe
of You.

You have purified their drinking places, taken them to the objects of
their desire, granted their requests, accomplished their wishes through
Your bounty, filled their minds with Your love, and quenched their
thirst with Your pure drink. Through You have they reached the pleasure
of whispered prayer to You, and in You have they achieved their furthest
goals.

O He who comes toward those who come toward Him and grants gifts and
bestows bounty upon them through tenderness. He is compassionate and
clement toward those heedless of His remembrance, and loving and tender
in drawing them to His door. I ask You to place me among those of them
who have the fullest share from You, the highest station with You, the
most plentiful portion of Your love, and the most excellent allotment of
Your knowledge, for my aspiration has been cut off from everything but
You, and my desire has turned toward You alone.

You are my object, none other; to You alone belongs my waking and my
sleeplessness. Meeting You is the gladness of my eye, joining You the
wish of my soul. Toward You is my yearning, in love for You my
passionate longing, in inclining toward You my fervent craving. Your
good pleasure is the aim I seek, vision of You my need, Your
neighbourhood my request, nearness to You the utmost object of my
asking.

In whispered prayer to You I find my repose and my ease. With You lies
the remedy of my illness, the cure for my burning thirst, the coolness
of my ardour, the removal of my distress. Be my intimate in my
loneliness, the releaser of my stumble, the forgiver of my slip, the
accepter of my repentance, the responder of my supplication, the patron
of preserving me from sin, the one who frees me from my neediness. Cut
me not off from You, and keep me not far from You. O bliss and my
garden. O my this world and my Hereafter…”[^48]

The is a sublime piece from the loftiest of the whispered prayers, a
marvelous piece from the beautiful texts of *du’a’*, and the prime from
among the prime words of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in supplication, entreaty
and love; which has emanated from a heart filled with passionate love
for Allah, and longing for the meeting with Him.

These verses are worthy to be pondered upon a great deal. We shall,
however, restrict ourselves to a quick look at some of the descriptions
and concepts about the Divine love with which this whispered prayer is
embellished.

In the beginning, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) asks Allah to hold his hand
and make him traverse the path which arrives at Him. This is in fact the
summary of all that which is in this prayer of the loftiest requests.

In this supplication, the Imam (‘a) does not ask from Allah this world
or the Hereafter, though it is a permissible request which is also liked
by Allah; rather he asks Him for nearness, reaching Him, and His
neighbourhood in the abode of truthfulness with the prophets, martyrs,
and the truthful ones. He (‘a) says: “O Allah, so make us travel on the
roads that arrive at You.”

The Imam (‘a) does not say “the **road** (*sabil*) which arrives at You”
in a singular form; he rather says “the **roads** (*subul*) that arrive
at You” using the plural form. The reason being that the path (*sirat*)
toward Allah is one and not manifold, as the Qur’an has not mentioned
except one path. Allah, the Exalted, says:

• ***“Guide us on the straigth path (sirat), the path of those whom You
have blessed –such as have not incurred Your wrath, nor are
astray.”***[^49]

• ***“…and Allah guides whomever He wishes to a straight path
(sirat).”***[^50]

• ***“…and guides them to a straight path (sirat).”***[^51]

• ***“…We chose them and guided them to a straight path
(sirat).”***[^52]

But with regard to the word ‘*sabil*’ (road), it has appeared in the
plural form many times in the Qur’an, both in the case of truth (*haqq*)
and falsehood (*batil*). He, the Exalted, says:

• ***“With it Allah guides those who follow {the course of} His pleasure
to the ways (subul) of peace.”***[^53]

• ***“…and do not follow other ways (subul), for they will separate you
from His way (sabil).”***[^54]

• ***“…and why should we not put our trust in Allah, seeing that He has
guided us in our ways (subulana).”***[^55]

• ***“As for those who strive in Us, we shall surely guide them in Our
ways (subulana), and Allah is indeed with the virtuous.”***[^56]

Allah, the Exalted, has kept numerous ways which lead the people to Him,
as it is common among the scholars that ‘There are as many roads to
Allah as the breaths of the creatures.” Although all these ways and
roads are in accordance with the straight path (*as-Sirat al-mustaqim*)
of Allah. He, the Exalted, has appointed for everyone a specific way
through which he would come to know Him, and which would lead him to
Him.

Accordingly, some of the people move toward Allah through the road of
knowledge (*‘ilm*) and intellect (*‘aql*), while others through the road
of heart (*qalb*) and breast (*fu’ad*). Yet there are people who attain
recognition of Allah through trading and dealing with Him. He, the
Exalted, says:

***“O you who have faith! Shall I show you a deal that will deliver you
from a painful punishment?”***[^57]***,***

and:

***“And among the people is he who sells his soul seeking the pleasure
of Allah, and Allah is most kind to {His} servants.”***[^58]

Here, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) asks Allah to make him travel the
**ways**, and not a single way, that arrive at Him; as the more one
travels through different roads to Allah, the stronger, more definite
and assuring would be his arrival at His neighbourhood and proximity.

Thereafter, he asks from Allah to join him with those people who hasten
to Him from among His righteous servants, those who quickly move toward
Allah and spend their day and night in His obedience and worship.

However, the path to Allah is hard and difficult. The Qur’an refers to
this path as ‘one with thorns’ (*dhat ash-Shawkah*).[^59] There have
been many people who began journeying this path with resolution and
determination, but then collapsed in the middle of the way.

Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) asks Allah to make near for him the far, and
make easy for him the hard during this difficult journey, and to join
him to the righteous people (*salihin*) who have preceded him, though he
himself is the leader of the righteous; for the company of the friends
of Allah and the righteous ones on the road with thorns gives strength
to the hearts of all, and increases in their determination to pursue the
path further.

Indeed the journey to Allah is difficult. Therefore, if a group of the
righteous move together on this path, holding firm onto each other,
enjoining one another to patience and to follow the truth, then moving
on the path with thorns would become much easier for them.

Regarding the nature of this difficult and long journey, and asking the
nearing of the far, ease in the journey, and joining the righteous who
were on this path, Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a) says: “…and set us into
motion on the paths nearest to reaching You, make near for us the far,
make easy for us the hard and difficult; Join us to Your servants who
hurry to You swiftly, knock constantly at Your door, and worship You by
night and by day.”

Inspirations and Outflows of the Heart
--------------------------------------

The Imam (‘a) characterizes the righteous ones, those he asks Allah to
join him to them, with such a lofty attribute which is worthy of
contemplation. He (‘a) says: “…those for whom You have purified their
drinking places, and taken them to the objects of their desire… filled
their minds with Your love, and quenched their thirst with Your pure
drink.”

But what is this clean and pure drink which their Lord has given them to
drink in this world? And which receptacle is this that Allah fills it
with His love?

Indeed this pure drink is the drink of love (*hubb*), certainty
(*yaqin*), sincerity (*ikhlas*) and recognition (*ma’rifah*), while the
receptacle is the heart (*qalb*).

Allah, the Exalted, has provided man with numerous receptacles for
recognition, certainty and sincerity, but the ‘heart’ is the greatest of
all of them and the most spacious of them.

Thus, when Allah purifies for His servant the drink of his heart, and
makes him drink a clean and pure drink, then his actions, speech, and
offerings would also be clean and pure. This is because there is
similarity and homogeneity (*musanakhah*) between that which enters the
heart and that which comes out from it. Thus, if that which enters the
heart is pure and clean, coming from a pure and sweet spring, then that
which flows out from it would be similar to that. Subsequently, the
actions of a person, his speech, views, behaviour, stance and offerings
would all be pure and delightful.

On the contrary, if what enters the heart is dirty or polluted by it, of
what satans inspire their friends, then that which comes out of it would
undoubtedly be similar to it in deceit (*kidhb*), hypocrisy (*nifaq*),
miserliness (*shuhh*), and turning away (*i’rad*) from Allah and His
Prophet.

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said, “Indeed there are two
nearness to the heart; nearness from the angel {which is} promising of
good and a confirming of truth; and nearness from the enemy {which is}
threatening with evil and a denying of truth. So whoever experiences
that {within himself}, then he should know that it is from Allah; and
whoever experiences the other {nearness}, then he should take refuge
with Allah from the *shaitan*.”

Thereafter, he recited:***“Satan frightens you of poverty and prompts
you to {commit} indecent acts; while Allah promises you His forgiveness
and grace***.[^60]”[^61]

The nearness of the angel is the Lordly inspiration (*al-warid
ar-rabbani*), while the nearness of the *shaitan* is the satanic
inspiration (*al-warid ash-Shaitani*).

Do you not see when a bee collects the nectar from flowers, it gives out
a pleasant and sweet honey to the people, in which there is cure for
them? But if it gathers its food from unpure and unclean sources, then
its produce would naturally be the same.

Allah, the Exalted, says about His Friend, Ibrahim, and His messengers
Ishaq and Ya’qub:

***“And remember Our servants Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya’qub, men of strength
and insight. Indeed We purified them with the exclusiveness of the
remembrance of the abode {of the Hereafter}. Indeed with Us they are
surely among the elect of the best.”***[^62]

This lofty attribute of strength and insight which Allah ascribes to
these great prophets is the result of the pure drink which Allah had
given to them, “Indeed We purified them with the exclusiveness of the
remembrance of the abode {of the Hereafter}.”

Had Allah not purified them with this exclusiveness of the remembrance
of the Hereafter, they would have neither had the strength nor
insight.[^63]

Therefore, in order for man’s deeds to become pure, it is necessary that
his drink be pure, as the heart gives out what it takes in.

The Principle of Choice
-----------------------

After we have explained the role of what enters the heart (*qalb*) and
what comes out of it, and the similarity and homogeneity between them,
we would like to equally insist that what has been said does not
necessarily nullify the ‘principle of choice’ (*asl al-ikhtiyar*) which
is the basis of many Qur’anic concepts and ideas. It does not mean that
the heart is an empty receptacle which receives and gives out what is
put in it of good and evil. Rather, the heart is a conscious receptacle
which comprehends what is delivered to it, and distinguishes the truth
from the falsehood, and the good from the bad.

In fact, this is another fundamental principle in Islamic thought. Many
issues and principles in Islam are dependent on the principle of choice
as well as on this principle, that is, the ‘consciousness of the heart’
(*wa’y al-qalb*).

There has been great emphasis in the Islamic sources on the active role
of the heart in human life, of its ability of detection, and high
efficiency in distinguishing the right from the wrong.

It is narrated that once Prophet Dawud (‘a) secretly called upon Allah
and said, “O Allah, every king has a treasury, where is Your treasury?”
He, the Majestic, replied, “I have a treasury even bigger than the
Throne (*‘arsh*), wider than the Seat (*kursiyy*), better than the
Heaven, and more beautiful than the dominion (*malakut*); its earth is
{My} cognizance (*ma’rifah*), its heavens is faith (*Iman*), its sun is
yearning (*shawq*), its moon is love (*mahabbah*), its stars are secret
thoughts (*khawatir*), its cloud is intellect (*‘aql*), its rain is
mercy (*rahmah*), its tree is obedience (*ta’ah*), its fruit is wisdom
(*hikmah*). It has four pillars: reliance (*tawakkul*), contemplation
(*tafkir*), intimacy (*uns*), and remembrance (*dhikr*). And it has four
doors: knowledge (*‘ilm*), wisdom (*hikmah*), patience (*sabr*), and
contentment (*rida*)… indeed it is the heart.”[^64]

It is obvious that the above narration employs a symbolic language in
terms of question and answer; a language frequently employed in the
Islamic traditions.

It has been narrated that Allah, the Exalted, said to Prophet Musa (‘a),
“O Musa, free your heart for My love; because I have made Your heart a
field of My love, and I have spread in Your heart a land of My
cognizance (*ma’rifah*), and I have built in Your heart a sun of My
yearning (*shawq*), and I have placed in Your heart a moon of My love
(*mahabbati*), and I have put in Your heart a spring of contemplation
(*tafakkur*), and I have set in motion a wind of My success (*tawfiq*)
in your heart, and I have showered on your heart a shower of My grace
(*tafaddul*), and I have planted in your heart a plant of My
truthfulness (*sidq*), and I have grown trees of My obedience (*ta’ati*)
in your heart, and I have put mountains of My certainty (*yaqin*) in
your heart.”[^65]

The language employed in this narration is also a symbolic one. Anyway,
both narrations illustrate the active role of the heart in
distinguishing truth from falsehood, and guidance (*huda*) from error
(*dalal*).

A Return to the Whispered Prayer of Al-muridin
----------------------------------------------

Thereafter, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) calls on Allah with this touching
call, “O He who comes toward those who come toward Him, and grants gifts
and bestows bounty upon them through tenderness, and who is
compassionate and clement toward those heedless of His remembrance, and
loving and tender in drawing them to His door.”

The above call entails two points. The first point is that Allah, the
Exalted, comes toward those who come toward Him, and reverts to them by
His grace. And the second point is that He is clement toward those who
are heedless of Him, and repels heedlessness (*ghaflah*) from them
through Lordly attractions (*al-jadhabat ar-rabbaniyyah*).

After this preamble, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) invokes Allah to make him
among the righteous ones with the biggest share of His mercy, the
highest status, and the greatest lot of His love, “I ask You to make me
amidst them one with the fullest share from You, the highest station
with You, the most plentiful portion of Your love, and the most
excellent allotment of Your knowledge.”

This phrase of the supplication gives rise to this question that just a
while ago the Imam (‘a) was wishing that may Allah join him with the
righteous ones, and now he longs from Allah that He may make him to be
the one with the fullest share and highest station with Him. So how can
we place this request beside the previous one? What had transpired in
the atmosphere of the prayer as well as in the soul of the Imam (‘a)
during the supplication that led to this leap in his request; that is,
from the request of joining the righteous to the desire to attain
precedence over them and to lead them?

The answer to this question requires an explanation of a secret from
among the secrets of prayer. The secret is that Allah, the Exalted, has
taught us not to slacken off in asking and not to desist from praying so
long as the Master is the Generous. And how vile it is to desist from
praying when the one asked from (*mas’ul*) is the Generous, and there is
no limit or end to the treasuries of His mercy, rather the frequency of
giving increases Him not but in generosity and kindness.

From among the things that Allah, the Exalted, has taught us of the
manners (*adab*) and characters (*akhlaq*) of the servants of the
All-merciful (*‘ibad ar-rahman*) is that we should ask from Him to make
us the leaders of the pious ones (*muttaqin*), “… and make us leaders of
the Godwary.”[^66]

Besides, we frequently come across the following high-aspiring phrase in
the supplications that have reached us from our infallibles
(*ma’sumin*), “And give preference to me, and do not give preference to
anyone else over me.”

The Peak and Trough of the Prayer
---------------------------------

Many supplications have a point of climax and nadir. The lowest point in
a supplication embodies the state of the servant of Allah and what he
has committted of the sins and evils; whilst the climax of it is
manifested in the high aspiration and hope of the servant in Allah, the
Glorious; as there is no limit to His kindness, generosity and the
treasuries of His mercy.

In the supplication of *abu hamzah ath-thumali*, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin
(‘a) refers to this spiritual diversity in the state of the soul when he
says: “When I look at my sins, O my Master, I am terrified; but when I
look at Your generosity, I become hopeful.”

In another place of the same supplication, he says: “My hope, O my
Master, is ever great, but my deeds are evil, so grant me of Your pardon
to the extent of my hope, and do not punish me because of my worst
deeds.”

In the supplication of *kumayl*, Imam ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (‘a) begins
from the trough and says: “O Allah, forgive me the sins which tear apart
protection; O Allah, forgive me the sins which bring down adversities; O
Allah, forgive me the sins which alter blessings; O Allah, forgive me
sins which hold back prayer… O Allah, I find no forgiver of my sins, nor
concealer of my wicked acts, no transformer of any of my bad deeds into
good acts but You…

Glory be to You, and praise is due to You; I have wronged myself, I have
been audacious in my ignorance, and I have depended upon Your constant
remembrance of me and Your favour toward me…

O Allah, my tribulation is tremendous, and my bad state is excessive, my
acts are inadequate, my fetters have tied me down, my high hopes have
held me back from my again, and this world with its delusions, my own
soul with its offences, and my dilly-dallying have {all} deceived me. O
my Master, so I ask You by Your might not to let my evil deeds and acts
veil my supplication from You; and not to disgrace me through the hidden
things You have come to know from my innermost secret…”

This trough denotes the lowest level of servanthood (*‘ubudiyyah*) and
what surrounds it of the evil deeds. Thereafter, towards the end of the
supplication we see the climax of aspiration which manifests itself in
the great hope of the servant in the all-embracing mercy of Allah.
Hence, he (‘a) says: “…and bestow upon me earnestness in {my} fear of
You, and continuity in {my} being joined to Your service, so that I may
move easily toward You in the battlefields of the foremost, hurry to You
among the prominent, desire fervently Your proximity among the fervently
desirous, move near to You with the nearness of the sincere … and make
me the most excellent of Your slaves in share with You, the nearest of
them in station to You, and the most elect of them in proximity to You;
for that cannot be attained except by Your grace…”

And we also find this vast difference between the peak and trough in the
supplication of *Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali*; as in the beginning of it Imam
Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) sets off from the lowest point and says:

“… and who am I, O my Lord; and what is my significance? Bestow upon me
Your grace, and give me charity of Your pardon. O my Lord, cover me with
Your veil, and refrain from reproaching me by the honour of Your face…

Do not burn me with the Fire, because You are where I place my hope, and
reside me not in the abyss, for You are indeed the comfort of my eye…
have mercy upon my strangeness in this world, upon my grief at the time
of death, upon my loneliness in the grave, upon my fear inside the
burial place, upon my humiliation when I shall be resurrected before You
for the reckoning (*hisab*). And have mercy upon me when I will be lying
motionless on {my death} bed and the hands of my beloved ones shall be
moving me;

and be kind to me when I will be stretched on the funeral bath-place and
the righteous among my neighbours shall be washing me; and be
affectionate toward me when I shall be carried and my relatives would be
holding the extremities of my coffin, and be generous to me when I will
be transported {to the grave} while I have descended on You, alone in my
hole.”

Thereafter, in the climax of the supplication and the stage of
aspiration, he (‘a) says: “O Allah, I ask You the best of what Your
righteous servants have asked from You, O Best of those who have been
asked, and Most Generous of those who have given… fulfill my quest in
myself, my family, parents, and children…

enrich my living, and make manifest my manliness, and put in order all
my affairs, and make me among those whom You have prolonged their lives,
and made their acts good, and completed upon them Your blessings, and
whom You are pleased with, and have caused them to live a good life… and
single me out for Your special remembrance… and make me the one with the
fullest share with You amongst Your servants in every good that You have
sent down or are going to send down.”

This journey from the trough to the peak is another expression of the
journey of man toward Allah, the Exalted; a journey of hope and
aspiration. And when one’s aspiration and hope is in Allah only, then
there is no end to such a journey.

The Three Means
---------------

Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a) seeks recourse to Allah with three means in
this journey, as Allah, the Exalted, has commanded us to do so, ***“O
you who have faith! Be wary of Allah, and seek the means of recourse to
Him”***[^67], and, ***“They {themselves} are the ones who supplicate,
seeking a recourse to their Lord.”***[^68]

The means which the Imam (‘a) seeks recourse with to Allah are the
neediness (*hajat*), petition (*su’al*) and love (*hubb*). How excellent
is the Imam as a teacher of supplication, for he well knows what to ask
from Allah, how to ask, and where the places of Allah’s mercy are.

The First Means: Neediness
--------------------------

Neediness by itself is among the places of Allah’s mercy. Allah sends
down His mercy upon His creatures, even upon animals and plants without
them having asked for it, due to their need. However, this does not
imply the negation of petition and request, as both of them are two
other doors of the mercy of Allah beside neediness.

Hence, when people become thirsty, it is their Lord who gives them
drink; when they become hungry, it is He who feeds them; when they are
uncovered, it is He who covers them:

***“and when I get sick, it is He who cures me”***[^69]***;***

even if they have no knowledge of Allah, and no knowledge of how to call
upon Him or what to ask from Him, “O He who gives to one who asks Him, O
He who gives to one who does not ask him and does not know Him, out of
His affection and mercy.”[^70]

In the famous whispered prayer (*munajat*) of Imam ‘Ali (‘a), we find a
beatiful reference to this Lordly point with regard to attracting
Allah’s mercy. He says:

“My Master, my master, You are the Master and I the servant! Has anyone
mercy upon the servant but the Master? My Master, my Master, You are the
Owner and I the owned! Has anyone mercy upon the owned but the Owner? My
Master, my Master, You are the Exalted and I the abased! Has anyone
mercy upon the abased but the Exalted. My Master, my Master, You are the
Creator and I the creature! Has anyone mercy upon the creature but the
Creator.

My Master, my Master, You are the All-supreme and I the lowly! Has
anyone mercy upon the lowly but the All-supreme. My Master, my Master,
You are the Strong and I the weak! Has anyone mercy upon the weak but
the Strong. My Master, my Master, You are the Needless and I the needy!
Has anyone mercy upon the needy but the Needless.

My Master, my Master, You are the Giver and I the asker! Has anyone
mercy upon the asker but the Giver. My Master, my Master, You are the
Living and I the dead! Has anyone mercy upon the dead but the Living. My
Master, my Master, You are the Subsistent and I the perishing! Has
anyone mercy upon the perishing but the Subsistent.

My Master, my Master, You are the Everlasting and I the vanishing! Has
anyone mercy upon the vanishing but the Everlasting. My Master, my
Master, You are the Provider and I the provided for! Has anyone mercy
upon the provided for but the Provider? My Master, my Master, You are
the Generous and I the stingy! Has anyone mercy upon the stingy but the
Generous?

My Master, my Master, You are the Reliever and I the afflicted! Has
anyone mercy upon the afflicted but the Reliever? My Master, my Master,
You are the Great and I the small! Has anyone mercy upon the small but
the Great? My Master, my Master, You are the Guide and I the lost one!
Has anyone mercy upon the lost one but the Guide?

My Master, my Master, You are the Forgiver and I the sinner! Has anyone
mercy upon the sinner but the Forgiver? My Master, my Master, You are
the Victor and I the defeated! Has anyone mercy upon the defeated but
the Victor? My Master, my Master, You are the Cherisher and I the
cherished! Has anyone mercy upon the cherished but the Cherisher?

My Master, my Master, You are the All-magnanimous and I the submissive!
Has anyone mercy upon the submissive but the All-magnanimous? My Master,
my Master, have mercy on me through Your mercy, and be pleased with me
through Your generosity, kindness, and grace, O Possessor of generosity
and favour, and might and gratitude.”

In these beautiful phrases of the supplication, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) seeks
means of recourse to Allah through his neediness (*hajat*) and indigence
(*faqr*), and places the neediness of the servant and his indigence in
the position of attracting Allah’s mercy.

This is because the creature brings down the mercy of the Creator, the
lowly draws on the mercy of the All-supreme, the weak attracts the mercy
of the Strong, the needy draws on the mercy of the Needless, the one
provided for attracts the mercy of the Provider, the afflicted brings
down the mercy of the Reliever, the lost one causes the mercy of the
Guide to descend, the sinner attracts the mercy of the Forgiver, the
confused attracts the mercy of the Proof, and the defeated draws on the
mercy of the Victor.

All these are part of the universal norms of Allah, and the norms of
Allah shall never change.

Accordingly, wherever the elements of neediness and indigence are found,
the mercy of Allah would be there. The mercy of Allah comes down on the
places of need as water flows to, and settles in, lower lands; for
Allah, the Exalted, is kind and generous, and the Kind always takes care
of the places of need and singles them out for his mercy.

Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says in the supplication of *abu hamzah
ath-thumali*, “…give me due to my being poor, and have mercy upon me
because of my weakness.” Thus, the Imam (‘a) takes up his neediness and
weakness as means to attain the mercy of Allah.

It is, however, natural that this speech cannot be understood
unrestrictively and as a sole factor for attaining Allah’s mercy,
because there are other elements as well which are decisive in
attracting Allah’s mercy. Likewise, there are obstacles which impede
Allah’s mercy. Moreover, there is also the principle of trial
(*ibtila’*) which is one of the norms of Allah in human life.

Hence, when we say that ‘neediness and poverty attract the mercy of
Allah’, we ought to comprehend this speech within the framework of this
comprehensive Divine system. Understanding this system entails by itself
a wide horizon of knowledge which we do not intend to dwell on at the
moment. I hope that Allah will grant me success (*tawfiq*) in the future
to explain this reality in a manner worthy of it.

We find in the Qur’an instances of the presentation of neediness and
poverty before Allah, the Exalted, in order to attract His mercy and
attain the response (*ijabah*) from Him. Neediness has its own kind of
response as supplication and petition have a response peculiar to them;
for exhibiting ones neediness is in itself a kind of prayer.

The Holy Qur’an mentions these instances, ascribing them to the
righteous servants of Allah. They are:

1. The neediness of Prophet Ayyub, the righteous servant of Allah, when
he called upon Allah amidst affliction and trial:

***“And Ayyub, when he called out to his Lord, ‘Indeed distress has
befallen me, and You are the Most Merciful of the merciful.’ So We
answered his prayer and removed his distress, and We gave him {back} his
family along with others like them as a mercy from Us, and an admonition
for the devout.”***[^71]

Although this phrase which is mentioned by the Qur’an, quoting it from
this afflicted righteous servant, does not contain any prayer, Allah,
the Exalted, says: ***“… So We answered his prayer and removed his
distress”***; as if presenting one’s neediness and poverty is also a
kind of supplication.

2. The righteous servant, Dhu an-Nun (‘a), presents his indigence,
neediness and the wrong he committed against himself before Allah, the
Exalted, from the darkness of the belly of the fish, deep inside the
sea,

***“And the Man of the Fish, when he left in a rage, thinking that We
would not put him to hardship. Then he cried out in the darkness: ‘There
is no god except You! You are immaculate! I have indeed been among the
wrongdoers.’ So We answered his prayer and delivered him from the agony;
and thus do We deliver the faithful.”***[^72]

As exhibiting neediness is a kind of prayer, similarly the response
(*istijabah*) would not be to the petition, rather to the neediness and
indigence itself. In the above case, Prophet Yunus (‘a) did not utter
more than these words, ***“There is no god except You! You are
immaculate! I have indeed been among the wrongdoers”***, but Allah
answered him and delivered him from the agony (*ghamm*), ***“So We
answered his prayer and delivered him from the agony.”***

3. We find in the Qur’an the words of Prophet Musa (‘a) and his brother
Harun (‘a) when Allah commanded them to take His message to Fir’awn. The
Qur’an says:

***“Let the two of you go to Fir’awn. Indeed he has rebelled. Speak to
him in a soft manner; may be he will take admonition or fear. The two of
them said, ‘Our Lord! We are indeed afraid that he will forestall us or
will overstep the bounds.”***[^73]

They neither asked Allah to protect them from Fir’awn and his army, nor
provide them with the security they needed, rather what they mentioned
to Allah was their weakness and fear of oppression, power and
transgression of Fir’awn, “We are indeed afraid that he will forestall
us or will overstep the bounds”, and Allah answered their need for
support and backing:

***“He said, ‘Do not be afraid, for I will be with the two of you,
hearing and seeing {whatever happens}.”***[^74]

4. The fourth example is in the words of Prophet Nuh (‘a), the righteous
servant of Allah, when he presented before Allah his need for his son to
be saved from the flood,

***“Nuh called out to his Lord and said, ‘My Lord! My son is indeed from
my family. Your promise is indeed true, and You are the fairest of all
judges.”***[^75]

This is a polite petition from this righteous servant of Allah, for he
did not even ask Allah to save his son, rather he only exhibited before
Him his *need* that his son should be saved from drowning.

In conclusion, neediness and indigence are among the places where the
mercy of Allah descends.

Even the animals and plants attract Allah’s mercy but through their
neediness and indigence. Thus, when they get thirsty, it is Allah who
gives them to drink, and when they become hungry, it is He who satisfies
and feeds them.

There is a lot to be said on this topic and I have explained part of it
in my other book called ‘Open-heartedness’ (*sharh as-Sadr*), in the
series of lessons from the Qur’an titled ‘Lessons from the Qur’an’
(*rihab al-qur’an*).

The Second Means: Supplication
------------------------------

Supplication is among the keys of Allah’s mercy. He, the Exalted, says:

***“Call Me, I will answer you”, and, “Say, ‘What store my Lord would
set by You were it not for Your supplication?”***[^76]

The Third Means: Love
---------------------

Through love, one can attract of the mercy of Allah what he cannot by
other means.  
 Now in the following phrases, just ponder over these three means by
which Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) is seeking recourse to Allah:

“Your good pleasure is my wish; vision of You my need… With You lies the
remedy of my illness, the cure for my burning thirst, the coolness of my
ardour, the removal of my distress.” This is the means of neediness and
indigence.

“Your neighbouring is my request, nearness to You the utmost object of
my asking… Be my intimate in my loneliness, the releaser of my stumble,
the forgiver of my slip, the accepter of my repentance, the responder to
my supplication, the patron of preserving me from sin, the one who frees
me from my neediness.” This is the means of supplication.

“You are my object, none other; to You alone belongs my waking and my
sleeplessness. Meeting You is the gladness of my eye, joining You the
wish of my soul. Toward You is my yearning, in love for You my
passionate longing, in inclining toward You my fervent craving.” This is
the means of love.

Now let us contemplate on this phrase of the speech of the Imam (‘a)
which is among the beautiful pieces of this supplication; as a prayer
has a beauty just like that of the art and literature. He (‘a) says: “…
for my aspiration has been cut off (*inqita’*) from everything but You,
and my desire has turned toward You alone; You are my object, none
other; to You alone belongs my waking and my sleeplessness, meeting You
is the delight of my eye.”

Cut-off (*inqita’*) involves in meaning what attachment (*ta’lluq*) does
not. This is why the Imam (‘a) does not say, ‘For my aspiration has been
*attached* to none but You’, rather he says: ‘For my aspiration has been
*cut off* from everything but You’; for attachment to Allah does not
negate attachment to other than Him, even if one may be sincere in his
attachment to Allah, whereas the concept of ‘cut-off’ entails both a
positive and a negative meaning, as the meaning of *inqita’* is
‘detachment from the creatures and turning toward Allah’. Detachment
from the creatures is the negative significance intended by the Imam
(‘a) from this phrase, whilst the positive significance intended by him
from it is ‘the turning toward Allah’.

This is because sincerity (*ikhlas*) in love manifests itself in
disjoining (*fasl*) and joining (*wasl*); disjoining from all other than
Allah, and joining with Allah and those whom He loves and has commanded
to love. These are, in fact, two sides of one issue.

Hence, when ‘love’ becomes pure and free from insincerity, it would
involve two things; association (*wala’*) and disassociation
(*bara’ah*), attachment and detachment, and disconnection from ‘the
creatures’ to Allah.

The same meaning is also contained in the second phrase which says:
“…Toward You is my yearning”; for turning toward Allah entails the
turning away (*i’rad*) and the turning toward (*iqbal*). Turning away
from all other than Allah, and turning toward Allah, and toward that
which He loves and has commanded us to carry out.

Thereafter comes the third emphasis on this reality and the most
eloquent of it. It contains of the meaning of ‘love’ and ‘detachment
from all other than Him’ what cannot be described and expressed by
words, “You, and none other, are my object; to You alone belongs my
waking and my sleeplessness.”

Wakefulness (*sahar*) and sleeplessness (*suhad*) are the opposite of
sleep (*nawm*), with the difference that *sahar* is keeping the night
awake in the state of intimacy (*uns*), while *suhad* is a kind of
sleeplessness which occurs to a person when he is occupied with
something of concern to him, such that it leaves him sleepless. In our
case, this occupation with something of concern is yearning (*hanin*)
and longing (*shawq*) for Allah.

Therefore, *sahar* and *suhad* represent two states among the states of
love; intimacy and yearning. Intimacy with the remembrance of Allah and
His presence such that the servant feels the presence of Allah in his
supplication, remembrance, secret supplications and prayers (*salat*);
and yearning for the meeting (*liqa’*) with Allah.

In fact, a lover experiences both the above states when he stands before
Allah, as both of them have a role in leaving him sleepless when people
are asleep and lose their consiousness and senses because of it.

Nevertheless, sleeping is a human need, and each of the righteous and
the wicked have their share of it, even the prophets and the truthful
ones do sleep. But, there is a difference between one who takes from
sleep to the extent of his need, the way he fulfills his need from
eating and drinking, and between one who surrenders himself to sleep and
is dominated by it. As for the friends (*awliya’*) of Allah, they do not
surrender themselves to sleep; rather sleep is a need for them and they
take their share from it.

The Holy Prophet (S) did not use to sleep but a little in order to be
able to stand before Allah. He (S) also used to order for the water of
ablution (*wadu’*) to be kept at his head so that he may stand before
Allah every time after he had taken his share from this natural need. A
soft and comfortable mattress would be spread for him but he would order
it to be taken away lest it should gradually lead him to submit to
sleep. Instead, he would sleep on a rough mat such that it would leave
an impression on his side.

Allah, the Exalted, has indeed placed in the calmness of the night
treasures of His whispered prayers, remembrance and proximity which
cannot be found in the daytime. The night has its own men, as the day
has its own; they stand in prayers when people are asleep; they get
zealous and lively when people are dull; and they ascend toward Allah
when people submit themselves to sleep and fall into their beds.

The night has its dominion (*dawlah*) as has the day. There are
treasures at night as there are treasures at daytime. Normally people
know well of the dominion of the daytime, its men and treasures. Few
among the people are aware of the value of the dominion of the night,
its treasures and its men. If a person combines the dominion of the
night with that of the day, then such a man is sound, rightly guided and
well balanced.

The Holy Prophet (S) was the man of both, the night and the daytime,
utilizing from both of them in equal proportion. He would take love,
sincerity and remembrance from the night, as he would acquire power,
strength and wealth from the daytime in order to pave the way for
propagation of the message of Islam and strengthening it.

Nonetheless, the vigil at night used to help him and make it possible
for him to carry the heavy load of Prophethood. He, the Exalted, says in
this regard:

***“O you wrapped up in your mantle! Stand vigil through the night,
except a little, a half, or reduce a little from that, or add to it, and
recite the Qur’an in a measured tone. Indeed soon We shall cast on you a
weighty word. Indeed the watch of the night is firmer in tread and more
upright in respect to speech, for indeed during the day you have
drawn-out engagements.”***[^77]

It would delight me to relate a Divine Narration here regarding the
night and its men. It has been narrated that Allah, the Exalted, once
revealed to one of the truthful ones and said:

“I have servants from among my creatures who love Me, so I love them;
they yearn for Me and I yearn for them; they remember Me and I remember
them; they gaze at Me and I gaze at them. If you follow in their way, I
shall love you; and if you turn away from them, I shall hate you.  
 He said, ‘O Lord, what are their characteristics?’

He {the Exalted} answered, ‘They watch the shadow during daytime just
like a kind shepherd watches his sheep[^78]; they crave for sunset just
as a bird craves for her nest at sunset. When the night covers them and
the darkeness gets intense and the mats are spread and the beds are
prepared and every lover retires with his beloved, they rise to their
feet for Me, they spread their faces toward Me, they secretly call on Me
with My speech, and they cling onto Me with My melody.

You will find some of them crying and lamenting, and moaning and
complaining; while some others {in the position of} standing and
sitting, bowing down and prostrating. I see what they endure because of
Me, and I hear their complain out of love for Me.

The foremost of what I give them are three things: I cast of my light
into their hearts such that they talk of Me and I talk of them; if the
heavens and the earth were to be in their scales (*mawazin*), I would
undervalue that for them; and I turn toward them with My face. Can you
tell Me of anyone who is aware of what I intend to give him toward whom
I have turned with My face?”[^79]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is narrated to have said, “Among the things that
Allah had revealed to Musa (‘a) was, ‘He is a liar who thinks that he
loves Me but when the night falls he forgets Me. O son of ‘Imran! Had
you only seen those who stand for Me in the darkness while I have become
incarnate before their eyes, addressing Me while I am far above to be
seen, and talking to Me while I cannot be {physically} present. O son of
‘Imran! Give Me tears from your eyes, and humility from Your heart;
thereafter call on Me in the darkness of the nights and you will find Me
Nearmost, Answering.”[^80]

In the sermon of *al-Muttaqin* (the Godwary), Imam Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali
bin Abi Talib (‘a) -describing for Hammam the state of the friends of
Allah in their secret prayers at night, their remembrance and standing
before Allah, says: “At night they rise on their feet {for prayers},
reading parts of the Qur’an in a measured tone, creating through it
grief for themselves and taking counsel with it for the cure of their
ailments. If they come across a verse which arouses desire {for the
Heaven}, they pursue it avidly, and their spirits turn toward it
eagerly, and they feel as if it is in front of them.

And when they come across a verse which fills with fear {of the Fire},
they bend the ears of their hearts toward it, and feel as though the
sound of Hell and its cries are reaching their ears. They bend
themselves from their backs, prostrate on their foreheads, palms, knees
and toes, beseeching Allah, the Exalted, to set {them} free {from the
Fire}. In the daytime, they are enduring, learned, virtuous and Godwary.
Fear {of Allah} has made them thin like arrows…”[^81]

Another Illustration of the State of Yearning to Allah
------------------------------------------------------

**3)** Here is another illustration of yearning toward Allah in the
whispered prayer of *al-’arifin* (the knowers) by Imam Zayn al-’Abidin
(‘a). He says:  
 “  
 O Allah, make us among those within the gardens of whose breasts the
trees of yearning for You have taken firm root, and the assemblies of
whose hearts have been seized by the ardour of Your love. They seek
shelter in the nests of meditation, feed upon the gardens of nearness
and disclosure, drink from the pools of love with the cup of gentle
favour, and enter into the watering-places of warm affection.

The covering has been lifted from their eyes, the darkness of disquiet
has been dispelled from their beliefs and their innermost minds, the
contention of doubt has been negated from their hearts and their secret
thoughts, their breasts have expanded through the verification of true
knowledge, their aspiration have ascended through precedent good fortune
in renunciation, their drinking is sweet from the spring of devotion to
good works, their secret thoughts are delicious in the sitting-place of
intimacy, their minds are secure in the place of terror,

their souls are serene through the return to the Lord of lords, their
spirits have reached certitude through triumph and prosperity, their
eyes have been gladdened through gazing upon their Beloved, their
settling place has been settled through reaching the request and
attaining the expectation, and their commerce has profited through the
sale of this world for the next.

O Allah, how agreeable for hearts are the thoughts inspiring Your
remembrance, how sweet traveling to You through imagination upon the
roads of the unseen worlds, how pleasant the taste of Your love, how
delightful the drink of Your nearness! So give us refuge from Your
casting out and Your sending far, and make us among the most elect of
Your knowers, the most righteous of Your servants, the most truthful of
Your obeyers, and the most sincere of Your worshippers.”

I do not intend to stop here and ponder upon this prayer which is among
the magnificent pieces of prayers from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

But I would like to briefly explain the phrase with which Imam ‘Ali bin
al-Husayn (‘a) begins his prayer. He says: “O Allah, make us among those
within the gardens of whose breasts the trees of yearning for You have
taken firm root, and the assemblies of whose hearts have been seized by
the ardour of Your love.”

The breasts (*sudur*) of the friends of Allah –as it appears from the
speech of the Imam- are gardens of delight containing delicious fruits.

Generally, the breasts of the people are of different kinds. Some
breasts are libraries and schools of learning. No doubt knowledge is
good and light (*nur*) provided the breast remains a garden of yearning
toward Allah.

Some other breasts are like shops, banks, and stock markets, crowded
with numbers, tables and charts, and the accounts of profit and loss.
Wealth and trade are good, but with the condition that they should not
become activities which occupy the heart and the breast of a person,
such that they become his only concern which do not part with him.

Yet there are breasts which are similar to salty lands in that they
produce but thorns, colocynth, poison, hatred, tussle for acquiring
wealth and power, and deceit and plots against others.

There are breasts which are places of entertainment and playgrounds, the
way this world (*ad-dunya*) is a play and diversion for a large number
of people.

And there are people whose breasts are divided into two parts; a part
for poison, hatred, deception and trickery, and a part for amusement and
sport. Consequently, when the first part agitates them and makes them
restless, they would take resort to the second part and seek help from
it in order to rescue themselves from the torment of the first part.

But as for the breasts of the friends (*awliya’*) of Allah, they are –as
put by Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a)– gardens of yearning (*shawq*), filled
with joy, delightful fruits, and wherein the trees of yearning have
taken firm root.

Therefore, the yearning toward Allah is not something extrinsic to their
breasts such that it would disappear under the compulsion of their lowly
desires, or in case this world were to glamorize itself for them; nor
would it diminish or its leaves wilt if this world were to cause
constrain over them, or they were encircled by its hardships; for as
long as the trees of *shawq* are firmly rooted in these breasts, they
would remain leafy, verdant, and fruitful despite all obstacles and
difficulties.

The state of yearning is in fact the state of the lightness (*khiffah*)
of the soul; a state contrary to that of heaviness (*tathaqul*) and
being inclined toward this world which is refered to in the following
holy verse:

***“…What is the matter with you that when you are told: ‘Go forth in
the way of Allah’, you sink heavily to the ground? Are you pleased with
the life of this world instead of the Hereafter?”***[^82]

Indeed the soul becomes burdensome and bloated whenever one becomes
attached to this world and gets pleased with it and is inclined toward
it. In contrast, if one is freed from this world and plucks out his self
from it[^83], he would become spiritually light and, subsequently,
easily attracted to the love of Allah and yearning toward Him.

This much of the discussion on the illustrations of love, *shawq*, and
intimacy from the texts of the supplications of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
seems to be enough. We will now take up another discussion regarding the
‘love of Allah’.

Sincerity in Love of Allah
--------------------------

The position of this issue is higher than that of ‘unity in love’
(*tawhid al-hubb*). This is because unity in love does not negate any
other love apart from the love of Allah; rather it makes the love of
Allah dominant over other kinds of love. Subsequently, the love of Allah
would be the dominant and reigning love:

***“…but the faithful have a more ardent love for Allah…”***[^84]

This is one of the requisites of faith (*Iman*) and a branch among the
branches of *tawhid*.  
 In contrast, sincerity (*ikhlas*) in love of Allah negates all other
kinds of love apart from that of Allah, unless they are in extension
(*imtidad*) to the love of Allah and take the form of ‘love for Allah’
(*al-hubb lillah*) and ‘hatred for Allah’ (*al-bughd lillah*).

However, sincerity in the love for Allah is not among the requirements
of faith and *tawhid*, rather it has to do with the truthful ones
(*siddiqin*) and their spiritual stations (*maqamat*). For Allah, the
Exalted, enables His friends and His righteous servants to free their
hearts from all kinds of love other than the love of Him.

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “The heart (*qalb*) is the sanctuary (*haram*)
of Allah. Thus, do not settle in the sanctuary of Allah someone other
than Allah.”[^85]

This is a characteristic peculiar to the heart. The bodily parts move in
life in different directions and embark on a variety of affairs which
Allah has allowed and permitted. But with regard to the heart, it has
been considered as the *haram* of Allah in which love of other than
Allah and attachment to other than Him ought not to dwell.

The reference to the ‘heart’ in the above narration as ‘a sanctuary’ is
precise and of significance; for a sanctuary is a guarded area and
closed upon every stranger. Its inhabitants are not harmed nor do they
experience any fear, and no stranger can enter it. Thus the heart is,
the secured sanctuary of Allah; no love other than the love of Allah can
enter into it, and no harm or evil can touch it while it is in the
heart.

It is due to this very reason that the truthful ones and the sages from
the servants of Allah wholly dedicate their love to Allah, such that
they never associate His love with any other love, whatever it may be,
unless if it is in extension to the love of Allah.

In the following prayer, we can sense the ardour of love and the
trueness of sincerity in the love of Allah in the words of Imam Zayn
al-’Abidin (‘a), “O my Master, toward You is my desire, to You is my
fear, and toward You is my aspiration. My hope has driven me to You; and
onto You, O the One, I have placed my determination, and on what You
possess I have unfolded my wish.

For You are my earnest hope and fear, with You my love has become
accustomed, and to You I have surrendered myself, and to the rope of
Your obedience I have fastened my fear. O my Lord, my heart is living
with Your remembrance, and in confiding to You do I cool within myself
the agony of fear…”[^86]

In this part of the supplication, the Imam (‘a) ties his desire, fear
and hope altogether to Allah, placing all his resolution on Him, and
dedicating to Him his earnest hope and fear.

The Holy Prophet (S) is narrated to have said, “Love Allah
whole-heartedly.”[^87]

In one of his supplications, Imam ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (‘a) says: “O
Allah, I ask You to fill my heart with love of You, awe of You, belief
in You, faith in You, fear of You, and yearning toward You.”[^88]

When the love of Allah and yearning toward Him fills the heart of a
servant, there would remain no vacant place in his heart for another
love apart from that of Allah, unless if the other love is in extension
to His love, and, in this case, it would be counted as the love of Allah
and yearning toward Him.

In his prayer at the beginning of the holy month of Ramadan, Imam
as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “Send blessings on Muhammad and his Progeny, occupy
my heart with the great of Your affair, and send love of You to it until
I meet You {on the Day of Judgement} with blood gushing forth from my
jugular vein.”[^89]

This statement implies sincerity in love for Allah, as His love becomes
the only thing occupying the heart, and its only concern which does not
part it.

The Jealousy of Allah for His Servant
-------------------------------------

Allah, the Exalted, loves His servant, and one of the properties of love
is jealousy (*ghayrah*). Thus, He is earnestly concerned about the heart
of His servant, as He loves His servant to be sincere in his love for
Him and not to love anyone other than Him and not to let any other love
enter his heart.

It has been narrated that Prophet Musa (‘a) once called on Allah at the
Sacred Valley (*al-wadi al-muqaddas*), saying, “O Lord, I have dedicated
my love to You, and I have cleansed my heart of all other than You.”
{This was at a time when} he used to extremely love his family. So
Allah, the Exalted, the Blessed, said to him, “… If your love is purely
for Me, then take off from your heart the love of your family.”[^90]

Among the instances of the jealousy (*ghayrah*) of Allah for His servant
is that He removes love of others from his heart, such that if He were
to find that his heart is attached to other than Him, He would take that
love away from him so that his heart may purely be for His love.

In the supplication of *‘arafah*, Imam al-Husayn (‘a) says: “You are the
one who has removed {love of} others from the hearts of Your lovers,
such that they loved none but You… What has he found one who has lost
You? And what has he lost one who has found You? Indeed he who is
pleased with other than You as a substitute has gone wrong.”[^91]

I would like to relate in this regard an enlightening story which Shaykh
Hasan al-Banna has narrated in his book *Mudhakarat ad-Da’wah wa
ud-Da’iyah*. He says that Allah, the Exalted, had blessed Shaykh
Shalabi, one of the Egyptian scholars in mysticism and ethics, with a
daughter in the later stages of his life. The Shaykh was extremely fond
of her and loved her passionately, such that he would not separate from
her even after she had grown up. His love for her was on increase as she
grew up and became young.

On the eve of the birth anniversary of Holy Prophet (S) , Shaykh
al-Banna, together with a group of his friends, visited Shaykh
ash-Shalabi as they were coming back from a gathering -near the house of
the Shaykh- held due to this auspicious occasion, and sat with him for a
while. As they intended to leave, the Shaykh told them with a gentle
smile on his face, “By the will of Allah, visit me tomorrow so that we
may bury {my daughter,} Ruhiyyah.”

This daughter was the only child he was blessed with after eleven years
of his marriage. He would not separate from her even while at work. Now
she was grown up and was in the prime of youth. He named her ‘Ruhiyyah’
as her position to him was that of a spirit to the body.

Shaykh al-Banna says that we were astonished and thus asked him, “When
did she pass away?” He replied, “Today, just before sunset.” We said,
“Why did you not inform us, so that we could have taken out the funeral
procession from another house?” He said, “But what has happened? {This
auspicious occasion} has lessened our grief, and the funeral ceremony
has changed to a happy occasion. Do you still want a greater blessing
from Allah than this?”

Hence, the discussion changed into a lesson in mysticism given by the
Shaykh. He saw the reason behind the death of his daughter as the
jealosy (*ghayrah*) of Allah for the heart of His servant; for Allah is
greatly concerned about the hearts of His righteous servants lest they
should be attached to other than Him, or turn toward someone apart from
Him.

The Shaykh cited the example of Prophet Ibrahim (‘a) and how he was
attached to his son Isma’il, thus Allah commanded him to slaughter him;
and the example of Ya’qub and his fondness toward Yusuf, due to which
Allah separated him from Ya’qub for a number of years. This is why the
heart of a person ought not to be attached to other than Allah, the
Blessed, the Exalted, otherwise he would be dishonest in the claim of
His love.

Then the Shaykh brought the story of Fudayl bin ‘Ayad when he was
holding the hand of his little daughter and kissed it. So she said to
him, “Dear father, do you love me?” He replied, “Yes, my little
daughter.” She said, “By Allah, I did not think of you to be a liar
until today!” He said, “And how is that? Why would I lie?!” She
answered, “For I thought that because of the state of God-wary you are
in, you would not love anyone else.” So the man wept and said, “O my
Master! Even the small children have unveiled the pretension (*riya’*)
of Your servant, Fudayl!”

And the like of these anecdotes with which Shaykh ash-Shalabi tried to
calm us and avert what had struck us of grief due to the calamity which
had befallen him, and the state of our being ashamed because of spending
that night with him.

So we left and came back the next morning and buried Ruhiyyah. We did
not hear any voice of wailing, nor did anyone utter a distasteful word.
We did not see but manifestations of patience and submission to Allah,
the High, the Great.

Love 'of' Allah and 'for' Allah
-------------------------------

We ought to answer the following question that this interpretation of
‘sincerity in love of Allah’ could be seen to be contradicting the human
nature (*fitrah*); for Allah, the Exalted, has created man with love for
different things as well as dislike for different things. Now, sincerity
in love of Allah, as explained above, seems to stand in contrast with
this nature according to which Allah has created mankind.

The answer to this question is that sincerity in love of Allah does not
mean the rejection of the human nature. Rather it means directing one’s
love (*hubb*) and dislike (*kurh*) according to what Allah likes and
dislikes. Allah, the Exalted, does not want from his servant, nor did he
want from Musa bin ‘Imran, to take out the love of his family from his
heart. Rather, what He wants from him is that his love for his family
should be *through* his love of Him, and His love should be the only
source of all other kinds of love in his heart.

In other words, that which Allah wants from His servant, and wanted from
Musa (‘a), is to tie all kinds of love with His love. As a result, one’s
love for his family would be, in this case, a consolidation of the love
of Allah in a person.

This is a profound concept and a beautiful method of education
(*tarbiyah*) which none can comprehend but those whom Allah has chosen
and singled out for His love.

The Holy Prophet (S) , who is the greatest of all mankind in sincerity
and purity, used to say, “{Two things} have been made dear to me from
your world, women and perfume; and the delight of my eyes is in the
prayers (*salat*)*.*”[^92]

No doubt that this love in the speech of the Prophet (S) is a love which
is in extension to the love of Allah. The dearest of these three to the
heart of the Messenger of Allah (S) is indeed the prayers, as it is the
delight of his eyes. And there is no doubt in the fact that the
Prophet’s love for them was in extension to his love of Allah.

Therefore, ‘sincerity in love of Allah’ does not lead to destruction of
the human nature or cause disturbance in it. Rather, it entails a
reconstruction of the structure of love and hatred in human life based
on this new criterion presented by Islam.

Accordingly, the natural love and inclination of man remains intact, but
within a new arrangement, which, in fact, contributes to the
strengthening of one’s love of Allah, instead of weakening it and
causing confusion in it.

For this very reason there has been enormous emphasis in the Islamic
narrations on the value of ‘love *of* Allah and *for* Allah’. For
instance, Imam ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (‘a) is narrated to have said, “Love
for Allah is the closest kinship.”[^93]

He is also reported to have said, “Love of Allah is much stronger than
the womb relation.”[^94]

The above expression is precise and depends on an important intellectual
principle. There is indeed a diversity of blood relationships and close
ties in the lives of the people. The firmest of these relations is the
womb relation. Now, according to the above tradition, the relation with
Allah is much stronger even than the womb relation. Thus, if a person
ties his love and attachment to this relation, and if he succeeds in
organizing his love and hatred based on it, then all his relations would
become the strongest and the most perfect of relations.

The reason they would become the firmest of relations is that if a
relation is for the sake of other than Allah, then it is prone to change
and upheaval, as it can be affected with things which can alter the
attitude of a person toward the other. But if the love of a person for
his brother in faith is for the sake of Allah, then it would be firm and
strong, and more enduring in the face of different conflicting elements
and factors.

‘Sincerity in love of Allah’ not only does not negate the natural
attachments of a human being, but it also strengthens and consolidates
it after he has organized them based on the ‘main course’ {i.e. the
course of the love of Allah}, which plays an exclusive role in directing
the love of the truthful ones (*siddiqin*) and the friends of Allah.

Thus, the best of the people in the eyes of Allah would be the one who
is more loving toward his brother in faith, for the sake of Allah. Imam
as-Sadiq (‘a) says: “No two believers meet except that the best of them
is the one more ardent in love for his brother.”[^95]

He (‘a) is also reported to have said, “Those who love each other for
the sake of Allah shall be on the pulpits of light on the Day of
Judgement, such that the light of their bodies and the light of their
pulpits would illuminate every thing to the extent that they will be
known by it; and it will be said {about them}, ‘These are those who love
each other for the sake of Allah.”[^96]

It has been narrated that Allah, the Exalted, once revealed onto Musa
bin ‘Imran (‘a), “Have you ever performed a deed for Me? He answered, ‘I
have performed prayers (*salat*) for You, I have fasted {for You}, I
have given charity {for You}, and I have been remembering You.’

So Allah, the Blessed, the Exalted, said, ‘As for the prayers, they are
your proof (*burhan*); fasting is {your} shield (*junnah*); charity is
{your} shade (*zill*); and the remembrance is {your} light (*nur*). So
which deed have you performed for Me?’ Musa (‘a) said, ‘Show me a deed
which is solely for You.’ He {the Exalted} said, ‘O Musa! Have you ever
loved a friend of Mine for My sake, or have you ever hated My enemy for
My sake?’ Thus Musa came to know that the best of deeds is the love for
Allah and hatred for Allah.”[^97]

This narration is profound in meaning, for one may perform prayers out
of love for Allah, as he may perform it so that it may serve as a proof
for him in the Heaven. Likewise, he may fast out of his love for Allah,
as he may do so in order for it to serve as a protective shield for him
against the Fire. But love of the friends of Allah and hatred of His
enemies cannot be except out of one’s love for Him, the Exalted.

The First Source of Love
------------------------

From where should we draw the love of Allah? This is an important
question in our discussion. Now that we have known the value of the love
of Allah, we must know where to derive this love from and what is its
source?

A brief answer to this question is that Allah Himself is the source of
this love, its origin and goal. We will now explain this in detail.

### 1. Allah Loves His Servants

Indeed Allah loves His servants, He provides for them, protects them,
bestows upon them His blessings and bounties that none is able to count,
forgives them, turns toward them clemently, covers their shortcomings,
grants them success, guides them to the right path, takes care of them
with His patronage and grace, and averts evil and calamity from them.
All these are signs of His love toward his servants.

### 2. Allah Confers upon His Servants His Love and Affection

Among the signs of Allah’s love for his servants is that He loves them
and blesses them with His love. However, the affair of this love is very
strange; for it is Allah who is the bestower of love, and it is He who
receives love from His servants. He endows them with attraction
(*jadhbah*) after attraction, and thereafter He draws them toward
Himself with that attraction.

We find frequent indications to this concept in the Islamic narrations
and supplications. In the whispered prayer of *al-‘arifin* (the
knowers), Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says: “O Allah, make us among those
within the gardens of whose breasts the trees of yearning for You have
taken firm root, and the assemblies of whose hearts have been seized by
the ardour of Your love.” We have already explained this phrase earlier.

In the *munajat* of *al-mu’tasimin* (those who seek refuge), he (‘a)
says: “I ask You… to assign over us a protector through which You will
deliver us from destructions, turn aside from us blights, and hide us
from the striking of great afflictions; and to send down upon us some of
Your tranquility, to wrap our faces in the lights of love for You, to
give us haven in Your strong pillar; and to gather us under the wings of
Your protection; by Your clemency and mercy, O Most Merciful of the
merciful.”

Again in the *munajat* of *al-zahidin* (the abstainers), he (‘a) says:
“O Allah, induce us to renounce it and keep us safe from it, by Your
giving {us} success and by Your protecting {us} from sins. Strip from us
the robes of opposing You, attend to our affairs through Your good
sufficiency, amplify our increase from the boundless plenty of Your
mercy.

Be liberal in our gifts from the overflow of Your grants, plant in our
hearts the trees of Your love, complete for us the lights of Your
knowledge, give us to taste the sweetness of Your pardon and the
pleasure of Your forgiveness, gladden our eyes on the day of meeting You
with the vision of You, dislodge the love of this world from our hearts,
just as You have done for the righteous, Your selected friends, and for
the pious, those whom You have singled out, by Your mercy, O Most
Merciful of the merciful.”

In the supplement mentioned by Sayyid Ibn Tawus to the supplication of
Imam al-Husayn (‘a) on the Day of ‘Arafah, the Imam (‘a) supplicates to
Allah with the following verses, “How can Your existence be proved
through him who is dependent on You? Does other than You have an
appearance (*zuhur*) which You do not possess, such that he would become
the one to expose You? When have You become invisible such that You have
needed a proof to point You out? And when have You been far away such
that the effects (*athar*) would lead {us} to You? Blind is the eye
which does not see You watchful over itself, and the deal of one whom
You have not given a share out of Your love is in loss…

Guide me to You through Your light, and make me stand before You with
true servanthood… and protect me through Your protected secret… and make
me travel on the roads of the people of attraction (*ahl al-jadhb*). O
Allah, suffice me from planning for myself through your planning for me,
and from my choice through Your choosing for me, and keep me away from
cases of anxiety and restlessness…

You are the one who has caused the {rays of} light to shine on the
hearts of Your friends such that they recognized You and attested to
Your Oneness; You are the one who has removed {the love of} others from
the hearts of Your lovers, such that they loved none but You and did not
take resort to other than You; You are their companion when they are
left lonely by the worlds, and You are the one who has guided them after
they have been distanced from the signs and proofs. What has he found
one who has lost You?

And what has he lost one who has found You? Indeed he who is pleased
with other than You as a substitute has gone wrong, and verily one who
has sought other than You in exchange is in loss. How can one aspire for
other than You whilst You have not stopped {Your} benevolence? And how
can one ask from other than You while You have not changed {Your} way of
generosity?

O He who has made His lovers taste the sweetness of intimacy such that
they stood before Him in praise; and O He who has clothed His friends
with the clothes of His awe such that they stood before Him pleading for
forgiveness… O Allah, seek me by Your mercy until I reach You, and
attract me by Your favour so that I may turn toward You.”[^98]

### 3. Allah Shows His Affection toward His Servants

Allah, the Exalted, reveals His love to His servants by showering upon
them His blessings so that they might love Him. Indeed the bounties
showered upon the heedful and intelligent hearts are effective in
endearing Allah to them.

In his famous supplication at dawn, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) says: “You
show Your love toward us through Your bounties, and we return You with
sins; the good from You constantly descends upon us, while the evil from
us ascends to You. The honoured angel has always been, and is still,
bringing You the news of our ugly deeds, but that has not prevented You
from continuing to embrace us with Your blessings, and to kindly provide
us with Your bounties. Glory be to You! How clement You are, and how
great You are, and how kind You are, as the beginner {of the creation}
and the eventual claimer {of it}.”[^99]

A comparison between what descends from Allah to His servants of His
blessings, grace, benevolence, beauty, forgiveness and covering, and
that which ascends from the servants to Allah of evil and ugly deeds,
gives rise to a sense of shame in a servant toward his Master, as he
returns the love and affection from Him with avoidance and hatred toward
Him. And how miserable and wretched is a man who returns Allah’s love
for him and His exhibition of His love for him, by avoiding Him and
turning away from Him.

Just ponder over these words of the supplication of *al-iftitah* from
Imam al-Hujjah (‘a), “You call me and I turn away from You, You show me
affection and I show hatred towards You, You display Your love for me
and I do not accept {it} from You, as though I am above You. But this
did not prevent You from having mercy on me, being good to me, and
favouring me.”

[^1]: Qur’an, 9:24.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.98, pg.92.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.98, pg.226.

[^4]: Ibid, vol.78, pg.226.

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, pg.84.

[^6]: Ibid, vol.2, pg.83.

[^7]: Misbah al-Shari’ah, pg.2 3.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.12, pg.380.

[^9]: Ibid, vol.95, pg.467.

[^10]: Ibid, vol.98, pg.226.

[^11]: Ibid, vol.78, pg.175.

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, pg.125.

[^13]: Qur’an, 3:31.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.69, pg.237.

[^15]: Nur at-Thaqalayn, vol.5, pg.285.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.98, pg.26.

[^17]: Munajat Ahl al-Bayt, pg.96 97.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.98, pg.85.

[^19]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.94, pg.148.

[^20]: Ibid, vol.98, pg.226.

[^21]: Ibid, vol.94, pg.151.

[^22]: Ibid, vol.98, pg.82.

[^23]: Ibid, vol.94, pg.101.

[^24]: Ibid, vol.94, pg.99.

[^25]: Ibid, vol.94, pg.149.

[^26]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.94, pg.151.

[^27]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.94, pg.142.

[^28]: Ibid, vol.98, pg.84.

[^29]: Ibid, vol.98, pg.88.

[^30]: Munajat Ahl al-Bayt, pg.68 69.

[^31]: Bihar al-Anwar:, vol.94, pg.143.

[^32]: The supplication of al-Iftitah.

[^33]: Qur’an, 57:4.

[^34]: Qur’an, 50:16.

[^35]: Qur’an, 2:186.

[^36]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.94, pg.150.

[^37]: Liqa’ Allah, pg.101.

[^38]: Qur’an, 57:4.

[^39]: Qur’an, 13:28.

[^40]: That is, forgiveness and punishment.

[^41]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.46, pg.77 78.

[^42]: Ibid, vol.46, pg.80 81.

[^43]: Qur’an, 23:101.

[^44]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.46, pg.81 82.

[^45]: Falah as-Sa’il of Sayyid Ibn Tawus, pg.266.

[^46]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.94, pg.148.

[^47]: Qur’an, 54:55.

[^48]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.94, pg.148.

[^49]: Qur’an, 1:6 7.

[^50]: Qur’an, 2:213.

[^51]: Qur’an, 5:16.

[^52]: Qur’an, 6:87.

[^53]: Qur’an, 5:16.

[^54]: Qur’an, 6:153.

[^55]: Qur’an, 14:12.

[^56]: Qur’an, 29:69.

[^57]: Qur’an, 61:10.

[^58]: Qur’an, 2:207.

[^59]: Qur’an, 8:7 {Trans.}

[^60]: Qur’an, 2:267.

[^61]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol.2, pg.404.

[^62]: Qur’an, 38:45 47.

[^63]: There is a bilateral-relation between that which enters the heart
and that which flows out from it. If that which enters the heart is
good, then what comes out from it would be good as well; as the opposite
is true also. When the acts of a person are righteous, then Allah would
grant him with the exclusiveness of the remembrance of the Hereafter.
But if his deeds are evil, then Allah would deprive him of the pure
drink and leave him on his own; thus he would be drinking of what
shaitan and his own lowly desires inspire him with, and that which the
people drink from the table of satan and their mean desires.

[^64]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.15, pg.39.

[^65]: Ibid.

[^66]: Qur’an, 25:74.

[^67]: Qur’an, 5:35.

[^68]: Qur’an, 17:57.

[^69]: Qur’an, 26:80.

[^70]: Among the supplications of the holy month of Rajab.

[^71]: Qur’an, 21:83 84.

[^72]: Qur’an, 21:87 88.

[^73]: Qur’an, 43 45.

[^74]: Qur’an, 21:46.

[^75]: Qur’an, 11:45.

[^76]: Qur’an, 25:77.

[^77]: Qur’an, 73:1 7.

[^78]: This is an allusion to the fact that they eagerly await the end
of the day so that they may stand before their Lord in worship. {Trns.}

[^79]: Liqa’ Allah, pg.104.

[^80]: Ibid, pg.101.

[^81]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon no.193.

[^82]: Qur’an, 9:38.

[^83]: Freeing oneself from this world does not mean abandoning it. The
Holy Prophet (S) himself was a person free of {attachment to} this
world, but still he used to work for spreading the message of Islam in
this world, and to subject this world to it.

[^84]: Qur’an, 2:165.

[^85]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.70, pg.25.

[^86]: Part of the supplication of abu hamzah at-Thumali.

[^87]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol.47, pg.44.

[^88]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.98, pg.89.

[^89]: Ibid, vol.97, pg.334.

[^90]: Ibid, vol.83, pg.236.

[^91]: Ibid, vol.98, pg.226.

[^92]: Al-Khisal, pg.165.

[^93]: Mizan al-Hikmah, vol.2, pg.233.

[^94]: Ibid.

[^95]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.74, pg.398.

[^96]: Ibid, pg.399.

[^97]: Ibid, vol.69, pg.253.

[^98]: Ibid, vol.98, pg.226.

[^99]: Ibid, pg.85.


