II. Islamicization of the West.
===============================

“Islamicization of the West”, I will use this word for the diffusion and
assimilation of Islamic culture in the West. This is distinct from
Islamization which means the conscious acceptance and implementation of
the ideal Islamic cultural patterns by non-Muslims and nominal Muslims.
Islamicization is sociologically similar to, though not identical with,
Westernization subject to the limits and conditions of imitative-
innovative social change.

The Islamicization of the Medieval West, occurred, first, during the
period ending around the middle of the eleventh century before
systematic translations from Arabic into Western languages began;
secondly during the age of Arabic translations coinciding with the
little Renaissance of the twelfth to the seventeenth centuries; and
third, during the Catholic-Protestant Reformation and Renaissance of the
fourteenth to the sixteenth centuries.

The very presence of Muslims on Western soils (Spain, Sicily) was
creating a complex situation. On the one hand, Islamic civilization on
Western land was allowing a different way of living and thinking much
superior to that one existing in the rest of Europe. On the other hand,
it was giving bad feelings to the Christians towards those Muslims
inhabiting Latin neighboring countries.

The transformation of the West during these centuries until the
sixteenth, passed through several stages of contact and conflict with
Islamic culture. The West resorted to various strategies vis-à-vis “the
problem of Islam” (R.W. Southern,Western Views of Islam ). Until about
the end of the eleventh century, the Western views of ideal Islam and
its cultural and military triumphant civilization were fostered by sheer
ignorance, fanaticism, hatred toward Islam and the Muslims, Biblical
exegesis, and relative intellectual and physical isolation. This led to
the expected apogee of Western Zealot type response: the Crusades of the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The extensive contacts with the
superior Islamic culture and Muslims during the Crusades ushered in a
new era in Western self-consciousness, and awakened responses to Islamic
culture. The highest intellectual achievements of the West during these
two centuries, twelfth and thirteenth, comprised the imitation of
Islamic science and learning. Universities were found in the West
patterned on the Muslim universities to assimilate the new knowledge
made available by translations of the works in Arabic and, to a lesser
extent, of Greek classics which have been superseded by the Muslims.

III. Islamic achievements in science.
=====================================

A. Introduction: Unwillingness to recognize Islamic achievements.
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Many European scholars who approach the subject of Arab contributions to
science and philosophy do it with prejudice against the Arabs. Even some
of those who praise them do so grudgingly, Carra de Vaux in his chapter
“Astronomy and mathematics’, inLegacy of Islam felt compelled to begin
by disparaging the Arabs. He said: “we must not expect to find among the
Arabs the same powerful genius, the same gift of scientific imagination,
the same “enthusiasm”, the same originality of thought that we have
among the Greeks. The Arabs are before all else the pupils of the
Greeks, their science is a continuation of Greek science which it
preserves, cultivates, and on a number of points develops and perfects.”
This is what Carra de Vaux began by saying on the Arabs but a moment
later he elaborated and conceded that: “the Arabs have really achieved
great things in science; they taught the use of ciphers (sc. Arabic
numerals), although they did not invent them, and thus became the
founders of the arithmetic of every day; they made algebra an exact
science and developed it considerably and laid the foundations of
analytical geometry; they were indisputably the founders of plane and
spherical trigonometry which, properly speaking, did not exist among the
Greeks. In astronomy they made a number of valuable observations.”

The Arabs, with a great open mind went through a gigantesque translation
movement from Greek, Indian, and Syriac. Al Ma’mum, the Abbassid Khalif,
had founded at the beginning of the ninth century “the house of Wisdom”
(bayt el Hikmah) especially for translations. The Arabs assimilated
these works of the ancient and developed them. Philosophy, Mathematics,
Astronomy and Medicine were the first subjects to attract the interest
of Muslims.

B. Scientific method and rationalism.
-------------------------------------

The scientific or inductive method of inquiry was the greatest boon the
Islamic culture had bestowed upon the West. Muslim thinkers were using
the inductive method in their scientific investigation in different
fields. AlRazi and Ibn al Haitham expounded particularly this method.
Ibn Hazm, in his studies of logic emphasized sense-perception as a
source of knowledge. Later Ibn Taymiyah, refuting the Aristotelian logic
showed that induction was the only form of reliable inference.

It was the method of observation and experiment which led Al-Biruni to
the discovery of reaction time, al-Kindi to the formula that sensation
is a response of the organism proportionate to the stimulus, and Ibn Al
Haitham to his findings in optics.

Briffault, inThe Making of Humanity, (London, 1928, pp. 200-201) wrote:
“the debt of our science to that of the Arabs does not consist in
startling discoveries of revolutionary theories; science owes a great
deal more to Arab culture, it owes its existence.”

The ancient world was pre-scientific. The astronomy and mathematics of
the Greeks were a foreign importation never thoroughly acclimatized in
Greek culture. The Greeks systematized, generalized, and theorized, but
the patient ways of investigation, the accumulation of positive
knowledge, the minute methods of science, detailed and prolonged
observation and experimental inquiry were altogether alien to the Greek
temperament. Only in Hellenistic Alexandria was any approach to
scientific work conducted in the ancient classical world. What we call
science arose in Europe as a result of a new spirit of inquiry, of new
methods of investigation, of the methods of experiment, observation, and
measurement, of the development of mathematics in a form unknown to the
Greeks. That spirit and those methods were introduced into the European
world by the Arabs.

C. Humanism, philosophy, scholasticism.
---------------------------------------

Muslim philosophy influenced Western thought in several ways. It mainly
initiated in the West the humanistic movement and helped the Western
scholastics in harmonizing philosophy with faith.

Muslims gave a humanist bend to the Western mind. They revealed to the
West that outside the prevailing catholic church it was not all darkness
and barbarism but immense wealth of knowledge. Before any direct contact
between the Greek intellect and the Western mind was established, Arabs
had captured and further developed all the intellectual achievements of
Greece. It was also due to their influence that men outside the
Christian West began to be considered as human and even possessors of
higher civilizations.

Long before the Crusades, an Islamic rationalism, had existed in Muslim
Spain and Muslim Sicily on Western soil and had been radiating from
there to banish the Christian –Western “ Dark Age”. The Muslim
idealistic rationalists precede the Jewish and Christian scholastics.
Latin Christendom was borrowing and assimilating Islamic ideological
culture, directly from original Arabic sources and the Latin
translations of the works of Al- Ghazali, Al kindi, Al Farabi, Ibn Sina,
Ibn Rushd and others. Indirectly also through the translated works of
Jewish scholastics (Maimonides) who had come even under deeper Islamic
influences (G. Sarton,An Introduction to History of Science , 1:626,
694, 701).

It is now an established fact of the history of science that the
Christian scholastics did borrow from the Islamic philosophy
(E.Gilson,History of Christian philosophy in the Middle Ages ; –
sheriff, M.M. (Ed) AHistory of Muslim Philosophy *.* ; G.Sarton,An
Introduction to History of science . St. Albert and St. Thomas were
among the great imitative- innovative assimilators of Islamic
ideological culture. Sorokin cited the theory of knowledge of St. Thomas
as an example of “a European variety of Platonic- Aristotelian
idealistic rationalism” (Social and Cultural Dynamics , 2:99, 97ff).
Reverend Hammond proved by placing in parallel columns passages from
their works that St. Thomas plagiarized the ideas as well as the
phraseology of Al Farabi concerning the theory of knowledge, and other
ideas. (R. Hammond,The philosophy of al Farabi and its influence on
Medieval thought ). Sarton said St. Thomas “was deeply influenced by
Muslim philosophy… chiefly by Al- Ghazali and Ibn Rushd, but his own
point of view was fundamentally opposed to Averroism… The aim of his
life was to reconcile Aristotelian and Muslim knowledge with Christian
theology”.(Introduction , 2: 914f).

Philosophy and science were considered, in the West, up to the fifteenth
century, as antagonistic to religion. Hence the teachings of
Aristotelianism and Averroism were banned, Bruno was burnt, Kepler was
persecuted and Galileo forced to retract. By harmonizing faith with
reason Muslim thinkers made possible for themselves and for Europe, an
unhampered development.

The Renaissance finally could install Aristotle on the throne of
philosophy. Montgomery Walt expresses an interesting idea about the
origin of the extreme love and admiration Europe had for Aristotle and
the Classical thought in general. This phenomenon can be considered as
another Islamic contribution to the Western culture. It is because
Europe wanted to assert itself distinctly from the Islamic civilization
that it assigned to Aristotle a central position in philosophy and
science.

The main philosophical influence on the Christian thought at this period
was Avicenna and Averroes, the two Muslim philosophers commenting
Aristotle and building their philosophical systems on or against the
Greek philosopher. Aristotle presented to the Christian scholars the
opportunity to escape from the Muslim thought as such. Aristotle
belonging to the classical past (Greek and Roman) of Europe was a
positive complement to the Muslim sciences towards which the Christian
scholars had turned to acquire their knowledge. Montgomery Watt says:
“the purely negative activity of turning from Islam, especially when so
much was being learnt from Arab sciences and philosophy would have been
difficult, if not impossible, without a positive complement, the
positive complement was the appeal to Europe’s classical past”
(TheInfluence of Islam on Medieval Europe , p.79). Because Europe was
reacting against Islam it exaggerated its dependence on its Roman and
Greek heritage and belittled the influence of the Muslim one.

John Wycliffe (d. 1384), “the Morning star” of the Reformation called
for a reform of the church, by imitation of the Muslims, but certainly
without expressing his idea explicitly. (Sarton,Introduction , 3:
1346-50). He began a new era by pointing inwards at Christians and their
own deficiencies as an explanation for their lack of success compared to
the Muslims’ one. He believed the cause of Muslims’ success was their
religion which sanctioned worldly pursuits, self-will and secular
dominion. The success of Christendom depended on its development like
the Muslims’, for Wycliffe said “Opposites are dissolved by their
opposites”. (Southern, pp. 77-83; Sarton, 3: 1346-50).

The fifteenth century experienced continued Islamicisation of the West
and a variety of responses to the challenge of Islamic culture. John of
Segovia, a Spanish cardinal (d. 1458), advocated peaceful communication
with the Muslims. At the other end was Jean Germain (d. 1461), a French
bishop, interested in rallying Christendom to a sense of its own
identity, preached a return to crusader militarism; above all, he hated
those Christians- merchants and others, in increasing numbers- who
traveled in Islam and came back with scruples and criticisms of the
Christian faith. Unlike John of Segovia, he feared the contamination of
discussion. (Southern, p.97). By that time the Islamised Turks had
seized power in the Muslim world under the Ottoman dynasty. They had
taken over the Balkans, Constantinople and were reaching the outposts of
Western Europe.

Then came Martin Luther (d. 1546) after Wycliffe and others and claimed
that there can be no solution to the problem of Islam until Christian
reformation was completed. He strove to eliminate asceticism,
monasticism, celibacy, mendicants, the domination of the church, the
cult of saints and holy days, the indissolubility and sacredness of
marriage. He even admitted  polygamy as lawful. He taught the sanctity
of all work and rejected the notion of some works as holy. He emphasized
the ethic of worldly success. (Southern, p. 104-7). Like Wycliffe,
Luther rebelled against ecclesiastical authoritarianism and stressed the
importance of individual reasoning and conscience as necessary to
conduct independent study either to see God or to develop science and
philosophy as was so well demonstrated by the success of the Islamic
culture. Luther’s opponents were not wrong when they accused him of
imitating Islamic tenets.

The works of St. Albert, St. Thomas and Roger Bacon represent basically
a tremendous will to conquer learning primarily by borrowing from the
Muslims. The Western myth of Roger Bacon as the founder of the
experimental method has been exploded (Sarton,An Introduction ,
2:952-67; Briffault,The Making of Humanity ) though it remains to this
day esoteric knowledge. Bacon was a student and agent of diffusion in
Europe of the well established scientific method of the Muslims. Bacon
abandoned the*Bible* as an instrument for understanding the role of
Islam in the World; he opposed the militant and zealot responses of the
Crusades and Western obscurantism. He was convinced of the importance of
learning Arabic and the Muslim sciences and philosophy as the only way
to true knowledge for Christian Europe. (Southern,Western Views , pp
52-64). Even if Roger Bacon, like other medieval Western scholars, did
not acknowledge his Islamic borrowings, part V of hisOpus Majus is
almost a copy ofThe Optics of Ibn al Haitham (d. 1039) (Southern,
pp56-7). Bacon was one of the most outspoken agents of diffusion of
Islamic culture in the West; for this he was imprisoned during the last
fifteen years of his life.

The career of Frederic II, the semi-Muslim Hohenstaufen Emperor of Rome
(1215-1250) exemplifies the Western Christian pre- Reformation
ideological and institutional obstacles to Islamicization. He patronized
translations of Arabic books and popularized them, established the first
medieval Western university at Naples, and others at Messina and Padua.
He introduced advanced Muslim medicine in the school of Salerno. Pope
Gregory IX called him an anti- Christ and stirred revolts against him.
Repeatedly excommunicated, vanquished, baffled, betrayed, harassed,
disheartened, embittered by long years of strife and daily peril,
Frederic II capitulated to the Pope and departed from Italy on a
Crusade. In Jerusalem, this strangest of Crusaders, was received by
Sultan Al Malik Al Kamil, as an honored friend. Discussing with the
knowledgeable Sultan, mathematics and sciences, as well as the folly of
men who like darkness rather than light, Frederic II exclaimed: “Happy
Sultan who knows no pope” (Briffault, p.214). These were prophetic words
pointing at the Christian institutional obstructions to Islamicisation.
The concept of an anti- Christ was shifting from the Prophet Muhammad to
Western Islamicisers and, at the hands of the Protestant reformers, to
the Popes.

D. Mathematics
--------------

The first important name in mathematics is that of AL-khwarismi, known
to the Latin scholars as Algorismus; from his name is derived the
technical term “algorism” and he is the founder of the science of
“Algebra”. Alkhawarismi was followed by many famous mathematicians, like
AlKindi, AlSarakhsi, the three sons of Shakir Ibn Musa, the “Banu Musa”,
Alhazen, the Brethren of Purity, etc…

The achievements of Islamic mathematics can be summarized as follow: the
Muslims developed number theory in both its mathematical and
metaphysical aspects. They generalized the concept of number beyond what
was known to the Greeks. They devised new methods of numerical
computation reaching their height with Alkashani in the eighth/fifteenth
centuries. They also dealt with numerical series, decimal fractions, and
similar branches of mathematics connected with numbers.

They systematized and developed the science of algebra, preserving
always its links with geometry. They continued the work of the Greeks in
solid and plane geometry and developed trigonometry, both plane and
solid, working up accurate tables for the functions and discovering many
trigonometric relations. This science, cultivated previously in
conjunction with astronomy, was perfected and made into an independent
science for the first time by Nasir al Din al Tusi in his famous*Figure
of the Sector,* which represents major achievements in medieval
mathematics. Muslims, above all, developed the "Arabic numbers" and thus
made easier all the dealings done previously with the roman numbers
encouraged to go beyond the mathematical operations and opened the
mathematical horizons with the invention of the zero.

E. Astronomy
------------

In Astronomy Muslims continued the Greek tradition while making
extensive use of the knowledge of the Persians and Indians and
integrated this new astronomical system into the Islamic world view. The
several new features of Islamic astronomy include, besides all the
refinements made in the Ptolemaic system, the star catalogue of Ulugh
Beg, which was the first new catalogue since the time of Ptolemy, and
the replacement of the calculus of chords by the calculus of sires and
trigonometry. The Muslim astronomers also modified the general system of
the Alexandrians in two important aspects. The first modification was to
abolish the eight spheres which Ptolemy had hypothesized to communicate
the diurnal movement to each of the heaven; the Muslims substituted a
single starless heaven at the confines of the universe, above the
heavens of fixed stars, which in undergoing diurnal motion carried all
the heavens with it. The other modification, which had a greater
significance for the philosophy of sciences, involved a change in the
nature of the heavens. The abstract heavens of the Greeks were
transformed into a solid body.

The Islamic astronomy continued to correct the mathematical shortcomings
of the Ptolemaic model, but it did not break the bounds of the closed
Ptolemaic system, which was so intimately tied to the medieval world
view.

Later Muslim astronomers criticized various aspects of Ptolemaic
astronomy, and Al Biruni knew of the possibility of the motion of the
earth around the sun and an elliptic rather than circular motion of the
planets. But none of them did, nor could they, take the step to break
with the traditional worldview, as was to happen during the Renaissance
in the West, because that would have meant not only a revolution in
astronomy, but also an upheaval in the religious, philosophical and
social domains.

As long as the hierarchy of knowledge remained intact in Islam, and
sciences (scientia) continued to be cultivated in the bosom of wisdom
(Sapientia), a certain “limitation” in the physical domain was accepted
in order to preserve the freedom of expansion and realization in the
spiritual domain. The wall of cosmos was preserved in order to guard the
symbolic meaning which such a walled-in-vision of the cosmos presented
to most of mankind.  For The great majority of men, it was difficult to
conceive of the sky as some incandescent matter whirling in space and at
the same time as the throne of God. And so, despite all the technical
possibility, the step toward breaking the traditional world view was not
taken, and the Muslims remained content with developing and perfecting
the astronomical system that had been inherited from the Greeks, Indians
and Persians, and which became fully integrated into the Islamic world
view.

F. Medicine
-----------

Islamic medicine is one of the most famous and best known facets of
Islamic civilization, being one of the branches of science in which the
Muslims most excelled. The Muslim physicians were studied in the West
until the 19th century. In the East, despite the rapid spread of Western
medical education, Islamic medicine continues to be studied and
practiced on a minor scale.

Islamic school of medicine which came into being early in the history of
Islam is of great significance first for its intrinsic value, secondly
because it has always been closely allied with the other sciences, and
especially philosophy.

The wise man or Hakim, who has been throughout Islamic history the
central figure in the propagation and transmission of sciences, has
usually been a physician. The fact that both the sage and the physician
are called Hakim shows the relationship between the two. Many of the
best known philosophers and scientists in Islam, such as Avicenna and
Averroes, were also physicians. The same thing holds true for the Jewish
philosophers in the world of Islam. Maimonides besides being a great
thinker was also the physician to Saladin.

The first generations of Muslims were having a simple medicine based
on what became to be known as the Medicine of the Prophet (Tibb
an-Nabi). Islam, as a guide for all aspects of human life, was concerned
with the general principles of medicine and hygiene. Several verses of
the***Quran*** deal with medical questions of a very general order.
There are also many sayings of the Prophet dealing with health,
sickness, hygiene, and many questions related to the field of medicine.
Their guidance has determined many of the Muslims dietary and hygienic
habits.

To this typically Islamic medicine were integrated the Hippocratic and
Galenic traditions of Greek medicine with the theories and practices of
the Persians and Indians, within the general world view of Islam. It is
therefore synthetic in nature, combining the observational and concrete
approach of the Hippocratic school with the theoretical and
philosophical method of Galen and adding to the already rich Greek
tradition the theories and experiences of the Persian and Indian
physicians. The Islamic medicine was seeking the concrete causes for
individual phenomena rather than the general causes sought by the
Peripatetic “natural philosophy.”

With medical texts of Greek, Pahlavi and Sanskrit origin translated into
Arabic, and a sound technical vocabulary firmly established, the ground
was prepared for the appearance of those giants whose work have
dominated Islamic medicine ever since: Al Tabari, Rhazes, Ali ibn al
Abbas, Avicenna, Averroes, Mesue Senior (yuhanna ibn Masawaih), Mesue
Junior (Masawaih al Marindi) and many others.

The Muslim physicians taught their science in schools, mosques and
hospitals. There were the theoretical teaching and the practical one.
The hospitals were very cared for and all the sick persons were admitted
and were receiving all the care  needed, plus clean and new clothes and
enough money to live with until they were able to resume working.

It would be too long to speak about all the sciences the Muslims
developed: History, Geography, Cosmography and Cosmology, the sciences
of man, the city planning, Engineer architecture, Arts, etc…

Arts and sciences in Islam are based on the idea of Devine Unity, which
is the heart of Islamic Revelation. Just as all genuine Islamic arts
provide the plastic forms through which one can contemplate the Divine
Unity manifesting itself in multiplicity, so do all Islamic sciences
reveal the unity of Nature, which is an image of the unity of the Divine
Principle. \`

G. Material Culture
-------------------

### 1. Commerce and Seafaring

###

Arab presence in Sicily and Spain from the eighth century onward and the
European presence in the Levant during the two centuries of the Crusades
had led to a certain adoption by Western Europeans of many features of
Islamic culture. We should add to these relations those resulting from
the trade and commerce Arabs had been carrying out throughout the lands
under Islamic domination and far beyond these frontiers.

The Arabs in the West wanted the material luxuries to which they had
been accustomed in Damascus, and the local inhabitants, admiring the
Arabs, wanted to share as far as possible the external aspects of their
life. Traders were coming from the East with manufactured goods,
incense, spices and all the niceties giving a flavor for daily life.
They were bringing back from Europe raw materials, slaves, iron and
timber.

The sharing of material culture is observed also in techniques connected
with shipbuilding and seafaring. The Arabs invented the lateen sail,
despite its Western name, in the lateen caravel. The principle of the
lateen sail was adopted by European shipbuilders and once developed made
possible the construction of larger ships capable of crossing the
Atlantic for the voyages of discovery. They also discovered the
mariner’s compass, the portolans or nautical charts, etc… It was from
the Arabs that Europeans gained a wider and more precise geographical
knowledge. The Arab scholar Al Idrissi (1100-66) under the patronage of
Roger II of Sicily, produced a complete description of the world as then
known to the Muslims. He set out the fruits of his travels from Asia to
England in a series of seventy maps accompanied by written description
comprising what is known as “the book of Roger”. Up to the twelfth
century, men still thought that the whole world, apart from Europe,
belonged to the Muslims, to judge from the writing of William of
Malmesbury.

### 2. Agriculture and Minerals

###

Arabs were having a prosperous agriculture in the lands where
agriculture was possible. They certainly raised the level of agriculture
in a country like Spain where they introduced ways of conserving and
distributing water. Evidence for this is the large number of Spanish
words pertaining to irrigation techniques which have been derived from
Arabic, ex: acequia, irrigation ditch; alberca, articial pool; aljibe,
cistern; noria, irrigating wheel or draw well; arcaduz, water conduit or
bucket; azuda, Persian wheel; almatriche, canal; alcantarilla, bridge,
sewer; atarjea, small drain; atanor, water pipe; alcorque, hollow round
the base of a tree to hold water, etc… besides this evidence from
language, the actual forms of wheels still used in Spain were invented
in the Middle East where they are found today.

The Arabs introduced into Spain their crops: among others were the
sugar-cane, rice, oranges, lemons, aubergines, artichokes, apricots and
cotton. For all these even the English words came originally from
Arabic.

The mineral wealth of Spain was fully exploited: Iron, Copper, cinnabar
from which mercury was extracted, gold, precious and semi-precious
stones were sought and collected.

### 3. The Arts of “Gracious Living”

###

### 3.1. Industry

###

This wide variety of materials from agriculture and mining was used by
the Arabs of Spain to enhance the pleasure of life. There were various
industries producing luxury goods. Among the products were gorgeous
textiles in wool, linen and silk. The ceramic industry, the
manufacturing of Crystal, the handicraft of fine metal, of jewellery, of
carving ivory and wood, of leather work, book-biding, etc… were highly
developed.

### 3.2. Architecture

###

The glorious buildings called “Moorish” constituted the framework of
this life of luxury. The evidence of the Spanish language shows that the
Arabs were responsible for many improvements and refinements in building
techniques. The words for “architect” and “mason” are from Arabic,
“alarife” and “albanil”. So also are the following; alcazar, castle;
alcoba, bedroom; azulejo, tile; azotea , roof terrace; baldosa, fine
paving tile; aldaba, door-knocker, etc…

### 3.3. Music

###

The Arabs invented or improved many types of instrument. The Arabic
names of the lute, guitar, rebec and naker show their Arabic origin. The
actual Arabic singing and playing was spread by the troubadours. The
Morris dancers of England (or Moorish dancers) perform with a
hobby-horse and bells and are reminiscent of the Arab minstrels:

### 3.4. Books

###

Familiarity with books was one part of “gracious living”. The use of
paper made easier the possession of books. The Arabs developed the
manufacturing of paper invented by the Chinese. Its use spread into
Western Europe through Spain and Sicily.

### 3.5. Urban organization

###

The “gracious living” of the Arabs of Spain was essentially urban living
and presupposes the existence of cities where law and order is preserved
and people living together in peace. It is not surprising therefore to
find in Spanish number of words of Arabic origin dealing with municipal
administration and the control of commercial activity like, alcalde
(mayor), alcaid (governor of a fortress), the zalmedina (magistrate),
zoco or azoguejo (market) etc…


