V. Conclusion
=============

The notion of “the miracle of Arabic science” circulated most
unfortunately by Sarton, the Historian of medieval science, is false.
The explanation of the “phenomenon” of the sudden birth of Islamic
science lays down in the living Islamic ethos of those times; its dogmas
and its gamut of culture; the all- pervading Islamic law which forged
strong bonds of social co-operation among the Muslims, and between the
Muslims and non-Muslims, citizens and resident aliens of the vast
Islamic society of bewildering religious, ideological, national, racial
and linguistic diversity. This Islamic ethos in action rekindled the
dying embers of the pre-Quranic ancient sciences and world-wide
civilization. The Muslims absorbed the best in the existing sciences and
civilizations consistent with Islam and developed them, thanks to the
intensely developed Islamic consciousness and conditioning, based on a
remarkable Islamic system of education. There was great flexibility in
horizontal and vertical mobility of people as nationalistic and
hedonistic evils were held in check. Prerequisites for science and
civilization were there: invention and innovation based on original
thought; social mindedness and utilitarianism of individual efforts as
well as in the organization of state and its educational and other
programs; political stability, the rule of law and constitutionalism.
All these mechanisms and conditions are necessary for the genesis,
development, diffusion and application of science and technology. These
mechanisms operate only in a cultural and political milieu of propitious
dogmas, laws, values, cosmological doctrines, attitudes and efforts, all
of which existed in the progressive period of medieval Islamic
civilization.

I would like to emphasize the Islamic origins of modern science and
civilization, and the ascendancy of Islamic science and learning in the
world for more than 600 years (eighth to thirteenth centuries AD/second
to seventh AH at least).

The West has generally maintained a conspiracy of silence regarding its
medieval rejuvenation through Islamicization (the imitative-innovative
assimilation of Islamic culture by non-Muslims - Islamization being the
adoption of ideal Islamic culture and religion in the behavioral
culture).

In more recent times a large number of Western scholars, together with
Muslim scholars writing in Western languages, have been bringing out the
diffusion of Islamic science, philosophy, and other aspects of Islamic
culture in medieval West.

However, such researches have not been incorporated in the Western
education system and culture, in the manner and to the extent necessary
for fostering the proper appreciation of the ideal and historical
patterns of Islamic culture. Therefore the West portends and strives for
Westernization of the Muslim world because of what is considered to be
the backwardness of contemporary Muslim behavioral culture pattern and
the denyial of the existence and validity of ideal Islamic culture
pattern. Therefore we can see the reactionary Muslim responses through
polemics, xenophobia, historical romanticism, zealotism, fanaticism,
extremism, even terrorism. Which are in fact a far cry from the creative
adaptation indispensable for contemporary rejuvenation.

The consequences of the denial, falsification and neglect of this
historical fact have been extremely serious: the denigration of Islam in
the eyes of Muslims and non-Muslims; the identification of Islam and its
culture with ignorance and backwardness and of “modernity” and progress
with Western civilization; the creation of xenophobia and arrogance in
Western mind, and the perpetration of ideological and politico- economic
Western imperialism against Muslim people; the imposition of an
inferiority complex among Western educated “modern” Muslims, and the
bitter social and political cleavages between the “modern” and the
“traditional” Muslim elites.

This fact of medieval Islamicization of the West needs to be fully
researched, accepted and incorporated in specialized works and in the
teaching materials of schools and colleges around the world. The
consequences of this will be far reaching in understanding the
socio-cultural rejuvenation and modernization of the developing nations,
in building up a genuine and universally acceptable theory of social
action, and in ridding sociology of ethnocentrism; in removing the
burdens of historical romanticism and apologetics imposed upon the
underdeveloped nations and suppressed minorities as a reaction to the
cultural arrogance of nations and ethnic groups which are highly
developed today but had their own dark ages at some other time and in
promoting international understanding and co-operation for development
and world peace.


