The “What There Should Be” and “What There Is” System
=====================================================

A value is something useful to man. If something has no physical or
spiritual advantage for man, it cannot be regarded as a value. There are
two kinds of value:

1- Conventional values: These values are credits various peoples
designate themselves. They can be categorized into two groups:

a) Values entitled as “taboo ethics.” Touching the chief's food, for
instance, is considered as prohibited in some tribes. Such affairs are
values for these peoples. There is no doubt, however, that these values
have no real basis or origin.

b) Cultural values: Each nation or ethnic group consider themselves a
series of values that are rooted in their beliefs, viewpoints, artistic
elements and other natural and social affairs. For example, Norooz,
coinciding with the beginning of spring, is one of the values arising
from Iranian cultural and social background.

2- Values based on facts: These values are related to man's nature. The
stronger its connection with the human disposition, the more essential
the value. The principle “People's lives should not be disturbed,” for
instance, is a value-based issue rooted in man's nature. There are two
reasons why it is essential:

a) Disturbing people's lives leads to personal vengeance or legal
punishment.

b) Disturbing people's lives causes discomfort, annoyance and tortures
the conscience.

Any form of annoyance to others influences the souls of both the
disturber and the disturbed. Defying values based on facts affects them.
If people resist values, the values will not be defied. If someone
commits suicide, for instance, he has actually confronted a fact with
another real phenomenon. In suicide, it is not a matter of one credited
act destroying another; in fact, a mental disorder is destroying the
most original reality of all - human life.

By ignoring values rooted in his true nature, man causes disorders in
his soul. If, for example, one defies justice - commits an atrocious
act, in other words - he is in fact damaging his own character. A liar
causes disorders in his soul and his ego when he lies, consciously or
unconsciously.

The Relationship between Values and Scientific Research
-------------------------------------------------------

As we know, values are “what there should be;” they are “obligations.”
And what there should be relates to man's free will. In other words,
duties, obligations and moral values are meaningful when man does them
by free will. “What there is,” however, is irrelevant to man's free
will. Some people think that moral ethics have nothing to do with
science and philosophy, for science and philosophy are related to “what
there is,” whereas moral ethics and values pertain to “what there should
be.”

The value-based realities rooted in man's free will have a scientific
aspect. To elaborate on this, we must consider the definition of free
will. Free will consists of the supervision and dominance of the human
character

upon the positive and negative poles of the action with good-will goals.
If such an action takes place, it will be an action done by free will.

Those who see values as non-scientific believe that the human character
influences actions of free will, so we cannot discover the factors and
motives that have brought about actions of will; we are thus unable to
predict actions of free will by means of regulated calculations like the
law of causality, and unpredictable phenomena cannot be scientific. In
response to their statements, we must keep a few points in mind:

1- It is a scientific principle that if an object has arisen out of
various causes and factors, studying the different possibilities can
show us its cause.

The greater the distance between man and the optional action that will
occur in the future, the more likely the occurrence of events and
incidents that will affect it, or even prevent it. Naturally, we have to
scientifically calculate all the possibilities and discover what events
and incidents that may occur until the time of the action; the nearer we
get to the time we intend to do it, the more we know about the factors
and events that take place, so the clearer our picture of what will
happen will also be.

2- Man's actions based on his free will can be scientifically studied in
two different domains:

a) In the domain of the factors and motives of the action: As we know,
man never does anything without a motive, and the greater the motive,
the more likely for it to happen. Also, the vaster the range of man's
motives, the higher the possibility of the action occurring.

b) In the domain of the human character there is also a direct
relationship between the strength or weakness of the human character and
his optional actions. The stronger man's character and the more
awareness the individual has about the preliminaries and goals of the
action, the more likely for the individual to do it. The more committed
the human character is to moral values, the more accurate our
explanation and justification of the optional action will be.

3- An action of free will can also be scientifically studied after its
occurrence, which itself shows that the occurrence of actions based on
free will is scientific.

4- The nature of values can be identified and studied scientifically and
philosophically. We can ask, for example, what is the nature of justice,
sacrifice and dutifulness? Other questions may be posed about why values
have arisen and what consequences they have. The results of commitment
to moral values can be studied scientifically. What results high moral
values leave in the occurrence of man's mental tranquility and the
improvement and development of the society is a scientific issue. If we
consider high human moral values as having proper human qualities that
arise out of moving on the path of evolutionary preserving the human
disposition, we can ask philosophically whether man being put on this
path is in his nature or does it happen externally. If the answer is the
latter, why has this phenomenon arisen in some human beings?

All in all, value-based realities cannot be separated from sciences.
That would weaken and even insult the sciences.

The Relationship between “What There Should Be” and “What There Is”
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Some Western thinkers, David Hume for instance, believe that we cannot
deductively reach “what there should be” from “what there is.” In other
words, they think that values and morals cannot be extracted from
science. There is no relationship between “what there is” and “what
there should be.”

Contrary to Hume's idea, there is harmony among “what there is” and
“what there should be,” and that the latter can be deduced from the
former.

Human beings have the potential to live with values, which is the best
reason that proves there is harmony between “what there is” and “what
there should be.” Although most people's life goes nowhere beyond purely
natural life, few people do have a life based on values. In other words,
they have activated the human perfections inside themselves. Man is the
only being who can be addressed by responsibilities and do's and don'ts,
for he has the potential to use his responsibilities.

If “what there should be” and “what there shouldn't be” cannot be
extracted out of “what there is,” the whole reality of the universe will
be meaningless. If we accept that the universe has a mystery and glory
which makes it a sign, man's existence must be an effect of God's wisdom
and will. God's wisdom says that man is full of hidden potentials, based
upon which a series of do's and don'ts can be presented. Can we accept
that God may give us the means for evolution but not its instructions?

Even if the Qur’an makes no direct statement that man's existence is a
sign that makes him commit himself to the do's and don'ts that help him
develop and perfect himself, the meaning of the existence of divine
wisdom and will inside man proves the reality that man is responsible
for gaining an intelligible life, just as the universe is a sign telling
us that we are responsible with regard to what is good and what is bad.

We must keep in mind, however, that attention to how harmonious and
glorious the universe is does not lead to the deduction of religious
duties or responsibilities. No one can say that the wisdom and glory of
the universe makes us realize that we should pray in the morning.
Throughout history, many peoples have presented many duties as legal,
moral and religious instructions, but none have been proven by the
harmony of the universe. What we mean here is that the amazing order and
harmony in the universe proves is:

<p dir="rtl">
قطره ای کز جويباری میرود از پـی انجــام کــاری میرود
</p>

*(Every drop of water passing by in a stream has an aim.)*

The conscious human being must realize from the order and harmony of the
universe that he must do his own part, too.

An Analysis of the Relationship between “What There Should Be” and “What There Is”
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If we consider truthfulness as a “should,” our analysis would be:

1- We should be truthful. Why? Because truthfulness brings about trust
in social relationships.

Trust and reliability in social life is a must.

2- Why should we accept social life? Because various aspects of human
life are only activated in social life.

3- Why is it necessary to activate the various aspects of man's
existence? Because man's life flourishes when these aspects are
activated.

4- What is so important about this prosperity? Because such a prosperity
is hidden in man's nature, and proper life has its continuity in its own
nature.

The final response cannot be met with another “why.” We cannot ask why
the needs of the nature of life should be fulfilled, for the nature of
something is logically unintelligible.

The issue that life naturally causes its own continuity to be necessary
depends on what there is, but the issue that effort should be made for
life to continue is not dependant only upon what there is; it needs
another rationale, which can be considered from two points of view:

Viewpoint 1: The desirability of the positive characteristics of life
itself makes it go on. From this point of view, there is no factor
beyond natural life to prove the necessity of life. This is why the
desirability of life leads to hedonism and greed for power.

Viewpoint 2: The issue that effort is needed for life to continue
depends on God, the creator of life. This is the theologians' point of
view. They believe that the “what there should be” ordered by God is
based upon man's sound reason and pure disposition.

All moral values like justice-seeking, righteousness-seeking, and
moderating selfishness can be analyzed by means of these two basic
principles:

Principle One: It is “what there is” that is rooted in man's natural
talents. In other words, man innately has tendencies toward justice,
righteousness and other moral qualities. If the talent for seeking
justice, righteousness and moderating selfishness did not exist, there
would never be so many outstanding, developed figures in history.

Principle Two: “What there should be” originates in “what there is.” The
desire for development and evolution, which innately exists in man,
needs some guidelines beyond the purely natural self - “what there
should be” - from divine religions to prevent man from falling into
selfishness and hedonism.

There is another way for elaborating on the relationship between “what
there is” and “what there should be,” and that is giving moral issues a
conditional form - i.e., if desired human spiritual development is the
issue, justice is necessary. In other words, we can state
unconditionally that justice is needed for man's spiritual development.
Although such a theorem cannot prove the necessity of spiritual
development, when we suppose that development is desirable and needed,
the necessity of justice for development is also conveyed.

The Relationship between “What There Should Be” and “What There Is” in the Qur’an
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One: Verses in the Qur’an that prove the necessity of faith and piety
based upon the facts of the universe, like 2:28.

Two: Verses that prove the necessity of thought and reasoning based on
witnessing and studying the signs shown in the universe, like 3:190-1.

Three: Verses in the Qur’an that present the aimed, righteousness of the
universe, to help man understand the necessity of obeying God and
realize what he should do. In other words, the universe cannot be right
and dominated by God unless one accepts the necessity of realizing one's
duties about what to do and what to avoid, like 3:191 and 6:73.

Four: Qur’anic verses that consider recognizing signs of God as the
basis of gratitude and thankfulness, a duty itself, like 25:62.

Five: Verses in the Qur’an that consider witnessing miracles performed
by prophets of God - signs of “what there is” far beyond material and
physical facts - as a factor causing religion and observing what God
wants us to do and what God prohibits us from, such as verses 113
through 121 in The Battlements, and also verses 65 and 73 in Ta Ha.

The Relationship between Ideology and World-view
------------------------------------------------

There are three theories on the relationship between ideology and
world-view:

1- Ideology arises from world-view. Any kind of ideology must be based
upon a specific form of world-view.

2- Ideology and world-view are not directly proportionate. In other
words, ideology is not dependent upon world-view, for world-view
concerns “what there is,” and one cannot reach “what there should be”
from “what there is.”

3- If one is to study the relationship between ideology and world-view,
it is necessary to discover what their goals are.

### What Is Ideology?

###

Here, by ideology we refer to a series of acknowledged principles which
are desirable enough to become one's beliefs, an original component of
his mind and soul, and interpret his life 'as it should be.' It is quite
obvious that commitment and responsibility in life, from a general point
of view, calls for interpretation and justification of life.

### What Is World-view?

###

Man's mind can make contact with the universe in three forms:

a) Direct scientific contact by means of contact between the senses with
the world outside.

b) Receiving facts, like realizing the beauty of phenomena or how
glorious or great something is in the eyes of a thinker.

c) Contact with the whole universe, which leads to philosophies.

All three are a kind of world-view, for when scientific contact with the
universe is made, though it is itself a kind of world-view, only certain
components and effects of the world are revealed to man. Making contact
with facts by means of reception also shows faces of the universe to
man. Contact with the whole universe - absolute world-view - is
impossible, for a number of general principles and concepts cannot
describe and interpret all aspects of the universe. All in all, each of
the above-mentioned forms of contact between man and the universe reveal
a picture of the universe to

man. Having seen the three basic forms of world-view, now we can proceed
to the relationship between world-view and ideology.

If world-view means identifying some parts and phenomena of the universe
and their interrelations - and man ignoring the general, fundamental
laws and principles dominating the universe - such an incomplete,
limited form of world-view cannot make a specific belief for man and
guide him toward certain duties he should fulfill. In such a world-view,
the human mind does nothing more than a mirror in contact with facts. It
merely reflects the phenomenon in itself. Such a superficial knowledge
cannot direct man to a definite ideology.

On the other hand, if world-view refers to associating all factors of
internal perception with the external world rather than only associating
the senses with the world, such a world-view would definitely bring man
out of his indifferent, neutral side in regard to contact with the
universe, and make him accept certain beliefs and perform certain
actions as his duty. In this form of world-view, man is not confined to
merely scientifically knowing the universe; he also considers his own
perceptions about the universe, like glory or justice. Thus, we can say
that overall, comprehensive world-view can lead to ideology.

Man has a variety of potentials and talents, so he can make contact with
the universe from different aspects. We can, for instance, see aesthetic
aspects in the universe since we possess such a sense. We use justice in
our individual or social life because we have the potential to
understand justice.

Another original human potential is man's questioning himself and his
life. “Who am I?” he asks himself, and this takes him to the conclusion
that makes him behave in a way to discover the philosophy of his life.
In other words, if man's world-view is in the form of an isolated part
of the universe photographing it, he will never achieve an ideology, but
if he believes that, “There is a universe which I am an active part of;
I am born from the parts of this universe, and gradually, with the
knowledge I gain and the potentials and talents that flourish in me, I
see a nihilistic world and life as equal to my own oblivion,” he will
definitely come to the conclusion that he must submit to certain
actions, and cannot act according to his wishes and desires any longer.


