Life, Rising Up
===============

1- Human life is an immensely glorious phenomenon. Some people, however,
have taken it for granted, considering it as a normal thing available to
everyone. Those who have tried to interpret life materialistically and
regard the source of life as unknown or arising from alien creatures
from outer space, are incapable of seeing the supreme values of life.

2- Life is virtually respectable, and seeks its own activity and
preservation under any circumstances. Man will never feel reluctant
toward life unless mental disorder darkens his picture of life.

3- To discover the aim of life, man must step much higher than his
unconscious, fatalistic nature. If man limits life to a purely natural
one - feelings, actions and desires arising from animal instincts and
reproduction - he will never find an elevated aim for his life. If man
is to find the true meaning of life, he should go far beyond his natural
life.

4- Life has two dimensions: physical and spiritual. Since the material
aspect of human life is the grounds for man's mental and spiritual
activity, any disorder in his physical aspect will affect the other,
too. The mental and spiritual aspect of human life are essentially
important, but should be activated by means of proper development and
flourishing further.

5- Human life cannot be discovered without activating the spiritual
dimension of life. As a general rule, when man drowns in some
phenomenon, since he cannot control it, not only will he never
understand it deeply, the phenomenon will be unable to show its true
self, too. If man's life flourishes, his starting point and destination
in life will also reveal themselves.

6- If the spiritual dimension is not activated, man's life will pass
with baseless games, attractions and mockery. Sometimes man deceives
himself with limited knowledge, and sometimes his natural instincts
influence his reasoning and wisdom, making him move along the negative
path of life, interpreting life with the pleasure he gets out of
satisfying his natural instincts.

The selfishness and hedonism caused by man's indulging in his instincts
makes him misinterpreting his life, and struggling along the wrong path
for a whole lifetime. If man's spiritual aspect is activated, his tools
of discovery will no longer be affected by desires and pleasures, but
logically flourish, for the spiritual aspect of life casts a kind of
light upon all of man's knowledge, preventing any deceit. Without
activating the spiritual aspect of life, life loses its true form, and
man will drown in the superficial prolific of life.

7- Human life has no value without the activation of the spiritual
aspect. Respect toward man's nature is not possible unless the spiritual
aspect of life is activated, and that happens only when all humans are
considered as equal. As we read in the Holy Qur’an:

<p dir="rtl">
من قتل نفسا بغير نفس او فساد فی الارض فکانما قتل الناس جميعا و من
احياها فكانما احيا الناس جميعا
</p>

***“Whoso slays a soul not to retaliate for a slain soul, nor for
corruption done in the land, shall be as if he had slain mankind
altogether; and whoso gives life to a soul, shall be as if he had given
life to mankind altogether.”( 5:32)***

When man becomes so evil that he insults God by killing another human
being - and insulting the creator of the whole universe is in fact equal
to insulting the whole universe itself, too, which man himself is also
the most valuable and glorious part of - killing one human being is
equal to killing all of mankind, and giving life to a human being is
equivalent to giving all of humanity life. This is why the human
disposition of a human being who has a deep understanding of truth is so
heavily respected.

Throughout history, the human nature and disposition has been paid
respect for various reasons, each of which calls for study and
criticism. Some of them are:

a) Throughout history, all outstanding figures have generally advocated
respect for the human disposition, and the public, influenced by them,
have imitated them in doing so.

b) Crude, primitive emotions and feelings have also led to support for
respecting the human disposition. However, this motive has no strong
basis, so it cannot be regarded as a stable factor. It fades when
cruelty and filth is done by man, or man's selfishness overflows.

c) The third reason is religion, for all religions see respect for the
human disposition as their highest item of anthropological agenda. In
divine religions, respect for the human disposition is based on God's
will, which has created man's life as glorious and precious.

d) Deep feeling for the human disposition; recognizing and receiving
man's disposition in the general harmony of the universe. Such a feeling
is in fact the supreme religious feeling mentioned above. Of course,
man's reaching this great and profound feeling - which regards each
human being as a fundamental component of the general harmony of the
universe - calls for development and perfection.

e) Some regard scientific, industrial and artistic advances and human
cultures as the motive for respecting the human disposition, whereas
such issues can only prove the greatness and importance of human
potentials, not the necessity of respecting the human disposition.
During the last few centuries, science has made a great deal of
progress, but respect for the human disposition has waned.

f) Humanists also support the value of man, referring to the decree of
wisdom and reason on the necessity of supporting mankind. Depending on
reason and wisdom - theoretical wisdom and reason, at that, which does
not concern supreme human values and principles - respect and value for
the human disposition cannot be gained. Reason-based humanism, which has
become hugely popular these days, has still not been successful in
bringing human beings together in friendship and affection, or creating
respect and love between them. The only motive that can make value and
respect for the human disposition a reality is a religious one.

8- Concepts like character, ego, spirit and soul will only exist when
the spiritual dimension of man's life is activated. Drowning in
selfishness and

hedonism destroys the harmony in man's management of his life,
inhibiting his character, ego and spirit - which are vital for the
evolution of man's life - from flourishing. When man feels hedonism is
all he needs, he will not seek spirit or character anymore.

The Factors that Can Elevate Man's Evolutionary Life
----------------------------------------------------

The human soul has the potential for development and perfection; in
order to achieve them, we must figure out what factors or methods can
lead man to an evolutionary life. Here, we will provide 21 principles
for it:

1- Man's natural self cannot be the leader of man's soul. If the human
soul drowns in selfishness - in other words, if it is degraded down to
its “natural self” - it will be unable to evolve. The natural self (ego)
manages the initial, compulsory life; it never undertakes activating
supreme levels and aspects. Let us quote from Jalal-addin Muhammad
Molawi (Rumi) from Divan-e-shams:

<p dir="rtl">
برگشاده ســوی بالا، بالهـــا زده انـدر زمين چنگـــالها
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
خواجه می گريد که ماند از قافله خنده ها دارد از اين ماندن خرش
</p>

*(The soul has spread its wings, heading for the heavens, but the body
clings to the earth - this world - with its claws. The wealthy man
weeps, for he has fallen behind his group; his donkey is laughing at
this.)*

2- God helps man with his spiritual evolution. As Imam Ali has said:

<p dir="rtl">
عبادالله ان من احب عبادالله اليه عبدا اعانه الله علی نفسه
</p>

*“O servants of God! God's most precious servants are those God has
helped to crush their lusts and desires.”*

God, of course helps man know and elevate his soul when man himself
wants it. As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi says:

<p dir="rtl">
چون چنين خواهی، خدا خواهد چنين حــق بــــرآرد آرزوی متّقيــــن
</p>

*(When you want it, God will do it: God grants what the pious ask for.)*

The potential and grounds for the will and enthusiasm to do good deeds
is hidden inside man; the best reason to prove it is the great, glorious
group of developed righteousness-seeking humans that have existed
throughout history.

If such a will and progress toward development and perfection does not
flourish, several inhibiting factors can be named, which we can
generally categorize into two groups:

a) Man's hallucinations and inductions to himself, implying that it is
too difficult for him to gain mystic knowledge and elevate his soul.

b) External factors also sometimes inhibit man. Unsuitable social
circumstances, the lack of constructive education and many others
factors are what man must overcome and do his best to move toward
development and perfection; he should not shrug off developing himself.

3- The most important form of justice is justice toward oneself, which
is not possible without harnessing one's desires. Self-preservation is
the most significant factor that makes life go on. When the human
disposition is released from all laws or human principles, it will fall
into its natural path.

Any activity aiming to preserve the natural self is destructive to man.
If man proceeds toward elevating his soul - in other words, if he defies
his desires and lusts - he has taken the first step toward making
justice a reality. If man cannot do justice with regard to his own
forces and potentials and save himself from drowning in lusts and
desires, how can he ever provide others with justice?

4- One must not attempt to fulfill others' wishes and desires to the
extent that one's own soul becomes corrupt. When governing people
requires convincing them, and convincing them must be done by satisfying
their desires and lusts, the result will be nothing but the corruption
of the soul of the ruler and his helpers.

One who is sensitive about the improvement and refinement of his own
soul, will never be ready to corrupt it in order to fulfill others'
wishes; rather, the shining rays of his brilliant, good-deeded soul can
cast light on others, too.

5- Make use of yourself for yourself. As Imam Ali says:

<p dir="rtl">
فاخذ امرو من نفسه لنفسه
</p>

*“Developed man makes use of himself to his own benefit.”*

<p dir="rtl">
خويش را تسليــم کن، بــردار مزد وانگه از خود بی ز خود چيزی بدزد
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
چون به هر ميلی که دل خواهی سپرد از تو چيـزی در نهان خواهند برد
</p>

*(Make me true, and take any reward you like from me; but if you give
your soul to anyone you wish, they will steal your inside from you
secretly.)*

**Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi**

Man possesses potentials and talents that blossom on contact with the
world outside. Some people make use of their potentials in order to
achieve their natural goals; still others use them to gain human goals -
these people make positive use of themselves. They activate their
positive potentials, and enjoy perfection and development.

6- If you do not know yourself, you are doomed. Let us quote from Imam
Ali:

<p dir="rtl">
هلک امرؤ لم يعرف قدره
</p>

*“If man does not recognize his own value and potential, he is doomed.”*

We cannot make use of ourselves without knowing ourselves. Man cannot
activate his talents and potentials if he does not discover them and
know about them.

7- Nobody will pay any attention to one who pays no attention to his/her
own self. If man does not care about himself, and does not activate his
talents and potentials, he should never expect others to care about him,
either.

As Imam Ali has said about this essential principle of evolutionary
life:

<p dir="rtl">
و اعلموا انه من لم يعن علی نفسه حتی يکون له منها واعظ و زاجر لم يکن
له من غيرها لا زاجر و لا واعظ
</p>

*“Lo and behold, he who does not care to be his own internal advisor and
conscience, nothing and nobody else will do that for him.”*

No one, not even God's prophets, can guide man toward perfection and
development unless man himself attempts to progress. Man must have the
will to construct and develop himself if he is to move toward
evolutionary life.

8- If you know yourself, you will know your God. As the Holy Prophet of
Islam Muhammad has said:

<p dir="rtl">
من عرف نفسه فقد عرف ربه
</p>

*“If you discover yourself, you have in fact discovered your Lord.”*

Thus, if the human “self” - the human” soul”, in fact - is
comprehensively known and discovered, the greatest step toward knowing
God has been taken, for:

a) One of the aspects of the “self” is a monotheist nature which puts
man in contact with God.

b) The human self can gain complete knowledge of the universe, and see
the divine light shining on the universe.

c) Knowledge of the unity of the human disposition, with all its diverse
qualities, is a sign of the conceptual multiplicity of God's qualities.

d) Abstracting the human soul - the human self - from material aspects
and the dominance of such abstraction on the body without making
physical contact with it.

e) All the activities of the human disposition without subtracting
anything from it or analyzing it.

f) Creating works of art or mathematical operations is a sign of how God
works.

g) The imaginations formed in the human mind are examples of creating
facts with no physical background about them whatsoever.

9- Always calculate and balance yourself. Self-calculation and
self-balance is a fundamental principle on the path to elevating
evolutionary life. Some may think that in these days of machine-like
life and people's hectic lifestyles, no one has the time to do
self-calculations, whereas they would take serious steps toward doing so
if educational systems and social leaders made them understand the
crucial importance of having an original character. If man analyzes and
calculates his own nature and character, life will have a different
meaning to him; social leaders and those responsible for education must
realize how necessary this is.

10- In evolutionary life, you must not degrade the value and glory of
your own self by submitting to profanity and being prolific. Let us
quote from Imam Ali:

<p dir="rtl">
و اکرم نفسک عن کل دنية و ان ساقتک الی الرغايب فانک لن تعتاض بما تبذل
من نفسک عوضا
</p>

*“Consider your nature, your disposition, as too great to be traded with
lowly, decadent affairs, even though your nature may encourage you
toward them, for they are quite attractive and satisfying. But you will
lose far more than you gain if you fall for them.”*

Giving in to lowly affairs and decadence is the greatest barrier on the
path to development and perfection. Not all means can guide one to the
aim

of life. Man should not sell the elixir of his existence for a meager
price. If the human ego is lost, nothing can ever replace it. The value
of the “self” is higher than anything else. Countless human beings have
sacrificed themselves for meager desires and lusts, thinking that they
have gained something.

11- One of the most significant effects of evolutionary life is
adjusting oneself with regard to others. The correct criterion for the
relationship between human beings is a crucially important issue. Here,
by relationships between human beings we do not refer merely to social
life, for the main factor that makes social life is not making any
disturbances in life and providing the grounds for people's talents and
potentials to be harmonized and put to better use in order to make
social life a reality.

The criterion necessary for the relationship between human beings on the
path toward evolutionary intelligible life is far beyond the rules and
criteria in social life. That criterion is nothing but the human ego - a
purified human ego, of course, that moves on the path toward development
and perfection.

12- Supreme effort is the strongest force of evolutionary life. As Imam
Ali has said,

<p dir="rtl">
قدر الرجل علی قدر همته
</p>

*“A man's value and merit lies in his effort and endeavor.”*

Extreme effort has some conditions:

a) Supreme aim and dissatisfaction about what the society imposes upon
man.

b) Stepping beyond the waves of mortal desires and evaluating natural
pleasures, which keep man busy and prevent him from development and
elevation.

c) Logically interpreting the concepts of “possibility” and
“impossible.” Some people who have enough power and will to accomplish
things mistake the possible with the impossible; they imagine what they
aim for is beyond their abilities.

d) Will power has a crucial role in making supreme effort fruitful, for
man will accomplish nothing without will power.

With supreme effort, man will achieve:

● Patience: Supreme effort gives man firmness and tranquility against
the negative consequences of pleasures and sorrow.

● Revealing the secrets of the soul: Pleasures and sorrows deprive man
of the secrets in his soul. With supreme effort, man can put up a
resistance against them.

● Social constructivism: Only human beings of supreme effort can
construct the society.

● Freedom: Supreme effort can set man free.

● The highest level of freedom increases the heart's capacity for
gaining goodwill and perfection.

13- One of the signs of entering evolutionary life is clearing the soul
of all hatred and frustrations. If we hate another person intensely, to
the extent that hatred fills our souls and affects our other mental
activities, it will be a horrendous grudge. Grudges make man lose his
ability to see things

righteously. Man ignores human values and will continue until he
destroys the one he hates.

14- You cannot proceed on the path of evolutionary life unless you stop
expecting rewards for your good deeds. If man's relationship with others
becomes a form of trade, he will never make it to the path of
evolutionary life. Some people never seem willing to give anything
unless they gain something in return. Trade and reward and punishment
are phenomena necessary to the natural ego, but man must step beyond
them if he is to achieve development and evolution.

15- Feeling that your purely natural life is insufficient can make you
start moving on the path of evolutionary life. If man does not feel
eager to become perfect, if he does not suffer from his shortcomings, he
will never make any progress on the path to evolutionary life. Alas,
many people do not feel the need for reaching perfection, so they take
no action toward eliminating their shortcomings.

16- In an evolutionary life, rewards and punishments are based upon
intentions. Intention consists of decision and objective action, the
merit of which depends on one hand upon the value of man's effort in
deciding to do so, and on the other hand upon man's mental motive. If
man's decision is based on a negative motive, his character will
deteriorate a positive motive will, in contrast, boost his personality.
This is why we can say that reward and punishment - rise or fall -
depends on our intentions.

17- The basic factor in man's evolutionary life is the fact that God
watches man's every single word, action and even what goes on deep
inside him. If man believes that God is aware of his every move -
internally or externally - he will avoid evil. Such a man will not avoid
wrongdoing for fear of social punishment, but rather due to his shame
toward his creator. Belief that God is at all times observing every
aspect of human life can elevate man's evolutionary life, for man now
knows that God wishes the best for him, and has provided him with
intelligible ways to get there, and the tools he needs to do so; obeying
what God wants man to do is the path to perfection.

18- Man's evolutionary life cannot be elevated without activating the
human intellect, which in turn cannot serve man without spiritual
purification. If intelligence enjoys the advice and directions of a pure
conscience and sound nature and disposition, it can guide man toward
progress and perfection, for intelligence alone is unable to provide man
with evolutionary advance. It should be accompanied with
self-purification in order to remove all the inhibiting factors on its
path.

19- The human ego requires natural flourish and expansion in order to
proceed on the path of evolutionary life.

If the perfection-seeking human soul starts its climb toward
supernatural progress without any chances for relaxation or rest, and
constantly cuts its ego off from all its natural characteristics,
forcing them to obey its furiously accelerating development, the ego
will undoubtedly suffer, losing the management of its body, which serves
as its steed. Thus, moderate dealing with the ego is necessary for
elevation toward evolutionary life.

20- In evolutionary life, man's progress should be forward-looking at
all times. Sometimes imitating one's predecessors' beliefs and
traditions prevents man from logical activity and progress. This is why
we must state that on his path toward evolutionary life, man must
analyze the culture that dominates his society, and remove any
sedimentary elements in it. Imitations are steel dams inhibiting man's
advance toward evolution.

There are two kinds of future man must have in mind on the path to
evolutionary life:

a) The future of this worldly life, for which thoughts and intelligence
are a crucial necessity.

b) The future of man's other life, which if man ignores or defies,
interpreting his worldly life will also become impossible.

21- Those who are the most obedient of God also have the best intentions
about their own selves. As Imam Ali has said,

<p dir="rtl">
عبادالله ان انصح الناس لنفسه اطوعهم لربه و ان اغشهم لنفسه اعصاهم
لربه
</p>

*“O servants of God, those people who are the most obedient are the
kindest to themselves, and those who defy God are betraying themselves
the worst of all.”*

Man, in contact with God, sees Him supervising and dominating his ego.
Such a feeling makes man believe that he is always in the realm of God,
so he will not fall astray from God's path.

Intelligible Life, the Fundamental Domain
-----------------------------------------

Human life can be divided into two kinds, purely natural life and
intelligible life. In the former, which is a somewhat animal-like life,
people are engaged in a battle for survival. Their sole aim is to
fulfill their natural desires, and since their life is totally engulfed
by worldly needs, the positive aspects of humanity are entirely
forgotten. Man’s infatuation with purely natural ways of life has
greatly influenced the history of mankind. Let us take a look at some of
its effects:

1- Stupefaction replacing consciousness

2- The destruction of positive forms of love

3- Conflicts between power and righteousness

4- Self-bestrangedness

5- Selfishness and stubbornness

6- Misjudging the human character

7- Human relationships based on personal benefit

8- Various philosophizations tending to vouch for human corruptions

9- Considering oneself as the goal and others as one’s means to achieve
it

10- Ruining the environment

11- Man’s conflict with his own self

12- The destruction of man’s highest emotions and unity

13- The waning of human affection and sympathy

14- Sacrificing the goal for its means

15- Aimless deconstructing and weakening original cultures

16- Losing one’s aim in life and falling into nihilism

17- Uncertainty and anxiety about one’s future

18- Self-alienation

19- The aimlessness and uselessness of the arts

20- Increasing suicide

21- Social maladjustment

22- Pitiful incompetence in explaining absolutes and relativities

The Definition of Intelligible Life
-----------------------------------

A conscious life which guides the compulsory and pseudo-compulsory
forces and activities of man’s natural life in the path toward
evolutionary goals by means of more freedom of choice; thus, the human
character is gradually developed and guided toward the highest end of
life - playing a role in the whole harmony of the universe dependent
upon divine greatness.

Let us take a closer look at some of the most important aspects of this
definition:

● A 'Conscious Life': Living an intelligible life, man is quite
conscious of his life. His character is independent, and everything he
does arises from his original personality, not imitating of others. In
an intelligible life, man is totally aware of the principles and values
of life, and follows them.

● 'Guiding the compulsory and pseudo-compulsory forces and activities of
man’s natural life toward evolutionary goals by means of more freedom of
choice': moving on the path of intelligible life, man is well aware of
the fatalistic, compulsory causes and factors surrounding him, and tries
to make the most of his freedom. For instance, if he wins a better
position, he does not allow the factors around him that may lead to
pride or arrogance make him fall astray from his progress toward
perfection and commitment to great human values. In an intelligible
life, man achieves the highest level of free will, and the more he makes
use of his freedom in his will, the greater his intelligible life will
be.

We should not neglect the critical role of environmental factors and
social leaders in making intelligible life possible. In unsuitable
social conditions, freedom of will - and subsequently intelligible
life - will have no chance to flourish. Therefore, leaders of societies
should encourage proper human virtues and values.

● 'Towards evolutionary goals': In an intelligible life, all of man’s
actions, words, even his mental activities aim for perfection. He never
feels that he has finally become perfect; he is constantly trying to
raise himself to greater levels of perfection.

● 'Gradually developing the human character'. All of man’s positive
potentials and talents flourish in an intelligible life, and he finds a
life of happiness and prosperity. His naive, childish feelings fade
away, and his petty interests are replaced by greater, more valuable
ones. In an intelligible life, the human character uses internal and
external realities correctly, for every aspect of his life is undergoing
evolutionary metamorphosis.

● 'Being guided towards the highest end of life': Man cannot achieve the
highest aims of life by drowning in the compulsory and pseudo-compulsory
tendencies of his natural self. If he wants to accomplish the greatest
ends in life, his actions must be logical and conscientious, and he
should be determined enough to make use of the mental activities needed
to interpret the highest aims of life.

The Role of Wisdom in an intelligible Life
------------------------------------------

Wisdom in an intelligible life is not confined to theoretical wisdom -
although theoretical wisdom too is a necessary tool in an intelligible
life - for anything useful to man's life cannot be ignored in an
intelligible life. Both theoretical wisdom and practical wisdom - man's
alert, active, motivating conscience - are employed in an intelligible
life to elevate and develop the human character. They harmoniously
provide the grounds for elevation to the level of perfect wisdom, which
is of great mystic significance.

Here we must criticize schools of thought such as rationalism for
overemphasizing the role of wisdom, and considering it dominant over
man's life without any divine interference at all. Many rationalists
ignore the fact that if man's opportunist, ambitious nature is guided
toward divine aspects, it will move on the path to an intelligible life,
where man can step out of his “self-orientated” nature and be attracted
by his “real ego” to an intelligible life - and this is the only way man
can abandon war, bloodshed, atrocity and all other evil, and change “the
history of purely natural life” into “the history of mankind”.

The Feasibility of an intelligible Life
---------------------------------------

Some people believe that man is generally incapable of achieving an
intelligible life, and only an exceptional few have been able to leave
“purely natural life” for a “intelligible life”. In other words, most
people are drowned in their “purely natural life”.

We must first say that man does possess the capacity for accepting an
intelligible life, for when he feels a passion for something, he will
aim for it, and bear any inconvenience he has to in order to achieve it.
Those who love fame or wealth undergo a great deal of trouble, pain and
insults in order to achieve success in acquiring them.

Second, when man moves on the path of an intelligible life, he feels
that he is approaching something not impossible, but a truly original
life, which he will find highly valuable.

Also, though the number of those who have developed themselves into an
intelligible life is low, they are not totally exceptional people, for
when man moves on the path of intelligible life, he feels that all of
the necessary elements for perfection exist in him, and are in no
conflict with his innate natural self.

Social leaders should try to help their people realize what a conscious
life feels like. If leaders of societies make their people understand
how necessary a life of consciousness is, they will never protest. If
human beings become aware of the glory of justice, honesty and wisdom
existing in actions and words and the glorious sense of duty and love
for peers, they will easily accept it. By reinforcing and developing
man's positive potentials, he can be made aware of the importance of
understanding and adopting the necessity of endeavor toward an
intelligible life.

This is the same mind that can so delicately gather wealth, fame and
defeat his rivals by means of brilliant ideas, and high intelligence
throughout his purely natural life; surely, can it not understand that
its

wisdom and intellect can be employed toward higher goals, such as
serving his peers, justice and upholding the right? Can it not realize
that it is able to seriously calculate the mysteries of the universe,
not merely act like on a stage?

When discussing the feasibility of intelligible life we must keep in
mind that the human character can be developed, “built up.” Man can
improve himself through calculations made in his intelligence and
conscience. The important point is identifying the way to explore
reaching intelligible life, and that is not impossible. If man steps
beyond his “purely natural life,” he can enter “intelligible life,”
where he will undergo eleven changes:

● his raw feelings change into elevated emotions;

● his scattered brainwaves turn into “specific thoughts about a certain
topic;”

● his raw kindness becomes “intelligible affection;”

● his high expectations change into “motivating hopes;”

● his nominal likes and interests become perfection-creating ones;

● being content with worthless concepts of goodness and perfection give
way to effort toward discovering the real truth about them;

● pure imitation and passiveness will disappear, and be replaced by
original, direct thought and truth-finding;

● fractional, theoretical chess games in the mind will be replaced by
harmony between sound wisdom and realistic conscience;

● elevated freedom will replace desires;

● seeing oneself as exceptional as and higher than others will change
into understanding the highest human unity and equality among humans as
being the means or the end.

● Being content with the milestones of life in this world as man’s main
goal is replaced by always considering oneself as still on the way.

A Closer Look at the Aspects of Intelligible Life
-------------------------------------------------

When man moves toward intelligible life, every aspect of his life will
undergo dramatic change. Let us take a closer look at some of them:

1- The human character in intelligible life: According to the following
three principles, the human character is virtually valuable:

a) Man is a being who has various talents and is ready to step up to
higher stages of perfection and greatness. Throughout history we see
human beings who ascended to the pinnacles of humanity, showing the most
brilliant human ideals.

b) Despite all the diversity people have in race, appearance or
secondary qualities, they still have the same universal harmony. In
other words, they can move along the ultimate path of life.

c) In spite of ethnical, social and other differences people have, they
feel a kind of value-based unity regarding each other if they are in a
well-balanced mental state. Such a feeling is deeply rooted in man's
soul, and many of the heroic acts he has shown throughout history depict
the unity men have in their common principles and values.

We cannot accept the three above-mentioned principles without believing
in intelligible life. In other words, proving the value of human
character is a result of accepting intelligible life. This cannot be
done unless the “natural

self” is overcome. Having stepped beyond his natural self, man can
accept the existence of others, understand his basic relationship with
them, and regard the human character as valuable.

On the path of intelligible life, man sees great human beings from a
vaster, more elevated horizon, as if they are mirrors reflecting divine
beauty and glory. Those who obey natural life, on the other hand, are
considered worthless, even if they are socially outstanding.

2- Ethics in an intelligible life: In order to understand how important
ethics is in intelligible life, we should compare it with ethics in a
purely natural life:

a) In purely natural life, ethics consists of accepting principles
confirmed by the society, and the reason for obeying them is merely to
avoid interference between individuals. But ethics in an intelligible
life means considering oneself as part of the whole of human life, which
has - as the Qur’an states - divinity breathed in it, and accepting the
principle that all human beings come from the same origin. In such a
system of moral ethics, man does not wish for others what he would not
wish for himself. He does not blindly follow a set of socially
established norms.

b) The favorable ethics in natural life consists of following emotional
desires and whims, whether they are to the benefit of other human beings
or not. Thus, each person does as he/she may please, whereas in
intelligible life man's emotions are elevated to harmony with fixed
human principles. In intelligible life, human emotions are based on
justice considering other human beings as valuable.

c) The basis of moral ethics in purely natural life is accepting and
obeying rules arising from choosing a lifestyle decreed by the social
trends. In such ethics, great human moral virtues are ignored, and the
only thing that matters is what desirable in social life; in
intelligible life, on the other hand, principles such as free conscience
representing goodness, perfection, and motivating human beings toward
that are of significance.

d) In natural life, ethics serves as to enforce social laws and prevent
crimes in the society. In intelligible life, however, it is not the
servant of man's rights in a natural life or a reducer of crime -
although if correctly used, it will have such results, too. The aim of
ethics in intelligible life is to activate man's greatest potentials and
elevate the members of the society.

3- Law in intelligible life: The purpose of the law is basically to
enforce social order and mutual coexistence among members of the
society. In intelligible life, it not only does so, but also emphasizes
on the rights of human lives. If social laws pay sufficient attention to
advancing evolutionary morals and true human love for having a free
character, “the natural history of life” would become “the human
history.” Human laws can never be effective unless man's natural self is
well-balanced and all human beings move on the path of intelligible
life.

Intelligible life insists on having rights for human lives alongside the
rights of purely natural life. It makes people realize each other's
advantages and spiritual greatness, and enables them to use such
qualities; this is what changes a normal living being into Abuzar
Ghafari, a wanderer into Owais Qarni, a petty poet into Hakim Sanaee,
and a criminal into Fuzayl Ayaz.

4- Social relationships in intelligible life: Human relationships in
intelligible life is based upon humanity, not seeking advantage of one
another. In purely natural life, however, man only considers his own
benefit, and his relationships with others are only to serve that
purpose. In intelligible life, the way a teacher behaves with his
students goes way beyond his salary. The teacher relates to not only
their senses and thoughts, but indeed to their souls. In intelligible
life, therefore, careful attention to the highest aim of life is what
makes the link among people and provides human unity.

5- Science in intelligible life: It is vital for man to gain knowledge.
Intelligible life and purely natural life agree on this. The difference
is whether science makes man's natural self inflate, or control it. In a
purely natural life, man may fall into infatuation for science, and
consider nature only superficially; in intelligible life, however, man
makes use of science as a means to advance toward his evolutionary
goals; wisdom and free conscience control human desires, and all of
man's physical and spiritual activities are guided by God. Here, man
sees science as a divine ray of light -shining on human societies by
means of the human senses, brain, nature and laboratories.

6- Ideology in intelligible life: Merely seeing the world outside and
the world inside - just “taking photos of it, in fact - is quite
different from observing and gaining knowledge about the universe by
means of precision tools and determining where man stands as the knower.
Man is not a living being who merely reflects the facts about the world
inside himself like a big mirror, without any awareness of his own role
in discovering them. Man has the capability to know everything about the
universe and his knowledge of the world is by no means limited to mere
photographic observation.

Such mental effort, dominant knowledge and observation leads to a vital
result, and that is the fact that there is an extremely high philosophy
and wisdom guiding the universe toward a very elevated destination by
means of certain laws; every particle in the universe, when considered
in relation to other particles, confirms that

<p dir="rtl">
قطــرهای کــــز جويبــاری میرود از پــی انجــام کـــاری میرود
</p>

*(There is a cause behind even a drop of water going by in a stream.)*

The ideological principles understood and accepted by means of these
basics undoubtedly enter man's deepest levels of psyche, and influence
and explain his life. Such a life, accounted for according to the
highest destination of the universe is called an intelligible life.

7- Arts in an Intelligible Life: When an artist steps into intelligible
life, he does not want art for the sake of art itself anymore; he wants
art for the sake of humanity in an intelligible life. Here, the artist
pictures facts as they are and as they should be by means of his finely
elevated emotions. In an intelligible life, the artist pays careful
attention to the aim of life, and attempts to use his art to guide the
fatalistic activities of man's natural life toward freedom and
development. When a work of art is created, motivated by the cause of
making intelligible life come true, it is not only an appealing work
relieving man's fatigue of natural life, but also a wave of
“intelligible

life itself, “reinforcing this kind of life in other members of the
society and letting them get a taste of it, too.” Art in an intelligible
life aims to develop man's awareness, freedom and perfection, not his
animal-like wishes and natural desires.

8- Politics in an Intelligible Life: Politics is managing people's lives
on the path to achieving the highest of physical and spiritual goals.
Throughout history, politicians drowned in purely natural life have
degraded the life of human beings down to “things.” Machiavelli has
written the most possibly logical account based on purely natural life.
He did not even for a moment consider intelligible life and the prospect
of making it a reality in human societies. Instead of taking man's
immense range of potentials into consideration, Machiavelli expressed
his own internal thoughts. He believed that managing the purely natural
life of people arises from “self-love.” In an intelligible life,
however, politics has a goal, and a starting point and a path. The goal
of politics in an intelligible life is creating factors of awareness and
adjusting the fatalistic forces and activities of natural life by
providing the development of freedom. The starting point is relief from
self-love, and the path is continual searching by the human character in
an effort to reach the highest aim of life.

9- Economy in an Intelligible Life: As far as a purely natural life is
concerned, self-love confirms man's freedom in claiming dominance and
absolute possession of all creatures. In a purely natural life, man
considers all natural and man-made blessings and facilities as his own,
and thinks his possession of them is unlimited; in an intelligible life,
however, man believes that since all human beings have the right to
live, the results of human mental and physical endeavor must serve to
safeguard and preserve the whole of human life, and be present in the
total rhythm of the universe. Such a human being considers goods at the
service of life, not life at their service. Man's wishes and desires are
harnessed in order to achieve social coexistence in an intelligible
life, and economy is also considered to be a factor serving to guarantee
man's survival, not inflating his natural self. In brief, man should let
others also be provided with the financial blessings he has, and attempt
to make their life more comfortable; he should not selfishly want
everything for himself, and trample all values and morals in his
commercial activities.

10- Education in an Intelligible Life: In an intelligible life,
education includes reinforcing and enhancing the factors that influence
cognition and understanding the original facts about life, and
motivating the children in a society to gradually move from purely
natural life to an intelligible life. The primary duty of education in
an intelligible life is to dramatically change the mental and spiritual
system of the learner by teaching him/her the basic principles of
education, so that the learner considers them as vitally necessary as
food and water are essential to his/her survival. In an intelligible
life, moral virtues like honesty and justice are necessary to man's
nature, and the educators and teachers of the society should try to
activate human virtues.

If education is anything other than what we mentioned above - i.e, if
the facts taught as the basics of education are regarded as not a part
of the

human nature or virtues - not only will the learners be deprived of
progress toward development and perfection, but also be influenced by
external factors.


