Man and Freedoms
================

First, we must clearly distinguish the three basic terms involved in
discussions on freedom - free will, release, and freedom and define
each:

1- Release:The state of release can be defined as the elimination of all
restrictions or barriers preventing man’s will toward doing anything.
For instance, when a person is in exile, he is forced to stay there.
Whenever this restriction is removed, the person is totally free.

2- Freedom:can be divided into two levels:

a) Natural freedom involves the selection of a particular end or means
out of various ends and goals before us. This level of freedom is higher
than being released, which only conveys the omission of all limitations,
and prevents the flow of human will.

b) Elevated freedom includes the domination of human character over the
positive and negative extremes of an action. Thus, the more control man
has over the positive and negative poles, his freedom will be greater,
and vice versa.

3- Free Will : consists of the character's supervision and control over
the positive and negative poles of an action, or deservingly giving up
an option in order to accomplish perfection.

Both of the above-mentioned levels of freedom are quite distinct from
release; with freedom, man’s personality aids him in his actions.

Let us consider how freedom and free will differ:

a) The notion of merit-based selections and aiming for perfection
provides the point of distinction between free will and freedom, for
freedom is not concerned with the fact whether the action is merit-based
or leading to perfection or not.

b) With freedom, doing or not doing something is enjoyable, for the
feeling of freedom arises from two side products which are both ideal to
man:

● firstly, the absence of any kind of restrictions limiting man’s will,
and

● second, the feeling of being able to select ends or means out of
infinite possibilities.

Feeling free causes the most delightful of emotional states in man, as
the feeling of being alive itself does. With free will, on the other
hand, not only does man not seek the enjoyment of being alive, but even
makes man perform the hardest of tasks in order to achieve perfection.
Nevertheless, carrying out tasks with the aim of reaching perfection
refreshes and elevates the soul, which is totally incomparable with
natural pleasure.

c) With free will, the human will, decisions and actions fall into the
domain of meritorious deeds, whereas actions performed or refused out of
pure freedom results in a natural merit incomparable to values.

The Right to Freedom and the Right to Free Will
-----------------------------------------------

At any level, freedom is capable of spiritually and mentally developing
mankind, provided it fulfills these two conditions. Elevated freedom,
however, is more effective.

Condition 1 : Freedom, whether purely natural or elevated, should not
prevent man from moving towards free will and evolutionary development.

In other words, the pleasant feeling of freedom should not block our
path toward an intelligible life.

Condition 2 : One’s freedom should in no case disturb that others’
freedom or free will. Man should thoughtfully attempt to develop his
freedom and potentials from purely natural to elevated. Even when
achieving so, he should not stop, and strive for reaching a level of
free will that can be named intelligible freedom on the path toward
intelligible life. Freedom and free will are significant enough to be
considered human rights, just as important as the right to live.

The Classifications of Freedom
------------------------------

We can classify freedom into six different types:

1- Freedom of belief: can be considered from three aspects:

Aspect One: the essence of belief - is man free to believe or not? Can
man live with no belief at all if he wishes to? Every human being must
believe in something, and it is impossible to find somebody who does not
have faith in anything at all, for every human being accounts for his
life in some way. Even claiming to live with no faith or belief at all
is a kind of belief itself.

Aspect Two: are people free to live with one sole belief throughout
their lives? Are they free to abandon their beliefs or not? Generally,
most people seldom undergo a change of belief, except in cases of
upheavals in their mental and psychological states, which makes them
find faith in something else. Of course, if the change of faith lies in
divine realities, it can be a sign of man’s spiritual growth.

Aspect Three: what man actually believes in, which can include:

● Facts about the components of the universe, such as the order and
harmony in its creation,

● Facts about the universe as a whole, like the aim of the creation of
the universe,

● Facts about man, like human anatomy,

● Facts about human existence in general, for example the fact that man
is capable of developing himself into divine greatness,

● Facts about human proper virtues and merits, such as man’s elevation
through purifying his soul.

Since man cannot exist without some kind of faith, it is not possible to
ignore all of the above in the name of freedom of belief, for his life
would be inexplicably futile.

2- Freedom of thought: cannot be denied. Hundreds of verses of the
Qur’an point out the necessity of thought. If man were not free to think
about the realities of humanity and the universe, God would never order
him to do so. As freedom of belief should not be so inordinate as to
make human life lose all accountability, freedom of thought should also
prevent falling into complete negligence toward life, or hinder man’s
mental or psychological activities.

Thought should serve the purpose of intelligible life, not censoring
oneself. Thinking about the world and the natural aspects of humanity is
perfectly allowed - provided the fact that it does not lead to damages
to mankind. There should be a law on the topics suitable for thought
about

human identity and his values, virtues and merits, for ideals, taste and
also social and cultural conditions influence what man may choose to
think about. In order to prevent any disorder in people’s thoughts and
their falling into dangerous speculations, we need a rule: the aim is
discovering and understanding man’s intelligible life in an objective,
intelligible world.

3- The Freedom of Expression: should be intelligible. In the West, this
kind of freedom is absolutely unlimited. As Voltaire said:

“I disagree with what you say, but I am willing to sacrifice myself in
order to let you say it freely.”

I wonder how much Voltaire valued his own self, or if he would still be
willing to sacrifice himself and allow such a volcanic eruption of
mental and psychological brainwash affect all of mankind if his
objections were to the benefit of the rights of all of mankind -
including the right to freedom?

Expressing what is logical and intelligible is quite acceptable, but
expressing unintelligible things has these harmful effects:

a) Emphasis on the expression regardless of what the content may be;

b) Useless, irrelevant speeches being sympathetically delivered to
people only because the speaker considers them important;

c) A chance for people to use futile speeches for their own personal
aggrandizement;

d) Interesting, amazing information given without having any effect on
the reader.

Expressing realities useful to man - whether physically or spiritually -
is not only free, but refusing to express them can be a crime. Freedom
of expression faults only when it causes disorder in all true human
principles and values and misguides minds. If man were so mentally
developed that he would not only tell only the truth, and provide both
the speaker and the listener with effective information and sufficient
expressions, there would be no problem at all with the absolute freedom
of speech - but is it truly so?

Are today's Eastern speakers, listeners, and researchers all as great as
Abu-Reihan Biruni, Avicenna and Farabi in philosophy, or Muhammad Mehdi
Naraqi and Sheikh Morteza Ansari in human Gnostics and knowledge, who
never spoke a word without prior study, research and thought, and did
the same with what they heard from others? And are Western speakers,
listeners and researchers nowadays like Aristotle, Socrates, Augustine,
Descartes, Hegel, Kant, Whitehead, and Saint Hiller, who spoke out of a
vast background of study, research and calculation?

After a long and deep research on freedom of speech in the Qur’an, we
come to the following conclusions:

a) Those who know certain facts or the truth are obliged to share them
with others, for God has made those who know vow to spread their
knowledge.

b) Any kind of knowledge which is harmless and useful to man - whether
physically or spiritually - should be expressed.

c) Apart from making those who know responsible for expressing what they
know, God also obliged those who do not know to seek knowledge.

d) Knowledge should not be taught to those who do not deserve it. On the
other hand, those who do deserve it should never be deprived of
knowledge.

e) Those that spread any kind of knowledge useful to mankind will be
rewarded.

f) Those that know but do not share the truth with others will severely
be punished on Judgment Day.

All in all, logical freedom of speech should be supported. However, the
reasonability does not lie in the freedom itself, for the meaning of
freedom conveys being free to commit or reject an action, regardless of
its merit or harm.

Any kind of freedom of speech, thought or opinion physically or
spiritually harmful to human beings is considered illogical freedom.
When not all people are allowed to comment on things lie medicine or
medical treatment, which requires much research and study, the
humanities, which determine man's fate, is certainly also thus. Anybody
who comments on medical issues with no prior knowledge and only based on
illogical freedom, is considered a criminal; now if someone attempts to
write, speak and repeat his ideas about various aspects of humanity
without any previous thought, study or research, and even try to
brainwash people with his attractive, deceiving words, will it not be a
problem?

Intelligible freedom of speech should be used in accordance with these
two principles:

a) As far as physical nature is concerned, there is complete freedom of
speech, thought and opinion, whether our knowledge is based on concrete
evidence, probability, or deduction.

b) In domains of the humanities and general philosophy, which deal with
mankind, “what there is,” and “what there should be,” the supervision
and expertise of the learned is essential.

When discovering issues dealing with the humanities and ideology, it is
necessary to both deeply understand the original fundamentals and
principles, and have the required honesty, clarity, purity and eagerness
to seek the truth, for this is where one's pre-determined principles and
ideals proves actually influential. Therefore, any theory or research
done on the above-mentioned topics must be presented to learned,
impartial experts who will carefully study them and present the results
considering the quality, quantity, clarity of confirmation or rejection,
and the needed mental and psychological modifications for the public.

Thus, first of all, researchers on the humanities should have two
qualifications: continuous, relentless effort and endeavor to discover
the truth, and the sincerity and purity that makes the light of divinity
shine upon hearts, clarifying man's knowledge. Secondly, the results of
the research must be handed to scholars of the humanities who possess
the needed knowledge, expertise and justice, so that they can study them
carefully before their release. Some may claim that such a method in
anthropology will lead discoveries to stagnancy. All research in other
fields also, such as medicine or pharmacology, is thoroughly discussed
prior to public release.

The above-mentioned suggestions also replaces selfish rivalries with
positive competition, for not only does it engage knowledgeable, fair
scholars of the humanities responsible for studying novel ideas in the
fields of anthropology and ideology in scientific competition, but also
invites others experts to discuss them, thus guiding constructive
scientific competitions into an intelligible path.

4- Freedom of Behavior:This form of freedom is totally unconditional in
the West, and is thus defined: “Do whatever you want, just don't bother
anyone.” Such freedom of behavior calls for reconsideration, for human
desires and wishes do not always obey wisdom and reality. Thousands of
the crimes, betrayals, and atrocities in history have been committed
because of man's wishes. The provision about not bothering others is
ineffective in confining man's freedom unless his desires and wishes are
brought under control. How can one who does not believe himself to have
any rights or value be expected to respect others' rights? When
corrupted internally, he will never be able to consider others as having
the right to live, be great or free, for none of these terms mean
anything to him, let alone respecting them.

As we did with freedom of speech, we can also categorize freedom of
behavior into two kinds - intelligible and unintelligible.
Unintelligible behavior does not follow any law, principle or natural
tendency at all; intelligible human behavior, however, is based on
certain laws, rules or will-power arising from lawful, natural
tendencies. Defining freedom of behavior as “Do whatever you want, just
don't bother others” is a result of incorrectly isolating religion,
ethics, law and politics from each other.

5- Freedom of Slavery in Any Form: Slavery arose thousands of years ago,
and intellectuals like Plato and Aristotle considered it as an original
social law. It had deep roots throughout history, and fighting it has
always been difficult. This is the reason why Islam took a gradual
approach to eradicate slavery. Had he decided not to battle it with full
force, all the social and economic foundations of the society of his era
would have fallen apart. The methods Islam used to gradually fight
slavery were:

a) He made no exceptions between slaves and free people in regards to
moral virtues and vice.

b) In Islamic societies, slaves found the chance to reach higher
positions by showing themselves worthy of it.

c) If a man's bondmaid bore him a child, she would be freed as “mother
to the child.”

d) Slaves could work to free themselves; through an agreement with their
masters, they worked to earn the money required and freed themselves.

e) In many of his (and also the subsequent Imams') hadith, the Holy
Prophet emphasized that freeing slaves is a greatly rewarded deed, which
prepared the grounds for more and more slaves to be freed and slavery to
slowly fade away.

f) Teaching people that freeing slaves would compensate for many of the
sins they had done.

g) Uprooting the main event that included taking people as slaves -
wars. The occupation of Mecca resulted in all the slaves being freed.

h) The prisoners the Muslims took in their battles would be freed
provided that they taught Muslims their knowledge and skills.

i) Many Islamic hadith regard slavery as an unnatural side-effect in
man's social life. They emphasize that human freedom is of primary
importance in Islam. All human beings are considered in Islam as being
born free and entitled to dying free.

j) The Holy Prophet objected to slavery in Africa, Asia and all around
the world, stating all humanity to be free people.

6- Political Freedom: Two principles concerning political freedom are:

● Every human being has his own free will.

● No one can dominate another human being's free will.

According to the former principle, each human being has free will about
his/her own lifestyle, provided that it is not legally prohibited, like
bringing harm to himself/herself or to others.


