God: From Seeking God to Faith in God
=====================================

The History of Belief in God
----------------------------

The history of theism is probably equal to the history of mankind
itself. Since man's mental structure, capabilities and forces have not
undergone dramatic change throughout at least the last 40000 years, we
must say that belief in God has at all times existed. The supernatural
tendencies and prayers that have accompanied man's life ever since he
came into being, prove that man has never been without believing in God.

Of course, man has at times erred in his supernatural tendencies and
worshiped other beings rather than God. Some sociologists studying
religions have attempted to prove that in order to evolve from ignorance
to knowledge, man had to begin with idolatry, and subsequently turn to
monotheism. They present these two reasons in defying the history of
monotheism:

1- Man's worshipping idols and statues instead of God shows that
monotheism has not existed since ancient times. In response, we must say
that there are still a great many unsolved things about primitive men -
such as the magic some say they did - that cannot be scientifically
considered to be true and that man worshiped nothing but those; such
findings should not be generalized as being the only things that really
were. Even today, there are sacred places around the world in which
people, although believing in God, still have deep respect for.

2- Throughout history, man has always been attracted by “gods.” Even
after Abraham, “gods” were still very popular and were given specific
duties. Some writers seem to have imagined that these gods were really
worshiped instead of the one God.

There are several reasons proving that the word god has been used
referring to particularly sacred or respected things and people.

a) As Abu -Reihan Biruni quotes from Galen, “Great men who have achieved
extreme mastery and skill in industries or medicine deserve to be
included among 'gods.' “

b) Abu -Reihan Biruni believes that the fact that the public are more
interested in what they can sense rather than the rational is the reason
why sculptures have been so popular in nations all over the world.

c) Plato, a monotheist philosopher, believed that human spirits were
made by secondary gods. Plato used the term “gods” referring to abstract
and adducent objects.

d) Some ignorant Arabs, although believing in God, called God at first
and then their idol while performing the Haj pilgrimage.

e) The Holy Qur’an has also pointed out that Arabs thought idols would
provide them with intercession with God:

<p dir="rtl">
و يقولون هولاء شفعانا عندالله
</p>

***“They say´ These are our intercessors with God. “ (10:18)***

Void of Reasons for Defying God
-------------------------------

None of those who defy God have ever been able to produce any reasons
why God does not exist. Atheists and materialists have no reasons that
show

there is no origin to the universe; they have merely criticized the
reasons theists have for the existence of God. Debating on the reasons
why God exists cannot logically prove that God does not exist. If one is
to defy the existence of God, independent reasons that God does not
exist are required.

Those who defy God mainly refer to the evil and discomfort in the world.
If there really is a God, they say, why is there so much pain and
suffering in the world?

Such criticism will obviously never lead to the defiance of God, for the
most we are able to conclude from it is that the order and harmony in
the universe is not what we might expect or imagine. In fact, those who
refer to evil in the world are concerned with divine justice rather than
the actual existence of God itself.

As Voltaire says, those who attempt to defy the existence of God by
referring to the evil and suffering in the world are like someone who
enters a highly sophisticated mansion full of exquisite architecture,
paintings and woodwork. Although the extremely skillful works he sees
can only lead to the fact that a master must have built them, he says
that since he found drops of blood and broken arms and legs on the
stairs or in the hall, such a mansion cannot have a maker! This is
clearly a baseless argument, for asking about the maker of a mansion is
quite irrelevant to violations in the laws and rules that govern it.

Classifying People based on Their Belief in God
-----------------------------------------------

According to their belief in God, humans can be divided into three
groups:

1- Believers in God: This group is dominant both qualitatively and
quantitatively, for most scientists and great thinkers throughout
history have believed in God.

2- The Indifferent: These people do not seem to have any belief in God,
nor do they believe in the existence of any absolute being as God,
either.

This group includes anyone who has no inclination, tendency or actions
based on belief - anyone who doubts the existence of God, those who defy
God in imitation of others, and those who may realize deep inside that
there must be some kind of extreme origin or force, but fail to
associate it with God.

These people have not turned indifferent about God in spite of their
research, awareness or knowledge, for if they are provided with suitable
instructions and guidance, they abandon their defiance and doubts.

3- Those who have turned against God: Some people lose their belief in
God, and claim that they scientifically or philosophically doubt that
God exists. Based on why they turn away from God, these people can be
categorized as:

a) Personal: These people turn away from God because they fail to
achieve the goals or ideals they set for themselves. For example, those
who attempt to gain wealth, fame, or power, sulkily abandon their faith
when they are unable to get what they aim for; in fact, they suffer from
a multi-personality syndrome.

b) Ideological: Some people claim that the reasons theists have for the
existence of God are baseless, because we cannot see or feel God or evil
and suffering has filled the world.

Despite the philosophical and/or scientific justification these people
have for their criticism, an intellectual will never accept them as
reasons that can prove that there is no God; even if the theists'
reasoning is baseless or the world is full of evil and suffering, it
cannot mean God does not exist. How can such people claim that they have
studies the universe carefully and found no God? If their criterion is
feeling that God exists, why do they not observe their own thoughts,
which is the base of all their activities?

Each human being knows that he/she has a “self,” an ego. In spite of
this, the human body becomes ill, and suffers a lot at times. Does that
mean that man has no ego, no “self,” for if he did, he would never
suffer? Although man's ego adjusts his actions and behavior, it also
warns him about things that might harm him physically or mentally. The
ego's functions are not limited to man's physical, worldly life; yet, it
is not comparable to God's role in the universe, for God influences
everything about man infinitely, even things far beyond man's control.
Thus, even the slightest attention to the human “self” will never lead
to defiance of the existence of God.

Factors Inhibiting Obvious Recognition of God
---------------------------------------------

Man can achieve faith and knowledge about the existence of God, for
there are a great many logical reasons supporting it. There are, on the
other hand, various veils that inhibit it. We can categorize the
inhibiting factors as:

1- Those arising from practical deviations, like drowning in sins and
lusts, which make man both fail to recognize God and communicate with
Him, and darken the most obvious reasons supporting God's existence,
changing them into a bunch of meaningless, ineffective words. There are
many thinkers and intellectuals who are highly proficient in divine
philosophy and have mastered the reasons that clearly prove that God
exists, but still do not believe in God. Such people are empty of any
supreme human-divine sense of responsibility. Their points of view have
been blinded by both scientific factors and practical deviations.

2- Some scientific perceptions about the universe have also hindered
true belief in God. As we know, there are many aspects to the universe,
and man has made contact with it with specific aims and viewpoints.
Sometimes our discoveries make us associate one characteristic of one
component of the universe with all its other components. For example,
when we observe the dominance of quantity, we may regard it as an
absolute fact that dominates all aspects of the universe.

The less man's mental development, the more natural occurrences and
appearances penetrate into his mind, which he uses to evaluate all facts
about the universe.

The inhibitions caused by incorrect scientific receptions are due to
mental and spiritual weaknesses of individuals themselves, for they are
incapable of freeing their intelligence of the superficial occurrences
and issues of nature. The most significant of “scientific veils” is
absolutist perceptions of the law of causality, which the normal mind
saturates with

absolute concepts and destroys his sense of absolutism toward
discovering the basic principles of the universe. Inaccurate
comprehension of the law of causality changes it into a thick barrier.

As we know, there is some definite information at hand on the law of
causality. Some of these facts are:

● Every effect has a cause.

● A cause cannot transfer something it does not have to its effect.

● The principle of “same kinds” between the cause and its effect.

The problem with causality in regard to God starts when we extract the
causes of things from nature, and suppose there is no room left for God
as the creator of the whole world of nature. Thus, we put God aside from
nature, considering Him as the cause of all causes among the chain of
nature's components. In other words, God is regarded as the creator of
the first natural reason, the manager of the whole of nature, and nature
is considered to be the one controlling itself directly.

We see in the Holy Qur’an that every event and motion in the universe is
directly related to God. All of nature is an act of God:

The big mistake is that we - consciously or unconsciously - derive the
main operative cause out of material and superficial causes, concluding
their independence of the direct creator, and putting God at the very
beginning of the creation chain. Interestingly, we even call God the
primary cause - the cause of all causes.

That, indeed, is the real point. We must realize that God, though being
the primary reason and the cause of all causes, is in fact the actual
creator of the whole universe.”

Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi) says that as long as we human beings
are imprisoned in our natural senses and theoretical intelligence, all
of our receptions will be confined to natural appearances; only if we
can step far beyond these superficial causes may we find God, the direct
truth behind all events:

<p dir="rtl">
بی سبب بيند چو ديـده شـد گذار تو که در حبسی، سبب را گوش دار
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
با سببــــها از مسبـّـب غافلــی سـوی اين روپوشـها زآن مايلــی
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هين ز سايه شخص را ميکن طلب در مسبــب رو گذر کـن از سبب
</p>

*(Those who have made great effort in life and succeeded in ignoring the
pleasures of natural life, stepping beyond their natural self, achieve
the level in which the causes and reasons of the world are revealed to
them. Their penetrative eyes can now see the underlying foundation of
the universe which is independent upon the cause-and-effect
relationships. But you, drowning in your mortal lusts and animal-like
desires! You, who have sold the gem called 'your life' for meager
selfishness!*

Now that you are indeed imprisoned in this ring of senses and
superficialities, keep struggling in the fatal whirlpool of causalities,
and just go on desperately grabbing for something to cling to. You are
so absorbed in causes and effects that you are ignoring the creator of
them all; all you see is superficial effects. From these shadows you see
(in fact, man's

existence), you can find the shadow-maker; indeed, these apparent causes
can lead you to the Master of All Causes.)

Our theoretical intelligence sometimes pays attention only to
superficial reasons, failing to penetrate deep into the mysterious ways
the universe works.

<p dir="rtl">
اين سبــب را محـرم آمد عقــل ما و آن سبـبها راسـت محـــرم انبيا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وآن سببــها کانبيـا را رهبــر است آن سببها زين سبـبها برتـر است
</p>

*(It is indeed the very hidden causes that guide prophets on their
mission. By contact with these causes, they can perform miracles in this
world. The hidden causes are much greater than their natural
counterparts in this world. We can only realize these natural causes,
whereas prophets of God can use those supreme causes and reasons.)*

Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi)

Essentiality Reasoning
----------------------

Saint Anslem, the Christian thinker, presented this form of reasoning,
and later on philosophers like Descartes continued using it. It is based
upon the image man makes of God in his mind. First, man defines God as
the greatest being imaginable, and then as the most complete, perfect
being imaginable. Anslem believes that if God is not considered as the
most perfect, things more perfect than God can exist. If God is not a
being, we cannot consider God as the most perfect thing of all, and that
is not what we believe. Here, we have proved that the opposite of what
we want to prove is wrong; since God cannot be non-existent, He must
exist. Thus, the basics of this reasoning are:

1- We imagine God as the greatest or most perfect existence of all.

2- What we imagine must exist, for if it does not, we have not imagined
the most perfect being.

3- Thus, God, as the most perfect, complete being, must exist.

The biggest problem with this reasoning is the mixing of the first,
natural concept and the secondary, popular one. Anslem has mixed up
primary, natural being with consequential creation. God being existent
and perfect as the primary nature is fine, but the latter is inaccurate.
Merely imagining the most perfect being does not lead to the external
occurrence of the most perfect. We can, for instance, consider a partner
for the primary nature that must exist - God - as the first, natural
idea, but that will not make such a partner for God exist externally,
too.

All in all, if a concept is in nature perfect, but when actually
existent is not, this does not create a contradiction for us to use this
form of reasoning for.

This reasoning is called the essentiality reasoning, also called the
perfection reasoning. Here, existence arises from essentiality. This
reasoning has roots in Islamic prayers and hadith. As the Sabah prayer
by Imam Ali reads:

<p dir="rtl">
يا من دلّ علی ذاته بذاته
</p>

*“O God, the God Whose nature is itself a reason for the existence of
His nature.”*

And let us quote from Imam Zain-ul-abedin in the Abu Hamzeh Thumali
prayer:

<p dir="rtl">
بک عرفتک و انت دللتنی عليک و لو لا انت ما ادر ما انت
</p>

*“I discovered You through You Yourself; You reasoned me toward
Yourself. If not for You, how could I ever know You?”*

Now let us describe this reasoning:

1- All human beings of sound mind and soul pay attention to the concept
of God. Even those who defy God must pay attention to the concept of
God's existence at first. If one says that God exists, he has
undoubtedly understood that God is a concept that can exist. One who
says that God doesn't exist also understands that God is a concept that
cannot exist. In fact, the concept of God has been distinguished from
the imagination of God, because the concept of God can be paid attention
to, but it cannot be imagined. We realize that we are enjoying
something, but we cannot imagine it.

2- The concept of God in developed minds is, “the most perfect truth,
the richest existence and the most powerful,” for even the slightest
imperfection would tarnish the concept of being God.

The god some thinkers have cast doubt on has characteristics that are
not compatible with the real God, so their doubt is not justifiable.
Bertrand Russell, for instance, who is doubtful about God, has failed to
understand God correctly; the god Russell has recognized does not exist
at all.

Having recognized God as the most complete, perfect being, we must say
that God needs no other being - even Himself - and if someone claims
that he can understand the highest of beings in a way that it also needs
something, he has not recognized the highest of beings at all.

3- God, as the most perfect, complete being, exists. In other words,
recognizing God as the greatest, most perfect, is a necessity for His
reality, just like confirming the fact that a triangle has three sides
when we see it. Merely recognizing God as the highest, most complete
being is a sign that God exists, and if one claims that such recognition
cannot prove God's existence - as Anslem was criticized - we can
consider his claim as due to three factors:

a) The impossibility of God's existence

b) The absence of reasons

c) Inhibiting barriers

Firstly, as we have said before, no reason can defy that God exists.
Secondly, this concept needs no reason. Thirdly, even if it had
inhibiting barriers, it would not be recognized as the most perfect
being at all. In other words, being the absolutely perfect contradicts
with having reasons (causes) and also with having barriers inhibiting
its existence.

Actually, the difference between these statements and Anslem's reasoning
is that Anslem insists on the image of God, whereas we emphasize
recognizing and understanding God. In other words, natural recognition
is significant here.

In brief, this deduction consists of making man understand his own
disposition, rather than having a reality outside the human mind
reflected upon it. Man can understand and recognize what he has in
himself my means of this deduction.

As we said about Anslem's reasoning, merely imagining something is not a
sign that it really exists externally; we can imagine many things
without them having any external existence.

Considering normal knowledge, such an objection is correct and logical,
but we should not forget the fact that no imagination leads to its
subject actually existing in the real world; thus, the existence of a
fact always needs a cause. Just imagining does not imply its existence.
Concerning our topic, however, our supposition is that our mind has been
able to recognize a being that needs no cause.

Of course, the mere imagining of a being that needs no cause does not
make us accept its reality, unless we intuitively recognize it; gained
imagination is not enough. And intuitive recognition is nothing more
than man's God-seeking disposition.

Some may claim that imagining such a being is hallucination. In other
words, the human mind can have a wrong image of God, a God that is
scared and coward, just like other cases when the human mind can imagine
an effect without imagining its cause.

In response, we must say that the issue of God cannot be imagination or
hallucination, for if one believes in God, he either knows that his
belief is a hallucination or he does not. If he knows that he has
imagined something unreal and wrong, why has he made so much effort
toward proving it or defying it? If the imagination were in fact unreal,
man should never have worshipped God so much throughout history. And if
he does not know, there is no argument at all.

When studying this reasoning, we should keep in mind whether deep inside
us we can recognize the most complete being or not. This is why merely
recognizing the most perfect being brings about belief that He exists,
just as simply as one accepts that 2×2=4. There is no need for a medium
state here. In other words, the substance for its reasoning is included
in itself.

Faith
-----

The best way to define faith is: the confirmation of an active
conscience. Some scholars have regarded faith as merely confirmation -
so do some hadith - where it means expressing the distinct,
understandable base of the public. Thus, we can conclude that the main
idea here is the confirmation of an active conscience, for conformation
alone cannot make any effect in the mind; there is great difference
between confirming something and making effect based upon it Most
conscious, aware people admit the necessity of justice for individual
and social human life, but few men have actually executed justice. Man
will definitely be just if he considers justice as part of his own life.

### The Necessity of Faith

###

It is sometimes asked whether man can live without faith or not. In
response, we must first see what life means here. If it means endeavor
toward satisfying natural, animal-like desires, faith is not only
unnecessary, rather even disturbing. Those who claim that man has no
need for faith are in fact referring to animal life.

But if life means paying attention to all human potentials and talents,
man cannot definitely do without faith.

If man has faith, all his thoughts and deeds will be in accordance with
the law. Such a man will do things out of eagerness and enthusiasm, not
reluctance that will later make him feel guilty.

There are three points of misunderstanding about faith nowadays:

1- Evil persons pretending to have faith. Machiavellians have no
stronger tool for misleading others than pretending to have faith.

2- Mental errors concerning faith. Some people think that any kind of
faith arises out of pure worship. In other words, the believer considers
his every action or thought to be based upon worship.

3- Verbal manipulation. Instead of having faith in God and His prophets
and considering the ultimate goal of the universe and obeying God's
orders, some people confine faith to a series of concepts.

Nowadays, concepts like humanism or advocating science or freedom have
become playthings in the hands of the selfish, who have deprived man of
a series of realities, because they themselves have no faith in these
concepts at all.

We must remember, however, that the three above-mentioned orientations
cannot defy the necessity of faith for a human being who tends to live
an interpretable life in this world.

The consequences of having faith are:

● Faith makes people be trusted by their fellow beings.

● Faith corrects man's thoughts.

● It makes man interpret and account for his life.

● It makes man morally dependent.

● Faith has man abandon personal desires and turn to serving people
socially.

● It provides man with internal, constant liveliness.

● Man finds innate dignity and elegance through faith.

● Faith makes man himself carry the heavy load of his life instead of
imposing it upon others.

● With faith, man is freed of mental anxieties and worries.

● Faith helps man accomplish great achievements.

● It makes man feel greatness in the universe, and observe moral
principles.

If man's faith in God makes him constantly pay attention to God, he will
always admit that God is watching him, and if man accepts God's
continual supervision of what he does, the results will be:

1- Man will spend every moment of his life seeing God before him.

2- Man will act upon devotion and commitment, for he has realized
without doubt that only God - and nothing else - can deserve to be man's
goal in his deeds.

3- Man will make savings for his eternity in this world.

4- Man will avoid forbidden actions - even if they are not sins, like
unsuitable actions or deeds based upon imagination or hallucinations.

5- Man will not waste his life.

6- It is only through recognizing God's constant supervision that man
can harness his lusts and desires.

7- Such a man will realize that every action of his in this world leads
to reactions.

<p dir="rtl">
اين جهان کوه است و فعل ما ندا ســوی ما آيـــد نداها را صــدا
</p>

*(This world is like a mountain, and our actions are shouts; their
reactions come back to us.)*

**Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi)**

8- Man will give up his far-reaching wishes, and will not allow baseless
illusions replace facts and realities.

9- God's supervision makes man be patient and tolerant toward events.

10- Man will regard piety as the tool to pass the bridge of death.

11- Man tries to keep moving on the right path amidst all the dangerous
cliffs and deviating ways full of thorns during his life.

12- Man considers every moment and aspect of his life as precious and
valuable, and will not let apparently-fatalistic events disturb his
life.

Such a man will adjust his life in a way that it seems he is on the
verge of death:

Man's Mental States during Worship
----------------------------------

When worshipping God, man may be in a state of fear or a state of
flourish and joy.

Basically, man's mental state depends on his viewpoint of his position
in the universe. If he does not see himself as of great meaning in the
universe, his mental state will also suffer from meaninglessness; if,
however, he interprets his life as related to the origin of the universe
and regard his development and progress as due to God's kindness, he
will always remember God, and his worship will be in an elevated mental
state.

Of course, human beings differ in their degree of development and
progress, and those who have achieved high levels of development
intuitively see God while worshipping. This is why some perfected human
beings weep strangely in their worship. It has been said, for example,
that Imam Ali writhed like a snake when he worshipped God in the dark
night.

When man pays attention to God's qualities of greatness and beauty, he
will be in a state of hope; if man considers qualities of God's power
and anger, he will feel fear of God. The reasons for fear of God can be:

1- Fear of the results and consequences of the sins man has committed;
sins make the soul deteriorate and become evil, and developed man cannot
remain insensitive about that.

2- Fear of the fact that man may not have put the blessings and
potentials God has given him to correct use.

3- Fear of the significance and glory of the meaning of the universe and
man's existence in it.

4- Fear of God, i.e. realizing God's immense glory and His absolute
dominance over the universe; such a realization can fill man with awe
and intimidation.

5- Fear of God's great, divine position, which makes man realize how
absolutely dependent he is upon God - the originator of the universe -
and this makes man terrified of disobeying God.

Since man has extremely numerous and diverse aspects, and God's
qualities are also endless, man can thus make contact with a divine
quality with each of his mental aspects, and each contact will lead to a
different mental phenomenon. For example, if man feels God's absolute
dominance as the Creator of the universe, he will realize the glory of
God. And since God is constantly dominant over the whole universe, man
will always feel that God, the extreme witness and supervisor, watches
his every move and behavior.

Such a feeling is itself a special mental phenomenon, and realizing the
fact that God is the absolute just and has accurately calculated every
single detail about the universe and all of man's deeds and words, man
will acquire a feeling of how just and fair God is. Furthermore, when
man realizes that God has created man to bestow him with kindness, and
is affectionate and merciful toward man, and when man realizes God's
brilliant beauty by means of intuition, he will have a feeling of high
joy.

Is Religion a Personal Matter?
------------------------------

Some Western thinkers have regarded religion as a persona; spiritual
state irrelevant to all elements of life.

We must say that mismanagement on behalf of churches and other places of
worship has led to this kind of viewpoint about religion, which should,
in fact, provide man with awareness of himself, which leads to awareness
about the universe, and eventually development on the path of
intelligible life. As Iqbal Lahouri says:

<p dir="rtl">
چيست دين؟ برخاستن از روی خاک تا که آگه گـردد از خود جان پــاک
</p>

*(What is religion? It is rising from the earth - this world - so that
you can be aware of your pure soul.)*

If various educational systems used religion to develop the human
character, such thoughts would have never arisen.

As we know, man needs to find answers to the six basic questions: Who am
I? Where have I come from? Who am I with? Where have I come to? Where do
I go from here? Why am I here? It is only religion that can provide him
with the answers.

Those thinkers and intellectuals, who separate religion from man's life
and try to confine it to something personal, are in fact throwing man
into countless aspects of nervous and spiritual retardation; such people
would only think about God on Saturdays or Sundays, never taking God
into consideration in any other parts of their lives.

The Origins of Defying Divine Commandments
------------------------------------------

The factors that make man disobey God and defy the worship God has
obliged His subjects to carry out are:

1- Ignorance and incapability: Those who suffer from mental handicap do
not know that God exists, and have no blame; how, on the other hand, can
someone of sound brain and spirit see all the discipline and harmony in
the universe and ignore its source?

2- Neglect toward God: Some people ignore the supreme level of divinity,
for they are drowned in their lusts and desires.

3- An illusion of independence: Some people do not understand the
necessity of having a relationship with God and obeying His orders, so
they believe themselves to be independent. This is the most degraded
form of conceit and selfishness.

If man is aware that God exists, if man realizes how great and glorious
God is, and if man understands that without contact with God he can
never reach the supreme aim of life, he will not avoid worshipping God.

Devotion
--------

There are two kinds of devotion:

1- Devotion in a general meaning: Regarding a fact as innately
desirable, whether the fact or reality has an aspect of merit or not,
like power, wealth, ethnic characteristics, science and freedom. Such a
form of devotion is not a value or a merit, and cannot develop the human
character.

2- Devotion in a specific meaning: Regarding a fact that if achieved
potentials and talents are activated as innately desirable.

Devotion in the first meaning inflates man's natural ego, and throws him
into grief. It is meritorious devotion, however, that can bring about
man's development and perfection.

The greatest of all meritorious form of devotion that is the base of
other valuable kinds of devotion is devotion to God. When man is devoted
to God, he is aware of what is proper and appropriate to man, and
progresses toward gaining them.

In fact, if something is to be innately desirable to man, it must be a
reality that can make all of man's potentials flourish. It should be in
accordance with man's sound logic, nature and his psychic observations
about God.

Since complete devotion causes the true elixir of man's soul to
flourish, there will be irreparable damage if such devotion is given to
something other than God.

Devotion to God brings about being devoted to all realities and facts of
merit and value. If man acquires a certain kind of knowledge with
devotion for God, for instance, the knowledge will be innately
desirable. Or, if man acts with justice in all aspects of his life with
devotion to God, he will enjoy both the individual and social benefits
of justice and its divine aspect, too.

### The Characteristics of Valuable Devotion:

###

1- Value-based devotion is not compatible with selfishness or egotism,
for no supreme reality can become innately desirable to man unless the
natural self is moderated.

2- Like true love, devotion based on value and merit is the strongest
factor of self-possession - a perfectionist human being's greatest ideal
of all.

3- Value-based devotion provides man with tranquility. When man's soul
is devoted to a supreme reality, he is also guiding himself toward the
highest aim of life.

4- Devotion helps man concentrate his mental and psychic forces and
guards him against baseless hallucinations and soul-damaging
temptations.

5- Being devoted to a supreme reality makes man's attention to it change
dramatically. Devotion for something makes all other facts and realities
fade away.

6- Devotion has two values - an innate, dispositional value and a value
as a means. Its innate, dispositional value involves “the desirability
of devotion itself which purifies man's relationship with the desired
truth of all contaminating factors and selfishness.”

Its value as a means, on the other hand, consists of the innate
desirable that attracts the soul. The most valuable form of devotion is
the one that attracts man toward God.

7- When man considers something as desirable, his entire character is
attracted to it, and he accounts for and justifies his whole life based
on it. Since devotion, as an innately desirable thing, makes man choose
his path in life, man must make great effort to choose a reality as his
goal that is really worth being devoted to.

8- Devotion is a bipolar mental development - it has innately external
and innately internal poles. Its internal pole consists of man's
tendency toward a reality that is considered as innately desirable. Its
external pole consists of the reality that is innately desirable to man.
Such a reality should be able to activate all of man's potentials and
aspects.

9- In value-based devotion man deals with everything logically.

One of the most fundamental characteristics of value-based devotion
reveals itself when the desired reality shows its true face and attracts
the soul; it's not that it cannot hear the disagreeing sounds or cannot
see the protestors, or that it does not confront those who conflict with
the reality. If it can, it defeats the protestors and destroys those who
fight reality and righteousness; if it fails to do so, it continues on
its way without the least attention or influence from them.

10- Having devotion in one's thoughts, deeds and speech purifies man's
inside. Devotion in thoughts makes realities able to be received by man
intuitively, and prevents the facts from being contaminated by
hallucinations and illusions. Pure and devoted speech also keeps man
away from deceitful words. Devoted deeds are the soul of deeds, and
builds up man's existence on the path of intelligible life.

Having God in Mind
------------------

Remembering God at all times has various effects and benefits. Let us
point out some of them:

1- Faith in God makes one always have God in mind. When one has faith in
God, he sees nothing in the whole universe worth remembering and calling
but God. When God infiltrates man's heart, there will be no more room
for anything else at all.

2- Remembering God creates a special spiritual state in man which
safeguards him from falling for worldly and materialistic affairs. This

spiritual state makes man's life become meaningful and logical, his
purely natural life will be replaced by intelligible life.

3- Remembering God makes man fresh, and keeps him safe from the sorrow
of the disorders that occur in purely natural life. Likewise, it does
not allow the relative joys of purely natural life spoil the secret of
human character.

4- Remembering God removes all temptations, imaginations and mental
illusions, safeguarding the human mind and soul from being baselessly
exhausted and used up.

5- Remembering God adjusts man's mental and psychic activities, and his
existence will illuminate. The tranquility that remembering God creates
in man will balance his entire existence. As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi
(Rumi) says:

<p dir="rtl">
اين قـــدر گفتيـم، باقی فکر کن فکر گر راکد بود، رو ذکـــر کن
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ذکـــر آرد فکـر را در اهتـــزاز ذکر را خورشيد اين افسرده ساز
</p>

*(Now go and think about the rest, and if your thoughts lead nowhere,
remember God and call out for him, for that will elevate your thoughts.
It will be like a sun you’re your thoughts are down and depressed.)*

6- Remembering God prevents man's character from being decomposed into
the scattered components of this world; instead, by means of realizing
the rules governing the universe and gaining complete knowledge of it,
man will find a certain tranquility, and feel that he is always close to
God.

7- Remembering God makes God's will start to purify and illuminate man
internally, and man's positive internal potentials will flourish.

8- Remembering God frees man from all his imagining and hallucinating,
and makes him speak of things that he will really act upon. Remembering
God leads to living and speaking realistically.

9- Remembering God is a path to reach the truth and benefit from man's
internal treasures. Remembering God makes God reveal some realities and
secrets to man as a reward for remembering Him.

10- Remembering God leads to the knowledge of God's glorious blessings.
Deep thought about God's blessings guides man toward constant
remembrance of and calling out for God.

11- Remembering God makes man never weaken in the battle on the boundary
of life and death. Those who remember God in a battlefield never forget
God's rules and Godly values.

Remembering God is the strongest builder of human nature. Calling God's
name is a comprehensive book including all the chapters of mental and
spiritual development and training, a divine trainer and teacher that
accompanies man day and night.

### The Conditions for Calling and Remembering God

###

Of course, this does not mean merely utterances from the mouth; saying
the word without considering what it means is worthless. In other words,
attention to the meaning is the essential preliminary. Remembering God
in one's heart also needs the attention of the soul.

● Man must remember God when his soul is eager to do so, not when he is
forced to externally. And when an action becomes like a habit, it will
be something compulsory, with little interference on behalf of man's
free will. We must keep in mind that the habit of remembering and
calling God should not be in a way that makes it deft man's free will
and awareness.

● Man should act and behave in accordance with his remembering God. If
someone says “God is great,” he must not drown in selfishness, greed for
power or wealth.

● Remembering God must be considered as the factor that activates man's
heavenly soul, not a tool for self-conceit. Man should not remember God
in order to remove his frustrations over a monotonous life. It should
not be the means for performing extraordinary acts either, like what
ascetics do.

Divine Justice
--------------

The principles that make up our viewpoints on divine justice are:

1- The universe is orderly and harmonious. Otherwise, there would be no
laws either, for laws are general theorems that arise out of the harmony
and discipline in the world. We cannot understand the role of divine
justice in the universe without accepting the existence of order,
discipline and harmony.

2- The creatures in the world can be divided into two groups. First,
creatures that are alive, and have a “self” (an ego) of their own, and
second, creatures that are not alive, and submit to the flow of nature.

3- Order and harmony, where divine justice manifests itself, is
different in the two mentioned groups of creatures. Something that
applies to a living creature as a law may not be applicable to a
non-living one. For instance, reproduction and avoiding unsuitable
habitats is a law for living creatures, but for lifeless creatures it
can be a violation of law and order.

4- Justice is equal to order and harmony for creatures that have a
'self.' When we come to harmony, law and orderliness for the universe
(that has a 'self'), we are in fact speaking of justice.

5- When the human mind sees the universe, it sees the order and harmony
it includes, but when it comes to creatures in the world, the concept of
order and harmony fades, and concepts like joy and sorrow and justice
and atrocity arise. Likewise, when discussing the issue of man and human
relationships, we come to concepts such as right and wrong, good and
evil, and justice and atrocity become deeper and clearer to us.

The more developed, deeper and more diluted the “self' (the ego) is, the
more accurate and profound its imagination of justice and atrocity will
be. A well-developed self will expect a higher level of justice from
himself and others, and - at the highest level - from God, and if man
were to picture justice himself and make it come true, it would be
justice at its supreme level.

6- Each human being defines justice based on his/her own knowledge and
tendencies. As Tolstoy says, “When a child is stung by a bee, it might
think that bees live only to sting people; a beehive keeper, on the
other hand, believes that bees live to gather honey, and to a poet, who
enjoys watching bees on flowers, will see bees' mission as extracting
nectar from flowers, and a botanist will call it fertilizing flowers.
This example shows

how diverse viewpoints can be. Man may look upon justice from various
points of view, and reach diverse interpretations.

7- Normal people associate justice with natural tendencies, but
developed human beings see the root of justice in ideal tendencies.
People like Napoleon and Tamberlaine see divine order and justice in
there being nothing inhibiting their triumph and victory; however,
developed human beings interpret justice not in regard to their own
desires; they believe that the universe is based on order and harmony,
and does not proceed in accordance with man's wishes. Thus, we must say
that the more developed man is, and the deeper and more accurate his
observations are, the more his view of justice will shine.

8- If man had abstract perception and had no sense of joy or sorrow, he
would never think about justice, for then his mind would be like a
mirror, reflecting everything equally; a human being's painful suffering
would sound like the exquisitely beautiful bird singing. It is the
feeling of pain and joy, the pleasure of joy and inconvenience of pain
and sorrow that makes man see true justice in the fact that “everything,
throughout all of life, be pleasant and good,” and the utmost pain and
atrocity be regarded as suffering from pain at one point of the life of
living things.

9- Since joy and pain depends on a variety of changeable factors
dominating the world of creatures, man assumes an average level of
justice to use as his criterion for assessing justice and interpreting
it. Such a viewpoint makes some people consider death - even after a
lifetime of 10,000 years - as contradictory to divine justice. They
expect all people to be as handsome as Joseph and as fair and just as
Imam Ali, and be able to conquer like Napoleon and travel around the
globe like Alexander. Such a state of mind shows how intensely playful
the human mind is.

10- If man takes a clear look at the universe, he will see the order and
harmony in it, but if he attempts to interpret the universe from merely
a natural point of view, he will fail to see any divine justice in the
universe. Thus, we should be true observers, and eliminate all of our
natural tendencies. In other words, we must change our natural
tendencies into ideal ones. If that happens, the bitternesses and
inconveniences we suffer will not make us protest to divine justice.

This is why the great men of history have tolerated cruelty and torture,
and never had the least doubt in God's justice. If Imam Ali had a
natural viewpoint as his spiritual guidelines, even a thousandth of the
amount of cruelty and torture he bore was enough to make him skeptical
about the whole universe and all of mankind, and defy divine justice.

11- Man's big mistake is losing ideal tendency, which makes him fail to
fulfill his duty entirely and eventually fall into doubt about divine
justice. When man achieves the supreme 'self,' attaining development and
perfection, he can find with internal intuition that divine laws call
for him to relieve others from pain and suffering. When man is at the
level of natural tendencies, however, he does not think of the relief of
others; all he thinks about is himself. Thus, being content with what
there is, and watching God's geometry - in which human lives play the
most important part of its illustration - being deformed is in fact
fighting against divine justice.

12- Man's endeavors and actions can be divided into two basic groups:

a) Things man does out of his free will.

b) Non-voluntary actions that occur without the supervision and
dominance of the human character. These actions are like the actions and
movements seen in animals and other living creatures. All of the
voluntary or non-voluntary actions of man and other living creatures
affect the universe. In other words, the general destiny or
interpretation of the universe is the product of various actions and
fixed and changeable affairs.

13- Elaborating on physical and mental inconveniences and defections: we
should first discuss two important issues:

a) Imperfect life: The handicaps and disabilities seen in some people
and the pain and suffering they undergo is regarded as imperfect life.

b) The flame of life going out: When some living creatures, or even
human beings, are destroyed in the fight for survival, it is a sign of
the fire of life being put out.

There are several points we must mention concerning the relationship
these issues have with divine justice:

a) The source and origin of the universe has no need for favoritism or
unfairness. So the inconveniences seen in the creatures in the universe
cannot be due to that.

b) It cannot be imagined that God acts cruelly. “Because cruelty happens
when the object cruelty is done upon is somehow beyond the ability of
the oppressor to conquer; there must be some issue or law absent in the
cruel one to make it commit the cruelty. On the other hand, we know that
all creatures are absolutely under control and possession of God, with
all their laws and affairs.”

c) The base and foundation of life gives the same importance to the
minimum level of life as it does to the highest level.

Serious defense of life indicates that the important thing is true life
itself, not its time length. The absence of some of the characteristics
or means of life does not make it bad. All creatures endeavor to make
their life flourish and go on, and prevent any factor that tends to
inhibit that. Wishing for death or tending toward suicide does not arise
out of the origins of true life; it is despair and social problems that
cause them. The flame of life being put out does not conflict with
divine justice, for both the cruel and the oppressed ones' free will
also has a part.

14- Feelings of evil, imperfection, and disorder in creation is due to
man's limited thoughts and viewpoints; when discussing such
imperfections we must always keep these three points in mind:

a) There is a difference between the universe and discovering the
universe.

b) The order, harmony and discipline that governs the universe has not
been established in accordance with man's wishes.

c) God's position is too great for us to be able to know about it
completely.

The life-oriented viewpoint means that man's only criterion in
determining the rules of the universe is considered his own wishes and
desires; however, many of man's wishes and desires can never be
fulfilled.

In other words, when studying the imperfections of the universe, we use
standards that pertain to our own observations and desires, and
practical reasons can never confirm them.

Handicapped or disabled people - though having become disabled or
handicapped due to natural reasons and causes - never feel hatred for
life, for life is the incredible phenomenon that man will always want to
continue, unless a mental or spiritual blow is delivered onto it.

I once visited a nursing home for deaf and mute people in Isfehan, Iran,
in order to study their handicaps and disabilities. I arranged with the
officials of the nursing home, who were dear friends of mine, that I
watch and observe the children and young people there alone for a while,
so that I could have a better chance of seeing how their mental and
spiritual state was considering the handicap they also had.

The result was quite near to what I had expected - they did not feel any
suffering or defection due to their deafness or muteness, and their
behavior clearly showed that they were not dissatisfied with their
lives. There was no indication of feeling disabled or imperfect in how
they played, treated each other or even others. I also studied young
people who were paralyzed or crippled. I was amazed to see that they had
no sadness or depression when they were alone, or were playing. They
looked exactly like other, normal young people. So, it is obvious that
life is the astonishing, incredible reality that will go on trying to
survive, even if it means mere existence - unless, of course, man's own
soul delivers it a crippling blow.

The Rule of Kind Favors
-----------------------

There are several preliminary explanations on the rule of kind favors:

1- Creating man has no benefit for God, and avoids no harm from God,
either; God is too great to need anything or anybody to help Him.

2- Humans have been created so that their character can be developed. In
other words, God has set a perfect existence for man, and wants man to
reach it.

3- Man is not perfect when he is born.

4- Man cannot achieve the desired perfection that is considered as his
aim without endeavor.

5- Not all kinds of endeavor can guide man to perfection; the endeavor
that is based upon conscience and reason, and is supported by divine
sermons given by prophets can do that.

6- The above-mentioned principles can flow through two kinds of affairs:

a) Non-voluntary affairs: Affairs that influence man's fate although he
can do nothing to change them, like being born, having certain
instincts, having wisdom and conscience, hereditary backgrounds, social
and geographical conditions, etc. These non-voluntary affairs are
related to God's justice, for if we suppose that the aim of creating man
(evolution and improving and developing the human character) is related
to these non-voluntary affairs, there is no way except God's justice to
adjust them.

b) Voluntary affairs: These affairs also influence man's fate.
Non-voluntary affairs are related to God's justice, but these affairs
are up to man himself.

7- Now we can present a definition of kindness: Kindness consists of a
certain effect of God's justice that motivates man in the boundaries of
lack of clarity, and can be voluntary or non-voluntary.

The Consequences of the Rule of Kind Favors
-------------------------------------------

The following four conclusions can be made from the rule of kind favors:

1- All the divine knowledge man can gain comes from the rule of kind
favors.

2- According to the rule of kind favors, there is a series of duties and
instructions which must be fulfilled if the human character is to
develop.

3- The necessity to appoint leaders arises from the rule of kind favors.

4- The acceptance of the overall opinion of jurisprudential scholars,
which is one of the sources of jurisprudence, is also based upon the
rule of kind favors, for the rule of kindness says God prevents the
leaders of a school of thoughts from falling into error - when the
scholars confer, there is either disagreement or agreement, and the
leader is in one of these two groups.

The Relationship between God and His Creatures
----------------------------------------------

Ever since a long time ago, the relationship between “the existence that
has to be” and “the existence that can be” - the creator and the
creature - has been subject to debate. Since man gets most of his
philosophical and scientific input from nature, he cannot discover
exactly the relationship between God and the universe. Most of the
material at hand on the subject is also mere personal ideas or literary
metaphors that satisfy just a few. As the famous Iranian poet Sheikh
Mahmoud Shabestari says,

<p dir="rtl">
عدم آيينه، عالم عکــس و انســان چو چشم عکس در وی شخص پنهان
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تو چشم عکسی و او نـور ديده است به ديده ديده، را ديده که ديـده است؟
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
جهان انسان شد و انسـان جهانــی از اين پاکيــزهتر نبــود بيـــــانی
</p>

*(Absent is the mirror, and the universe is like a reflection. Someone
is hidden in him, like the eye of the reflection. You are the eye of the
reflection, and He is the light of the eyes; who has ever seen that true
light with his/her eyes? Indeed, man becomes the universe, and the
universe becomes man can it be worded any better than that.)*

The universe being a picture of God in the mirror of oblivion is merely
a metaphor, for oblivion is not a thing to be able to reflect the truth.
Can infinity ever be reflected within finite components?

The relation we use in order to discover the relationship between God
and the universe - the cause-and-effect relation - is not accurate. The
law of causality is derived from things in this world, associating
things with one another, but God cannot be compared to things found in
nature. Normally, causes consist of a subject cause and also a material
cause, whereas God, a subject cause, needs no material cause.

Things in this world occupy space and time in regard to one another, but
God does not; His position is high above others. Thus, the concepts we
conclude from the phenomena and effects in nature cannot be used to
interpret God's relationship with the universe.

Man can see the relationship between God and nature by referring to his
own self, his own nature, for though the human soul and body interact,
they are not at all one of a kind. Likewise, although God created this
world, He had no need for materiality. The human soul can invent
imaginations that are not comparable with it at all.

The Relationship between God and His Creatures in the Qur’an
------------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an mentions different forms of relationships between God
and the universe. We can categorize them into ten groups:

1- Surrounding: The Qur’an believes that God surrounds and dominates
everything, material or abstract.

<p dir="rtl">
و کان الله بکل شی محيطا
</p>

***“And God encompasses everything.”(4:126)***

God dominates and surrounds everything, both in knowledge and in
existence, like the human soul which controls its entire actions.

2- Establishing: The universe has its strength and foundation from God.
God has established the universe, like man's existence is founded upon
his soul.

<p dir="rtl">
الله لا اله الا هو الحی القيوم
</p>

***“God, there is no god but He, the Living, the Everlasting.”
(2:255)***

3- Accompaniment: God is with all creatures. This does not mean
physically near; it is a relationship of soul with physique, far beyond
time and place.

<p dir="rtl">
و هو معکم اينما کنتم
</p>

***“He is with you, wherever you are.” (20:111)***

4- Creation and Production: Various verses in the Qur’an refer to this
form of relation:

<p dir="rtl">
لا اله هو خالق کل شی فاعبدوه
</p>

***“That then is God your Lord; there is no God but He, the creator of
everything. So serve Him.”( 6:102)***

5- Absolute Possession: Here, possession does not mean conventional or
credit-based ownership; we are referring to true possession. God's
possession of creatures refers to the facts that God gave them their
existence. It is similar to the relationship between the intellect and
its creations.

6- Protection: This is one of the most important issues in theology, for
normally people think that God has created everything and then left them
on their own, whereas God is always protective of the universe and
everything in it.

<p dir="rtl">
ان ربی علی کل شی حفيظ
</p>

***“Verily, my Creator and Nurturer is the Protector over all things.”
(11:57)***

“I believe God is the protector and keeper of laws,” Einstein has said.

As we know, laws have no observable reality in the world; there is order
and harmony in the external world, and from that laws are abstracted. It
is God's will that makes events continue in a fixed, orderly fashion.

7- Creation and Nurture: Over 1000 verses in the Qur’an emphasize this
form of relationship.

<p dir="rtl">
و هو رب کل شی
</p>

***“And He is the Creator-Nurturer of everything.” (6:64)***

According to this relationship, the creator - or nurturer - constantly
dominates and takes care of its creations.

8- Worship: Everything worships God.

<p dir="rtl">
ان کل من فی السموات و الارض الا اتی الرحمن عبدا
</p>

***“Nothing is there in the heavens and earth but it comes to the
All-merciful as a servant. “ (19:93)***

Here, worship means complete submission of all creatures to God's will.

9- Divinity: God is the absolute dominant upon all levels and basics of
the universe.

<p dir="rtl">
فسبحان الذی بيده ملکوت کل شی و اليه ترجعون
</p>

***“So glory be to Him, in whose hand is the dominion of everything, and
unto whom you shall be returned.” (36:83)***

Here, “malakoot” in this verse refers to the supernatural picture of all
things, for the human “ego” has two faces:

a) The observable, created face

b) The supernatural face

This face of the universe describes the relationship between divine
absolute ownership and the supernatural face, nullifying the thoughts of
some philosophers who believe that God has no control or dominance over
the fundamentals of the universe.

10- Light: As the Holy Qur’an says:

<p dir="rtl">
الله نور السموات و الارض
</p>

***“God is the light of the heavens and the earth.”( 24:35)***

This verse explains both the existence of God and God's dominance and
control over the whole universe. God exists in the universe,
illuminating it without becoming connected or united with it, just like
light which penetrates into transparent things without becoming part of
them.


