A Look at Human Rights
======================

Unless we begin to interpret mankind in a domain of values, speaking of
human rights is impossible. Those who claim to be arguing about the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights should first specify which kind of
human being they refer to: the one described by the holy prophets, i e.
the being created with innate greatness, created by God’s perfect
wisdom, the being who lives to be good and become perfect, the being to
whom any insult equals insulting God’s will? Or do they mean a wolf-like
creature devoid of any values.

Human rights should be based on innate greatness and generosity; none of
the Western philosophies, like Nietzsche and the supporters of
authoritarianism have provided such a basis. In order to become a
universal culture, the Universal Human Rights should concretely prove
human dignity and greatness, and eliminate any Machiavellian,
authoritarianism, or utilitarianist ideas.

Western human rights are based on mutual coexistence accompanied by
peace, freedom, and justice in all societies. Although such a basis is
significant, it cannot provide a foundation in which all people can feel
themselves as a part of one family; that is only possible by means of a
much greater foundation - which, in Islam, is God.

Merely making and compiling laws does not necessarily mean executing
them. For a legal system to be executed 1) there should be no bias among
people and 2) the educational background needed for the system to
embrace reality should be established. This is why Islam has provided a
series of psychological and moral principles common to all people in
order to make its legal system feasible.

Human rights in Islam are based upon religion, which results in a few
exclusive characteristics:

1- It is a legal system based on God's will; in other words, it is God
who has presented His subjects with these rights and responsibilities.
Thus, each individual not only performs his duties with pure sincerity,
but also considers fulfilling them to be of critical importance to one’s
own development and perfection.

2- Man’s own perfectionist character is responsible for enforcing
Islamic laws.

3- The fact that Islam - as other religions - is based on Abraham’s
innate religion makes it easier to prove that human rights and duties
are universal.

Why the Human Rights Were Made: the Western Point of View

Seven reasons have been presented for the compilation of the Human Rights. We will now comment on some of them:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1- In the Human Rights Declaration, “the basis of freedom and peace lies
in identifying the virtues of all of mankind and their equal,
untransferrable rights”. The problem with this point is that it cannot
be claimed unless man's innate value and dignity is proven. The
Declaration considers all human beings, with all their ethnical, racial
and cultural diversities and characteristics as equal, and invites them
all to abandon their disputes and advantages. But how can we make this
embrace reality - by force, or

showing people the necessity and value of such rights?! In other words,
human rights will never truly exist unless people are made to realize
that there are rights for human lives alongside the rights providing
their natural mutual coexistence.

2- The Declaration uses the term “members of the family of mankind”,
which is of great significance; more important, however, is making it
come true, and why humans have very seldom achieved unity throughout
history. The answer is: man has seldom embraced elevated virtues
throughout history. Islam, believing that everyone is part of God's
family, emphasizes brotherhood and unity, and strongly believes that all
human beings are potential divine light.

3- “Human innate dignity” and “members of the family of mankind” are
meaningless unless man proves himself to be worthy of kindness. If
people's innate respect for humanity is not confirmed, and each human
being cannot love himself, he will never be capable of loving others. It
must first be proved that man respects every other human being, and that
everyone is able to truly love himself. He should be able to advance
from accepting respect for congeniality to loving humanity for the sake
of humanity itself. Then, having understood the universality of such
human congeniality which is caused by dependence upon God, he can be
kind and loving to others authentically, not due to a desire or mortal
feeling.

4- Human rights will be impossible unless people control their purely
natural life and their selfishness. Man must realize that the
intelligent balancing of one's desires and wishes - emphasized by all
philosophers and religions - is not a myth or impossible. Compiling such
idealistic rights by people who are totally obsessed with managing their
natural life, is like building a glorious mansion on top of a volcano.

5- Freedom of speech, uprooting poverty and fear have been claimed to be
the reasons and motives for setting the Human Rights, but they are in
fact merely the means, not the end. The “means” aspect of freedom is
much more logical than its “end” one. Fear and poverty are also factors
that prevent human life from continuing, and their destruction will make
man's life much easier to go on. They are, therefore, inhibitors of
human life, not factors developing it.

6- In the Declaration, states are obliged to make global respect and
true human rights a reality through cooperation with the United Nations.
We might even rightly claim that such a promise is indeed the highest
responsibility governments worldwide can ever undertake. However, two
points must be kept in mind:

a) preparing the grounds for having human rights accepted globally by
means of making human dignity understood and approved of, and

b) the political, personal and cultural issues pertaining to each
membering states, disputes and conflicts in which sometimes lead to
disagreements between state leaders on what is proper and deserving for
mankind. Thus, again we must reiterate the necessity of mutual
understanding and agreement on the basics of human virtues and dignity.

Considering what man has been through, the conclusion we get out of all
the causes and motives in the preface to the Declaration of Global Human
Rights is:

Man cannot possibly reach a feeling of real mutual understanding unless
human beings' souls get closer to each other.

The Reasons and Motives for Setting Human Rights in Islam
---------------------------------------------------------

The fundamentals upon which the human rights were set in Islam are very
different from those in the West, so their motives and reasons will also
naturally differ to a great deal. Let us consider some of the reasons
and motives for establishing human rights in Islam:

1- In Islam, the life and death of one human being is regarded as equal
to the life and death of all of mankind. Thus, Islam elevates mankind
way beyond quantities to the domain of qualities. See the Holy Qur’an,
5:32 .

2- The true value of kindness and charity toward people lies in the
charitable deed itself. In other words, man must be kind for God's sake
alone, not for the reward he might get from others. See the Holy Qur’an,
76:9.

3- The closest of human beings to God is the one who is the most helpful
and useful to others. Everyone should run to aid their fellow beings. As
a hadith says:

<p dir="rtl">
الخلق کلهم عيال الله و احبهم اليه انفعهم لهم
</p>

*“All people are like God's family; the most loved by God is the one who
is the most useful and helpful to people.”*

4- Islam believes all human beings to be members of one big family.
Their relationship must be one of brotherhood and harmony.

5- Islam categorizes human beings into several groups. However, they all
still have a series of common rights in Islam, which are:

a) the right to live,

b) the right to innate greatness,

c) the right to work,

d) the right to education, and

e) the right to freedom.

6- The divine, supernatural factor is necessary for human development
and prosperity, and Islam has put much emphasis on it.

The Ad Valorem Theorems in the Human Rights Declaration
-------------------------------------------------------

Let us now study and analyze some of the ad valorem issues included in
the Declaration of Human Rights:

1- Man: Everything in the Declaration of Human Rights is based on
mankind. Here we are concerned with how it interprets man. According to
the Declaration, is man the same creature born by unconscious laws of
nature, who spends his aimless life destroying the earth, fighting his
fellow men, and quenching his endless desires for pleasure, and is
eventually buried under the ground? Or is man the meaningful being who,
according to righteous religions created by God's will and wisdom, has
been made to head for a meaningful end?

If we accept the first interpretation man would be a totally selfish
creature, seeing himself as the end and others as the means; a being who
only thinks of seeking his own pleasures, human innate values and
greatness have no meaning at all. The Declaration of Human Rights
unfortunately does not - even once - say a word about the necessity of
piety, or encourage people to seek it; as we know, man can have no
superiority, dignity, greatness or value without piety.

2- Man's Virtual Dignity: The key to freedom, peace and justice is
accepting man's munificence, his greatness, which is not possible
without admitting that man has virtual dignity. Unless this goal is
established, the destructive formula, “I am the end, the others are the
means” will always prevail. Man's virtual munificence and dignity is the
most important issue in the human rights, and all intellectuals should
keep its necessity in mind.

3- Members of the Human Family: One of man's greatest ideals is having
all human beings related to each other. Unfortunately, ever since social
life arose, human beings have never felt themselves united, except for
when God-sent leaders made them recognize their virtual ability to be
one. We cannot have people keep their unity and relationship unless they
join with the supernatural, where they originate from. If man is to stop
seeking his own benefit and think about others' benefit, he must have a
common, divine goal.

4- Brotherhood and Equality: This is undoubtedly one of the greatest
ideals in social human life. All of God's prophets and true men of
wisdom have tried to make it a reality. But alas, the tyrants of history
have always destroyed it. Brotherhood among men is the fertilization of
the highest possible concept of unity and emotion.

5- Friendly Relationships: One of man's oldest wishes throughout history
has been to have all of mankind live in friendship and peace. So far,
due to selfishness and alienation from the true human self, the
relationships among human beings, in particular between the powerful and
the meek, have been one of wolves and sheep.

6- The Spirit of humanity: is also one of the valuable concepts in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. If the spirit and soul of
mankind, with all its glory and holiness, were truly respected by the
powerful leaders of the world, history would have definitely taken a
different course, and many human beings would not have been oppressed
and undergone so much atrocity. The human spirit, however, can be
considered as sacred only when it is regarded as a non-physical,
non-materialistic issue, not merely a part of the nervous system.

7- Equal rights: Recognizing human rights and establishing equality
among all is one of the highest wishes of developed man. Its reality,
alas, throughout history has seldom gone beyond writings and lectures.

8- Freedom: Freedom has been defined in a variety of ways. Let us define
it as the factor providing the survival of a desired life and the
supervision and dominance of the human character upon the pros and cons
of an action on the path to the good. One of the points of criticism the
Declaration of Human Rights undergoes is that it emphasizes natural

freedom so much that spiritual freedom has been ignored. Even some of
man's collective rights, like avoiding weaknesses, have been neglected.

9- Peace: Every mental, moral, or religious reason concerning the value
and importance of human lives has also emphasized safeguarding and
protecting them. Since peace and friendship are essential to
safeguarding and protecting life, it proves that all war and conflict
are to be opposed and overruled. The important point about peace is that
physical conflict and killings cannot be avoided without wiping out the
motives for war inside human beings.

10- Justice: The conscious, free way that is in accordance with the law
is justice. The important point in this definition is, which law is the
free, conscious and compatible with justice? How can it be determined?
After all, each individual and every society accepts principles that are
in accordance with their own specific culture and circumstances.

Thus, the Universal Declaration of Global Rights must determine which
reality about justice it conveys. Hence, once again the importance of
fine human moral ethics, originating from pure human nature and
accepting evolutional principles is proved. Furthermore, if we consider
man's freedom as so vast and unlimited that he would feel no shame to
commit the filthiest of actions, nothing called justice will exist in
him; his deeds, if in accordance with the laws and regulations set for
him, would be fatalistic. The justice required if human rights are to be
accepted and obeyed cannot come true without moral ethics.

11- The Highest human wishes: Freedom of belief and eliminating poverty
are considered as the highest of man's wishes in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. The necessity of discovering and respecting
human rights is emphasized with the aim of preventing savage actions
leading to mutiny, hoping to create a world in which human beings enjoy
freedom of belief and have no dread of poverty.

Of course, it is obvious that establishing freedom of belief in human
communities and removing any threat of poverty is a necessity; they are
not, however, the highest human wishes. They are merely means to prevent
the theory of “life for life” - which suits animal history, not human
history - from becoming a reality.

12- Wisdom and Conscience: The two words “wisdom” and “conscience” have
been included in Article 1 of the Declaration in order to prove human
glory and dignity; they are sources of rights, not the rights
themselves, and should have been included in the preface, not in the
article itself.

There is little argument that man has wisdom and intelligence that helps
him think and distinguish right from wrong. The concept of conscience,
on the other hand, is under much debate; the first question is, what is
conscience? Does it refer to awareness - self-consciousness, in
particular - or moral conscience?

Of course, it means moral conscience, and those who set and compiled the
human rights intend to use it to encourage people to follow the thirty
articles of the Human Rights. If man is to make correct use of his moral
conscience and not let his wisdom fall into obeying his desires and
whims

and eventually reach the truth, humanities intellectuals should begin
discussing such issues, and prove that our predecessors and contemporary
have been quite wrong in ignoring these originally human issues.

13- Life: In our era, biology and some psychological schools of thought
have become so obsessed with science that they have come to regard human
life as a physical, materialistic issue. They believe that life is
merely a gathering of substances; this so-called “scientific” belief
destroyed the value of human life. There can be no value for man's life
unless it goes beyond the physical limits.

14- The Belief and faith of united nations: These two concepts have also
been damaged by the extreme science-obsessed, for they regard belief as
nothing more than scientific conformations based purely on scientific
premises; emotional perceptions are of no value to them.

15- Universal respect: The necessity of universal respect has been
emphasized in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Demanding
universal respect for an issue without illustrating why will clearly
never go beyond a hearty request; it is essential, therefore, that the
philosophy underlying this universal respect be explicitly explained for
the people on earth.

Merely claiming it to be important will not make people form the
respect. They must really understand its reason, for respect is one of
the psychological phenomena that is value-based, and if the UN has not
been able to save values from the peril of the professionally
science-obsessed, by no means will it succeed in getting respect by just
begging for it.

16- Mutual Understanding: It is clearly stated in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights that mutual understanding plays a crucial
role in the complete execution of its articles. This is perfectly
logical, and much needs to be done to make it come true.

17- Savage Actions: In the preface to the Declaration, neglect and
humiliation for the human rights is said to lead to savage actions. The
point of significance here is that if intellectuals and leaders of
societies do not regard the strong overcoming the weak as a savage act
and do not attempt to harness human selfishness, savage deeds will never
come under control. The idea “Whatever I want is to my benefit, and I
can get anything I consider to my advantage” must be eliminated and
replaced by “I can use completely what is my right, and my friends and
society have to defend my rights.”

18- Sin and rebellion: The preface of the Declaration also reads, “Since
neglect and humiliation of human rights leads to savage deeds and
sinful, rebellious actions by man.” We, however, do not approve of using
terms like “sin and rebellion” here, for they convey rebellion and
mutiny against values. More suitably, “resistance heading for
righteousness-seeking” should have been used, which means the
individual's resistance to acquire his lost rights.

19- Great effort: The preface ends with inviting humans to “make great
efforts to expand these rights by means of education and respect.” This
is a moral value of high significance, and the grounds should be
prepared for humans to commit themselves to.

20- The Ultimate limit of development: One of the points of importance
in the Declaration is that, “education should be guided in a way so that
it elevates the human character to its ultimate level of development.”
The interpretation of what that development is, alas, is usually
neglected. Intellectuals who study human culture should put much more
effort into interpreting what development, perfection and freedom means.
From a general point of view, development and perfection can have two
meanings:

a) Human development and perfection means the power to achieve every
goal possible for man to achieve. In other words, it is the absolute
power to gain anything man can possibly accomplish, whether it is a
human value or not. Such an interpretation of development and perfection
would definitely prove anti-human.

b) Development and perfection means, “man influencing and being
influenced by the universe, all of whom and which are dependent upon God
Almighty, the granter of perfection and development.” This concept of
development and perfection calls for internal human refining of speech
and actions based on the instructions prophets of God have brought us.

21- Correct compliance to moral expectations: The Declaration presents
correct compliance to moral expectations in a democratic society, which
is not entirely perfect, for it obscures the concept. In a democratic
society, where quenching any desire - provided that does not disturb
others - is allowed, this can destroy fine human morals.

The Points in Common between the Western and Islamic Views on the Human Rights
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are several things in common between the human rights Islam
presents and the Declaration of Human Rights:

1- Both regard the right to live as quite serious.

2- Both have paid significant attention to human dignity.

3- In both systems, the right to education is considered as one of the
responsibilities of social leaders.

4- They both consider the right to freedom as one of the primary rights,
which should be provided by the government and the society.

5- They both approve of the right to equality.

Let us now consider what they have in common and how they differ:

1- The Right to Live: In both systems, the right to have a deserved
life, freedom, security, and the elimination of torture, atrocity and
inhuman behavior has been emphasized. Nevertheless, there are some
points of difference between them:

a) In contrary to the Western system, Islam believes life to be a
blessing from God.

b) The Declaration of Human Rights considers governments and states all
around the world responsible for executing the laws concerning the right
to live, but there is no guarantee whether they will actually be carried
out or not.

c) Islamic human rights state that human life cannot be destroyed by any
means at all, but the Western human rights does not. In Islam, nobody is

allowed to bring harm to his own life, and if others bring harm to him,
the issue must be resolved and compensated.

d) The right to live is so significant in Islam that even abortion is
not allowed - except for highly dangerous cases.

2- Human Dignity: This principle has also received attention in both
systems. However, Islam believes there are two forms of dignity:

a) The innate, natural dignity and greatness all human beings possess.

b) The value-based dignity arising from activating human potentials on
the path to perfection.

The points in common between the two systems regarding human dignity
are:

a) All human beings are entitled to dignity.

b) No human being can be humiliated.

c) Man's dignity brings him certain rights and duties in order to carry
it out.

d) No political preference or social situation can eliminate man's
dignity.

e) Torture, disturbance or insult of any kind is forbidden.

f) No individual's name, dignity or reputation should be insulted.

g) Every individual is entitled to the standard of life required to
provide him/her and his/her family with a healthy, dignified living.

The two systems differ on the principle of human dignity:

● The Western system of human rights makes no distinction between innate
dignity and value-based dignity, but Islam does.

● In Islam, innate dignity is regarded as a God-given blessing, whereas
Western human rights have no logical explanation for it, for they have
no accurate anthropological system.

● In Islamic human rights, the right for people to live in surroundings
free from any corruption or vice is an unquestionable reality, but this
does not exist in Western human rights.

3- Education: There are several points in common between the two systems
concerning the right to education:

a) The right to education is generally approved by both systems.

b) Both systems regard education as important to human development and
emancipation.

c) Parents have the first priority in selecting what kind of education
suits their children the best.

d) Every human being is entitled to dignified education.

The two systems, however, have some differences:

a) In the Western system of human rights, primary school education is
considered necessary, whereas Islam believes education should continue
throughout man's life, for each human being is entitled to a dignified,
deserved life, which cannot be possible in Islam without correct
education.

b) In Islam, it is the parents' natural, value-based right to choose
their children's type of education provided the fact that their
selection be calculated and accurate; such a condition does not exist in
the Western system of human rights.

c) In Islam, the education of orphans is the responsibility of those who
legally have the child's custody, for instance the child's grandfather.
The Western human rights include nothing on this.

d) In contrary to Western human rights, much importance is given in
Islam to man's mental and spiritual issues.

e) Another point absent in the Western system is Islam's belief that in
an Islamic society, all people have the right to invite and encourage
others to do good

f) Islam believes that propaganda and the mass media should serve to
guide man toward perfection and greatness; in the West, they mainly
serve to quench desires and create pleasures.

4- Responsible Freedom: Again, we see some points in common and some
differences. Let us first consider the commonalities:

a) All humans are born free, and cannot by any means be enslaved.

b) All humans are equal in terms of dignity and freedom.

c) All human beings have reason and conscience.

d) All humans should treat each other in a brotherly fashion.

e) No human being is allowed to insult one another.

f) Freedom of expression is of the undoubted human rights.

g) Another one of the rights humans unquestionably have is the right to
be provided with and make use of scientific, literary and artistic
advances.

h) All humans are entitled to freedom of religion.

i) Both systems believe that every human is entitled to the right of
citizenship.

However, Islam has several advantages over the Western system of human
rights:

a) Islam emphasizes that no one has the right to exploit or dominate
another; Western human rights neglect this point.

b) The numerous results of man serving as God's slave have been accepted
in the Islamic system of human rights.

c) In Islam, no one is allowed to, “…make use of totally unlimited
freedom of speech, expression or religion so as to disturb the members
of the society.” As mentioned before, freedom is not virtually absolute,
and it is not the goal; it is, in fact, the state of being provided with
the creative force of life that enables man to reach an intelligible
life.”

● Freedom of selecting a religion should also be accompanied by the
required education.

● The forbidden aspects of freedom are not confined to the cases where
others' rights are violated; man should not harm his own development or
progress, either.

5- The Principle of Equality: Here we do not mean that all human beings
completely resemble each other, or that they are all the same; the point
is equality in a certain number of principles and characteristics.
Generally, human beings can have three kinds of equality:

a) “Equality in relation to the source and origin of the highest
principles of the universe,”

b) “Equality in the identity and characteristics all human beings have
in common,”

c) “Conventional equality in the natural rights required for life,”

Both systems have some points in common concerning equality:

● They both emphasize the equality of all human beings with regard to
the law.

● Everyone is guaranteed the right to refer to the judiciary to get back
what is his/her right in both systems.

● All human beings - regardless of their race, language, sex or
religion - are entitled to be provided with social services.

● The right to establish charity groups and community services has been
guaranteed in both systems.

● Everyone has the right to present his/her case to a court of law.

● Everyone is protected by the law against any kind of bias.

● Every human being is entitled to attempt to accomplish the highest
goals of life.

The differences between the two systems regarding the principle of
equality are:

a) If someone's presence is necessary for a group or community that
serves the good of the whole society, he/she is religiously obliged to
be there.

b) Although obeying and keeping social order and discipline has been
emphasized in both systems, Islamic societies are basically different
from democratic ones.


