Preface
=======

In the 1923, a child was born in northwestern Iran who would a few
decades later become, for his scientific efforts and profound writings,
one of the greatest thinkers of his time. His name was Muhammad Taqi
Ja’fari.

Though born in a family who were by no means rich - which created many
problems inhibiting his progress in education and academic endeavors -
he persisted, and it was his tireless persistence and stamina that
turned him into one of the richest men of the East in knowledge and
mysticism. He soon accumulated a huge treasure of knowledge full of
original, basic, innovative thoughts.

Muhammad Taqi Ja’fari never studied at any university; yet, his
ingenious, delicate mental endeavors lead to the creation of invaluable
amounts of knowledge, particularly in fields such as philosophy,
anthropology, ideology and analyzing modern truths.

Ja’fari began his formal education at theological schools and
seminaries, but his academic career mostly involves comprehensive
viewpoints with the context of solving major ideological and
philosophical dilemmas.

Searching for topics and posing fundamental questions was the most
prominent aspect of Allamah Ja’fari's mentality; thus, he was constantly
searching, excavating into new worlds few had stepped into - at least,
the way he stepped into them.

His childhood was spent with his silent, boyish thoughts; his youth,
however, involved studies mainly focusing on humanity and the universe.
As time passed, these two issues became more and more important to him,
though his peers did not think so.

His first book, The Relationship between Man and the Universe (The
Change of Physical Mass in Man's Understanding from the Earliest Times
up to the Twentieth Century), written in three volumes, showed how
distinctive his way of thinking was; even though he was just a young
man, he had begun a journey that he spent the rest of his life on -
studying humanity, the universe and the facts that sacrifice the
universe for man and man for himself.

By considering things from a novel point of view, Muhammad Taqi Ja’fari
tended to use historical issues with a new definition and for a new
purpose. This made him be much more than a pure philosopher; other
scholars paid attention to his thoughts on the basics of recognition and
discovery and insights into science and philosophy.

Still, he never stopped at that, and tried open up a new road by using
the latest findings in the humanities and also experimental sciences
like physics and mathematics. In fact, his questions about the mystery
of life and his stops at stations like how evolutions arises in culture,
the secrets about education helped him swiftly pass through the narrow
road of “what there is” and “what there should be,” and see life as an
elevation.

That was when he reached a crucially fundamental domain called
“intelligible life,” and then devoted all his capabilities into
extracting a constructive truth out of obvious realities like culture,
economics, science, history, philosophy, civilizations and technology
that could save the world

from falling into oblivion for the stormy hands of those who lack
balanced thinking.

Since Ja’fari put a great deal of care into his work, and experienced
and analyzed both Western and Eastern unsolved issues with incredible
vigor and passion, and also probably due to his pioneer discoveries
regarding issues where others failed, the second half of his lifetime
had him change into an internationally renowned thinker.

Many Western scholars and thinkers from prominent universities all over
the world visited him and held talks and discussions with him - over 100
major interviews, some of which have been published. Allamah Ja’fari and
Bertrand Russell had correspondence with each other. Professor
Rosenthal, Dr. Kenneth Alan Luther, Dr. Allal Al-fasi, Professor
Gankowski, Professor Van Ess, Professor Koroda, Professor Muhammad
Abdul-Salam, and many others were among those who came to Tehran to hold
discussions with Allamah Ja’fari.

This book contains selections of but parts of the late Allamah's
thoughts on some fundamental issues. It can be considered a way of
thinking attempting to view truths from a new scope. Allamah Ja’fari's
thoughts clearly show that he never confined himself to geographical
boundaries; his main concern was mankind and the future - a future we
cannot afford to neglect.

Those who knew him admit that he excelled at avoiding prejudiced or
limited thoughts, and this book should also verify this fact - it is the
cry of a thoughtful bird who sees the world as a garden to develop, fly
and fly higher and higher in. He heeds us not to forget flying higher.
Through his hundreds of comprehensive studies and analyses, he has told
us that it is impossible to solve the mystery of life without making it
face eternity.


