A Brief Study of the Qur’an
===========================

The Qur’an can provide us all the truth about man - whether in the “what
there is” domain or in the “what there should be” - if we attempt to
understand it with a pure soul and all of our powers. It is necessary
that we study as much as possible about each subject beforehand, in
addition to then begin to think on the verse in the Qur’an concerning
the subject.

Generally, four conditions are to be met if the immense glory of the
Qur’an's verses is to be fully comprehended:

● Truly original thoughts and realistic conclusions.

● Avoiding such thoughts mixing with the concepts and perceptions of
sedimentary cultures.

● Extensive study on the subject. The significance of this condition
lies in the fact that once we have studied others' thoughts and opinions
on a subject, our point of view about it changes.

● Studying what the Imams have said about the subject we are studying,
for the Imam's knowledge and mysticism is based upon what the Prophet
Muhammad knew and the verses revealed upon him - their knowledge of the
Qur’an, therefore, is the highest.

However, some the above conditions may in some cases be more important
than the others, e.g. studying the ideas and thoughts of scholars when
they have given the subject particular homage, like the issue of the
factors that make history. We believe that there are two distinct groups
of verses in the Qur’an in regard to the truth about the factor that
brings about history. The verses of the Qur’an interpret each other, and
the reasons for this are:

1- The verses of the Qur’an have been sent by God. Whatever issue they
might concern, not only do they not conflict with the other verses ,
they even supplement and enrich them, for they depict a part of the
truth about God and the universe related to “man as he is” and “man as
he should be.” If there were any contradiction among the verses of the
Qur’an, its unity of meaning would fall apart and the miraculous effect
would be lost.

2- The Qur’an has been studied by critics and experts on speech and
philosophy ever since it was sent by God. If they had found even the
least disagreement or contradiction in it, they would have definitely
made it public, especially at the time Islam had recently arisen and the
idolatrous were doing their best to destroy it, for they were losing all
their belief, wealth, history and culture due to Islam. Still, they
failed to come up with any contradiction in the Qur’an; if they had, it
would have provided them with an easy victory, and no war would have
needed to take place.

3- The unity and systematic structure of the Qur’an in presenting a
great deal of facts concerning theology, natural sciences, man and the
universe, decrees and orders, moral ethics and tales, leaves no doubt
that its verses must be able to interpret each other.

What is the Qur’an?
-------------------

We believe that the Qur’an is light, guidance, the cure, a blessing, a
letter from the Creator of the universe to his servants. The Qur’an is a
book that can help us become real human beings and rise to divinity. It
tells us all the

truths about a meaningful man and a meaningful universe. It is a tongue
that will never become silent, for man's serious questions on life will
never end. This is not a book made up by limited human brains that may
only account for one aspect and fail to consider the others over time. A
book that says:

<p dir="rtl">
و العصر ان الانسان لفي خسر الا الذين امنوا و عملوا الصالحات و تواصوا
بالحق و تواصوا بالصبر
</p>

***“By the time! Surely man is in the way of loss, save those who
believe, and do righteous deeds, and counsel each other unto the truth,
and counsel each other to be steadfast.” (103)***

and will never fall into decline or silence. Never!

Any complete research on the humanities must begin with a study of the
existing scientific and philosophical ideas; then, one can proceed to
the concerned Qur’anic verse, and see how clearly the Qur’an has
clarified the issue. “Profound feeling” and “logical reasoning,” both
vessels of recognition and cognition, will be saturated and satisfied.

Unfortunately, some readers of the Qur’an merely open the book and start
reading a surah from beginning to end and even proceed to the next one
without taking the concept inside each verse into careful consideration.

This kind of reading is unacceptable as a study of the Qur’an. In other
words, Qur’an is not something whose words you merely see and utter.
Each verse of the Qur’an is the ultimate sentence that cannot be fully
understood unless you master everything about it previously.

The Qur’an is where God's signs can truly be seen; though people could
not possibly see God when the holy Prophet was sent to them, God's words
in the Qur’an made it possible for them to intuitively discover God
through their innate God-seeking potentials. God's words in the Qur’an
interpret so clearly how societies fall and decline that any wise person
can see the order and harmony of the universe in them, and feel totally
certain that this turning machine must have an operator. This holy book
creates two books - one outside man's body, the other inside his
existence - that are impeccable. It shows man and the universe “as they
are” and “as they should be,” and pictures the universe “as it can be
used.

The truth the Qur’an reveals on “man as he should be” are the highest,
utmost possible. Subsequently, the Qur’an presents the facts about “man
as he is” and “the universe as it is” with absolutely perfect precision.

The Qur’an, the most fundamental reference in Islam, provides all the
Islamic rules and decrees on moral ethics, ideology, law, individual and
social duties that have also been pointed out in many of the Holy
Prophet and the Imams' hadith.

“Islam” in the Qur’an means two things:

1- A general, divine religion, revealed to all prophets to guide
mankind, presented to people by Abraham after Noah. Such a general
context cannot be ignored or omitted, and it was not limited to a
specific society or era, either. In several cases, the Qur’an refers to
the Holy Prophet Muhammad as a follower of this religion.

2- Islam as a specific religion, the context of Abraham's religion plus
some decrees and responsibilities which have not been deviated during
time; in other religions, deviations and changes have taken place.

We will now discuss “The Three Religions as Seen in the Qur’an.” From
the three holy books - the Qur’an, the Bible and the Torah - we can
prove that Abraham presented the general context of a divine religion
which all followers of the three religions mentioned are to follow.

Since Muslims believe that the Qur’an, which is free from any
manipulation or modification, presents that general divine religion,
scholars and researchers on all three religions can extract the points
they have in common - which forms, in fact, Abraham's religion - and
follow them. Also, those Christian and Jewish researchers and scholars
who regard Muhammad as an honest human being, have to agree with Islamic
scholars on this issue and find the general basics of Abraham's religion
from the Qur’an.

Likewise, Mr. Hans Kung, the respectable German scholar, said while
attending the seminar on “Prosperity and Happiness as Seen by Muslim and
German Thinkers” held in Tehran:

“Muhammad was a prophet, and God granted him revelations. Ultimately,
however, meanings and concepts were revealed to him, so he was free to
choose the words to express them by. The words themselves were not
revealed to him.”

It is apparent that Mr. Kung does admit that the Holy Prophet of Islam
was honest and pure, for otherwise he would never have been chosen as a
Prophet, and would never have received revelations. Hence, Mr. Kung and
those who agree with him can regard the Qur’an as the context of
Abraham's religion, and extract a general religion from the Qur’an, for
the Qur’an - as we have mentioned previously - introduces Islam as
Abraham's religion.

Thus, though it seems that we can extract the general context of
Abraham's religion out of the Qur’an - as Mr. Kung agrees - Christians
and Jews may object. That is why Mr. Kung posed this question at the
seminar, “Well, not that Abraham's religion is the context of the
general religion, how and where do we get it and apply it to the three
great religions?”

Thus, the respectable scientist, though believing that the Prophet
Muhammad has been sent by God, does not intend to acknowledge him as
being honest!

In response, I answered, “Let us open all three books - the Qur’an, the
Bible and the Torah - and accept anything that common sense and pure
conscience can regard as religion pertaining to God as Abraham's
religion.”

Everyone agreed excitedly, especially Mr. Kung. I hope efforts on the
issue soon start, and scholars of the three religions reach the desired
results - even if on the long run.

Mr. Kung's views on revelation called for fundamental reconsideration
are approvable. At the seminar Mr. Kung had said, “The Prophet received
revelations, but what he received was in the form of meanings and
concepts; it was the Prophet who chose how to word them.” Mr. Kung also
discussed the differences between surahs revealed in Mecca and Medina,
which we will deal with later on in this chapter.

Some of those attending the seminar agreed with Mr. Kung. I replied, “If
you mean this theory is a great development in which a Christian scholar
presents based on concrete reasons, that is correct. But if you mean
that the theory is entirely correct, that is not so; how could just
meanings and concepts have been revealed to the Prophet rather than the
exact wording? If the Holy Prophet has done the wording perfectly, such
a theory would not lead to any specific results, for there would be no
room for displacing any words with the same meaning. In the following
verse, for example:

<p dir="rtl">
و من احسن دينا ممن اسلم وجهه لله و هو محسن و اتبع ملة ابراهيم حنيفا
</p>

***“And who is there that has a fairer religion than he who submits his
will to God being a good-doer, and who follows the creed of Abraham, a
man of true faith?” (4:125)***

There is a concept in which the Prophet has been told to obey Abraham's
religion, which has also been presented to the Jews and the Christians,
but the Holy Prophet of Islam worded it generally! No one would ever
suppose that the Holy Prophet would word it like that.

If we say that anywhere we do not like the meaning of the Qur’an, we can
state that God provided the Holy Prophet with the correct concept but he
wrongly worded it, such a statement would definitely be wrong, both by
reason and the Qur’an itself. God is so wise that He flows revelations
in a way that nothing is changed, not even by mistake.

Having briefly discussed reasoning, we must say that if the Prophet was
free to choose which words to use in the verses, it would be possible to
have conflicts between the meaning the verse is supposed to have and
what the wording suggests, and we would feel no certainty to believe
that the Prophet's words are truly God's, too. Furthermore, the Qur’an's
miraculous nature is based on two things:

1- meanings and concepts

2- wording

We do not regard the Holy Prophet's words as miraculous, even though
they are perfectly eloquent. But the fact that the words in the Qur’an
are miraculous arises from their coming from God.

Then I brought up the issue of Jesus being God's son, an issue
Christians staunchly believe in. “This does not mean 'son' as we
normally refer to,” Mr. Kung replied, “rather, it shows how close and
valuable Jesus Christ was to God.”

I replied, “Such an interpretation may be appropriate for the concept
you are presenting, but why doesn't this theory regard other prophets,
like Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses and Muhammad as children of God? They
were also very close to God. Islam even in one case sees all of mankind
as God's family:

<p dir="rtl">
الخلق كلهم عيال الله و احبهم اليه انفعهم لهم
</p>

*“All people are God's family; the people closest to God are those who
present God's family with the most benefit and advantage.” (The Holy
Prophet Muhammad)*

On the issue of what kind of book the Holy Qur’an is, let us first take
the following verse into consideration:

<p dir="rtl">
و السماء بنيناها باَيد و انا لموسعون
</p>

***“And heaven - We built it with might, and We extend it wide.”(
51:47)***

Interpreters of the Qur’an in the past have provided three different
meanings for “extend” in the above verse:

1- Vastness, the literal meaning; God has created a very vast heavens.

2- God has created the heavens with his immense divine power.

3- Daily bread; God has created a huge universe and has reinforced and
strengthened it by means of proper nurturing.

In 1920, Alexander Friedman, a Russian mathematician, presented his
theory on the expansion of the galaxies. As George Gamov says in his
book, Matter, the Earth and the Sky:

“He found that the light coming toward us from galaxies very far away
shows a shift in spectrum lines toward the red extreme, and the more
farther the galaxy, the stronger the shift. Since shift toward red light
is due to retreat speeds of light sources - there is no other reason for
that at present - [our universe is steadily expanding] and the speeds at
which two galaxies move farther away from each other is proportionate to
the distance between them.

The efforts made by Friedman, Hubble and his colleague Milton Homason
led to the foundation of the theory of the expanding universe, which was
later supported by the Belgian astronomer, George Lemaitre. “

We may conclude that any knowledge of the contents of the Qur’an is a
step toward guidance, a step toward less ignorance and blindness.

Provided that man be aware of all the potentials hidden in him and that
he tries to use them, and provided that he accept the need for
evolutionary change with his sensitive conscience and sound common
sense, any conscious human being can elevate his sight and development
with these words of God's, and cure himself of ignorance. Now we know
why so many people not only fail to use the Qur’an correctly, but even
cause harm by doing it.

The scientific aspect of the Qur’an is also quite amazing. The Qur’an
is, in fact, “ultra-scientific,” for the truths the Qur’an includes are
far superior to what we see in everyday life.

There are several important reasons why the Qur’an does not present the
truths about the four relationships (Man-Man, Man-God, Man-The Universe
and Man-Other Human Beings) systematically and scientifically.
Throughout history, scientific issues have continually been subject to
change. What was a scientific law yesterday is discarded due to new
discoveries today. Let us consider, as a few examples, these excerpts
from Pierre Roseau's The History of Science:

● Sciences become fashionable

● Sciences overuse Descartes' method

● Newton's followers go against Descartes' followers

● Roseau and Kant swim against the current

● A whiplash on analysis

● Auguste Comte creates certainty philosophy, but later on, its
weaknesses were revealed

● Arithmetic is basically destroyed

● Analysis crumbles

● Science announces bankruptcy

● Evolution faces many problems

● All scientific breakthroughs and achievements are questioned today

If we were to account for all scientific developments - both in general
and in detail - we would definitely have to write a few volumes; the
Qur’an, however, provides the concrete, definite truth about the four
relationships without the least conflict or change-prone quality,
regardless of the currently popular scientific order and harmony.

Though the verses in the Qur’an are not, for the two reasons mentioned
above, based on the usual scientific or philosophical methods, they have
been referred to and quoted by great scholars and philosophers
throughout history. Mollasadra, the great Iranian philosopher, for
instance, quotes verses of the Qur’an to give his final reasons why
objects have substance movement.

The Qur’an is the greatest piece of advice God has provided man with,
for the Qur’an is like a rope man can cling to and rise up to the
highest levels of greatness and perfection.

We generally see the Qur’an as a book that gives life; it includes
orders that make man start living, and tells him what can inhibit his
intelligible life. As we read at the beginning of the second surah in
the Qur’an, The Cow, it is “a guidance for the Godfearing.” (2:2)

In other words, this divine book can guide the human character and help
it flourish, provided that man himself realizes what he is and knows
that he should guide it toward his true destiny on the pathway to
eternity, and safeguard it from impurities as best as he can.

The Qur’an: A Miracle
---------------------

You may have read the Qur’an many times, but if you consider carefully
the kind of atmosphere and land the Holy Prophet was chosen to preach
people in, you will indeed admit how miraculous the Qur’an is, even by
glancing at one of the smaller surahs.

Another miraculous aspect of the Qur’an which, unfortunately, has been
neglected, is the verses that show the mathematical nature of the
universe.

Having the mathematical nature of the universe explained by a man with
no education of any kind, in a country so overwhelmed with dark
ignorance that even calculated thought was non-existent, must be a
miracle.

Two conditions have to be met before we can understand this miracle:

1- Enough information must be gained on the conditions of the Arab
peninsula and also the life of the Holy Prophet before he was appointed
as prophet by God.

2- Fairness, conscientiousness and avoiding clichés while studying
history.

A few examples of the verses in the Qur’an that show us the mathematical
face of the universe are:

<p dir="rtl">
و ان من شي الا عندنا خزائنه و ما ننزله الا بقدر معلوم
</p>

***“Naught is there, but its treasuries are with Us, and We sent it not
down but in a known measure.” (15:21)***

<p dir="rtl">
لقد احصاهم و عدهم عدا
</p>

***“[God] has indeed counted them, and He has numbered them exactly.”(
19:94)***

Verse 53 of the surah Distinguished is one of the most comprehensive
verses proving the “sign” aspect of the universe and that fact that from
that very aspect one can find “God:”

<p dir="rtl">
سنريهم اياتنا في الافاق و في انفسهم حتي يتبين لهم انه الحق اولم يكف
بربك انه علي كل شي شهيد
</p>

***“We shall show them Our signs in the horizons and in themselves, till
it is clear to them that it is the truth. Suffices it not as to thy
Lord, that He is witness over everything?”(41:53)***

The above verse states that having considered and correctly understood
God's signs in both internal and external worlds, man can realize that
God is indeed the truth and just. We should never confine ourselves to
just sit there under the huge tree of nature and be satisfied with
merely watching, for we are “human beings,” and we have a duty. Such a
feeling arises out of careful attention toward the universe, not
superficial, childish toying with it. Furthermore, if we study our own
existence curiously and consciously, we will indeed conclude that:

“Though we may possibly restrain from being impressed by neither good
actions nor bad, we always feel there is something like an organ inside
us, an organ always ready to start playing, pouring music into our soul,
crying out against aimlessness, rebelling against oblivion.”

If we were to also complement the above statements with a scientific,
philosophical touch, we would say, “The sound of this internal organ,
loud and clear, rebels against oblivion, and states, 'O man! You cannot
say that you do not exist, and such a confession will lead you to a
second one - now that you cannot claim that you do not exist, you cannot
be aimless or farce either, so you must have a duty.'“ As the renowned
Iranian poet, Hafiz, says:

<p dir="rtl">
در اندرون من خستـه دل ندانـم چيست؟ كه من خموشم و او در فغان و در
غوغاست
</p>

*(I don't know what there is in my weary heart, but although I say
nothing, it is crying out with all its might.)*

This is not just a poetic context; as we realize by studying the
outstanding figures of science, philosophy and mysticism, such sentences
arise out of elevated feelings rather than crude ones. These great men
could never have achieved such supreme feelings without abandoning their
previous raw, crude ones.

A brief study of the Arab culture and knowledge at that time proves that
the verses in the Qur’an that show the mathematical aspect of the
universe cannot possibly be conceived in the mind of a normal human
being, however a genius he may be. Did Arabs in those days use
arithmetic or mathematics even in their daily life? Could they even step
beyond their “stomach and below the stomach only” style of life and look
at the sky, let

alone think about the mathematical sky? Can there be any miracle better
than having a man in those dark times gain such immense knowledge of the
universe that he can speak of the mathematical context of the universe?
That is how miraculous the Qur’an is.

There are many proofs for the mathematical aspect of nature. Here, we
intend to focus on just one important one: the universe is lawful, so
the fact that we do not know so many things in the vast universe is not
because the universe is baseless and non-organized. As Einstein says:

“The universe and discovering the universe are two very different
things; what we may see as disharmonious and without law and order is
due to our own viewpoint and attitude.”

God also emphasizes the necessity of careful observation and thought on
nature, which shows that nature can be discovered by means of meticulous
calculation and thought. However, the other issue is that, being
mathematical, the universe is not closed and unoccupiable for God,
either. As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi) says,

<p dir="rtl">
عالم چو آب جوسـت، بسته نمايد، وليک میرود و میرسد نو نو، ايـن از
کجاست؟
</p>

*(The universe is like the water in a stream; it looks like a closed
system, but new, fresh water keeps coming, how can it be?)*

If we carefully study the history of culture and knowledge in the Arab
world of that era, how the people felt about mankind and the universe,
their viewpoints on their history and their future, their values and
morals, it would be quite stubborn or ignorant to have doubt in the fact
that the Qur’an is a miracle or to claim that Arab people themselves
wrote the Qur’an. The immense beauty of these exquisite sentences that
intrigue the deepest of human feelings, and the incredibly strong logic
alongside the power of the speaker creates a miracle of both style and
expression.

How God's Divine Beauty Can Be Recognized
-----------------------------------------

We can start from spiritual and mental ideals and use them as the
starting point to reach divine beauty. The first one is glory, greatness
and immense beauty, which the Qur’an refers to as malakoot; such a
feeling cannot be put into words, as the absolute dominance of order and
harmony in the universe reaches our brain via a kind of physical wave
that cannot be worded.

This is a “feeling,” not an “imagination;” it is “received,” not
“reflected.”

<p dir="rtl">
ز تو با تـو راز گويم به زبــان بي زبـــاني به تو از تو راه جويم به
نشان بي نشاني
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
چه شوي ز ديده پنهان كه چو روز مينمايد رخ همچـو آفتابـت ز نقــاب
آسمانـي
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تو چه معنـــي لطيفـي كه مجـرّد از دليلي تو چه آيت شريفي كه منــزّه
از بيانـي
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ز تو ديده چون بـدوزم، كه تويي چراغ ديده ز تو كي كنار گيرم، كه تو
درميان جانـي
</p>

*(How could you disappear from our eyes? Your shining face shines
through the mask of the heavens. You are so delicate that you are free
above any reasoning; you are such an elegant sign that you are too
superior to be described. How can I stop looking at you? You are the
light of my eyes. How can I ever move away from you? You are right here
in my soul.)*

**Khajou ye Kermani**

If we get such a feeling when we watch the delicate movement of a leaf
on a branch in a breeze, and our soul rises to the skies, like the
feeling we get when we realize the mathematical movement of the universe
on a mountain top in the moonlight; would we not get a far higher
feeling flowing in us like waves if we actually realize in ourselves the
creator of all this beauty?

<p dir="rtl">
هو الله الخالق الباري المصور له الاسماء الحسني
</p>

***“He is God, the Creator, the Maker, the Shaper. To Him belong the
Names Most Beautiful.” (59:24)***

When you are anxious to meet the painter of the most beautiful painting
possible, is it equal to the quivering anxiety you feel when you saw the
painting? Never. Anxiety to meet the painter is far greater than that of
seeing the painting itself, for through meeting the painter, you can see
the beauty of the painting in his mind, in his mental levels; such a
vision cannot be tarnished by sunlight, rain, insects, a madman or
children.

Your quivering climax and intuition is not over once realizing the
mental beauty in the painter's mind; you go on to see that the immense
artistic activity that has led to such a beautiful painting is totally
incomparable to the other various potentials and talents existent in the
artist.

Now add the highest of moral virtues, capacities, justice and sacrifice
for righteousness to such an artist's character, and you will see that
the beautiful painting will seem like nothing more than a few meager
brainwaves of the artist! You will then be fascinated by the artist
himself and his mental beauty rather than his beautiful painting. No
natural scenery has succeeded in making human beings so fascinated that
they will be ready to include it as even a superficial part of their
soul; true love, on the other hand, engulfs all of man's mental and
spiritual horizons, becoming such a powerful desire that man wants to
make his beloved a part of him.

As Kant says:

“I can't get enough of watching two things: a sky full of stars - a
statue of infinity - and the human conscience, the wonders of which
truly cannot be described.”

Victor Hugo also adds:

“There is a great gallery in the world - the sea. Greater galleries also
exist - the sky. But greater than both to watch is the human
conscience.”

In the two quotations mentioned above, a philosopher and an
anthropologist have referred to two galleries; indeed, they have
discovered great secrets about man. Surely, they do no mean merely
seeing something; their point is a kind of profound vision together with
thought, in which the thought affects the vision, like water affects
leaves, though not conspicuously.

Therefore, the way mentally developed men watch the skies neither like
the way some “froglike” men watch the reflection of the stars in the
water they swim in, for the latter only plan to throw the reflections
out of their pond, nor like observers merely aiming to discover
astronomical laws and call themselves astronomers. Thus, even greater
than the gallery these two

thinkers refer to is observing the skies and the immensely exquisite
order and harmony we see in it; yet, it still resembles a beautiful
painting.

<p dir="rtl">
ينقلب اليك البصر خاسئا و هو حسير
</p>

***“Your eyes will return to you, wearied, feeling the need to come back
to you.” (67:4)***

Another verse that intrigues man to realize and appreciate the glory and
beauty of the universe is:

<p dir="rtl">
اولم ينظروا في ملكوت السماوات و الارض
</p>

***“Have they not considered the dominion of the heaven and of the
earth?” (7:185)***

Here, using a negative question, God scolds people for not observing the
skies and the earth. Do they not possess senses, reason and thought? Why
do they not look down to the earth they live on?

I am amazed how some great thinkers fail to realize the immense glory of
the universe! It seems that if a conscious, aware thinker looks up and
observes some great human beings' moral values and their mental and
spiritual greatness - for such human beings cannot possibly have an
immense spiritual state and the highest of moral values without having
realized and appreciated the glory and beauty of the universe - their
eyes will also open up to the great beauty they have within themselves
too; even the mere walking of people on earth is a sign of the glory and
the beauty of the universe.

Beauty -whether in nature or in man's mind- is approved by Islam, for it
believes that all forms of beauty pertain to God.

Many verses in the Qur’an attribute beauties to God, and even condemn
people's depriving others of these beauties. For example:

<p dir="rtl">
قل من حرّم زينة الله التي اخرج لعباده
</p>

***“Say, 'Who has forbidden the ornament of God which He has brought
forth [from nature] for His servants?”( 7:32)***

We will now classify beauties as seen as desirable in the Qur’an:

1- The Beauty of the Sky and its Stars: Several verses in the Qur’an
refer to the beautiful sky and its stars; God directly attributes such a
beautiful structure to Himself, its Creator.

2- The Beauty of Man's Creation and His Face: This form of beauty has
been referred to in various ways in the Qur’an:

<p dir="rtl">
لقد خلقنا الانسان في احسن تقويم
</p>

***“We indeed created Man in the fairest stature.”( 95:4)***

<p dir="rtl">
و صوّركم فاحسن صوركم
</p>

***“And He shaped you, and shaped you well.” (40:64, 64:3)***

In the former verse, “the greatest stature” refers to all aspects of
beauty, whether in appearance or anatomy; in fact, it depicts the
incredible order and harmony all researchers have witnessed in the human
body.

3- The Beauty of Living Creatures: God also refers to the beauty in the
creation of other living beings:

<p dir="rtl">
و لكم فيها جمال حين تريحون و حين تسرحون
</p>

***“And there is beauty in them for you, when you bring them home to
rest [in the evening] and when you drive them forth abroad to pasture
[in the morning].” (16:6)***

4- The Beauty of the Scenery on Earth: Many verses in the Qur’an concern
the beautiful scenery on earth God has asked man to watch, like flowers,
trees, plains and other plants. These extreme forms of beauty have been
provided for man by God so that man can relieve himself from the
monotony of life, and refresh his soul. Thus, God is attributing beauty
to Himself in these verses, and it is proved that it has been God's will
to create them; man has not induced them into his own mind.

5- The Beauty of Mental and Intellectual Ideals: The verses in the
Qur’an emphasize the beauty of moral ethics and moral values and all
proper human virtues:

<p dir="rtl">
و ان الساعة لاتية فاصفح الصفح الجميل
</p>

***“Surely the Hour is coming; so pardon thou, with a gracious
pardoning.” (15:85)***

<p dir="rtl">
فاصبر صبرا جميلا
</p>

***“So be thou patient with a sweet patience.” (70:5)***

Now let us discuss the contents of the Qur’an. We may categorize the
contents of the Qur’an into the following eight groups:

1- The allowed (halal) and the prohibited (haram): Halal refers to legal
freedom regarding an issue or an action, like the freedom to marry
someone, eat certain things or wear certain clothes that are allowed.
The opposite, haram, refers to issues or actions one is prohibited from,
like producing harmful material.

2- Mandatory duties (fara'ez) and the meritables (faza'el): Fara'ez are
the mandatory actions one must do, such as daily prayers, fasting, the
Haj pilgrimage, defending one's life, etc.Faza'el are approved, merited
actions not as necessary as the former, like having good intentions,
following moral ethics, etc.

3- The Omitted and the Substitutes: Though various definitions have been
given for the nasikh (the substitute) and the mansookh (the omitted), it
is generally agreed that the former happens when the decree cited in a
verse of the Qur’an is omitted, though the verse itself remains in the
Qur’an. However, some scholars have denied the existence of such verses
in the Qur’an. These four verses have been pointed out as instances of
nasikh and mansookh in the Qur’an:

<p dir="rtl">
ما ننسخ من آية او ننسها نات بخير منها او مثلها
</p>

***“And for whatever verse we abrogate or cast into oblivion, We bring a
better or the like of it.” (2:106)***

<p dir="rtl">
و اذا بدلنا آية مکان آية و الله اعلم بما ينزل
</p>

***“And when We exchange a verse in the place of another verse - and God
knows very well what He is sending down.” (16:101)***

<p dir="rtl">
يمحوا الله ما يشاء و يثبت و عنده ام الکتاب
</p>

***“God blots out, and He establishes whatsoever He will; and with Him
is the Essence of the Book.”( 13:39)***

<p dir="rtl">
فبظلم من الذين هادوا حرّمنا عليهم طيبات احلّت لهم
</p>

***“And for the evildoing of those Jewry, We have forbidden them certain
good things that were permitted to them…”( 4:160)***

Thus, it is possible to have such a phenomenon in the Qur’an; many
stories about the life of the Holy Prophet of Islam and the Imams, cited
by both Shiites and Sunnites, also refer to some cases of nasikh and
mansookh.

4- Emergency allowances and the main mandatory duties: In some cases,
allowances have been made for emergencies or situations made by force.

<p dir="rtl">
فمن اضطر غير باغ و لا عاد فلا اثم عليه
</p>

***“Yet whoso is constrained to eat dead flesh or other forbidden
things, not desiring nor transgressing. No sin shall be on him.”(
2:173)***

5- The General and the Specific: Some laws and decrees cover all people
and all jobs, for example trade is allowed, unless details are added.
Some other laws and decrees focus on specific people or things.

6- Tales, Anecdotes and Examples with Useful Points: The Qur’an includes
many stories of past peoples and nations that God has provided to add to
man's knowledge of how to live properly and learn the lessons from them,
like the stories of the Pharaoh, the Ad people, and many prophets and
great figures.

7- The Unlimited and the Limited: Some issues are not confined; others
qualitatively and quantitatively limited, like personal issues.

8- The Firmly Clear and the Like: Some verses are so clear that we can
firmly know what they mean:

<p dir="rtl">
الحمد لله رب العالمين
</p>

***“Praise belongs to God, the Lord of all Being.”(1:1)***

In some others, the meaning is not so clear in the words used:

<p dir="rtl">
و جاء ربك و الملك صفا صفا
</p>

“And [on Judgment Day] thy Lord comes, and the angels rank on rank…”
(89:22)

It is definite that “God comes” cannot refer physical movement. There
are two important points about such verses:

1- Sometimes the meaning of the verse is the opposite of what it seems
to be:

<p dir="rtl">
و جاء ربك والملك صفا صفا
</p>

***“And thy Lord comes, and the angels rank on rank…” (89:22)***

2- Sometimes there is an unclear word in the verse that calls for
explanation and interpretation, like “time” or “hour” which sometimes
means Judgment Day, or:

<p dir="rtl">
ما كذب الفواد ما راي
</p>

***“The Messenger's heart did not deny what he saw…”(53:11)***

and other words at the beginning of the surahs.

Both of the above-mentioned forms exist in surahs revealed in Mecca and
also in those revealed in Medina, so they should be interpreted with
care. This does not mean, however, that people cannot use the Qur’an;
the more knowledge they have, the better they can use it, as is the case
with some man-made books, like poems by Hafiz or Jalal-addin Muhammad
Molawi (Rumi), which despite being literary works, mean different things
to different people.

Another issue about the Qur’an is the surahs revealed in Mecca (the
Makki ones) and those revealed in Medina (the Madani ones). Differences
have been pointed out in these verses, which we will now analyze:

1- It has been said that the surahs revealed in Mecca have fewer verses
than the ones revealed in Medina. This is not so, for in both types,
there are long surahs, medium ones and short ones. The short ones do,
however, exist more frequently among the surahs revealed in Mecca.

Makki surahs include about 77 verses concerning laws and decrees, some
containing more than one law or decree. If there are about 500 verses in
the Qur’an including laws and decrees, about one sixth or one seventh of
them must have been revealed in Mecca. Of course, most verses showing
laws and decrees have been revealed in Medina; most short surahs have
also been Makki. Thus, it is inaccurate to say that all short surahs
have been Makki and all surahs concerning Islamic laws and decrees have
been revealed in Medina. It is natural, however, that most laws and
decrees be sent once the fundamentals of Islam were well-established,
and that happened in Medina.

2- It has been said that Madani surahs contain laws and decrees, but
Makki ones do not. This is also incorrect. Here is just a short list of
the many verses revealed in Mecca that do include laws and decrees:

***Hood, 113 and 114.***

***Abraham, 31.***

***Jinn, 18.***

***The Believers, 2 through 9.***

3- It has been said that Makki surahs are more threatening and scolding,
whereas the Madani ones are milder. This is again incorrect; Joseph,
revealed in Mecca, contains - in the story of the prophet Joseph's
life - many gentle, delicate issues concerning the most beautiful points
on mankind. Such verses seem to have been revealed in a beautiful place
with fascinating scenery; it has, in fact, they were revealed in Mecca,
where the Holy Prophet of Islam was continually in conflict with people,
and had to scold and threaten them.

4- It has also been said that the Makki ones have shorter verses than
the Madani ones. First, we must say that many surahs revealed in Mecca
have a lot of short verses. All of the verses of surahs like The Clear
Sign, The Earthquake, and Charity are short, and so are the last four
verses of surahs like Help, Daybreak and Men. Muhammad, a surah revealed
in Medina, has many short verses; all of the verses in the surah Man are
short.

Secondly, many Makki surahs have very long verses, like The Spoils, The
Battlements, Jonas, Hood, Joseph, The Camel, The Cave, The tairways,
Mary, Ta Ha, The Prophets, The Spider, Al-Hijr. We see that almost one

third of the verses of all Makki surahs are long, and many also have
medium-long verses like Abraham, The Spider, Lokman, The Greeks, etc.

5- It has been said that Makki verses are vague and unclear, whereas
Madani verses are elaborate and understandable. Whoever said this either
knew nothing about the Qur’an or wanted to be cruelly stubborn. If he
was referring to the verses that may have several meanings, he could
have said it in a more suitable way, too.

The Divinity of the Qur’an
--------------------------

There has been no book written by man about the truth about man and the
universe that does not suffer from numerous limitations and
shortcomings. There are several issues, on the other hand, that prove
the Qur’an is a divine book:

### 1. The Sense of Absolute Dominance and Control

###

Found in no other man-made book, this is one of the Qur’an's most
incredible qualities. Consider these verses:

<p dir="rtl">
و قضي ربك الا تعبدوا الا اياه
</p>

***“Thy Lord has decreed you shall not serve any but Him…” (19:23)***

The context addresses the whole universe; it controls and dominates all
of mankind.

<p dir="rtl">
يا ايها الانسان انك كادح الي ربك كدحا فملاقيه
</p>

***“O Man! Thou art laboring unto thy Lord laboriously, and thou shalt
encounter Him.”( 84:6)***

The contents and unusual wording included in the above verse determines
with total dominance and control the nature of man, his final goal and
the path he should go through. Such a statement could not possible have
been said by a human being, a part of mankind drowning in nature, ideals
and desires.

Such a sentence would have been impossible without absolute dominance
over man's ideas, ideals, thoughts, and corruptions.

<p dir="rtl">
فاين تذهبون
</p>

***Then where are you going?” (81:26)***

The question “Where are you going” is posed from a position that has
absolute dominance and control over where man has come from, where he
goes from here and why he has come here. The law that dominates man's
good and bad desires is a background prepared for the laws of the
universe to flow - the place where God's will is displayed.

### 2. The Void of Contradiction in Qur’anic Verses

###

The fact that conflict and contradiction does not at all exist between
the verses of the Qur’an can be of quite help in order to know the
Qur’an better. Though the verses of the Qur’an have been revealed to the
Holy Prophet during hectic moments of his life which were full of ups
and downs - such as the beginning of his mission, the end of his
mission, periods when Muslims where in painful dire straits, when Islam
had conquered the whole Arab land, times of triumph and defeat, joy and
sorrow - there is no sign of contradiction or conflict between the
verses.

Let us now discuss some other characteristics of the Qur’an:

a) Incredible influence and penetration into all of man's mental
aspects: The words and expressions used in the Qur’an are at such an
immensely exquisite level of eloquence and beauty that they lead to a
mental fascination that no poetry can reach.

b) The profound depth in meaning and concept: The Qur’an provides all of
the ultimate truths about man and the universe in the form of extremely
simply-worded verses.

c) Continuous eternity of content: As Imam Ali says in the
Nahj-ul-balaghah, “There is no end to the wonders and unique meanings in
the Qur’an; without turning to the Qur’an for help, the darkness can
never be eliminated.”

The continuity of the contents of the Qur’an - a reason itself why the
Qur’an is in fact a miracle - shows that the Qur’an is in fact far
superior to the developments and changes that occur in human societies.
The Qur’an puts much emphasis upon thought and reasoning.

Contrary to what some so-called “thinkers” - totally unaware of the
fundamentals of Islam, however - baselessly claim, the necessity of
making use of one's senses has been regarded as extremely important in
the Qur’an. As we see in the verses below:

<p dir="rtl">
و الله اخرجكم من بطون امهاتكم لا تعلمون شيئا و جعل لكم السمع و
الابصار و الافئدة لعلكم تشكرون
</p>

***“And it is God who brought you forth from your mothers' wombs, and He
appointed for you hearing, and sight, and hearts, that haply so you will
be thankful.” (16:78)***

<p dir="rtl">
و هو الذي انشأ لكم السمع و الابصار و الافئدة قليلا ما تشكرون
</p>

***“It is He who produced for you hearing, and eyes, and hearts; but
little thanks you show.”( 23:78)***

<p dir="rtl">
قل هل يستوي الاعمي و البصير ام هل تستوي الظلمات و النور
</p>

***“Say: 'Are the blind and the seeing man equal, or are the shadows and
the light equal?”( 13:16)***

There are about 24 verses in the Qur’an condemning people who deprive
themselves of using the powers of sensing and observing they have.

In general, a great many verses in the Qur’an concern intriguing man to
think intelligently and activate their intellectual reason. We may say
that no human philosophy or ideology has given so much consideration to
intelligent, intellectual cognition.

Many verses of the Qur’an emphasize the necessity of mental activities
and reasoning:

1- Strengthening reason and following it: 40 verses

2- Precise comprehension: 15 verses

3- Thought: 17 verses

4- Careful decision-making: 4 verses

5- The importance of being with the wise: 15 verses

6- Gaining common sense, awareness and knowledge: 21 verses

7- Gaining knowledge, following it and avoiding ignorance: 100 verses

8- The necessity of learning philosophy, which is one of the reasons why
prophets have been sent

9- Observing the universe to understand it: 20 verses

10- Following religion and obeying correct facts: 18 verses

11- Internal perception and intuition: 35 verses

Now that we see so many cases in which man has been commanded and
encouraged to make contact with facts by means of his various tools of
observation and understanding, no room for doubt is left that Islamic
laws and decrees in any way oppose reason, intelligence and conscience.

Thought and Reasoning in the Qur’an
-----------------------------------

This has been pointed out in many verses; the word tafakkor (reflection)
comes in 18 verses:

<p dir="rtl">
قل هل يستوي الاعمي و البصير افلا تتفكرون
</p>

***“Say: 'Are the blind and the seeing man equal? Will you not reflect?'
(6:50)***

Thus, Islamic references greatly emphasize that man should know the
rules of objective intellect and reasoning - the basics that manage
man's intelligible life - and depict them and how man is to use them. By
studying the verses above, we see how intellect and reason should be
reinforced and what is necessary to make man move on the path of an
intelligible life.

We will now present a definition and classifications for reasoning and
proof, which involves presenting facts and justifying them for human
beings via comparison, exemplification, induction or referring to
personal perceptions. There are seven kinds of reasoning:

1- Mathematical

2- Inductive

3- Comparison

4- Exemplification

5- Philosophical

6- Personal perceptions

7- Intuitive

We should say about the first kind of reasoning that the Holy Prophet
has been ordered in the Qur’an to use three fundamental methods for
guiding people toward meaningful facts and truths: philosophy, positive
preaching and discussion via the best of methods. The Nahj-ul-balaghah
also shows this clearly. The Qur’an includes three forms of reasoning:

a) Experimental

b) Mystic

c) Experimental-mystic

The third kind involves recognizing the supreme order and harmony of the
universe with scenic clarity in a way that it shows its hidden meaning.
The Qur’an refers to this form of reasoning - which uses both the
innately external and innately internal poles - as heavenly observation
(reasoning).

In this reasoning, the internal pole includes the mind's abstract
activity in the immensely orderly, harmonious universe - which is
continually

changing, because the creatures in the universe, too, are in continuous
move and change.

The external pole, on the other hand, involves understanding the
visible, observable aspect of the beings via reflection; in this case,
the mind is like a mirror reflecting inside itself what it sees in the
world outside. Such a situation of understanding and reflection is
purely a tool; it seems that man receives the understanding of the
universe directly via his own presence there. In other words, he sees a
face in a mirror, and the fades into the face so much that it seems as
if there was no mirror at all.

How the Qur’an Sees the Universe: Carefully Calculated
------------------------------------------------------

The logic in the Qur’an states in a variety of ways that there is
nothing uncalculated in the world; everything is based upon logical
calculation. Ultimately, we human beings, merely a tiny part of the
universe, can only realize and gain knowledge about some of the events
in nature; all great thinkers know too well, however, that the immense
machine of nature is far greater than the small part we see.

They also know by geometry and final calculations concerned that the
universe is much vaster and more profound than what we may imagine.

By studying the verses of the Qur’an we realize that even the smallest
event - whether in nature, inside man, individual or social - is quite
calculated and orderly. Thus, we can state that the formation and demise
of communities and societies, like other natural and human phenomena,
are based upon order and logic; nothing happens by chance or
coincidence. Some other verses explain how this law also applies to
societies.

In some other verses, the prohibition of “corrupting the earth” has been
mentioned in a variety of ways: one verse, “…those who corrupt the
earth…” (5:33), regards them as “those who fight God and His Prophet.”
Another verse involves God damning “corruptors” and confirmation of
their eventual doom (13:25).

Many verses in the Qur’an directly or indirectly mention this form of
“fixating reforms.”

<p dir="rtl">
و اصلح و لا تتبع سبيل المفسدين
</p>

***“… and put things right, and do not follow the way of the workers of
corruption.”(7:142)***

<p dir="rtl">
فاتقوا الله و اصلحوا ذات بينكم
</p>

***“… so fear you God, and set things right between you…” (8:1)***

The Stories in the Qur’an
-------------------------

The Qur’an is definitely not a history book that serves just to report
events. God has included these stories to show man's various aspects and
dimensions and make people realize fixed, stable laws such as actions
and reactions, the cause and effect and orderly calculations in life.

Thus, people can use these stories to gain experience and insight to
establish their intelligible life. In the Qur’an, some stories have been
repeated, like the stories of prophets like Noah and Moses and their
conflicts with tyrants. The philosophy behind this repetition is the
same as that of the Qur’an's emphasized education and justification of
the facts and truths of

life, so that people may understand that human life is no joke, and
involves orderly calculation.

If people observe carefully what goes on in the world, what happened to
other people and why some fall and deteriorate, their ability to realize
and reason facts will improve - this is, in fact, “experimental reason,”
which leads to new knowledge and increases man's insight.

There are many verses in the Qur’an that are quite useful for learning
experiences and lessons which build up to an intelligible life,
especially these verses: The House of Imran 3:137, Women 4:26, The
Spoils 6:11, The Battlements 7:74, Joseph 12:109, The Bee 16:36, Haj
22:46, The Ant 27:69, The Greeks 30:9 and 42, The Angels 35:44, The
Believers 40:21 and 82, Muhammad 47:10.

There are also other verses about the lives of people in the past, with
useful advice on what experience should be learned from them. If one is
aware of how valuable life is in this world, what goes on in the
universe will undoubtedly be a line of a great book to him. Thus, every
event - past or present, large or small, sad or joyous, about friends or
enemies - can be a lesson and provide us with experience and advice.

The Qur’an includes knowledge of what is to come in the future and what
has occurred in the past. Some future events, such as the rise and fall
of the Roman Empire, have been stated.

The events mentioned in the Qur’an can be divided into two groups:

1- Although some verses do not seem to include certain events, scholars
have been able to extract them.

2- The Qur’an contains some basic principles that can be regarded as
divine ways and methods. These principles can apply both to the history
of man and also to the future. Ultimately, comparing them with past and
future events - and experience - requires internal enlightening, a taste
of divinity.

The Qur’an states that human life has a goal which is extremely supreme
and important. The verses in the Qur’an show this in a variety of ways:

1- Some verses strongly emphasize that man has not been created
aimlessly:

<p dir="rtl">
افحسبتم انما خلقناكم عبثا و انكم الينا لا ترجعون
</p>

***“What, did you think that We created you only for sport, and that you
would not be returned to Us?” (23:115)***

<p dir="rtl">
الذي خلق الموت و الحياة ليبلوكم ايكم احسن عملا
</p>

***“The God who created life and death, that He might try you which of
you is the best in actions…”(67:2)***

2- Many verses greatly emphasize that everything in the universe has
been created “justly and righteously.”

Many verses in the Qur’an call the creatures in the universe “signs.” We
can categorize these verses as:

a) Some verses directly call the facts in the universe factors leading
to faith, monotheism, piety, avoiding blasphemy, belief in the afterlife
and fear of God.

b) Some verses order us to observe carefully the signs in the universe
and emphasize that thought and reasoning are necessary. As some of these

verses say, “Those who observe and realize these signs and the order and
harmony are those who have sound common senses and strong intelligence.”
Many verses in the Qur’an emphasize this.

c) Some other verses clearly justify the righteous creation of the
universe. The word haq has several meanings, but when referring to the
creation of the earth and the heavens, it depicts the properness and
righteousness of their creation.

The point is that God-given laws preached by the Prophet of Islam
account for both the adjustment of man's social life and spreading
positive moral and mystic qualities; it is an Islamic principle that all
domains like law, economy, moral ethics and culture be in harmony and
united - man-made laws, however, have not gone beyond providing man's
social life, for they are the result of man's information and desires
alone.

Every action arising from original mysticism and knowledge and purity,
together with its positive results which show in mystical changes, serve
as a brighter light shining the way to the higher level.

All the verses in the Qur’an which regard the Qur’an and religion as the
factor providing light with illumination definitely mean that the light
is the result of obeying them, for the abstract words uttered by the
Holy Prophet and other religious leaders, and the written aspect of the
Qur’an are but physical phenomena. The shining light arising from them,
therefore, can be considered from two aspects:

1- Arising from God.

2- Obeying them is what creates light in man's mind and soul.

The Qur’an categorizes life in this world into two groups:

a) Worldly life: A purely natural, physical life which includes nothing
but desires and pleasures.

b) Life based on reason (intelligible life): Such pessimistic nihilists
are lower than even the starting point of the path toward positive
mystic development and becoming a perfect human being, for they have not
yet gained the awareness that may prove to them that the universe and
their existence is serious and objective.

Such a starting point is not a fixed part of man's life that man passes
and moves on; the start of awareness and awakening should always be with
man and light up his path during his whole life. The awareness and
awakening should increase both qualitatively and quantitatively as he
ages.

The Qur’an and sunnat is also a very considerable issue. The Qur’an and
the itrat (the Holy Prophet's family) are always connected; in fact,
their association (as the bigger weight and the smaller weight) forms
one of the most important hadith both Shiites and Sunnites believe in:

<p dir="rtl">
اني تارك فيکم الثقلين كتاب الله و عترتي ما ان تمسكتم بهما لن تضلوا
ابدا
</p>

*“I leave you two great things: the Book of God and my progeny. Follow
them, and you will never fall astray from the right path.”*

Here, the word saqal has been interpreted differently, based on how “the
book of God and progeny” is interpreted. The most suitable meaning of
the word seems to be “weight,” for the book of God and the Prophet's
progeny are what Islam and Muslims depend upon.

What we mean by sunnat is the way of the Holy Prophet of Islam, which
was presenting the good and evil about man in two dimensions - physical
and mental. As we know, sunnat is Islam's second most important
reference, and obeying it is every Muslim's duty. There are three forms
of sunnat: the words, the actions and the writings of an infallible holy
person. Since the knowledge our Imams had was based upon the Qur’an and
the Holy Prophet of Islam, sunnat generally means what the Imams said,
did and wrote.

On the other hand, sunnat interprets the Qur’an; it is impossible to
make full use of the Qur’an without it. Those who believe that the
Qur’an already includes all the beliefs, laws and duties man needs to
know are either too stubborn or too ignorant, for as we know, the Qur’an
does not include all beliefs, laws, duties and basics, and the minds of
the public are naturally unable to find or realize them, too. Omit
sunnat from Islamic references and all that remains is a series of
basic, general beliefs, duties, decrees and moral ethics plus
interesting stories in the Qur’an and some general mental issues that
cannot explain or interpret all Islamic laws or duties alone.

It is itrat, the Prophet's progeny, who can interpret sunnat and the
Qur’an, and indeed, if the Qur’an and the itrat were not enough, the
hadith mentioned above would be useless. Furthermore, if the Qur’an
alone were enough and everyone were able to use it in all circumstances,
the history of the Shiites and the Sunnites would not be so full of
jurisprudential research. Even those who do not refer to the above
hadith, admit the necessity of obeying the Holy Prophet's way of life,
and have in fact done so.

All experts on Islamic studies agree that Imam Ali was a statue of the
Qur’an; he had complete knowledge of the Qur’an and absolute faith in
its content, which showed in his words. Indeed, he must have believed
that he was close to God according to these verses:

<p dir="rtl">
و نحن اقرب اليه من حبل الوريد
</p>

***“… and We are nearer to him [man] than his jugular.” (50:16)***

<p dir="rtl">
و هو معكم اينما كنتم
</p>

***“… and He is with you, wherever you are.” (57:4)***

and had found out about it through intuition. He has also mentioned his
direct contact with God in several parts of the Nahj-ul-balaghah.

Sunnat has been mentioned many times meaning 'way, law or principle' in
the Qur’an and the Nahj-ul-balaghah, which shows how important it is to
learn from the ways of life man has had throughout history; otherwise,
not only would our study of the history of man and the laws of history
prove incomplete, but also we must say that our knowledge of man's
identity, his stable qualities - good or bad - would be helplessly
inconsiderable.

However, contrary to what some ignorant people claim about Islam's lack
of attention to the history of mankind, the Qur’an includes many stories
that show how man has been in the domains of “man as he is” and “man as
he should be,” and provided special emphasis upon traditions that have
been followed or should have been followed, which shows how wrong such
unaware or stubborn people are.

Traditions and ways of life sometimes arise in the form of the law of
causality and the law of actions and reactions:

<p dir="rtl">
قل للذين كفروا ان ينتهوا يغفر لهم ما قد سلف و ان يعودوا فقد مضت سنة
الاولين
</p>

***“Say to the unbelievers, if they give over He will forgive them what
is past; but if they return, the wont of the ancient is already gone!”(
8:38)***

Actions and reactions dominate all aspects of man's life, whether
individual or social; there is a sign of the law of causality in every
corner of both mankind and the universe. In the philosophy of history as
Islam sees it, there must be a law of action and reaction based on a
fixed order and harmony in the domain of man's life, for without
accepting such a basic principle, historical analysis would be
impossible.

The Rise and Fall of Cultures and Civilizations
-----------------------------------------------

First, let us see what civilization is: Civilization means creating
order and harmony in human relations in a society so that destructive
conflicts are replaced with competition toward perfection and greatness;
people's social lives and communities cause the people's constructive
potentials to be activated.

Here, “man-oriented” does not mean the ridiculous concept of
“considering man as high as a god;” what we mean is that all efforts and
values concerning civilization should be at man's service rather than
man being sacrificed for deceiving phenomena called civilization.

The most fundamental fact is that civilization and culture, with all
their unique advantages, have been regarded in Islam as servants of
man's intelligible life; man's intelligible life should not be at the
service of a civilization or culture so as to activate his positive
human potentials and supreme feelings.

If man sometimes sacrifices himself in order to safeguard culture or
civilization, it should serve to eradicate dangers to intelligible life,
not a culture or civilization that does not care about his intelligible
life.

A human society affected by the factors that can destroy a civilization
or culture is like a human being who has risen due too certain factors,
but then suddenly falls.

It is understood from the Qur’an and the Nahj-ul-Balaghah that man is
the start and the end of all cultures and civilizations.

<p dir="rtl">
و لو ان اهل القري امنوا و اتقوا لفتحنا عليكم بركات من السماء و الارض
و لكن كذبوا فاخذناهم بما كانوا يكسبون
</p>

***“Had the peoples of the cities believed and been god-fearing, We
would have opened upon them blessings from heaven and earth; but they
cried lies and so We seized them for what they earned.” (7:96)***

The Qur’an has cited factors like lack of gratitude toward God for His
blessings (what brought about the fall of the Saba people) corruption,
selfishness, tyranny, atrocity, and deviation from righteousness as what
makes a civilization or culture fade away, so the opposites of these
factors must be those which create and elevate them. Thus, giving thanks
for God's blessings, good intentions, justice, acting on the path of the
truth, and righteousness are factors that enrich cultures and
civilizations. Many verses

in the Qur’an amazingly state that cruelty and atrocity bring cultures
and civilizations to their doom.

<p dir="rtl">
و لقد اهلكنا القرون من قبلكم لما ظلموا
</p>

“We destroyed the generations before you when they did evil.”( 10:13)

<p dir="rtl">
و تلك القري اهلكناهم لما ظلموا و جعلنا لمهلكهم موعدا
</p>

***“And those cities, We destroyed them when they did evil, and
appointed for their destruction a tryst.”( 18:59)***

The issue of providing a good living for people in order to create a
great Islamic society is a highly important and delicate one, for
reaching man's mental and spiritual comfort requires man's physical
needs - which, depending on man's various needs can make quite a vast
range - to be fulfilled.

Basic Islamic references - the Qur’an and hadith - have dealt with it
with great emphasis. Let us consider an example:

<p dir="rtl">
يا ايها الذين امنوا استجيبوا لله و للرسول اذا دعاكم لما يحييكم
</p>

***“O believers, respond to God and the Messenger when He calls you unto
that which will give you life…”( 8:24)***

There is no doubt that “giving life” in the above verses does not refer
to “being alive and breathing,” for animals can also explore, discover
and struggle without even needing prophets; it refers to finding
intelligible life. And intelligible life is indeed impossible without
the readiness for a clean life, free from all the evil, greedy
opportunism seen in all lifestyles like industry, agriculture and so
forth.

Fear of God as Seen in the Qur’an
---------------------------------

The Qur’an warns those who have no fear of God that they will meet a
terrible punishment, and those who fear God have been promised physical
and mental rewards.

Fearing God does not mean that God is a terrifying being able to cruelly
hurt His subjects. We must first see what “fear of God” means. As the
Qur’an puts it:

<p dir="rtl">
انما يخشي الله من عباده العلماء
</p>

***“Even so only those of His servants fear God who have knowledge…”
(35:28)***

Here, fearing God refers to the fact that if man ignores God - the
greatest truth of all - he will definitely feel depressively incompetent
and impotent, and once he does realize how badly he needs God, he will
feel terrified for not having submitted himself to God, for having
fought against it.

There is no doubt that man needs to gain, consciously and voluntarily,
the three common principles (a) belief in the one God, b) regarding God
as only One and truthfully worshipping Him, and c) freedom for all
people from slavery) so that he can elevate his own soul and, having
reached an objective, targeted state regarding these principles, see
himself as united with other similar human beings. The Qur’an includes
some verses regarding such supreme unity:

<p dir="rtl">
و اعتصموا بحبل الله جميعا و لا تفرقوا و اذكروا نعمة الله عليكم اذ
كنتم اعداء فالف بين قلوبكم فاصبحتم بنعمته اخوانا و كنتم علي شفا حفرة من
النار فانقذكم منها كذلك يبين الله لكم آياته لعلكم تهتدون
</p>

***“And hold you fast to God's bond, together, and do not scatter;
remember God's blessing upon you when you were enemies, and He brought
your hearts together, so that by His blessing you became brothers. You
were upon the brink of pit of Fire, and He delivered you from it; even
so God makes clear to you His signs; so haply you will be
guided.”(3:103)***

There are several aspects that cast light on the immense divine unity
the above verse presents.

<p dir="rtl">
من اجل ذلك كتبنا علي بني اسرائيل انه من قتل نفسا بغير نفس او فساد في
الارض فكانما قتل الناس جميعا و من احياها فكانما احيا الناس جميعا
</p>

***“Therefore We prescribed for the Children of Isreal that whoso slays
a soul not to retaliate for a slain soul, nor for corruption done in the
land, shall be as if he had slain mankind altogether; and whoso gives
life to a soul, shall be as if he had given life to mankind altogether.”
(5:32)***

That the context of this verse is a very simple formula - “One equals
all and all equals one” - that actually contains the greatest of truths:

<p dir="rtl">
ايـــن ما و من نتيجــه بيگانگـی بود صد دل به يکديگر چو شود آشنا
يکيست
</p>

(All this 'me and us' was the result of alienation; if a hundred hearts
unite, they will see that they are in fact only one.)

Sa'eb Tabrizi

The reason for such unity and equality does not lie in man's physical
aspect, but in his mental and physical being, which despite being
related to natural levels on one hand, is on the other hand heading for
the supernatural, the source of perfection, divine beauty and glory. The
part of man that faces the supernatural receives God's light from its
original source, then speads it across the world in rays of various
magnitudes. Hence, unity, harmony, brotherhood and equality - and above
all relationships, the connection of unity - pertains to the divine sun.
As Imam Ja'far Sadiq says:

<p dir="rtl">
المؤمن اخو المؤمن كالجسد الواحد ان اشتكي شيئا منه وجد الم ذلك في
سائر جسده و ارواحهما من روح واحدة و ان روح المؤمن لاشد اتصالا بروح الله
من اتصال شعاع الشمس بها
</p>

*“Faithful believers are brothers, as close as the parts of one body. If
one part moans in pain, the other parts will also feel the pain; the
souls of the faithful believers are one, and such a soul is closer to
God than sunrays are to the sun.”*

Clearly, as soon as the faithful man's soul begins its conscious,
voluntary competition against others in doing good, his soul will also
start getting closer to reaching God. Such a feeling of unity is, as we
have previously emphasized, due to faith in what common sense and pure
conscience decree internally and what the prophets of God tell us
externally.

The background needed for such a unity to be reached among human beings
is the common principles and perceptions from the two abundant domains -
man and the universe. As I stated during the talks I had with some great
scholars from the East:

“We human beings have enough common principles and perceptions about man
and the universe - both in the domain of what there is and in the domain
of what there should be to be able to abandon our destructive conflicts
and turn instead to positive, competitive forms of perfection.”

I brought up the same issue again when I met German scientists at the
Society of Philosophy in 1984.

“We have all agreed that Abraham is the father of the three great
religions,” I told them, “and that everything pertaining to him is
correct, and our criterion for distinguishing right from wrong is our
wisdom and reason. By agreeing on Abraham's nation, we will see that all
the means and ways for unity among the believers of these three great
religions are in our control, for they are all proper, approved
qualities.”

One issue which is common between religions is Judgment Day, and many of
the verses in the Qur’an concern it. The Qur’an considers Judgment Day
as “The Day of Gathering.”

On several occasions, the Qur’an refers to gathering:

<p dir="rtl">
ذلك يوم مجموع له الناس
</p>

***“… a day on which all mankind will be gathered (to be judged)…”
(11:103)***

<p dir="rtl">
قل ان الاولين و الاخرين لمجموعون الي ميقات يوم معلوم
</p>

***“Say: 'The ancients, and the later folk shall be gathered to the
appointed time of a known day.”( 56:49-50)***

Forget Judgment Day, and There Will Be No Good or Bad
-----------------------------------------------------

This is one of the most serious viewpoints regarding moral ethics and
religion nowadays.

Today, instead of making use of their powers to provide their people -
and people of other nations who burn in the flames of poverty and
ignorance - with material and spiritual prosperity, powerful countries
are busy killing each other and human beings who work hard to extract
their daily needs from nature and make contact with their God. This is
what naturally happens when Judgment Day is denied and/or forgotten.

Even more amazing is the fact that the selfish Machiavellians pretend to
be staunch supporters of goodwill, human virtues, obeying conscience and
the necessity of avoiding the immoral and downgrading consciences, but
in fact, having deceived the simple-minded, prepare the scene to
sacrifice the truth to enhance their selfish goals! Let them make
mankind cry as much as they want; the day will also come when they will
cry, too.

The Universe on Judgment Day
----------------------------

Science today does provide some predictions on the future changes in the
universe, though it cannot present any definite details. Many verses of
the Qur’an point out the coming changes in the universe:

<p dir="rtl">
اذا وقعت الواقعة ليس لوقعتها كاذبة خافضة رافعة اذا رجت الارض رجا و
بست الجبال بسا فكانت هباء منبثا
</p>

***“When the terror descends (and none denies its descending), abasing,
exalting, when the earth shall be rocked and the mountains crumbled and
become a dust scattered, and you shall be three bands…” (56:1-6)***

There is debate whether Judgment Day is the day when some go up and some
go down. Ibn Abbas believes that, “Some people rise on Judgment Day;
others are sent down.” Hassan and Jabbaee have written that, “Judgment
Day sends some people down into the fire, and takes some others up to
heaven.”

Tabarsi believes that, “Both theories can be summarized as: Those who
get inflated in this world become tiny on Judgment Day, and vice versa.”

According to the verses in the Qur’an, these events will happen just
before Judgment Day and on Judgment Day itself:

a) Intense earthquakes; several verses have stated this point.

Mountains will become hollow like cotton wool, and then crumble down.

The sky will split apart, and become unsteady and twisted.

The moonlight and the sunshine will disappear.

The stars will fade out and scatter.

The skies will open up, making doorways through which angels can pass.

Two great shrieks will be heard; hearing the first will terrify all
people, and the second will bring them to normal again.

Immense horror and distress will engulf people so intensively that they
will abandon their dearest, their children, their family; pregnant women
will bear their babies and people will be intoxicated, even drunk, with
bewilderment.

The earth will throw out everything inside it, like dead bodies, etc.

Waters of the oceans and seas boil and catch fire, and all waters will
mix with each other.

Such immense changes and developments do not occur simultaneously; as we
have mentioned before, some may take place before others.

The Qur’an describes Judgment Day as an extremely severe one. Is that
because of the galactic developments concerned? Or is it due to the
pressure exerted on man's physical faculties and aspects as he prepares
to see and express the truth about himself? Indeed, both intelligence
and reason and also some evidence arising from quotations prove that
people enter Judgment Day differently, for they have accumulated various
amounts of savings during their prosperous or atrocious life.

Now we will discuss some other interesting aspects of the Qur’an.

The Necessity of Knowing the Qur’an
-----------------------------------

We must know the Qur’an as best as we can and use its light to cure our
mental and spiritual problems. Thus, we can create everlasting freshness
and vigor in our hearts by means of this knowledge.

Learning about and knowing the Qur’an involves man's learning about and
knowing his own perfection-loving soul in the domain of “what there is”
and “what there should be.” The Qur’an is not a scientific book that

presents man from a limited point of view, or from a viewpoint that is
itself subject to change. Such forms of knowledge are either a product
of man's natural senses plus the relative meddling he makes when gaining
knowledge, or the product of man's specifically aimed combination of his
own coordinates with the fact he is studying.

The Qur’an and Creation
-----------------------

God has emphasized in 10 verses of the Qur’an that there is a reason for
creating the universe and nature; this is a great warning to man, who
should know that he lives in a world based on truth and reason. Thus,
his existence, superior to all the universe in dignity and greatness,
cannot in any way be farce and aimless. As we read:

<p dir="rtl">
و ما خلقنا السماء و الارض و ما بينهما لاعبين
</p>

***“We created not the heaven and the earth and whatsoever in between
them is for playing.”( 21:16)***

In verse 38 of The Smoke, the Qur’an states the same thing, though it
refers to “the heavens” instead of “the heaven.” Moreover, other verses
in the Qur’an also state that man's existence in the universe has an
aim. Some even reveal the highest aim and goal of life:

<p dir="rtl">
و ما خلقت الجن و الانس الا ليعبدون
</p>

“I have not created jinn and mankind except to serve Me.” (, 51:56)

Clearly, worship means nothing but being placed in the domain of God's
divine attraction field. Furthermore, God has no need for our worship -
a fact too obvious and simple to ask for any reasoning.

All these verses order man, in a variety of ways, to understand where
they stand in this objective world, and having reached such an
understanding, obey their reason, internal conscience and the prophets
sent by God - his “external” reason and conscience, in fact. All the
laws and decrees concerning this human aspect are regarded as fixed and
basic.

The Qur’an and the Consequences of Obeying It

When man moves on the path to evolution, obeying the Qur’an lights his
eyes up, for truly accepting and obeying the book of God creates such a
light inside man that it even shines through his eyes. Thus, he will see
the truth as it really is; no vagueness or dark points will remain. The
eyes and the ears of faithful human beings are accustomed with
interpreting divine words:

<p dir="rtl">
گوش و دل مؤمن است سامع صوت خداي گرچه به ظاهر همي ملك پر از هاي و
هوست
</p>

*(The eyes and the ears of the faithful listen to the voice of God,
despite all the noise the world seems to be filled with.)*

**Foad Kermani, Iranian poet**

The Book of Justice and Fairness
--------------------------------

The Qur’an clearly states that Abraham's religion, which the Holy
Prophet Muhammad regards himself as a follower of, opposes atrocity,
oppression, ignorance, tyranny and mental stagnation; the Qur’an leaves
no

question that prophets have been sent by God in order to enforce justice
and equality between people. This is by no means in accordance with some
attitudes and behaviors seen in some - both Islamic and non-Islamic,
including Christian - religious leaders throughout history.

The Book of No Contradictions
-----------------------------

Some writers, in an attempt to prove that religion is not an ideology,
have said, “The founder of Islam has not presented religion as an
ideology, and religious books - even holy religious books (including the
Qur’an) - have no compiled, systematic form.”

Their reasoning is clearly false.

The Qur’an, the Book that Confirms and Verifies Prophets
--------------------------------------------------------

Many verses in the Qur’an verify and confirm the Prophet of Islam and
his faith in the previous Prophets of God and their original Books. The
Qur’an also states that Islam arises from Abraham's religion:

<p dir="rtl">
قولوا امنا بالله و ما انزل الينا و ما انزل الي ابراهيم
</p>

***“Say you: 'We believe in God, and in that which has been sent down on
Abraham…' “(2:136)***

The Qur’an, the Panacea for Mankind's Pains
-------------------------------------------

The Qur’an has the remedy for all the mental and/or spiritual suffering
mankind has today. So far, man has produced over 5 billion books, and
hundreds of millions of them must concern the humanities. Let us suppose
ten million of those books are about the humanities, and let us also
suppose one million of that number concerns theological issues, moral
ethics and the aches and pains man's soul has today (what there is and
what there should be).

If we suppose that each of these books have 300 pages, we may conclude
that 300 million pages have been written on man's pains and their cures.
Let us put aside 299,000,000 pages of them, supposing they contain
examples, anecdotes and supplementary material. Thus, we have 1 million
pages directly talking about man's suffering, diagnosing and curing
them. Moreover, there are the holy books, which tell us the truth about
man's suffering the most clearly of all.

Yet, what pain remains that prevents man from curing himself now that he
has so many diagnoses and prescriptions?

If only there was a book that could tell us how to find that single pain
that prevents all the others from being diagnosed and cured, people say.
We respond that the answer has undoubtedly been included in the holy
books and the pure-minded scholars and thinkers' interpretations of
them. Namely, the pain is unmoderated selfishness which is constantly
strengthened by ignorance. Such a pain has only one cure: will power.
Unless will power is awakened and activated inside man, it is impossible
to cure the pain.

The Qur’an, The Book for Mankind
--------------------------------

Though the Qur’an does not recognize an individual broken off from the
society, - and that lies in the delicate fact that such a person is not
useful - we can say that nature and the characteristics the Qur’an
presents in

description of man reveal both territories. If we pay close attention to
the “natural” and “mental” aspects of man given in the Qur’an, and if we
gain enough knowledge about what the Qur’an regards as “proper and
suitable” for man, we can state that the relationship between man and
the Qur’an is: The Qur’an is the book for man, and man needs the Qur’an.

Without a doubt, no human mind or book has been able to describe man as
the Qur’an has - and this is perfectly natural, for even the most
realistic thinkers have been able to consider mankind from one or at
most two aspects; such a limited scope would definitely not lead to the
real picture arising from the combination of all aspects. Furthermore,
there is great difference between a rigid solid effort do discover
itself and a living being that dominates it trying to do so; likewise,
there is a great difference between an animal's knowledge of itself and
man's knowledge of the animal.

Thus, there is great difference between man's presenting himself to
himself, and his creator providing the identification.

All scholars and experts of the humanities admit that so far,
anthropology has produced nothing more than a bunch of scattered,
superficial material. There is no need for us to elaborate on this; let
us, instead, consider the mind-boggling question that has been posed in
most human societies and saddened the compassionate thinkers and
intellectual leaders around the world: Instead of telling us something
about the “philosophy of life,” why are you just stuffing poetry in our
minds, deceptive views in our eyes and balanced music in our ears, all
of which lead to even more questions?!

We may conclude from the situation human societies are in today that not
much has been revealed about human beings and humanity - apart from the
limited faces made to create mutual coexistence and dealing with
inconveniences. Let us study “mankind” again, this time from the
Qur’an's point of view; perhaps we can escape half of the damage, which
will be quite a gain in itself.


