From Science to Philosophy: A Look Inside
=========================================

As we know, science has two meanings. In one sense, it conveys absolute
awareness. In logic, it is referred to as the picture an object makes in
the mind. Its second meaning pertains to empirical sciences, which
include studying the relationships among phenomena in order to discover
a law. Understanding and science are quite distinct from each other;
cognition is absolute perception, and there are two kinds of
understanding:

a) Initial Understanding: includes the reflection of an observable
phenomenon, like the face of a person or a tree, in the mind, or the
perception of an unobservable fact, like realizing justice and beauty.

b) Continuous Understanding: involves the continuation of the reflection
of initial understanding in the mind. This type of understanding was
called imaginative cognition by ancient philosophers.

We cannot find a comprehensive definition for science on which all
scholars and intellectuals would agree. Some of them have considered
science as the reflection of facts in the human mind. They do not
consider mental activities to have a significant role in the development
of science, for if a topic is to fall into scientific domains, omission,
selection, secondary knowledge of the realities reflected in the mind,
imagining them, their dependence on laws and rules, and also the
possibility of their breaking away from the old laws and rules owing to
new discoveries, are other elements necessary for knowledge.

The Definition of Science
-------------------------

Science involves discovering the fact whose general occurrence is
independent upon the self and cognitive tools of man's existence and
establishing a relationship with it. Any theorem depicting such a
discovery can be called a scientific theorem.

Any scientific theorem based on facts consists of components that may
disrupt the whole theorem by their least change. For example, changes in
the relationship of the observer and the facts, i.e. any shift in his
line of sight or distance from the object, will alter the entire
scientific theorem.

Thus, science is the recognition of phenomena accompanied by the
complete domination of man’s soul over them - therefore, not all forms
of imagination or perception can be called recognition; the domination
of the soul over the issue is essential. Science is one of the human
self’s discovery activities, not merely a reflection and subsequent
perception.

The Levels of Science
---------------------

Regardless of pre-determined principles, science can be classified into
two degrees:

1- The beginning level of science includes the pure reflection of a
subject into the mind by means of our senses and other devices. At this
level, our mind is like a mirror except for issues without observable
effects, like causality, which is far different from seeing something in
the mirror. This level is called “pre-science.”

2- In the next level, the subject reflected in the mind falls into the
streams of side information, concentration and universal laws, and
principles. We now have a clearer knowledge of the subject, for it is no
longer a mere

reflection. In this step, the mind learns a lot about a phenomenon, and
begins to discover how it relates to other phenomena. For example, when
observing a leaf, the mental awareness of the observer does not only
make him study the physical aspects of the leaf; he will go beyond that
and study its other aspects, considering it as a link of the chain of
the universe.

Considering science according to the state of mind the scientist may be
in, science will have three steps:

a) Elementary: in this step, the mind encounters a great deal of
certainties. Any phenomenon man realizes is considered as a separate
fact.

a) Intermediate: the mind encounters various aspects of phenomena, and
figures them out, provided there is no conflict between them; thus, the
mind passes doubt and enters the higher stage.

b) Advanced: the mind is at the peak of its awareness here, and reaches
complete certainty by means of total knowledge of all phenomena.

Factors that Make Man Seek Science
----------------------------------

The basic factor that arouses the interest for science in man is the
necessity for a correct, clear relationship with the facts that surround
the human character. Such a necessity arises from the “self-love,” or
the “need for self-preservation.”

If the need for science persists, the necessity to establish a correct,
clear relationship with facts can appear in various ways. In other
words, people recognize facts by means of different factors, namely:

1- Expanding the dominance of the “self” upon nature in order to make
use of its physical and spiritual benefits,

2- The enjoyment of science,

3- Eagerness for discovering facts,

4- Literal advantage-seeking, whether the greed for wealth, fame or
popularity.

5- Spiritual flourish and elevation through establishing contact with
the truth.

Each of the above-mentioned factors is rooted in self-preservation and
the perfection of the soul, and has advanced science throughout history.
The third and fifth factors were more dominant in the past, but nowadays
the factors which mostly aid man to govern nature are considered more
significant.

Endeavors toward the flourishing of the soul are considered by some
philosophers as the highest aim of philosophy.

Islamic philosophers also believe the primary purpose of seeking science
to be perfecting the soul and flourishing the spirit.

Scientific Laws
---------------

What makes a law scientific? What criteria make scientific laws? Various
answers have been posed, each of which cast light on one aspect of the
question. For instance, when a thinker says, “A scientific law is a
theorem that is repeated in the observable, physical world,” his
statement does not conflict much with another thinker's statement,

“A scientific law is a theorem applicable and compatible to numerous
cases, and is general enough to apply to more than one person or one
case.”

Thus, both thinkers state that if a phenomenon cannot apply to more than
one case, it cannot be a scientific law. So, all thinkers agree that
partial, specific cases and facts which only arise at times, never
qualify as a scientific law, even if they still may be worth studying
from a scientific point of view.

Likewise, when a thinker says, “Every scientific law proves that any
phenomenon arising in the physical, observable world depends on the
existence of certain circumstances and the absence of inhibiting factors
which, if distorted, the phenomenon will fall apart,” describes the same
aspect about scientific laws as this statement, “If there were no order
and harmony in the universe, there would be no laws in human knowledge,
either.” Such theories not only do not conflict as definitions of
scientific laws, but even verify one another, studying the same truth
from various - and very useful -points of view.

Generally speaking, a scientific law is a general theorem showing a
harmonious process in the universe, the occurrence of which calls for
certain conditions and circumstances; if any of the required conditions
are not fulfilled, the process cannot take place. The continuation of
the needed circumstances make the process last, and the continuation the
conditions provide is what gives the scientific law its generality.

When taking a scientific law into consideration, the following four
aspects should be studied about it:

1- The Reality of a Scientific Law is the harmony existing in nature,
protected by God. If we do not believe in God, we will have no logical
way to account for the harmony and order in nature, the continuation of
which is the origin of scientific laws.

As we know, there are several theories on the laws of nature:

a) Laws are innate,

b) Laws are not innate, or the instructional the theory about laws

c) The theory of observable, orderly symmetries,

d) Laws are conventional.

In the first theory, the scientific law discovers the innate why others
are related to other phenomena. In other words, it is unsolved how the
original law is to be interpreted. The other problem with this theory is
that the internal relationships and characteristics of an action are
considered absolutely relative. Characteristics that are innate and
internal to one process may be external in another.

The instructional theory, which we approve of, states that there is no
extended rope to pull phenomena after each other, and prove that
Phenomenon A must definitely be followed by Phenomenon B. We have failed
to directly observe the essential relationships that form the laws of
nature even with the most accurate tools. We know that the essential
relationships that make up the laws of nature are not mental, and that
the laws of nature show each scientist various constants that science is
based on. Will there be a day when we can observe these constants? Thus,
the best of these theories on the nature of the laws of nature is the
instructional one, for it accounts for the more important hows and whys.

According to the instructional theory, the universe and everything in it
are constantly changing, for God's blessing flows into it from the world
of supernatural. Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi) has supported the
instructional theory in these verses of his poetry:

<p dir="rtl">
قرنها بگذشت و اين قـرن نُويســت ماه آن ماه اســت و آب آن آب نيسـت
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
عدل آن عدل است و فضل آن فضل هم ليک مستبدل شــد اين قـرن و امــم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قـــرن ها بر قرنها رفـت ای همــام ويــن معانــی بر قــرار و بــر
دوام
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
شد مبــدّل آب ايـن جــو چند بــار عکـس مـــاه و عکــس اختـر برقرار
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
پــس بنايــش نيســت بر آب روان بلکـــــه بر اقطـــار اوج آسمـــان
</p>

*(Many centuries and eras have gone by, but the reflection of the moon
shining on the stream of times is still coming from the same moon.
Justice, for instance, is still as it was; greatness has remained
unchanged. It is only the centuries and the people who have changed. O
Noble One! Centuries have gone by, but truly original human concepts and
virtues are still standing firm. The water in the stream of the universe
keeps changing by the moment - not even two moments are the same - but
the picture reflected upon the water from the moon and the stars (the
truth) is firm and steady. Thus, the basis of the reflection of the moon
and the stars cannot be on the water; it must be connected to higher
things.)*

In fact, Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi) is pointing out that time
passes us by, relationships change and peoples and social trends evolve,
some disappear forever, but the basic concepts and truth about man and
the universe prevail firmly.

The instructional theory believes that the creatures of the universe do
not innately possess the ability to continue their existence, but
receive it from a higher, greater world. In other words, the fact that A
must have the Characteristic B, or B must be the result of A is not
their innate quality, but divine blessing. Let us quote from Albert
Einstein: “I consider God the protector of laws.”

And also from Max Plank:

“A physicist's ideal is to externally discover the truth; yet, his sole
tool - his devices of measurement - never tells him anything about the
real world. Measures are merely doubtful messages to him. As Helmholtz
believes, they are signals the real world sends him, and he tries to
make a conclusion from them, just like a linguist attempting to read a
document found from a lost civilization. In order to achieve any
results, the linguist must accept the fact that the document has some
meaning. Likewise, the physicist has to base his work on the rule that
the universe follows laws we cannot comprehend.”

Bertrand Russell believes that by imagining that the realities about the
universe come from another eternal world, we will have a pleasant
picture of our world.

2- How Scientific Laws Are Discovered: the first factor in discovering
scientific laws is the concrete belief and intelligent understanding of
the fact that no phenomenon in the world is without a law. If a
scientist tends to

discover the laws of nature, he must basically have faith in the harmony
in the universe. As Einstein writes:

“ For even the slightest rays of intelligence and logic to be able to
shine on the world, deep faith that the universe is harmonious is
essential. A burning desire to understand is necessary. Men like Newton
and Kepler undoubtedly had such faith and desire.”

Ever since man became capable of relating to other creatures from a
scientific point of view, his primary motive for discovering the laws of
the universe arose.

The steps the mind must go through in order to discover a scientific law
are:

a) The communication between his senses and tools with the subject.

b) Experiencing and completing the observation by means of the senses
and technical tools. In this step, trial and error observations are
carried out until the scientific law is established.

c) In the third step, the mind proceeds to consider the puzzling points,
and deletes those that do not comply with the law studied.

d) The last step includes a general theorem in the mind of the
researcher forming a law, abstracting itself from observable cases in
the world.

3- The generality of the scientific law, and its origin: A theorem
cannot become a scientific law unless it applies to a great many cases.
The generality of a law originates from the continual order dominating
nature, which brings about effects and similar results. The two factors
that influence the generality of scientific law are:

a) The generality of the characteristics found in all creatures, like
the law of self-preservation. The generality of the characteristics
among creatures is a result of the experiencing and generalizing all
cases concerning the subject. For example, in order to study
reproduction in living creatures, all animals must be studied. Direct
observation of every case is, however, quite difficult, but observing a
large number of them can lead to a generality, and turn the hypothesis
into a scientific theorem.

Experiencing each single case is neither possible nor necessary. By
realizing the original identity and elements of a subject, a general
theory about its cases can be presented. For instance, when we discover
the identity of water by means of knowing its basic elements, we may
consider it as a scientific theory, and present general principles on
it. Nevertheless, the mere discovery of identity is not sufficient in
order to discover all forms of a kind, and all characteristics must be
taken into consideration. General knowledge about a certain animal, for
example, cannot mean knowing about all animals.

b) Abstracting the facts about the universe and understanding how they
are related; we call this abstract composition, which involves mental
activity aiming to find the identity of facts not needing observation of
all cases, like understanding numbers, geometric shapes and the
principles concerning them. 2 × 2 = 4, for instance, is a result of
abstracting numbers and the relationships among them.

4- The criteria for being scientifically valuable: any fact identifiable
according to the following aspects can be considered as a scientific
subject. In other words, the characteristics a scientific subject should
have are:

a) The possibility of determining its identity and characteristics,

b) The possibility of studying the conditions which promote and /or
inhibit its occurrence,

c) The feasibility of studying and logically calculating its effects and
results,

d) The feasibility of distinguishing cyclic phenomena (like the four
seasons) from those phenomena that are related by means of a
cause-and-effect relationship,

e) The phenomenon should be comparable to its similar and opposite
cases,

f) The principles and laws governing scientific laws (such as the
impossibility of combining opposites in philosophy, two opposites
neutralizing each other, and many others) should apply to it.

Thus, many natural phenomena like mines and trees, and also social,
economic, political, and psychological topics, and even valued facts
such as justice and duty can be studied scientifically.

Therefore, higher facts like dignity, virtue, duty, justice, etc, can be
investigated scientifically in the same manner as physical phenomena
can. Justice, for example, can be studied scientifically if these six
characteristics are taken into consideration:

1- Justice is a topic that has a definite identity and can be defined.
The identity of justice is “behaving in compliance with law,” or in fact
the innate quality that prevents man from breaking the law.

2- Justice follows the cause-and-effect law. It cannot occur in man's
life without a cause. Justice cannot deviate from the cause-and-effect
law.

3- Justice keeps man away from committing evil deeds and falling into
psychological disorders, and can also make his free will flourish. It is
impossible to imagine man without this quality, which motivates him
toward the good and dutifulness.

4- It is not possible to have justice without its effects and results.
Justice certainly brings about outcomes, which must be identifiable, for
justice itself is identifiable, too. For example, scientific research
can show that just people are well-balanced, confident, and enjoy a good
reputation in their society.

5- As other scientific topics, justice is also comparable with similar
cases. Justice can be compared with other human virtues.

6- Certain conditions and circumstances are required before justice can
embrace reality. Not everything can provide those conditions, which is
also the case for any physical phenomenon to occur, too.

The Definitions of Philosophy
-----------------------------

Ever since thought and intellect arose, many definitions for philosophy
were presented throughout the East and the West. Having studied them, we
will discuss three groups of them:

1- Philosophy means, Efforts towards knowing the causes, effects, and
the analytical and combination flows in a problem. Once a question is
posed

about a problem, the first step toward its philosophical analysis has
been taken.

2- Philosophy is the mental activity in these five domains:

a) The fundamental principles of knowledge: Is there any reality if we
ignore the ego? Can realities really be known? If they can, how and how
much?

b) Issues prior to the formation of scientific theorems, such as the
objects in the observable world can be separated up to a point where
further separation is impossible. This philosophical perception had been
accepted before science had discovered the facts about atoms and
molecules. Is the order in the universe in its particles - where laws
are abstracted - or is it non-innate and non-innate, and laws are
conventional?

c) The problems that arise after making contact between scientific laws
and facts. For instance, when science discusses the various kinds of
movement in nature, the movement of creatures can be used as the basis
of a series of philosophical problems.

d) Problems that arise simultaneous with the arising or continuing of
scientific theorems, such as the mortality or immortality of matter,
time, space, and the basics about values and virtues. In any period,
with our scientific knowledge reaching a certain level, such theorems
and concepts come into the eye of human thought, too.

e) Other issues that fall into philosophical discussions concern the
characteristics of the “self,” and its supernatural activities, like the
survival of the “ego” throughout man's life, the constant qualities of
the human self or the abstraction of generalities and numbers and
concepts that balanced, sound minds are capable of.

3- The knowledge caused by “scientific understanding, guesses,
innovations, inspirations and observations,” is called philosophy. For
example, science shows the order in nature, and the perceptions we get
from guessing prove that natural flows are not baseless; both of them
show that the universe must have a meaning and a highly significant
rhythm. Some people realize the glory and elegance of nature by means of
evidence and observation, which is also a form of philosophical
perception.

The Principles of Philosophical Systems
---------------------------------------

Philosophical systems are based on two kinds of principles:

1- Established principles that prove philosophical systems, and are two
kinds:

a) Principles that have established themselves in Eastern and Western
philosophical schools throughout the history of human thought, such as
Aristotelian philosophy eras ago, medieval abstraction principles, and
positivist philosophies nowadays.

b) Established principles that are dynamic and unlimited, like the
principle of the necessity of discovering and knowing realities,
perfection-seeking and greatness-seeking by man, which is one of
significance in philosophy.

2- The principles and mental activity of the intellectuals based on pure
reasoning, abstraction and principles of imagination. Sometimes an
intellectual's perceptions so strongly dominate his spiritual states
that they

can even fatalistically justify his thoughts, and consider them as
absolute. For instance, philosophers like Machiavelli and Hobbes
believed that the human nature is pure evil with such certainty and
realism that they could not imagine anything else to be true.

The intellectual is deceived by the fatalistic justification of the
domination of his hidden spiritual levels. Some intellectuals like
Machiavelli and Hobbes believe so firmly that the human nature is pure
evil that it had occupied all of their mental states, becoming their
internal, active element; they were so firm in their claim that it seems
they had created man themselves.

We should not think that all intellectuals produce their thoughts
regardless of all absolutes or imaginations. Sometimes the intellectual
becomes so passionately prejudiced about an issue that it controls his
spirit deeply, making him ignore some realities.

The Criterion for a Subject Being Scientific or Philosophical
-------------------------------------------------------------

It is the researcher or the observer's approach that determines whether
a subject is scientific or philosophical. How observers see the
relationship between the realities and facts in the universe can
influence the research - in fact, this relationship can define the
individual's investigation as being scientific, philosophical, or
imaginary.

The scientific or philosophical nature depends, in other words, on how
the observer relates to the reality. If he pays attention to the
superficial aspects of the subject, his knowledge will be scientific; if
he focuses on the principles and fundamentals of knowledge concerning
the subject, his knowledge will be philosophical. There are four
principles about this:

1- The realities and facts in the universe are interrelated. In order to
scientifically study a subject, it must be studied clearly determined
from various aspects and points of view. Thus, any scientific theorem
involves a reflection of the selection and determination of a subject
(realities current in the external world) and serious efforts to explore
aspect or aspects of the focused current reality.

2- The universe is very vast, and man's mental and spiritual activities
are greatly varied; thus, the contents of scientific theorems should
never be regarded as absolute and continual explorations and research is
always needed. As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi says,

<p dir="rtl">
تازه مــیگيـر و کهـن را مــیسپار که هر امسـالت فــزون است از سـه پار
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
چيست نشانیّ آنک، هست جهانی دگر نو شــدن حال ها رفتن اين کهنه هاست
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
روز نو و شـــام نـو، دام نو و بــاغ نـو هر نفس انديشه نو، نو خوشی و
نو عناست
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
عالم چون آب جوست بسته نمايد، وليک مــيرود و مــيرسد نونو، اين از
کجاسـت
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
نو زکجا مـي رسد؟ کهنه کجـا ميرود؟ گرنـه ورای نظــر عالـــم بی
منتهــاست
</p>

(Don't let yourself get stuck in the past and the old; remember that
your current year is worth more than your last three years altogether.
What does all that exists indicate? Another world. The newness of the
present is the fading away of the old. New days, new nights, new
problems, new gardens;

each breath signals a new idea in new clothes. Though the universe may
seem limited like a stream, but it continually flows on; where does it
originate from? Where does all the new come from? Where does all the old
go off to? Indeed, beyond what we see lies an endless world.)

3- From any scientific theorem, many analytical and combination theorems
can be derived. In other words, when a reality is determined as a
scientific theorem for an observer, it can become the starting point for
his progress to analyze and combine things and make a great deal of
scientific theorems.

4- No clear issue exists without there being theoretical theorems around
it, and vice versa. Thus, no theoretical issue is without an apparent
theorem, either. The farther you get from the issue you are
scientifically studying, the slower your progress will be after some
time, for the path will get darker and darker.

A Scholar's Philosophical Rise
------------------------------

Provided that the developed thinker is not confined to pre-established
mental and spiritual principles, he can discover delicate scientific
theorems by means of his effort, accuracy and passion, and descend to
exploring the highest secrets of the universe. Such advance can happen
in both purely natural sciences and also the humanities. For instance,
Niels Bohr, the renowned physicist, had to consult the philosophy of the
ancient Chinese intellectual, Laozi, and use one of his philosophical
principles:

“In the great theatre of existence, we are both actors and spectators.”

Another scientist who explored many of the amazing secrets of the
universe and the relationship between nature and the supernatural was
Max Planck. He said:

“Tending to believe that powerful, mysterious factors are at work in
this world is one of the most significant characteristics of our times.”

“The fact that while researching on the phenomena and processes of
nature we try to omit all 'ifs' and 'maybes' and reach what is
essentially necessary, shows that our endeavors are continually
dependent upon something vital far beyond the relative - something
absolute, eternal. That is what we want to reach. I believe that this is
not a quality only of physics, but all sciences.”

Hence, we see how purely scientific theorems can provide the grounds to
rise to the highest of philosophical and supernatural issues.

Researchers and scientists who possess deep insight and sharp
observation, like Albert Einstein and Max Planck, are able to see higher
aspects of the universe - things unintelligible to those who devote
themselves to nature. Nature scientists of pure mind and accurate
actions can use their knowledge of this world to reach “evidence about
the perfect absolute,” achieving a certain originality and brilliance.
Thus, these mountains, jungles and fields - though seeming to be obeying
purely natural laws - can be seen as meaningful parts of a meaningful
whole that possesses a great rhythm having made the ascend.

The Essence of Supernatural Knowledge
-------------------------------------

Supernatural knowledge is of crucial importance to man. The reasons for
this are:

a) Man's curiosity makes him not confine his study of the facts about
the world to the apparent relationships; he attempts to get into the
depth of the fact, and explore all their aspects.

b) Experimental sciences are not capable of answering all of man's
fundamental questions. The human mind tends to move from the details up
to the generalities, and explore the principles and foundations of the
facts about the world. Science cannot do him much help here.

c) If man's intense need to discover the fundamentals of the world is to
be fulfilled, and the anxiety created by the incapability of man in
solving the basic problems on knowledge is to be quenched, highly
supernatural concepts and issues are necessary.

We must keep in mind that the supernatural knowledge we believe
necessary is one that pays considerable attention to not only
intelligence and wisdom, but also the purification of the human will; it
prevents man from abusing his relationship with himself and the truth.
Supernatural knowledge defines the range, level and harmony of natural
sciences. Supernatural knowledge is not limited to the knowledge of the
facts about the world; it should discover what is useful to man's
development and emancipation. When supernatural knowledge does not
ignore the realities about human life, it will lead to these advantages:

1- Achieving such knowledge, man will regard the other sciences he has
as part of his supernatural knowledge;

2- It presents man with the principles and fundamentals of knowledge and
discovery, enabling him to find his ultimate aims.

3- Natural sciences identify the components of nature for us, but they
say nothing about the highest of its principles and the purpose of its
creation; supernatural knowledge, however, reveals not only the ultimate
principles and ends, but also provides man with the most elevated of
feelings and emotions. It shows him the highest aim of life. Despite all
the recent scientific advance, attention to the philosophy of life has
unfortunately not only not increased, but rather diminished.

4- If man defies supernatural knowledge, his knowledge will be limited
to phenomena and their inter-relations. He would ignore the discovery of
the real truth of what they all depend on.

5- Supernatural knowledge is higher than all forms of human knowledge,
not at their service, for it is not confined to the discovery of
short-lived events and mortal phenomena. “Supernatural knowledge, the
pinnacle of which is the knowledge of God, cannot be regarded as a
device.” It is far too high to be that. Without paying attention to
knowledge about God, man cannot make any spiritual advance.

Ever since late 17th century, the West has ignored the supernatural. The
viewpo­ints that have led to this ignorance are:

a) Auguste Comte - who divided the history of mankind into divine,
philosophical and scientific periods - and some others believe that we
are living in the era of science, not philosophy, so there is no need
for talk about the supernatural. We must say that if philosophical
issues were unnecessary,

there would not be so much discussion about the highest of philosophical
matters between philosophers during the last few centuries. Comte has
categorized history based on human cognition.

For instance, he believes that during the divine period, when man was
unable to understand the reasons underlying natural phenomena, he
assumed that they had supernatural reasons, but now that man has
discovered how they happen, he does not need supernatural elaboration
for physical phenomena. Yet, understanding philosophical issues requires
a great deal of mental effort, and man has to be at the peak of his
mental development - which Comte believes is our era - to understand
them. Furthermore, if we accept Comte's categorization, we cannot
logically interpret the philosophical schools of thought before Jesus
Christ was born, or even the medieval ones.

b) Another reason why the supernatural has been ignored is that man
feels he has no need for advanced philosophical issues now that science
has made immense progress; since he has been able to make contact with
phenomena by means of scientific developments for a few centuries, he
thinks there is no room for philosophical discussions any more. Those
who support this belief have forgotten that experimental sciences are
too limited to be able to answer certain philosophical questions.

For example, the human mind is interested in moving from the specific to
the general and vice versa, which is beyond what science can do for him.

c) Combining scientific methods with philosophical ones by philosophers
of the past also led to the neglect toward the supernatural. In the
past, scientific and philosophical problems were intertwined, and
philosophers did not necessarily use scientific methods to solve
scientific problems, so some people have come to think that only
scientific methods are to be used for studying phenomena, and philosophy
should be put aside totally. They ignore the important fact that
separating science from philosophy and all their issues and problems
does not omit one of them in favor of the other. Philosophy deals with
things that science can never consider.

The supernatural should be protected from superficial approach.
Philosophy is not a science easily presentable to people. However
simplified advanced philosophical issues may become, they will only
torture the average mind, for they are far above it to be fathomed.

These days, some intellectuals have fallen into superficial approach,
and try to present the highest of philosophical concepts in a way the
public can enjoy. Although presenting thoughts in a simple way is
important, it should not fall into superficiality, where even
supernatural issues can be made understandable to the public. Having
studied some philosophical books and terms briefly, some people think
they can easily understand them, so they begin giving opinions and
remarks about it.

The Analytical Method or the Combination Method?
------------------------------------------------

One of the issues in scientific and philosophical discussions and
debates is which method is more suitable: analytical or combination.
Some philosophers defend the analytical method, believing that a
phenomenon must be analyzed into its components up to a point where
further separation is not possible, and then it can be studied and
explored.

Bertrand Russell, for instance, was one of the intellectuals who named
his method “logical atomism.” He believes, “The only label I have ever
given to method is 'logical atomism,' although I have always avoided
being labeled with something. I believe that logical atomism means the
only way of discovering the nature of objects is analysis as
exhaustively as possible; the resulting components are 'logical atoms' -
or that's what I've named them - for they are not small physical
particles, [but] components of ideas, outside the issues concerned with
the structure of things.”

The problem with purely analytical knowledge and discovery is that it
studies a phenomenon totally regardless of other phenomena. In other
words, it does not see each component as related to the other beings and
phenomena it is surrounded by.

The analytical method is of importance in discovering facts about the
universe, but it is incapable of a full discovery. The combination
method can serve as its complementary.

Extreme applications of the combination method makes man cast doubt upon
the most obvious of realities, and be left with a scattered collection
of knowledge. Nowadays some people think that the analytical and
combination methods belong to scientific domains and the combination and
generalist approaches suit philosophy. We must keep in mind that the
scientific method is not solely analytical, nor is the philosophical
method entirely combination. A harmony between the two methods is what
can provide man with accurate knowledge.

The analytical method is suitable for studying sets where the components
have no interactive relation with each other. In other words, the
analytical method is best when if by discovering each component,
accurate knowledge is achieved. But when the components interact with
each other and their combination results in a new phenomenon, the
analytical method does not suffice. Merely mentioning that water
consists of oxygen and hydrogen, or that salt is a combination of sodium
and chlorine is not enough - merely identifying hydrogen and oxygen
tells us nothing about the qualities and characteristics of water.

Knowledge gained by the analytical method, therefore, ignores the
combinatory characteristics of the whole.

The problem with the analytical method is that having separated the
whole and studying each component, the researcher considers each
component as absolute. In other words,

The most serious harm the analytical method can do to knowledge is that
by following this method, the thinker, having separated and analyzed the
whole, a component becomes the absolute reality of his study, affecting
everything else.

As an example, George Sarton believes that, “The history of science is
one of the major parts of the spiritual history of human beings, and the
other major parts are the history of art and religion.” On the other
hand, he has said that, “In order to account for man's progress, the
history of science should be the basis of the explanation.” In fact, he
is following an analytical method; therefore, he is considering the
history of science, a mere part of the history of human evolution, as
the absolutely basic part.

The Differences between Science and Philosophy
----------------------------------------------

Some of the differences between science and philosophy are:

1- As Whitehead believes, “Philosophy searches for generalizations that
determine the entire reality of the truth, without which no reality
could escape being abstract. Science, on the other hand, creates
abstraction, content with knowing only some basic aspects of the entire
truth, just a relative part of it.”

2- Science cannot provide us with absolute dominance over the universe;
each scientist can discover only aspects of realities, whereas by means
of philosophy one can dominate the knowledge of the whole universe.

3- Philosophical systems are more stable than scientific systems, for
they are based upon principles and generalizations far beyond the
interpretations that form science. Philosophy has many fixed principles,
such as the existence of realities in the world outside the mind,
movement in the universe, objects for objects' sake and objects for the
self's sake, the reliance of variables on unchangeables, and the
uniformism of the mind.

4- In philosophy, we can achieve a form of certainty mixed with some
vagueness, but in science we cannot achieve any certainty because of the
influence of factors like the tools of knowledge.

There are a great many subjects which science fails to discover, such as
the final value of good and evil, or in general any phenomenon that has
absolute value and cannot be measured like natural issues; issues like
absolute reality, absolute nonexistence, etc are also among them.”

Philosophy is putting all its efforts into finally solving problems that
have existed since the earliest times. In other words, philosophy still
endeavors to discover the truth about philosophical matter, absolute
values, the relationship between man and the universe, and the extent of
the mind's judgment in realities. Another part of philosophy tends to
understand general principles including various scientific results.

Despite the disputes scientists and philosophers have, they need each
other. Contemporary philosophers believe that science can help them by
proving the preliminaries to some philosophical proofs, and also by
providing new problems for philosophical analysis.

The philosopher knows things that the scientist can neither deny nor
study on by means of scientific methods. However, the sometimes the
scientist becomes concerned with the possible necessity of gaining such
philosophical knowledge and their influence on scientific explanations
or the foundations of those explanations.

For example, when a physicist discusses movement in physics or when a
chemist studies interactive movements in chemistry, each have a certain
concept of movement in his mind; likewise the philosopher attempts to
perceive a kind of movement that involves everything. When the physicist
or chemist assume that the meaning of movement according to the
philosopher is vaster than what physics and chemistry (or experimental
sciences, in general) offers, they may conclude that by taking the
philosophical meaning of movement into consideration, they may both
discover new meanings and even develop their approaches.

Science also explains various forms of physical matter with all their
specific characteristics to us. The flow of human thought, however, does
not stop at that; it attempts to discover the truth that can be the
absolute matter in all external objects, and then come to a general
relationship regarding movement. Thus, it is in such philosophical
problems where science seems to be at the service of philosophy.

The philosopher knows quite well that science has discovered some of the
realities and facts of the universe, and that scientific contact with
facts - if accurate - is more reliable than the philosophical one, but
purely scientific knowledge cannot bring us to the discovery of all
components and levels of the universe. In other words, the mind may even
playfully inhibit the progress of thoughts, so using science whenever
possible is necessary. The philosopher should, however, keep in mind
that his scientific contact with facts can only reveal to him some
limited aspects of the facts, and he should never expect science to
introduce him to all components and levels of the universe.

The Classification of Philosophy
--------------------------------

Some philosophers have preferred a geographical classification:

1- Eastern philosophy

2- Western philosophy

They have then proceeded to point out a series of characteristics for
each category, sometimes even making them conflict. Here are five points
of difference between Western and Eastern philosophy:

a) Eastern philosophy focuses on supernatural realities, but Western
philosophy is more naturalistic, focusing on the physically observable.

b) Eastern philosophy makes use of pure thought and reasoning when
studying the facts and realities of the universe, whereas Western
philosophy - particularly since the Renaissance - uses the senses and
other technological devices.

c) In order to discover general principles accounting for the universe,
Eastern philosophy takes into consideration the post-experimental
principles, whereas Western philosophy insists on using experimental
methods.

d) Unlike Eastern philosophy, Western philosophy tends to criticize and
reconsider general philosophical fundamentals and principles of the
past.

e) Western philosophy emphasizes that when discussing man and the
universe, “what there is” and “what there should be” be separated, but
Eastern philosophy does not.

Such an approach and distinction between Western and Eastern
philosophies is not acceptable. The issues thinkers and intellectuals
face depends on the conditions and circumstances they are surrounded
with, so any intellectual or thinker may come up with the same issues
and problems as his peers when facing the same conditions. If the
conditions make him feel it absolutely crucial to discuss time and
movement, for example, any other intellectual or thinker would do the
same feeling the necessity.

The important point is the intellectual's mind becoming engaged with the
problem - if this happens the intellectual will start his work on it,
whether belonging to Western or Eastern philosophy. Industrial advances,
changes in

social relationships and the rise of a new meaning of Epicurean freedom
led to new issues in the West, the study of which even infiltrated their
philosophy and created special philosophical principles and basics. If
such phenomena had arisen in the East, however, the same would
definitely have happened to Eastern philosophy, too.

Th­e points of criticism on the characteristics of thought systems in
Western and Eastern philosophies are:

1- The claim that Eastern philosophy focuses on non-physical facts and
Western philosophy pays more attention to materialistic issues is not
acceptable. Although Western philosophy did find some tendency toward
naturalism thanks to Francis Bacon, many Western thinkers did not follow
it. In the twentieth century, many Western thinkers focused on the
supernatural, and their naturalistic tendencies never prevented this.
Einstein, Planck, Bergson and Whitehead had a comprehensive approach to
the issues about man, both natural and supernatural.

2- Stating that Eastern philosophy is based upon pure reasoning and
intelligence and Western philosophy is founded on experimental methods
shows how ignorant one can be toward the developments of thought systems
in the West.

If the West has paid more attention to naturalism - which certainly
follows experimental methods - throughout the recent centuries, it is
due to the needs of those countries; if the East also felt the need to
study the qualities and characteristics of vegetables and plants and
physical and chemical phenomena, they would have used such methods too,
rather than the al-vahed theory, which states that only a single, unique
thing can arise from the nature of a single, unique thing. In the early
stages of the development of Islamic culture, when Muslims paid a lot of
attention to naturalism, experimental methods were put to frequent use.

Scientists like Zachariah Razi, Avicenna and Hassan ibn Heissam used
laboratory devices in fields such as chemistry, physics and medicine.
Neither Islamic thinkers nor Western intellectuals, however, were
ignorant toward the basic principles of philosophy, and the necessity of
abstraction and mental generalization, for without them they could never
have abstract natural laws from the order and harmony dominant over the
universe.

3- Another point of criticism is the statement that Western philosophy
shows little emphasis on general concepts and fundamentals, whereas
Eastern philosophy searches for general laws that interpret the
universe. Positivism - which aimed to categorize sciences and give
philosophy a positivist aspect - failed in the West, and was criticized
by many Western philosophers, who turned to non-experimental methods. No
intellectual can defy a series of mental fundamentals and still believe
in observable facts that cannot be analyzed without those fundamentals.

4- The claim that there is no criticism or reconsideration in Eastern
philosophy, whereas Western philosophy criticizes and reconsiders the
fundamental philosophies of the past quite often is not correct. All
books on Eastern philosophy include a criticism of the thoughts and
ideas presented before. Islamic thinkers and intellectuals have never
been mere followers of their predecessors' thoughts.

For instance, though Farabi and Avicenna have accepted some of the
philosophical ideas of Aristotle and Plato, they never completely
followed them. In his book**Asfar** , Mollasadra has discussed and
criticized many of the philosophical thoughts before him, and presented
new ideas, too. If Eastern philosophy were truly obedient of prior
thoughts, there would be no valuable works like
Qazali's**Tahafat-ul-phalasefe** or Ibn Rushd's**Tahafat-ul-tahafat** .

We must remember, however, that philosophers have also sometimes turned
to indirect criticism; in other words, they have criticized the thoughts
of others alongside presenting their own ideas. Some of them have even
interpreted the thoughts of other philosophers, for sometimes a thinker
cannot properly word his own thoughts, but another intellectual may be
able to correctly interpret them in a better way. This has been an
important step toward eliminating the disputes between philosophers.
Furthermore, respecting others' views is a highly significant principle
in scientific and philosophical research; even in the West, there are
both inconsiderate figures like Bertrand Russell and also quite morally
well-adjusted ones like Whitehead and Planck.

5- It also incorrect to say that in Western philosophy there is much
attention to making a distinction between “what there is” and “what
there should be” when discussing mankind and the universe, whereas
Eastern philosophy shows little emphasis on it.

First, we cannot make any separation between what exists and what there
should exist concerning man, for human life is drowned in an ocean of
“propers.”

Second, such a distinction is merely an excuse for some people to make a
negative approach toward morals and religion which are the basic factors
of human development.

Third, we cannot speak of “what there should be” without discovering the
existence of man and activating his positive potentials; this is what
neither Western nor Eastern philosophy knows how to do.

The Advantages of the Collaboration between Science and Philosophy
------------------------------------------------------------------

The cooperation between science and philosophy can lead to the following
advantages in favor of human knowledge:

1- Most scientists of experimental sciences believe that philosophers
generalize, so they live in a world apart from the one scientists spend
their time discovering; this is why scientists sometimes consider
philosophers' work as worthless.

2- By means of his experimental information, the scientist tries to
analyze unities; the philosopher, on the other hand, tends to achieve
comprehensive unities. Cooperation between the two can lead to even more
comprehensive unities in science.

3- Due to technological advances and changes in scientific aims, science
is always changing; philosophical principles, on the other hand, are
fixed, and provide the best tool for quenching man's mental desire for
combining. The generalizations philosophy includes can save science from
falling into a

scattered mess, and prevent it from becoming trapped in its own
technological devices.

4- By making contact with science, philosophy can study and reconsider
some of its fundamentals and principles. For example, science can help
revise the law of causality and its details, thus eliminating its
vagueness.

5- Science has made amazing progress in discovering some parts of
nature. If these advances are put to use on the path toward human
unity - which philosophy is responsible for - man can make correct use
of nature, and move from “what there is” to “what there should be.”
Science and philosophy should join ships to solve the problems of
mankind. If the scientist and the philosopher are to have stronger
cooperation, they should first acknowledge each other and then follow
these principles:

a) The scientist and the philosopher should both know that analyzing the
components of nature for the purpose of scientific research does not
damage their interrelation, for:

<p dir="rtl">
اگر يک ذرّه را برگيری از جای خلل يابـد همه عالـم سـراپای
</p>

*(Disturb one particle, and the harmony of the whole universe will be
disturbed.)*

b) Scientists should avoid statements like, “It's definitely this, and
nothing else,” for the universe is quite open, and man's limited senses
and devices and internal ideals shouldn't let make such generalizations.

c) Scientists should accept the fact that there is a start and an end to
the universe, even though science cannot verify them as observable
physical phenomena. The scientist should not fall into such a
superficial approach in which:

<p dir="rtl">
ما ز آغاز و ز انجام جهان بی خبـريم اول و آخر اين کهنه کتاب افتاده
است
</p>

*(We know nothing about the beginning and the end of this world; it
seems that it is an ancient, great book whose first and last pages have
been lost.)*

d) The scientist should realize that his contact with facts is done
through his senses and experimental devices, so he can never directly
achieve contact with all the facts of the universe:

<p dir="rtl">
ای خدا بنمای تو هر چيز را آن چنان که هست در خدعه سرا
</p>

*(O God, Who is aware of all obvious and hidden! Reveal everything in
this deceitful world as it truly is.)*

**Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi)**

e) The scientist should realize that unless he understands and
acknowledges the existence of divine wisdom and philosophy in the
universe, he cannot claim to have gained any - not even the slightest -
knowledge of the universe, for his knowledge and sensory and mental
activities are components of the universe themselves, and should be
added to the components of nature. The wise human should say that:

<p dir="rtl">
کاشکی هستـی زبانـــی داشتــی تا ز هستـــان پرده ها برداشتـی
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هر چه گويی ای دم هستــی از آن پرده ای ديگـر بر آن بستــی، بدان
</p>

*(If only the universe could speak, and would thus reveal all its
secrets, for all the theorizing, imagination, reasoning and
contradicting made by man about the universe cannot possibly provide him
with complete knowledge about the universe, for they are merely
phenomena and parts of the universe.)*

**Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi)**

f) The scientist and the philosopher should believe in God so that they
can interpret the flow of natural laws and the movement in them.

Following the above principles can not only provide the grounds for
science and philosophy to cooperate, but also make them both work
together on the path of wisdom. If science can help man discover one or
many components of the world inside or outside, philosophy can show us
the general principles dominant over the universe.

Wisdom and philosophy are able to make the human soul flourish. If
science and philosophy were the two wings of a bird, wisdom would be its
soul, which can take it from “what there is” to “what there should be.”
It is wisdom that provides man with the truly original feeling of being.

The Humanities
--------------

The humanities are the sciences concerned with man and various aspects
and approaches related to him - that is why it is not limited to a
particular field of science. Every science studies man from a certain
point of view. Politics, for instance, involves the study of “man from
the point of view of his management of social life in order to achieve
the most desired goals,” or economics concerns man from the viewpoint of
his material life management and adjustment.

The humanities can be categorized into seven groups “according to their
various aspects in relation to the central point of the study of man -
the human character:”

1- The humanities that concern man's natural life, like biology,
physiology, pathology, and man's relationship with his surroundings.

2- The humanities that relate to history, such as the natural history of
man, the political history of man, etc.

3- The humanities related to economics, like work and its values,
production and distribution, economic development, etc.

4- Those that are related to man's social life, like sociology,
anthropology, management, politics, law, etc.

5- The humanities that pertain to man's evolutional “propers,” like
culture, civilizations, literature, aesthetics, art, etc.

6- The humanities that concern man's mental potentials and activities,
like psychology, psychiatry and identifying faculties such as the
memory, imagination, will, choice, genius and discovery.

7- The humanities that are related to values or virtues of individual or
social evolution, like morals, religion and positive mysticism.

The above seven forms of the humanities should move on the path that can
take the human character - the “self” - to perfection. The human
character and its needs and potentials should always be the main factor
in the humanities. Alas, it is not so nowadays, and the humanities have
fallen into merely considering phenomena; they study the effects – human

behaviors - instead of the real truth. Today's humanities are obsessed
with statistics instead of scientifically accurate discussions. Ignoring
the human “self” and its pivotal role in human life has led to these
effects:

a) Important phenomena in man - like emotions, thought, intelligence,
and will - have been studied without taking into consideration the
influence of the “self” in managing them. Due to the neglect toward the
human “self,” some scholars of the humanities have even come to ignore
issues like thought, intelligence, imagination, will and freedom of
choice, and only study their resulting behaviors.

b) Some great values that are innately planted inside man have been
ignored, like religion, morals and mysticism. Thus, ignorance toward the
“self” has caused little attention to be paid for it to flourish, which
is brought about by moral values and the sense of duty; the final goal
of the “self,” being attracted by divinity, has been forgotten.

c) Misinterpretation of free will - flourishing freedom on the path to
development and perfection - is a result of studying free will without
considering the “self's” dominance over the positive and negative poles.
Ignoring the “self” leads to misinterpretations of free will, and also
other effects like nihilism and alienation. In other words, man's
advances in providing his own luxury, he will feel totally void.
Ignoring the “self” arises from two factors: one is hedonism and
selfishness, and the other is various thoughts and beliefs, among which
the following are the ones that have caused the major deviations in the
humanities:

1- Extreme naturalism: Man has never been moderate in his mental
endeavors. Intellectuals both past and present have damaged evolutional
flow of science. Due to their extreme naturalism, scientists and
intellectuals have focused on analyzing physical phenomena and issues
that are measurable, and pay little attention to the essence of life and
the human “self.”

2- The theory of the evolution of kinds, presented by scientists like
Darwin, and Lemark which brought great harm to the greatness and sacred
value of the human “self.”

3- The theory of the originality of power, supported by intellectuals
like Nietzsche. Although power is the primary condition for man's
intelligible life in both domains of individual and social life, it must
be the power with which each person respects the right for others to
live too, not enslave them to his own advantage. People like Nietzsche
have in fact interpreted themselves, not power and its usage.

Do these supporters of the essence of power mean to describe that up to
now it has been the powerful who have controlled life, or are they
commanding the powerful to do so?

They cannot be claiming to be describing the truth, for ignoring all the
humanitarian deeds, the sacrifices human beings have made for each
other, the resistances they have shown against atrocities and their
struggle for freedom throughout history would mean ignoring the whole of
history altogether! Thus, we must say that these supporters in fact
express their own internal ideals and wishes, not a real historic trend.

4- Freud's extremist theory concerning the sexual instinct also degraded
the value of the human “self” and human moral virtues. Some of Freud's
theories on various forms of sleep and his classifications of man's
conscious (consciousness and unconsciousness) are considerably useful,
but his negative approach toward man's qualities and mental greatness
and also his misinterpretation of morals and religion deserve criticism;
these theories caused a great deal of confusion and misjudgment among
the simpleminded.

In brief, the humanities should move on the path of correctly
interpreting the “self,” and also respond to these six questions:

a) Who am I? b) Where have I come from? c) Where have I come to? d) Who
am I with? e) Why have I come here? f) Where do I go from here?

The Necessary Aims of the Philosophy of Science

Other philosophers of science generally focus on the methodology of
science, and are not concerned with issues like the duties of science
and the scientist; there is, however, much more in the philosophy of
science. Philosophers concerning science should take value-based issues
into consideration, and determine the role of science in man's
evolutional life. In other words, the philosophy of science should not
ignore the relationship between science with man's life and the mission
it has regarding human evolution.

If the philosophy of science is to move toward the development of human
knowledge, it should undertake these duties:

1- The philosophy of science should express the necessity of the
proportionate relationship between the cause and the claim.

Unfortunately, some scientists, particularly in the humanities, do not
present suitable reasons for their claims, for example when an
intellectual claims that “man is evil by nature” or “man is pure good by
nature” merely by observing human behavior. If the scholars of the
humanities expressed the reasons for their claims clearly and properly,
man would never have to name the twentieth century 'The Century of
Alienation from Himself and Others,' nor would he become a tooth of
rigidly cold machinery with all the emotions, aesthetics and
humanitarian tendencies he possesses.

2- The philosophy of science must take any measures necessary to avoid
proving facts by means of statistics. Statistical proof and deduction in
scientific theorems needs careful evaluation. Statistical studies can
sometimes shows us an aspect of a phenomenon, but it should be never
considered as a form of absolute discovery. Statistics cannot identify a
phenomenon from various points of view.

3- The philosophy of science should make scientists realize that they
should consider science like rays that first light up the insides of the
scientists, then light up the whole society. In other words, the
philosophy of science is to remind scientists that science consists of
two values:

a) Science is innately brightly illuminated, and can enlighten man up
too, so it is innately valuable.

b) It also has value as a means; it can be used on the path of human
life, which can be quite suitable and advantageous, too.

4- The philosophy of science should reduce man's playfulness and
pretension concerning cognitive factors, like his senses, laboratory
tools and any device that can help man make contact with facts.

5- By discovering the relationship between various fields of science and
presenting general viewpoints on ideologies, the philosophy of science
can save researchers from being trapped in the vicious circles of their
own fields, and make them seek the fundamental goals of life.

In other words, the philosophy of science should make researchers
understand that although they may be experts in their own particular
field, they may know little about the domains beyond it, especially the
fundamentals and aim of life.

6- Though presenting methods of discovering facts in science is quite
difficult, here is how the philosophy of science can help:

a) Showing how to think correctly.

b) Evaluating entirely theorems that are presented to researchers in
form of theories.

c) Freeing researchers from inadvertent reliance on predefined
principles.

7- Determining the importance and criterion for preferring various
branches of science to one another. The philosophy should prove that
sciences are not equally important, and some may be preferred to others.
The philosophy of science can identify the criterion by means of vast
research and study. The criteria should be the intelligible life of
human beings.

8- Research on the philosophical origins and basics of each branch of
science and discovering their inter-relationships in order to discover
the greater unity of sciences.

9- “Revising continually the principles and laws of science and nature
and their corresponding tools,” the primary factor of which is
establishing a free relationship with the concerned principles and laws;
in other words, accepting them should not be as sacred as believing in
divine rules, so that man might feel free to put them to use at his
wish.

The philosophy of science should on one hand provide the crucial
necessity to constantly revise scientific laws and theories and on the
other hand show acceptable, mental methods for the revision. This does
not mean, however, that there is no fixed scientific law; what it means
is that there should be a modernist approach to various scientific
principles if different aspects of issues are to be considered.

The point that is of high significance and calls for complete awareness
and care is that even the mental aspects of science and knowledge -
which are considered as unchangeably correct - need continual
reconsideration; they must be exposed to the latest information and
discoveries every day, as if we were discovering them again and again,
for as we said, most scientific and industrial discoveries are caused by
the modernist dynamism and mental endeavor of thinkers who thought the
principles and laws of their times should have been revised.

The Philosophy of Science and the Humanities
--------------------------------------------

Nowadays, the philosophy of science is focused mostly upon natural
sciences rather than the humanities. The complexity of man's nature and

identity makes it highly difficult for the philosophy of science to deal
with. As we know, the humanities concern man, with all of his countless
physical and spiritual aspects, which are further influenced by his
will, decision, induction, imagination, wishes and ideals. Thus, we
cannot easily establish a set of laws and principles for the philosophy
of science to comment on their preliminaries, results, stability or
variability.

If we fit man's physical, spiritual, mental and psychological talents
and behaviors into rigid molds and frames, we will degrade man down to
the domain of other living beings, or even machines. Furthermore, no
science - not even philosophy - can be expected to be able to comment on
man as it would about abstract mathematical topics. Mathematical
activities are based upon quantity, whereas the humanities deal with
qualitative issues and a series of realities. There are two factors that
generally make the philosophy of science fail regarding the humanities:

● The difficulty of the identification of the laws and principles
governing man's four relationships. Although a great deal of effort has
been put into discovering humanity and human potentials and various
aspects, he general knowledge and agreement on it is quite little,
therefore the philosophy of science cannot successfully describe the
fundamentals and methods of the humanities.

● The diverse, contradicting reactions man shows in response to
different situations has also created complications for the philosophy
of science making progress in the domain of the humanities. Man
endeavors in many ways to fulfill his economic, legal and health needs,
and since many of these needs are fixed, the humanities are able to
describe basic economic needs and their consequences according to
general laws and principles.

They can be studied from a philosophical point of view, but having
fulfilled man's needs, it is impossible to foresee how the society will
then be. We cannot predict, for example, after the fulfillment of the
needs, whether people will definitely have a fine religion, culture,
politics and moral ethics or not. In other words, when man's specific
needs have been satisfied, his status regarding his four relationships -
with God, himself, the universe and others - cannot be defined.

Philosophical Doubt
-------------------

Doubt implies the equality in the possibility of proving or denying a
fact. Science, contrarily, is the undeniable discovery of facts. Doubt
is naturally invariable, so philosophical doubt is not much different
from other forms of doubt. When in doubt, the discoverer cannot discover
the facts fully, for he feels himself in an obscured darkness. In other
words, doubt can be described as a mixture of light and darkness. In
primary ignorance, there is only darkness, whereas in doubt, there is
some light. If man knows nothing at all, he will have no doubt, either.
Doubt arises when there are both unknowns and certainties concerning a
subject. We can categorize doubts into two groups:

1- Normal doubts, which arise from conflicts between reasons of the mind
and those of sensory observations. It is the result of mistakes and
lacks of knowledge man encounters in life, and has no solution except
stronger scientific endeavor.

2- Doubts concerning divine issues and man's highest of uncertainties,
like the supernatural. Such doubts cannot be resolved by thought - and
heading toward God is the only way to repel them.

Even in normal doubts, contact with God can relieve man of the
psychological stress and suffering it may lead to. As Jalal-addin
Muhammad Molawi (Rumi) says:

<p dir="rtl">
هر که را در جان خدا بنهد محک هر يقيــن را بازداند او ز شک
</p>

*(If man desires spiritual and mental development, God will be his best
guide through the darkness of life, creating a light in him that can be
the criterion that can distinguish fake from genuine and right from
wrong - in other words, certainty from doubt.)*

It is necessary to have a criterion that can distinguish certainty from
doubt. As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi believes, no matter how
scientifically advanced man becomes, he will not be able to purify his
soul completely of doubt. However, if he can relate his knowledge to
divine knowledge, his doubts will not upset him anymore, for his soul
will find a light that will serve as the criterion, providing him with
serenity and accuracy.

No matter how accurate man's senses and tools may be, he will never be
able to keep away from his doubts about his knowledge of the universe.
Therefore, this doubt will always remain with him: what are the
boundaries of his role as actor and spectator in the universe? However,
if we can somehow make contact between the drop-sized knowledge we have
to dive in the oceans of divine knowledge; then our doubts would no
longer make us suffer.

The factors leading to doubt can be divided into two groups:

a) Some believe that doubt arises from man's acts in discovering facts
about the world. In ancient times, some people believed strongly in
doubting, for they thought that errors of their senses influenced their
judgment of facts. Now that man knows about sensory mistakes, this
factor has been eliminated. The playfulness of the senses only leads to
doubt in facts when we cannot guide their playfulness toward our
observation's advantage; with technological advances now, we cannot
consider our senses to play a crucial role in creating doubt any longer.

b) Some others believe that since there are a few unknown things in the
world, and all components of the universe are interrelated,
philosophical doubts are inevitable.

There are shortcomings in this viewpoint, too. There are a great many
facts that are clear to man without the least shadow of a doubt;
furthermore, without accepting a series of unquestionable realities,
human knowledge would never be able to exist. On the other hand, having
doubt in some components does not conflict with belief in the whole
system.

For instance, we may see a painting full of hundreds of lines, shapes
and colors, and we are certain that the artist has had a definite
subject in his mind to use them for; however, we may not be able to
clearly understand all of them. If we believe in the overall harmony in
the world of nature, our

lack of knowledge about some phenomena and relationships do not
contradict the whole system.

Doubts vary in subject and the degree of certainty in the units
surrounding them. Here, we can divide doubts into deep and superficial
kinds. If our knowledge of a subject we are doubtful of is superficial,
our doubt about it will also be superficial. If we know a lot about it,
however - that is, if there is more light on the subject - we will be in
deep doubt. For instance, if we do not know much about whether “internal
freedom is variable or not,” we will have superficial doubt about it,
but the more we know about internal freedom and change, the more dark
points there will be, and the deeper our doubts will become.

The doubts thinkers and intellectuals have should not be considered to
be the same in all cases, either. Bertrand Russell, for example, had a
profound knowledge of logic, mathematics and Western philosophy, but he
did not know Eastern philosophy, psychology, ethics and religion; his
doubts on all of the mentioned topics cannot be regarded the same.

Doubt is a phenomenon essential to the progress of human culture and
civilization. Doubt about formal knowledge, however, must be for the
purpose of discovering newer facts and secrets, and it should not cause
man to cast doubt on everything. If he does not intend to discover new
knowledge, he may question the whole fundamentals of human thought
patterns. This is no longer philosophical doubt; it is a mental illness.
In facts, doubts should not be regarded as originally, innately
desirable, but rather as a means to escape decadent, archaic knowledge,
and make efforts to reach new facts. Some have referred to doubt as the
“means to flee from rigid, fixed laws and principles.”

Science and Philosophy in Intelligible Life
-------------------------------------------

Some scientists and intellectuals have done research on whether
realities like science, art, management and politics are virtually
valuable or not. Some believe that science, art and politics are
virtually desirable, whereas some others think that without mental
endeavors on the path of human life, they would be worthless. The value
of science and philosophy should be considered in connection with
intelligible life.

Intelligible life is the life in which all of man's positive aspects are
fulfilled, and as we know, one of the most fundamentals of positive
human aspects is seeking the supreme aim of life, that can interpret and
justify life intelligently and logically.

In natural life, science can intoxicate man and make power overcome
righteousness.

Science can cast light upon one aspect of man, granting him the power to
reveal facts. This kind of using this power is only possible in
intelligible life. We know that gaining awareness of facts is one thing,
and adjusting man's relationship with them is something totally
different, as being aware of many issues concerning righteousness and
justice is quite different from behaving righteously and justly toward
others. In intelligible life, science never serves to inflate the
natural self, promote arrogance and boastfulness or taking advantage of
others.

In brief, science can be used in two different ways:

1- Discovering facts in order to adjust and moderate the four
relationships:

a) Man-God

b) Man-himself

c) Man-the universe

d) Man-other human beings

This form of science is like a pure light shining onto man's nature.
This science is pure light, created by God, the One who enlightens the
whole universe. It is with this form of science that man can activate
his abstract perfection and greatness (i.e., innate light) toward
reality.

2- Understanding realities in order to reinforce man's desires, or
inflating the natural self. When science is used in this way, man
considers himself as the end and others as the means. In other words, he
intends to dominate others. Such a science will lead to nothing but
disaster and doom for man. It will alienate man from himself, which will
make him also alienated from the universe and other human beings.


