Anthropology: A New Scope
=========================

Theories on Human Nature
========================

There are four theories on the reality of human nature:

1- Some intellectuals believe that they know man’s nature quite well,
and consider man a meritorious being. This theory may be categorized
into two sub-theories:

a) Some believe man to be the most well developed being found in nature,
the absolutely perfect creation.

There are some points of criticism to this theory: firstly, we do not
have enough knowledge of nature to claim man to be its perfect being.
Second, we must not confuse man’s complex aspects and diverse talents
with his being the most complete of all creatures.

a) Some other intellectuals believe that although human beings are
great, meritorious creatures, they cannot be entitled as the most
perfect in nature, for apart from a meager few, mankind is drowning in
its selfishness and desires for pleasure.

2- Some intellectuals believe that man is cruel by nature. They see man
as a selfish, inconsiderate being who thinks of nothing but his own
benefit. As Nero once said, “If only all men had one neck, so I could
kill them all with one single stroke!” Anastas, who taxed the air people
breathed, is another example.

If we study the history of mankind, we will not come to accept this
theory, for despite all of the animal-like conceited figures, there have
also been men of great valor and glory.

3- Some believe that the fundamentals of human nature are still unknown
to us, but we do know that man has shown on great many occasions his
selfishness and desire for pleasure. Many human beings have considered
themselves the end, and many others have assumed the role of being the
means to the end. This theory suffers from two weaknesses: first, we
cannot claim that we know nothing at all about the fundamentals of man's
nature. We are aware of some aspects of man. Some physiological,
psychological and social aspects of human nature have been identified.
We cannot deny the endeavors anthropologists have made. Secondly,
although history has seen selfish vultures of human beings, it has also
witnessed men of the highest human values.

4- Man is believed to have a great variety of potentials and talents,
only some of which have been investigated or known. We can study the
activation of man's potentials from two points of view:

a) Activating the human potentials related to man's compulsory life.

b) Man's attention and great eagerness for his own perfection. Some
human beings have been successful in activating their potentials. These
seekers of greatness and perfection have always saved human virtues from
annihilation. According to this theory, man possesses both glorious,
incredible virtues as well as evil and corruption.

The Human Nature in the Qur’an
------------------------------

Some verses of the Qur’an show some of man's psychological elements and
positive and negative aspects, not the nature and identity of man. A few
of such verses are:

<p dir="rtl">
خلق الانسان ضعيفا
</p>

***“Man was created a weakling.”(4:28)***

<p dir="rtl">
خلق الانسان من عجل
</p>

***“Man was created of haste.” (21:37)***

<p dir="rtl">
ان الانسان خلق هلوعا اذا مسه الشر جزوعا و اذا مسه الخير منوعا
</p>

***“Surely man was created fretful; when evil visits him, impatient,
when good visits him, grudging.” (70:19-21)***

It is impossible to take the true identity and nature of man into
consideration using these verses. In fact, since man's degrees of
elevation and degradation are truly infinite, he cannot be totally
discovered. The potentials and talents mentioned by the Qur’an express
not only man's identity, but some of the characteristics and qualities
he can show. If the Qur’an did explain the elements of man's
congeniality and nature, it would not need to mention some exceptional
human beings or condemn others.

<p dir="rtl">
والعصر ان الانسان لفی خسر الا الذين امنو و عملوا الصالحات
</p>

***“By the afternoon! Surely man is in the way of loss, save those who
believe and do righteous deeds.” (103:1-3)***

The Qur’anic verse mentioning that man has been created of haste does
not imply the nature or identity of man either, for haste is a certain
quality about how we move from a starting-point to a destination; it is
not an external, independent fact about the movement that can be
considered a part of human nature. Furthermore, the following verse
cautions man for his haste, so if it were all or part of his innate
nature, it would be impossible for him to give it up.

<p dir="rtl">
خلق الانسان من عجل ساريکم اياتی فلا تستعجلون
</p>

***“Man was created of haste. Assuredly I shall show you My signs; so
demand not that I make haste.” (21:37)***

Human Characteristics
---------------------

There are various anthropological theories. One theory, pertaining to
materialists, believes that man is a harmonious machine that has
achieved perfection and complexity through the laws of nature. According
to this theory, human beings should be considered just like other
creatures, for he has no identity different from them.

There are a great many differences between man and machines, the least
of them being the element life. Man has a huge number of characteristics
no machine can have. We have listed 232 human characteristics based on
man's identity and relationships with others. However, some are so
diverse themselves that the list can be actually considered to include
950 characteristics. Some of them are:

1) Man's ego, 2) Man's awareness of his ego, 3) Man's attitude, which
shows the quality of his character, 4) Endeavoring for perfection, 5)

Reinforcing his will, 6) Autolysis, 7) Macro mania, 8)
Self-consciousness and self-alienation toward peers, 9) Self-ignorance
and the possibility for self-discovery,

10) Self-loss, 11) Self-denial, 12) Conscious conscience, self-conscious
conscience and unconscious conscience, 13) Moral conscience (with 50
different functions), 14) Pride and glory, 15) Desire for fame, 16)
Self-defense, 17) Psychological complexes, 18) Internal emotions,
feelings and anxieties (over 100 different types), 19) Introversion and
extroversion,

20) Analytical and combination thought, 21) An existent called the
heart, with over 100 functions, 22) Intellectualism and solidity of
thought, 23) Hope, 24) Dissatisfaction of monotony, 25) Wishing, 26)
Denial, 27) Sacrifice, 28) Seeking benefit over others, 29) Idealism,
30) Worship, etc.

Human Nature
------------

The nature and temperament of man - his original creation, his
fundamental existence - is one of the most important issues of
anthropology. There is much debate whether man has a nature or not.
There are three reasons upon which those against human nature deny its
existence:

1- Man's psychological, instinctive, and mental forces and activities
have been identified by various branches of science, and no sign of
human nature has been discovered by any of them.

2- If there were human nature, the various aspects of human existence
would not suffer so much change and upheaval.

3- The diversity and differences among the individual and social
behavior of human beings, is in conflict with the existence of a
commonality called human nature.

However, if the human nature is defined correctly, the three problems
mentioned above will vanish. The definition of the human nature is:

The human nature - the natural disposition of the human heart - is the
natural, orderly flow of the forces inside man. Therefore, there is a
nature for each of man's instinctive, mental and psychological forces,
which also forms its natural, logical flow.

According to the above definition, each of man's powers and potentials
are included in man's nature. In other words, the orderly, logical flow
of every power and potential of mankind is called its nature. Now we can
present counterarguments for the three problems we posed above:

First, we cannot deny their claim that human nature is not included
among man's psychological, mental and instinctive activities, for those
who believe in human nature do not intend to prove a separate,
psychological reality or a body part which may be denied; every power
man possesses, in its natural, logical course of action, is a part of
human nature.

The second problem - stating that the changes man undergoes conflict
with human nature - does not seem correct if we take into consideration
the survival of human aspects throughout all the changes mankind has
seen. For instance, thought, one of man's aspects, does not undergo
change during all the ups and downs of man's life. Only the raw material
or subjects related to human thought are interpreted.

Thirdly, the third problem - defying human nature based on the
differences existing between individual and collective thoughts and

behaviors - also appears to be incorrect, for if we are to recognize
human differences as the criterion, we should not recognize any other of
the human aspects, either. For example, do people not differ in their
ideas? Are humans not different in the emotions and reactions they show
in response to motivations and conscientious activities? Must we defy
thoughts, emotions and the conscience?

As we have already mentioned, the human nature consists of the logical,
orderly flow of each of the human forces. Now, by means of comparing it
with each of the human forces, we can come to a more accurate analysis
of the human nature:

1- Thought: Thought includes activities done on known things in order to
discover the unknown, or activities done on the means in order to
achieve a goal. If human thought acts logically and omits or selects the
means correctly to achieve his end, he has moved on the path of his
intrinsic nature; however, if he falls astray from the correct way of
thinking, and behaves illogically, we may say that his thought has
deviated from human nature.

2- Will: If the human will chooses and activates the useful motives, his
will arises from a healthy, sound human nature.

3- Emotions and Feelings: If man's emotional behavior is rational in
response to the stimuli that arouse his feelings and emotions, and do
not fall for imaginations, flashbacks or scattered thoughts, his
feelings will have a healthy human nature; the slightest distortion in
the normal flow of feelings and emotions will harm them.

4- Selfishness: If acting on the path of self-preservation and aiming
for human development, selfishness is compatible with the true, original
human nature. Yet, when it falls into hedonistic pleasures, it deviates
from the real course of human nature, and becomes self-conceit.

5- Conscience: Conscience is one of man's greatest internal powers. If
it acts legitimately, it will have a healthy human nature. For instance,
if the human conscience proves him right and wrong, or makes righteous
judgments and scorns and tortures man when he sins, it has moved on its
rational path.

6- The Supreme Feeling of Responsibility: It can behave in two ways:

a) The Supreme Feeling of Responsibility toward People: In this case,
man sympathizes for the joys and sorrows others feel, and considers love
toward his fellow human beings superior to all other aspects of social
life.

b) The Supreme Feeling of Responsibility for Man's Own Self-development:
Man does not feel his existence in the universe is aimless; he is always
in attempt to lead his existence to perfection.

Both forms of the supreme feeling of responsibility mentioned above can
be in accordance with the human nature if man acts rationally.

All human beings generally have an original human nature, which is pure
and has the potential to seek greatness and perfection. If man succeeds
in protecting his pure nature from deviations, inculcations, and the
pre-defined grounds of an unhealthy society, he can keep it pure and
original. These verses from the Holy Qur’an imply the existence of the
human nature:

<p dir="rtl">
فاقم وجهک للدين حنيفا فطرﺓ الله التی فطر الناس عليها لا تبديل لخلق
الله ذلک الدين القيم و لکن اکثر الناس لايعلمون
</p>

***“So set thy face to the religion, a man of pure faith - God's
original upon which He originated mankind. There is no changing in God's
creation. That is the right religion—but most people know it not.”
(30:30)***

<p dir="rtl">
صبغة الله و من احسن من الله صبغة
</p>

***“Having faith in God, and submitting to God's will on the way to
development and perfection is in fact being colored by God - and who can
color [human lives] better than God?”(2:138)***

Man's Internal Potentials
-------------------------

There are potentials inside man that can be activated by external
factors. Some intellectuals have claimed that there is no reality apart
from what external factors create in man.

We disapprove this theory, for the external factors that influence man
internally produce results different from themselves. Some behaviorists
ignore man's potentials, although they do not clearly deny their
existence.

Now we will present several reasons for the necessity of human
potentials:

1- Denying Man's Internal Potentials Casts Doubt on All Identities Man
Discovers about Realities: Every phenomenon has an identity which is
definite and clear. For instance, we see something in the distance, and
we are not sure whether it is a person or a rock; the object itself,
however, has its own, definite identity, anyway. If man had no
potentials inside him, his behaviors and actions should be indefinite -
and this is impossible, for indefinite identity in the world outside is
not observable.

Therefore, we either have to consider those potentials arising from
general concepts inside human beings - which is wrong, for general
concept are fictitious products of the human mind - or we have to
consider them as part of man's inside: there are realities inside man
that create certain behaviors and reaction when in contact with external
factors.

2- The Phenomenon of Inventions, Discoveries and Innovations: If
discoveries and inventions do not originate from man's internal
potentials, they must arise from external factors; however, there is not
similarity or association between external factors and the discoveries
and inventions made by man.

The inventions and discoveries do not arise from the great deal of
information man has about a subject. If external factors could lead to
discoveries and inventions by themselves, anybody who had them would
become an inventor or a discoverer.

3- Different Behaviors - Political, Judicious, and Artistic: Some people
have specific behaviors. Some seem to have a political kind of style,
others a military, judicious, artistic or managerial behavior. The fact
that people have different behaviors proves that they must have the
potential needed for it. For example, if one has an artistic kind of
behavior, he must have artistic potential, too.

4- The Activation of the “Self” that Manages Man's Life: As we have
already mentioned, man's soul is abstract, and has been interpreted in
various ways, like the “self” and the “ego.” The external factors that
enter man's life cannot be regarded as parts of the existence of the
“self,” for they are by no means comparable. The “self” is not a result
of external factors; however, the accumulation of these factors inside
human life can bring about the activation of the “self.”

In brief, if the 'self' potential did not exist inside the phenomenon of
life, external factors - that cannot consciously save their own
existence against any creature - could never create the 'self.'

5- Mental Activities: We arrange the pictures we get from the world
outside in our mind. The mind regards some phenomenon as true and some
others false. The mind's potentials help it carry out various tasks. If
man did not possess the potential of wisdom, for instance, it could not
use its wisdom in any task at all. Without the potential of moral
conscience, man would never accept a series of “shoulds” and deny
others. Likewise, if man did not have the potential to seek beauty, he
would never enjoy watching beautiful things.

Interpreting Opposite Potentials
--------------------------------

Man is a being capable of showing himself to have both the highest and
greatest of moral ethics and the most vile and vulgar qualities. Now
that he possesses two opposite kinds of qualities, can he be said to
have internal opposite potentials and talents? Will the fact of having
opposite potentials and talents contradict man's unity of personality
and the inseparability of his soul?

There is no doubt that man has internal opposites. Man can be more
degraded and filthier than animals, or higher than angels; no one doubts
that. The point that calls for consideration is how to interpret these
conflicting qualities. Man has a variety of potentials. He can become a
judge, or maybe an artist. He has both the potential to be righteous,
and to be selfish and victimize the right for his own desires.

Our interpretation for such opposite potentials is that man cannot
activate conflicting potentials in the same circumstances - he cannot
simultaneously be righteousness and selfishly cruel. He may be righteous
at times, but under certain conditions become cruel. We may consider
man's conflicting potentials from two points of view:

1- Positive, Opposite Potentials: An example is the potentials for crude
emotions and purely intelligent ones. The former are not any principle
or law other than their causes, whereas the latter cannot do anything
without obeying the law.

2- Potentials Implying Possibility and Power: Many qualities can arise
in man, although he does not innately have them. In fact, the appearance
of atrocious, vulgar qualities is the result of the disappearing or
destruction of man's innate potentials; man has no innate negative
quality of his own.

The former group mentioned above can be harmonized and organized in
order to result in man's mental and spiritual development. For instance,
if man's powers of thought and intelligence are enhanced, his crude
emotions will become highly elevated ones.

The latter group, which are potential, cannot even flourish at the same
time, let alone be harmonized. If man's potential for justice is
activated, for example, at that moment he cannot be cruel and unfair.
Thus, when a certain potential is activated, its opposite cannot
possibly arise alongside it; if the conditions and circumstances change,
however, the opposite may arise. Man must always beware of the opposites
of good qualities arising within him.

In a word what God has blessed man with is purely positive, constructive
potentials. Even the nature of the filthiest of man's instincts is
useful and good. It is man who neutralizes his positive, constructive
potentials, and abuses his instincts. The fact that man possesses
various potentials does not conflict with the fact that his nature is
abstract, either. The human nature has to be non-physical, and
supernaturally united to be able to have different potentials. If man's
nature were not supernatural, it would be impossible to interpret and
justify the interference, overlapping and observable inseparability of
his potentials.

The Identity of the “Self” (the “ Ego” )
----------------------------------------

All living beings have a “self.” That is how they can resist harmful
factors. In plants, the “self” is limited, and they cannot defend it
against everything. The resistance against harmful factors in plants is
not vast.

In animals, the “self” is more apparent, for they tend to reach pleasure
and avoid pain. Animals are able to fight natural, fatalistic laws much
more than plants.

In the case of human beings, however, we see a “self” consisting of many
units - cognition, intelligence, imagination, affirmation,
hallucination, discovery, decision, free will, interest in beauty …

Man possesses several “selves”:

1- A “self” the same as other living beings.

2- Wider selves like cognition, intelligence, imagination, thought and
many others.

If psychological terminology does not allow us to call these phenomena
'selves,' we can express it in another way: the 'self' together with
dozens of other highly significant means that have arisen in various
fields, and can reinforce and supervise human endeavor and activity
units.”

3- Deep “selves:” Using his “self,” man can supervise and dominate his
actions much better.

Considering the vastness of the human “self” and its tendency toward
progress and perfection, we may categorize it via “width and length”
categorization:

a) Wider selves: Having gone through the preliminary stages of
development, man possesses a natural self. This natural self is the
non-self-conscious aspect of the self, and develops as time goes by.

In fact, man acquires a “moral” self, possesses a 'scientific' self,
gets a 'social' self, and has an exclusive 'divine' self.

b) “Length” selves: Since birth, man develops both from a physical,
natural point of view, and the development and perfection of his “self.”
As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi) says:

<p dir="rtl">
از جمــادی مـُـردم و نامــی شدم وز نمــا مُردم ز حيـــوان ســر زدم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
مـُـردم از حيوانی و آدم شـــدم پس چه ترسم؟ کی ز مردنکم شدم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حملة ديگــــر بميــرم از بشــر تا بـــر آرم از ملايک بـــال و پـــر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وز ملک هم بايــدم جستــن ز جو کلّ شـــــــی هالـــک الّا وجهــه
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بار ديگر از ملک پــرّان شــــوم آنچـه آن در وهــم نايــد، آن شوم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
پس عدم گردم، عدم چون ارغنون گويــدم کانّا اليــــه راجعـــــون
</p>

*(Apparently, I stopped being like an animal; it seemed that sort of
life died in me. But that death elevated me to higher states of human
perfection. So why should I fear these successive deaths, for they are
lifting me up toward development? These deaths made me even more alive.
I was not losing anything; I was merely heading for a higher stage of
life. After that, I was at the stage of humanity for a while. Now if I
lose my human body and give myself to human death, angelic spirit will
fill my soul, and fly me toward divinity. Soon, I will even surpass
angels, and head for a hugely greater world. No point or state living
beings move on the path of has stability or eternity, for everything is
mortal, except His Divine Essence. Then, I will even climb beyond being
like angels, and reach a state reason and wisdom can never fathom; I
will head for oblivion, which is the general rhythm of the universe
conducted by God's Mighty Will, telling us that 'we will all return to
God'.)*

We can also present another classification for the self:

1- The Natural Self: This kind of self is common between man and
animals. The natural self cannot step out of fatalistic circles, or
supervise and dominate various affairs. At the level of the natural
self, man acts in accordance with fatalistic factors and principles.

2- The Human Self: Having stepped out of the natural self, man finds his
human self. Justice, love for other human beings and paying attention to
other morals and virtues become significant. With this kind of “self,”
man can bring the natural self and its various activities under control.
He is not totally free of fatalistic issues, however, for the natural
self is combined with the human self, and plays a role in man's deeds.

3- The Human-divine Self: If man's soul and spirit are elevated, he can
go beyond his normal human self, and reach a “human-divine” self. The
spirit is released from all the chains trapping it, and finds divine
freedom.

We may divide the identity of the self into two kinds:

a) The self with the identity of the natural self-conveys the management
of purely natural life, which exists in all living beings, from animals
to even just, spiritually elevated humans. Its only purpose is to
inflate the self and dominate anything other than the self, considering
everything else at the service of enhancing the inflation and dominance
of the self. All good or evil are evaluated by selfish criteria.

This kind of self will trod on all moral virtues to get what it wants,
burn down the whole world for a meager desire. It is totally
“self-oriented.” This is the self that has caused the natural and
animal-like aspect of the history of mankind to continue, hindering the
history of humanity. The qualities of the purely natural self are:

● It considers itself the leader, and obeys itself.

● It is morbidly selfish and arrogant.

● The natural self-fights anything that does not appeal to its desires.

● It worships itself.

● It has a tendency toward hedonism.

● It can mislead man from righteousness and justice.

● It denies all harmony and order in the universe.

● It considers wishes and favoritism prior to discipline and order.

● It regards itself as the end and others as the means.

b) The self with the identity of dynamic progress toward perfection:
This form of self is always elevating; it never spins around itself. It
does not lose its perfectionist, progressive identity, for it never
falls into selfishness or arrogance. This kind of self never regards the
purely natural self as the criterion for morals and virtues, for it
knows too well that man's true rise to perfection is possible only
outside the natural self, which merely aims to achieve pleasure and
repel harm.

When man possesses a dynamic self, he will at least:

● always assess himself,

● take himself seriously, and

● care about himself.

Self-assessment
---------------

Self-assessment is higher than self-knowledge. Seldom do human beings
attempt to assess themselves, and far fewer of them are able to do so.
The reasons for its difficulty are:

1- Man should be aware of his own mental aspects and internal settings
that affect his present and future.

2- He should know qualitatively and quantitatively about the power in
him.

3- Know exactly what his relationship with the laws and principles that
cause evolution and development is.

Self-assessment should not turn into absolute independence of character,
for then it would become a sort of self-battle, leading to a war against
others, too. By independence of character we mean that man may consider
his own existence as being far superior to all values and morals. The
only kind of independence that means is the independence of selfishness.
Cultures can have great influence on how people assess themselves; some
cultures totally ignore the issue of educating people how to assess
themselves, which is absolutely essential - for even a short time.

Taking Oneself Seriously
------------------------

When man takes himself seriously, he will neither deceive himself nor
others. The following steps are necessary if man is to take himself
seriously:

1- He should know himself thoroughly, correctly assessing his internal
potentials.

2- Having done that, he will feel the desire for the highest aim of
life.

3- Serious attention to the highest aim of life makes man understand
that he cannot achieve it without activating his potentials and powers.

4- Once man realizes that he cannot take his existence as a joke, he
cannot submit to the laws of nature or even other people. He is
dependent upon God's will, and that should be taken seriously.

No force can penetrate into the human ego, for God has built it like a
forbidden area into which only man himself can find way. If he does not
break the sacred security of his territory and tries not to deceive
himself, no other being can enter it.

Good Intentions for the Self
----------------------------

Man cannot be well-intentioned about himself unless a) realities of good
intentions and perfections are presented to him, and b) the self itself
becomes important to man, too.

If the self is not important to man, he will never attempt to discover
what is useful or harmful to him. The two factors mentioned above
account for why many human beings are not well-intentioned about their
own selves.

There are many factors that lead to the self being considered as
worthless, the most important of which is the activation of the self
without any free endeavor. As we know, man feels his ego arise in him
after childhood, without having done any attempt to acquire it. It is
the lack of attempt to acquire the self that makes man feel no
importance in it, and do no study on its characteristics.

Education is of great significance in self-discovery. Unfortunately,
societies that neglect the role of religion and moral ethics in various
aspects of human life, do not feel enough respect and value for the life
of human beings so as to acknowledge its existence, and consider its
education as important. If the “self” were of importance to man today,
millions of human lives would not be at the peril of tyrants' whimsical
desires and wishes.

Self-alienation
---------------

Self-alienation involves the lack of the self, the absence of some of
the elements of the ego which may be caused by several factors.
Considering the evolutions of the self and its definite or indefinite
state, we can list eight meanings for self-alienation. They can be
categorized into two main groups:

### 1. Negative Self-alienation

###

Negative self-alienation includes the lack of the self or the absence of
some of its elements that make man fail in his life. This form of
self-alienation can be of six kinds:

1- Ignorance about the self: This kind of self-alienation has engulfed
most of humanity today. Although prophets of God and great men of wisdom
have preached man to discover themselves ever since the history of
mankind began, their preaching has seldom been entirely fruitful.
Self-knowledge is so important that an ideology is useless if it cannot
make man discover himself and what is proper and appropriate to his
life.

The point here is that with all the unknown and unsolved mysteries in
man, how can the self-alienation caused by lack of knowledge of the
domains of human life be eradicated? Considering the quality of
“self-familiarity,” the answer should be quite obvious, for it is one of
the characteristics of human life that when it gains some extent of
knowledge of its self, it can save itself from self-alienation only to
that extent. Of course,

if man has the capability to discover himself but does not do so, he
will suffer from one of the most degraded forms of self-alienation.

2- Losing the self: In this kind of self-alienation, one sees one's self
in another person. It is caused by two basic factors:

a) Extreme extroversion, where man thinks too highly of “other than
himself,” and is drowned in its attraction. Such an inadvertent tendency
toward others can alienate man from himself. The only way to escape this
kind of self-alienation is by paying attention to the fact that no
advantage possessed by the “other than oneself” should make one lose
one's “own self.”

b) Sometimes it is the weakness and incapability of the “self” that
cannot safeguard its independence. The feeling of humiliation may lead
to such weakness and incompetence.

These two factors can make man feel that he exists actually outside
himself - feel that his life exists in others.

3- Self-defiance: If one knows that cruelty to others actually means
cruelty toward oneself, and that escaping duties is in fact escaping
one's own self, and that lying can distort reality, but still does cruel
deeds and tells lies, has in fact defied his own self. When man feels
his internal tendency toward the philosophy and aim of life, but
destroys it with his own desires and wishes, is he not defying himself?
Denying the beginning and the end of creation is a sign of
self-alienation.

4- Bargain-like self-alienation: This kind of self-alienation is based
upon greed for benefit and advantage. Those who suffer from it consider
themselves as merchandise that can be traded with others. They are ready
to lose even themselves in return for a profit.

5- Living with an unreal self: This kind of self-alienation involves
ignoring one's own elements of life. Man neglects his own potentials and
lives with his unreal self. There are two kinds of unreal self:

a) The self that is full of desires, hopes and aims that pertain to
selfishness. This is the unreal self that normal people deal with. Their
self, in other words, is a mere set of baseless tendencies and wishes.

b) The self that copies and imitates the life of others. Many human
beings live with the self of others, not their own. They imitate the
behavior and thoughts of other people; their life is no more than a
photograph of others' life.

6- Ignoring the power and advantages of the self: Man has a great many
potentials, which are what make him superior to other living beings.
Outstanding figures of history have been those who have succeeded in
activating these potentials. This is the kind of self-alienation man
will suffer from if he cannot manage his potentials and advantages. In
fact, several factors make him escape his potentials, and become
self-alienated. As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi says:

<p dir="rtl">
جملــه عالم ز اختيار و هست خــود می گريزند در سر سرمست خــود
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تا دمـــی از هوشيــاری وارهـنــد ننگ خمر و بنگ بر خود می نهند
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
مي گريزنـد از خودی در بيخــودی يا به مستی يا به شغل ای مهتــدی
</p>

*(People are running away from their own existence, their own free will…
but where to? To stupefying infatuations that will take them far away
from consciousness and awareness - if, even, momentarily. They turn to
drugs and alcohol and submit to being dehumanized. With the occupation
or infatuation they acquire, they are fleeing from self-consciousness
toward unconsciousness, but they do not know that they will be pulled
back into their natural, physical self by the chains of their desires
and whims, for their escape was not upon God's command.)*

If man loses supreme self-awareness, then conflicting and contradicting
forms of awareness and destructive forms of freedom can bring about his
intoxication and self-alienation.

### 2. Positive Self-alienation

###

Here, we refer to intelligible developments of the self. According to
the end it may have, this kind of development may be of two forms:

a) Positive self-alienation with natural, normal orientation and
destination: Man's life undergoes developments as time and his life
pass. His advance in age also brings about evolutions in his
relationship with the universe. Another factor is more knowledge, which
can change man's self. The new-formed self can in turn alienate man from
his previous selves. By gaining knowledge, man acquires more new
“selves.” In many cases, the new self is caused by the natural,
fatalistic flow of life; that self should be discarded, for developments
in the self that are not caused by the freedom of human character have
no value.

b) Self-alienation on the path to evolution: This form of
self-alienation is caused by evolutions in man's internal existence. It
differs from the former kind of self-alienation, however, in the fact
that it happens at the individual's free will. The individual attempts
to find a new self on the path to evolution. In fact, this form of
self-alienation involves abandoning previous selves in order to achieve
a developed, evolved self. Such a new self is impossible without making
use of freedom.

When discussing this form of self, we must keep a few points in mind:

1- The factor of endeavor and adjusting the self on the path to
evolution is far beyond passive, mortal selves. This basic factor may be
considered as man's higher knowledge of supreme ideals.

This theory is quite useful in finding the grounds needed and the
correct explanations about the means to pass on to evolutional 'selves,'
but it cannot provide the management factor that is able to correctly
give the 'selves' and their means (the knowledge, experiences and
gradual familiarity with ideals) evolutional adjustment.

2- The origin of man's endeavor toward an evolved self lies in his
spiritual aspect. In other words, we must admit that man has a spiritual
aspect and that it is capable of guiding his selves on the path to
evolution and perfection.

3- When the selves are guided onto the path to evolution, the previous
ones are not eliminated, for not all of the previous elements and
aspects are negative or imperfect enough to be deleted; they do contain
elements necessary for the new selves, like correct ideals. Furthermore,
some

elements of the previous selves can provide the preliminary development
and growth for the new ones.

4- A more evolved self means changes inside the self in order to achieve
more independence and eliminate fatalistic states surrounded by the
changes in nature and other human beings. Evolution in the self makes
man's potentials and talents become activated, changes his internal
conflicts into constructive ones, and increases the capacity of his
existence.

5- The evolutions in the new self, along with use of freedom, eliminate
the chains that trap man, granting him greater internal freedom.

6- The human self must take eternal prosperity into consideration if it
intends to evolve, for as the eternal capital, the self cannot be
exchanged for anything except eternal prosperity.

7- By achieving eternity, the self becomes immortal due to divine
immortality. This does not mean, however, that it moves to another world
in which it becomes immortal; it does mean, either, that the self is
totally demolished. We are referring to the elevating evolution of the
self in this world - the expansion and development of the various
aspects of human existence.

8- Along with any change or development the self undergoes, it finds new
characteristics, too. If it achieves divine immortality, it will never
think about gaining advantages or personal benefit, or competing against
“other than the self.”

The Qualities of Existence Dependent upon the Self
--------------------------------------------------

If man's existence becomes dependent upon his self, he can save himself
from negative self-alienation. In other words, the human self must be
independent in selecting goals and means and what is proper for man's
life. There are three points that should be kept in mind about existence
dependent upon the self:

1- When man's existence is dependent upon the human self, it does not
mean that it is abstractly isolated from natural and human factors; it
should not be dependent upon what others do, like a musical instrument
that needs to be played by others.

2- Dependency upon the self implies obeying the logical principles of
life.

3- Self-dependent existence does not mean exploiting other human beings
as one's tools. If man is free of negative self-alienation, he will
never claim “I am the end, and the others are the means,” for that would
take him to the inflation of his natural self, not the independence of
his human self.

The steps needed to be taken in order to return to the self are:

a) First, man must become aware of the issue of life and its value and
significance. Humans cannot regain their lost existence without proving
the independence value of life.

b) Human laws must have origins far superior to the desires of natural
life; likewise, the executors of the law must also have supernatural
tendencies so that they can guide people toward an existence dependent
on the self.

c) Education is quite significant in making the existence dependent upon
the self-embrace reality. Education must devote all of its efforts and
use all

of its skills and appropriate expertise ever since man is born into
trying to make him understand that he is for now merely a meager stream
of existence originating from the foothills of history, genetics and the
environment; quite soon, however, the immense power hidden in him will
change him into an ocean so great that all the other streams, rivers and
lakes will turn to him for help. In order to demonstrate to man this
amazing development, it is necessary to introduce him to thousands of
outstanding figures in history who have taken great steps toward
changing man's goals and way of life.

d) Man must gain a clear understanding of independence and dependence;
he should realize that total independence is impossible, and total
dependence also leads to man's alienation.

Finding the Roots of Man's Weaknesses
-------------------------------------

In our analysis of human shortcomings, the following factors can be
mentioned:

1- The dependence of human life upon realities outside it: Man's
physical aspect depends on a series of internal and external factors
that follow specific rules; these factors sometimes bring about
shortcomings in man. In the spiritual aspect - concerning man's
potentials and instincts - there are extremely delicate and sensitive
relationships that may be distorted and disabled by other powerful
factors. Thus, man possesses a series of physical and spiritual
abilities and limitations he cannot escape. These limitations do not
however, a) inhibit the order and harmony in his life, and b) man has no
responsibility concerning his involuntary inabilities.

2- The shortcomings caused by emergent ignorance: Man never knows what
kind of spiritual or mental state he will be in the next moment.

<p dir="rtl">
ای برادر عقل يک دم با خود آر دم‌به‌دم در تو خزان است و بهار
</p>

*(Do thought and intuition inside Yourself, and you will find that
various states and moods Keep arising in you. Indeed, springs and
autumns rise and fall in us.)*

Thus, as Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi) sees it, the human spiritual
states - if not derogatory and vulgar - can be related to God.

Man may guess what his future spiritual state may be by means of
comparisons and metaphors, but he can never have definite knowledge of
it. This kind of shortcoming makes man moderate in his feelings of
innate greed and ambition, and prevents him from rebellion. By
reinforcing human thought and intelligence in the knowledge of facts,
this can be overcome.

3- Voluntary shortcomings that originate from man himself: The two
weaknesses mentioned above are not considered as imperfections in the
creation of man, for they are involuntary and cannot be eliminated
entirely; however, man suffers from a series of shortcomings that are
brought about by actions he does at his own free will, and is
responsible himself for overcoming them. Wars, atrocities, lies, and
addictions are examples of shameful weaknesses that are caused by man
himself, and only he is responsible for eliminating them.

There are three situations in which the powers and weaknesses of human
beings reveal themselves:

1- Differences in potentials and talents and involuntary situations make
people differ. A genius is quite different from someone who has fairly
little intelligence. The former can be regarded as powerful, and the
latter as weak. When a person has literary talent and taste, he can be
considered as stronger than the one who does not have it. Various
talents for learning, intelligence, the power of guessing, and talent
for economics, law and politics can categorize people into strong or
weak. The variety and diversity in talents and characteristics is so
great that some people may be strong in certain potentials and weak in
other ones. In such cases, since each person has advantages that others
do not possess, the members of the society must harmonize their
different potentials and talents to serve everyone's development and
perfection.

2- Sometimes the difference between the strong and the weak is used for
progress toward intelligible life, and both the strong and the weak aim
for the pinnacles of intelligible life. The diversity in the potentials,
talents, emotions, desires, thoughts, cultures, physical situations and
social environments is so great among people that the difference between
the strong and the weak can never be totally eliminated; social life,
instead, should be adjusted in a way that each individual, with all of
his/her characteristics, can head toward intelligible life.

3- Sometimes the strong and the weak compete against each other. Their
competitions can be divided into three groups:

a) Competition without conflict: The strong and the weak continue their
lives without intersecting each other. They each go their own way, none
taking action against the other.

b) Disturbing competition: This kind of rivalry may lead to the
opponent's doom. We must say that all rivalries and competitions in the
domain of purely natural life that are dominated by the self are of this
second kind; the 'other than the self' is considered as worthless, and
man tries to dominate anything to his advantage if he has the power to
do so, and if he does not, he will take any measures needed to get it,
burning in desire all the time. Like animals, their 'natural self' knows
no boundaries, ever-inflating; even worse, they always believe that the
whole universe owes them everything, and whenever they fail to achieve
their desires, they think that the world has been cruelly atrocious to
them, and they should seek their revenge.

c) Constructive competition: This kind of rivalry guides both sides
toward perfection. Such rivalry is quite approvable, even reiterated.
Many verses of the Qur’an emphasize the importance of competing with
others in good deeds:

<p dir="rtl">
و لکل وجهة هو موليها فاستبقوا الخيرات
</p>

***“And for every nation there is an end, a goal in life; so, what
matters is to be ahead of others in good deeds.” (2: 147)***

Those who do not take part in the competition of doing good, make
themselves weak and incapable at their own will.

In brief, in this kind of rivalry between humans, which is of the
constructive kind, the two persons do not confront front each other
aiming

to destroy one another; it is a serious attempt to do more good, to
become more talented than the struggling men were before.

Conscience
----------

Conscience is one of man's most significant aspects. There are two
approaches to study the conscience: an internal study of oneself and
others, and by means of anthropological studies.

### The Definition of Conscience

###

There are two types of definitions for conscience:

1- Some are general definitions, which take an overall look at it,
without presenting any specific cases; for example, conscience means
awareness about the self or one's character.

2- Others are specific definitions, concerning the effects of
conscience, for instance, facts like bring a compass of the character or
supervisory role conscience.

### A Scientific and Philosophical Study of Conscience

###

The conscience can be studied from two points of view. One viewpoint is
based on the scientifically observable effects of the conscience, and
the other explores its roots philosophically. Due to the following three
factors, we are obliged to select the philosophical study:

a) The conscience has no physical entity. No dimension of time or place
can be specified for it.

b) It has opposite aspects that can never be collected in any physical
form. For instance, the conscience can both torture and be tortured.

c) Internal freedom, one of the most original aspects of conscience,
cannot be interpreted with any scientific principle.

### The Criticism on the Originality of the Conscience

###

Several reasons have been posed against the existence of conscience. Let
us criticize them:

1- The function of the conscience is not general: Some believe that if
the conscience were universally original - in other words, if all human
beings possessed it - why does it not show in all of them? Could anyone
imagine someone like Genghis Khan having a conscience?

We must respond by saying that there are many instincts in humans about
which people are highly diverse in possessing, using and fulfilling,
such as the sexual instinct, emotions, curiosity and lots of others.
Even the absence of some non-instinctive mental activities or a
spiritual phenomenon cannot imply that an individual is basically devoid
of it.

2- Differences in the functions of the conscience in human beings: Some
say that if the conscience is to be original, why is there so much
diversity among people in its functions? Various functions for the
conscience cannot defy its existence, as the existence of brutally
savage human beings cannot prove that there is no conscience; the
furthest we can go is to say that conscience is a relative phenomenon,
prone to variation in its intensity, which varies from one person to
another. If people use their conscience in various intensities, it
should lead to the conclusion that they do not have a

conscience at all, as diversities people have in their usage of their
mental powers cannot imply that they have no intelligence.

3- If the conscience is original, why is there so much debate and
dispute over it among thinkers? We must counter argue by pointing out
that thinkers are in debate and dispute over a great many things, and
conscience is merely one of them. Do philosophers not disagree over
matter and its identity? Is there absolute agreement over motion and
time? If thinkers are in debate over issues like matter, motion and
time, it does not defy them, as is the case about conscience.

4- The function of the conscience is not compatible with that of
intelligence and reason: Some claim that the conscience does not
function compatibly with intelligence and reason; the former is highly
concerned about the good and evil of actions, whereas the latter is not
at all. Moral conscience can identify gratitude and thankfulness, and
intelligence can study it. There is no conflict between reason and
conscience, despite the occasional differences seen between some
principles of moral conscience and some schools of thought. For
instance, moral conscience decrees that be fair and just, but hedonism
believes that a person should enjoy himself, going after his desires.
This is definitely not a conflict between the methods of moral
conscience and those of intelligence and reason; it is a difference
between the principles of moral conscience and the views in various
schools of thought.

5- Is conscience created by the society? Some sociologists believe that
conscience is an outcome of man's social life, and has no identity of
its own. We must say that human societies are not capable of creating
new phenomena in man; the most they can do is to give them a touch of
color. Can the society make its members discover the unknown without
thinking? Can a society make all of its members mathematicians? Can we
have a society in which people's desires are controlled in such a way
that everyone follows a moderate, balanced way of life?

Man is a being possessing a great many potentials, and high flexibility.
Human societies can merely determine how the potentials are put to use.
In brief, if this means that social and environmental laws and factors
are generally influential in coloring the conscience, it is a highly
proper point, confirmed by our scientific and sensory observations. It
does not mean, however, that the conscience is totally a consequence of
the society and environmental factors. We also admit that social and
environmental factors may affect the conscience, but it does not mean
that the conscience is made by the society, even if it is done by an
internal flexibility.

6- The conscience starts functioning from childhood: Freud believes that
the conscience is based and founded by the dos and don'ts engraved in
the human mind in childhood. Since a child obeys his/her parents, he
believes, and the parents continually order him to do or not do certain
things to protect him, a phenomenon called moral conscience is gradually
formed in the child.

If commands and preventions can lead to moral conscience, the same thing
should happen in animals, which is not true. Freud may argue that it is
only man who can develop a conscience through intrigue and forbiddance,

whereas we must accept that man has an internal characteristic that
allows him to develop conscience when encountering certain motives.

7- There are no fixed principles concerning conscience: Some believe
that it is impossible to set fixed principles for the conscience, for it
is a personal, variable phenomenon. Our response is that each mental or
spiritual phenomenon arising in man is accompanied with certain personal
factors. Yet, all phenomena follow their own set of laws. When phenomena
like recall, will, or decision-making arise in man, they are accompanied
with the individual's certain characteristics - thus, it is
characterized, and does not defy its orderly nature.

8- Moral conscience cannot be fixed, for man's moods and mental states
vary: Since human mental states are always changing, moral conscience
also undergoes continual change, and no fixed phenomenon can be
associated with it. Some people are extremely conscientious in some
cases, and at other times totally put their conscience aside. Thus, how
could we ever consider moral conscience as being a fixed phenomenon? We
must say that we should consider the difference between conscience - or
any phenomenon - and an activity done under certain circumstances.
Conscience itself is a fixed phenomenon, but its activities depend on a
variety of factors. Do we use our intelligence and reason equally at all
times? If we do not, does that defy its existence?

9- Conscience and man's tendency toward machinery: Some say that despite
all the value and significance moral conscience has, there is no need to
continue discussing it now that technology has begun to dominate man.
Nowadays, man does not need an internal factor, or a built-in judge to
distinguish good from bad. Our response is that having accepted the
necessity of conscience for man's emancipation, we must take its advice
in the technology-infatuated world we are living in. If people realize
its significance, they will take fundamental steps toward its revival.
Even now, people are still deeply moved when they learn about
sacrificial actions made by other human beings.

### The Importance of Conscience

###

As Bertrand Russell says, “Man has never needed his conscience as
crucially as he does today.” That is how necessary conscience is. Let us
also quote from Tolstoy: “Whoever claims that human life can be managed
merely by means of intelligence and reason has in fact defied the very
possibility of life.”

Using the conscience can remove the diversities and differences between
humans. The most important factor in harmonizing and uniting the people
and classes of a society is the conscience. It is the strongest builder
of justice. Conscience can prevent atrocities, oppression, and harness
man's desire for fame. It can present man with ideals, which are vital
if man is to bring his desires and wishes under control.

### The Characteristics and Consequences of Conscience

###

The most important characteristics and consequences of conscience are:

1- Conscience is where memories are kept. If so memories about pleasant,
shameful, embarrassing, good and bad events cannot be insignificant to
man's character.

2- There are various levels for conscience.

3- Conscience and reason can be harmonious.

4- Conscience understands the basic principles that reason follows, such
as: The whole is larger than its parts, reality exists, and man should
act reasonably.

5- The functions of the conscience are also reflected on other human
beings.

6- Man's character develops along with the development of his
conscience.

7- Conscience is man's safest guide.

8- The conscience can become ugly and vulgar, a burden on man's
existence.

9- The conscience can be tortured.

10- The conscience can suffer from great anxiety and worry.

11- The conscience can be held responsible.

12- The conscience can differentiate good from evil.

13- The conscience can supervise.

14- The conscience can suffer from upsets and fits.

15- The conscience can decree.

16- The conscience can find serenity.

17- The certainty of the conscience is much greater than that of reason
and intelligence.

18- The conscience can set up trials.

19- The conscience can scold and reprimand.

20- The conscience is capable of judgment.

21- The conscience can be entrapped or freed.

22- The conscience executes the law.

23- The moderate conscience shows facts without manipulation.

24- The conscience reminds human beings about the necessity of sympathy.

25- The conscience is where man can privately confer with himself.

26- The conscience can speak with man's reason and intelligence.

27- The conscience can be deceived.

28- The conscience can be disabled.

29- The conscience can be put to the test.

30- The conscience can weaken and strengthen.

31- Man's internal freedom arises from his conscience.

32- The conscience reflects God's words.

33- The conscience feels that man's “self” is immortal.

34- The conscience has conflicting waves.

35- The conscience reminds man about the objectiveness of creation.

The Relationship between Recognizing Oneself and Recognizing God
----------------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet of Islam has said,

<p dir="rtl">
من عرف نفسه فقد عرفه ربه
</p>

*“Know yourself, and you will know your God.”*

Let us study 20 significant points on the above hadith:

1- The human nature is abstract - it is not a physical entity. God is
also far beyond materiality and all of its attributes.

2- God possesses true unity, and so does the human nature, which is in
charge of man's internal and external components.

3- Although the human nature is related with the human body, it manages
all of the body organs, natural instincts, forces and potentials.

4- The Almighty God, though connected to the universe, is far superior
to space or time; the human nature is also superior to the human body
organs in regard to time.

5- God is virtually united, but also has many innate characteristics
that do not conflict with the divine unity.

6- God has created the universe out of complete nothingness; there was
no sign or history of it before whatsoever - without any matter
previously. The human nature does the same with its imaginations,
analyses and discoveries.

7- God is aware of both the unchangeable and the variable; however, his
awareness about the variable does not cause his knowledge to multiply.
Likewise, knowledge created by pertinence to the variable does not lead
to change.

8- God and the human nature are both doers equipped with free will.
There are some differences, however, between divine and human free will.

9- God knows all generalities and details, and this knowledge of the
details does not affect God's divine nature. The human nature, also
capable of awareness about details, does not change by intuitive
knowledge, either.

10- God is dominant over all components and events in the universe, and
He dominates all components of the universe equally.

11- We can recognize the principle that God exists and has glory and
beauty; however, we are unable to comprehend God's divine nature, for
our tools of recognition do not have the capability to dominate the
nature of divinity. In the same way, the sacred nature of man is not
identifiable either; we can only identify man's principles of existence
and his characteristics.

12- God has affection for all of His creations, especially mankind. This
affection does not rise out of instinctive factors or seeking benefit.
The human nature is also capable of being affectionate to man's
inventions and creations, and can develop his affection to be free of
any motives of advantage-seeking or instinctive factors.

13- God loves beauty and perfection, and although He infinitely
possesses beauty and greatness, He wants His creations to possess them
too. Regardless of all social and cultural factors, the human nature
also has a tendency for beauty and perfection; seeking beauty and
perfection can be considered as some of the most important of man's
nature.

14- Whatever God creates, God's divine nature remains unchanged; in
other words, God's creations are not parts of a whole, which break away

from it when created. Likewise, the human nature can create billions of
ideas, imaginations, decisions and deeds, but none of them affect it.

15- The Almighty God is constantly active, and all of the changes and
developments in the universe eventually refer to God's continual
activity.

16- God created the universe without intending to gain any advantages.
The human nature can also fulfill its duties without expecting any
benefit in return. By purifying his soul, man can learn to do things for
their own sake, not for a reward or escaping punishment.

17- We can never interpret the universe reasonably unless we accept God
and the fact that the universe depends on God.

18- Since God has absolute knowledge and control over the universe, His
patience is endless. The human nature has some of that patience, too.

19- By means of intuitive knowledge, God is aware of His nature and
characteristics. The human nature is also capable of gaining such
knowledge.

20- The universe cannot limit God - in other words, the creatures in the
universe cannot occupy space or locations where God is absent. The human
nature is also so dominant over the human body that nobody organ can
never be limited or denied.

Man's Four Relationships
------------------------

Four relationships can be associated with man:

1- Man-Himself: Man has self-consciousness, and is able to change and
evolve himself. It is this self-consciousness that has led to various
branches in psychology. If man were not aware about himself, he could
never know about the psychological effects of others. There a few laws
that govern man's relationship with himself:

High awareness of the fact that man is a part of the objective universe:
Man must increase his knowledge of all of his physical and spiritual
aspects, and remove any dark points about his existence. He should make
the most of what he knows about himself. The fact that man's life is a
part of the harmony of the universe is highly significant. If man
reaches a level of awareness where he considers himself a part of the
universe, he will find these qualities:

● He will not stupefy himself.

● He will avoid deceits that are destructive to his soul.

● Greed, boastfulness and arrogance will leave him.

● He will be able to use and enjoy beauties.

● Destructive rivalries and conflicts will be replaced by constructive
competition.

● Man will achieve spiritual expansion.

● He will be able to assess means and ends correctly.

● He will interpret power accurately.

● Human societies will become a united family.

● Man will endeavor to spiritually develop and increase the knowledge of
his fellow beings.

The necessity of accepting self-possession : Man must put sincerity into
his relationship with his own self, and accept the truth.

Self-deceit is the worst way man can betray himself. If man does not
accept reality, he will be betraying himself.

Maximum use of man's positive, constructive potentials: With
self-awareness, man will never destroy his own positive potentials. He
will not use his potentials in order to destroy other human beings; he
will use them for his own spiritual development and serving others.

Affection toward others that arises out of human nature : Self-awareness
makes people be kind to one another. By kindness here we mean affection
rising out of sublimated emotions, not purely natural tendencies. By
spiritual elevation, man sees himself in harmony with others in the
universe, and thus begins to feel affection for them.

2- Man-The Society: Emile Durkheim has presented a rather extremist
approach to man's relationship with the society. He believes that the
human self is built by the society, and man has no independent identity
regarding his social surroundings. In response, we must say that man
possesses many potentials, and the society can merely develop or inhibit
them.

Though the society is able to take charge of radical identities, it
cannot determine the identities. Preparing the grounds for man's
physical and spiritual development - or hindrance - is the farthest the
society can go. In other words, Man is born with a series of potentials,
and many factors can influence them, one of which is the society and its
various components. It can, however, trap man into fatalistic,
unconscious factors guided by social management, which may prevent human
beings from becoming self-alienated.

3- Man-The Universe: If man thinks he has been created as a worthless
being for a certain period of time and thus has no relationship
whatsoever with the universe, he has in fact begun to destroy himself.
With regard to man's relationship with the universe, he has several
responsibilities:

a) Man must discover the universe and the orderly harmony governing it:
Man's approach to the universe must be both general and detailed. From
the detailed point of view, man studies and discovers the universe by
means of his senses and technical devices, whereas through his general
point of view he can understand concepts and meanings.

b) Taking the rules of gravity in the universe seriously and making use
of them: The universe includes many physical and spiritual laws that
cannot be ignored. Cause and effect, and also actions and reactions are
examples of such rules, which man should use.

c) The universe has a supernatural, divine aspect: The supernatural,
divine aspect of the universe consists of its relationship with its
creator. Understanding this aspect makes man's sense of duty and
responsibility be aroused, and find a new, profound concept for life.

4- Man-God: Man can achieve perfection by means of his relationship with
God. This is when man understands that God created him perfectly, so he
should develop divine attributes in himself. If man realizes that divine
perfection and greatness awaits him, he would never keep himself busy
indulging with worldly affairs.

In his relationship with God, man must take God's dominance and control
on him seriously, for if man feels that his whole existence is
overwhelmed by God, he will never deviate from the path of
righteousness.

Spiritual Moderation
--------------------

Spiritual moderation involves a harmony among man's internal potentials
and the factors that activate them. The better man's potentials do their
orderly duties, the more moderate man will be. Since human potentials
are interrelated, the balance of man's spiritual system is a sign of the
moderation of each potential. Likewise, if each and every potential is
well-balanced, the whole system is moderate, too.

Spiritual moderation can also be regarded as “mental well-being.” The
higher man's mental well-being is, the better his spiritual moderation,
too. By “mental,” however, we do not refer to only formal thoughts, but
man's overall mental activities, including incoming feelings,
imagination, associating meanings, selecting the means and balancing the
means and the end.

Spiritual moderation does not exist, or cannot be scientifically
discovered. The reasons for this are:

1- The infinity of man's greed for gaining advantages, whether selfish
or seeking perfection: Since man knows no boundaries in expanding his
“self-love” or “supreme self,” there can be no true moderation for the
free psyche. The endless quality of the self is due to man's
supernatural aspect. The human character has two sides. On one hand he
deals with what his senses reveal to him, and on the other hand he is
concerned with the supernatural and moral values. The human self can
infinitely advance on both sides, so we cannot imagine a real moderation
between them; neither on the positive side, which pertains to the
“supreme self,” nor the negative one, which involves the natural self.

2- Man's endless flexibility: Man can vary fatalistic factors and make
optional selections due to his infinite flexibility. Proper education
and training, for example, can bring about such a spiritual revolution
in man that a criminal becomes a fair person, or vice versa. This proves
that true moderation is not verifiable.

The Relativity of Spiritual Moderation
--------------------------------------

Man's spiritual moderation is a relative truth, for each human being has
his/her own spiritual balance depending on his/her specific social,
moral, legal, cultural and historical circumstances. The impurities in
the spirit make it have relative balance. If the human self succeeds in
harmonizing the flow of his internal potentials, there will be spiritual
moderation in the domain of “how it is.”

The management of the “self” in this domain involves preserving the
desired self - this is the main goal of the self in managing man's
existence.

The self can aim for two kinds of self-preservation in the domain of the
psyche:

a) Self-preservation based on fatalistic factors: Like animals, man
lives only according to his natural instinct and tendencies in this
state. In such people, spiritual moderation is merely the harmony
between instincts and

fatalistic factors. It is a pseudo-fatalistic product of the management
of the self, and if the unconscious parts are put together as a machine,
they would all function harmoniously.

b) Self-preservation based on the development of potentials: Some people
to some extent put their potentials and powers to work. Influenced by
geographical, cultural, legal, and political factors of their society,
they cannot consider ideals any higher than their society offers for
their “self,” so they make no attempt for its advance. They go after
anything they consider useful - that is, what their social circumstances
offers them.

If there are sophisticated figures in such social conditions that can
make people realize that they can make better use of their potentials
and forces, they will have a chance of being guided to the path of
perfection and greatness.

By elevating himself from the “how it is” to the domain of “how it
should be,” man can have better spiritual moderation. Man is a being
that possesses the basic factor for such a promotion; he has a built-in
tendency towards the proper virtues he deserves.

There are two reasons that prove that man possesses a strong internal
force that moves him from “how it is” to “how it should be:

a) The fact that many human beings throughout history have achieved
extreme greatness and perfection: History shows us many prophets of God,
men of wisdom and moralists that have harnessed selfishness and achieved
the ultimate level man can advance to. Without such internal
purification, Abraham could never have attempted to slay his own son.

b) The necessity of education and guidance: If the potential to enter
the domain of “how it should be” didn't exist in man, education would
never have existed; we clearly see, however, that education has had a
profound effect on human beings.

The essential factor that evolves man from “how it is” to “how it should
be” is his perfection-seeking, intense eagerness to expand his existence
all across the whole universe and totally dominate it.

Any human being who enjoys mental well-being will be interested in such
spiritual development.

The moderation man achieves through development and perfection is true
moderation, and he will see every event and moment of the universe as
new. As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi says:

<p dir="rtl">
تازه می گير و کهـن را مي سپـار که هر امسالت فزون است از سه پار
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
جان فشان ای آفتـاب معنـوی مر جهان کهنه را بنمــــا نوی
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
اي جهان کهنه را تـو جان نـو از تن بي جان و دل افغان شنو
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
گرچه هر قرنی سخـن نـو آورد ليک گفت سالفــان يــاری کند
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تا نزايد بخت تـو فرزنـد نو خون نگردد شير شيرين، خوش شنو
</p>

*Don't let yourself get stuck in the past and the old; remember that
your current year is worth more than your last three years altogether.
Endeavor to elevate your character the best you can, for your efforts
will refine your inside of all the old precipitated in you from nature,
and refresh your soul.*

*When your soul is refreshed, the universe before you will also be fresh
and new. When man thinks about God's divine state from the very depth of
his conscience and devotes his whole ego to perceiving divinity, he will
completely realize that each moment of his life will be new, and his
soul will be fresh is its contact with God.*

Though each century brings with itself new speech and new speakers, the
past also promotes it by establishing the fundamentals of human culture.
Your spiritual prosperity should present the results of original truths
like newborn babies, which open their mouths and feed upon previous
knowledge, thus evolving your spiritual life.

In fact, Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi (Rumi) is inviting man to abandon
this material world, and submit himself to divine changes.

Internal moderation in the domain of “as it should be” is not possible
without considering the supreme aim of life and obeying moral values. If
the human self is to develop and establish a correct relationship with
the universe, it must be attracted by the ultimate aim of life and
acquire the highest of human virtues.

In brief, taking into consideration the philosophy of creation and
obeying divine values is absolutely crucial if spiritual moderation is
to be achieved. Only then will man's internal potentials be in harmony
with various factors, and result in his mental well-being and spiritual
moderation.

Spiritual Expansion and Contraction
-----------------------------------

When expanding, the human spirit finds amazing qualities so amazing that
one would think it has undergone complete change. Spiritual expansion
cannot be defined logically, and only experiencing it can really let us
understand it.

Spiritual expansion is accompanied by the feeling of absolute freedom.
In other words, in such a state man feels that nothing can hold him
back; he is in an unbelievably exciting state that no material emotions
pertaining to nature or its aspects can fathom. When man's emotions are
in harmony with his intelligence and logic, psychological expansion
appears in its supreme state.

The Relativity of Spiritual Expansion
-------------------------------------

Human spiritual expansion can be regarded as relative from three points
of view:

a) The Factors that Make It Happen: like physiological, mental,
spiritual, personal, and many other factors.

b) The Fundamental Elements of Character: Since these elements vary in
people, the expansion caused by encountering events varies in each
person.

c) The Perfection and Imperfection of People's Characters: This is also
a significant factor. The spiritual expansion each person feels is
proportionate with that person's system of character. For example, those
who are drowning in their “natural self” find an expansion when they
achieve a higher position or more wealth in which they regard the whole
universe as their servant. One who seeks knowledge, on the other hand,
considers unsolved scientific issues as crucially vital and cannot
achieve spiritual expansion without figuring the unsolved out.

### The Basic Origin of Spiritual Expansion and Contraction

###

Spiritual expansion and contraction pertains to the goal man aims for in
his life. Those who have no real aim in life experience expansions and
contractions equal to the normal joys and sorrows of everyday life.

When man sets for himself a goal in life and tries to achieve it, he
experiences spiritual contraction if he encounters an obstacle hindering
his progress, and expansion when he successfully passes it. When one has
a great end like saving the people of a society, the expansion brought
about by achieving it will be an incredibly immense spiritual promotion
for him. In general, whenever the human spirit moves on the path to
perfection, passing any obstacle on his way will result in expansion.

### Conscious and Unconscious Expansions and Contractions

###

Expansions and contractions can be divided into two groups:

a) Conscious, and

b) Unconscious.

Sometimes man is qualitatively and quantitatively aware of the
expansions and contractions, and sometimes he does not know anything
about his spiritual state.

Spiritual expansions and contractions can also be regarded as conscious
or unconscious by considering their causes. In other words, sometimes
man knows what causes such spiritual states, and sometimes he does not.

When man encounters obstacles hindering his path to achieving his goal
in life, and fails to pass it, he will experience one of the following
spiritual states:

1- He may undergo mental contraction due to doubt and anxiety about
achieving his goal. If such people have powerful thoughts, they will
thus develop a pessimistic ideology.

2- He may abandon all efforts to reach his goal, and become totally
indifferent. All values would then appear as worthless to him.

Those who have experienced progress toward perfection are able to
withstand external setbacks, so they do not suffer from spiritual
contractions when encountering obstacles.

### The Expansion and Contraction of the Divine Conscience

###

Spiritual expansions and contractions can never penetrate into man's
God-given conscience, for spiritual expansions and contractions are due
to success and failure to achieve worldly advantages. The divine
conscience is, however, far superior to these mediocre states. Many
human beings, alas, are so drowned in material affairs that they disable
their God-given conscience and waste their life on baseless expansions
and contractions.

When the divine conscience is awaken in man, all normal expansions are
replaced by supreme, divine expansions.

Having achieved divine expansion of conscience, man will undergo no more
contractions, unless:

1- He feels a greater expansion which will make his current expansion
seem meager.

2- Since man is in the natural world, he will always suffer from
contractions in his worldly affairs until he reaches God. Divine
expansions

do make, however, man feel that these natural contractions are temporary
and mortal.

### The Consequences of Expansions and Contractions

###

Both expansions and contractions leave certain effects. Constant
contractions depress the soul, but frequent expansions result in
spiritual joy and freedom.

The Reasons Why Anthropology Has Failed
---------------------------------------

Throughout history, a great many intellectuals have attempted to study
and explore man from various points of view - scientific, mystical,
philosophical, moral and religious. Although the amount of research done
is so great that it cannot be totally discarded as unsuccessful, many
scholars admit that the human nature is by no means discovered or
revealed to them. The factors influential in its failure are:

1- As we already know, all facts are interrelated, and not knowing one
of them will cast darkness on others, too. Man is an extremely complex
being, full of countless, unsolved aspects and potentials. It is the
unsolved aspects of man that has prevented the complete exploration of
his nature. Incorrect interpretations of intuitive knowledge (where the
recognized is the same as the recognizer) and free will (the dominance
and supervision of the self over the positive and negative poles of an
action) are examples that prove man's unsuccessful endeavor to
generalize the laws and principles of nature to his own case.

2- On one hand, we have divine religions and men of wisdom and men of
wisdom stating that man is a valuable being innately full of hidden
potentials; on the other hand, the history of mankind shows that many
human beings have not activated their potentials, and are thus devoid of
a great deal of their deserved greatness. Such a contradiction has led
these scientists to believe that there must some unknown X-factor in man
that inhibits his development and progress.

This inability in man - that is, not all of his potentials being
activated - cannot lead to the human nature remaining unsolved, for
oppressing human potentials is not due to lack of knowledge about them,
for man does not correctly put the little knowledge he already has about
himself to use, either. Does man truly not know the fact that fighting
righteousness is wrong, or does he know it and still does not stop doing
it?!

3- Sometimes an incorrect point infiltrates the culture of a nation as a
basic principle, which leads to incorrect interpretations of man. For
instance, the culture of slavery so strongly penetrates into ancient
India that even an intellectual like Aristotle accepts it and expresses
ideas confirming its originality.

4- Analyzing and separating the human nature, which has become quite
fashionable nowadays, has brought about great confusion in the
humanities. Intellectuals who have studied one of man's aspects have
become so obsessed with that one aspect that they have considered all of
man's existence in it, thus imperfectly interpreting man. Despite its
weaknesses, the analytical method does, however, have its advantages in
studying and interpreting the nature of man it’s incredible accuracy,
whereas combination

methods sometimes show superficial tendencies that prevents correct
knowledge.

Expertise is definitely an essential part of scientific advance, but
experts of the humanities have to beware not to allow their expertise to
cause disastrous damage to human harmony and unity.

The disadvantages of the analytical method are:

First, it cuts off all relationships existent between realities. The
fact that man's various aspects are interrelated is totally ignored; all
human facts are studied separately from each other.

Secondly, it neglects the harmony in the human character; therefore when
one aspect of man's nature appears to be significant to an intellectual,
he - consciously or unconsciously - interprets man solely from that
point of view.

Ever since studying man by means of the purely analytical method became
popular, one essentially important principle was forgotten: comparing
man with at least one product of the interaction of chemical elements
which has characteristics different from the separate, individual
elements, in particular chemical compounds that cannot be changed back
to their components. By comparing the unity and harmony existing in life
and the human character with the product of a chemical compound, we see
that it has both new qualities and is irreversible.

The third problem with the analytical method is that the thinker
sometimes falls into the disastrous “There is nothing except this” state
of mind. As some of them have claimed in interpretation of man:

● Man has a social aspect and nothing else.

● He is an absolutist, and nothing else.

● He is a hedonist, and nothing else.

● He is merely a sexual instinct and nothing else.

● Man is nothing but a wolf.

● He is an exploring animal, and nothing else.

● Man is no more than a selfish animal.

● He is an animal seeking freedom.

● Man is an ambitious animal greedy for power, and nothing else.

● Man is a bargaining animal, and nothing else.

Anthropology can only make logical progress when the “There is nothing
else except this” viewpoint does not exist.

Since only one aspect of man is considered in the analytical method,
sometimes man becomes obsessed with it, and puts all of his other
aspects at its service. Furthermore, obsession toward one aspect makes
man fall astray from science and research, and become intensely
infatuated merely with the fascinating fame and influence of outstanding
figures of science.

The Problems with Contemporary Psychology
-----------------------------------------

1- Some western psychologists tend to interpret psychological issues by
means of biological, physiological or purely natural bases. This
prevents them from discovering the human soul.

2- Some psychologists are quite sensitive about accepting advanced human
psychic faculties, and ignore them. As Freud admits, “It upsets me to
bring up mystic and supernatural issues.”

3- One of the major faults with interpreting contemporary science is
that it confines scientific thought to what experiments and observations
provide. Some scientists have limited their analyses of the human psyche
to what their observations provide them with. This is as devastatingly
damaging as interpreting the world only by dividing it into the four
elements. Taking into consideration the human soul and the endless
aspects, potentials and changes it has in various circumstances, there
will be no point in limiting ourselves to experimental sciences. When
interpreting issues concerning the human psyche, different scientific
fields should be employed, as is the case in accounting for physical
phenomena.

4- Nowadays, psychology ignores the various activities, characteristics
and aspects of the human soul, or “heart.” Persian literature cites 427
different words deriving from the “heart,” like “heart-disturbed,”
“heart-given,” “heartless,” and many others. The human “heart” and
conscience are so important that when intelligence, wisdom and logic
fail in discovering the secret underlying an issue, man refers to his
heart and nature to prove that he is right.

5- In contemporary psychology, a certain range has been abstracted and
described for the psyche; going beyond these limits is considered as
being psychologically unbalanced. In this kind of psychology, there is
no difference between a rigid, stagnant soul and one that is dynamic and
tries not to see an event the same at two different moments.

For instance, why do some people become fascinated in themselves, why do
some others have a dynamically progressive psyche, and try to avoid
self-obsession, and save themselves from nihilism? There is no
distinction between a stagnant soul and a dynamic one in this
psychology; both are treated as equal.


