Life: The Hows and Whys
=======================

Asking about the Philosophy of Life
-----------------------------------

Asking about the philosophy of life has always existed. Many people
around the world have posed the question. Basically, once any conscious
human being succeeds in releasing his “self” from the ocean of
anxieties, joys and tensions of his fatalistic, natural life and
consider life itself, he will immediately reach the question of the
philosophy of life. Without a correct interpretation of life, man will
fall into nihilism; this became quite intense ever since machines
dominated life increasingly in the 18th century, making people shout
about the emptiness they feel in their lives.

In order to understand nihilistic feelings, we must first consider the
mental characteristics of a nihilistic person:

1- A nihilist does not regard life as a necessary issue. He hates life
rather than enjoying it.

2- For nihilists, the facts, principles and relationships of life
undergo dramatic change. Beauty and ugliness are meaningless,
orderliness becomes a mere hallucination.

3- A nihilist's soul is influenced quite quickly and easily, sometimes
even taking his consciousness away. As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi
(Rumi) says:

<p dir="rtl">
میگريزند از خـودی در بيخودی يا به مستی يا به شغل ای مهتدی
</p>

*With the occupation or infatuation they acquire, they are fleeing from
self-consciousness toward unconsciousness, but they do not know that
they will be pulled back into their natural, physical self by the chains
of their desires and whims, for their escape was not upon God's
command.*

4- Values are worthless in the eyes of a nihilist; greatness and
degradation are no different to him.

The first two groups basically do not ask about the philosophy of life
at all. The first group, who cannot abstract life from themselves, are
unable to consider the phenomenon of life. The second group, although
developed people, regard life as a part of the whole universe, heading
for the aim of creation. The second group are quite joyous people.

<p dir="rtl">
به جهان خرّم از آنم که جهان خرّم از اوست عاشقم بر همه عالم که همه
عالم از اوست
</p>

*I love this world because God has created it. The beauty of the world
comes from God.*

**Sa'adi**

Motives for Asking about the Aim of Life
----------------------------------------

The various motives for seeking the aim of life can be thus categorized
into these four groups:

1- Negative aspects of life: Human life tends to dynamically develop,
and if its movement and progress becomes stagnant, the questions
arises - what is the philosophy of life? The negative aspect of asking
about the philosophy of life is quite a despaired, hopeless one.
However, not all people are influenced by negative motives; some people,
when facing those stagnant, miserable beings, believe that if such
people cannot realize the true

taste of life, others can do so very well. Some people have a nihilistic
philosophy for themselves, while others endeavor to overcome the factors
that inhibit the dynamic progress of life.

2- Positive aspects of life: Those who live a purely natural life and
are satisfied with it will sooner or later realize that they have lost
their true self, and become captive to something artificial and unreal.
They cannot present themselves with the true form of life in order to
search for its philosophy. Even if they start inquiring about the aim of
life, their questions will not be real ones.

3- Secondary, consequential aspects of life: Sometimes man sets for
himself some ideals and interprets life on their basis. When he fails to
achieve his ideals, life will seem worthless to him, and he begins to
question the philosophy of life. For instance, some people who go after
science, at first think science is the absolute aim of life; when they
fail, they hopelessly turn nihilistic. Some others turn to despair when
they cannot achieve wealth and luxury. Such people cannot find the
correct answers, for they do not ask the correct questions.

4- Neutral aspects: feeling the necessity of a general viewpoint of
life: If man is to ask questions about something, the subject matter
must be outside his human nature; he should look at it from a superior
point of view.

We must keep in mind that asking about the aim of life never includes
asking about the means and levels of life, for each part of life has its
own philosophy; thus, any thinker exploring the philosophy of life
should not consider all components of life. The human ego should rise
higher than natural life to be able to question it.

This is when the human ego does not search for the philosophy of life in
purely natural life anymore. Unless one reaches the highest levels of
the human self, distinguishing the aim of life from its shadow will not
be possible. One cannot deserve to ask about the philosophy of life
without stepping beyond his normal life, which is riddled with material
things and feelings.

The Necessity of Recognizing the Ultimate Aim of Life
-----------------------------------------------------

We can present several reasons why it is necessary to recognize the
ultimate aim of life:

1- Many schools of thought throughout history have attempted to seek and
present the aim of life. They regard goals merely higher than the petty
goals of life as the ultimate end of life. If the relative goals in
natural life really could provide the ultimate goal of life, there would
be no more need for research on the philosophy of life.

2- As man's knowledge and dominance over his life increases, it has been
proven that man's true life is meaningless without choosing higher aims
for life. Without an intelligible aim, human life will lose all its
value and significance.

3- If the universe and the phenomenon called life have no aim, life will
have no meaning at all. As Nasser Khusro, the renowned Iranian poet
says:

<p dir="rtl">
روزگار و چرخ و انجم سر به سر بازيستی گر نه اين روز دراز دهر را
فرداستی
</p>

*All this world and stars are not all of what there is; someday, all
this will come to an end.*

Various Viewpoints on the Aim of Life
-------------------------------------

There are many different schools of thought on what the aim of life is.
Let us study some of them further:

1- Personal goals: Some people consider what they desire, like money,
power, science and maybe even serving people as their main aim in life.

2- Power: Some intellectuals, like Nietzsche, believe power to be the
main aim of life.

3- Making the best choice: Some people, like Nero, Genghis Khan,
Alexander and the pharaohs, are regarded as the best choice in natural
life schools of thought.

4- Hedonism: Hedonists believe that saturating one's need for pleasure
is the main aim of life. They have mistaken the interpretation of the
mechanism of purely natural life for the main aim of life.

5- Comfort and luxury: Some schools of thought see the main aim of life
in having luxury and comfort. “Can anyone accept the logic that you
should lose your life today, so that a living human being in future may
have a comfortable life? Now that life today is not any less comfortable
than the future, why should it be sacrificed? Furthermore, those human
beings whom history remembers as distinguished and aware, did not even
consider their own comfort as their aim of life; how can they consider
the comfort of beings like themselves in future as their aim of life?

6- Man: Some schools of thought believe that man is the aim of life.
Moral ethics, avoiding disturbing others, activating human emotions and
respect toward others are the main principles of this belief. The
problem with it, however, is that it provides no logical grounds for man
to give up his greed, and learn how to sacrifice his own wishes for the
sake of others'.

7- Abstracting the soul from material interests: Some Indian religions
consider the aim of life as purifying the soul from all desires, whims
and wishes. Although this belief reinforces one aspect of the soul, it
ignores the others, which are activated by establishing a correct
relationship between man and the universe.

The climax of this aim of life is when the abstraction-seeker considers
himself as God, claiming that there is nothing in him but God. After
quite convincing study and thoughts that satisfy my conscience, I have
come to the conclusion that these Indians, having reached an extremely
delicate view of the universe, where they are able to see the universe
as a unit for their own perception, make a very strange mistake -
instead of realizing how great their soul is, they make God seem
smaller! We can say, however, that if the human soul makes such mistakes
in these delicate states, their soul truly has made no progress at all.

8- Nirvana: Presented by Buddha, this belief is said to be achieved by
abstracting the soul away from material and physical pleasures. Nirvana
ignores man's talents and potentials, making the human ego fall astray
from its true path. In other words, it omits some facts about man.

9- Absolute freedom: Here, being released from any form of confinement
or limitation is considered as the aim of life. Simpletons who follow
such a

belief have not understood the meaning of freedom correctly, for freedom
is a means, not an end. Freedom is the power to choose, and if
accompanied by proper thought and choice, can elevate man. Since freedom
arises from the dynamism of life, it cannot even be the partial aim of
life, let alone the main one.

10- The ultimate aim of life in divine religions: Life, as seen in
divine religions, is an outstanding effect of God's will. Thus, the aim
of life is to reach God. The Holy Qur’an has also expressed the aim of
life in various ways.

The Aim of Life as Seen in the Holy Qur’an
------------------------------------------

The verses in the Holy Qur’an that concern the aim and philosophy of
life can be categorized into ten groups:

1- Verses saying that creation is not aimless. (3:191)

2- Verses implying the objective righteousness of the universe. (6:73)

3- Verses that show that life has an aim. (23:115)

4- Verses that state that the universe has not been created as a means
for playfulness or amusement. (21:16)

5- Verses that believe God is the final destination of everything.(
41:53)

6- Verses that say man will return back to God. (3:109)

7- Verses that say those who do good will go to heaven and evildoers
will end up in hell. (Counsel, 41:22) and (4:140)

8- Verses that regard the end of life as meeting God. (18:110)

9- Verses that call drowning in purely natural phenomena as “worldly
life,” and denounce such a life. (47:36)

10- Verses that state worship as the aim of life, encouraging man to be
pious and pure. (51:56)

Studying these verses leads us to some conclusions:

a) The creation of the universe has not been in vain. We can conclude
this principle by studying the external world and the order and harmony
ruling it, and also by studying the internal world.

Ever since mental development begins, a kind of original perception
occurs inside us that contends with the playful manipulations,
hallucinations and imaginations about the universe. This battle, like
the battle between the conscience and evil, goes on until it wins and
shows man the ultimate aim of the world, or it loses, sending man off to
a nihilistic place to hang about.

b) The universe is orderly and righteous; nothing in the universe moves
outside the realm of values and proper merits.

c) The universe is not a plaything; it is quite serious in its creation.
By understanding the mathematical face of the universe, we can realize
how serious it is.

d) The universe is moving toward its final destination. Such a
destination cannot be lower than the stages it passes through, and it
cannot be equal to them either. The final destination of all movements
and developments is God.

e) The law of actions dominates the universe. All of man's movements,
developments, words, thoughts and actions lead to reactions in this
world and the other world.

f) The aim of life is much higher than purely natural life. The supreme
aim of life cannot be of the same kind as the advantages of natural
life, for the benefits and desires natural life provides belong to
natural life, which cannot be regarded as the real aim of life itself.
Thus, the ultimate aim of life must be beyond the conditions of purely
natural life.

g) The principle of reward and punishment shows that each human being
will receive the rewards or punishment he should get with the aims he
has set himself in his life.

h) The final aim of human life is the success of man's supreme nature in
life, which begins from God and returns to God through worship. Worship
means accomplishing the nature of life in its various aspects. Once man
steps beyond his purely natural life, his worshiping will begin. If man
understands himself as a part of the general rhythm of the universe, who
must make efforts to activate the disposition of his existence, he will
turn to worship. Thus, all aspects of man's life can be regarded as
worship, and as Imam Ali says, the whole world can become man's mosque.

Therefore, a university student, a farmer working on his farm, and a
worker busy in his workplace are all worshiping God, provided that they
consciously move along the path toward God. The ultimate aim of life as
Islam sees it is:

The ultimate aim of life is making the ideals of this passing life with
the waters of intellectual-spiritual principles and freely guiding the
human character - which has arisen from earth - toward divine
attraction, freeing it from natural factors and selfishness by means of
awareness of pure soul, which is connected to the general rhythm of the
universe.

A life with an aim is a conscious effort; every moment of the observable
aspect of such a life is the preliminary to the next, evolutionary
moment in a transparent world upon which divine light shines on man's
pure conscience, and its deep aspect is drops pouring into the ocean of
eternity, elevating the human character with its waves all the way to
God.” That is a life with an aim - intelligible life, which means:

<p dir="rtl">
انّ صلوتی و نسکی و محيای و مماتی لله رب العالمين
</p>

***“My prayers, worship and death are at the will of God, the Creator of
the universe.” (6:162)***

The Characteristics of an Objective Life
----------------------------------------

If man sets himself an ultimate goal in life and aims for it, his life
will find new qualities:

1- Realizing the value of life and not feeling emptiness: If man
considers the aim of his life as worshiping God, he will believe that
every moment of his life belongs to God. Such a human being will not
only understand the value of life, but also never feel nihilistic, even
if his wishes or dreams do not ever come true.

2- Supreme responsibility; knowing where one stands in the universe: In
an objective life, man both understands where he stands in the universe
and also feels the necessity to move along the path of evolution.

3- Respecting one's own and others' nature: When there is an aim in
life, man considers his nature as valuable, and also feels respect for
the value of

other human beings' nature, for he understands the unity among human
beings in the talent to find God and move toward the highest goal of
life.

4- Appreciating God's blessings: In objective life, man gains every
benefit he gains - from science

5- Reasonably adjusting the relationship between the means and the end:
In objective life, man does not make use of any illogical means for
reaching his goal; he considers the logical relationship between the
means and the goal, and chooses his goal by means of correct assessment
of the means he uses.

6- Deep passion for work and activity: Since achieving the aim of life
is impossible without moving along the path of divine attraction,
serious work and effort is a crucial fundamental man with an objective
life. As Jalal-addin Muhammad Molawi says:

<p dir="rtl">
دوســت دارد يار اين آشفتـــگی کوشــش بيهوده به از خفتگــی
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
اندرين ره مـیتراش و مـیخراش تا دم آخــر دمی فارغ مبــاش
</p>

*All this anxiety and effort - however it may be - is appreciated and
approved of by God. He likes desperation and anxiety, and creates
challenges and situations of hard effort for us so that we do not fall
into sleep in this world. O people! Struggle, endeavor and carve
yourself a life out of this rough path, and never cease trying.*

7- Gaining supreme freedom: In an objective life, man's lusts and
desires are harnessed in order to achieve supreme freedom

Life with supreme freedom is one of the characteristics of an elevated,
objective life. Without such a freedom, which consists of man's release
from selfishness, hallucinations and even other kinds of freedom gained
for the natural flow of man's life, like social freedom and freedom of
expressing one's ideas, we will have no logical response to the question
of the meaning of life.

8- Freeing man from petty absolutism: The human mind always tends to
aspire for absolutism, so man must always consider the supreme aim of
life as the absolute, so that other affairs and things will seem to him
merely as a means to achieve it.

The Six Kinds of Life:
----------------------

1-**A life with no consciousness, freedom, free will or independency of
character:** In this form of life, only things that are necessary for
survival are of concern, like reproduction and resisting the adversities
of nature. Man thinks about neither the meaning of life nor material
life. Such people have no self-independence; they purely obey natural
factors.

2-**A worldly life purely for the world: Material life is sought and
nothing else:** These people do observe some of the laws about nature,
and do not consider it as total farce, however. But they are content
with their material life, and ignore higher aspirations. They are
ignorant toward their standing in the universe, and do not tend to find
answers to basic questions like: Where have I come from? Where do I go
from here? Why am I here?

3-**A spiritual life to provide spiritual delicacy (living purely for
the other world)** In this form of life, one spends his whole time
struggling

against his desires and natural emotions keeping them silent in order to
purify his soul. Some ascetics believe that the highest aim of life is
activating the delicate aspects of the soul.

4-**A life aiming for both this and the other world (a life of two
independent goals):** In this lifestyle, attention is paid to both
worlds. However, these people see no relation between this world and the
other. They do not realize that man's life is an inseparable reality,
despite its numerous aspects. They neglect the unity between life in
this world and in the other.

5-**A spiritual-looking life aiming for material life (pretending to aim
for the other world, but actually aiming for this one):** Those who have
chosen this kind of life are incapable of understanding the truth about
life, and merely pretend to know it. They ignore the fact that being
pretentious will only fool the simple-minded, and even that for a short
time. These people have actually tricked themselves, living a life of
gradual spiritual suicide. They look quite like a saint, but are evil
inside.

6-**Living in this world on a path to life in the other (an intelligible
life):** This is the lifestyle prophets of God have approved of. They
believed that life is a truly great reality, and that proper, pious
knowledge and deeds are needed like two wings that can fly man toward
evolution, guiding his worldly life toward a life in the other world.
Man should make use of this world only to develop; however, the heart
and soul of all of man's worldly activities relate to the other world.
This form of life - worldly in appearance but in fact aiming for the
other world - will never make man feel nihilistic, and its many problems
are easily tolerable for man.


