How Do Cultures Evolve?
=======================

Various definitions have been given for culture in encyclopedias all
around the world, but they all have elements of properness, perfection,
spiritual and physical progress, man's virtual dignity and glory, a
deserved, appropriate life along with responsible freedom and
law-abiding justice in common. Over 164 various definitions exist.
Having studied and evaluated the most important definitions of culture,
we may provide a comprehensive one: Culture is the necessary or proper
attribute of man's physical or mental activities, based on sound logic
and emotions arising from sensible evolutionary lifestyles.

Culture is generally a bi-polar phenomenon; it has both external and
internal natures. On one hand it concerns man's mental structure and
spiritual make-up - which other living beings lack - and on the other,
it has observable effects, too, which are behaviors and results
physically visible.

The Four Principles of Culture
------------------------------

Four principles should be noted in our definition of culture:

Necessary or proper quality based on sound logic and emotions arising
from evolutionary lifestyles. In other words, every cultural element
must first originate from sound logic and supreme human emotions, and
secondly provide man with the means for his development and perfection.
If what the society calls culture does not tend to develop man or arouse
his highest emotions, it will be in fact an anti-culture element.
Culture is a term including values. Phenomena like greed for power,
fame, selfishness and hedonism cannot be regarded as cultural elements.

Human life is worthless without a culture based on the definition given
above, for without culture, life will be empty of supreme human meaning,
intellect, or emotions.

The more the culture of a society relies on basic, intelligible
principles and supreme human perceptions, the more lasting the culture
will be.

Culture has two aspects: relative and absolute.

By absolute aspect we mean the comprehensive, general aspect of culture,
such as the culture of appreciating beauty, respect for others, and
gaining knowledge, which is applicable to all human societies. The
relative aspect of culture arises from the particular ways of thinking,
emotions and behaviors of a certain society, like mutual respect.

Two Different Forms of Culture
------------------------------

We can categorize culture into two kinds: pioneer and pursuant.

Pursuant culture is the quality or lifestyle independent of proven
principles; it arises merely out of people's wishes and desires, right
or wrong. In other words, whimsical desires are the base of this form of
culture. It includes unnecessary beauties and pleasant phenomena,
ignoring what people really require. Here, immoral, prolific phenomena
are regarded as culture. The culture nowadays is mainly pursuant rather
than pioneer. The reason for this is that a series of the highest of
cultural fundamentals have been downtrodden:

1- The culture of authentic affection for one's fellow beings

2- The culture of finding original moral conscience

3- The culture of having a high aim in life

4- The culture of honesty, faithfulness and keeping promises

5- The culture of responsible freedom, thoughts and just deeds

6- The culture of regarding science and knowledge as sacred

7- The culture of cooperation and collaboration

8- The culture of spreading constructive, pioneer arts

9- The culture of truth dominating the media and avoiding omission of
facts or incorrectly interpreting them

10- The culture of fine economy and providing all people of the living
they are entitled to.

Pursuant culture can be divided into three groups:

● Sedentary culture: If the cultural elements of a society consist of
ethnic and mental traditions, geographical conditions and qualities of
the past, that culture can be considered as sedentary. In this form of
culture, a series of fixed historical or environmental characteristics
infiltrate deep in the society and resist any social evolution.

● Liquid, colorless culture: Based on no fixed mental basis or
principle, it is always undergoing change.

● Self-oriented culture: Here, cultural phenomena and activities
themselves are regarded as goals rather than means to get us to higher
goals.

This form of 'self-goal' was quite typical of scientific, technological
and economic cultures of 19th and 20th century societies. It caused
stillness in the real nature of culture - providing creativity and
development in the ideals of life of the human ego. The other thing it
has done, which is as dangerous as the former, is that instead of being
the maker and manager of technology, man has become an irresponsible
part of its fatalistic trends.

A Pioneer, Dynamic, Objective Culture: This kind of culture arises from
the basic principles of man's evolutionary life. Its motives are
original human aspects, and its goal is the ideals that make man head
for the attraction of life's supreme end. This is the culture that can
provide man with truly original human civilization, and free him from
all selfish rulers. Cultural activities also aim toward the highest of
human values. If a culture is creative, objective and progressive, it
will never fall.

Pioneer culture originates from two factors - primary and secondary. The
primary factor is the active, mental factor that tends to change the
universe into man's ideal home by using constructive human aspects. The
secondary one involves the external and internal factors exclusive to
each nation or peoples, accounting for their lifestyles.

If pioneer culture is to dominate human societies, man should recognize
the highest aim of life as one of the basic elements of culture.

The basic principles of pioneer culture are:

1- The principle of perfection-seeking and eagerness toward it. Cultural
truth is eternal, even if its peoples and occurrences vary.

2- The principle of respect, which has been called love for peers, love
for mankind and affection in human cultures.

3- Man's high desire for a proper life

4- Correcting and adjusting the four relationships:

a) man-himself

b) man-God

c) man-the universe

d) man-his fellow beings

Two Aspects of Culture
----------------------

Every culture can have two aspects:

1- The observable, visible aspect includes the human ideas and ideals
that materialize in an observable fact, like artifacts.

2- The clear aspect of culture consists of the ideals, emotions, morals
and goals chosen for life and justifies and account for man's life
individually or socially, consciously or unconsciously. The word 'clear'
for these cultural aspects is like needing light and special glasses to
see things, without which nothing would be observable.

The clear, unobservable aspects of culture - which account for its
observable aspects - are of different kinds:

1- Selfishness and greed for power.

2- Unintelligible racism and patriotism.

3- General ideas and ideals that have been of interest to man throughout
history, like science, art and well-being.

Some of the clear aspects of culture attract man with their ideal,
desirable appearance. The way to deal with them is for man to refer to
his own self. Since man has fallen quite far away from his own self
nowadays, they have also put aside original, pioneer culture. As we
know, the clear aspect of culture interprets man's life in all its
aspects. If man turns to himself again and finds the supreme goal in his
life, he can change and improve the clear aspects of culture.

The supreme goal of life creates pioneer culture. The supreme goal of
life answers the six questions - Who am I? Where have I come from? Who
am I with? Where have I come? Why am I here? Where do I go from here? -
thus accounting for where it stands in the universe, and acquiring an
original culture.

Diversity of Cultures
---------------------

Can a society have diverse cultures? Can the society survive different
cultures? First, we must see what cultural diversity means. Let us begin
by studying several forms of culture:

1- Cultures that are harmonious because they have original
commonalities, like holy religions. Islam, Christianity, Zoroastrians,
Sa'ebeens (followers of the prophet John) and other God-sent religions
can live in harmony, for they have the same:

a) faith in the origin of the universe

b) faith in God's wisdom and will

c) faith in afterlife

d) faith in human dignity

e) faith in the necessity of man's proper life

2- Cultures that have the same basic principles of natural life and
ideology. Cultures that have the same belief about the desired mental
life can reach harmony, even if they are not religious.

3- Cultures that differ in their interpretation of the universe and the
supreme aim of life. Such cultures may be able to live alongside each
other for a limited period of time, but the disturbances and
contradictions they cause each other will soon destroy their harmony.

If various cultures have the same ideas about things useful for man's
physical and mental life, they can coexist harmoniously.

Acquiring Cultures
------------------

Cultures are diverse, so people and societies may be subject to
acquiring or transferring cultures. We must take the issue into
consideration whether cultures can be absolutely acquired or not. Should
cultures be totally accepted or should we study the culture we are to
acquire first?

If the culture is a pioneer one, we definitely must accept it and
endeavor to transfer it, for man's perfection-seeking potential
considers such a culture as desirable to man. Furthermore, no culture
should be accepted without study and refinement.

The elements and aspects of the culture should be evaluated and
criticized to make sure the inappropriate elements are not transferred;
culture transfer is not always correct, and only those cultures that are
based upon human values - which makes them useful and constructive - had
better be transferred. The elements of such cultures, like science,
industry, pioneer arts and supreme moral ethics, can bring about
remarkable developments in human societies, like Islam did when it
entered Iran and many other countries.

Sometimes, on the other hand, culture transfer leads to corruption and
mental disruption. Such cultures make human life nihilistic and ignorant
toward social values and the people.

Factors that Can Preserve Cultures
----------------------------------

Some cultures are stable and sustainable. They can prevail for a long
time and in various societies. The factors that can make a culture
stable are:

First, the positive relationship between the culture and some necessary
components of the society. For instance, the special culture Indians
have toward animals is necessary due to India's specific environmental
or ideological factors, whereas other societies have neither such
beliefs nor the necessity to do so.

The second, factor is time. Cultural elements become more firmly fixed
through time and also more attractive. The continuity of a cultural
element, however, does not necessarily mean that it is correct or
attractive.

For example, selfishness has been quite common throughout the history of
mankind, and few human beings have succeeded in correctly assessing
themselves and controlling their selfishness. Does the mere fact that
selfishness has prevailed mean that it is correct and well-established?
Obviously not, for the stability and continuity of a phenomenon in
various aspects of human life does not necessarily mean that it is
righteous and justified.

The traditions and customs of a nation are the third factor. As cultural
elements, traditions and customs affect different people, and create a
specific identity that can provide the culture of the society with
continuity.

The fourth, factor is the compatibility of cultures with facts. Any
culture that can be compatible with the fixed principles of human life
will be stable.

If the factors that make a culture stable belong to its ethnic
necessities, they must be studied. If the necessities are due to the
people's mental principles and rules, time cannot ruin the necessities;
if they are based upon the beliefs of influential figures among the
people, the stability of the culture depends upon how influential these
individuals are, and how logical they are.

In brief, the mere firm establishment of a culture among people does not
imply its originality or its compatibility with the truth. Although when
a culture deeply infiltrates inside people it does become like lenses in
their eyes through which its followers see the universe, since many
cultures of past and present prove baseless when analyzed, we can say
that for every positive step man takes on the path of his evolutionary
life, he must analyze the culture that dominates his society, throw away
any sedentary elements and prevent them from inhibiting his development.

Why Cultural Elements Lose Their Harmony
----------------------------------------

As we have already said, culture consists of various elements, which in
harmony can provide members of the society with development, elevation
and continuity. In most societies, however, there is unfortunately lack
of harmony among cultural elements. Intense disorder in the elements of
a culture can lead to the destruction of the whole culture. The most
important disorder in the culture of a society occurs when there is a
divide between the spiritual principles and human values. The factors
that can bring about disharmony among the cultural elements of a society
are:

1- The selfishness of the social leaders can cause disorders in some
cultural elements.

2- Hedonism is of the most significant of factors making cultural
elements disharmonious.

3- Greed for authority can also, in many forms, demolish cultural
values.

We should also keep in mind that harmony among cultural elements in a
society does not necessarily mean that all elements originate from the
same principles, for every cultural element or phenomenon must arise
from its own, specific origin. It does not matter, for example, for the
moral culture of a society to originate from emotional principles,
whereas its scientific culture may be intellectual and observational;
likewise, artistic culture may arise out of abstract tendencies while
historical culture originates from observable, realistic elements, and
religious culture is based upon pure spiritualism.

Can Culture Undergo Evolution?
------------------------------

Some people believe that culture has undergone an evolutionary progress
throughout history. These thinkers consider the advances achieved in
some cultural elements such as science and man's making use of his
potentials and talents as evolution in human culture. If evolution means
scientific and technological advances, man has undoubtedly made progress
with regard to his contact with the world and his fellow beings, for the
necessity to adjust life and man's sense of domination and
benefit-seeking has led to

developments in some cultural phenomena in history. But when it comes to
components of culture that are to develop man's soul, there has been no
evolution. In other words, man's material culture has made progress, but
the other aspects have not. For instance:

● Man still has to make himself committed to defy the culture of
selfishness.

● The culture of kindness toward human beings, constructive love,
creating charity and greatness has vanished.

● The culture of righteousness being the highest and using power to
uphold righteousness and executing what is good and right has waned.

● The culture of scientific conscience has been marred by greed for
fame, power and selfishness.

● The culture of caring for geniuses and constructive figures and using
them correctly has faded away in today's societies.

● There is no culture of constructive relationship between people; human
beings behave toward one another with savagery.

● If human culture has really had evolution, why does man ignore the
most fundamental principles of his life:

a) an Intelligible life

b) human dignity and grace

c) responsible, intelligible freedom

d) all laws should be equally applicable to all people

Man still suffers from cultures influenced by Machiavelli, fighting for
survival and greed for power. Stagnant evolution in culture has deprived
most people of realizing the supreme realities and following them.
People cannot comprehend intelligible beauties. The culture of
mechanistic life has disabled man's understanding of the beauty of the
universe, justice, freedom and dignity.

Nowadays, committing immoral acts is the preferred way to achieve one's
goal in political cultures. The logic of human economics has turned into
consumerism, and the culture of making a living for life has become
living to make an earning.

The Fundamentals of Western Culture
-----------------------------------

The principles we see as dominating cultural life in Western societies
today that can be considered the basics of Western culture. This does
not, however, mean that all people in the West believe in them; there
are some who actually defy these basics. The important thing is that
these principles govern the life and behavior of the people in the West.
Let us take some of these principles into consideration:

1- Worldly life is fundamental: Western man has no goal beyond life in
this world. They believe that this world is man's ultimate location of
existence in the universe.

2- Absolute freedom: Any individual or group can do as he wishes, as
long as they do not disturb others. Thus, the individual's life for his
own sake has no meaning, for man can do the filthiest of actions legally
as long as he causes others no inconvenience. Western culture emphasizes
mutual coexistence, not human effort on the path to an intelligible
life.

3- Greed for power: Power plays a crucial role in Western culture. It
has made cooperation, affection and tolerating legitimate actions of
other human beings mere tools for reaching power. The powerful do their
best to disable man in order to reach their own animal desires more
easily.

4- Hedonism: Western culture encourages hedonism. Some Western so-called
“thinkers” have even used science to promote hedonism. If human pleasure
is downtrodden, they believe, man will fall into mental disorders and
complexes.

5- Desire for seeking profits and advantages: Western culture sees man
as always seeking his own benefits and desires. That is what has led to
so much exploitation of various peoples and loss of human life

6- Machiavellianism: Machiavellian beliefs dominate the political
culture of the West. Human principles fade away, and politicians can use
Machiavellian principles to ignore human values.

7- Pragmatism spreads: Another basic characteristic of Western culture
is spreading pragmatism without correctly interpreting it. If Western
thoughts were based on the premises that mere emphasis upon abstract
concepts is not the only way to practically use true facts, and an
intelligible interpretation of the facts of the universe were presented,
the West would never be what it is today. Unfortunately, the current
trend is judging as true or false based upon only observable actions.
Thus, the criterion for being the truth is only observable actions.

8- Ignorance toward the limitations of science: In the West, man pays
attention to only science and what he gets from his physical senses and
laboratory devices. Religion, moral ethics, philosophy wisdom and
mysticism are overruled because they are regarded as non-scientific.

9- The incapability of Western philosophies: There is no question that
ever since many years ago, not only has the West failed to present a
systematic philosophical school of thought or world-view to man, but has
even been unable to provide a significant number of profound,
meaningful - though scattered - material. Alas, man cannot interpret or
freely choose his way of life without a general understanding of the
four relationships (man-himself, man-God, man-his fellow beings and
man-the universe).

10- Prolific, profane arts become popular: Although there is a concept
of perfection hidden in art, what exists in the West today is prolific
art. Lowly, decadent concepts are presented in the most attractive form
to fascinate people. Prolific art and using culture in the service of
one's desires and lusts is a factor that can destroy original human
cultures.


