The Abdication of al-Hasan
==========================

When in 40 A.H. 'Ali b. Abi Talib had been murdered in Kufa, his son,
al-Hasan succeeded him to the caliphate. 'Ali had collected a force of
40,000 men to march on Syria in an attempt to put down Mu'awiya1 .

The latter on the pretext of avenging the death of his uncle 'Uthman had
been steadily increasing his power and authority at 'Ali's expense. When
'Ali was killed, confusion rapidly developed among the forces which he
had assembled. It soon became apparent to al-Hasan that the situation
had reached the point where any continuation of hostilities against
Mu'awiya would result in catastrophic defeat. In order to avoid this and
the useless bloodshed that such a defeat would involve, al-Hasan came to
terms with Mu'awiya.

A version of the settlement made between al-Hasan and Mu'awiya has been
preserved by Ibn A'tham2 .

These are (the terms) on which al-Hasan b.'Ali b. Abi Talib settled with
Mu'awiya b. Abi Sufyan. The latter would make peace with the former
provided that he handed over to him authority for ruling the believers
on condition that:

1. He (Mu'awiya) governed them according to the Book of God and the
sunna of His Prophet, Muhammad, and the practice established by the
righteous Caliphs (sirat al-khulafa 'al-salihin)3 ;

2. Mu'awiya was not to make a bequest (of the caliphate) to anyone after
him. Rather the matter should be (settled by) a shura (deliberative
council) of the Muslims after him;

3. The people (al-nas) would be guaranteed security wherever they were
in the land of God, Syria, Iraq, Tihama or Hijaz;

4. The followers of 'Ali and his shi’a were guaranteed security with
regard to their persons, property, women and children;

5. Accordingly Mu'awiya would take up the covenant and compact of God
(ahd Allah wa-mithaquh); what God barred from any of His creatures would
be compensated by what He gave of His own accord;

6. He (Mu'awiya) would not oppress al-Hasan, nor his brother al-Husayn
nor any of the family of the Prophet (ahl bait al-nabi) with any evil
(gha’ila) either secret or public, nor cause any of them to be afraid
anywhere.

**Then follow the names of witnesses to the document.**

The document, if genuine presents several points of interest. It
demonstrates that succession to political authority was to be decided by
the Muslims and was not to lie in the hands of Mu'awiya. Although many
Shi'i would oppose the idea of a shura to decide the next political
leader instead of the office going automatically to the leading member
of ahl al-bait, it was the sort of compromise that al-Hasan would have
to have made. After all he himself was to pledge allegiance to Mu'awiya
as the political ruler. The second important point is that Mu'awiya
guaranteed the security of all 'Ali's supporters. Some of these had been
involved in the death of 'Uthman and as Mu'awiya's pretext for the war
was to avenge the death of 'Uthman, the treaty reveals that Mu'awiya's
real interest had been the acquisition of

power. The sixth clause is an undertaking by Mu'awiya not to harm any
member of the Prophet's family. The public cursing of 'Ali which
continued

after the treaty seems to violate the condition, particularly when the
ancient Arab view of cursing is taken into consideration.

Al-Tabari does not include this treaty. However he does include a story
from al-Zuhri of how Mu'awiya had sent al-Hasan a blank sheet with his
own signature at the

bottom, but at the same time al-Hasan had sent a sheet including his own
terms, which were much less than Mu'awiya had expected. When al-Hasan
received Mu'awiya's letter he doubled his demands but Mu'awiya, as he
had the original terms of al-Hasan, refused to accept al-Hasan's second
terms4 .

The only things mentioned by al-Tabari consist of funds in the Kufan
treasury and security for al-Hasan and his family5 . The accounts seem
to indicate at this point a strong Umaiyad bias, but at least they give
evidence for the existence of a version of the treaty which was not
adhered to by Mu'awiya, and probably was the actual treaty.

Al-lmama wa-l-siyasa attributed to Ibn Qutaiba includes only one
condition that "The (terms) on which he, al-Hasan, made peace with him
were that the Imamate should belong to Mu'awiya for as long as he was
alive, but when he died, authority should belong to al-Hasan."6

This can hardly have been the full treaty and it looks like a gloss on
the 2nd condition in Ibn A'tham's version. It seems likely that al-Hasan
believed that the Imamate would revert to his family if the items of
that condition were adhered to.

There seems to be fairly strong evidence that although al-Hasan gave the
oath of allegiance to Mu'awiya, al-Husayn did not. According to Ibn
A'tham al-Hasan dis­suaded Mu'awiya from attempting to force al-Husayn
to pledge allegiance to him7 .


