The eighth Imam, ‘Ali Ibn Musa, Al-Ridha’ (as)
==============================================

Born in Madina 11th Zeeqaad 148 Hijri (1.1.766 AD). Died in the city of
Tus Iran on 17th Safar 203 Hijri (26.5.819 AH) Period of Imamate 20
years.

His grandfather Imam Ja’far Al-sadiq (as) died one month before the
birth of Imam Ridha’ (as) The family must have been consoled by his
birth which took place after such a great loss. He was brought up and
instructed by his affectionate father under whose supervision he passed
his boyhood and youth. He availed himself of the instructions of his
learned father for thirty one years, till the later was taken to Baghdad
to suffer the hardship of imprisonment for four years till his death.

Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far (as) could foresee that the hostile Abbasid ruler
would not allow him to live peacefully and circumstances would take such
a turn that his followers would not be able to see him or enquire about
his successor prior to his death.

So while free and undisturbed in Madinah he felt the need to introduce
his successor to his followers. He, therefore, assembled seventeen
prominent dignitaries from the descendants of Imam ‘Ali (as) and
proclaimed that his son ‘Ali Ibn Musa (as) would succeed him.

He also wrote his will on which 60 respected elders of Madinah signed as
witnesses. Such elaborated arrangements were never made by any other
Imam and they proved to be most appropriate due to the controversy about
the Imamate which ensued after the death of Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far (as) .

Imam Ridha’ (as) was 35 years old when his father died in prison of
Harun al-Rashid in Baghdad and the responsibilities of the Imamate
devolved on him. At that time Harun Al-Rashid was the absolute ruler of
Baghdad and the descendants of Imam ‘Ali (as) were passing as ever,
through trials and tribulations because of the tyranny of the Abbasid
ruler.

Yet Imam Ridha’ (as) carried on the responsibility of administering the
Divine Law of Shari’ah as taught by the Holy Prophet and Imams of the
Ahlul Bayt after him.

After putting an end to the life of Imam Musa Ibn Jaa’far (as) Harun
al-Rashid lived for ten years. He had less tolerance for the existence
of Imam ‘Ali Ridha’ (as) , then he did for his revered father. But he
also knew that his Government had already lost face due to its prolonged
maltreatment and eventual assassination of Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far (as) or
perhaps the tyrant felt the stings of conscience which kept him from
harassing the 8th Imam.

It is said that once Yahya Barmaki, his Prime Minister, in order to gain
the ruler’s favor, informed Harun that Imam ‘Ali Ibn Musa (as) claimed
Imamate in the same way his father had done, Harun coldly replied, “We
have already inflicted cruelties on his father, do you expect me to
annihilate this family altogether.

Still, Harun was antagonistic towards the Prophet’s descendants and
persisted in maltreatment of most of them in Madina. The local Governors
of Madina who wished to please the ruler could not afford to be fair to
Ahlul Bayt. People could not visit the Imam freely seek his knowledge,
and he had little chance to teach his followers openly, for the eyes of
the agents of Caliph focused unceasingly on the activities of the Imam.

Political wranglings in Baghdad between the two sons of Harun were
rocking the Empire. His elder son Amin who had an Arab mother had the
support of the Arabs and most of the Abbasid elders, while the younger
son Mamun had a Persian mother and was supported by the Persians.

To console both factions Harun took a pledge from both his sons that
after his death Amin will rule the Arab part of the Empire while Mamun
will rule the Persian side.

When Harun died in faraway Tus, the most northern town of his Persian
Empire, Mamun was with him and buried him there. Amin in Baghdad
immediately proclaimed himself the Caliph of the whole empire and
immediately deposed Mamun from the rulership of the Persian Province.
Mamun’s main concern was to subdue the Persian province under any
circumstances.

He realized that the majority of Persians favored the teachings of Ahlul
Bayt and if somehow he could persuade the Imam of the Ahlul Bayt in
Madina to side with him, he could confirm his rule there. Once he felt
secure on that side of the Empire, he would then rise against his
brother and easily depose him.

So the orders were sent out for the Imam to leave his home in Madina and
go to the Abbasid ruler in faraway Tus. Imam, as if by some miracle knew
what was to come. So he left his wife and only son Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al
Jawad, later known as Imam Muhammad Taqi (as) in Madina.

He also called many elders of Madina mostly from Banu Hashim and told
them of his call to go to the outpost of the Empire to see Mamun. The
date of his departure was in the month of Rajab 200 Hijri. It was a long
journey to Merve and the Imam set out on this momentous journey with
some of his friends who were loyal to him throughout his life.

His journey began from Madina to Makka where he performed the Umra, then
he took almost the same route as Imam Husayn (as) took in 61 hijri
towards Karbala’. Half way through the hills of Hejaz when he crossed
over to the desert of Najd his route changed to that of Imam Husayn (as)
and his caravan moved towards the eastern side and reached the town of
Basra in the month of Shawwal.

From Basra he crossed over the Shatt-al-Arab and reached the Persian
soil heading towards the town of Qum. It was in the month of Zilhijja
that he reached Qum where he stayed for a while. The month of Muharram
the 8th Imam spent in Qum where it is said that he established for the
first time a Majlis to commemorate the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (as).

This was the first Muharram in 201 Hijri that set the tradition of
Majlis, beginning in Persia the way the Imams of Ahlul Bayt had wanted
it and the way it was observed in Madina and Makka and throughout the
province of Hejaz and Najd and to some extent in Iraq where people
thronged for pilgrimage to the Shrine of Imam Husayn (as) .

After spending the Month of Muharram in Qum the Imam proceeded towards
the northern part of Persia crossing the Alburz mountains to the town of
Merv where Mamun had settled with his army to secure his empire for him.

It is thought in some historical circles that the 8th Imam involved
himself in politics while his ancestors up to the 7th Imam after the
martyrdom of Imam ‘Ali (as) refrained from this journey. Outwardly it
looks like the Imam was abandoning the policy of his predecessors for
the Imam could not be the heir- apparent to the caliphate without
becoming involved in the politics of the day.

The Imam took pains, however, to indicate that it was not his desire,
but that he was acting only in accord with the summons he had received
from Mamun. He seemed to have no choice but to proceed on this hazardous
journey.

Indeed if he had refused to proceed or shown any reluctance, force would
surely have been used which would have been more humiliating for the
Imam and his family.

Yakubi in his history gave some details of this journey. From Qum the
Imam moved north to the town of al-ray, the Greek Rhages, which is near
the site of the present city of Tehran. From this place the caravan
continued its journey until it reached the city of Tus. From Tus they
travelled on to the city of Merv, in what is now modern Turkistan.

On his arrival in Merv, Mamun welcomed him with great ceremony and pomp.
Mamun treated the Imam with great honor.

It is mentioned by various historians, Both of Shia and Sunni schools of
thought, that when Mamun initially offered the Imam his throne, the Imam
declined the offer firmly and resolutely. After several attempts to
bring the Imam to accept the offer failed, Mamun told him to accept the
offer of being his heir- apparent to succeed him after Mamun’s death.

Imam replied to this offer, “ I will accept this to console you, but
this will never happen for I will leave this world before you.” Once
Mamun achieved his desire to get the consent of the Imam as his
successor, he declared this openly to all in order to see the reaction
of the Abbasid clan who were favoring his half-brother Amin.

According to Yakubi it was on the 27th of Ramadan, in the year 201 Hijri
that the Imam was officially designated as Mamun’s “heir- apparent,”(
Wali’ahd,) and the Imam’s name was included with his own on gold and
silver coins. The inscription on these coins is well worthy of notice:
“The King of God and the faith, Al-Mamun, Amir and Khalifa of the
faithful, and Al-Ridha’, the Imam of the Muslims.”

This meant more than that the Imam was to be official chaplain to him
for Mamun summoned the descendants of Abbas, men and women to come to
Merv. It was an assembly of thirty three thousand and when they all
assembled, the caliph Mamun called for ‘Ali al- Ridha’ (as) and gave him
a place of honor among the greatest of the Abbasid nobles.

He then announced to those he had summoned, that he had carefully
considered all the descendants of Abbas and also the descendants of
‘Ali, and that he had not found in his search anyone more worthy or more
fit to be his successor than ‘Ali al- Ridha’.

He therefore took him by the hand and publicly acknowledged him as his
successor(Kulaini). He then gave his daughter Umme Habib in marriage. He
also sent abroad the command that the wearing of black flags which was
the symbol of Abbasid rule after the destruction of the Ummayads, should
be discontinued and that hereafter the use of green should be
substituted. Green being the color of Ahlul Bayt and the House of ‘Ali
(as) was the order of the day.

Once this story of succession was announced Mamun’s political ambition
was achieved. He secured the help of the Persians fully behind him. With
their help his army invaded the capital of the Abbasid empire, Baghdad,
Amin was killed and his head was sent to Mamun to see for himself that
he had become the sole ruler of the Abbasid Empire.

But Mamun was still not secure on his throne. The Arab party who sided
with Amin, never liked the appointment of Imam ‘Ali al- Ridha’ (as) as
the successor of Mamun, no matter how dubious it looked to them on the
face of it.

The chiefs of the Abbasid family in Iraq perceived that by this
appointment the principal authority in the empire would very likely be
taken from them. They got together, therefore, and proclaimed that for
bequeathing the Caliphate after his death to the Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’
(as), who was not their immediate family, Mamun himself was declared
deposed.

They swore allegiance to Ibrahim al Mehdi, Mamun’s uncle as their new
caliph. This proclamation took place on the 5th of Muharram 202 Hijri.

While Imam Ridha’ was with Mamun in Merv, his Prime Minister Fadl ibn
Sahl arranged a conference on religions to which he invited the leaders
of different sects, including Zoroastrians and Christians and Jews, that
they might hear what the Imam of the Ahlul Bayt had to say to impress
them of their spiritual abilities and excellences.

It was in these discussions with leaders of other faiths that the Imam
clarified the position of sinlessness of the Prophets and of the guided
Imams. These conferences were so successful that at one stage Mamun was
fearful of the increasing influences of the Imam on the people as a
whole.

In one such incidence on the occasion of the Eidul Fitr, the whole
strategy of Mamun and the shear hypocrisy of the drama he was playing
was exposed. He had asked the Imam to lead the Eidul Fitr prayers at the
end of Ramadan that year. First the Imam declined, but when Mamun
insisted, he agreed on the condition that he will direct the occasion as
he would deem fit.

On the morning of the Eidul Fitr, when the military and civil leaders
assembled outside the door of the Imam to come out and lead the prayers,
they saw the Imam come out of the house bare foot, wearing a white shirt
and white headgear. Imam also advised his companions to follow him in
the same manner. He came out on the Road to the mosque outside the city
of Merv.

All the citizens who saw the Imam in this fashion copied him and all
walked barefoot. Even the military chiefs and civil judges walked bare
foot. A huge crowd followed the Imam. He was saying Takbir loudly and
all were following him and shouting Takbir (God is great).

The situation became so tense that when Mamun was informed of this huge
following of the Imam he immediately sent a request to the Imam to
withdraw from leading the Eid prayers. Imam withdrew and it was a great
show down for the Emperor and exposed his trickery to the full.

It was after about a year’s stay of the Imam in Merv that Mamun decided
to do something about the situation in Iraq. He knew that his uncle
Ibrahim al Mehdi had been proclaimed as Caliph there in his place. This
was a thorn in his heart.

He decided that it was time for him to return from Khorasan and assert
his rights in person. He had already strengthened his position due to
the help of the Persians. With a huge army beside him Mamun prepared his
journey back home.

He was accompanied, as Yakubi mentions it in his history, by Imam al
Ridha’ (as) as his heir apparent and by his prime minister Fadl ibn
Sahl, who was known as the holder of two offices, civil and military,
being the Prime Minister as well as the chief of the Army.

But when they reached the town of Sarakhs, Fadl ibn Sahl was
assassinated in his bath by two persons, Ghalib al Rumi and Sarraj al
Khadim. They were found out by Mamun who immediately put them to death
immediately that if there was any implication of Mamun in this murder it
should not be exposed.

Mamun had his suspicions about his Prime Minister who was secretly
gaining favor with the Abbasids in Baghdad. Historians did mention the
name of Mamun in disposing off Fadhl ibn Sahl.

Within two days of this murder when the army reached the town of Tus,
Imam Ridha’ fell ill and died within three days of his illness. Yakubi
reported that “his sickness was no more than three days and it was
reported that Ibn Hisham, Mamun’s favorite henchman had given the Imam
poison which caused his death.

He mixed poison in grapes and when Imam had eaten the grapes he became
ill in the same manner as Imam Hasan did and died within three days.”

Ibn Babawaih relates various reasons that have been assigned to Mamun
for poisoning the Imam and shows also the circumstances in which Imam
‘Ali Ridha’ (as) is said to have designated his son Muhanmmad ibn ‘Ali
as his successor to the Imamate.

Imam ‘Ali Ridha’ (as) died and was buried far off from Madina, the home
of his forefathers of the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet. In Sanabad, about a
mile from the village where he died, they placed him in a grave inside
the tomb of Harun al- Rashid who was buried there ten years ago.

Mamun’s ambitions to get the Empire under his feet was almost
accomplished for he knew that the army under his command would not run
away from him at this juncture. So he cleverly killed off the Imam and
reached Baghdad with the declaration that the Caliphate of Banu Abbas
would remain in the family. Ibrahim al Mehdi was deposed and later
killed and Mamun became the supreme leader.

Imam's Conduct
--------------

Usually, the poor who cannot afford to enjoy the pleasures of life are
held in contempt or just tolerated by the society. But those who assume
a hermits’ simple austerity in spite of wealth and power are the real
saints.

The Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet adopted a peculiar policy. Those whose
means were limited dressed nicely because otherwise their adversaries
would taunt them as destitutes which would injure the dignity of their
piety.

But blessed were those who by chance became wealthy, and who assumed
simplicity and austerity so their simple life became a source of
consolation for the poor and a model for the rich. This can be
illustrated from the life of Imam ‘Ali (as) . For nearly five years he
ruled the Muslim world as caliph. He ate and dressed himself as a hermit
would.

Imam ‘Ali al- Ridha’ (as) too, led a simple life, though he was the
heir- apparent of the vast Arab Empire compared to which the Roman
Empire or the Persian territories would certainly not be a match. A vast
chain of countries whose caliph's upon watching a passing cloud, would
arrogantly assert: “Go and pour your waters anywhere you please; the
revenues of that land shall ultimately be brought to us”.

The appointment of Imam ‘Ali al -Ridha’ (as) as heir apparent
demonstrated to the world how the saints fare when the treasures of the
world are put at their feet. He felt he was morally bound to abandon
riches and pomp. History repeated itself, and the austerity of Imam ‘Ali
ibn Abi Talib (as) once more was shown in the calm and content
personality of Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as).

He did not like to decorate his house with expensive carpets, instead he
covered its floor with rough mats during the winter and grass mats
during the summer. When food was served, he would call all his servants,
including the gatekeeper to sit and eat with him.

Majlisi in Biharul Anwar V 49 Page 101, writes that our 8th Imam
insisted on eating his meals only after the entire members of his
family, young and old, servants and grooms were present. One day someone
who was fonder of royal formalities than the fraternity of the Ahlul
Bayt, suggested that it would be better to make separate eating
arrangements for the servants, The Imam replied, "All are created by
God, Adam is their father and Eve is their mother. Everyone will be
dealt with by God according to his deeds. Why should there be any
discrimination in this world."

Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’’s (as) life contains countless anecdotes of this
sort. Once a man said to him, "By God, there is none who is superior to
you in the nobleness of your ancestry.” The Imam said to him, “My
ancestors are honored merely for their Godliness, piety and worship.”
Another man once declared,” By God, you are the best in the world.”

The Imam checked him by saying: “Don’t you declare an oath. Any man who
is more pious than me can be better than me.” Imam several times
declared the Hadith of the Prophet that a black negro slave can be
better than a person from my own family if his deeds are better.

Establishment of Majalis to commemorate the events of Karbala’
--------------------------------------------------------------

As mentioned earlier, when Imam ‘Ali Al-Riza was on his journey to
Khorasan he stayed in the city of Qom for a few months and there he
established these commemorative Majalis. In Tus where he stayed for over
a year as heir apparent to the Emperor, Imam re-established these
Majalis there too. This tradition was initiated by Imam Muhammad al
Baqir (as) and then continued by the 6th Imam. But during those times,
only those who came to visit the Imams in their homes were narrated
these stories.

But Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as) was respected both as Imam and heir
apparent. Merv, the capital and a central city of Persia of that time,
was the meeting place of people from all walks of life and from all
corners of the earth. As soon as the crescent of Muharram was sighted,
Majalis of Karbala’ began. Everybody was expected to recite the sad
events that befell the Prophet’s descendants and maintain a serious
atmosphere of sorrow and grief.

Imam himself convened these Majalis in which he recited first, then
allowed others to read the story of Karbala’. Abdallah ibn Thabit and
D’bil al Khuzai were the poets who asked to recite poems narrating the
tragic events.

At the end of such a majlis the Imam bestowed on the poet a costly
shirt. The humble poet refused to accept such a precious gift,
requesting that the Imam be gracious to grant him his used shirt
instead. The good natured saint insisted on granting him both shirts,
the new one and his own old shirt.

This incident proves two things: First, that the speaker in these
majalis must not decide or demand any payment for his address, second
that if the convener presents something as a gift or payment, the
speaker may accept it.

To get an insight into the lives and activities of the Imam, let me give
a few anecdotes from the pages of history to establish his manner and
his behavior with other people.

One day a man approached the Imam and said, “ I am one of your followers
and have love for the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet. I am now returning from
pilgrimage to Makka and I am now penniless and have no money to return
home.

If you think it proper, please give me enough money so that I can reach
home. After reaching home, I will give the same amount to the poor in
your name. I am not poor at home, it is during my travels that I have
spent more than I should have and become penniless.

Imam got up, and went inside the house. He then called the man to the
door, extended his hand from behind the curtain and handed him the
required amount, saying, “Take these two hundred Dinars. These are your
travel expenses, and may this bring you the blessings of God. There is
no need to give equivalent money to the poor but if you feel you must
then you may give it to the orphans and the widows of your town.”

The man took the money and left. The Imam came out from behind the
curtain and resumed his seat. People asked, “Why did you adopt such a
way that the man could not see you while you were giving the money.”
Imam replied, “ I did not want to see the shame of supplication on his
face.” (Ayoun Akhbar al Riza)

Mohammed ibn Sinan reports that during the caliphate of Haroun, they
once warned the Imam about declaring his Imamate as the caliph would try
to harm him. The Imam replied, “ What gave me courage are the words of
the Prophet when he said, “ If Abu Jehl can harm even a hair of my head,
then be witness that I am not the messenger of God.”

And I say that “ if Haroun can harm even a hair of my head, then be
witness that I am not a true Imam." (Kafi)

Abu Salt Harvi reports that Imam left Nishapur and reached a village
called Din-Surkh, it was the time of Zohr prayers. Imam descended from
the horse he was travelling and asked for water to perform the Zohr
prayers. No water was found. Then the Imam with his holy hands dug some
earth and a spring gushed out Imam and all his companions performed the
wuzu.

This place near Nishapur is now called Qadamgah. It is a small hillock.
The spring still gushes and people who visit this place drink from the
spring for blessing and for obtaining cures from sickness and skin
diseases. The place preserves the Holy foot prints of the Imam on a
black stone. (Akhbar al Riza)

One of the famous saying of Imam ‘Ali Al-Riza is,

“ This world is a prison for a momin and a paradise for the unbeliever.”

This means that a true believer always aspires to leave this prison of
his body and his Nafs and Ruh wants to get away to the nearness of God,
but those who do not believe have nothing further than their mortal
lives and they aspire to make it a paradise.

But in the process they create their own hell on earth for their
aspirations are never ending desires for accumulating material wealth.


