The Ninth Imam, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al Taqi al Jawad (as)
=======================================================

Born in Madina, 10th Rajab 195 Hijri (12.4.811 AD). Died in Baghdad Iraq
29th Zeeqad 220 Hijiri (27.11.835, aged 25 years, Period of Imamate 17
years.

At the time of the death of Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as) our 9th Imam was
only 9 years old. Some people from among the followers of Ahlul Bayt and
others, doubted Imam’s eligibility to become Imam at this young age.
Kulaini in his Kafi relates that the Mutawalli of the Holy Ka’aba
questioned Imam for several days before he was satisfied and accepted
him as the Imam of the Time.

It is an undeniable fact that the whole episode of the call for Imam
‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as) to Tus, and his appointment as heir apparent to
Mamun was a game played for political convenience to get the sympathies
and support of the Persians to get his empire back from his step brother
Amin. Once this was achieved Mamun had the Imam poisoned to get him out
of his way.

But the fact is that Mamun being the most learned among all the Abbasid
rulers, was aware that the family of the Prophet had a special type of
knowledge which should be appreciated and be known to other people as
long as power remained in Mamun’s hands and his authority remained
supreme. This became apparent when he arrived in Baghdad victorious.

He began a policy of reconciliation with the Abbasid elders and also
with those who had inclinations towards the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet.
He reappointed Hasan ibn Sahl as Governor of Iraq who had openly
supported the cause of Ahlul Bayt. Ibn Sahl being a scholarly person,
co-operated handsomely in the literary and cultural interest in the
Emperor’s Court.

For in spite of the fact that there was warfare and political turmoil in
all directions during the reign of Mamun, the period marks perhaps the
apex of the oriental renaissance. There was freedom of speech and
expression which resulted in open discussions on many issues which were
taboos previously.

Most significant for the life of Imam Muhammad Taqi (as) was the fact
that Mamun’s favors towards the Ahlul Bayt did not cease because of
their scholarly and intellectual approach to Islam. Although after
arriving in Baghdad Mamun replaced the Hashemite Green color to the
black color of the Abbasids on flags and court dresses, he still
encouraged the intellectuals to engage in open discussions about the
concept of power and authority.

Indeed he took that action as political necessity for he did not want to
alienate his Persian friends and supporters. For not only prominent
friends of Ahlul Bayt were appointed to responsible positions, but
particular public favor was shown to the family of the deceased Imam
‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as).

One of the Imam’s brothers was chosen to preside at the annual
pilgrimage in Makka, and it was but a short time until Mamun married his
own daughter Umme Fadhl to Imam Muhammad Taqi (as) According to Yakubi,
Mamun bestowed upon the bride groom one hundred thousand Dirhams, and
said, “Surely I would like to be a grandfather in the line of the
Apostle of God and of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as).

It is a well-known fact that the Imam gave all this money to the poor
rather than spend it upon himself, which his wife Umme Fadhl, who was
the daughter of Mamun did not like at all and complained to her father
about this. But Mamun knew the ways of Ahlul Bayt, rejected her
complaints and told her to live like the wife of an Imam of the Ahlul
Bayt of the Prophet.

The story of Mamun’s first meeting with the young son of Imam ‘Ali
Al-Ridha’ (as) is interesting. One day, when the young Imam was only
nine years old, the caliph Mamun went out hunting. The Imam was standing
silently by the road side where some children were playing. The caliphs
entourage came that way. Seeing the soldiers of the caliph all the
children ran away, but the young Imam remained standing at his place.

Noting this, Mamun stopped his carriage and asked, “Young man, why did
you not run away like the other children?”

The Imam replied calmly, “ Neither had I committed a crime, nor was I
blocking the way. Why should I have run away or be afraid? And I also
know that you will not cause any unnecessary trouble when your way is
not blocked."

Mamun was surprised with this mature reply and asked, “ What is your
name?”

“Muhammad,” came the reply. Whose son are you? asked Mamun. "Son of ‘Ali
ibn Musa (as) ."

Mamun rode on. During his hunt the hawk returned to him with a fish in
its beak. Mamun was surprised. He returned back toward the city. Once
again, he found children playing on the same spot, who ran away seeing
the caliph’s soldiers, except this young man who said he was Muhammad
son of ‘Ali ibn Musa (as) who remained where he was.

Mamun hid the fish in his palm, stopped his carriage near the Imam and
said, “Tell me, what is there in my fist?” The Imam replied, “God
created clouds between earth and sky. The hawks of kings sometimes catch
fish from there and bring it to the Kings. They hide it in their fist
and ask a member of the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet, “Tell me what is
there in my fist.”

Mamun said, “ Truly, you are the worthy son of Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as)
(Bihar-al Anwar ,Majlisi). Mamun took the young Imam with him, and let
him live in a nearby house next to the Royal Palace.

It was during this stay of the 9th Imam nearby that Mamun had the chance
of seeing him closely and gaining an insight into the intellectual
abilities of this pious household.

Mamun convened many conferences during this period in which many
intellectuals and scholars assembled in order to listen and learn from
the Young Imam. Mamun told the Abbasid hierarchy that Imam ‘Ali
Al-Ridha’’s son was no doubt a boy of tender age, but he had inherited
his father’s virtues and qualities in full.

The learned scholars of the Islamic world could not compete with him. If
they doubted, they could put the young Imam to the test. This reply,
though totally said in jest, amounted to a challenge. Impulsed by
Mamun’s taunts they consented to judge the boy’s knowledge in a contest
with the most learned authority then, namely Yahya ibn Aaktham.

Mamun convened a magnificent gathering for this open contest. There was
anxiety to see this unequal match where a boy of Twelve was to contest
with the seasoned and renowned Chief Justice of the Abbasid Empire.
People crowded from every quarter. Historians have recorded that apart
from dignitaries and nobles, 900 seats were reserved for scholars only.
Mamun’s’ reign was described as the golden age of learning.

Experts of every trade and profession assembled in that great capital
from every corner of the Empire. Mamun had a carpet laid by the side of
his throne to seat Imam Muhammad Taqi (as) . In front of him was
accommodated the Chief Justice Yahya ibn Aktham. There was a pin drop
silence among the audience who waited to hear the arguments.

Silence was broken by Yahya who said, “ Will His Majesty allow me to put
some questions to Imam Muhammad Taqi (as) Mamun replied, “ You may seek
permission from the Imam himself.”

Yahya said to the Imam, “ Do you allow me to put some questions to you?”
“Yes, you may” replied the Imam. Yahya began by asking a question, “What
is atonement for a person who hunts a game while he is dressed in the
pilgrimage garb (‘Ahram).” The question itself indicated that Yahya
underestimated the scholarly attainments of his opponent.

Drunk with the pride of position and knowledge, he thought that the
young man might well be aware of simple daily routine problems of prayer
or fasting, but the possibility that he might be totally ignorant of the
statutes of pilgrimage or of the atonement of sins or mistakes committed
by a pilgrim never entertained his mind.

The sagacious young Imam was clever enough for the seasoned enquirer.
Instead of giving a general or a vague reply, he analyzed the different
aspects of the problem so dexterously that the audience immediately had
a true estimate of the Imam’s knowledge and of Yahya’s shallow
mindedness. Yahya too was puzzled and felt humiliated when the Imam
addressed him in the following manner:

“Your question is utterly vague and lacks definition. You should first
clarify whether the game killed was outside the sanctified area or
inside it; whether the hunter was aware of his sin or did so in
ignorance; did he kill the game purposely or by mistake, was the hunter
a slave or a free man, was he adult or minor, did he commit the sin for
the first time or had he done so before, was the hunted game a bird or
something else, was it a small animal or a big one, is the sinner sorry
for the misdeed or does he insist on it, did he kill it secretly at
night or openly during daylight, was he putting on the pilgrimage garb
for Hajj or for the Umra? Unless you clarify and define these aspects,
how can you have a definite answer?”

Whatever Yahya’s knowledge might have been, he was undoubtedly a
well-read man in Jurisprudence. While the Imam was unfolding all such
details of the problem, he had judged that he was no match for his
ingenious opponent. His face lost color and the audience realized the
situation well. His lips were sealed and he made no reply. Mamun fully
assessed his condition and thought it was useless to put any further
pressure on him.

He then requested the Imam to solve all the aspects of the question.
Yahya silent and puzzled, gazed at the Imam. But Mamun was bent on
carrying the matter to the end. He therefore requested the Imam to put
some questions to Yahya if he liked. The Imam then said to Yahya, “ May
I ask you a question? Disillusioned, Yahya who now had the true estimate
of the Imam’s capacity and had no misunderstanding about his own worth,
said in a humble tone,”

Your grace can ask, I shall reply if I can or I shall get it solved by
your own self.” Then the Imam put a question in reply to which Yahya
admitted his ignorance. The Imam explained it too. Mamun's joy knew no
bounds. What he had asserted came true.

Addressing the audience he said, “Did I not tell you that the people of
the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet have been gifted by God with limitless
knowledge? None can cope with even the children of this elevated House.”

The excitement of the gathering was great. All unanimously exclaimed
that Mamun’s guess was correct and that the Imam Muhammad Taqi al Jawad
(as) was a matchless person. The Emperor then thought it advisable to
marry his daughter to Imam there and then.

The Imam himself recited the marriage Khutba. This address (Khutba)
became so famous that as a remembrance, it has been recited at weddings
everywhere throughout the Muslim world ever since. Over joyed at this
auspicious occasion Mamun displayed his full generosity, giving away
millions in charity to the poor.

When the people departed and a few of the courtiers remained including
the Chief Justice Yahya ibn Akhtham, Mamun asked the Imam to tell them
the law concerning the aspects into which the killing of the animal was
done by a Muhrim. (Meaning a pilgrim in Aahram)

“Yes,” replied the Imam. “ If he had killed the animal outside the
sacred ground and it was winged and large ,an atonement of sheep would
have been necessary for him. If he had struck it down in the sanctuary,
the penalty required of him would be doubled.

If he killed a young bird outside the sacred ground, then the atonement
of a lamb which had been weaned off milk would have been required of
him. If he had killed it in the sanctuary, then he would have been
required to sacrifice a lamb and the value of the young bird. As for
wild animals, if it was a wild ass, he would have been required to
sacrifice a cow.

If it was an ostrich, the sacrifice of a camel would be necessary. If it
had been a deer, then a sheep would have been necessary. If he had
killed any of those in the sanctuary, the penalty would have been
doubled. Imam continued to describe all avenues of penalties for the
Muhrim to the astonishment of the audience.” ( Al Irshad by Mufid) “You
have done well Abu Jaafar and God has adorned you,” said Mamun to him.

Character and Virtues
---------------------

Imam Muhammed Taqi (as) occupied the highest position in human virtues
and moral attainments as this was the marked feature of the Prophet’s
family. It was customary for the Imam to meet everyone humbly, fulfill
the needs of the poor, maintain Islamic requisites of equality and
simplicity, help the poor secretly, treat even foes fairly, extend
hospitality, impart true Islamic knowledge to all and specially to the
scholars of religion and the like, marked his saintly life-in full
conformity with other members of this sacred series of infallible Imams.

Common people who could not appreciate such heights of moral excellence,
might have thought the new relationship, i.e. to become son-in-law of
the most influential monarch of his time, must influence the pattern of
life of the Imam and change his manners altogether.

Mamun too, might have thought on the same lines because spiritualism
which was the chief characteristic of this household was against the
practices of worldly rulers. It could be said that neither the Ummayads
nor the Abbasids had any personal grudge against the Prophet or his
family, the Ahlul Bayt, but they were at war with the moral standards
set by them.

They always tried to destroy the center of moral excellence and human
values which was shown as the polar star of ideal spiritual perfection,
overshadowing their royal glory.

In order to uphold their imperialistic and luxurious norms of life,
these monarchs wanted to do away with these godly saints who
demonstrated righteousness, compassion, faith, piety, fraternity and
justice as the main teachings of Islam. Yazid’s demand of obedience from
Imam Husayn (as) or Mamun’s appointment of Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as) as
his heir-apparent were two different aspects of the same desire.

The procedures were different but the end purpose was the same. Imam
Husayn (as) did not bow to pay homage, so he was slain in the
battlefield. Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as) did not serve the cause of Abbasid
imperialism, so he was silenced with poison.

Mamun, however, took it as a great opportunity to serve his objective to
patron the Imam who was only a young man. The political sagacity
suggested that it would be far easier to cast a young man into the
desired mold and thus it would be possible to demolish the center of the
Prophet’s teachings in Madina or elsewhere in the Islamic world which,
although working silently, was dangerous to the imperialistic designs of
the antithesis called Muslim Monarchy.

No doubt Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as) did not conform to Mamun’s designs, or
to his desires, but this could not disappoint him. Imam Ridha’’s mature
way of thinking and simple way of life could not be changed.

But there was the hope that in all probability a man of a tender young
age, who was brought up in the luxurious atmosphere of a Royal Palace
would grow into an ambitious merrymaking prince, altogether against his
ancestral ways and views.

With the exception of a few enlightened persons, everybody would think
on the same lines. But the world stood aghast to see that the young
son-in-law of the most distinguished monarch of his time refused to stay
in the royal palace and lived instead in a small house, thus maintaining
the Islamic values of virtue and ethics of a simple and humble life.

It is usually seen that if the bride’s people are comparatively rich,
they wish that the groom might live with them, if not in the same house,
at least in the same town and in a house of the same standard.

The Will power of the Imam can be judged from the fact that he lived in
a separate dwelling and of a humble standard in Baghdad. After one year
when Mamun realized that the Imam was not pleased with staying in
Baghdad, he allowed the couple to go to live in Madina.

On his return to Madina the Imam maintained the same ancestral
unimposing behavior: no body guards, no pomp, no restrictions on people
meeting him, no visiting times, and no discriminations against anyone
meeting the Imam and learning from him.

He spent most of his day time sitting in the Mosque of the Prophet where
Muslims came to avail from his knowledge and preaching. The narrators of
Hadith and other students of theology came to enquire about religious
sciences and the Imam guided them by explaining every complicated
matter. All the world saw that Imam Ja’far Sadiq’s successor, seated on
the same mat, was guiding the people towards piety which was the hall
mark of Islam.

Imam Muhammad Taqi (as) allowed the same amount of freedom to his wife
Umme Fadhl and imposed the same restrictions on her as his ancestors had
done in the case of their wives. He did not care much about the fact
that Umme Fadhl was a princess.

Although she lived with him, he married another lady who was a
descendant of Ammare Yasir. God had intended to continue the line of
Imamate through her and she gave birth to Imam ‘Ali Naqi (as) the tenth
Imam.

Imam Muhammad Taqi’s speech was very charming and effective. Once during
the Hajj season he addressed a gathering of the pilgrims and stated
commandments of the Divine Law of Sharia’a. The audience included
learned scholars who admitted that they had never heard such an eloquent
and comprehensive speech.

Many scholars came to learn the teachings of Ahlul Bayt. A collection of
brief and wise sayings is also left by the Imam, resembling the wisdom
of his ancestor Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) Some profound discourses on
theology and monotheism are also to his credit.

Mamun died in 218 Hijri (833 AD). As long as he lived no harm came to
the Imam. Mamun was succeeded by his brother Mu’taman, the second
heir-apparent after Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as) . He came to be known as
Al-Mu’tasim billah Abbasi.

His niece Umme Fadhl now began to write to him complaining more than she
did during the reign of her father because Mamun always rejected her
complaints. But Mu’tasim was jealous of Imam ‘Ali Al-Ridha’ (as) from
the very beginning. He had also opposed the marriage of Umme Fadhl to
Imam Muhammad Taqi (as) .

Al- Mu’tasim now got a chance to settle his differences in this matter.
Imam Muhammad Taqi’s (as) fame as a great scholar and the constant
gathering of people around him as well as the fame of his world renown
noble character annoyed him.

The failure of the political tactics too, intensified his resentment.
All these factors irritated him into enmity. In the second year of his
reign he summoned the Imam from Madina to Baghdad, ordering his Governor
in Madina expressly about it. Imam was compelled to set out for Baghdad
leaving his son ‘Ali ibn Muhammad (Naqi) with his mother in Madina.

For one year after the Imams’ arrival in Baghdad, Mu’tasim did not do
anything. He was hoping that the Imam would conform to the Royal ways of
living and then this would be a source of infamy for the Ahlul Bayt. But
when he realized that the man was becoming more popular in Baghdad with
his scholarly discourses with the scholars there, he had to act to stop
this as all his ancestors did before him and use the silent weapon of
poison to eliminate that thorn in his heart.

The Imam died of poison on the 29th of Zeeqa’ad 220 Hijiri (24.11.835
AD). He was buried by the side of his grandfather Imam Musa ibn Ja’far.
It is because of the two Imam’s who were famous for their suppression of
anger that the place was called Kazemain, the two Kazims, the enduring
ones.

Razavi Sayyids
--------------

It is a fact that all Sayyids known as Razavi are actually Taqawi. Imam
Ridha’ (as) had no son other than Imam Muhammad Taqi. Had he other sons
then the Imam Muhammad Taqi then their offspring should have been called
Razavi Sayyids. But as Imam Ridha’ (as) came to Iran and died in Tus
many descendants of his son Imam Muhammad Taqi were also called Razavis.

One famous saying of the 9th Imam Muhammad Taqi al Jawad (as) follows:

Someone asked, “was the Messenger of God Muhammad ibn Abdullah an
illiterate.” Imam replied, “No, the Messenger of God knew 72 languages
in which he could read, write and speak.”

Someone asked the Imam about the Angels. What are they? The Imam
replied, “ They are the powers of God that regulate the Universe.”


