The Ka’aba, The House Of Allah
==============================

In the province of Hejaz in the western part of Arabia, not far from the
Red Sea, there lies the town of Makka. In the center of this town there
is a small square building made of stones, about 60 feet long, 60 feet
wide and 60 feet high. Since time immemorial this town and this stone
built house has been known to world travelers. This is Baitullah, the
House of Allah. Its sanctity and antiquity is older than history itself.

Tradition goes that the Kaaba was ordained by Allah to be built in the
shape of the House in Heaven called Baitul Ma’amoor. Allah in his
infinite Mercy ordained a similar place on earth and Prophet Adam was
the first to build this place.

The Bible, in the Chapter of Genesis describes its building when God
ordained Abraham to erect a Shrine for worship when Abraham was ordered
to go to the Southern desert with his wife Hagera and infant son Ismael.

The Old Testament describes this building as the Shrine of God at
several places, but the one built at Ma’amoor is very much similar to
the one at Makka. There is no doubt that it was referring to the stone
built house at Makka.

Qur’an brought this story into the full light of history. In Sura 3:90
Qur’an says

***“Allah has spoken the Truth, therefore follow the creed of Ibrahim, a
man of pure faith and no idolater”.***

The first house established for the people was at Makka, a Holy place
and guidance to all beings. Qur’an firmly establishes the fact that
Ibrahim was the real founder of the Holy Shrine. When Prophet Ibrahim
built the Holy Shrine in Makka, his prayers were that this place should
remain a center of worship for all good and pious people; that Allah
should keep his family the custodians of the Holy place.

Ever since, Ismael the son of Ibrahim who helped his father to build
this place and his descendants remained the custodians of the Holy
Shrine. History tells us that centuries passed and the guardianship of
the Kaaba remained in the family of Ismael until the name of Abde Manaf
came into the limelight. He inherited this service and made it much more
prominent.

His son Hashim took this leadership and extended it to many other towns
of Hejaz so much so that many pilgrims flocked annually to this place
and enjoyed Hashims’s hospitality. A feast was given in honor of the
pilgrims, food and water was served to all guests by the family of
Hashim. This prominence created jealousy and his brother Abdu sham’s
adopted son Ummayya tried to create trouble.

There was a dispute in which Ummayya failed and left Makka to settle
down in the Northern provinces of Syria(Sham) currently known as Syria.
After Hashim his brother Muttalib and after him Hashim’s son Shyba who
became known as Abdul Muttalib assumed the leadership of the family. He
organized feasts and supplies of water to the pilgrims during the annual
festival of Pilgrimage to the Holy Shrine.

Prophet Ibrahim built this House for devout worship to one God. But
within his lifetime people disobeyed his orders and began to put idols
inside the Kaaba. Ibrahim had to clean the House of these idols and of
Idle worshippers.

He told the people that this was a symbolic house of God. God does not
live there for He is everywhere. People did not understand this logic
and no sooner had Ibrahim died the people, out of reverence, filled the
place with idols again.

They thronged to this place annually and worshipped their personal gods,
It was over Four Thousand years later that the last of the line of
prophet (S), Muhammad Ibne Abdullah entered Makka triumphantly, went
inside the Ka’aba and, with the help of his cousin and son in law ‘Ali
Ibne Abi Talib, (as) destroyed all the idols of Ka’aba with their own
hands.

At one stage of this destruction of idols, the tallest of the idol
Hubbol was brought down after ‘Ali had to stand on the shoulders of the
Prophet to carry out God’s orders. The Prophet of Islam was reciting the
Verse from the Qur’an:

***“Truth hath come and falsehood hath vanished.” (17:81)***

This was done in the 8th year of Hijra, January 630 AD after the
bloodless victory at Makka by the Prophet of Islam.

Historically when Ibrahim was ordered by Allah to build the Shrine for
worship over a small he uncovered the original foundations of the Kaaba
built by Adam. Ibrahim with the help of his son Ismael erected the new
shrine on the same foundations. Originally it contained only four walls
without a roof .

Centuries later during the time of Kusayi who was the leader of the
Tribe of Quraish in Makka a taller building was completed with a roof
and a quadrangle wall around it to give it the shape of a sanctuary and
doors all around the sanctuary walls. People entered through these doors
to come to the Ka’aba for worship.

It is now about 60 feet high, 60 feet wide from east to west and 60 feet
from north to south. A door is fixed about 7 feet above ground level
facing North East. A Black stone (Hajar al Aswad) was fixed into its
eastern corner. In front of the building was Maqame Ibrahim, the arch
shape gate known as that of Banu Shayba and the Zamzam Well.

Just outside are the Hills called Safa and Merwa and the distance
between the hills is about 500 yards. These days both of the hills are
enclosed into the sanctuary walls with a roof over it.

The whole building is built of the layers of grey blue stone from the
hills surrounding Makka. The four corners roughly face the four points
of the compass. At the East is the Black stone (Rukn el Aswad), at the
North is el Ruken el Iraqi, at the west al Rukne el Shami and at the
south al Rukne el Yamani.

The four walls are covered with a curtain (Kiswa). The kiswa is usually
of black brocade with the Shahada outlined in the weave of the fabric.
About 2/3rd’s of the way up runs a gold embroidered band covered with
Qur'anic text.

In the Eastern corner about 5 feet above ground the Hajar el Aswad (the
blackstone) is fixed into the wall. Its real nature is difficult to
determine, its visible shape is worn smooth by hand touching and
kissing. Its diameter is around 12 inches.

Opposite the North west wall but not connected with it, is a
semicircular wall of white marble. It is 3 feet high and about 5 feet
thick. This semicircular space enjoys an especial consideration and
pilgrims wait in queue to find a place to pray there.

The graves of Ismael and his mother Hajera are within this semicircular
wall. Between the archway and the facade (N.E.) is a little building
with a small dome, the Maqame Ibrahim. Inside it is kept a stone bearing
the prints of two human feet. Prophet Ibrahim is said to have stood on
this stone when building the Ka’aba and marks of his feet are
miraculously preserved.

On the outskirts of the building to the North East is the ‘Zamzam Well’
(this is now put under ground).

History of the building of the Ka’aba
-------------------------------------

Qur’an in Surah Baqara Verses 121 to 127 described it clearly that Allah
had ordained his servant Ibrahim to build the Shrine there for worship
of One God. During Kusayi’s time it was rebuilt and fortified. During
the early years of Prophet Muhammad (S) before he announced his
ministry, the Ka’aba was damaged by floods and it was rebuilt again.

When the Black stone was to be put in its place the Makkans quarreled
among themselves as to who should have the honor to place it there. They
had just decided that the first comer to the quadrangle should be given
the task of deciding as to who should have the honor. Muhammad (S) came
in and was assigned this task.

He advised them to place the stone in a cloak and ordered the heads of
each Tribe each to take an end and bring the cloak nearer the corner on
the eastern side. He himself then took out the stone and placed it in
its position. It has been fixed there ever since.

After the martyrdom of the family of the Prophet at Karbala in 61 Hijri
(681 AD), the Ummayad Caliph Yazid Ibne Moawiya did not stop there in
the pursuit of his destruction. He sent a large contingent under the
command of Haseen Ibne Namir to Madina which destroyed the Mosque of the
Prophet.

They did not stop there but proceeded to Makka and demolished the four
walls of the Ka’aba and killed thousands of Muslims who protested. Yazid
died and Ibne Namir returned to Damascus, Ka’aba was rebuilt by Abdullah
Ibne Zubayr and his associates.

Umawi forces came back to Makka and killed Abdullah Ibne Zubayr, hung
his body on the gates of the Ka’aba for three months for all to see the
Umawi power. But eventually this arrogance of power brought its own
consequences and Mukhtar became the ruler in Iraq. Under his guidance
the Ka’aba was refurbished and pilgrims began to arrive in safety to
perform Hajj.

The Ka’aba successfully withstood the Karamatian invasion of 317/929,
only the Blackstone was carried away which was returned some twenty
years later. In the year 1981 the Wahhabis brought tanks inside the
Ka’aba to crush the kahtani revolution against the Saudi regime and
almost demolished the South Eastern Wall. This was later restored with
the help of the Makkan people.

Every man living in Makka in the 6th and 7th century must out of
necessity have had some relationship with the Ka’aba. On the Muhammad
(S), the Prophet of Islam, the Qur’an is silent during the Makkans
period in this respect. All that is known is that the Muslim community
of the period turned towards Jerusalem in prayers.

Subsequently about a year and a half after the Hijra the Muslims were
ordered during prayers which were led by the Prophet of Islam himself to
turn towards Makka. The particular mosque in Madina where this happened
is called Masjid al-Qiblatain, meaning the mosque with two Qiblas. The
Qur’an tells the Muslims,

***“Turn then thy face towards the sacred mosque and wherever ye be turn
your faces towards that part ” (2: 139-144)***

At this same period the Qur’an began to lay stress on the religion of
Ibrahim, presenting Islam as a return to the purity of the religion of
Ibrahim which, obscured by Judaism and Christianity, shone forth in its
original brightness in the Qur’an.

The pilgrimages to the Ka’aba and ritual progressions around the
building were continued, but were now for the glorification of One God.
The Abrahamic vision of the Ka’aba created a means of discerning an
orthodox origin buried in the midst of pagan malpractices to which the
first Muslims pointed the way.

Every year after the Hajj ceremony the place is closed for one month and
on the Day of Ashura the Ka’aba is washed from inside by the Water from
the well of Zamzam and a new Kiswa is brought to cover the Ka’aba for
the next year.

This is the story of the Ka’aba and the persons who protected it and
remained its custodians and protectors from the satanic and evil forces
throughout history. Muhammad (S) and the people of his household (Ahlul
Bayt) were the protectors of the Ka’aba, and currently the 12th Imam
from the direct descent of the Prophet of Islam is the real protector,
its custodian and guardian and shall remain as such while in
concealment. In the following pages we shall unfold the lives and times
of these 14 Ma’sumeen Alaihimussalam.


