The Story of Hazrat Fatima (sa), daughter of the Holy Prophet
=============================================================

The Prophet of Islam had only one daughter named Fatima. Her mother
Khadija had two other daughters from her two earlier marriages. When The
Prophet married her, both daughters came with her mother to live in the
house of the Prophet.

Hazrat Fatima (sa) was born five years before Bethat when Muhammad (S)
was about 35 years old and her mother Khadija was about 50 years old.
She has many other titles. Zahra (Lady of Light) and Sayyidatun Nisa al
Alamin (Leader of the women of the worlds). The Date of her birth was
20th Jamad al Akhar.

After the death of her mother Khadija, she looked after her father the
Prophet of Islam so devoutly that Muhammad (S) used to call her “Umme
Abiha”, i.e. the mother her father. This was the hardest time for the
family because in the same year Abu Talib who was the protector of
Muhammad (S) from the animosity of the Quraish also died in the same
year as Khadija.

Muhammad (S) married Umme Salama, an old widow after the death of
Khadija to have someone to look after the household chores.

When Umme Salama was requested to tutor the child Fatima (sa), the wise
woman replied “How can I tutor one who is the personification of high
virtues and purity. It is I who should learn from her.” Her childhood,
therefore, was passed in a very chaste and modest environment.

It was then that she saw her revered father preaching Islam in the most
hostile atmosphere. The hostility of the Quraish after the death of Abu
Talib and Khadija was the strongest. Fatima saw and dressed the wounds
sustained by her father due to the stones thrown on him by the non-
believers who were ho to the preaching of Islam.

She might have heard and seen that certain wretched women hurled rubbish
on her noble father. She might have learnt of the plans made to put an
end to her father’s life. But from all these things Fatima was neither
frightened nor disheartened. She comforted her father, tended to his
wounds even at that tender age.

The entire family was blanketed with clouds of sorrowful gas a result of
the almost daily humiliation and mockery to which her most revered
father was subjected.

Migration
---------

When the migration took place, Fatima was left in Makka with the rest of
the Family which included her step mother Umme Salama, ‘Ali’s (as)
mother Fatima binte Asad and many others. ‘Ali (as) was in charge of the
family.

He stayed in Makka for another 3 days to give back the deposits to the
Makkans who entrusted these to the Prophet for safe keeping. After
fulfilling this duty ‘Ali (as) brought the family to Madina

Marriage
--------

After one year’s stay in Madina when Fatima (sa) was about 18 years old
that proposals for marriage began to be received by the Prophet who
politely refused to accept by simply saying that it is in the hands of
Allah, that he was awaiting Allah’s decree in this matter.

Fatima (sa)was the model of Prophet’s teaching among women just as ‘Ali
(as) was the best embodiment of his instructions and manly qualities
among men. They were the most suitable couple to be married. But ‘Ali
(as) was too modest to speak about it.

After some persuasion from friends he finally went to see the Prophet in
the mosque and proposed for marriage. Prophet told Fatima about it and
asked her whether she would approve. After receiving her consent the
marriage of Fatima (sa) and ‘Ali (as) took place in the simplest
possible manner.

‘Ali (as) sold his shield of armor for 200 Dirhams, brought the money to
the Holy Prophet who added a similar amount and asked his companions to
buy household goods to set up home for the Holy Family. Marriage was
solemnized by the Prophet himself and after marriage the couple went to
live in a separate house next to the House of the Prophet around the
Mosque.

Children
--------

Hassan (as) was born in the 3rd year of Hijra, Husayn (as) was born in
the 4th year of Hijra, Zainab was born in the 6th year of Hijra, Umme
Kulthoom was born in the 7th year of Hijra.

It was in the same house that the famous Verse of Purification (Surah
33.Verse 33) was revealed on the Holy Prophet and its narration by
Fatima has become so famous that it is read in every Muslim house as
Hadith-e-Kisa. The Reading of this Hadith brings blessings to the
household.(Tafseer-e- Kabir by Al-Razi).

It was in the same house where this blessed family fasted for three days
continuously without eating any food giving away their Iftari to a
beggar, an orphan and a prisoner who arrived at their door and asked for
food. The Verse in Surah Dahr revealed in praise of their extremely
charitable act in the way of Allah.

It was in the same house where every morning the Holy Prophet stood
outside and said loudly “Assalamo Alaikum Ya Ahlebaitin Nubuwwah” Peace
and blessings on the people of the Household of the Nabi.

There was so much respect in the heart of the Holy Prophet for Fatima
(sa) that whenever Fatima (sa) arrived in the mosque of the Prophet, the
Holy Prophet stood up to respect her. This gesture was also to show the
companions respect for women generally which was lacking in the Arabian
society of the day.

These acts of the Prophet were to show the companions that this house
and its occupants have a special place in the way of Allah and that this
status should be maintained after the death of the Prophet.
Unfortunately this was not done as the Holy Prophet intended his
companions to do. History tells us some very sad moments connected with
this house.

After the death of the Prophet when ‘Ali (as) did not come out to give
his oath of allegiance to Abubakr, the door of the house was burnt down
to get him out and in the process Fatima (sa) was injured. Her 5th
unborn child died because of this harsh action of some of the companions
and she herself died within 3 months of the death of her Holy father.

The following lines of poetry show her ordeal after the death of her
holy father very clearly.

“After the death of my father My sufferings were so great that if such
hardships fell upon days, the days would turn into nights.”

Fatima (sa) was a symbol of womanhood in Islam. How a daughter, a wife
and a mother should behave in their ordinary lives. She was devoted to
her father, looked after him when he was in distress by the hands of the
non-believers of Makka, she was the exemplary wife, queen of her
household yet fair to her maid servant Fizza to divide household chores
between herself and the maid servant, she was a devout wife and the most
loving mother to her children.

There were occasions when there was no food for the family, but she
would never complain. Once ‘Ali (as) went out to do some work to get
food for the family but returned empty handed. Fatima asked ‘Ali (as)
what happened to the food.

‘Ali (as) said that he did earn some money and bought food, but while on
his way home he met some poor hungry persons and gave away all the food
to them. When the Prophet heard of this situation he brought some food
for the family and told them that ‘Ali’s charitable act was of the
greatest value in the eyes of Allah.

The whole family was thankful to Allah and there were no complaints
against anyone.

She would go to the mosque of the Prophet to participate in the prayers
with all the ladies, she would go out in the battlefield to tend the
wounded. In the battle of Ohud when her father was injured she tended
him, cleaned his wounds, put some burnt wool on the wounds to stop blood
flowing. When the Holy Prophet recovered, he thanked her for her great
work in the battlefield.

Death Of Hazrat Fatima (sa)
---------------------------

On 3rd of the month of Jamad al Thani Hazrat Fatima (sa) died. This was
about 90 days after the death of her Holy father. Asma binte Umais in
the same house to help her household work tells the story of her death
in a very moving manner. When the day arrived she prepared food for her
children, then she told Asma that she was going to her prayer room.

She would say Takbeer loudly at various intervals. When Asma does not
hear the sound of Takbeer she should go out to the mosque and tell
Hazrat ‘Ali (as) about the death of his wife. If in the meantime the
children come home give them food before telling them about the death of
their mother. Hasan and Husain arrived and Usma brought some food for
them.

They said they do not eat without their mother and she had to tell the
children of the death of their mother. Both entered the prayer room and
stayed with her for a while. Hazrat ‘Ali (as) arrived and prepared for
the last rites. When he was giving her last bath he cried loudly.

Asma asked the reason and he said he could not bear to see the wound by
her side when the door of the house fell on her due to commotion by some
of the companions of the Prophet when they all wanted ‘Ali (as) to come
out of the house for the oath of Allegiance to Abubakr.

After performing the last rites she was taken to the cemetery of Baqii
in the darkness of the night for burial. Very few family members were
present at the burial of the daughter of the Prophet. Some historians
say that she was buried in her own house which became part of the
Masjid-e-Nabavi during the reign of Umavi Caliph Umar Ibne Abdul Aziz.

Jannatul Baqii
--------------

This is a plot of land not far from where the mosque of the prophet
stood and the houses of his companions around it were built as living
quarters. This land was used as a cemetery for the Muslims.

The famous writer Mustafawi writes in Nuzhatul Qulub, “The cemetery of
Madina called Baqii lies to the west of the town and here is seen the
grave of Ibrahim, Prophet’s only son and also the grave of his daughter
Fatima. There are graves of Prophets grand son Imam Hasan, Imam ‘Ali
Ibnul Husayn Zainul Abedeen, Imam Muhammad Baqir and Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) .

For centuries there has been a marble slab over their graves and on this
is written:

In the name of God, The Merciful, The Compassionate

Praise be to God Who sustains the nations and Who gives life to dead
bones.

Here is the tomb of Fatima, the daughter of the apostle of God and the
queen of the women of the world.

Here is also the tomb of Hasan Ibne ‘Ali;

Here is also the tomb of ‘Ali Ibnul Husayn;

Here is also the tomb of Muhammad Ibne ‘Ali al Baqir;

Here is also the tomb of Ja’far Ibne Muahammad As-Sadiq.

May God favor them all.

The cemetery of Baqii was destroyed by the Wahabis in 1932.

. A modern writer describes the scene as such: 1.

When I entered the Baqii the sight which I saw was as if it were a town
which had been raised to the ground. All over the cemetery nothing was
to be seen but little indefinite mounds of earth and stones, pieces of
timber, iron bars, blocks of stone and a broken rubble of cement and
bricks strewn about.

It was like the broken remains of a town which had been demolished by an
earth quake. All was a wilderness of ruined building material and
tombstones, not ruined by a casual hand, but raked away from their
places and ground small.”

The writer of this book also visited Baqii in 1995 and found that the
authorities have erected a wall around the whole area of Baqii
incorporating also the jewish part of the cemetery in it to make it into
one huge cemetery.

A platform was built just outside the wall where people can stand and
see the graves of the Holy Ma’sumeen and shed a tear or too. People were
allowed to enter the inner circle of the wall after the Fajr prayers for
two hours but were not allowed to go near the graves.

They had to stand about 30 feet away from the place and can see the
outlines of the graves. Besides 5 Ma’sumeen, there was a mark for the
grave of Hazrat Fatima Bine Asad, mother of Imam ‘Ali (as) .

This is Jannatul Baqii where the most beloved daughter of the Holy
Prophet together with her children and grandchildren lie in wilderness
without even a tomb stone over them.


