The Fourth Imam, ‘Ali Ibn Al Husayn, Zainul Abedeen (as)
========================================================

When the young ‘Ali took the mantle of Imamate, times were hard on the
Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet. His is the saddest story of all time. On the
10th of Muharram at the time of Asr Prayers, when his father Husayn (as)
was alone in the battlefield ready to do battle, he withdrew to the camp
of his ailing son, came beside his bed, woke him and told him that the
story of Karbala’ was over, that he was about to go to sacrifice his own
life for the cause of Islam.

It was at that time that the father transferred the mantle of Imamate,
the spiritual guidance, to his son to lead the Muslim Ummah towards the
Right Path.

He was born in Madina some 22 years ago, on 5th Shabaan 38 year of
Hijra. In some history books his date of birth is shown as 15th Jamadiul
Awwal 38 AH. His mother was Shahr Bano the daughter of Yazdjurd II, the
last of the Persian Kings before Islam.

She was taken prisoner when Muslim armies conquered Persia. When she was
brought in Madina Imam ‘Ali (as) spoke to her and she embraced Islam and
was married to his 2nd son Imam Husayn. (as) She had died after giving
birth to her only son. He was only two years old when his grandfather
‘Ali (as) was martyred in the Mosque at Kufa. After that the whole
family of the Prophet returned to live in Madina.

For the next 10 years under Imam Hasan (as) as Imam and after his
martyrdom, his father Imam Husayn (as) as the Imam, the young ‘Ali was
growing in their shadow and watching the workings of the Imamate without
the worldly authority. People knew they were the grand sons of the Holy
Prophet and followed them by their hearts but outwardly because of the
fear of the Ummayad ruler in Damascus, there was very little following
of the Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet.

In 60 Hijri when his father Imam Husayn (as) had to leave Madina for
Makka and then for Karbala’, he was with him all the time. In Karbala’
all male children of ‘Ali (as) and Husayn (as) were killed except ‘Ali
Ibn el Husayn who with providence became so ill that he was unable to
participate in the Jihad with his father and survived the massacre.

His life and with that the line of descendants of Husayn (as) survived
because the Imamate had to go on. He became the 4th Imam on the 10th of
Muharram 61 Hijri. He was taken captive and was brought to Kufa and then
to Damascus in chains.

In spite of his illness and humiliating position in front of Yazid the
Ummayad ruler, when Yazid addressed him in an insulting manner saying
that his father wasted his life by refusing to give the oath of
allegiance to Yazid, Imam replied, it was to save Islam. They were
wondering how Islam was saved. When time for Azan came and the Moazzin
screamed from the minaret” I bear witness that Muhammad is the messenger
of Allah, Imam shouted to Yazid, this is the way Islam was saved.  
 People would have forgotten the name of Muhammad as the Messenger of
Allah if his grandson would not have shown the world that you were a
ruler by default. Yazid ordered his swordsman to kill this young man,
but by the intervention of his aunt Zainab his life was spared. He
remained in prison for one year with the whole family.

There was turmoil in all parts of the Islamic empire on this brutal
killing. In the end Yazid was afraid that if he kept the family of the
Prophet in prison any longer, he will lose his kingdom. So he sent
orders to bring the family before him and told him that he was releasing
them. He also asked what they wish to do now.

In reply to this His aunt Zainab said that they would wish to hold a
gathering in Damascus so that she can tell the people what happened in
Karbala’. Yazid agreed and the first Majlis was held in Damascus. In
this Majlis most of the women of Damascus took part who were secretly
following the path of Ahlul Bayt which included Yazid’s wife Hind.

Then they all returned to Karbala’ to pay homage over the graves of
their beloved father, uncles and brothers. It was on the 20th of the
month of Safar 62 Hijri that they arrived back in Karbala’. The first
Majlis of Arbaeen was held in Karbala’ in which his aunt Zainab and all
the surviving family attended.

It was at that time that one of the companions of the Prophet Jabir Ibn
Abullah Ansari visited the grave of Husayn (as) who later narrated the
whole story of Karbala’ to many of his listeners in Madina and many
other towns he visited. The message of Husayn (as) was spreading from
town to town and from country to country.

The whole family then returned to Madina except the wife of Imam Husayn
(as) . Her name was Umme Rabab. She said that she would not return back
home, for her home was here where her husband lay buried. She stayed in
Karbala’ until she died a few years later. A small town flourished for
the up keep of pilgrims who began to visit the grave of Husayn (as) and
all the martyrs of Karbala’.

Having being released from confinement in Damascus, Imam came to live in
Madina with his family and to lead a quiet life. But the city was in
revolt against the cruel regime of Yazid. Many tried to persuade the
Imam to join them, but Imam knew their unreliability and he declined. So
when Yazid’s army invaded Madina, they left the Imam’s family alone.

Yet he was greatly shocked to see how for three days the invading army
led by Muslim Ibn Aqaba who was charged with invading Madina, tied their
horses in the Prophet’s mosque, turning the sacred place into a filthy
stable, killing hundreds of innocent people and playing havoc with
chaste women.

For three continuous days these beasts from Damascus ravaged the city
and destroyed it. Imam had so much control over his emotions that he
kept quiet. When different revolutionary parties rose to avenge the
blood of Imam Husayn, he wisely kept aloof from them whose uprisings he
deemed untimely.

No doubt Sulaiman Ibn Surad al-Khuzai and Mukhtar ibn Obaidah
ath-Thaqafi avenged Imam’s precious blood. Imam Zainul Abedeen had
compassion for them; he prayed for them and for their success and often
enquired about those who were captured and executed by Yazid’s cruel
regime. Certainly Mukhtar relieved the Imam’s wounded heart by punishing
the culprits.

But the Imam was so cautious that his outward appearance gave the
impression that he was indifferent, so much so that the cruel Government
could not implicate him of any subversion.

Times were hard in Madina for the family of the Prophet. Imam ‘Ali Ibn
el Husayn(Sajjad became his title because of his intense prostrations in
prayers) lived for another 35 years after the event of Karbala’.

He was the Imam of the time and it was his duty to spread guidance to
the people. But how he would do that when a single word in favor of the
Ahlul Bayt would have meant certain death. No one dared to say that he
followed the family of the Prophet.

The Imam survived with the sheer will power and providence. He used to
go to the mosque of the Prophet and sometimes prayed there all night.
These were special prayers in the shape of supplications with great
significance than mere ritual. These prayers were memorized by his
companions, written down by his two sons, Mohammad and Zaid.

Mohammad became the 5th Imam after the death of his father while Zaid
rose against the rulers of his time and was martyred in Kufa. All these
supplications were later collected by his companions in the shape of a
book which was named “Al Saheefa el Sajjadiya”. Several copies of the
book were made and distributed among the followers.

Normal teachings of the Qur’an by the family of the Prophet were not
allowed. With these supplications Imam taught his followers the
relationship between God and the people. In ordinary language it is not
possible to enhance the knowledge of God.

But in the language of prayer, when one bows down before the creator,
one realizes one’s own meager self, in comparison with the immensity of
the universe. All vanity or ego disappears. All thoughts of self
indulgence vanish. He relates himself with his creator in all humility
and sublime self.

His true self awakens which only exists to help others for they are all
creatures of God. Emotions that were attached to his own Self disappear.
He feels alone in the wide world. His only hope rests with his creator.

God alone gives him hope and meaning of existence on earth. Side by side
these supplications also gave the human race their Rights and duties
with each other. In the name of “Risalat- el- Huqooq” which was an
addition to Saheefa, completed the meaning of Islam as a Deen of deeper
spiritual understanding as well as the ways and means of lion this
planet earth with other people.

Imam’s whole life was spent in helping all the people in the city of
Madina. He was seen going during the darkness of the night with a sack
full of bread for the hungry people of the city.

They never knew the identity of the person who gave them food night
after night, but Imam’s own companions knew the fact and they passed it
on to the later generation to know and to learn. It was after his death
that those hungry souls came to know the identity of their benefactor.

Imam performed thirty pilgrimages in all after the event of Karbala’.
Sometimes he would go for Hajj on the back of a camel, but sometimes on
foot for 250 miles to Makka. Once he was travelling with a companion.
When they reached the outskirts of Makka, the crowd of pilgrims going
towards Makka was enormous.

His companions shouted, "There is a lot of crowd for Hajj this year."
Imam replied, "There is only you and me and this camel, the rest are
animals. " He was again teaching the meaning of Hajj which was to reach
out for God with all your heart and do not just regard it as another
ritual.

An incident occurred that is said to have provoked the jealousy of
Hisham Ibn Abdul Malik who was heir apparent to his father and arrived
in Makka with great pomp and a retinue of servants. But in spite of
this, he was not able to reach for the Black Stone in the Ka’aba. In
pilgrims garb Hisham was unrecognizable.

He sat down on a high place waiting for the crowd to move so that he
could also kiss the black stone. While he was waiting he saw an old man
arrive and watched the crowd give way for him. He reached the Black
stone , kissed it and returned back to his place. Hisham, being the son
of the caliph was astonished and enquired about the identity of the
person.

Farazdaq the famous poet was standing right there. He composed a Qaseeda
in praise of the Imam to introduce him to the Heir apparent of the
throne. He said, “ He is who that the whole Makka knows him, Every stone
in the Ka’aba knows him. He is the son of the grandson of Fatimah and
‘Ali and of the Holy Prophet. Hisham, in his arrogance of power,
imprisoned the poet who died in prison some years later.

In another incident while the Imam was about to begin his prayers a man
came round and began to use abusive language against him. Imam ignored
the man first. But when he repeated the abusive language pointing to him
directly, Imam said to him, "what you are saying about me, if it is true
then I ask God’s forgiveness, but if it is not true, then only God can
forgive you.”

The man was thoroughly ashamed of his behavior and apologized. Later on
he became a great devotee of the Imam.

Some people say that the Imam spent his life after Karbala’ in weeping
and crying for the atrocities committed to his family. Indeed it was
true that he wept profusely and that sometimes the glass of water he
drank would soil with tears so that he would not be able to drink that
water. And when people said why you weep so much, for martyrdom is the
inheritance of the Ahlul Bayt.

He would say, "Yes indeed, I do not weep for the killing of my family,
but for the humiliation we the whole family faced on the way to Damascus
which was beyond description. I weep for that disgrace of women and
children." He would then call the people around and tell them the story
of Karbala’ and the plight of the captives after Karbala’.

People would also weep and cry loudly. The message spread. This was the
means to tell the people otherwise people would not want to know.
Through tragedy the message reached the hearts of the people and that
message is still alive after 1400 years. And with this the line of
demarcation drawn in Karbala’ between truth and falsehood is still
visible.

Imam’s aunt Hazrat Zainab was organizing gatherings in the city of
Madina to tell the assembled ladies in the majlis the events of Karbala’
and these participants spread the message to all corners of the town and
in Makka and other cities of the province of Hejaz.

This method was so successful that the Governor of Madina wrote to Yazid
about it and on the orders from Yazid, Hazrat Zainab was escorted back
to Damascus. She lived there for a while then she was moved to Egypt on
the orders of the monarch because even in Damascus her speeches in
private gatherings were successful in spreading the story of Karbala’.

Hazrat Zainab stayed in Egypt for few years but then she was brought
back to Damascus where she was martyred. Her mausoleum is in Damascus,
just outside the City and pilgrims visit the place all the time. Many
many miracles have appeared at this place and people suffering from
incurable diseases have come to pray on her grave and have found good
health.

Imam (as) in Madina through his silent teachings left many pupils, the
most prominent of them was Abu Hamza-e-Thumali, who remained to spread
the teachings of Ahlul Bayt in the Islamic world. Abu Mikhnuf was also
one famous pupil of the Imam who later on the instructions of the fifth
Imam wrote the story of Karbala’ in the narrative form which became the
part of the Majlis all over the world.

The calm and peaceful life of the Imam was not to be tolerated by the
Ummayad’s cruel regime. They realized that the Imam was succeeding in
his mission of spreading the message of his father Husayn (as) The
Syrian monarch Walid Ibn Abdul Malik had him poisoned. He died in Madina
on the 25th of Muharram 95 Hijri. His eldest son Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al
Baqir arranged the burial and laid him to rest in the grave yard of
Jannatul Baqii beside his uncle Imam Hasan. (as)


