Chapter 5 : Is the Belief in an "unschooled" Prophet Rooted in the Interpretation of the Word "ummi"?
=====================================================================================================

The claim of Dr Sayyid \`Abd al-Latif (who observes that the source of
belief in an "unschooled" Prophet (SA) has been in the interpretation of
the word "ummi"), is unfounded. This is because, firstly, the history of
the Arabs and the Makkah at the advent of Islam, is decisive evidence of
the fact that the Prophet (SA) was untaught. Earlier, we have explained
that the status of reading and writing in Hijaz at the advent of Islam,
was such that the names of all the people familiar with reading and
writing were recorded in the history, but no one had listed the Prophet
(SA) among such people. Assuming that there was no reference to the
question, nor any explanation thereof, Muslims following the
unquestionable verdict of history, would have to accept that their
Prophet (SA) was untaught.

Secondly, in the Holy Qur'an, there is another verse which is not less
explicit than the verses of Surat "al Ar'af containing the word "ummi".
On the concept of "ummi" used in the verses of "Surat Al-A'raf", the
opinion is divided among the Islamic interpreters of the Qur'an; but on
the concept of the following verse which indicates unschooled or
untaught Prophet (SA), there is no difference of opinion:

"And you did not read before it any book, nor did you write one with
your right hand, for then those, who say untrue things, could have
doubted (29:48). "

This verse makes it explicit that the Prophet (SA) neither read nor
wrote before his prophethood. Islamic exegetes have generally given a
similar interpretation of the verse. But Dr \`Abd al-Latif claims that,
the very verse has been misinterpreted. He claims that the word "kitab"
used in this verse, has a reference to such sacred books as the Tawrat
(Old Testament) and the Injil (Bible). He claims that the verse suggests
that until the revelation of the Holy Qur'an, the Prophet (SA) was
unfamiliar with any sacred book, for such books were not available in
Arabic, and if the Prophet (SA) had read the books available then in a
language other than Arabic, he would have been suspected and accused by
the idle talkers.

This claim is not true. Contrary to its meaning nowadays widely used in
Persian, the word "kitab" in Arabic language has been defined purely as
"writing", be it a letter or a book, sacred or otherwise, or be it holy
or otherwise. This word has been used in the Holy Qur'an repeatedly.

Occasionally, this word "kitab" has been used (in the Holy Qur'an) to
signify a letter sent by one person to another, such as the one
concerning the "Queen of Saba": "O Noble Men! I have received a revered
letter from Sulayman (Solomon) "; and occasionally it is used in
connection with an agreement concluded as a document between the two
parties: "Slaves who wish to be freed as per an agreement, accede to
their requests to conclude such contracts". At times the term has been
used in connection with occult tablets and heavenly truths which tell
scientific facts about the world events: "There is neither any thing
green nor dry but (it is all) in a clear book ...(6:59). "

In the Holy Qur'an, only at places where the word "ahl" has been added
to form "ahl al-kitab", a particular concept is meant.

"Ahl al-Kitab" signifies "the followers of a heavenly book." In the
Surat al-Nisa' of the Holy Qur'an, verse 152 reads: "The followers of
the heavenly book shall ask you to send unto them a letter from the
heavens. " In this verse, the term has been employed at two places: at
one place, in conjunction with the term "ahl" and at another place, it
is used alone. Wherever the term "ahl" has been prefixed, it is meant
"heavenly book" and wherever it is used alone it is meant "letter".

In addition, the construction of the sentence: "You did not write with
your right hand" suggests: "You did neither read nor write and if you
knew how to read and write, you would have been accused of copying from
some other source; but since you did not know how to read or write,
there was no room for such an accusation".

However, if the purport is that "You did not read the holy books since
they were available in other languages", then, the verse would be
under-stood as:. "earlier you neither read nor wrote in other
languages", which is not right, for only reading the books in those
languages would have well justified the accusation, and also it would
not have been necessary for him to have been able to write in those
languages. If he had been able to write in those languages it would have
justified the accusation, even though he should have written in his own
language. Admittedly, here, there is a point which may confirm Dr \`Abd
al-Latif's view, even though neither he himself nor any one of the
exegetists has given attention to this point.

In this holy verse, the word "tatlu" has been used, a word derived from
the root "tilawah" which, as referred to in Raghib's book: "Mufradat
Alfaz al-Qur'an", is peculiar to reading the holy verses, and which
contrasts with the generic term "Qira'ah" signifying "reading".
Therefore, although the word "kitab" is applied commonly to "the holy
and other books", the term "tatlu" is peculiar to reading "the Holy"
verses.

Evidently, however, the reason that the word "tatlu" has been used
here, is that the subject under discussion is the Qur'an. The term has
been used in respect of all the texts for reading, ie, as if it should
have been said to mean: "Now you read (tilawah) the Qur'an but you did
not read any writing before the revelation of the Qur'an.

Another verse indicating the unschooling of the Prophet (SA), is verse
52 of the "Surat al-Shura' " (The Counsel): "And thus We revealed to you
a spirit by Our command. You did not know what a writing or a faith was
...(42:52)." The verse suggests: "You were unfamiliar with the book or a
writing until the Qur'an was revealed. "Dr Sayyid \`Abd al-Latif has
made no mention of this verse. He may observe that the term "kitab" as
used in this verse, means "the holy texts", which existed in a language
other than Arabic. The answer to this point, however, is the same as was
referred to in the earlier verse.

For some reason, not clear to us, Islamic exegetes have maintained that
"kitab" particularly refers to the Qur'an. Therefore, the interpretation
of this verse is out of the scope of our logic.

Thirdly, the Islamic exegetes been unanimous regarding the meaning of
the term "ummi". On the contrary, all the Islamic exegetes and scholars
without any exception, have been unanimous on the unschooling of the
Prophet (SA) and his non-acquaintance with reading and writing prior to
his prophethood. This in itself is a conclusive evidence of the fact
that the source of the Muslims' belief in the unschooling of the Prophet
(SA) has not been the interpretation of the term "ummi". However, we
have to discuss about the meaning of the word "ummi".

The meaning of the word "Ummi"

Islamic exegetists have come up with three interpretations of the word
"ummi ".

(i) Unschooled and unacquainted with writing

The majority of exegetes who favour this observation, have said that
the word ummi is related to "umm" meaning "mother". The word "ummi"
means a person who by birth is familiar with human written works and
knowledge; or, it is related to "ummah" ie, who observes the customs of
the majority, for the majority of people did not know about writing.
Rather, only a few did. Likewise, the word " ummi" means, a man who is
like the common people and ignorant. [^23] Some have said that the
meaning of "ummah" is "creation", and "ummi" is one who has remained in
his original state, ie, the illiteracy. For evidence one should refer to
a poem [^24] by Al-A'sha. However, be it either a derivation of "umm" or
"ummah" - or whatever meaning of "ummah" is preferred - the meaning of
the term ummi is the same, ie, "untaught".

(ii) An inhabitant of Umm al-Qura

Those who favour this view associate the word with "Umm al-Qura", ie,
Makkah. The Qur'anic verse 92 of Surat Al-An am refers to Makkah as "Umm
al-Qura": ...And that you may warn the (inhabitants of) Makkah and those
(who live) around it (6:92). "

This possibility [^25] has, since ancient times, found its way in the
interpretive literature, and is confirmed in a number of Shi'ah ahadith,
although these very ahadith have been found to be un-authentic and have
been said to be of Israelite origin. [^26] This possibility has, however,
been rejected on the basis of certain proofs. [^27]

One reason is that the word "Umm al-Qura" is not a proper noun, and has
been applied to Makkah as a common attribute and not as a proper noun of
Makkah. The word "Umm al-Qura" signifies the "centre of villages". Any
point which serves as a centre of villages is known as "Umm al-Qura".
From another Qur'anic verse, ie, verse 59 of the Surat Al-Qasas, it
becomes clear that the word carries a descriptive rather than a
nominative function:

"Your Lord is not like this that He kills the residents of the villages
until He sends a prophet to them in the centre of the villages, reciting
to them Our revelations."

It becomes evident that in the Qur'anic language, any point
constituting the centre of an area [^28] is called its "Umm al-Qura".

Moreover, this word "Ummi" used by the Holy Qur'an, has been applied to
non-Makkans. Verse 19 of Surat Ali \`Imran says:

"...And say to those who have been given the Book and the unlearned
people (non-Jewish and non-Christian Arabs): \`Do you submit
yourselves?' ... (3:20). "

It then becomes evident that according to the custom of the time; and
also in the language of the Holy Qur'an, all the Arabs who did not
follow a heavenly book were referred to as "ummiyyin ".

More important still is the fact that this word "ummi" was applied for
the common Jews who were not educated. Verse 78 of Surat Al-Baqarah of
the Holy Qur'an reads: ' "Some children of Israil are "ummi"; who do not
know their Book except false hopes... (2:78)".

It is obvious that the Jews whom the Holy Qur'an refers to as "ummi"
were not the inhabitants of Makkah, but rather, most of them were
residents of Madinah or of its neighbourhood. Thirdly, if a word is
associated with "Umm al-Qura", literary rules require that "qurawi"
should be said in place of "ummi", for, according to the lexical rules
governing attribution, when modifying the modifier or the modified,
particularly when the modifier is "ab=father", "umm=mother", "ibn=son'",
or "bint=daughter", it modifies the modified and not the modifier, just
as when modifying "Abu Talib", "Abu Hanifah", "Banu Tamim", they are
referred to as "Talibi", "Hanafi" and "Tamimi".

(iii) Arab polytheists who were not the followers of the Book

This view has existed among the exegetes of the ancient times. In
Majma\` al-Bayan, under verse 20 of Surat "Ali-\`Imran" of the Holy
Qur'an, "ummiyyin"has been placed against "Ahl al-Kitab" This view is
described as that of the Companion and great exegete, \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas. Under verse 78 of the Surat Al-Baqarah, Abu \`Ubaydah states',
a similar view. It follows from what is understood from verse 75 of
Surat Ali-\`Imran that Al-Tabarsi himself has selected the meaning for
the verse. In his book: "Al-Kashshaf", AI-Zamakhshari has provided a
similar interpretation of this verse and of verse 75 of the Surat
Ali-Imran. Fakhr al-Razi mentions the same possibility under the verse
78 of the Surat al-Baqarah and verse 20 of the Surat Ali-\`Imran.

But the fact is that this meaning is not different from the first one.
However, it is not correct that a people who do not follow a divine
book, be referred to as "ummi" although they may be literate. This term
has been applied to Arab polytheists because they were illiterate. What
constituted the basis for applying this term to Arab polytheists was
their unfamiliarity with reading and writing rather than their not
following a heavenly book.

Hence, wherever this word has been used in the plural form and applied
to Arab polytheists, this possibility has been mentioned: but wherever
it has been used in the singular form and applied to the Holy Prophet
(SA), no interpreter has said that the significance is that the Prophet
(SA) did not follow one of the heavenly book. In this case, the
possibilities are only two at the most. One is that the Prophet (SA) was
not familiar with handwriting, and the other was that he was from
Makkah. Since, for the conclusive reasons enumerated above, the second
possibility is ruled out, definitely the Prophet (SA) was called "ummi"
because he had not been taught, nor did he know how to write.

Here, there is a fourth possibility in regard to the meaning of the
word: this being that the word meant unfamiliarity with the texts of
holy books.

This possibility, is the one that Dr Sayyid \`Abd al-Latif has
innovated, and that he confused it with the third one that we have
mentioned, quoting the ancient exegetes. The aforementioned person
says:

"The words "ummi" and "ummiyyin" have been used at several places (in
the Holy Qur'an) but they have always been used to mean the same
everywhere. Lexicographically the term "ummi" means a "newly-born baby"
from a mother's womb. It is with reference to this state of living and
life, that the word "ummi" came to imply:" one who can neither read nor
write. The word "ummi" also means "a person who lived in "Umm al-Qura".
"Umm al-Qura" means "the mother of cities", "capital city", and
"metropolis". This was the attribute the Arabs of the Prophet's (SA)
time associated with Makkah. Therefore, whoever was from Makkah was
referred to as "ummi

". Another area of application of the word "ummi" is to a person who
has not been conversant with Semitic texts nor been a follower of
Judaism or Christianity which has been referred to as "Ahl al-Kitab" in
the Holy Qur'an. In the Holy Qur'an, the word "ummiyyin" was applied to
the pre-Islamic Arabs who neither had a holy book nor followed the New
Testament and the Old Testament, and that the word was used for Ahl
al-Kitdab ".

While there are so many meanings for the word "ummi" it is not known
why the exegetes and translators of the Holy Qur'an, Muslim or
non-Muslim, have picked up the meaning namely, "a newly-born baby
unaware to his environment" and interpreted it as illiterate and
ignorant, and as a consequence, have introduced [^29] the pre-Islam
inhabitants of Makkah as "ummiyyin", or "an illiterate people".


Firstly, since the earliest days, the Islamic exegetes have interpreted
the words "ummi" and "ummiyyin" in three ways, and have come up with at
least three possibilities Contrary to Dr Sayyid \`Abd al-Latif, Islamic
exegetes have not given one single meaning.

Secondly, no one has said that the word "ummi" means a newly-born baby
unaware of his surroundings "whose connotation is that a person who can
neither read nor write. Basically, this is not applied to a newly-born
baby, but rather to an adult who knows as much about the skills of
reading and writing as when he is just newly-born. As referred to by
logicians, the word signifies "absence and second nature". Islamic
logicians would always mention this word as one of the examples of
"absence and second nature" in books of logic.

Thirdly, it is not true to say: "the word is also used to mean a person
who has no familiarity with ancient Semitic texts". What can actually be
inferred from the sayings of early exegetes and lexicologists is that
the plural form of the word (ummiyyin) has been used for the Arab
polytheists who were generally illiterate, as compared with the "people
of the book". The polytheists were perhaps given this humiliating title
by the Jews and the Christians.

On the whole, it is illogical to call a people "ummi" who can read and
write in their own language, just on the basis of unfamiliarity with a
certain book or language. The root of the word is "umm" or "ummah" and
implies remaining in the same state as when one is born.

But why this word "ummi" has not been recognised as being rooted in
"Umm al-Qura", although the possibility has been mentioned consistently,
is because of numerous objections which have been mentioned earlier. The
Indian scholar's amazement is therefore baseless. It is confirmed by the
fact that in some other usages of this word, recorded in books of
history and ahadith, there is no other meaning for it except "untaught".
In the book: "Bihar al-Anwar", vol 16, p 119, it is narrated from the
Holy Prophet (SA): "We are a people who neither read nor write". In vol
4 of his history book, under the biography of Muhammad ibn \`Abd
al-Malik, popularly known as Ibn Al-Zayyat, a minister of Al-Mu'tasim
and Al-Mutawakkil, Ibn Khallikan writes:

"Earlier he was among the secretaries of Al-Mu'tasim, the \`Abbassid
Caliph, and Ahmad ibn Shadi Al-Basri was the minister. Once a letter
came to Al-Mu'tasim, which the minister read for the Caliph. The word
"kala' " was in the letter and Al-Mu'tasim, who was not a knowledgeable
person, asked his minister for its meaning. The minister didn't know the
meaning either. The Caliph said: "An untaught Caliph and an ignorant
minister". Then he asked for one of the secrataries to come. Ibn
Al-Zayyat was present and came for explaining the meaning of the word.
He explained through some other words which were closer to the meaning
and stated their differences. This formed a prelude for him to become
the Caliph's minister later on."

Here, the Caliph, who spoke the language of the ordinary people, meant
"untaught" when he used the word "ummi". The poet Nizami says as given
below:

Wisdom is inferior to the Messenger Ahmad,
The two worlds depend on the existence of Muhammad.
He is unschooled but stating in the most fluent way,
The inclusive knowledge from Adam to Jesus, I say.
In the keeping of a promise he is perfectly steadfast,
Ahead of all prophets he was though among them he was the last.

[^22]. "Rawshanfikr", issue no 8 and 15, October 1965 and the
Publication of the Society of the Headclerks. November 1965 (copied from
the Publication of the Ministry of Education and Training, September
1965).
[^23]. Al-Raghib Al-Isfahani, Mufradat Alfaz al-Qur'an Al-Taqaddum
al-'Arabi Press, November 1972, under the word "umm" and Exegesis of the
Holy Quran : Majma' al-Bayan, under the verse 78 of Surat Al-Baqarah.
[^24]. Exegesis of the Holy Qur'an: "Majma' al-Bayan, verse 78 of "Surat
Al-Baqarah ".
[^25]. Exegesis of the Holy Qur'an: Majma' al-Bayan, under the verse 75
of Surat Ali 'Imran and verse 157 of Surat Al-A'raf; and Tafsir al-Razi,
under the verse 75 of Surat Al-A'raf.
[^26]. The Magazine published by the Astani Qudsi Razavi, Mashhad, issue
no 2.
[^27]. Ibid.
[^28]. One of the narrations confirms the word "ummi" as a derivative of
"Umm al-Qura" meaning Makkah, although the word "Umm al-Qura" is a
common attribute and not a proper noun. The narration states: "The
Prophet was known as "Ummi" because he was an inhabitant of Makkah and
Makkah is one of the "Umm al-Quras",
[^29]. The publication of the society of the Headclerks, issue of
October 1965 (copied from the publication of the Ministry of Education
and Training, September 1965).

