The Adversaries' Accusation
===========================

It was mentioned at the very beginning of the book that: "The opponents
of Islam and the Prophet (SA) accused him of borrowing ideas from others
(this accusation is reflected from some verses of the Qur'an). But they
did not say that he was literate and knew how to read and write and that
he perhaps had some books which he consulted before presenting his
views."

Someone might, however, claim that the Prophet (SA) accusation is was
accused in this respect too. This reflected from the Qur'an where it
says:

"***They say: The stories of the ancient - he has got them written
down - so that these are recited to him morning and evening (25: 5)'.
"***

The answer is that this verse does not explicitly indicate their claim
that the Prophet (SA) used to write, regardless of the fact that the
opponents' accusations were so prejudiced and based on complexes and
grudges that, as the Holy Qur'an puts it, only terms like "injustice"
and "oppression" can best be used for them. At the same time, the Arabic
term "iktitab" means both \`to write' and "istiktab" ie, to make someone
write something'.

Here, the second meaning applies to the verse which would mean "They
said: \`he has written (or others have written for him) the stories of
the ancient, then someone reads to him every morning and evening,"
"iktitab" is mentioned here in the past tense and "imla"' in the present
continuous.

It implies that someone wrote them, and that those who knew how to read,
used to come to Prophet (SA) every day and night and read them to him,
and that he learned and memorized them. Thus, if the Prophet (SA) knew
how to read, they would not necessarily say that others used to read to
him day and night; rather, it would suffice them to say that he himself
referred to writings and memorized them.

Therefore, even the oppressive and accusing infidels of his time, who
accused the Prophet (SA) in many ways and named him an insane, a
sorcerer, a liar and an imitator of others' oral statements, etc, could
not claim that he read the contents of other books to them due to his
inability to read and write.**Â **


