Introduction
============

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

**All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds and may prayer and
peace be upon our master and Prophet, Muhammad, and his pure progeny,
and may Allah’s curse be upon all their enemies from the first to the
last one.**

We Twelver Shias believe that Imam Mahdi, son of Imam Hasan 'Askari
(a.s)and from the descendants of Imam Husayn (a.s) is the twelfth
infallible imam from the progeny of the Holy Prophet (S).

We believe that he is born and is alive though he lives away from
people. This belief is among our essential religious beliefs and any
Shia who casts doubts on it is no longer considered as a Shia.

In order to be able to hold dialogue with the followers of other
religious sects and to invited them to accept this belief we need to
make use of [generally] accepted arguments and valid methodologies. It
is on the basis of such an approach that we can hold talks with
fair-minded and impartial scholars of other religious sects. There are
however people who do not pay heed to sound arguments and friendly
admonitions. It is thus useless to engage in dialogue with such type of
people. It seems as if the followers of Ibn Taymiyya, to cite an
example, are among such people. Instead of paying attentions to sound
arguments they use foul language and level accusations.

In his *Minhaj al-Sunna*, Ibn Taymiyya, mentor of such kind of Sunnis,
commenting on Shias' belief in Imam Mahdi, says very rudely: "One of the
stupid acts done by Shias is that they have devoted to awaited Mahdi
particular places where they keep waiting for him. The basement (sardab)
of Samarra considered by Shias as a place where Mahdi has disappeared is
among such locations. They sometimes put animals such as mule, horse
etc. over there so that the awaited imam would ride on them after
reappearing. They commissioned a person to stand by the basement and
keep calling on awaited Mahdi to reappear. They carry weapons whereas
there is no one they need to fight with. Among Shias there are people
who do not offer their prayer lest they are not deprived from helping
their imam if he reappears, due to getting engaged in prayer. This is
while they live in cities like Medina that is far away from the place
where he is likely to reappear. During the last ten days of the month of
Ramadan or days that are better off than these days they turn their
faces towards the east asking him earnestly to reappear.

Obviously, if there is a Mahdi and Allah orders him to reappear he will
reappear, whether or not the Shias make any requests. [And if there is a
Mahdi but] Allah does not allow him to reappear he will not reappear
whether or not they make any request. In either case, what Shias do is
futile. In addition, if he reappears, Allah will help him, providing him
with vehicle and supporters. Thus it is not necessary for some misguided
people who are struggling in vain, thinking they are doing something
good, to keep waiting for him.

In the *Holy Quran*, Allah reproaches those who address in their prayers
people and things that do not respond them… In the age of ignorance,
they worshiped idols that were accessible to them and that sometimes
contained evils that talked to them.

Obviously, the condition of those who communicate with a none-existing
thing is far worse than that of those who communicate with an existing
thing – though it is not alive.

Shias may possibly say, in response, that they believe in the existence
of Mahdi, but they have to be reminded that their word is similar to
that of idol worshipers. This is because they were also of the view that
the idols they worshiped were able to intercede for them with Allah.
Addressing them, Allah the Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَا يَنفَعُهُمْ وَلَا يَضُرُّهُمْ
وَكَانَ الْكَافِرُ عَلَى رَبِّهِ ظَهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they serve besides Allah that which neither profits them nor
causes them harm; and the unbeliever is a partisan against his Lord.***
[^1]

In short, both idol worshipers and Shias ask for assistance from those
who are unable to help them. There is however a minor difference between
the two. Idol worshipers regard idols as their intercessors and their
objects of worship. Shias however believe that Mahdi is an infallible
imam. They go so far that they regard their Mahdi as the standard of
love and hatred just as idol worshipers deem their idols as such.

Just as some polytheists consider believing in gods as a basic article
of their faith, Shias regard believing in Mahdi as a basic article of
their faith, assuming that without such a belief no one's religion is
perfect".[^2]

Elsewhere he states: "Similarly it is not possible for anyone to know
about the commandments and prohibitions of the Mahdi whom we should obey
according to them. Thus if a Muslim will not achieve happiness except
through obeying someone whose commandments and prohibitions are not
clear and accessible, then such an obligation will be a clear example of
unbearable obligations, but Shias try more than anyone else to prescribe
such obligations both for themselves as well as for others.

If it is said that Mahdi's commandments are not anything other than the
beliefs and rulings existing currently among Twelver Shias, it must be
said in response that in such a case there is no need for believing in
the existence of Mahdi. This is because Shia's religious commandments
are known to everybody and his life or death, presence or absence will
not change anything….

Shias are however among the most ignorant people. This is because to do
intellectual and religious duties and not to do intellectually or
religiously rejected things is either dependent on the commandment and
prohibitions of this awaited imam or not.

If they are dependent on his commandments and prohibitions then we are
obliged to do an unbearable obligation. In such a case to perform or not
to perform an obligation is conditioned to something that is beyond the
ability of anyone. This is because no one has honestly claimed to have
seen him or heard him say anything in in the entire world.

If they are not dependent on knowing his commandments it will be
possible to perform intellectual and religious obligations and to avoid
intellectually or religious unwanted things without relying on this
awaited imam. In such a case there is no need for his presence and
existence…"[^3]

Elsewhere he mentions: "Some great Shias like Ibn Ud Hill[^4] are of the
view that whenever Shias differed on any issue and the holders of one
opinion are known whereas the holders of another opinion are not known
the correct opinion is the opinion whose holders are not known, for the
awaited imam is likely to be present among them.

This is the extremity of ignorance and misguidance. This is because even
if there is such a person as the awaited infallible imam, it is not
clear if he cherishes such an opinion, for he is not quoted directly or
indirectly as having said such a thing. How can thus one make sure that
he really cherishes such an opinion?

It can thus be concluded that Shia's religion is based on something that
is unknown and non-existing".[^5]

Elsewhere he says: "Any supposed imam who is useful in religious or
worldly matters is far better than an imam who is not useful at all…

Can one thus find anyone more distanced from the objective of imamate
and from goodness and dignity than Shias who follow a destination that
brings them regret?"[^6]

Commenting on Shias he points out: "No one benefited from him- neither
those who believed in him nor those who denied him".[^7]

Likewise he states that it is plain that this awaited imam – who has
passed away according to general Muslim opinion and is alive according
to Shiite opinion – is of no avail to any human being. His predecessors
were also like him not being able to do anything an infallible imam is
supposed to do for Muslims…[^8]

Elsewhere he maintains that anyone who takes over people's affairs is
far better than the non-existing awaited imam whom Shias introduce as
[prophet's] successor having divine authority.[^9]

He says that from among some religious sects some have claimed to be the
promised Messiah, among whom are Qarmatiyan Mahdi, Ibn Tumert's Mahdi
etc. The said claimants are however far better than Shias' Mahdi. This
is because their Mahdi can never be traced…[^10]

According to him, the belief in Mahdi has, in addition, caused numerous
evils of which only Allah is aware.[^11]

On his opinion, Muhammad bin Jarir Tabari, Abd al-Baqi bn Qani'a and
other historians are of the view that Hasan bin Ali Askari had no
child.[^12]

Explaining Shias' beliefs about Imam Mahdi (may Allah hasten his
reappearance), the book in your hand studies the doubts and skepticisms
raised about Imam Mahdi. This study is divided into three parts:

Part One: Mahdawiyyat and Imam Mahdi from the view point of Muslim
thinkers

Part Two: Counter traditions

Part Three: Question of Mahdawiyyat and doubts about it

It is hoped that this humble effort will be accepted by Imam Mahdi (may
Allah hasten his reappearance).

**Sayyid Ali Husayni Milani**

[^1]: Quran, Yunus, 18.

[^2]: Mihaj al-Sunna, vol. 1, pp. 44 47.

[^3]: Ibid,, pp. 87 88.

[^4]: Abu al-Qasim Najib al-Din bin Husayn bin Ud Hilli (H.d. 679 AH.
See 'Ayan al-Shi'a, vol. 10, p. 296.

[^5]: Mihaj al-Sunna, vol. 1, pp. 89 90.

[^6]: Ibid, pp. 100 101.

[^7]: Ibid, p. 133.

[^8]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 378.

[^9]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 548.

[^10]: Ibid, vol. 8, pp. 258 and 259.

[^11]: Ibid, p. 259.

[^12]: Ibid, vol. 4, p. 87.


