Part 3: Question of Mahdawiyyat and Doubts about it
===================================================

Taftazani's strange opinion
---------------------------

A great Sunni theologian, Sa'ad al-Din Tatazani says: Imamite Shias are
of the view that Muhammad bin Hasan Askari, being afraid of his enemies,
has hidden himself from people's eyes. According to them, like Noah,
Luqman and Khidr he also lives a long life. This is while other Islamic
sects deny what Shias claim, for going into hiding for such a long time
without being effective at all is something that is unbelievable.

Moreover, it is useless to appoint a person with such a long occultation
as an imam. Had there been such an imam, he should have been present
among people. Thus it is not true to say – as it is said by some – that
Jesus Christ will follow Mahdi in prayer or vice versa.[^1]

### An Apt Answer

If such questions are raised as intellectual concerns looking for
answers, they are welcomed. I wish this was the case and we would
observe moral values while holding our discussions.

Though some Sunni scholars have observed these moral rules others like
Ibn Taymiyya in his *al-Minhaj* has violated them. In a chapter devoted
to Mahdi, he has made use of foul language and impolite terms. To deal
with his ill-treatment of Mahdi is of course in need of an independent
study. To pay a glance at some instances of such an approach reference
has to be made to the examples that were given in the beginning of this
work.

Being under the influence of Ibn Taymiyya, some contemporary writers
have also followed the same disgusting approach while dealing with the
question of Mahdi. Instead of observing moral rules, they accuse Shias
of telling lies.

It is even more regrettable that some people read these books and make
efforts to spread their content.

The fact is that those who propagate against Mahdi are somewhat skeptic
about the traditions on Mahdi. They are either skeptic about the
tradition that specifies the 'twelve imams' or else are refusing to
accept the tradition that says that he who does not know the imam of his
time dies the death of ignorance.

This model of discussion is good as far as the rituals of debate are
concerned. They insist on their opinions rejecting thus the traditions
available in their books. To get involved in debates with such type of
people is indeed useless (for they illogically insist on their own views
and do not accept the traditions available even in their own books).

Despite all these, since the traditions on Mahdi have appeared in Sihah,
Sunan, Masanid and other reliable sources that are accepted by all
Muslims, therefore it is obligatory for every Muslim – whether a Shia or
a Sunni – to believe in Mahdi as the twelfth Imam of Islamic community.
If researchers, however, accept the traditions on Mahdi as acceptable,
they need then to accept Mahdi as the twelfth imam, for this is the
implication of the

traditions accepted by them. Some Sunni scholars have followed this line
of thought. We mentioned examples of such scholars on previous pages.

The issue of Mahdawiyyat and important questions
------------------------------------------------

Let's now deal with important questions concerning the issue of
Mahdawiyyat

1. Imam Mahdi and his long life
-------------------------------

Among the important questions concerning the issue of Mahdawiyyat is
Imam Mahdi's long life. Some Sunni scholars like Sa'ad al-Din Taftazani
are of the view that Mahdi cannot live such a long life saying that it
cannot be easily accepted that someone may live such a long life in this
world.

Taftazani does not deny that Mahdi, son of Imam Hasan Askari is born.
What he terms as unacceptable is his extraordinary long life.

It is on the basis of such an opinion that some Sunni scholars based on
existing evidence accept that Imam Mahdi is born but claim that now he
is no longer alive. This is because they regard it as unlikely for a
person to live an extraordinary long life. Their opinion is however in
contradiction with a prophetic tradition saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات و لم یعرف امام زمانه مات میته جاهلیه
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who dies without knowing the imam of his time, dies the death of
ignorance.

According to this tradition, there is no time without an imam. Given
such traditions, some Sunni scholars, have, instead of speaking about
the death of Imam Mahdi, said that they know that he is born but they do
not know what has happened to him. Since they cannot accept Imam Mahdi's
long life, therefore they are not willing to confess to it.

On the hand, since they know that the rejection of Imam Mahdi's long
life is in contradiction with traditions, they do not explicitly reject
his long life. As a result, they accept his birth, though they say they
do not know what has happened to him.

It seems as if they feel compelled to accept these traditions and thus
they are required to accept his birth and long life as well.

### Is long life something incredible?

Something might seem incredible before it happens, but once it happens
it is no longer incredible. For example, you believe that something is
impossible, but if it happens for once you can no longer be cocksure
about its impossibility and your certainty will decrease. Now if the
same phenomenon happens for twice and thrice, your certainty will also
decrease correspondingly. If this process continues to happen your
certainty will continue to decrease.

Now in response to what Taftazani has said, it must be pointed out that
Allah has given long lives to (many including) Noah, Khidr and Jesus
Christ. The belief in Jesus's long life is an essential belief among
Muslims and no one can deny that Jesus is alive now.

Similarly based on Sunni traditions, Dajjal is alive now and they
believe firmly that he is alive now.

Now that there have been many people in the world, who have lived long
lives, no one can deny as improbable Imam Mahdi's long life.

The discoveries and inventions we observe everyday also make impossibles
possible.

The belief cherished by Taftazani and his likes that long life is
improbable gets increasingly weakened as history proceeds ahead.

[To explain it further], some of our scholars have said that it may look
queer if someone claims that he is able to walk on the surface of water,
but if he does it for once and people watch it, they will somewhat
change their views concerning walking on water's surface. If he does it
for many times, it will become a natural act and everyone will easily
accept it.

### Ibn Taymiyya and denial of Khidr's being alive

He basically refuses to accept that Khidr is alive now saying that most
scholars are of the view that he is dead by now.[^2]

He rejects the fact the Khidr is alive by now in order to be able to say
that the point that Mahdi is alive by now is very unlikely.

### Opponents of Ibn Taymiyya's opinion

Contrary to Ibn Taymiyya, in his *al-Isaba*, Ibn Hajar Asqalani
considers Khidr as one of the companions of the Holy Prophet(S).[^3]

Likewise, in his *Tahdib al-Asma wa al-Lughat,* Hafiz Nawavi, a sixth or
seventh century scholar openly says that according to most scholars
Khidr is alive now.[^4]

This shows that Khidr was alive when Nawavi was living.

Other scholars like Qari (in his *Mirqat al-Mafatih fi Sharh Mishkat
al-Masabih*[^5]) and the commentator of *al-Mawahib al-Ladunniya* who
lived years after Nawavi's time, were also of the view that Mahdi was
alive (at least) until their times. They have gone so far that they have
mentioned in their books stories of people meeting Khidr and listening
to his words.

Given all these issues, Ibn Taymiyya's refusal to accept that Khidr is
alive is very meaningful! He knew if he accepted that Khidr was alive it
would pave the ground for rejecting the theory that rejects Mahdi's long
life as incredible.

### Divine power and wisdom

Moreover, if Allah who is all-power, wills on certain grounds to keep
someone alive for thousands of years He will do it. Thus it is not that
much difficult to answer the question of Imam's long life in our present
time.

2. Why did the Imam disappear? How can we benefit from him, given he is not among us now?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Taymiyya and Sa'ad al-Din Taftazani are of the view that what is
available now is only Mahdi's name and no one –even those who believe in
him – can benefit from him.

In many places in his commentary, Fakhr Razi says it is not possible to
know about Mahdi in whom Shias believe and it is no possible to benefit
from him.

### Imam Mahdi's occultation and traditions

We will answer the above-mentioned question in the following manner:

Firstly, it has to be kept in mind that the Holy Prophet (S) who being
the most truthful one was appointed as prophet, reminded us of his
occultation and that he was an imam decades before he was born.

There are many authentic traditions that deal with Mahdi's imamate and
occultation. According to these traditions:

Mahdi is appointed as an imam by Allah.

He will disappear.

His life and imamate are useful, for Allah does not do anything useless.

Let's now study some of these traditions. Based on a tradition, Jabir
bin Abdullah Ansari says: When this verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ فَإِن تَنَازَعْتُمْ فِي شَيْءٍ
فَرُدُّوهُ إِلَى اللّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ إِن كُنتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللّهِ
وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you; then if you quarrel about anything, refer it
to Allah and the Apostle, if you believe in Allah and the last day; this
is better and very good in the end.***[^6]

I said: O Messenger of Allah! We know Allah and His Messenger but we do
not know 'those in authority' whose obedience is equal to your
obedience. Who are they?

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمْ‏ خُلَفَائِي‏ يَا جَابِرُ وَ أَئِمَّةُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ مِنْ بَعْدِي
أَوَّلُهُمْ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ ثُمَّ الْحَسَنُ وَ الْحُسَيْنُ
ثُمَّ عَلِيُّ بْنُ الْحُسَيْنِ ثُمَّ مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عَلِيٍّ
الْمَعْرُوفُ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ بِالْبَاقِرِ وَ سَتُدْرِكُهُ يَا جَابِرُ
فَإِذَا لَقِيتَهُ فَأَقْرِئْهُ مِنِّي السَّلَامَ ثُمَّ الصَّادِقُ
جَعْفَرُ بْنُ مُحَمَّدٍ ثُمَّ مُوسَى بْنُ جَعْفَرٍ ثُمَّ عَلِيُّ بْنُ
مُوسَى ثُمَّ مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عَلِيٍّ ثُمَّ عَلِيُّ بْنُ مُحَمَّدٍ ثُمَّ
الْحَسَنُ بْنُ عَلِيٍّ ثُمَّ سَمِيِّي وَ كَنِيِّي حُجَّةُ اللَّهِ فِي
أَرْضِهِ وَ بَقِيَّتُهُ فِي عِبَادِهِ ابْنُ الْحَسَنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ
ذَاكَ الَّذِي يَفْتَحُ اللَّهُ تَعَالَى ذِكْرُهُ عَلَى يَدَيْهِ
مَشَارِقَ الْأَرْضِ وَ مَغَارِبَهَا ذَاكَ الَّذِي يَغِيبُ عَنْ
شِيعَتِهِ وَ أَوْلِيَائِهِ غَيْبَةً لَا يَثْبُتُ فِيهَا عَلَى
الْقَوْلِ بِإِمَامَتِهِ إِلَّا مَنِ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قَلْبَهُ
لِلْإِيمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Jabir, they are my successors and leaders of Muslims after me. The
first of them is \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, then Hasan and Husayn, then \`Ali
ibn Husayn, then Muhammad ibn \`Ali, known as *Baqir* in the Torah. You
will see him. When you see him, greet him on my behalf. Then comes
Ja\`far al-Sadiq and after him Musa ibn Ja\`far and after him Muhammad
ibn \`Ali and finally one who has my name and will be Allah’s Argument
(*hujjat allah*) on the earth, the son of Hasan, the same Imam whom
Allah has appointed to conquer east and west, the same Imam will be
hidden from the eyes of the Shi\`ites and his friends. At that time, no
one will be firm in his belief in his Imamate unless those whom Allah
has purified their hearts for faith.

Jabirs says: O Messenger of Allah! Can his Shias benefit from him during
his occultation?

Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِي وَ الَّذِي بَعَثَنِي بِالنُّبُوَّةِ إِنَّهُمْ يَسْتَضِيئُونَ
بِنُورِهِ وَ يَنْتَفِعُونَ بِوَلَايَتِهِ فِي غَيْبَتِهِ كَانْتِفَاعِ
النَّاسِ بِالشَّمْسِ وَ إِنْ تَجَلَّلَهَا سَحَابٌ يَا جَابِرُ هَذَا
مِنْ مَكْنُونِ سِرِّ اللَّهِ وَ مَخْزُونِ عِلْمِهِ فَاكْتُمْهُ إِلَّا
عَنْ أَهْلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yes. By Allah who appointed me as a Messenger they will benefit from the
rays of the light of his imamate during his occultation. [He will be
useful during his occultation] just as the sun hidden behind the clouds
is useful for people. O Jabir! This is one of the secrets of Allah and
the remaining of His knowledge and therefore keep it secret from
unworthy people.

In another tradition, Imam Sadiq (a.s) quotes the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لابد للغلام من غیبه. فقیل له: و لم یا رسول الله؟ قال: یخاف القتل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This young boy has to go into hiding. When the Holy Prophet (S) was
asked as to why he had to go into hiding he said: He is afraid lest he
is killed.

In yet another tradition, he narrates from his forefathers from the Holy
Prophet (S) who says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المهدی من ولدی اسمه اسمی و کنیته کنیتی. اشبه الناس بی خلقا و خلقا تکون
له غیبه و حیره حتی تضل الخلق عن ادیانهم فعند ذلک یقبل کالشهاب الثاقب
فیملؤها قسطا و عدلا کما ملئت ضلما و جورا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mahdi is from my descendants. His name and tittle are the same as mine.
He resembles me more than anyone else in terms of physical complexion
and moral values. His occultation will last as long as people will
become perplexed and as a result abandon their religion. It is under
such circumstances that he will appear just like a meteor, eliminating
all the darkness at once. He will fill in the earth with justice and
equity just as it was filled with injustice and cruelty[^7].

In another tradition, Imam Sadiq (a.s) quotes the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying:

> طوبی لمن ادرک قائم اهل بیتی و هو مقتد به قبل قیامه یإتم به و بالائمه
> الهدی من قبله و یبرأ الی الله عز و جل من عدوهم اولئک رفقائی و اکرم
> أمتی علی111

"Lucky is he who sees our Qa’im (Mahdi) and before his uprising, he,
however, follows him and his guided predecessors and hates their
enemies. They are my friends and companions and the best of my
community."

Imam Sadiq (a.s) quotes the Holy Prophet (S) as having also said:

> طوبی لمن ادرک قائم اهل بیتی و هو یاتم به فی غیبته قبل قیامه و یتولی
> اولیائه و یعادی اعدائه ذلک من رفقائی و ذوی مودتی و اکرم امتی الی یوم
> القیامه112

"Lucky is he who sees our Qa’im while he follows him during his
occultation before his uprising, befriends his friends and antagonizes
his enemies. He is among my friends and sympathizers and the best of my
community until the Day of Judgment."

Imam Sadiq (a.s) similarly says that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

> من انکر القائم من ولدی فی زمان عیبته فمات فقد مات میته جاهلیه113

He who denies Qa’im (Mahdi) from my offspring in the period of his
occultation dies the death of ignorance.

In another tradition, Imam Sadiq (a.s) narrates from his great
forefathers who quote the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القائم من ولدی اسمه اسمی و کنیته کنیتی و شمائله شمائلی و سنته سنتی
یقیم الناس علی ملتی و شریعتی و یدعوهم الی کتاب ربی عز و جل من اطاعه
فقد اطاعنی و من عصاه فقد عصانی و من انکره فی غیبته فقد انکرنی و من
کذبه فقد کذبنی و من صدقه فقد صدقنی الی الله اشکو المکذبین لی فی امره و
الجاحدین لقولی فی شأنه و المضلین لامتی عن طریقته (و سیعلم الذین ظلموا
ای منقلب ینقلبون(
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qa’im (Mahdi) is from my descendants. His name and surname are the same
as mine. His complexion is the same as mine. His tradition is the same
as mine. He rules people on the basis of my tradition and asks people to
act in accordance with my Lord's book (Quran). He who obeys him obeys
me. He who denies him during his occultation denies me. He who refutes
him refutes me. He who confirms him confirms me. I will complain before
Allah against those who reject my words concerning him and prevents my
people from following him. ***And those who act unjustly shall know to
what final place of turning they shall turn back*** [^8].[^9]

Imam Sadiq (a.s) says Imam Ali (a.s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و لیبعثن الله رجلا من ولدی فی آخر الزمان یطالب بدمائنا و لیغیبن عنهم
تمییزا لاهل الضلاله حتی یقول الجاهل: ما لله فی آل محمد من حاجه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah shall send someone from my offspring at the end of the times. He
will avenge our bloods. He will go into hiding in order to distinguish
those who are misguided (from others). (His occultation will last so
long that) ignorant people will say that there is no need for Prophet's
household. [^10]

Imam Sadiq says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان لصاحب هذا الامر غیبه لابد منها یرتاب فیها کل مبطل
  </p>
</blockquote>

The one in authority (Imam Mahdi) shall go on an occultation which is
inevitable. His occultation will take so long that all the people of
falsehood will begin doubting. [^11]

### The need to know the imam of the time

Secondly there are many successively reported Shia and Sunni traditions
that state that it is necessary to know the imam of the time and that
the imams are twelve people from Prophet's household. These traditions
imply that Mahdi is the twelfth Imam and that he is born and is alive.

Now that Imam Mahdi is not present among us, he must be, on the basis of
the traditions mentioned, somewhere hidden from our vision.

### Harmony between occultation and imamate

Thirdly we need to know that there is no contradiction between imamate
and occultation. Allah appoints someone as an imam in order to guide

people through him and to make him an authority between Himself and
them, but it is not Allah who has caused his occultation; it is rather
people who have caused his occultation.

### Imam Mahdi and divine grace

Fourthly Khaja Nasir al-Din Tusi, a celebrated scholar commenting on
Imam Mahdi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجوده لطف و تصرفه لطف آخر و عدمه منا
  </p>
</blockquote>

His existence is a divine grace, his action is another divine grace and
his absence is due to us.

Commenting on Khaja's words, Allama Hilli says: It is said that an imam
is a divine grace as long as he can take actions through issuing orders
and is actively present in society, but when he is missing (as in the
case of Imam Mahdi) he is no longer a divine grace. Shias (in other
words) do not consider what is a divine grace as necessary (and what
they consider as necessary is not an instance of divine grace).

In response to this objection it has to be said that it is necessary to
have an imam because of the following:

He protects religion against any addition and subtraction (innovation).

Obviously, if all those under obligation in every circumstance believe
in the existence of an imam and in the necessity of the implementation
of his orders, they will shun evil deeds and will instead do good acts.

No doubt, Imam's participation is a divine grace and this will not
happen except through his presence. Thus Imam's existence is a divine
grace and so is his participation.

In other words, imamate is a divine grace in many ways:

It is incumbent upon Allah to create an Imam, make him eligible, by
giving him knowledge and power and pronounce clearly his genealogical
details. All this is done by Allah the Almighty.

It is incumbent upon the imam to accept imamate and to shoulder its
responsibility.

It is incumbent upon people to help the imam and obey his commandments,
but people however did not fulfill their responsibility. Thus Allah has
not deprived people of this divine grace nor did the imam. It is hence
the people themselves who have deprived themselves of this divine
grace.[^12]

### Uses of an absent imam

Fifthly critics are not aware of the uses and advantages of the
existence of an absent imam. They will not come to know about these
things even if they want to do so.

There are some Shia scholars and even reliable Shia laymen who have met
the Imam of the Time. Their stories are related by reliable people and
are recorded in relevant books.

To solve many of their problems including their personal problems,
(some) Shias have been able to meet the Imam and solve their problems
through relying on his directives.

The hypocrites and the enemies of the imams do not naturally however
accept such reports and thus we do not criticize them for that.

Moreover, Allah has appointed a prophet and an imam for every nation in
order to guide them and set a divine authority among them. Many prophets
were martyred during the very first days of doing their mission. Others
were sent on exile. Can we say that sending such prophets was useless?

In short, the Imam is absent not because of Allah or his own
observations, but because of the obstacles created by people. As soon as
these obstacles are removed, he will appear, establishing a divine
government and filling the world with justice and equity.

As to when the Imam appears, we do not know and it is Allah alone who
knows about it.

3. Where does he live?
----------------------

Before responding this question, we must ask as to where other great
figures whom we consider alive because of reliable traditions, live.

As mentioned in some Shia books, Imam Mahdi lives in a place called
Khadra Island. It seems that some great Shia scholars agree with this
theory.

### A baseless claim by Ibn Taymiyya and Ibn Khaldun

As quoted before, Ibn Taymiyya is of the view that Shias believe that
Mahdi has gone into hiding in a basement in Samarra (in Iraq). Ibn
Khaldun repeats the same thing saying: "Shias think that their twelfth
imam – Muhammad bin Hasan Askari called Mahdi – has gone into hiding in
the basement of his father's house in Hilla, after he and his mother
were arrested. (According to them) it is he who appears in the end of
time establishing justice and equity in the world.

This Shiite belief is based on a tradition Timihdi has mentioned
concerning Mahdi in his book. They are still waiting for his
reappearance and that is why they call him 'awaited imam'.

After offering evening prayer, they stand every night at the door of
this basement. They bring an animal for him to ride on and appeal to him
by calling his name to appear. As darkness looms, they disperse. This is
what they do in the coming nights as well. The aim is to show that they
are, as they have pledged, waiting…"[^13]

These are some of the lies they attribute to poor Shias. Some Shias'
enemies have even expressed these lies in the form of poems saying: "Is
it not the proper time for the basement to give birth to …."

### A response by Shiite scholars

I wish these people referred to a single Shiite tradition or a single
word said by a Shiite scholar to prove their lies and accusations.

Great early and later Shiite scholars have decisively rejected such
accusations. Below are some of their words:

Sheikh Arbili says: "Those who believe in Imam Mahdi do not claim that
he lives in a basement. They instead believe that he is alive moving to
and residing at different places in the world…"[^14]

Sheikh Noori Tabarsi (another Shiite scholar) says: "Though we tried our
best, we could not find any evidence to show the truthfulness of their
words (that Mahdi lives in a basement). Above all, traditions have made
no mention of this 'basement' either".[^15]

Sayyid Sadr says: "The opinions expressed by some Shiite laymen are
attributed to us by some Sunni scholars. I could not find any evidence
to show these opinions are right".[^16]

Commenting on this issue, Allama Sheikh Abd al-Husayn Amini says: "The
accusation of 'basement' is more embarrassing than any other
accusations. Though some other Sunni scholars have related this
accusation as well, he (Ibn Tamiyya) has extremely exaggerated about it
adding donkeys to horses.

He claims that Shias do this ritual every night and they have been doing
it for the past one thousand years.

This is while Shias do not believe that their imam has disappeared in a
basement. He has not hidden himself in that place nor will he arise from
that place. According to Shiite beliefs that are based on sound
traditions, Mahdi will appear in Mecca.

No (important) Shia believes that the basement is the place where he
disappeared. Basement is a place each house had at that time. They made
it in order to use it when the weather was very hot.

The basement of the Imam's house is so important because it is related
to him and other imams. This basement was used, like the rooms of his
house, by three imams. Other houses belonging to anyone of the
infallibles (including the Holy Prophet (S)) have the same place and
status no matter where they are located. This is because Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللَّهُ أَنْ تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ
يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالْآصَالِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the houses which Allah has permitted to be exalted and that His
name may be remembered in them, there glorify Him therein in the
mornings and the evenings.*** [^17]

I wish these liars reached a similar conclusion about the said basement
so that we would not observe the signs of fabrication and lie in their
words.

As an instance, in his travel account, Ibn Batuta says that the said
basement is located in Hilla.[^18]

In his *Akhbar al-Duwal*, Qarmani claims that it is located in Baghdad.
Others have pointed out that this place is located in Samarra. Qamisi
who lived years later than the above mentioned figures, was not aware of
the location of this basement. Only to deceive others, he has made use
of the term 'basement'.

Having tried their best, Suwaidi and his likes were not able to find a
single document in Shiite traditions or Shiite scholars' words, to prove
their point of view."[^19]

### The Samarra basement as a holy place

Some Sunni scholars like Ibn Khallakan[^20] and Hafiz Ganji have
considered the issue of 'basement' as indisputable and thus they have
defended it on certain grounds.[^21]

It is worth mentioning that the quotations we quoted from Shiite
scholars (that according to Shia he does not live a basement) do not
reject respecting and paying homage to the basement located in the
neighborhood of the holy shrines of Imam Hadi and Imam Hasan Askari in
Samarra (in Iraq). This basement is no doubt a holy place used by
Prophet's household and that is why believers visit it.

4. When will Imam Mahdi reappear?
---------------------------------

As mentioned before, the reappearance of Imam Mahdi depends on the
fulfillment of certain conditions. (If these conditions are fulfilled he
will appear.) Some Shiite traditions state that he will suddenly
reappear.[^22]

### How does Imam Mahdi judge?

Based on Shiite traditions, his judgments are similar to those of
Prophet Dawood. The Holy Prophet (S) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انما اقضی بینکم بالبینات و الایمان و بعضکم الحن بحجته من بعض و ایما
رجل قطعت له قطعه فانما اقطع له قطعه من نار
  </p>
</blockquote>

He is abler than others in terms of presenting formal arguments….[^23]

To explain it, it has to be said that whenever two people disputed on
something they would go before the Holy Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet
(S) would ask the complainant to offer his evidence. If he offered
reliable evidence the Holy Prophet would take that thing (on which they
were disputing) from the accused and gave it to him.

In other words, the Holy Prophet's judgments were based on formal
arguments and outward evidence. That is why the Holy Prophet himself
says that his judgments are based exclusively on formal arguments and
evidence. He adds that if the complainant's arguments are false he must
make sure that what he earns through such arguments is Hell's fire.

In other words, the Holy Prophet wants to say that he is duty bound to
judge on the basis of formal argument and evidence. (To judge on such
basis is not immune from errors). Thus if the complainant knows that he
is not right he must not proceed further.

Thus Islamic judgments whether at the time of the Holy Prophet or after
him were passed on the basis of formal and conventional rules and
regulations and these rules and regulations were nothing more than
formal arguments and evidence.

After reappearing, Imam Mahdi will not however judge on the basis of
such rules and regulations. He will instead judge on the basis realities
on the ground (for Allah helps him know the realities sooner than
others).

For example, if he observes that (a) belongs to (x) but (y) claims that
he owes it, he will take (a) from (y) and give it (x) (without following
the formal procedures). Similarly if he observes that (x) has unjustly
occupied (a), he will order him to evacuate it and submit it to its
owner, even though (x) has strong formal arguments acceptable at courts.

In other words, Imam acts in accordance with realities rather than
conventional rules and regulations. (It is on the basis of such a
procedure that) he can quickly return all rights back to their owners.

### Waiting and Those Who Wait

Now that we came to know that the Imam appears very suddenly and that he
judges on the basis of realities rather than formal rules, we need to
know about our duties (during the time of occultation) towards
ourselves, Allah

and others. We can better understand the importance of these duties if
we pay attention to the following two points:

One: It is possible for the Imam to reappear at any moment.

Two: Once he reappears, he will judge (as mentioned before) on the basis
of realities rather than formal rules.

Given all these, what are the responsibilities of each one of us?

In a tradition, it has been stated that the best deed is waiting for his
reappearance.[^24]

Considering all these facts, we can come to know why the holy imams
prevented their companions from making haste in asking for his
reappearance and stressed that they only needed to follow their Lord and
pray for his reappearance.

In other words, waiting for the Imam's reappearance and his righteous
government is a good way for individual and social reform. If we are
able to reform ourselves, we will be included among the Imam's
companions and helpers.

### Waiting and praying for Imam's reappearance

We are told to pray a lot for the infallibles' reappearance and wait for
their arrival. Waiting is nothing but self-purification and compliances
with the realities on the basis of which the Imam will rule. We need to
give to others what we owe to them. In our societies, there might be
people with properties they really do not owe. Once the Imam reappears,
he will confiscate such properties and give them back to their real
owners.

Thus we can pave the ground for his reappearance if we pay attention to
the issue of self-purification and practically abide by religious rules
on personal and social levels.

Commenting on the issue of reappearance, Imam Ali (a.s) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ِ الْزَمُوا الْأَرْضَ وَ اصْبِرُوا عَلَى الْبَلَاءِ وَ لَا تُحَرِّكُوا
بِأَيْدِيكُمْ وَ سُيُوفِكُمْ فِي هَوَى أَلْسِنَتِكُمْ وَ لَا
تَسْتَعْجِلُوا بِمَا لَمْ‏ يُعَجِّلْهُ‏ اللَّهُ‏ لَكُمْ‏ فَإِنَّهُ
مَنْ مَاتَ مِنْكُمْ عَلَى فِرَاشِهِ وَ هُوَ عَلَى مَعْرِفَةِ حَقِّ
رَبِّهِ وَ حَقِّ رَسُولِهِ وَ أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ مَاتَ شَهِيداً وَ وَقَعَ
أَجْرُهُ عَلَى اللَّهِ‏ وَ اسْتَوْجَبَ ثَوَابَ مَا نَوَى مِنْ صَالِحِ
عَمَلِهِ وَ قَامَتِ النِّيَّةُ مَقَامَ إِصْلَاتِهِ لِسَيْفِهِ فَإِنَّ
لِكُلِّ شَيْ‏ءٍ مُدَّةً وَ أَجَلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Stick to the earth, keep patient in trials, do not move your hands and
swords after the liking of your tongues, and do not make haste in
matters in which Allah has not asked for haste because any one of you
who dies in his bed while he had knowledge of the rights of Allah and
the rights of His Prophet and members of the Prophet's house, will die
as martyr. His reward is incumbent on Allah. He is also eligible to the
recompense of what good acts he has intended to do, since his intention
takes the place of drawing his sword. Certainly, for everything there is
a time and a limit. [^25]

Shiite traditions maintain that anyone who has the above-mentioned
qualities and dies before the Imam appears his reward is similar to the
rewards of those who really serve Mahdi and fight in his company.

In a tradition, Imam maintains:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فانه من مات منکم علی فراشه و هو علی معرفه حق ربه و حق رسوله و اهل بیته
مات شهیدا و وقع اجره علی الله و استوجب ثوب مانوی من صالح عمله و قامت
النیه مقام اصلاته لسیفه فان لکل شیء مده و اجلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily he who dies from among you in his bed while he recognizes the
right of his Lord, the right of His Messenger and the right of Prophet's
household dies as a martyr. His reward is upon Allah. He deserves the
reward of the good deeds he has intended to perform. His intention to do
good deeds will be considered as his actions. [^26]

### Waiting and taking preparation for his reappearance

Though we are supposed to pray for his immediate reappearance, we must
get fully ready to help him in case he appears. If every Shia acts in
accordance with his duties and recognizes the rights of Allah, His
Messenger and Prophet's household, the ground will be automatically
paved for the Imam's reappearance. (Now if the Imam reappear, so much
the better, if not) they have at least acted in accordance with their
duties towards their Imam. Our main goal was also to explain this.

We ask Allah, the Glorious, to (further) acquaint us with His rights,
His Messenger's rights, and the rights of Prophet's household and help
us do our duties.

Peace and blessing be upon Muhammad and his pure progeny

[^1]: Sharh al-Maqasid, vol. 5, p. 313.

[^2]: Minhaj al-Sunna, vol. 4, p. 93.

[^3]: Al-Isaba, vol. 1, p. 429.

[^4]: Tahdib al-Asma wa al-Lughat, vol. 1, p. 176.

[^5]: Miqat al-Mafatih, vol. 9, p. 962.

[^6]: Quran, Sura an-Nisa, 4:59.

[^7]: Kamal-al-Din, vol. 1, p. 287.

[^8]: Quran, Shu'ara, 227.

[^9]: Kamal-al-Din, vol. 2, p. 411.

[^10]: Nu'amani, Kitab al-Ghayba, p. 140.

[^11]: Ilal-al-Sharae'a, vol. 1, p. 245.

[^12]: Kashf al-Murad fi Sharh Tajrid al-Itiqad, pp. 491 492.

[^13]: Muqaddima Ibn Khaldun, p. 352.

[^14]: Kashf al-Ghumma fi M'arifat al-Aamma, vol. 3, p. 283.

[^15]: Kashf al-Astar an Wajh al-Imam al-Ghaeb an al-Absar, p. 212.

[^16]: Al-Mahdi, p. 155.

[^17]: Quran, Noor, 36.

[^18]: Safar Nama Ibn Batuta, vol. 2, p. 198.

[^19]: Al-Ghadir fi al-Kitab wa al-Sunna wa al-Adab, vol. 3, p. 308.

[^20]: Wafayat al-Aayan, vol. 1, p. 372.

[^21]: Al-Bayan fi Akhbar Sahib al-Zaman.

[^22]: Sheik Mufid, Kitab al-Mazar, p. 9 and al-Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p. 324.

[^23]: Al-Kafi, vol. 7, p. 414. There are other versions of this
tradition as well. See for example this one: إنّما أقضى بينكم بالبيّنات
و الأيمان و بعضكم‏ ألحن‏ بحجّته‏ من بعض فأيّما رجل قطعت له من مال أخيه
شيئا فإنّما قطعت له به قطعة من النّار.Jawmi'a al-Kilam, p. 698.

[^24]: Saduq, al-Khisal, p. 616.

[^25]: Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon 190.

[^26]: Ta'awil al-Ayat, p. 642, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52,p. 144.


