Bibliography
============

1. The Holy Quran

2. Nahj al-Balagha

3. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Siddiq, Abu al-Fayz Ghamari Hasani Azhari
Maghribi, Ibraz al-Wahm al-Maknoon,

4. Abu Mnsur Ahmad bin Ali bin Abi Talib Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj, Beirut,
Mu'assia Aalami.

5. Shams al-Din Sakhawi, Istijlab Irtiqa al-Ghuraf.

6. Ahmad bin Ali bin Hajar Asqalani, al-Isaba fi Tameez al-Sahaba,
Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, 1415 AH.

7. Sayyid Muhsin Amin, A'ayan al-Shia, Beirut, Dar al-Ta'aruf, 1403 AH.

8. Muhammad Baqir Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Beirut, Dar al-Ihya
al-Thurath al-Arabi, 1403 AH.

9. Sheikh Ali Muttaqi Hindi, al-Burhan fi 'Alamat al-Mahdi, Qom, Matba'a
Khayyam.

10. Abu Ja'afar, Muhammad bin Hasan bin Farrukh Saffar, Basaer
al-Darajat, Tehran, Manshurat A'alami, 1404 AH.

11. Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Yusuf bin Muhammad Qarshi Ganji Shafi'ai,
al-Bayan fi Akhbar Sahib al-Zaman, Njaf, Haidariyya, 1390 AH.

12. Sayyid Sharaf al-Din Ali Husayni Astarabadi Najafi, Ta'awil
al-'Ayat, Qom, Madrasa Imam Hadi, 1407 AH.

13. Sheikh Mansur Ali Nasif, Al-Taj al-Jami'a Lilusul fi Ahadith
al-Rasul, Beirut, Dar Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi.

14. Abdur Rahman bin Khaldun Maghribi, Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, Beirut, Dar
al-Kitab Lubnani.

15. Khatib Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdadi, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya,
first edition, 1417 AH.

16. Imam Fakhr Razi, Tafsir Fakhr Razi (Tafsir al-Kabir), Beirut, Dar
Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi, third edition.

17. Nizam al-Din Nayshaburi, Gharaeb al-Quran wa Raghaeb al-Furqan.

18. Ibn Hajar Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdib, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya, second edition, 1415 AH.

19. Sheikh Abdullah Muhammad Hasan bin Mula Abdullah Mamqani Najafi,
Tanqih al-Maqal fi Ilm al-Rijal.

20. Nawavi, Tahdib al-Asma wa al-Lughat, Beirut, 1416 AH.

21. Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Tahdib al-Tahdib, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Illmiyya, 1415 AH.

22. Jamal al-Din Abu al-Hajjaj Yusuf Mazzi, Tahdib al-Kamal fi Asma
al-Rijal, Beirut, 1415 AH.

23. Mubark bin Muhammad Shaybani known as Ibn Athir, Jami'a al-Usul,
Beirut, Dar al-Fikr, 1417 AH.

24. Muhammad bin Ahmad Ansari Qurtabi, al-Jami'a li Ahkam al-Quran,
Beirut, Dar Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi.

25. Ali bin Dawood Husayni Samhoodi, Jawaheer al-Aqdin, Beirut, Dar
al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, 1415 AH.

26. Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, al-Havi lil Fatawa, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya, 1408 AH.

27. Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn Husayn Ibn Musa Ibn Babuwaih, known as Sheikh
Saduq, al-Khisal, Qom, Intisharat Jami’a Mudarrisin.

28. Jalal al-Din Suyyti, al-Durr al-Mansur fi al-Tafsir bi al-Ma'athur,
first edition, 1421.

29. Ibn Majah, Sunan, Beirut, Dar al-Jil, first edition, 1418 AH.

30. Abu Dawood, Sunan, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, first edition,
1416 AH.

31. Sa'ad al-Din Taftazani, Sharh al-Maqasid, Qom, Manshurat Sharif
Razi, 1409 AH.

32. Zarqani Maliki, Sharh Mawahib al-Ladunniya, Beirut, Dar al-Ma'arifa,
1414 AH.

33. Abdullah bin Habban, Sahih Ibn Habban, Beirut, Mu'assisa al-Risala,
1414 AH.

34. Bukhari, Sahih, Beirut, Dar Ibn Kathir, fifth edition, 1414 AH.

35. Muhammad bin Isa bin Sura Tirmidhi, Sahih Tirmidhi, Beirut, Dar
al-Fikr, 1403 AH.

36. Muslim bin Hajjaj Nayshaburi, Sahih Muslim, Beirut, Dar al-Fikr,
first edition, 1407AH.

37. Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ali Ibn Hajar Haithami Makki,
al-Sawaeq al-Muhriqa, Beirut, Mu’assisa Risalat, first edition, 1417 AH.

38. Muhammad bin Sa'ad, al-Tabaqatal-Kubra, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya, 1418 AH (second edition).

39. Yusuf bin Yahya bin Ali bin Abdulaziz Maqdisi Shafi'ai, 'Aqd
al-Durar fi Akhbar al-Muntazar, Cairo, Maktaba Alam al-Fikr, 1399 AH.

40. Abu Umar Ahmad bin Abd Rabbihi Qurtubi, al-'Aqd al-Farid, Beirut,
Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi, 1403 AH.

41. Muhammad bin Babway known as Sheikh Saduq, Ilal al-Sharae'a, Qom,
Intisharat Sharif Razi, 1421 AH.

42. Abu Muhammad Abdullah bin Muslim bin Qatiba Daynoori, Uyun
al-Akhbar, Qom, Manshurat Sharif Razi, 1415 AH.

43. Sheikh Abd al-Husayn Ahmad Amini Najafi, al-Ghadir fi al-Kitab wa
al-Sunna wa al-Adab, Beirut, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi.

44. Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ja'afar Nu'amani, al-Ghayba,
Qom, Manshrat Anwar al-Huda, 1422 AH.

45. Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani, Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, Beirut,
Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, first edition, 1410 AH.

46. Naem bin Hammad, al-Fitan, Qairo, Maktaba al-Tawheed, 1412 AH.

47. Ahmad Zayni Dahlan Makki Shafi'ai Mustafa Muhammad, al-Futuhat
al-Islamiyya.

48. Ibrahim bin Muhammad Hamuei Juwayni Khurasani, Faraed al-Samtin,
Beirut, Muassisa Mahmoodi, 1398 AH.

49. Ibn Sabbagh Maliki, al-Fusul al-Muhimma fi Ma'arifat al-Aemma,
(Beirut), Maktaba Dar al-Kutub al-Tijariya.

50. Abdur Rauf Manawi, Fayz al-Qadir, Sharh al-Jami’a al-Saghir, Beirut,
1415 AH.

51. Muhammad Ibn Ya’aqub al-Kulaini, al-Kafi, Beirut, Dar al-Ta’aruf,
third edition, 1401 AH.

52. Sheikh Husayn Noori Tabarsi, Kashf al-Astar 'an Wajh al-Imam
al-Ghaeb 'an al-Absar.

53. Abu al-Hasan Ali bin Isa bin Abi al-Fath Arbili, Kashf al-Ghumma fi
Ma'arifat al-'Aemma, Beirut, Dar al-Adwa.

54. Allama Jamal al-Din Hasan bin Yusuf Hilli, Kash al-Murad fi Sharh
Tajrid al-Itiqad, Qom, Jam'a Mudarrisiin, 1407 AH.

55. Muhammad bin Yusuf Ganji Shafi'ai, Kifaya al-Talib fir Manaqib Ali
bin Abi Talib, Najaf, Matba'ah Haidariyya, 1390 AH.

56. Abu Ja'afar Muhammad bin Ali bin Husayn bin Babuway Qomi known as
Sheikh Saduq, Kamal al-Din wa Tamam al-Ni'ama, Tehran, Maktaba Saduq,
1390 AH.

57. Jamal al-Din Muhmmad bin Mukarram bin Manzur Ifriqi Misri, Lisan
al-Arab, Beirut, Dar al-Fikr.

58. Mulla Ali Qari Hirawi, Mirqat al-Mafatih fi Sharh Mishkat
al-Masabih, Beirut, Dar Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi.

59. Muhammab bin Na'aman Ukbari Baghdadi known as Sheikh Mufid,
al-Mazar, Qom, Madrasa Imam Mahdi.

60. Hakim Nayshaburi, al-Mustadrak al al-Sahihain, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya, first edition, 1411 AH.

61. Ahmad bin Hanbal Shaybani, Musnad Ahmad, Beirut, Dar Ihya al-Turath
al-Arabi, third edition, 1415 AH.

62. Khatib Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, Beirut, Dar al-Fikr, 1411 AH.

63. Sulayman bin Ahmad bin Ayyub Lakhmi Tabarani, al-Mu'ajam al-Kabir,
Beirut, Dar Ihya al-Turath, 1404 AH.

64. Abd al-Rahman bin Khaldun Maghribi, Muqaddima.

65. Ibn Qayyim Jawziyya, al-Minar al-Munif fi al-Sahih wa al-Da'aef,
Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya.

66. Ibn Taymiyya Harrani, Minhaj al-Sunna al-Nabawiyya, Qairo, 1409 AH
second edition.

67. Sayyid Muhammad Baqir Sadr, al-Mahdi (a.s),

68. Dahabi, Mizan al-Itidal, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, 1416 AH.

69. Shams al-Din Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Khallakan, Wafayat al-A'ayan,
Beirut, Dar Sadir.

70. Sheik Sulayman bin Ibrahim Qunduzi Hanafi, Yanabi'a al-Mu'adda, Qom,
Manshurat Sharif Razi, 1417 AH.


