Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allāh (SwT), the Beneficent, the Merciful***

Only when we ponder and reflect on the guidance and traditions narrated
to us by the Prophet (S) and his Ahlul Bayt (as), do we realise the
treasures they have left behind for us. These pearls of wisdom light the
path to Heaven by providing us with advice and knowledge at every step
in our lives.

Unfortunately, the majority of these treasures are only available in
Arabic and Farsi, leaving English-only readers with just a fraction of
what is available, thus forcing them to rely on solely secular
information to fill this gap.

Two of these treasures are the Islamic teachings of sexual etiquette
between a man and a woman, and the creation of a ‘heavenly’ child. This
information has therefore been translated from various Farsi texts and
compiled into this manual. It is our hope that this will provide the
English reader with an Islamic manual to be incorporated and utilised
side by side with all the other information available, allowing one to
not only receive its benefits in this world, but to bring one closer to
Allāh (SwT) and heaven.

The information in this manual is based on the authentic and original
sources of the teachings of the Prophet (S) and his Ahlul Bayt (as).
Wherever possible, traditions from these Noble persons have been
included to highlight the strong Islamic basis behind the
recommendations made, as well as to encourage the reader to become
familiar with the words of our leaders in Islam. In addition the
inclusion of these traditions highlights the importance Islam places on
every single aspect of our lives, never leaving us without guidance at
any stage.

At this stage it is necessary to mention that it is possible that the
Ahlul Bayt (as) have narrated these traditions at a specific time, place
or situation, which information unfortunately has not reached us. We
have tried our best to bring the tradition to you as narrated in the
sources, in order that they may be useful and beneficial.

This manual begins with a discussion about the wedding night, including
the A°māl that have been recommended for this night, allowing the bride
and groom to start this stage of their life in the best possible way.
This is then followed by sexual etiquettes and its importance in Islam,
as well as recommendations for the acts and times in which a sexual
union is particularly advisable or not.

A section on important fiqh rules laying out essential information in a
simple manner follows. All the fiqh rules are in accordance with
Ayatullāh al-°Uzmā Sayyid °Alī al-°Husainī as-Sīstānī. Muqallidīn of
other mujtahids are recommended to refer to their own Risālah for these
sections.  
 With respect to sexual etiquette, family planning and the conception
period, Islamic recommendations have been highlighted with regards to
foods, acts and times, preparing the ground for the making of a
righteous and beautiful child, insha-Allāh.

Once pregnant, both the mother and father need to be aware of their
roles and responsibilities, allowing them to fulfil these in the best
manner possible. Once again, recommendations for foods, acts and
supplications have been outlined, to begin the nourishing and fostering
of the child from these early stages in the womb.

Recommended acts for a safe and easy delivery and for the period
immediately after delivery are then discussed, continuing on to
breastfeeding, which is known as one of the rights of a child. This is
then followed by some additional important fiqh rules for the mother,
dealing mainly with the issue of Nifās (the blood seen by the mother
after childbirth).

Last but definitely not least, this work closes with a chapter on
raising children, including 40 Akhlāqī points on interacting with your
child, instilling the love of the Ahlul Bayt (as) in them and tips on
memorisation of the Qur\`an for both parent and child. This section is
filled with important and interesting information that if adhered to,
can only serve to have a positive and beneficial impact on the child.

It is necessary to mention certain points that may crop up in the
reader’s mind when going through the vast amount of information
available. Firstly, certain recommendations may seem very specific and
narrow, such as that of the times when one should and should not
conceive; however, it is essential to remember that Islam is not a
difficult religion, and these recommendations are not there to impose
unnecessary restrictions on us.

Rather, these recommendations are placed there for our benefit, by a
Creator who knows us better than we know ourselves. A little effort on
our part will have long term consequences that we may not even be aware
of. Indeed, it is important to note that the majority of the
recommendations are just that, recommendations. All we have to do is to
approach this with the right niyyat, ensure that the obligatory acts are
performed and try our best with the rest, and insh-Allāh, He will guide
us the rest of the way.

Secondly, Muslim women in particular have an added responsibility during
pregnancy and beyond, as not only do the medical factors and advice have
to be adhered to, but the spiritual factors too. This is especially hard
if the pregnancy is a difficult one. Once again, one must keep in mind
that the benefits outweigh the costs.

Additionally, it is not necessary that every single recommended act be
carried out; rather a mother must see what is most suitable to her
timetable and carry out what she can to the best of her abilities, and
leave the rest to Allāh (SwT), who is All-Knowing. This is especially
pertinent considering that the recommendations will only have the
desired effect if carried out with a calm and peaceful soul, rather than
one with worry and stress.

Indeed, in all aspects of life, Islam has given importance to the
‘middle path’ and forbidden extremes. Likewise, it is wise to remember
that the recommendations in this manual each have their time and place,
and should not be overly indulged in, nor completely ignored. For
example, one of the recommendations for a beautiful child is that the
father should eat pomegranate; however, this does not mean that the
father should make pomegranate his only fruit, and even substitute it
for his main meals as this is harmful and dangerous.

It is only when the middle path is treaded upon that the inner,
spiritual benefits of these recommendation come into play and affect our
lives.

In closing, for a comprehensive approach to these areas, we would like
to recommend that this manual be read and incorporated side by side with
the supplications in *A Mother’s Prayer*[^1] by Saleem Bhimji and Arifa
Hudda.

We would like to thank all those who contributed to this manual in one
way or the other, and supported it throughout. May Allāh (SwT) reward
you for everything.

Lastly, we ask for your forgiveness if there are any shortcomings or
errors in this manual; please let us know and insha-Allāh, we shall try
to improve it for future readers. Any other comments or suggestions
would also be welcome.

When using this manual, please remember our families in your Du°ās, and
all Marhumeen with a Surat al-Fātiĥah.  
 We humbly pray to Allāh (SwT) to accept this effort, and if accepted,
we present it to Haďrat Ma°ŝūmah (sa), in whose Noble neighbourhood we
completed this work, and our Noble Imām of the time, Imām Mahdī (aj).

***“All Praise belongs to Allāh, Lord of all the Worlds.”***

Abbas and Shaheen Merali  
 1st July, 2005  
 The Noble City of Qom

[^1]: This book can be purchased from the Islamic Humanitarian Service
at www.al-haqq.com. To contact the authors, you can email them at
iph@iph.ca.


