Chapter 11: Raising Children
============================

40 Akhlāq Points on Interacting with your Child
-----------------------------------------------

*Mostly derived from Rayhāneye Beheshtī, pg. 221-241*

1. Give gifts to your daughter(s) first.

2. Play with your children.[^1] This has an important effect in the
training and nurturing of your child. Our leaders in Islam have stressed
the importance of this issue, and recommended it highly to Muslims.

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “The person who has a child, should
behave like a child with him.”[^2] It is also narrated from Imām °Alī
(as): “Anybody who has a child, should, for his/her training, bring
themselves down to their level of childhood.”[^3]

3. Do not hit your child when they cry, because it is narrated from the
Prophet (S): “Do not hit your babies since their crying has a meaning.
The first 4 months of crying is professing the unity of Allāh (SwT), the
second 4 months of crying is sending blessings upon the Prophet (S) and
his family and the third 4 months of crying is the baby praying for the
parents.”[^4]

4. Kiss your child. It has been narrated from one of the Imāms that:
“Kiss your children a great deal because for every kiss, you will be
granted a Divine heavenly rank which would otherwise take 500 years to
achieve!”[^5]

It is also narrated that a man once came to the Prophet (S) and said: “I
have never kissed my child.” The Prophet (S) said: “Surely a man like
this will be a resident of the fire of hell.”

5. By saying Salām to your child, build their sense of personality and
character. If youngsters say Salām, it is obligatory for elders to
reply; however, it was a characteristic of the Prophet (S) to say Salām
first, whether to elders or youngsters.[^6]

6. Do not ridicule the actions of your child, nor call them silly.

7. Do not order or forbid your child too much, as this emboldens them
and leads to rebellious behaviour when older.

8. Build your children’s chracters by respecting them. We read in
traditions that the Prophet (S)  prolonged his sajdah until his
grandson came down from his shoulders, and at other times he recited
Ŝalāt al-Jamā°at faster as he heard children of praying mothers crying.
Likewise, Imām °Alī  used to ask his children questions about religious
matters in the presence of others, and even passed on people’s questions
to them to answer.

When parents don’t satisfy the natural urges and desires of the child,
the child then resorts to wrong ways and means (often linked to sin) to
try and give himself the necessary push to build his sense of self and
importance. Personality, independence, will, self-trust, and likewise,
weakness, baseness and lack of self-trust are all characteristics the
foundations of which are in the lap of the father and bosom of the
mother. A child who has not been treated like another human being or a
valuable member of the family cannot be expected to have a well formed
personality in adulthood.

9. Keep your promises. Keeping promises in Islam is a sign of one’s
faith, and Allāh (SwT) mentions it in the Qur\`an.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَأَوْفُوا بِالْعَهْدِ إِنَّ الْعَهْدَ كَانَ مَسْؤُولاً 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And fulfil the covenants; indeed all covenants are accountable.”[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِأَمَانَاتِهِمْ وَعَهْدِهِمْ رَاعُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And those who keep their trusts and covenants.”[^8]

Keeping promises is one of the pillars of the prosperity of mankind and
one of the best qualities of one’s Akhlāq, its base lying in one’s
raising and training. It is narrated from the Prophet (S) : “Like your
children and treat them with affection and kindness. When you make a
promise to them, you must keep it, because children consider you their
sustainer.”[^9]

10. For the sexual training of children, the parents must first teach
their children not to enter their bedroom without asking permission.
Allāh (SwT) has pointed to this important point in Surat Nūr, Verse 58:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لِيَسْتَأْذِنُكُمُ الَّذِينَ مَلَكَتْ
أَيْمَانُكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ لَمْ يَبْلُغُوا الْحُلُمَ مِنكُمْ ثَلاَثَ
مَرَّاتٍ مِن قَبْلِ صَلاَةِ الْفَجْرِ وَحِينَ تَضَعُونَ ثِيَابَكُم
مِّنَ الظَّهِيرَةِ وَمِنْ بَعْدِ صَلاَةِ الْعِشَاء ثَلاَثُ عَوْرَاتٍ
لَّكُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O you who have faith! Let your permission be sought by your slaves and
those of you who have not reached puberty three times: before the dawn
prayer, and when you put off your garments at noon, and after the night
prayer. These are three times of privacy for you.”

It is also recommended to keep a close watch and control over their
actions with others and prevent those actions that increase one’s sexual
instinct (e.g. going out in mixed gatherings). It is important to
mention that their curiosity is very high in childhood. In addition,
they are very sensitive to what they watch and see, and fearlessly want
to put it into action and try it out for themselves, without knowing or
thinking that what they are doing may not be right.

Some useful points to be noted
------------------------------

a. Mothers should be careful that when tending to the cleanliness of
their children (e.g. giving them baths), even newborns, other children
are not present, especially those who are of a different gender.

b. From childhood, parents should not play with the child’s genital
organs, or even their chest and thighs.

c. Never leave children alone or in private for long periods of time and
when they are going through an inquisitive phase. It is also not
recommended to leave them unattended with someone else during this time,
especially a brother or sister.

d. Do not let girls of 6 years sit on a non-maĥram man’s lap or be
kissed by non-maĥram men.

e. Do not let girls be naked in front of others. In particular, their
chests and thighs should be covered.

f. Create love for Ŝalāt in your child, as Allāh (SwT) clearly states in
the Noble Qur\`an that Ŝalāt makes one far from ugly acts.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إِنَّ الصَّلاَةَ تَنْهَى عَنِ الْفَحْشَاءِ وَالْمُنكَرِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed the prayer prevents indecencies and wrongs.”[^10]

11. Spoiling a child creates weakness, and a lack of will and
determination. These types of children trouble their parents in their
childhood, and make them encounter many problems.

**The spoilt children themselves face two types of problems**

a. They have expectations that the rest of society will, like their
parents, comfort and respect them no matter what, and carry out their
wishes without any questions. When they realise that people will not
only not do this, but will also ridicule these expectations, they become
upset and feel humiliated and debased.

b. Such experiences form the base of contempt and make them angry,
aggressive, lacking patience and weak. They become the type of people
who think low of others and treat them with harsh words and actions.

12. Nothing silences the sense of self-trust in a child more than
forcing him to do things they may not have the capability of doing. This
is especially the case when, if the child is unsuccessful, it is
followed by belittling statements like: “Don’t bother trying, you can’t,
you don’t have the capability.”

13. Pray for your children, both during pregnancy and afterwards.[^11]

14. Reminders and requests should be given with gentleness and softness
so as not to create a barrier between parents and child. One day, Imām
Husain called his children and his brother’s children together and said
to them: “All of you are the children of today’s society and, it is
hoped, the leaders of tomorrow’s society.

So learn and make efforts in the acquisition of knowledge, and whoever
does not have a good memory and cannot memorise the subjects taught by
the teacher in teaching sessions, (should) write them down and keep them
at home.” Thus we see that the Imām created the love of acquiring
knowledge in them without using techniques like scaring or forcing them,
but by making them understand that knowledge is the path to honour and
esteem.

15. If your child is respected, he/she is less likely to rebel against
the rules of the house. Respect and good interaction between parent and
child are the bases in forming the child’s character. It is narrated
from the Prophet (S): “Respect your children and talk to them with
(good) manners and a likeable method.”

16. A good role model is someone who adjusts their children’s desires
wisely and with the correct techniques.

17. Foster the faith of your child. Children that have been raised from
the beginning with faith in Allāh (SwT) have a strong will and powerful
soul and from their early years are mature and courageous; this is
easily observed by their actions and words. The readiness of the soul of
a child to learn faith and Akhlāq is like fertile ground in which any
type of seed can grow. Therefore, parents should teach their child love
for Allāh (SwT) and the Ahlul Bayt (as) and leaders of Islam from the
earliest opportunities.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Teach traditions to your
children as soon as possible, before opposers (to your beliefs) reach
them before you do.”[^12]

In traditions, parents who do not take the future life (aakhirat) of
their children into consideration are reproached. It is narrated that
the Prophet (S)’s gaze fell on some children and he said: “Woe upon the
children of the end of time (before the coming of the 12th Imām) because
of the disliked methods of their fathers.”

It was asked of him: “Oh Prophet (S) of Allāh (SwT)! Because of their
polytheistic fathers?” He replied, “No, because of their Muslim fathers
who didn’t teach their children any religious duties. They were content
with worthless material things for them. I am weary and exempt of such
people…”[^13]

It is said that in communist Russia, they used to eliminate the
existence of God from the ground roots level; for example, when a child
was hungry or thirsty their parents would let them cry and say to them,
“Ask God to provide for you.” When the children would do this, and still
remain hungry and thirsty, they used to say to them, “See, you cried to
God he gave you nothing!

Now ask Lenin (the Russian leader) to provide for you!” When the
children would do this, then only would they give them food and drink.
The effect of this was that it was instilled in the children from
childhood that God doesn’t exist through this very deluded manner. This
same concept is condemned in Surat Yāsīn, Verse 47:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنُطْعِمُ مَنْ لَّوْ
يَشَآءُ اللٌّهُ أَطْعَمَهُ إِنْ أَنْـتُمْ إِلاَّ فِي ضَلاَلٍ مُّبِينٍ

  </p>
</blockquote>

“The faithless say to the faithful, “Shall we feed (someone) whom Allāh
(SwT) would have fed, had He wished? You are only in manifest error.”“

However, this is a wonderful lesson to us as to how Allāh (SwT) should
be introduced to a child from young age. Whenever a child gets to that
age that he understands that whenever they desire something they need to
ask their parents, their parents should ask them first to ask from Allāh
(SwT). Then when they provide the desired object, they should stress
that it reached them through the blessings of Allāh (SwT). Thus, as they
grow up, they will be able to see Allāh (SwT) as the underlying
principal behind every action.

18. Stay away from wrist-grabbing and bossy behaviour with children.

19. One of the duties of parents is to foster the innate nature of
telling the truth in children. Their behaviour in the house should be
such that this becomes a habit. However, this is one of the more
difficult areas of raising a child and attention to knowledge and action
is very important.

It is narrated in a tradition from the Prophet (S): “May Allāh (SwT)
have mercy on the person that helps his child in (doing) good.” The
narrator of the tradition asked: “How?” In his reply, the Prophet (S)
gave 4 instructions:

a. Whatever the child has in his power and has carried out, accept it.

b. Don’t expect that which is hard for him.

c. Prevent him from sin.

d. Don’t lie to him, or do silly things.

20. Do not use fear as a method of raising your child, as this causes
damage to their personality and leads to psychological problems. In
particular, excess punishment by the mother weakens the relationship and
value that the child has for his mother in his heart. Often a look or
silence can be more effective in making the child understand their
mistake than hitting them or scaring them.

21. Cuddling and kissing a child is one of their soul-foods, and it is
necessary that enough of this is given to them. One of the reasons that
a child is crying may be that they are thirsty for this expression of
love. Children who grow up with plenty of love have confident
personalities which are not swayed by the difficulties that crop up in
life.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Certainly Allāh (SwT) shows
mercy upon His servants who have strong love for their offspring.”[^14]
It is also narrated from the Imām: “Prophet (S) Mūsā said the following
to Allāh (SwT) when he was on the mountain of Tur: “O Allāh (SwT)! Which
act is the best one according to you?” Allāh (SwT) replied: “Loving
children is the best act.”“

22. Parents have a responsibility to make their children understand the
indecency of sin and create an aversion for people who partake in this,
and likewise, to reproach the bad and encourage the child’s good
actions. However, reproach and admiration has its time and place and
should not be overdone as this itself can corrupt a child.

23. The beds of children of 6 years and above should be separated from
each other, even if they are both daughters or both sons.[^15]

24. As well as the natural characteristics that the child inherits from
his parents, the environment and Nurture of the child have a profound
effect. It is highly unlikely that in a family that does not function
properly, a normal and natural child is raised.

In particular, the instructions of parents only have an effect if the
parents lead by example. The first step of raising children is the
Nurture of the self. Somebody who does not possess good Akhlāq cannot
guide another to this, and similarly, hot-tempered parents cannot
usually raise a calm and patient child.

Children need to be taught that characteristics such as lying,
back-biting, bad language, etc. are disliked, and naturally, the child
will refrain from such when the parents themselves have set such
examples.

25. There should be a difference in the order and expectations of the
behaviour of a child inside the home, and out. At home, allow the child
to play freely.

26. Always bear the unexpected behaviour of your child to a limit and do
not always take the mistakes of your child to be unforgivable, so that
you are not always compelled to punish. Patience, coping and forgiveness
are a must when raising children. If your child has a quality that you
do not like, it should be corrected in a wise manner without displaying
contempt of the child, and the correct manner of doing things should be
shown at the same time as stopping him/her from old ways.

When parents constantly tell the child off, they are belittling the
child and not only are they not going to be successful in reforming the
child, but are also going to create stubbornness in them. It is narrated
from Imām °Alī (as): “Excess reproach fuels the fire of
stubbornness.”[^16]

27. When instructing your child, don’t mention the names of other
children constantly, or compare them with others.

28. Stories are a useful and important method of encouraging good
qualities and characteristics, and discouraging bad ones, such as the
rights of friends, faith, etc. The Noble Qur\`an uses this method to do
the same as mentioned in Surat Yūsuf, Verse 111:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لَقَدْ كَانَ فِي قَصَصِهِمْ عِبْرَةٌ لِّأُولِي الأَلْبَابِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is certainly a moral in their accounts for those who possess
intellect.”***

It is important to keep the following in mind when selecting stories:

a. They should mention Allāh (SwT)  in some form or the other, and be
narrated with the intention of Nurturing the personality and
characteristics of your child.

b. Attention should be paid to the child’s age, intelligence and mental
state when choosing a story.

c. There shouldn’t be extremes, or lies or rumours far from the truth in
the stories.

d. They should contain answers to the questions of the child.

e. The best stories should be chosen, just as Allāh (SwT) has stated in
Surat Yūsuf, Verse 3:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 نَحْنُ نَقُصُّ عَلَيْكَ أَحْسَنَ الْقَصَصِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We will recount to you the best of narratives.”***

f. Truth and righteousness should always prevail in the stories.

g. The main character (who is the role model) of the stories should not
possess deviations or bad characteristics.

h. The stories should not be too lengthy or tiring for the child.

29. The mischievousness of your child in the early years is a sign of
increased intelligence in the older years, so you shouldn’t be too
worried or punish it too much.

30. Make your children perform Ŝalāt from 7 years, and fast from 9
years, either half day or more or less, depending on their abilities.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “When our children reach 5 years
of age, we tell them to pray ŝalāt, so you tell your children to do this
when they reach 7 years of age; and we tell our chidren at the age of 7
years to fast however much they have the ability to, half a day, or
more, or less, and to break their fast when they become hungry or
thirsty so that they get used to fasting and develop the ability for it,
so you tell your children at the age of 9 years to fast however much
they have the ability for, and when thirst overcomes them, to break
their fast.”[^17] and [^18]

It is also narrated in a tradition: “We command our children to (do) the
tasbih of Haďrat Fāťima, just like we command them to (pray)
Ŝalāt.”[^19]

It is important to remember that in acts of worship, just like
everything else, there should be moderation. It is narrated from the
Prophet (S): “Islam is the firm religion of Allāh (SwT). Go forth with
moderateness and don’t do something that will make your heart
pessimistic to the worship of Allāh (SwT).”[^20]

31. Do not be quick to accuse your children of lying because until 5
years, real lying or lying out of self-interest is rare; rather it is
due to their active imagination, related to playing or creating
astonishment in others, or to the child’s exploration of the self.

32. Do not condemn a child who has tired you with their questions, as
this weakens their sense of curiousity.

33. Try not to quarrel, especially in front of the child, as this
troubles them greatly and affects their personality.

34. Children have a particular fear of the word death, especially death
of their mother or father. Therefore, where it is not necessary, don’t
speak constantly of your death, or the like. However, do teach your
child the truth about death, clearly and calmly and without eliciting
fear.

35. Find out about your child’s talents and develop these as much as
possible.

36. In terms of wordly aspects, do not over-saturate your child so that
they go on the wrong path, nor under do it, as both these methods are
dangerous.

37. The single most important cause of the happiness of the child is the
kindness of the parents. No other quality can create happiness and
calmness in a child-like love, and likewise, no other quality can
disturb and trouble a child like the lack of affection from the parents.

Children of parents who are successful in this area try their best to
please their parents and stay away from actions that will displease and
trouble them, both in their childhood and when they are older.
Therefore, love and affection not only satisfies the needs of the child
but ensures their obedience.

Allāh (SwT) has referred to this impact of kindness in the Noble
Qur\`an, in Surat Āli-’ Imrān, Verse 159:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 فَبِمَا رَحْمَةٍ مِّنَ اللٌّهِ لِنتَ لَهُمْ وَلَوْ كُنتَ فَظًّا
غَلِيظَ الْقَلْبِ لاَنفَضُّوا مِنْ حَوْلِكَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is by Allāh (SwT)’s mercy that you are gentle to them; and had
you been harsh and hardhearted, surely they would have scattered from
around you.”***

It is important to note that there should not be extremes; too much
love, just like too little, is destructive to the child; therefore
practise the middle path and raise your child in such a manner that they
are able to stand on their own two feet when older.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “The worst fathers are those
who, in their goodness and love towards their child, go over the limits
and incline to excesses.”[^21]

38. It is important that the parents give freedom and independence to
their children according to their capabilities, so that they develop
their initiative, innate independence and self-trust. At the same time,
one must be careful not to exceed the limits so that children bring harm
to themselves.

Some parents, either to free themselves of their responsibilities or
because of misplaced love, leave their children completely to their own
devices; however, before long, the child grows up without knowing
anything of their responsibilities in the house, or otherwise. It is at
this point parents try to instil this in their children, not
surprisingly without any effect.

Other parents however, do the opposite and do not give their children
enough opportunities to lead their own activities, constantly
interfering in what their children are doing and how. Both are wrong and
have negative consequences.

39. Raising your child properly is one of the responsibilities of a
parent, and lack of attention to this responsibility is a cause of
reproach of the Imāms.[^22] One should try their best through various
ways to create the love of Allāh (SwT) and the Ahlul Bayt (as), so that
the child follows the right path. Insofar as the requisite of love is
acquaintance and knowledge, one should try their best to instil this in
their children.[^23]

40. Teach your children the Qur\`an. Recitation of Qur\`an in the home
spreads the superior words of the truth and reality of Islam. Being in
an environment where one is familiar with the Noble Qur\`an, listens to
the recitation of the Noble Qur\`an and acts upon the instructions of
the Noble Qur\`an, has a strong effect on the child’s life.

Every time parents recite Qur\`an, children are encouraged to do the
same and follow them in this habit. In particular, those children who
have a naturally strong memory and are talented can easily memorise the
Qur\`an, which will benefit them forever. [^24]

14 Ways to Instil the Love of the Ahlul Bayt (as) in your Children
------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mostly derived from Rayĥāneye Beheshtī, pg. 244-247*

1. Conception, the pregnancy period and the mentality of the parents all
have an effect on the child in this area. As well as following the
recommendations mentioned in this manual, the following things are
emphasized: eating the tabarruk (blessed food) of the Imāms, going to
majalis and listening to lectures, being careful of what one sees or
hears, listening to the Noble Qur\`an, Nauhas and Qasidas when
breastfeeding, etc.

2. Use Euphrates water and Khāke Shafā (dirt from around the grave of
Imām Husayn (as) in Kerbalā).

3. Develop love and emotional attachment. Teach your children that love
of the Ahlul Bayt (as) leads to them being loved by both Allāh (SwT) 
and the Ahlul Bayt , and that the love of Allāh (SwT)  and the Ahlul
Bayt (as) go hand in hand.

4. Pay attention to the Ahlul Bayt’s (as) favour to their Shī°as. It is
narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “We know our Shī°as the same way one
knows their family.” It is also narrated that on the Day of Judgement,
the Shī°as of Imām °Alī (as) will be satiated, saved and successful.

5. Relay the benefits of friendship with the Ahlul Bayt (as), such as:
“Know that whoever dies with the love of the family of Muĥammad is a
martyr,” and “Know that whoever dies with the love of the family of
Muĥammad, two doors to heaven will open from his grave.”

The value of a person is according to how much love is in their hearts.
The more valuable the object of love is, the more valuable is the one
that loves.

6. Relay the need of this love. People usually are attracted to those
things that satisfy their needs, and we are indeed extremely needy of
the Ahlul Bayt (as). It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “Love of me
and love of my Ahlul Bayt benefit one in 7 places where there is a lot
of agitation: At the time of death, in the grave, at the time of being
raised from the grave, at the time of getting the book of deeds, at the
time of accounting, at the time of the weighing of deeds, and at the
time of (crossing the bridge of) ŝirāt.”[^25]

7. Show your appreciation, and encouragement of certain acts, so as to
make an example of those acts for the future. It is narrated that the
Prophet (S) gave an Arab a piece of gold that had been gifted to him,
because the Arab had presented himself humbly to Allāh (SwT) in his
meaningful and sincere Ŝalāt. The Prophet (S) said: “I have given this
gold to you because in the presence of Allāh (SwT), you praised him with
goodness and deservingly.” However, it is important that encouragement
should not be in the form of a bribe.

8. Practice what you preach, as the state of being and actions of the
parent are indirect but important teachers of the child.

9. Celebrate and mourn the wiladats and wafats (birth and death
anniversaries) of the Ahlul Bayt (as), such as Muĥarram, °Eid al-Ghadīr,
the wiladat of the 12th Imām, etc. This includes not only going to
mosque, but programs at home, madrasa, etc. There should be ties between
the happiness of the child’s life and the lives of the Imāms, for
example, making their wiladats a happy experience in the child’s memory
by having a party, giving sweets, gifts, and thus indirectly having a
beneficial effect on the child.

10. The child’s desire for growing up and reaching perfection is highest
in the teenage years and early adulthood, and this causes them to
automatically look for role models in life. This innate desire must be
utilised well and the vacuum filled by the Ahlul Bayt (as).

Indeed, the Ahlul Bayt (as) are the manifestation of perfection of
beauty of Allāh (SwT). Relaying their bravery, virtues, miracles,
generosity, ability to cure people and solve difficulties and their
station of intercession with Allāh (SwT) all have a beneficial effect in
creating an attachment between the child and them.

One of the Qur\`anic methods of Nurturing human beings is also by the
use of good role models to guide one to the right path, as mentioned in
Surat al-Aĥzāb, Verse 21:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لَقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِي رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ لِّمَنْ
كَانَ يَرْجُو اللٌّهَ وَالْيَوْمَ الآخِرَ وَذَكَرَ اللٌّهَ كَثِيراً 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In the Apostle of Allāh (SwT) there is certainly for you a good
exemplar, for those who look forward to Allāh (SwT) and the Last Day,
and remember Allāh (SwT) greatly.”***

11. Stay away from those acts that remove love of the Ahlul Bayt (as)
from the child; this goes side by side with those actions that incite
love. For example, if the many majalis that take place in the first 10
days of Muĥarram are tiring and make the child weary, or the atmosphere
is not good for the children in that they are not treated well, or the
child is forced to do lots of worship, these all can create obstacles to
a close and loving relationship with the Ahlul Bayt (as).

12. Create a spiritual and meaningful atmosphere. Even if children are
left mostly to their own devices and not pulled in this direction or
that, if they are systematically placed in such an atmosphere, the
attraction to the Ahlul Bayt (as) will automatically arise. Cultural and
Islamic camps, ziyarats, going to the ĥarām, meetings with meaningful
personalities, constantly being with friends of the Ahlul Bayt (as),
community activities and participation in majalis, can all contribute to
creating such an atmosphere.

13. Acquaint your child with books, articles, paintings and poems
relating to the Ahlul Bayt (as). This can take place in a number of ways
such as competitions, discussions, studying, writing of articles,
exchanging opinions, etc.

14. Encourage the formation of youth groups specifically to commemorate
events in the lives of the Ahlul Bayt (as), including activities such as
azadari, plays, speeches, etc.

Memorisation of the Noble Qur\`an
---------------------------------

***Mostly derived from Rayĥāneye Beheshtī, pg. 235-238***

Below are some points to help both parents and children memorise the
Qur\`an, so that this honourable act will provide continuous benefits
forever, inshAllāh (SwT).

1. Start memorisation of the Noble Qur\`an with children at a young age,
as it is said that what is learnt in the early years is never forgotten.

Indeed, it is narrated from Imām °Alī (as): “The hearts of youngsters
are like uncultivated ground, it accepts whatever is strewn on it.”[^26]
It is also narrated from the Prophet (S): “Knowledge in childhood is
like engraving on a stone.”

2. Memorise the Noble Qur\`an with sincerity. All actions should be for
seeking nearness and closeness to Allāh (SwT) alone. As this is not
something easily conveyed to children, they must be observed to see what
their motivation for memorising the Noble Qur\`an is. There is no harm
in giving the child gifts to encourage them in the beginning, and then,
as they get older, gradually and suitably making them aware of the true
goal behind their actions.

3. Memorize each verse, section or Surat with the intention of a
Ma°ŝūmīn (as) or a marytyr, and gift that individual the reward upon
memorising it. Not only does doing this increase one’s reward but these
individuals will also become our intercessors. Thus one will insha-Allāh
(SwT) become the recipient of the increased mercy, blessings and tawfiq
of Allāh (SwT) and the verses will be memorised faster and better.

4. Trust in the eternal power of Allāh (SwT).

5. Never underestimate the power of prayer. For Allāh (SwT) says in
Surat Furqan, Verse 77:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قُلْ مَا يَعْبَأُ بِكُمْ رَبِّي لَوْلاَ دُعَاؤُكُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: What store my Lord would set by you were it not for your
supplication?”***

6. Have resolution, aspiration, perseverance and hope. To realise this
goal, as well as desire and enthusiasm, struggle and determination is a
must.

7. Eat simple, ĥalāl and pure foods as these are most effective in
preparing the mind and memory.

8. Have a precise timetable. Without a good timetable, it will be a
lengthy and difficult process, and maybe even impossible, to reach this
noble goal. For memorisation, specify a certain time every day, a
certain time-period as well as a certain amount (e.g. a number of pages
per day). Do not wait for opportunities to come, rather actively create
the necessary conditions required, and try not to skip even a day of
carrying out the timetable.

9. Use a Qur\`an that is simple, has a clear script, is easy to read and
has tajwid rules in it. If you are not familiar with the translation of
the Noble Qur\`an, it is better to use one that has the translation
under the script (or on the side), which is fluent and easy to read, as
reading the translation as well will help memorisation. It is important
that the numbering of the verses in the Qur\`an is correct and reliable.
The background of the pages should not be completely white, as this
leads to tiredness of the eyes.

10. Correct your pronunciation by learning under the supervision of a
competent reciter, or listening to a good reciter. The use of audio and
video tapes and CDs is helpful for this as well.[^27]

11. Repeat what you have learnt, melodiously and often. Don’t move to a
new set of verses/Surat until the previous set has been perfected.
Recite it to others to correct and test the memorisation, and constantly
return to what has been memorised in order to maintain it.

12. At the time of memorisation, have complete concentration and free
the mind from all types of thoughts. This is one of the main factors
leading to successful memorisation. Removal of all types of
distractions, such as hunger, thirst, agitation, tiredness is necessary,
as is the choosing of a suitable time and place.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “The recitor of the Noble
Qur\`an needs three things: a humble heart, a free body (from
disturbances) and a private place.”

13. Be in Wuďū when memorising the Noble Qur\`an, and as much as
possible, face the Qibla.

14. Encourage participation in memorisation and recitation competitions
and programs.

15. Recite the following Du°ā before beginning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ ارْحَمْنِي بِتَرْكِ مَعَاصِيكَ أَبَداً مَا أَبْقَيْتَنِي
وَ ارْحَمْنِي مِنْ تَكَلُّفِ مَا لاَ يُعْنِينِي وَ ارْزُقْنِي حُسْنَ
الْمَنْظَرِ فِيمَا يُرْضِيكَ عَنِّي وَ أَلْزِمْ قَلْبِي حِفْظَ
كِتَابِكَ كَمَا عَلَّمْتَنِي وَ ارْزُقْنِي أَنْ أَتْلُوَهُ عَلَى
النَّحْوِ الَّذِي يُرْضِيكَ عَنِّي أَللٌّهُمَّ نَوِّرْ بِكِتَابِكَ
بَصَرِي وَ اشْرَحْ بِهِ صَدْرِي وَ فَرِّحْ بِهِ قَلْبِي وَ أَطْلِقْ
بِهِ لِسَانِي وَ اسْتَعْمِلْ بِهِ بَدَنِي وَ قَوِّنِي عَلَى ذَلِكَ وَ
أَعِنِّي عَلَيْهِ إِنَّهُ لاَ مُعِينَ عَلَيْهِ إِلاَ أَنْتَ لاَ إِلَهَ
إِلاَ أَنْتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh (SwT)! Have mercy on me by enabling me to abandon acts of
disobedience to You forever as long as You keep me alive, and have mercy
on me by (keeping me from) burdening myself with that which does not
concern me. And grant me that I may have a good opinion of all that I
must do to make You pleased with me. And make my heart adhere to
memorizing Your Book as You have taught me, and grant that I may recite
it in the manner that makes You pleased with me. O Allāh (SwT)!
Through Your Book, enlighten my sight, expand my breast, gladden my
heart, make my tongue expressive and my body active. Make me strong for
it (the Book), assist me therein. Verily there is no assistant for it
save You; there is no god but You.”[^28]

[^1]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 15, pg. 171

[^2]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 21, pg. 386, no. 27659

[^3]: Ibid., vol. 21, pg. 386, no. 27658

[^4]: Biĥār al-Anwār, vol. 60, pg. 381

[^5]: Raw¤atul Wāidhīn

[^6]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 2, pg. 69

[^7]: Sūrat al-Isra, Verse 34

[^8]: Sūrat al-Mu’minūn, Verse 8

[^9]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 49

[^10]: Sūrat al-~Ankabūt, Verse 45

[^11]: Recommended supplications for a righteous child have been covered
in more depth in Chapter 6: Pregnancy, Recommended Supplications.

[^12]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 47

[^13]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 2, pg. 625

[^14]: Biĥār al-Anwār, vol. 103, pg. 7

[^15]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 2, pg. 558

[^16]: Tuĥaf al-~Uqūl, pg. 84

[^17]: al-Kāfī, vol. 3, pg. 409, no. 1

[^18]: This tradition specifically refers to boys; the general
implication, however, is that children should be trained to pray and
fast a few years before they reach buloogh, so that they develop the
ability for it.

[^19]: al-Kāfī, vol. 3, pg. 343, no. 13

[^20]: Ibid., vol. 2, pg. 86-87

[^21]: Tarikh Ya~qūbī, vol. 3, pg. 53

[^22]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 15, pg. 164

[^23]: This is covered in more depth in 14 Ways to Instil the Love of
the Ahlul Bayt (as) in your Children in this chapter.

[^24]: This is covered in more depth in Memorisation of the Qur\`an in
this chapter.

[^25]: Mizān al-°ikmah, vol. 2, pg. 237

[^26]: Nahjul Balagha, Letter 31

[^27]: Recommended recitors include Muĥammad Siddiq Menshawi, Khaleel
Hussari, Muhammed Jibrail, Abu Bakr Shaatri. These and others can be
found at: http://www.hidayahonline.org/?page=audio.

[^28]: al-Kāfī, vol. 2, pg. 577


