Chapter 1:The Wedding Night
===========================

Wedding Night A°māl
-------------------

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “The doors of Heaven to mercy will
be opened in four situations: when it rains; when a child looks kindly
at his parent’s face; when the door of the Ka°bah is opened; and when
marriage (occurs).”[^1]

As indicated by the above tradition, the concept of marriage in Islam is
so sacred and valued, that the doors of Allāh (SwT)’s mercy are open on
this occasion.

Indeed, this is not surprising when one considers that marriage secures
a large portion of one’s faith and protects it from the evil of Satan,
as narrated from the Prophet (S): “There is not a single young person
that gets married during his youth, except that his Satan cries out that
‘Woe onto him, woe onto him, he has protected two thirds of his faith
from me’; therefore, mankind must have *taqwā* (God-Conciousness) in
Allāh (SwT) to protect the remaining one third of his faith.”[^2]

It is therefore essential that a couple, when embarking on this step,
take utmost care to protect the sanctity of this sacred union and do not
taint it from the start by allowing the occasion of marriage to become a
source of sin and extravagance.

In particular, the wedding night is the first night that a man and woman
come together as husband and wife, and it is highly recommended that
they form this union with the intention of obtaining the nearness and
pleasure of Allāh (SwT) and perform the recommended amaal for this
night.

At this point it is necessary to take a look at what state the ‘mistress
of the women of the worlds’, Haďrat Fāťima (sa) had on the night of her
wedding, and how she started her life with her husband, Imām °Alī (as)
the wedding night, Imām °Alī (as) Haďrat Fāťima (sa) upset and in tears,
and asked her why she was in this state.

She replied: “I thought about my state and actions and remembered the
end of life and my grave; that today I have gone from my father’s house
to your house, and another day I will go from here to the grave and the
Day of Judgement (Qiyāmat). Therefore, I swear by you to Allāh (SwT);
come let us stand for Ŝalāt so that we can worship Allāh (SwT) together
in this night.”[^3]

The following A°māl are recommended for this night[^4]:  
 1. Try to be in Wuďū for as much of the night as possible, and
especially during the amaals below.  
 2. Begin by praising Allāh (SwT), then say Allāhu Akbar **(أللهُ
أكَبر),** followed by a Ŝalawāt **(أللهم صلى على محمّد و آل محمّد).**

3. Recite a two Rak°at Ŝalāt, with the intention of ‘Mustaĥab Qurbatan
IlAllāh (SwT)’ [a recommended prayer, seeking the pleasure of Allāh
(SwT)], followed by a Ŝalawāt.  
 4. Recite the following Du°ā, followed by a Ŝalawāt. First the groom
should recite it, after which the bride should say: Ilāhī Amīn [May
Allāh (SwT) accept this].

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ ارْزُقْنِي إِلْفَهَا وَ وُدَّهَا وَ رِضَاهَا وَ رَضِّـنِي
بِهَا ثُمَّ اجْمَعْ بَيْنَـنَا بِأَحْسَنِ اجْتِمَاعٍ وَ أَسَرِّ
ائْتِلاَفٍ فَإِنَّكَ تُحِبُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَلاَلَ وَ تَكْرَهُ الْحَرَام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh (SwT)! Bless me with her affection, love and her acceptance of
me; and make me pleased with her, and bring us together in the best form
of a union and in absolute harmony; surely You like lawful things and
dislike unlawful things.”[^5]

5. Even if a couple are not intending to conceive on the wedding night,
it is recommended that the following Du°ās are recited for righteous
children (whenever they are conceived):  
 a. The groom should then place his right palm on the bride’s forehead
facing Qibla and recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ بِأَمَانَتِكَ أَخَذْتُهَا وَ بِكَلِمَاتِكَ
اسْتَحْلَلْـتُهَا فَإِنْ قَضَيْتَ لِي مِنْهَا وَلَداً فَاجْعَلْهُ
مُبَارَكاً تَقِيًّا مِنْ شِيعَةِ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ لاَ تَجْعَلْ
لِلشَّيْطَانِ فِيهِ شِرْكاً وَ لاَ نَصِيباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh! I have taken her as Your trust and have made her lawful for
myself by Your words. Therefore, if you have decreed for me a child from
hver, then make him/her blessed and pious from among the followers of
the family of Muĥammad; and do not let the Satan have any part in
him/her.”[^6]

b. The following Du°ā should also be recited:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ بِكَلِمَاتِكَ اسْتَحْلَلْتُهَا وَ بِأَمَانَتِكَ
أَخَذْتُهَا. أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْهَا وَلُوداً وَدُوداً لاَ تَفْرَكُ
تَأْكُلُ مِمَّا رَاحَ وَ لاَ تَسْأَلُ عَمَّا سَرَحَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh! I have made her lawful for myself with Your words, and I have
taken her in Your trust. O Allāh! Make her fertile and devoted.”[^7]

6. The groom should wash the bride’s feet and sprinkle that water in all
the four corners of the room and house. Allāh (SwT) will remove 70,000
types of poverty, 70,000 types of blessings will enter the house and
70,000 blessings will come upon the bride and groom. The bride will be
safe from insanity, ulcers and leprosy.[^8]

Some Points about the °Aqd & Wedding
------------------------------------

[^9]  
 1. One should refrain from having the °Aqd or wedding during *Qamar Dar
Akrab* – when the moon is passing through the phase of Scorpio.

2. One should refrain from having the °Aqd or wedding outdoors, under
the sunlight.

3. It is recommended that the °Aqd and wedding take place at night.

**NOTE:** It is important to note that the main objective of the wedding
is the joining of a man and a woman. More often than not, weddings that
take place today are long and extremely tiring for the bride and groom;
they reach their room late at night and not fit for the recommended
A°māl of this sacred night, nor much else. Therefore, it is recommended
that the procedures of this night are kept simple and to a bare minimum.
If other ceremonies are desired, they should be held on the preceding or
proceeding nights.

Some Points for the Bride and Groom
-----------------------------------

1. It is not necessary that consummation of the marriage take place on
the wedding night; rather it may take a few days or even a few weeks.

2. Fatigue, nervousness and tension may make it harder; therefore it is
important that husband and wife take time to get comfortable with each
other and move at their own pace.

3. Artificial lubrication may be needed for the first few days or weeks
in order to make consummation easier and more enjoyable.[^10]

4. Early or premature ejaculation may be a problem for the first few
times; however, this should eventually be resolved after time and
experience.

5. The hymen may or may not bleed. Foreplay, gentleness and intercourse
again soon after can help reduce the pain of the tearing of the hymen.

6. After consummation (whenever it may be), the bride should not have
milk, vinegar, coriander, sour apple or melon for a week, as they cause
the womb to dry up and become cold and barren. Eating vinegar at this
time also results in the woman not becoming clean (ritually clean) from
the blood of menstruation, coriander (and watermelon) results in a
difficult labour and sour apple results in the stopping (of regularity)
of menstruation, and these all result in illnesses.[^11]

7. People may make certain comments over the next few days. It is
important not to let this affect you, and not to get drawn in to their
conversations.

8. Don’t talk about your intimate details to outsiders; maintain respect
of your spouse and your relationship.

The Wedding of Imām °Alī (as) and Haďrat Fāťima (sa)
----------------------------------------------------

### The °Aqd (Marriage Contract)

The Prophet (S) desired to have the °Aqd recited in the mosque and in
the presence of the people. Imām °Alī (as) joyfully went to the mosque
and the Prophet (S) also entered the mosque. The Muhājirīn and Anŝār
gathered around them. The Prophet (S) went on the minbar and after
praising and thanking Allāh (SwT), said: “Oh people! Know that Jibrā\`il
descended on me and brought a message from Allāh (SwT) that the ceremony
of the °Aqd of °Alī (as) has taken place in the presence of the Angels
in ‘Bait al-Ma\`mur.’ Allāh (SwT) has commanded that I perform this
ceremony on earth and make you all witnesses.” At the point, the Prophet
(S) recited the °Aqd.

Then the Prophet (S) said to Imām °Alī (as): “Get up and give a speech.”
Imām °Alī (as) got to his feet and after remembering and thanking Allāh
(SwT) began his speech and expressed his satisfaction and contentment at
his marriage to Haďrat Fāťima (sa).

The people prayed for him and said: “May Allāh (SwT) bless this
marriage, and place love and friendship in your hearts.”[^12]

### The Wedding

The wedding ceremony took place on the 1st of Dhul Hijjah, 2 AH[^13] (or
6th of Dhul Hijjah, 2 AH)[^14], one month after the °Aqd.

Between the °Aqd and the wedding ceremony, Imām °Alī (as) was shy to
speak about his wife to the Prophet (S). One day, his brother °Aqīl
asked him: “Why don’t you bring your wife to the house so that we can
congratulate you for the occasion of your wedding?” This topic reached
the Prophet (S), who called Imām °Alī (as) and asked him: “Are you ready
to get married?”

Imām °Alī (as) gave a positive response. The Prophet (S) said:
“Insha-Allāh, tonight or tomorrow night, I will make arrangements for
the wedding.” At that time, he told his wives to dress Haďrat Fāťima
(sa) and to perfume her and to carpet her room so as to prepare for the
wedding ceremony.[^15]

The Prophet (S) told Imām °Alī (as): “There cannot be a wedding without
guests.” One of the leaders of the Anŝār named Sa°ad said: “I gift you a
sheep,” and a group of the Anŝār also brought some[^16] corn[^17], and
some dried whey, oil and dates were also bought from the bazār.

The meat was cooked and the Prophet (S) with his purity took the
responsibility of cooking for the wedding, and with his blessed hands,
mixed them (the ingredients) and began preparing a type of °Arabic dish
called Habīs or Hais.[^18]

However, although the food was prepared, the invitation was public. A
large number took part and with the blessings of the Prophet’s (S)
hands, everyone ate and became full from the food, and there was even
some left over for the poor and needy; a dish was also placed for the
bride and groom.[^19]

The Prophet (S) told his wives to prepare a celebration for Haďrat
Fāťima (sa) After food, the ladies gathered around Haďrat Fāťima (sa)
and the Prophet (S) helped her get on his horse. Salmān al-Fārsī took
hold of the horse’s reins and with the special ceremony, brave men such
as Hamza and a number of the family and maĥārim of Haďrat Fāťima (sa)
gathered around the horse with drawn swords. Many women waited behing
the bride and recited Takbir.

The horse began moving, and the ladies began reciting Takbir and praises
of Allāh (SwT). At that time, one by one, they read beautiful hymns that
had been composed, and with splendour and joy, took the bride to the
house of the groom. The Prophet (S) also reached the group and entered
the bridal chamber.

He requested a dish of water, and when that was brought, he sprinked
some on Haďrat Fāťima’s (sa) chest and told her to do Wuďū and wash her
mouth with the rest of the water. He sprinkled some water on Imām °Alī
(as) as well and told him to do Wuďū and wash his mouth.

The Prophet (S) then took Haďrat Fāťima’s (sa) hand and placed it in the
hand of Imām (as) and said: “Oh °Alī! May you be blessed; Allāh (SwT)
bestowed on you the daughter of the Prophet (S) of Allāh (SwT), who is
the best of women (of the world).” He then addressed Haďrat Fāťima (sa)
and said: “Oh Fāťima, °Alī is from the best of husbands.”[^20]

He then recited a Du°ā for them: “Oh Allāh, make them familiar (close)
to each other! Oh Allāh, bless them! And place for them blessings in
their life.”

As he was about to leave, he said: “Allāh has made you and your
offspring pure (ritually clean). I am a friend of your friends, and an
enemy of your enemies. I now bid you farewell and deposit you with
Allāh.”[^21]

The next morning, the Prophet (S) went to see his daughter. After that
visit, he did not go to their house for three days, but went on the
fourth day.[^22]

### Haďrat Khadīja’s (sa) Wish

On the wedding night of Haďrat Fāťima (sa), Asma bint Omaīs (or Umme
Salama) who was among the women, asked permission from the Prophet (S)
if she could stay near Fāťima so as to carry out any needs she may have.

She said to the Prophet (S): “When the time of the death of Khadīja came
in Makkah, I was next to her and saw that Khadīja was crying. I said to
her: “You are the ‘mistress of the women of the worlds’ and the wife of
the Prophet (S) and despite this you are crying whereas Allāh (SwT) has
given you the good tidings of heaven?” Khadīja (sa) replied: “I am not
crying because of death; rather I am crying for Fāťima who is a small
girl and women on their wedding night need a woman from their relatives
and close ones (maĥram) who will tell them their hidden secrets, and I
am afraid that that night, my dear Fāťima will not have anyone.”

Then I told Khadīja (sa) that, “I swear to my God that if I stay alive
until that day, on that night I will stay in that house in your place.”
Now I would like permission from you that you excuse me so that I can
keep my promise.” Upon hearing this, the Prophet (S) started crying and
gave me permission to stay and prayed for me.[^23]

### The Wedding Suit

On the wedding night of Imām °Alī (as) and Haďrat Fāťima (sa), the
Prophet (S) gave her a (wedding) suit to wear on that night. When Haďrat
Fāťima (sa) had gone to the wedding house and was sitting on the prayer
mat praying to Allāh (SwT), suddenly a needy person came to the door of
the house of Haďrat Fāťima (sa) and with a loud voice said: “From the
door of the house of Prophethood, I want an old suit.”

At that time, Haďrat Fāťima (sa) had two suits, one old and the other
new. She wanted to give the old suit as per the request of the needy
man, when suddenly she remembered a verse which states: “You will never
attain piety until you spend out of what you hold dear.”[^24] Haďrat
Fāťima (sa), who knew she liked the new suit more, acted on this verse
and gave the new suit to the needy man.

The next day, when the Prophet (S) saw the old suit on Haďrat Fāťima
(sa), he asked: “Why didn’t you wear the new suit?” Haďrat Fāťima (sa)
replied: “I gave it to a needy man.” The Prophet (S) said: “If you had
worn the new shirt for your husband, it would have been better and more
suitable.” Haďrat Fāťima (sa) replied: “I learnt this manner from you.
When my mother Khadija became your wife, she gave all her wealth to the
empty-handed in your path, until it reached a point when a needy person
came to the door of your house and requested clothes. There were no
clothes in the house so you took off your shirt and gave it to him, and
this verse was revealed: “Do not keep your hand chained to your neck,
nor open it all together, or you will sit blameworthy, regretful.”[^25]

Overwhelmed by the love and sincerity of his daughter Zahrā (sa), tears
fell from the Prophet (S)’s (S) eyes, and as a sign of love, he hugged
Haďrat Fāťima (sa) to his chest.[^26]

[^1]: A Bundle of Flowers, pg. 149

[^2]: Muntakhab Mizān al-Hikmah, vol. 1, pg. 457

[^3]: Kitāb al-Irshād, vol. 1, pg. 270

[^4]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 116-117

[^5]: al-Kāfī, vol. 3, pg. 481

[^6]: Ibid., vol. 5, pg. 500

[^7]: Ibid., vol. 5, pg. 501

[^8]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 249, no. 25555

[^9]: Halliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 108-109 (Points 1-3)

[^10]: Pāsukh be Masāil-e Jinsī wa Zanāshuī, pg. 235

[^11]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 250, no. 25556

[^12]: Biĥār al-Anwār, vol. 43, pg. 120 and 129

[^13]: Ibid., vol. 43, pg. 92

[^14]: Some have narrated the time between the nikah and wedding to be
one year.

[^15]: Biĥār al-Anwār, vol. 43, pg. 130-131

[^16]: About 8 pounds

[^17]: Biĥār al-Anwār, vol. 43, pg. 137

[^18]: Ibid., vol. 43, pg. 106 and 114

[^19]: Manāqib Ibn Shahr Ashūb, vol. 3, pg. 354

[^20]: Izdawāj Maktab Insān Sāzi, vol. 2, pg. 300

[^21]: Manāqib Ibn Shahr Ashūb, vol. 3, pg. 354-355

[^22]: Ibid., vol. 3, pg. 356

[^23]: Sar Guzashthāye Hazrat ~Alī (as) wa Fāťima (sa), pg. 30

[^24]: Sūrat Ali-‘Imrān, Verse 92

[^25]: Sūrat al-Isrā, Verse 29

[^26]: Sar Guzashthāye Hazrat °Alī (as) wa Fāťima (sa), pg. 31


