Chapter 2: Sexual Etiquette
===========================

Sexual Etiqutte in Islam
------------------------

Sexual intercourse and the sexual relationship with a legal spouse are
governed by nature, and at the same time is a sunnah of the Prophets and
the Ahlul Bayt (as). It has even been referred to as the most
pleasurable thing in life. A group of companions and Shī°as of Imām
as-Ŝādiq (as) narrate that the Imām asked us: “What is the most
pleasurable thing?” We said: “There are many pleasurable things.” Imām
said: “The most pleasurable thing is making love with (your)
spouses.”[^1]

It is also narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Whether in this world or
in the hereafter, one has not, and will not, perceived a pleasure more
pleasurable than sexual relations with women, and certainly this is the
commentary of the words of Allāh (SwT) in the Qur\`an, in Surat Āli-’
Imrān, verse 14 where He states: ***“To mankind has been made to seem
decorous the love of (worldly) desires, including women and
children.”*** He then said: “Indeed, the people of heaven do not take
delight in the pleasures of heaven more than Nikah[^2]; neither food nor
drink has that much pleasure for them.”[^3]

As with every other aspect of our lives, Islam provides us with all the
necessary information for the sexual lives of man and woman. The reason
for this is simple; Islam recognizes the innate nature of man, and has
ordained sexual relations for pleasure, and not just procreation. Sexual
desires cannot, and should not be repressed, but rather regulated for
one’s well-being in this world and the hereafter. If these rules are
paid attention to and carried out with the intention of the pleasure and
closeness of Allāh (SwT) and staying away from the evil of Satan, it is
counted among the greatest of virtues.

Importance of Sexual Relations
------------------------------

There are many traditions relaying the importance of sexual relations.
It has the station of worship and ŝadaqah, and has been called the
sunnah of the Prophet (S).

Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) narrates that the Prophet (S) addressed one of his
companions on the day of Friday and asked: “Are you fasting today?” (The
companion) replied, “No.” The Prophet (S) asked: “Have you given
anything as ŝadaqah today?” (The companion) replied, “No.” The Prophet
(S) told him: “Go to your wife and that is your very ŝadaqah to
her.”[^4]

In another tradition, Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) narrates that the Prophet (S)
said to someone: “Are you fasting today?” He said, “No.” The Prophet (S)
asked: “Have you gone to visit a sick person?” He replied, “No.” The
Prophet (S) asked: “Have you been to escort a deceased person?” He
replied, “No.” The Prophet (S) asked: “Have you given food to a poor
person?” Again he gave a negative response. The Prophet (S) told him:
“Go to your wife and going to your wife is ŝadaqah (Go to you to her so
that you get all the reward for all these acts).”[^5]

Muĥammad bin Khalad narrates from Imām al-Riďā (as): “Three things are
from the sunnah of the noble Prophets and the messengers of Allāh, and
these are application of perfume, cutting of the hair and engaging in a
lot of conjugal relations.”[^6]

Staying away from sexual relations with one’s wife is a result of
Satan’s whisperings, and has many negative consequences such as
arguments and rancour between husband and wife.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): Three ladies went to the Prophet
(S) to complain. One of them said: “My husband does not eat meat.” The
other said: “My husband does not smell perfurme and does not use
perfume,” and the third lady said: “My husband does not come near the
ladies (i.e. does not engage in sexual relations).” The Prophet (S) with
unhappiness, in the manner that his blessed Aba (cloak) was dragging on
the floor, left and went to the mosque and on to the minbar.

He praised Allāh (SwT) and then said: “What has happened, that a group
from my followers don’t eat meat, or don’t apply perfume, or don’t go to
their wives? Whilst I eat meat, I apply perfume and also go to my wife.
This is my sunnah, and any person that turns away from this sunnah is
not from me.”[^7]

Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) has also narrated: The wife of °Uthmān bin Ma°dhūn
came to the Prophet (S) and said: “Oh messenger of Allāh (SwT), every
day °Uthmān fasts and in the evenings engages in Ŝalāt.” The Prophet (S)
picked his sandals and angrily went to °Uthmān (such that he did not
wait to put his sandals on) and saw him in the state of Ŝalāt. Because
°Uthmān saw the Prophet (S) he abandoned his prayer. The Prophet (S)
addressed him and said: “Allāh (SwT) has not sent me to be a recluse, I
swear by Allāh (SwT) that has instigated me to this pure, orthodox and
easy religion, I fast, I pray and I go to my wife, and any one that
likes my custom, must be bound by my sunnah and custom, and Nikah[^8] is
from my sunnah.”[^9]

Importance of Satisfying your Wife
----------------------------------

Satisfying one’s wife is an important issue in Islam, as demonstrated by
the traditions below; indeed, lack of satisfaction over a long period of
time can lead to frigidity and dislike towards the husband.

It is narrated from Imām °Alī (as): “When any of you wants to sleep with
his wife, he must not rush her for indeed women have needs (too).”[^10]

It is important for the husband to be aware that a woman’s sexual desire
takes longer to express itself, but once it is elicited, is very strong,
whereas a man is quickly aroused and also can quickly be satisfied.

Lastly, it is interesting to note that the importance placed by Islam on
the satisfaction of both man and woman, is a clear indicator of the
justice and fairness of Allāh (SwT). Indeed, it is repeatedly stated in
the Noble Qur\`an that man and woman were created from a single
soul[^11], and this is just one example of this.

Recommended Acts
----------------

There are no specific rules for sexual intercourse; whatever is mutually
pleasing is right, and likewise, whatever is mutually displeasing should
be avoided; the only exception to this rule is what the Sharī°ah clearly
forbids. However, there are several recommended acts that, if followed,
will inevitably lead to a more pleasurable experience.

Before Intercourse
------------------

1. Brush your teeth and chew pleasant-smelling things in order to remove
any smells in the mouth. Likewise, try not to eat unpleasant smelling
foods prior to intercourse either, such as onions and garlic.

2. Ensure you smell pleasant – the freshest smell is the one after a
shower or a quick wash, and the worst smell is that of sweat! Women in
particular are sensitive to smell.

Use of perfumes, oils and the like are recommended, although it is
important to note that it is better to use natural substances that have
been recommended in Islam as they lack chemical ingredients that may
cause damage to the body.

In particular, kohl has been recommended for women. It is narrated from
Imām al-Bāqir (as): “To put collyrium (kohl) round the eyes gives the
mouth a good smell, and makes the eye lashes strong and increases the
power of sexual intercourse.”[^12]

It is also narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “To put collyrium (kohl) in
the evenings is beneficial to the eyes and during the day it is
Sunnah.”[^13]  
 NOTE: Althought the traditions recommend the usage of kohl, they do not
condone its usage in places where it can be seen by men and can be a
source of attraction.

Foreplay
--------

### Importance of Foreplay

As highlighted earlier, satisfying one’s wife is very important and
engaging in sexual intercourse quickly and hastily is not the correct
way. There is an average difference of eight minutes between the time a
man and a woman reach climax; a man usually takes two minutes to reach
climax and a woman takes ten minutes to reach climax. Therefore, in
order to fully satisfy his wife, a man should caress her and engage in
foreplay so that both partners reach climax at the same time.

Islam greatly stresses the importance of foreplay, as indicated by the
traditions below.  
 It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “Do not engage in sexual
intercourse with your wife like hens; rather, firstly engage in foreplay
with your wife and flirt with her and then make love to her.”[^14]

It is also narrated from the Prophet (S): “All play and games are futile
except for three: Horse riding, archery and foreplay with your wife, and
these three are correct.”[^15]

It is narrated from Imām °Alī (as): “Whoever wants to get close to his
wife must not be hasty, because women before engaging in the act of love
making must be engaged in foreplay so that they are ready for making
love to.”[^16]

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “The Angels of Allāh and those
who are witnesses over all the actions of man are watching them in every
state except at the time of horse riding competitions and the time that
a man engages in foreplay with his wife before engaging in sexual
intercourse.”[^17]

### Method of Foreplay

There are very few restrictions to the methods used in foreplay;
kissing, cuddling, etc. are all allowed. Below are some tradition
pertaining to specific methods:

**a. Caressing the breasts**

It is narrated from Imām al-Riďā (as): “Do not engage in sexual
intercourse unless you engage in foreplay, and play with her a lot and
caress her breasts, and if you do this she will be overcome by passion
(and excited to the full pitch) and her water will collect. This is so
that the emission of the watery juices shoots off from the breasts and
passion becomes evident from her face and her eyes and that she desires
you in the same way you desire her.”[^18]

**b. Oral sex**

Imām al-Kādhim (as) was asked: “Is there a problem if a person kisses
the private part of his wife?” The Imām responded: “There is no
problem.” [^19]

NOTE: Though masturbation (i.e., self-stimulation of one’s own sexual
organ until emission of semen or orgasm) is not allowed, in the case of
married persons there is no problem if the wife stimulates her husband’s
penis until the emission of semen, or the husband stimulates his wife’s
vagina until orgasm. This is allowed because it does not come under
“self-stimulation”; it is stimulation by a lawful partner.

**c. Other**

It was asked of Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “If someone undresses his wife (and
makes her naked) and looks at her, is there a problem?” He replied:
“There is no problem, is there any better pleasure than this that
exists?” Again a question was asked: “Is there any problem if a husband
plays with the private part of his wife?” The Imām replied: “There is no
problem, provided that he doesn’t use anything other than his own body
parts (i.e. nothing external).” Again it was asked: “Is there a problem
performing sexual intercourse in water?” Imām replied: “There is no
problem.”[^20]

NOTE: The above tradition highlights the restriction of use of foreign
objects

After Intercourse
-----------------

1. It is mustaĥab that Ghusl al-Janābat should be performed soon after
sexual intercourse, and the sooner it is performed the better. Also, if
one would like to have sexual intercourse more than once in one night,
it is better that after every time, they perform Ghusl. However, if this
is not feasible, it is recommended that one should do Wuďū before every
act.[^21]

2. Immediately after completing the act of intercourse, the husband
should perform the Ghusl and at that very moment consume a portion of
bee wax (reputed to heal all sorts of wounds especially fractures) mixed
with honey and water or mixed with pure honey, as this will replace and
compensate for the lost fluids.[^22]

3. If a man’s virility strength quickly ceases after intercourse, he
should keep himself warm and sleep.[^23]

4. The husband and wife should both use separate towels to clean
themselves. It is narrated from the Prophet (S)  that if only one towel
is used, this leads to enmity and separation between the two.[^24]

Acts not Recommended
--------------------

### Makrūh [Discouraged] acts

**1. Anal intercourse**[^25]

Anal intercourse is permissible with the consent of the wife; however,
it is a strongly disliked act.  
 Zaid ibne Shabith narrates that a person asked Imām °Alī (as): “Can you
get close to a woman from her behind?” Imām °Alī (as) replied: “Be down
with you! Allāh lowers you by this means (of entering a lady). Have you
not heard the words of your Lord that is narrated from Lut who said to
his community: ***“What! Do you commit an outrage none in the world ever
committed before you?’***”[^26] and [^27]

There are some who justify this act with the following verse of the
Qur\`an:

***“Your women are a tillage for you, so come to your tillage whenever
you like.”***[^28]

However, Imām as-Ŝādiq (as), in his tafsir of the above verse of the
Noble Qur\`an narrates that: “The intention of this verse is that sexual
intercourse should be performed from the front, for the reason that the
wife in this verse has been compared to tillage (a cultivated land) that
gives produce (from the top of the land), which is (just like) the front
of the wife because this is from where (children) come into existence
and into this world.”[^29]

Abū Baŝīr narrates that he asked Imām (as) what the ruling is of someone
who gets close to his wife from the back. The Imām considered this act
unacceptable and said: “Stay away from the back of the wife and the
meaning of the Noble verse of Surat al-Baqarah (above) is not that you
can enter the wife from wherever you want, but rather (it is that you
should) perform sexual intercourse, and therefore the meaning of the
verse is that get close to your wife at whatever time that you want
to.”[^30]

**2. Having Qur\`an or the Dhikr of Allāh (SwT) on you**

It is narrated from °Alī, the son of Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): I asked my
brother Imām Kādhim (as): “Can a man have sexual intercourse and go to
the bathroom when he has with him a ring on his hand with the dhikr of
Allāh (SwT) or a verse of the Qur\`an written on it?” Imām replied: “No
(it is Makrūh).”[^31]

**3. Making love standing**

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “The husband and wife must not
engage in intercourse like two donkeys clinging together, because if it
is like this then the Angels of mercy will go far from them and the
mercy of Allāh will be taken away from them.”[^32]

**4. Making love bare (without a covering)**

It is narrated that Muĥammad bin al-Ais asked Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Is it
permissible to go near my wife naked (i.e. make love naked)?” Imām
replied: “No, don’t do such a thing…”[^33]

**5. Engaging in sexual intercourse under the sky**

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “Allāh dislikes 24 qualities for
you, Oh men, and has prohibited you from them; one of these qualities is
sexual intercourse under the sky.”[^34]

**6. Engaging in sexual intercourse when others are present (and can
hear and/or see) in the house**

It is narrated from Imām al-Bāqir (as): “It is Makrūh that a man engages
in sexual intercourse with his wife if, as well as them, there is
someone else in the house.”[^35]

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “Obtain three qualities from crows:
sexual intercourse secretly, going after sustenance at the beginning of
the morning and intelligence and alertness against probable
dangers.”[^36]

**7. Engaging in sexual intercourse in the presence of a child**

It is narrated from Imām °Alī (as): “The Prophet (S) has prohibited that
a man goes near his wife (for intercourse) and a child in the crib can
see them.”[^37]

It is narrated from Imām al-Bāqir (as): “Stay away from sexual
intercourse in a place where there may be a child who is able to
see.”[^38]

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Stay away from going to bed
(for sexual intercourse) with your wife when a child can see you, as the
Prophet strongly knew this act as Makrūh and very indecent.”[^39]

**8. Engaging in sexual intercourse on a boat, on the beach**[^40] **or
on the road**

It is narrated in traditions that sexual intercourse on a boat or on the
road results in the curses of Allāh (SwT) and the angels being upon
you.[^41]

It is narrated in another tradition from Sakūnī that Imām °Alī (as)
passed two animals who were engaged in intercourse at a place of traffic
(passage). Imām turned away from them. It was asked: “Oh Amir
al-Mu’minin, why did you turn away?” The Imām (as) replied: “It is not
right that you come close to each other in the path of people like these
animal; such an act is prohibited and it must take place where neither
man nor woman can see.”[^42]

**9. Facing, or having one’s back to, the Qiblah**

The Prophet (S) has prohibited sexual intercourse while facing Qiblah,
or having one’s back to Qiblah, and has said that if such an act is
done, it results in the curses of Allāh (SwT), the angels and all of
humanity being on you.[^43]

NOTE: If when you sit up from a lying position, your face is towards
Qiblah, this is known as facing the Qiblah, and vice versa.

**10. Refusing to have sexual intercourse (for various reasons)**

It is narrated from Imām al-Bāqir (as): The Prophet (S) said to women:
“Do not prolong your Ŝalāt such that it becomes an excusefor not going
to bed (for sexual intercourse) with your husbands.”[^44]

Recommended Times
-----------------

### Obligatory times

**1. When there is fear of ĥarām [forbidden]**

If one has a fear that he might succumb to his sexual desires and the
whisperings of Satan and indulge in ĥarām acts, it is obligatory that
they protect themselves from this.[^45] If one is single, they must get
married and thus stay away from any potentially forbidden acts.

It is narrated from Ayatullāh Khomeini (ra): “It is obligatory that one
who, because of not having a wife will fall into ĥarām, get
married.”[^46]

**2. Once every four months**[^47]

One must have sexual intercourse with his youthful wife at least once in
4 months. This is one of the conjugal rights of the wife and the
obligation stays in force unless it either is harmful to him, involves
unusually more effort, the wife waives her right or such a prior
stipulation was made at the time of nikah by the husband. It makes no
difference whether the husband is away on a journey or present.

Safwān bin Yahyā asked Imām al-Riďā (as): “A man has a young wife and
hasn’t come close to her for months, even a year. It is not because he
wants to trouble her (by staying away), but rather a calamity has
befallen them. Is this counted as a sin?” Imām replied: “If he leaves
her for four months, it is counted as a sin.”[^48]

### Mustaĥab (Recommended) times

Sexual intercourse, if engaged in a permissible manner, is always
mustaĥab. However, there are certain times when it is more recommended:

1. When a women desires it from her husband.[^49]

2. When one is attracted to another woman.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Any person that sees a woman
and is attracted to her must go to his wife and engage in sexual
intercourse with her, because that which the other woman has, the wife
also has, and one must not give Satan a way into one’s heart. And if one
does not have a wife, he must pray a two Rak°at Ŝalāt, praise Allāh a
lot, recite Ŝalawāt on the Prophet and his Ahlul Bayt, and request Allāh
to grant him a believing and religious wife and that He makes him
needless from the forbidden.”[^50]

### Times not Recommended

**Harām (Forbidden) times**

1. During menstruation (ĥaydh)[^51]:  
 Allāh (SwT) states in Surat Baqarah, Verse 222:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْمَحِيضِ قُلْ هُوَ أَذىً فَاعْتَزِلُوا
النِّسَآءَ فِي الْمَحِيضِ وَلاَ تَقْرَبُوهُنَّ حَتَّى يَطْهُرْنَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They ask you concerning (intercourse during) menses. Say, “It is
hurtful.” So keep away from wives during the menses, and do not approach
them till they are clean.”***

If a person who is engaged in sexual intercourse with his wife discovers
that her period has begun, then he should immediately withdraw from her.

During the period of ĥaydh, other acts besides sexual intercourse can be
performed, as indicated by tradition below:

Mu°āwiyah bin °Umar narrates that he asked Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “What is
permissible for a man when a woman is in the state of ĥaydh?” The Imām
replied: “Other than the private parts (i.e. the rest of the body except
for her private parts).”[^52]

Imrān bin Qanzalī narrates that he asked Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “How can a
man benefit from a lady that is in the state of ĥaydh?” The Imām
replied:”The two thighs (of the lady).”[^53]

However, although the rest of the body of the woman (apart from the
private parts) are permitted for the husband, the area from the navel to
the knees is Makrūh (not recommended)[^54]; therefore, it is more
advisable that the husband avoid these parts as well.

It is important to note that it is not recommended to engage in sexual
intercourse after the end of ĥaydh and before the Ghusl of ĥaydh.
However, if it is necessary, a woman should wash herself first.[^55]
Allāh (SwT) mentions this in the continuation of the above verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 فَإِذَا تَطَهَّرْنَ فَأْتُوهُنَّ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَمَرَكُمُ اللٌّهُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when they become clean, go into them as Allāh has commanded
you.”***

2. During Nifās.[^56]

3. During fasting in the month of Ramaďān.[^57]

4. During the state of Iĥrām and before reciting Ŝalāt of Ťawaf
al-Nisā.[^58]

5. When it may cause serious harm to either husband or wife. Sexual
intercourse is permissible if it does not cause serious harm.[^59]

### Makrūh (Undesirable) times

**1. In the state of Iĥtilām**

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “It is Makrūh that a man who has
become muĥtalim (i.e. become in the state of janābat during his sleep),
goes to his wife (to perform intercourse) in this state, unless he does
Ghusl for his iĥtilām.”[^60]

**2. When travelling and there is a possibility of lack of water**

It is narrated from Ishāq bin °Ammār: I asked Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “A man
is accompanied by his wife whilst travelling, but he has not obtained
any water to perform Ghusl. Can he go to bed with his wife?” Imām
replied: “I don’t like it if he does that and it is Makrūh, unless he is
scared that if he doesn’t get close to what his permissible for him, he
will fall into the forbidden.”[^61]

It is narrated from Imām al-Kādhim (as): “I don’t like it when a person
travelling who doesn’t have water engages in sexual intercourse, unless
he has fear of harm.”[^62]

(In such cases, as per the fiqh rules, one is able to do tayammum
instead of Ghusl in order to pray)

**3. The night of a lunar eclipse and day of a solar eclipse**

One evening the Prophet (S) was next to one of his wives and on that
evening an eclipse occurred, and nothing occurred between them. The wife
of the Prophet (S) said: “Were you unhappy with me the whole evening?”
The Prophet (S) replied: “What are you saying, this evening was the eve
of a lunar eclipse and I know it to be Makrūh that I should get pleasure
on this evening, because Allāh (SwT) reproaches a group that become
heedless and inattentive to His proofs and signs, and He has described
them in the following way: “Were they to see a fragment falling from the
sky, they would say, “A cumulous cloud.”“[^63] and [^64]

**4. Between the Subĥ as-Ŝādiq (Adhān of Salāt al-Fajr) and sunrise and
between sunset until the redness of the sky has gone.**

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Becoming junub during redness
of the sun rising and the redness of the sunset is Makrūh.”[^65]

**5. At the time of an earthquake (and other events necessitating Ŝalāt
al-Ayāt)**

It is narrated from Imām al-Bāqir (as): “One who doesn’t leave play and
pleasure at the time when the signs of Allāh (SwT) are apparent is from
those people who have taken the signs of Allāh (SwT) to be a
mockery.”[^66]

Healthy Body
------------

A healthy body allows for a healthy sex life. Several acts have been
recommended in Islam and if these instructions are acted upon, they will
result in a healthy and fresh body.  
 Recommended acts[^67]

1. Travelling.  
 2. Fasting.  
 3. Eating 21 red raisins on an empty stomach.  
 4. Drinking rain water[^68].  
 5. Praying Ŝalāt al-Layl.  
 6. Washing the hands before and after eating.  
 7. Discharging at the time of needing the toilet.  
 8. Washing the feet with cold water after having a bath.  
 9. Protecting the body from the cold in the autumn season but not
protecting it from the cold in the spring season (i.e. wearing heavy
clothing in autumn and light clothing in spring).  
 10. Getting a suitable amount of rest.  
 11. Eating aniseed and dates.  
 12. Chewing your food well.  
 13. Eating food only when hungry and refraining from eating when you
are full.  
 14. Eating a moderate amount and therefore, drinking a moderate amount.

**Use of massage oils**[^69]

In particular, massaging oil is very beneficial for a healthy body as
well as sexual desire, so much so that the Imāms (as) have narrated
traditions on this:

It is narrated from Imām °Alī (as): “To anoint the body with massage oil
softens the skin, improves the mood, makes the flowing of water and
fluids in the body easy, eliminates roughness, ruggedness, bad health
and tightness of earning and brings light to the face.”[^70]

It is narrated from Imām al-Bāqir (as): “To anoint the body with massage
oil in the evening is the cause of circulation in the blood vessels and
(this) revitalises the skin complexion and enlightens the face.”  
 It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “At least, once a month, or
once or twice a week, apply oil to your body. However, if ladies are
able to, they must try and apply oil to their body every day.”

**The following oils have been recommended**

**1. Violet Oil**

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Violet oil is oil of goodness:
massage it on your body so that it eliminates head and eye aches.”

A man fell on the ground from his camel, and when water started coming
out from his nose, Imām as-Ŝādiq (as)  said to him: “Pour violet oil on
it.” When the man did this, he was cured and became well. After that the
Imām related: “Violet oil in winter is warm and in the summer it is
cool[^71]…if the people understood the benefits of this oil, they would
drink a lot of it; this oil gets rid of pains and heals the nose.”

**2. Willow (Catkin) Oil**

A man came to Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) and complained about cracked hands and
legs. Imām told him: “Get some cotton, soak it with willow oil and put
it on the centre (of the crack), or put the oil straight onto the centre
(of the crack).” When the person performed this act, the pain
disappeared.

**3. Lily Oil**

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Lily oil has cures for 70
aches, and it is better if it is white lily, which is also known as
Arabian Jasmine.”

**4. Olive Oil**

If olive oil is mixed with honey and drunk instead of water for three
days, it increases the sexual strength. If olive oil is rubbed in hair,
it prevents it from falling or going white.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Eating olive oil increases the
sperm and sexual capability.”[^72]

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “Definitely eat olive oil because
this medicine cures bile, does away with phlegm, strengthens nerves,
heals pains, makes the akhlāq good, makes the mouth good-smelling and
takes away a person’s grief.”[^73]

It is also narrated from the Prophet (S): “Eat olive oil and rub it on
the body, as it is from a blessed tree.”[^74]

It is also narrated from the Prophet (S): “Any person who drinks olive
oil and massages it on the body, Satan will not come near him for 40
mornings.”

**5. Others**

A man and a woman who would like to increase their level of sexual
activity, but do not know what they must do, and likewise people that
would like to derive more sexual pleasure, should use massage oils like
Arabian Jasmin oil, coconut oil, violet oil and olive oil.[^75]

**Things that causes harm to the body with respect to sexual
intercourse**

1. Sexual intercourse at the beginning of the night, whether in summer
or winter, causes harm to the body because the stomach and blood vessels
are usually full at this time. Intercourse can lead to colic, paralysis
(of the face), gout, stones and distillation of urine, hernia and
weakness of eyes.[^76]  
 Therefore, engaging in sexual intercourse at the end of the evening is
more recommended for the maintenance of a healthy body, as it is more
likely that one will not have a full stomach.

2. Likewise, sexual intercourse at any time with a full stomach is
harmful. It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Three things damage
the body of a person and these include: going to have a bath with a full
stomach, engaging in sexual intercourse with your spouse with a full
stomach, and engaging in intercourse with old women, decrepit and
advanced in age.”[^77]

3. Repetitive prevention of ejaculation can also lead to difficulties
for men, as well as for women.[^78]

Strengthening and Weakening Sexual Desire
-----------------------------------------

Things that increase sexual desire[^79]

1. Carrots  
 2. Onions  
 3. Meat  
 4. Eggs  
 5. Melon  
 6. Fresh pomegranate  
 7. Fresh milk  
 8. Sweet grapes  
 9. Wheat oil  
 10. Extract of the centre of a date.  
 11. Wearing of yellow shoes.  
 12. Applying massage oil to the body.  
 13. Applying collyrium (kohl) to the eyes.

Things that renew and charge sexual desire[^80]

1. Honey  
 2. Walnuts  
 3. Dates  
 4. Bananas  
 Things that reduce sexual desire[^81]  
 1. Taking a bath with cold water.  
 2. Not eating dinner.

It is narrated from Imām al-Kādhim (as): “If people are modest when
eating their food (i.e. don’t over-eat or under-eat), their bodies will
always stay healthy; and never leave out dinner even if it means eating
torn bits of dry bread because it is a cause of strength of the body and
strength of sexual intercourse.”[^82]

[^1]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 23, no. 24927

[^2]: Nikah literally means sexual intercourse.

[^3]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 23, no. 24929

[^4]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 109, no. 25163

[^5]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 109, no. 25163

[^6]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 241, no. 25537

[^7]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 107, no. 25158

[^8]: Nikah literally means sexual intercourse.

[^9]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 106, no. 25157

[^10]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 118, no. 25184

[^11]: Sūrat al-Nisā, Verse 1; Sūrat al-Zumar, Verse 5, Sūrat Luqmān,
Verse 28; Sūrat Naĥl, Verse 72

[^12]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 91

[^13]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 38

[^14]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 110

[^15]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 118, no. 25186

[^16]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 115

[^17]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 188, no. 25185

[^18]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 2, pg. 545

[^19]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 55

[^20]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 111

[^21]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 52

[^22]: Tib wa Behdāsht, pg. 300

[^23]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 24

[^24]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 112

[^25]: Confirmed with the office of Ayatullāh Sīstānī, Qom.

[^26]: Sūrat al-A~rāf, Verse 80

[^27]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 144, no. 25258

[^28]: Sūrat al-Baqarah, Verse 223

[^29]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 134, no. 25253

[^30]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 147, no. 25266

[^31]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 148, no. 25271

[^32]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 120, no. 25190

[^33]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 137, no. 25238; pg. 138, no. 25239

[^34]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 61

[^35]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 12, pg. 380, no. 16565

[^36]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 133, no. 25227

[^37]: Ibid., vol. 12, pg. 382, no. 16568

[^38]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 134, no. 25229

[^39]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 132, no. 25222

[^40]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 137, no. 25238; pg. 138, no. 25239

[^41]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 138, no. 25240

[^42]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 133, no. 25226

[^43]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 138, no. 25240

[^44]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 164, no. 25317

[^45]: Confirmed with the office of Ayatullāh Sīstānī, Qom

[^46]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 71

[^47]: Islamic Laws, Rule 2427

[^48]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 21, pg. 458, no. 27573

[^49]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 71

[^50]: Ibid., pg. 48-49

[^51]: Islamic Laws, Rule 456

[^52]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 2, pg. 321, no. 2249

[^53]: Ibid., vol. 2, pg. 322, no. 2254

[^54]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 109

[^55]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 72

[^56]: Islamic Laws, Rule 520

[^57]: Islamic Laws, Rule 1593

[^58]: °ajj Manāsek, Rule 219

[^59]: Confirmed with the office of Ayatullāh Sīstānī, Qom

[^60]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 257, no. 25570

[^61]: Ibid., vol. 20, pg. 109, no. 25164

[^62]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 54

[^63]: Sūrat at-±ūr, Verse 44

[^64]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 20, pg. 126, no. 25207

[^65]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 59

[^66]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 12, pg. 177, no. 16008

[^67]: Mostly derived from, Gonjhāye Ma~navī, pg. 318

[^68]: This is only recommended in areas where one is sure the rain
water is not polluted.

[^69]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 24-25

[^70]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 172

[^71]: This refers to the effect of violet oil on one’s
constitution/internal heat.

[^72]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 332

[^73]: Makārim al-Akhlāq, pg. 190

[^74]: Biĥār al-Anwār, vol. 66, pg. 182, no. 14

[^75]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 22

[^76]: Tib wa Behdāsht, pg. 292

[^77]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 14, pg. 231, no. 16578

[^78]: Izdawāj Maktab Insān Sāzi, vol. 3, pg. 51

[^79]: Gonjhāye Ma~navī, pg. 318

[^80]: Tib wa Behdāsht, pg. 300

[^81]: Niyāzhā wa Rawābith Jinsī was Zanāshuī, pg. 28

[^82]: Ibid., pg. 43


