Chapter 8: After Delivery
=========================

Recommended Foods
-----------------

**1. Fresh dates**[^1]

a. It is narrated that the Prophet (S) said: “The first thing a woman
should eat after delivery should be ratb (a type of fresh date), as
Allāh (SwT) told Haďrat Maryam after delivering Prophet (S) °Isā to eat
ratb.[^2]” When asked, ““If it is not the season for ratb?” He replied,
“Then nine dates from Medina, and if these are also not available, then
any nine dates. Surely Allāh (SwT) has stated: ‘I swear by My Honour and
Glory, that any woman who has recently delivered and eats ratb, I will
make her child patient.’”

b. It is narrated from Imām °Alī (as) that feed Birni dates (a type of
date) to women after the birth of their child, so that the child becomes
clever and patient.

c. Eating dates is not only beneficial for the mother but has an effect
on breast milk as well, and is also beneficial when fed to children.[^3]
For newborns, it is narrated from Imām °Alī (as) that put a little bit
of date in the mouth of the child, and the Prophet (S) did the same with
Imām Hasan (as) and Imām Husain (as).

**2. Euphrates Water and Khakhe Shafaa**[^4] **(on the roof of the
child’s mouth)**

a. It has been narrated that Euphrates water and khakhe shafaa should be
placed in the mouth of the child, and if Euphrates water is not
available, then rain water.[^5] and [^6]

b. It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) that khakhe shafaa should be
placed in the mouth of the child, as this protects him/her from pains
and tribulations.[^7]

c. In another tradition from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as), it is narrated that he
said: “There isn’t a person who drinks Euphrates water and puts it in
the mouth of his child, except that he is a friend of ours, because the
Euphrates is the river of a mu’min (believer).”[^8]

**3. Other**

a. It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) that when a child is born,
obtain some milk from the mother (the size of a lentil), mix it in water
and put two drops in the right nostril of the baby, and then the left,
and recite Adhān in his right ear and Iqāmah in his left, before they
take the umbilical cord away. If this is done, fear will never reach the
child and Umme Sabyān (a Jinn) will never trouble him/her.[^9]

Recommended Acts
----------------

**1. Acceptance of the child, whether boy or girl**

Unfortunately, even today, many still have the stereotype that girls are
undesirable and treat sons and daughters differently. Whereas, it is
clear in the Qur\`an that the child is a creation of Allāh (SwT)  and
He grants a boy to whomsoever He pleases and a girl to whomsoever He
pleases.[^10]

It is narrated that when Imām Zain al-°Abidīn  was given glad tidings
of the birth of his child, he didn’t ask whether it was a boy or a girl,
but rather first asked, is his creation ok? Then, if told that the child
was healthy and there was no defect in the creation, he recited:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي لَمْ يَخْلُقْ مِنِّي شَيْئاً مُشَوَّهاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Praise Be to Allāh (SwT) who did not create from me something
disfigured.”[^11]

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “It is prosperous for the woman
that her first child be a daughter.”[^12]

It has been narrated that daughters are goodness and blessings and sons
are favours. One will be questioned about the favours given to them,
whereas goodness and blessings will be increased.[^13]

**2. Recitation of Adhān and Iqāmah**

The Prophet (S) stated that whomever a child is born to, should recite
Adhān in the right ear and Iqāmah in the left ear, as this is a
protection from the evil of Satan.[^14]

Additionally, in another tradition it is stated that the mid-wife or
someone else should be told to recite the Iqāmah in the right ear so
that the Jinn will never trouble the child, nor will it become mad.[^15]

It is also narrated that the Prophet (S) ensured that Adhān and Iqāmah
were recited in the ears of Imām Hasan (as) and Imām Husain (as), as
well as Surat al-Fātiĥa, Ayat al-Kursī, the end of Surat al-Hashr, Surat
al-Ikĥlāŝ, Surat al-Falaq and Surat al-Nās.[^16]

**3. Clothes of the child**

From traditions at the time of the birth of Imām Hasan (as) and Imām
Husain (as), it is apparent that it is Makrūh to tie the child in yellow
cloth just after birth; rather it is recommended to tie him/her in white
cloth.[^17]

**4. Ghusl**

It has been mentioned in *Fiqh al-Riďā* that one of the emphasized
mustaĥab acts (some even call it obligatory) after the birth of a child
is giving it a Ghusl. One should make a intention that I am giving this
child a Ghusl for the pleasure of Allāh (SwT), and then first wash the
head, then the right side, and then the left side.[^18]

However, it should be noted that this should only be done if it is
medically safe and not harmful to the baby.

**5. Shaving the hair**[^19]

This involves shaving of all the hair of the child (from in the womb)
once after birth, and giving gold or silver according to the weight of
the hair as ŝadaqah. The hair should then be buried in the ground. It is
recommended to do this on the 7th day after birth.

The hair should completely be shaved off, leaving no forelock or
ringlet. It is narrated that a boy who had a forelock was brought near
the Prophet (S); the Prophet (S) did not pray for him and said that his
forelock should be shaved off.

It is recommended that after the shaving of the hair, saffron should be
massaged into the head. Massaging the blood of the aqīqah however, is
strongly discouraged, and has been called an act of ignorance
(Jāhiliat).

**6. °Aqīqah**[^20] **and** [^21]

This involves slaughtering an animal in the name of the child for
his/her protection. °Aqīqah is a highly recommended sunnah for anyone
who has the capability (some even call it obligatory), and it is better
if performed on the 7th day after birth. [^22]

NOTE: It is recommended that the shaving of the hair, giving of the
gold/silver as ŝadaqah and °Aqīqah should be carried out in the same
place and at one time, although it is sunnah that the shaving of the
hair takes place first.

NOTE: It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) that aqīqah is not the same
as sacrifice (qurbānī)

**7. Circumcision of boys**[^23]

Circumcision is obligatory on boys, and as with shaving and aqīqah, it
is recommended that it be done on the 7th day after the birth of the
child, although if done earlier, there is no harm.[^24]

If not done then, it is sunnah that it be done until the bulugh of the
child, after which it is obligatory on the child himself to do it.
However, other ulema have stated that as the child nears puberty, it is
obligatory on the guardian. Indeed, it is narrated from Imām °Alī  that
a person who becomes a Muslim should be circumcised, even if he is 80
years old.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) that children should be
circumcised as it makes the body cleaner, makes the meat of the body
grow faster, and the earth has an aversion to the urine of an
uncircumcised person.

It is narrated from the Prophet (S) that the earth becomes najis for 40
days from the urine of an uncircumcised person, and in another
tradition, it is narrated that the earth groans to Allāh (SwT)  because
of his urine.

It is also narrated that if you circumcise a boy, and the sheath grows
again and covers the penis, circumcise him again, because the earth
groans to Allāh (SwT) for 40 days because of the covering of his
circumcision.

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “Somebody who has not been
circumcised should not lead prayers, and his witness is not accepted,
and if he dies, do not pray for him as he has left the biggest sunnah of
the Prophet (S), unless he has left it for fear of death (resulting from
circumcision).”  
 It is recommended to recite the following Du°ā at the time of
circumcision[^25]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ هٌذِهِ سُنَّتُكَ وَ سُنَّةُ نَبِيِّكَ (صَلَوَاتُكَ
عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ) وَ اتِّـبَاعٌ مِنَّا لَكَ وَ لِدِيـنِكَ
بِمَشِيَّـتِكَ وَ بِإِرَادَتِكَ لِأَمْرٍ أَرَدْتَهُ وَ قَضَآءٍ
حَـتَمْتَهُ وَ أَمْرٍ أَنْفَذْتَهُ فَأَذَقْتَهُ حَرَّ الْحَدِيدِ فِي
خِتَانِهِ وَ حِجَامَتِهِ لِأَمْرٍ أَنْتَ أَعْرَفُ بِهِ مِنِّي.
أَللٌّهُمَّ فَطَهِّرْهُ مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ وَ زِدْ فِي عُمْرِهِ وَ
ادْفَعِ الآفَاتِ عَنْ بَدَنِهِ وَ الأَوْجَاعِ عَنْ جِسْمِهِ وَ زِدْهُ
مِنَ الْغِنىً وَ ادْفَعْ عَنْهُ الْفَقْرَ فَإِنَّكَ تَعْلَمُ وَ إِنَّا
لاَ نَعْلَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh (SwT)! Surely (what we are performing) is in line with Your
tradition and the tradition (Sunnah) of Your Prophet (S) (may Your
blessings be upon him and his family) - to obey You and Your religion
and to fulfill Your will, intention and to carry out the rules which You
have decided to make to be followed unconditionally. You have thus given
him the taste of the heat of the iron through his circumcision and
cupping for a matter which You definitely know better than I do. O Allāh
(SwT)! Then cleanse him of sins; increase his age; and release from his
body, epidemics and pains; and increase his wealth; and save him from
poverty; since surely You know better and we do not know.”

**8. Walīmah**

This involves feeding the believers upon the birth of the child and for
the circumcision of the child (these can be combined). It is highly
recommended to invite family and friends on the 7th day after the birth
of the child (or near that day) to share in the auspicious occasion of
the birth of the newborn.

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “A walīmah on the first day is a
duty, on the second day good, and on the third day, riyā (i.e. for the
sake of other people and not for the sake of Allāh (SwT)).”[^26]

It is Makrūh that all the invitees be rich, but a mix of rich and poor
is not a problem. It is also mustaĥab that the invitees should accept
the invitation to a walīmah.

**9. Piercing the ears**

Piercing the ears of the child is recommended.[^27]

**10. Contact of child and mother and breastfeeding**[^28] **and** [^29]

One of the best acts after birth is cleaning the child and returning
him/her next to the mother’s skin and covering them with one blanket.
Half an hour after birth, the child is completely aware and alert and it
is the best time for him/her to become familiar with breastfeeding and
the mother’s touch.

The first few day a lot of milk is not produced; however, the amount
produced is enough, useful and necessary for the new-born child. It is
important that as much as possible, tiredness of the mother and lack of
milk are not used as reasons to bottle-feed the child as this results in
delayed milk production from the mother and the child not being able to
suck properly. It also increases the possibilities of infections in the
child.

°Aqīqah – A Closer Look
-----------------------

Importance of carrying out °Aqīqah
----------------------------------

It is narrated[^30] that the life of a child is bound by °Aqīqah[^31],
and if it is not carried out, it exposes one to tribulation and death.
If delayed, it is sunnah on the father until the bulugh of the child,
and after bulugh, it is sunnah on the child himself.[^32]

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) that aqīqah is necessary for any
rich man, and if one is poor, he should perform aqīqah once he obtains
some money, and if he does not obtain any money, then it is ok. If one
has not performed aqīqah, and he carried out a sacrifice (qurbani), this
will suffice.

It is narrated that somebody asked Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “We have asked
for a sheep for aqīqah but cannot get one, what do you suggest? Should
we give the value of the sheep as ŝadaqah instead?” Imām replied, “No,
ask until you get one as Allāh (SwT) likes the feeding of (others)...”

°Umar bin Yazīd narrates that he asked Imām as-Ŝādiq (as): “I don’t know
if my father performed aqīqah for me or not.” Imām replied, “Perform
it,” and so he performed aqīqah in his old age.

In another tradition it is related that somebody asked Imām as-Ŝādiq
(as) that if a child dies on the 7th day, should aqīqah still be carried
out? Imām replied if the child dies before Dhuhr, aqīqah is not
necessary, but if the child died after zuhr, then do it.

What should be slaughtered?
---------------------------

It is common among the ulema that the °Aqīqah should be a sheep, a camel
or a goat, and that the °Aqīqah of a boy should be a male animal and the
°Aqīqah of a girl should be a female animal.  
 If it is a camel, it should be 5 years or older. If it is a goat, it
should be 1 year or older.

If it is a sheep, it should be at least 6 months or older and it is
better if the 7th month has been completed. Its testicles should not be
cut and it is better if the testicles is not squashed either. Its horn
should not be broken (such that it bled) and its ears should not be cut.
It should not be too thin, nor blind, nor should it be so lame that
walking is difficult for it.

However, it is important to note that as narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq
(as), °Aqīqah is not the same as sacrifice (qurbānī) which has stricter
criteria for the type of animal that is sacrificed. Therefore, if it is
not possible that the above criteria be met, any sheep is fine, although
the fatter it is the better.

Du°ās at the time of °Aqīqah347
-------------------------------

At the time of slaughtering the animal for °Aqīqah, the following
supplications should be recited:  
 1. At the end of the supplication, one should say his name and the name
of his father [for example, if the father’s name is Ťāhir and his
father’s name is °Abdullah you would say, Ťāhir ibne (the son of)
°Abdullah]. This supplication begins with Verses 78 and 79 of Surat
al-An°ām followed by Verses 162 and 169 of Surat al-An°ām:

> يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِمَّا تُشْرِكُونَ. إِنِّي وَجَّهْتُ
> وَجْهِيَ لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمٌوَاتِ وَ الأَرْضَ حَنِيفاً مُسْـلِماً
> وَ مَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ. إِنَّ صَلاَتِي وَ نُسُكِي وَ
> مَحْيَايَ وَ مَـمَاتِي لِلٌّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِـين لاَ شَـرِيكَ لَهُ
> وَ بِذٌلِكَ أُمِرْتُ وَ أَنَا أَوَّلُ الْمُسْلِمِـينَ. أَللٌّهُمَّ
> مِنْكَ وَ إِلَـيْكَ بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ وَ اللٌّهُ أَكْـبَرُ. أَللٌّهُمَّ
> صَلِّ عَلـى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ تَقَـبَّلْ مِنْ... [Name of
> father and his father]

“O my nation! Surely I disown myself from that which you associate (with
Allāh (SwT)).” “Surely I have turned my entire presence towards He who
has brought forth the Heavens and the Earth, sincerely and I am not of
those who set up partners (with Allāh (SwT)). Surely my ŝalāť and my
sacrifice and my life and my death are all entirely for Allāh (SwT), the
Lord of the All the Worlds, He has no partners and to this I have been
commanded (to attest to) and I am the first of those who submit as
Muslims.” “O’ Allāh (SwT)! Surely this (animal) is from You and it goes
back to You in the Name of Allāh (SwT) and Allāh (SwT) is greater than
any description which can be mentioned of Him. O Allāh (SwT)! Shower
your prayers upon Muĥammad and the family of Muĥammad and accept this
from [your name and your father’s name.]”

2. The following supplication should also be read while the animal is
being slaughtered (whether the child is a boy or girl):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ وَ بِاللٌّهِ وَ الْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ وَ اللٌّهُ أَكْبَرُ
إِيْمَاناً بِاللٌّهِ وَ ثَنَاءً عَلـى رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ (صَلَّى اللٌّهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ) وَ شُكْراً لِرِزْقِ اللٌّهِ وَ عِصْمَةً
بِأَمْرِ اللٌّهِ وَ مَعْرِفَةً بِفَضْلِهِ عَلَيْنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In the Name of Allāh (SwT) and in Allāh (SwT) and All Praise belongs
solely to Allāh (SwT) and Allāh (SwT) is Greater than any description
which can be mentioned of Him. With full faith in Allāh (SwT) and
admiration upon the Messenger of Allāh (SwT) (may the blessings of Allāh
(SwT) be upon him and his family) and they are thankful for the
sustenance of Allāh (SwT) and the protection afforded by the command of
Allāh (SwT) and complete cognizance with His bounties upon us the Ahlul
Bayt.”

If the child is a boy, then the following supplication should also be
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَنْتَ وَهَبْتَ لَنَا ذَكَراً وَ أَنْتَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا
وَهَبْتَ، وَ مِنْكَ مَا أَعْطَيْتَ وَ لَكَ مَا صَنَعْنَا فَتَقَبَّلْهُ
مِنَّا عَلـى سُنَّتِكَ وَ سُنَّةِ رَسُولِكَ (صَلَّى اللٌّهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَ آلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ) وَ أَخْسِءْ عَنَّا الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ، لَكَ
سَفَكْتُ الدِّمَاءَ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ وَ الْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِـينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh (SwT)! You have gifted us with a son and You know better what
You have gifted us, and back to You is that which You have granted to us
and back to You is that which we make - so then accept from it (this
sacrifice) from us upon Your Tradition (Sunnah) and the Tradition
(Sunnah) of Your Messenger (may the blessings of Allāh (SwT) be upon him
and his family) and keep us distanced from the accursed Satan. For You
the blood (of this animal) has been spilt, and You have no partners and
all the Praise belongs solely to Allāh (SwT), the Lord of all the
Worlds.”

3. The follow supplication should also be recited at the time of the
slaughtering of the animal. When one reaches to the square brackets, you
would say the name of the child and his or her father [for example, if
the child’s name is Jābir and his father’s name is Kumayl, then you
would say: Jābir ibne (the son of) Kumayl] and then continue on with the
rest of the supplication. The first version of the supplication is for a
boy, the second supplication is if the child is a girl.

> بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ وَ بِاللٌّهِ أَللٌّهُمَّ هٌذِهِ عَقِيقَةٌ عَنْ [Name of
> child and his father] لَحْمِهَا بِلَحْمِهِ وَ دَمِهَا بِدَمِهِ وَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَظْمِهَا بِعَظْمِهِ. أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْهَا وِقَاءً لَهُ بِآلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ صَلَّى اللٌّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ وَ سَلَّمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In the Name of Allāh (SwT) and by Allāh (SwT), this aqīqah
(slaughtering of an animal) is for [name of the child and his father’s
first name]. Its flesh instead of his flesh; its blood instead of his
blood; its bones instead of his bones are all offered to You. O Allāh
(SwT)! accept it for that by which this child may be protected and
preserved, in the name of the progeny of Muĥammad, blessings of Allāh
(SwT) be upon him and his progeny.”

> بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ وَ بِاللٌّهِ أَللٌّهُمَّ هٌذِهِ عَقِيقَةٌ عَنْ [Name of
> child and her father] لَحْمِهَا بِلَحْمِهَا وَ دَمِهَا بِدَمِهَا وَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَظْمِهَا بِعَظْمِهَا. أَللٌّهُمَّ اجْعَلْهَا وِقَاءً لَهَا بِآلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ صَلَّى اللٌّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ وَ سَلَّمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In the Name of Allāh (SwT) and by Allāh (SwT), this aqīqah
(slaughtering of an animal) is for [name of the child and her father’s
first name]. Its flesh instead of her flesh; its blood instead of her
blood; its bones instead of her bones are all offered to You. O Allāh
(SwT)! accept it for that by which this child may be protected and
preserved, in the name of the progeny of Muĥammad, blessings of Allāh
(SwT) be upon him and his progeny.”

How should it be distributed?
-----------------------------

It is recommended that the bones should not be broken; rather they
should be separated at the joints. It is also better that the meat be
distributed cooked (with at least salt and water) and the raw hide be
given as ŝadaqah.

It is recommended that the legs and thighs of the aqīqah (this can
either be counted as one third or one fourth of the sheep depending on
the method of division) should be given to the mid-wife (or doctor) that
helped during the delivery and the rest should be given to the people to
eat as ŝadaqah. If the mid-wife or doctor is a Jew, then the value of a
quarter of a sheep should be given.

If the child was born without a mid-wife or doctor, it should be given
to the mother who can give it to whomever she wants; she should give it
to at least ten Muslims, and if she can give it to more, it is better.
It is not necessary that the meat should only be given to the poor;
however, it is better that it is given to the pious and the poor.

It is recommended that the father and mother (and those who are
dependant on them, such as parents and children) do not eat from the
cooked meat of the °Aqīqah, and this has been emphasized especially for
the mother.

Recommended Method of congratulating one on the Birth of a Child
----------------------------------------------------------------

It is narrated from Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) that he congratulated someone for
the child that God had blessed him with in the following manner (there
have been many similar narrations from Imām Hasan (as) also)[^33]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَزَقَكَ اللٌّهُ شُكْرَ الْوَاهِبِ وَ بَارَكَ لَكَ فِي الْمَوْهُوبِ وَ
بَلَغَ أَشُدَّهُ وَ رَزَقَكَ اللٌّهُ بِرَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May Allāh (SwT) bless you, and bless that which He has granted you, and
make him reach physical maturity, and (May) Allāh (SwT) bless you with
his righteousness.”[^34]

Naming the Child
----------------

Importance of naming the child
------------------------------

It is narrated[^35] from Imām al-Kādhim (as) that the first good a
father can do for his child is to give him a good name.

It is the right of the child that his parents give him a good name and
treat him well.[^36] In another tradition it is narrated that among the
rights of a child are a good name, teaching him to write and marrying
him off when he reaches the age of bulugh.[^37]

When to name the child
----------------------

It is narrated from Imām °Alī (as): “A child should be named while in
the stomach, and if not named and is miscarried, on the Day of Judgement
it will ask its father, “Why did you not name me?” The Prophet (S) named
Muĥsin, the son of Haďrat Fāťima while in the stomach, and Muĥsin is
that child that after the Prophet (S) passed away, he was still in the
stomach when °Umar made him a martyr.”

It is narrated from the Imāms (as) that: “A son is not born to us, the
Ahlul Bayt, except that he is named Muĥammad for 7 days, and then if
desired, it can be changed or removed.”[^38]

It has been mentioned in *Fiqh al-Riďā* that fix the name (i.e. announce
the name to others) on the 7th day.

Recommended names
-----------------

Naming the children after the Ahlul Bayt (as) is an open declaration of
love and friendship towards them, and religion is nothing but love and
friendship of the Ahlul Bayt (as), as Allāh (SwT) states in the Noble
Qur\`an, in Surat Āli-’ Imrān, Verse 31:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إِنْ كُنْـتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللٌّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ
اللٌّهُ... 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If you love Allāh (SwT), then follow me (the Prophet (S)); Allāh (SwT)
will love you…”

It is narrated from Imām al-Bāqir (as) that the most suitable names for
a child are those that denotes servitude to Allāh (SwT), like °Abdullāh
(servant of Allāh (SwT)), and the best names for a child are those of
the Prophets.

The Prophet (S) said that whoever has four children and has not named
any of them after me, has oppressed me.[^39]

It is narrated from the Prophet (S): “In a house where the names of some
of the individuals are of Prophet (S)s, the blessings of that house will
never disappear.”[^40]

In another tradition, it has been narrated from Imām al-Kādhim (as) that
poverty and indigence will never enter the house in which the name
Muĥammad, or Aĥmad, or °Alī, or °asan, or Husain, or Ja°far, or Ťālib,
or °Abdullāh, or Fāťima is present.[^41]

It is narrated from Imām Husain (as): “If I had a hundred children, I
would have liked to name all of them °Alī.”[^42]

It is narrated that a person came to the Prophet (S) and asked, “A son
has come to us, what should I name him?” The Prophet (S) replied, “Name
him the best of names with me, and that is Hamza.”  
 It is narrated from Jābir who said: I went with Imām al-Bāqir (as) to
someone’s house and a child came out. Imām asked him, “What is your
name?” He replied, “Muĥammad.”

Imām asked him, “What is your title (kunyah)?” He replied, “Abu °Alī.”
Imām said, “You have taken yourself out of Satan’s stronghold. Surely,
every time Satan hears someone being called, Ya Muĥammad! Ya °Alī! he
withers away and when he hears someone being called by the name of our
enemies, he becomes happy and takes pride in that.”

In another tradition it is narrated that someone came to Imām as-Ŝādiq
(as) and said that Allāh (SwT)  had given him a boy. Imām congratulated
him, and asked, “What have you named him?” He replied, “Muĥammad.” Imām
turned his head down towards the floor and kept repeating the name
Muĥammad until his face almost touched the ground.

Then he said, “My life, my children, my wives, my father, my mother and
all of the people of this earth be sacrificed for the Prophet (S).
Because you have given him such a blessed name, do not abuse him and do
not hit him and do not make bad reach him. And know this that there is
not a house in which the name of Muhammed is present, but that everyday,
that house is made Noble and pure.”

In another tradition it is narrated that one should respect a daughter
whose name is Fāťima and not abuse her and never hit her.[^43]

The titles of Haďrat Fāťima (sa) can also be used for names of
daughters:  
 Mubāraka: The one who is blessed.  
 Ťāhira: The one who is pure.  
 Zakiyya: The one who is wise.  
 Rāďiya: The one who is content.  
 Marďiyya: The one whom Allāh (SwT) is pleased with.  
 Ŝiddīqa: The one who is truthful.  
 Muĥaddathah: The one that angels talk to.  
 Muĥaddithah: The one that narrates traditions.  
 Zahra: The luminous one.

Names not recommended
---------------------

In several traditions it has been narrated that the Prophet (S) has
forbidden naming a child with the following names: Hākim, Hakim, Khālid
and Mālik. And he has said that the worst names with Allāh (SwT) are
Hārith, Mālik and Khālid. And when the name is Muĥammad, he has
forbidden 4 titles (kunyah): Abu °Isā, Abul Hakim, Abu Mālik and Abul
Qāsim, as both the name and title are not agreeable to the Prophet (S).

In tradition, it has been narrated that one should not name the child
Yāsīn, as that is specific to the Prophet (S).

[^1]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 125-127

[^2]: Sūrat Mariam (19), Verse 25

[^3]: Isrār khūrākīhā, pg. 96

[^4]: The Noble earth of Kerbala, Iraq

[^5]: This is only recommended in areas where one is sure the rain water
is not polluted.

[^6]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 24, no. 4

[^7]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 145-146

[^8]: Biĥār al-Anwār, vol. 104, pg. 114, no. 33

[^9]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 126

[^10]: Sūrat al-Shura (42), Verse 49: “He gives females to whomeve He
wishes, and gives males to whomever He wishes.”

[^11]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 21

[^12]: Biĥār al-Anwār, vol. 104, pg. 98, no. 64

[^13]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 6, no. 8

[^14]: Ibid., vol. 6, pg. 24, no. 6

[^15]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 126

[^16]: Biĥār al-Anwār, vol. 104, pg. 126, no. 86

[^17]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 146

[^18]: Ibid., pg. 130

[^19]: Ibid., pg. 132

[^20]: Ibid., pg. 130-133

[^21]: ~Aqīqah will be covered in more detail under ~Aqīqah: A Closer
Look in this chapter.

[^22]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 15, pg. 145, no. 17807

[^23]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 1343-135

[^24]: Ibid., pg. 134

[^25]: A Mother’s Prayer

[^26]: Wasāil ash-Shī~a, vol. 16, pg. 455

[^27]: Ibid., pg. 134

[^28]: Rayhāney-e Beheshtī, pg. 167

[^29]: This is covered in more depth in Chapter 9: Breastfeeding.

[^30]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 130-133

[^31]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 25, no. 3

[^32]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 150

[^33]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 127

[^34]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 17

[^35]: °alliyatul Muttaqīn, pg. 128-130

[^36]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 15, pg. 128, no. 17748

[^37]: Ibid., vol. 15, pg. 166, no. 17876

[^38]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 18, no. 4

[^39]: Tahdhib al-Balāgha, vol. 7, pg. 438, no. 11

[^40]: Mustadrak al-Wasāil, vol. 15, pg. 129, no. 17751

[^41]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 19, no. 8

[^42]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6, pg. 19, no. 7

[^43]: al-Kāfī, vol. 6


