Condition of the People
=======================

Now, let us take a quick look at the condition and picture which
prevailed, minutes before that decisive moment which was about to take
place to change the history of mankind, and all of creation and
universe.

The earth was filled with injustice, unfairness, violence, corruption,
bloodshed, wars, and struggles between the humans. Life has become like
hell that is unbearable, after materialism dominated it and pulled man
down as his lower desires and ambitions dominated him.

There is no room or place for morals, principles, values, manners, and
compassion among the people and life has become a chaotic jungle!

Man have submitted to his lower desires without limit or control and
have become arrogant and oppressor. The strong eats the weak, and the
king steps on the heads of those ruled and oppressed. Justice became
lost while injustice became widespread.

The wealthy and affluent compose a very small corrupted minority, while
the poor and deprived are the majority but they are weak and paralyzed.
Chaos has become widespread and the religions all lean towards
polytheism, idol and self worshipping. Human desires, fantasies,
deviation, fabrication, and misguidance took over and distorted the
religions.

The Jews have distorted their religion and their priests have concealed
the truth for their own personal interests. The Jews are divided on
Earth and most of them are corrupt, envious, and materialistic. Yet at
the same time, they claim that they are the "chosen people by Allah” and
that they are the "loved ones of Allah"!

They believe that there is no true religion except theirs and they have
disfigured their religion and killed their prophets and distorted their
purified history. They await the appearance of a prophet whom they know
will appear and they find his signs written in their books.

They believe that he will achieve for them final victory from God and
they will gain control over the world under his leadership. But of
course they anticipate him to be from among them [Bani Israel (sons of
Ya'qoob)]. At the same time, they despise the Christians and are happy
that they have allegedly killed their prophet Jesus.

On the other hand, the Christians went astray and have become misguided.
They worshipped their prophet Jesus instead of God and they said the
grave utterance and falsely claimed that Allah (SWT) has a son! They
deviated from the laws of their religion and distorted their Book and
followed their misguided priests and displeased their God.

They thought that they were on the right path while the others are
misguided and they bear animosity towards the Jews. Their scholars also
knew that a prophet was about to appear, whose signs were indicated in
their books.

As for the Zoroastrians, they also distorted the religion of Abraham
(Peace be upon him) and they worshipped the Fire. The Arabs have
distorted the religion of Ishmael and worshipped the idols. Disbelief
and polytheism have become widespread with all its different types and
forms. Everyone practices his ignorance, deviation, and disbelief with
all sincerity, fanaticism, and involvement.

The true believers are a very small minority and Muhammad is one them.
You can almost count them on the fingers of one hand as they are
scattered here and there. They were a minority who were wandering and
didn't know where to go as they searched for the truth in the midst of
darkness and sought the help of their Lord.

They requested Him to send a messenger to guide them and show them the
truth from falsehood, and lead them out of darkness to the light of
guidance. They too were waiting and anticipating the appearance of this
prophet sent from God so that they can believe in Him and march under
his banner and leadership.

Allah (SWT) sees, hears, watches, and observes everything. He (SWT) sees
the nonbelievers, polytheists, and those who are displeased with from
the Jews and the misguided from the Christians, and the idol worshippers
who associate another God with Allah (SWT). He (SWT) hears the prayers
of the oppressed people, the weak, the deprived, and the believers.

With His compassion, He (SWT) watches and observes all those people who
have been deceived by the life of this world and tempted by the ample
time which Allah (SWT) gave them, till they thought that He (SWT) is
oblivious of them, or that He (SWT) is absent from them or does not see
them. He (SWT) also sees those who believe in Him and are never
desperate from His mercy and compassion. Those who never give up hope
that one day He (SWT) will answer their prayers as they have very deep
faith and trust in Him. And Muhammad was surely one of them!

This condition reminds us of the same situation which was present before
when Allah (SWT) spoke with Prophet Moses (May Allah be pleased with
him). The sons of Israel were enslaved in Egypt for many long centuries.
Pharaoh used to torture them, kill their children, rape their women, and
enslave them in the worst conditions.

The believers among them kept praying to their God day and night to
relieve from this torture and bondage, and liberate them from slavery,
and send to them a messenger, leader, and deliverer to lead them out of
this torture. They were expecting the imminent appearance of that
prophet as they know from their books. One of those believers who prayed
to God to save his people from torture, persecution, and inferiority was
Moses (AS) who was the most humble, submissive and loving to God from
all of Bani Israel!

Suddenly, the mercy of Allah (SWT) poured at a fateful moment…and also
in the middle of a bare desert…and also in the middle of the darkness of
night…and also on top of a mountain. Moses sees the fire and goes
towards it to get a light.

But instead, Allah (SWT) speaks directly to him and informs him that He
(SWT) is the God of Abraham and Jacob and that He (SWT) listens and sees
the condition of the sons of Israel and the oppression of pharaoh. He
(SWT) informs him that he has been chosen to become the awaited prophet
and the expected deliverer to stand against Pharaoh by the power of
Allah (SWT) and lead his people out of bondage to the dignity of God's
obedience, and out of poverty and inferiority to independence and
sovereignty!

The tradition of Allah (SWT) is the same and you will not find change or
replacement in the way of Allah (SWT). Once again and under similar
circumstances, and after hundreds of years, the same situation repeats
itself exactly and the similarity is clear to any person.

Once again, the mercy of Allah (SWT) poured on the believers, the weak
and deprived, and the oppressed. And His wrath descended on those
nonbelievers, polytheists, counterfeiters, distorters, misguides,
hypocrites, arrogant, those whom Allah (SWT) is displeased with, the
luxurious, and the unjust, those who want to achieved highness on earth
and be worshipped besides Allah (SWT).


