Introduction
============

Although our existence is from Allah (Glory and Greatness be to Him), it
is our parents who are the means of giving us life.  We are an offshoot
of their existence and a fruit of the garden of their unparalleled
affection, training, love and sentiments. 

When the forgetful human being grows up to become big and strong and
comes to acquire a certain credibility (in life), he forgets the period
wherein he was weak and lacking in strength.  He disregards the
exhaustive efforts of his parents; what ingratitude could be worse than
this?

Humanity and ethics demand that we safeguard these two jewels (our
mother and father) - by exhibiting goodness towards them while they are
alive, and by means of charity and goodly remembrance after their
death. 

Our lives are an extension of our parent’s lives while our children’s
lives are a continuation of ours.  Our good behavior towards our parents
and our exhibition of kindness towards them shall cause our children to
grow up as grateful and righteous individuals.  They shall behave with
us just as we have behaved with our own parents.

Just as it is beyond our means to fulfill the rights of Allah (Glory and
Greatness be to Him) and to thank Him for all His bounties in their
entirety, similarly we can never thank our parents sufficiently for
their efforts.  The only thing that we can do is to acknowledge our
inability and submit ourselves, in humility and reverence, before these
two angels.  However, comprehension of their status in the eyes of Allah
(Glory and Greatness be to Him) paves the way to fulfill some of their
numerous rights.

The traditions that we shall read in this collection of forty traditions
shall serve to make us aware of some of our responsibilities towards our
parents.

May Allah (Glory and Greatness be to Him) grant us the Divine success
that we may come be regarded amongst those who have been good towards
their parents.

“O’ Allah!  Make us such that we may be grateful for the efforts of our
parents.”

“O’ Allah!  Make us successful in bringing forth a generation of
pure-hearted, believing, grateful and righteous individuals.”


