Subject: the Shi'ites and Sunnis
================================

Basically, a small number among the Sunni believe and claim that the
Shia are non-Muslim; a number among the Shia hold a somewhat similar
opinion of the Sunni.

As a person who belongs to that small group of shiat, I am declaring
that none of us has ever told that sunni is non-muslim.

Briefly about shiat:

1)- Shait says that "Logic" is very important and is a part of life. As
you eat, you must use the logic.

2)- The point is not that Ali-Ibn-Abitalib should have been the Caliph.
That is not the case any more. It is too late to choose Ali as the first
Caliph after the death of the prophet since it is almost 1350 years by
now.

(Even if all muslims, shiat and sunni, agree right now that Ali must
have been the first Caliph, nothing can be done.) The point is that the
true knowledge is transferred to muslims through Ali and his sons, and
other sources are not as reliable as this chain. The point is to know
that it is not too late to listen, think, and obey these true sources of
knowledge, Ali-Ibn-Abitalib and his sons.


**Subject: Health rules in Hadith books?**

I am getting closer to realize what Islam says about health of human. I
strongly urge scientists to investigate the following important
traditions. I hope that when they get Nobel Prize on this, share it with
me (say %5 only).

I would be grateful if my sunni brothers and sisters tell me if they
really benefit these islamic laws or not. Thanks a lot.

Narrated Abu Huraira:

Allah's Apostle said, "If a fly falls in the vessel of any of you, let
him dip all of it (into the vessel) and then throw it away, for in one
of its wings there is a disease and in the other there is healing
(antidote for it) i e. the treatment for that disease."

Narrated Abu Huraira:

The Prophet said "If a house fly falls in the drink of anyone of you,
he should dip it (in the drink), for one of its wings has a disease and
the other has the cure for the disease."

Narrated Abu Huraira:

Allah's Apostle said, "None of you should walk, wearing one shoe only;
he should either put on both shoes or put on no shoes whatsoever."

I understand that there might be some use not using any shoe, and more
advantage using both shoes. I do not understand where ONE shoe can be
applicable, and if not applicable at all, why it is mentioned anyway.
Thanks for your comments.

The traditions are taken from Sahih Bukhari:

**The translation of the meaning of Sahih al-Bukhari
Arabic-English
Dr. Mohammad Muhsin Khan
Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara**


**The Ahl al-Sunnah View of Ibn Taymiya and his Works**

The following article is written by a Sunni brother

**Subject: Ahl al-Sunnah and Ibn Taymiya**

Ibn Taymiya and his writings and those of his students have recently
been used by "Wahabbis" and "Reformists" to provide evidence against
madhaib and the Aqueedah of Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jamaat (The Four
Schools).

As can be seen from the following brief biography, taken from "The
Reliance of the Traveller" which is an AUTHENTIC book of fiqh, Ibn
Taymiya (Rahim-ullah) was considered an innovaitor and a heretic and
some scholars went so far as to declare his writings as Kufr.

Ibn Taymiya is Ahmad Ibn Abd al-Salaam ibn Abdullah, Abu al-Abbas Taqi
al-Din ibn Taymiya al-Harrani, born in Harran, east of Damascus, in
661/1263. A famous Hanbali scholar in Qur'anic exegesis (tafsir), hadith
and jurisprudence, Ibn Taymiya was a voracious reader and author of
great personal courage who was endowed with a compelling writing style
and a keen memory.

Dhahabi wrote of him, "I never saw anyone faster at recalling the
Qur'anic verses dealing with subjects he was discussing, or anyone who
could remember hadith texts more vividly." Dhahabi estimates that his
legal opinions on various subjects amount to three-hundred or more
volumes.

He was imprisoned during much of his life in Cairo, Alexandria, and
Damascus for his writings, scholars of his time accusing him of
believing Allah to be a corporeal entity because of what he mentioned in
his al-aqida al-Hamawiyya and al-Wasitiyya and other works, such as that
Allah's 'hand', 'foot', 'shin' and 'face' are literal (haqiqi)
attributes, and that He is upon the Throne in person.

The error in this is suggesting such attributes are literal is an
innovation and unjustifiable inferance from the Qur'anic and hadith
texts that mention them, for the way of early Muslims was mere
acceptance of such expressions on faith without saying how they are
meant, and without additions, subtractions, or substituting meanings
imagined to be synonyms, while acknowledging Allah's absolute
transcedence beyond the characteristics of created things, in conformity
with the Qur'anic verse "There is nothing whatsoever like unto him"
[Qur'an 42:11].

As for figurative interpretations that preserve the divine
transcendence, scholars of tenents of faith have only had recourse to
them in times when men of reprehensible innovation (bid'a), quoting
hadiths and Qur'anic verses, have caused confusion in the minds of
common Muslims as to whether Allah has attributes like those of His
creation or whether He is transcendently beyond any image conceivable to
the minds of men.

Scholars' firmness in condemning those who have raised such confusions
has traditionally been very uncompromising, and this is no doubt the
reason that a number of the Imams of the Shafi'i school, among them Taqi
al-Din Subki, Ibn Hajar Haytami and al-Izz ibn Jama'a, gave formal legal
opinions (fatawa) that Ibn Taymiya was misguided and misguiding in
tenents of faith, and warned people from accepting his theories.

The Hanafi scholar Muhammad Zahid al-Kawthari has written "Whoever
thinks that all the scholars of his time joined in a single conspiracy
against him from personal envy should rather impugn their own
intelligence and understanding, after studying the repugnance of his
deviations in beliefs and works, for which he was asked to repent time
after time and moved from prison to prison until he passed on to what
he'd sent ahead."

While few deny that Ibn Taymiya was a copious and eloquent writer and
hadith scholar, his career, like that of others, demonstrates that a man
may be outstanding in one field and yet suffer from radical deficiencies
in another, the most reliable index of which is how a field's Imams
regard his work in it.

By this measure, indeed, by the standards of all previous Ahl al-Sunnah
scholars, it is clear that despite voluminous and influential written
legacy, Ibn Taymiya cannot be considered an authority on tenents of
faith (aqueeda), a field in which he made mistakes profoundly
incompatible with the beliefs of Islam, as also with a number of his
legal views that violated the scholarly consensus (ijma) of Sunni
Muslims.

It should be remembered that such matters are not the province of
personal reasoning (ijtihad), whether Ibn Taymiya considered them to be
so out of sincere conviction, or whether simply because, as Imam Subki
said, "his learning exceeded his intelligence." He died in Damascus in
728/1328.

Taken From:

English/Arabic Traditional Sunni Manual of Shari\`ah


\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
| Reliance of the Traveller (\`Umdat al-Salik): | | A Classic Manual of
Islamic Sacred Law (Fiqh) | | By Ahmad ibn al-Naqib al-Misri
(d.769/1386) | | Translated by Noah Ha Mim Keller | | English/Arabic
(dual columns) | | xxii+1232 pages, Hardcover | | Published by Sunna
Books 1991, 1993 |
|\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_| \*\`Umdat
al-Salik is a traditional Fiqh manual by Ibn al-Naqib (d.769/1386). It
summerizes the conclusions of Imam al-Nawawi (d.676/1277),the great
Hadith scholar and Shafi\`i jurisprudent. It is based mainly on
al-Nawawi's Fiqh works; al-Majmu\` and al-Minhaj.

\*Reliance of the Traveller contains \`Umdat al-Salik in Arabic with
facing English translation, Commentary, Appendices, Biographical Notes
about every person mentioned (391 biographies), Bibliography of each
work mentioned (136 works), and a detailed subject Index (95 pages).

The Appendices form an integral part of the book and present readers
with original texts and translation from classical works by Imam
al-Nawawi, al-Ghazali, al-Dhahabi and other famous scholars on many
Islamic topics such as Islamic Law (Fiqh), Principles of Jurisprudence
(Usul al-Fiqh), Faith (Iman/\`Aqidah), Spirituality (Tazkiyah/Suluk).

Of the 136 works drawn upon in its commentary and appendices, 134 are
in the original Arabic. The sections and paragraphs have been numbered
to facilitate cross-reference which is utilized extensively.

\*Noah Ha Mim Keller is an American Muslim who produced this work in
Damascus and Amman from 1982 to 1990. He studied the book word by word
in the traditional way with two Shaykh-s (teachers) over a period of
five years after which they gave him their written warrant (ijazah) to
expound the book and translate it into English.

**\*Certificate:**

"...We certify that the above-mentioned translation corresponds to the
Arabic original and conforms to the practice and faith of the orthodox
Sunni Community (Ahl al-Sunna wa al-Jama\`a)..." Islamic Research
Academy (Majma\` al-Buhuth al-Islamiyyah), al-Azhar. al-Azhar is the
Muslim world's most prestigious institution of higher Islamic learning,
Cairo.

The following article is written by a Sunni brother


