Why Believe in God
==================

The Shiats say: Man is obliged by his reason to know God, and to obey
His commands. In other words, necessity of religion is proved, first of
all, by reason. Sunni scholars say it is necessary to believe in Allah,
but not on the account of reason.

It is necessary because Allah has ordered us to know Him. According to
the Shi'ite point of view, this type of proof creates vicious circle.
Believe in God. why? Because God has ordered it. But we do not know who
God is. Why should we obey Him?

**LIMIT OF LAW**

The Shiats say: God cannot give us a command beyond our strength,
because it is wrong rationally (La Yokalleffollaho nafsan illa vosaaha).
Some Sunni scholars do not agree with it.

**OUR ACTIONS: TAQDIR**

Are our actions really ours? Or we are just a tool in the hands of
Allah! Shia scholars say:

"Taqdir means that, Allah possesses foreknowledge of human action, but
He does not compel anybody to act in any particular way" Shi'i
reference: Shi'ite Creed (al-Itqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh Saduq The
above quote gives evidence to the fact that according to Shia, human has
option either to obey God's rules, or disobey. To make it clear, it
should be explained here, that man's conditions or actions are of two
kinds

(i) Those actions about which he can be advised, ordered, praised or
blamed. Such actions are within his power and are dependent upon his
will.

(ii) Such conditions about which he cannot be praised or blamed, like
life, death, etc. Such conditions are outside of his sphere of will or
power.

For example, we can advise a patient to consult this or that doctor and
remain under his treatment; but we can not advise him to become cured.
Why this difference? Because getting treatment is under his power, but
getting cured is not in his power. It is something which comes from
Allah.

Freedom of action is a gift of Allah. He has given us power, freedom,
strength, limbs, wisdom and everything with which we do any work.

Therefore, we are not independent of Allah, because our freedom is not
only given but even sustained by Him. However our actions are not
compelled by God, because He, after His showing us the right and wrong
ways, and after His encouraging us to do right, has left us to our own
free will. If we go wrong, it is our own choice. Shaykh Saduq stated:

"Our belief in this respect is what has been taught by Imam Jafar al-
Sadiq (the sixth successor/grandson of Prophet): There is no compulsion
(by God) and no relinquishing the authority (of God); but a condition
between these two conditions.

Then Imam was asked: How is it? He said: Suppose you see a man
intending to commit a sin; and you forbade him; but he did not listen to
you; and you left him; and he did commit that sin. Now when he did not
pay attention to you and you left him, nobody can say that you ordered
him or allowed him to sin."

Shi'i reference: Shi'ite Creed (al-Itqadat al-Imamiyyah), by Shaykh
Saduq In other words, we believe that God has given us power and will
and then has left us free to do what we like. At the same time, He has
taught us through prophets, what is right and what is wrong. Now, as He
is Omniscient, He knows what will be our actions in different times of
our life.

But this knowledge does not make Him responsible for our actions more
than a meteorologist can be responsible for cyclones and storms, if his
forecasts comes true. True forecasts are the result, not the cause of
the impending event. The Sunni scholars on the other hand say that Allah
is the Creator of all of our acts:

"No act of any individual, even though it is done purely for his
benefit is independent of the will of Allah for its existence; and there
does not occur in either in physical or extra terrestrial world the wink
of an eye, the hint of a thought, or the most sudden glance, except by
the decree of Allah...of His power, desire and will.

This includes evil and good, benefit and hurt, success and failure, sin
and righteousness, obedience and disobedience, and polytheism or
belief."

**Sunni reference: al-Ghazali (as quoted in Shia of India, p43)**

**PROPHETHOOD**

Based upon their belief of LUTF (Grace), the Shiats believe that it is
incumbent upon Allah to send prophets and their successors in this world
to put people on right path. The Sunni scholars say that it is not
incumbent upon Allah, because they do not accept necessity of Grace.

**SINLESSNESS:**

The Shiats and Sunnis in first instance, and then the Sunnis among
themselves, disagree about the theory of ISMAH (sinlessness; protection)
of the prophets. What is our conception of sinlessness? It is the Grace
of Allah which helps a person to refrain from sins, without effecting in
any way his will and power.

A MASUM (sinless person) has power to commit sins; but he does not even
think about sins because his spiritual standard is so high that such
inferior things do not enter his mind.

The Sunni scholars do not speak with one voice in this subject:

1. They first differ about the point when sinlessness of prophets
begins. Some Sunnis say it is after the declaration of prophet-hood;
others say that it is since childhood.

2. The scope of sinlessness before declaration of prophet-hood: Some
Sunni scholars say that it covers all sins; the majority say that they
are protected from KUFR (infidelity) only.

3. The scope of sinlessness after declaration of prophet-hood: It is
agreed that the prophets do not tell lie after prophet-hood. But what
about other sins? Some Sunni scholars say that they commit other sins
either intentionally or unintentionally; but the majority say that they
could commit it unintentionally, but not intentionally.

4. The minor sins: Some Sunni scholars say it was possible for prophets
to commit minor sins, even intentionally. But that they were protected
from such minor sins which might have degraded them in the eyes of
people.

The Shia point of view about sinlessness is that all the prophets were
sinless and infallible; they did not commit any sin, whether capital or
minor, and whether intentionally or unintentionally; and that they were
sinless from the beginning of their life till their last breath. About
the prophets, Shaykh Saduq wrote:

"Their word is the word of God, their order is the order of God, their
forbidding is the forbidding by God ... And that the Chiefs of the
prophets are five, and they are (called) 'Ulul-Azm' and they are Noah,
Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad (be blessings of Allah upon them all)
and that Muhammad is their Chief and best of all."

**IMAM (LEADER):**

Shiats say that Imam must be appointed by God; that appointment may be
known through the declaration of the Prophet or the preceding Imam. The
Sunni scholars say that Imam (or Caliph, as they prefer to say) can be
either elected, or nominated by the preceding Caliph, or selected by a
committee, or may gain the power through a military coup (as was in the
case of Muawiyah).

Shia scholars say that Imam must be sinless. The Sunni scholars
(including Mutazilites) say that sinlessness is not a condition for
leadership. Even if he is tyrant and sunk in sins (like in the case of
Yazid, or Today's King Fahd), the majority of the scholars from the
shools of Hanbali, Shafi'i, and Maliki discourage people to rise against
that Caliph. They think that they should be presevered.

Shiats say that Imam must possess above all such qualities as
knowledge, bravery, justice, wisdom, piety, love of God etc. The Sunni
scholars say it is not necessary. A person inferior in these qualities
may be elected in preference to a person having all these qualities of
superior degree.

Shiats say that Ali was appointed by Allah to be the successor of the
Prophet, and that the Prophet declared it on several occasions. More
than one hundred of those occasions are recorded in the history. The
Sunni scholars believe that the Prophet did not appoint anybody to be
his successor. This is despite the fact that there are many traditions
in the six authentic Sunni collections which support this assignment.

Wassalam.


