Is the God a Shape-shifter? (does God Have Finger and Leg?)
===========================================================

The Twelver Shi'ites believe that God has no shape, no physical hand,
no physical leg, no physical body, and no visible appearance.

He does not change along with the time, or does not occupy any physical
place. Under no circumstances, God changes. There comes no TIME frame
upon him. He has created time, and physical places. This is one of the
most important bases of shiat.

However, there are quite a few traditions in Sehah (specially Bukhari
and Muslim) in which it is assumed that God has such attributes. Since
shiat sect knows what is wrong with hadith, shiat was very kind not to
declare this sect of sunni as MISGUIDED (or Kafir) so far (because of
this subject only, other subjects have their own place).

This article is already long due to the references I am giving. Only a
few questions have accompanied with these references, and the discussion
will be for future.

**1)- Does the God have finger(s)?**

In the first and the fourth hadith, the prophet smiles AND confirms
this (from sunni sources). In the second and the third, the prophet only
smiles, which is known as confirmation of the prophet toward a
subject.

For your information, all of these traditions are declared as
"Israeeleeat" (which are intered by jews in islamic theology) and
rejected for one simple reason:

They are in logical disagreement with the book of the God.

-------------------------------------

Dr. Mohammad Muhsin Khan
Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara

Kaze Publications.
1529 North Wells Street, Chicago. ILL.60610(USA)
(3rd revised, 1977)(4th revised Edition, March 1979)

Narrated 'Abdullah:

A Jew came to the Prophet and said, "O Muhammad! Allah will hold the
heavens on a Finger, and the mountains on a Finger, and the trees on a
Finger, and all the creation on a Finger, and then He will say, 'I am
the King.' " On that Allah's Apostle smiled till his premolar teeth
became visible, and then recited:--

'No just estimate have they made of Allah such as due to him....(39.67)
'Abdullah added: Allah's Apostle smiled (at the Jew's statement)
expressing his wonder and believe in what was said.

Narrated 'Abdullah:

A man from the people of the scripture came to the Prophet and said, "O
Abal-Qasim! Allah will hold the Heavens upon a Finger, and the Earth on
a Finger and the land on a Finger, and all the creation on a Finger, and
will say, 'I am the King! I am the King!' " I saw the Prophet (after
hearing that), smiling till his premolar teeth became visible, and he
then recited: -- 'No just estimate have they made of Allah such as due
to him... (39.67)

Narrated 'Abdullah:

A Jewish Rabbi came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Muhammad! Allah
will put the Heavens on one finger and the earth on one finger, and the
trees and the rivers on one finger, and the rest of the creation on one
finger, and then will say, pointing out with His Hand, 'I am the King.'
"On that Allah's Apostle smiled and said, "No just estimate have they
made of Allah such as due to Him. (39.67)

Narrated 'Abdullah:

A priest from the Jews came (to the Prophet) and said, "On the Day of
Resurrection, Allah will place all the heavens on one finger, and the
Earth on one finger, and the waters and the land on one finger, and all
the creation on one finger, and then He will shake them and say. 'I am
the King! I am the King!'" I saw the Prophet smiling till his premolar
teeth became visible expressing his amazement and his belief in what he
had said. Then the Prophet recited: 'No just estimate have they made of
Allah such as due to Him (up to)...; High is He above the partners they
attribute to Him.' (39.67)

------------------------------------- Sufuism is almost in every
religion, in jewish, in christianity, in sunni sect, and in shiat sect.
However, Twelver Shi'ites does not agree with this theology. Although
some of knowledgeable people from this sect have accepted this theology,
it is widely rejected.

2)- In the following hadith, the God shifts his shape to allow his
believer to see him and accept him as true God. Just a few more
questions:

a)- How do you know God in this world (right now that you are reading
this article)? Assume that you are a faithful and you will certainly go
to heaven. My question is that based on this hadith, you know God's
shape already, in this world. You will not know God when you see him
first and you will say that he is not your God. Can you tell me how is
your God?

b)- Is the God with the same visisbility of Moon and Sun?

c)- Does the God changes his shape to fit to your definition in the
other day?

d)- Why Allah comes and returns and THEN comes back. My question is why
TIME is passing on him on the other day?

(That is enough. Please be patient and see my comments on the second
hadith.)

(This hadith and the next one are narrated in sahih muslim too:;h
Chapter LXXXI, pp 115-119, \#349, \#350, \#351, \#352, \#353, \#354, and
p1533, \#7078)

-------------------------------------
Sahih al-Bukhari, v9, p390, part (A):

Narrated 'Ata' bin Yazid al-Laithi:

On the authority of Abu Huraira: The people said, "O Allah's Apostle!
Shall we see our Lord on the Day of Resurrection?" The Prophet said, "Do
you have any difficulty in seeing the moon on a full moon night?" They
said, "No, O Allah's Apostle." He said, "Do you have any difficulty in
seeing the sun when there are no clouds?" They said, "No, O Allah's
Apostle." He said, "So you will see Him, like that.

Allah will gather all the people on the Day of Resurrection, and say,
'Whoever worshipped something (in the world) should follow (that
thing),' so, whoever worshipped the sun will follow the sun, and whoever
worshiped the moon will follow the moon, and whoever used to worship
certain (other false) deities, he will follow those deities.

And there will remain only this nation with its good people (or its
hypocrites). (The sub-narrator, Ibrahim is in doubt.) Allah will come to
them and say, 'I am your Lord.' They will (deny Him and) say, 'We will
stay here till our Lord comes, for when our Lord comes, we will
recognize Him.' So Allah will come to them in His appearance which they
know, and will say, 'I am your Lord.' They will say, 'You are our Lord,'
so they will follow Him.

Then a bridge will be laid across Hell (Fire)' I and my followers will
be the first ones to go across it and none will speak on that Day except
the Apostles. And the invocation of the Apostles on that Day will be, 'O
Allah, save! Save!' In Hell (or over The Bridge) there will be hooks
like the thorns of As-Sa'dan (thorny plant).

Have you seen As-Sa'dan? " They replied, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!" He
said, "So those hooks look like the thorns of As-Sa'dan, but none knows
how big they are except Allah. Those hooks will snap the people away
according to their deeds. Some of the people will stay in Hell (be
destroyed) because of their (evil) deeds, and some will be cut or torn
by the hooks (and fall into Hell) and some will be punished and then
relieved. When Allah has finished His Judgments among the people, He
will take whomever He will out of Hell through His Mercy.

He will then order the angels to take out of the Fire all those who
used to worship none but Allah from among those whom Allah wanted to be
merciful to and those who testified (in the world) that none has the
right to be worshipped but Allah. The angels will recognize them in the
Fire by the marks of prostration (on their foreheads),

for the Fire will eat up all the human body except the mark caused by
prostration as Allah has forbidden the Fire to eat the mark of
prostration. They will come out of the (Hell) Fire, completely burnt and
then the water of life will be poured over them and they will grow under
it as does a seed that comes in the mud of the torrent.

Then Allah will finish the judgments among the people, and there will
remain one man facing the (Hell) Fire and he will be the last person
among the people of Hell to enter Paradise. He will say, 'O my Lord!
Please turn my face away from the fire because its air has hurt me and
its severe heat has burnt me.'

So he will invoke Allah in the way Allah will wish him to invoke, and
then Allah will say to him, 'If I grant you that, will you then ask for
anything else?' He will reply, 'No, by Your Power, (Honor) I will not
ask You for anything else.' He will give his Lord whatever promises and
covenants Allah will demand.

So Allah will turn his face away from Hell (Fire). When he will face
Paradise and will see it, he will remain quiet for as long as Allah will
wish him to remain quiet, then he will say, 'O my Lord! Bring me near to
the gate of Paradise.'

Allah will say to him, 'Didn't you give your promises and covenants
that you would never ask for anything more than what you had been given?
Woe on you, O Adam's son! How treacherous you are!' He will say, 'O my
lord,' and will keep on invoking Allah till He says to him, 'If I give
what you are asking, will you then ask for anything else?' He will
reply, 'No, by Your (Honor) Power, I will not ask for anything else.'

Then he will give covenants and promises to Allah and then Allah will
bring him near to the gate of Paradise. When he stands at the gate of
Paradise, Paradise will be opened and spread before him, and he will see
its splendor and pleasures whereupon he will remain quiet as long as
Allah will wish him to remain quiet, and then he will say, O my Lord!
Admit me into Paradise.'

Allah will say, 'Didn't you give your covenants and promises that you
would not ask for anything more than what you had been given?' Allah
will say, 'Woe on you, O Adam's son! How treacherous you are! '

The man will say, 'O my Lord! Do not make me the most miserable of Your
creation,' and he will keep on invoking Allah till Allah will laugh
because of his sayings, and when Allah will laugh because of him, He
will say to him, 'Enter Paradise,' and when he will enter it, Allah will
say to him, 'Wish for anything.'

So he will ask his Lord, and he will wish for a great number of things,
for Allah Himself will remind him to wish for certain things by saying,
'(Wish for) so-and-so.' When there is nothing more to wish for, Allah
will say, 'This is for you, and its equal (is for you) as well."

'Ata' bin Yazid added: Abu Sa'id al-Khudri who was present with Abu
Huraira, did not deny whatever the latter said, but when Abu Huraira
said that Allah had said, "That is for you and its equal as well," Abu
Sa'id al-Khudri said, "And ten times as much, O Abu Huraira!" Abu
Huraira said, "I do not remember, except his saying, 'That is for you
and its equal as well.

'" Abu Sa'id al-Khudri then said, "I testify that I remember the
Prophet saying, 'That is for you, and ten times as much.' ' Abu Huraira
then added, "That man will be the last person of the people of Paradise
to enter Paradise."

In the following hadith which is very similar to that of mentioned
above, God has a special sign on his leg (or Shin). Would you please
tell us when you have observed such sign, what is this sign and how
misguided shiates can observe this sign such that they may know their
lord too? Please be kind, and let shiat become GUIDED. Thanks.

Narrated Abu Sa'id al-Khudri:

We said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we see our Lord on the Day of
Resurrection?" He said, "Do you have any difficulty in seeing the sun
and the moon when the sky is clear?" We said, "No." He said, "So you
will have no difficulty in seeing your Lord on that Day as you have no
difficulty in seeing the sun and the moon (in a clear sky).

" The Prophet then said, "Somebody will then announce, 'Let every
nation follow what they used to worship.' So the companions of the cross
will go with their cross, and the idolators (will go) with their idols,
and the companions of every god (false deities) (will go) with their
god, till there remain those who used to worship Allah, both the
obedient ones and the mischievous ones, and some of the people of the
Scripture.

Then Hell will be presented to them as if it were a mirage. Then it
will be said to the Jews, "What did you use to worship?' They will
reply, 'We used to worship Ezra, the son of Allah.' It will be said to
them, 'You are liars, for Allah has neither a wife nor a son. What do
you want (now)?' They will reply, 'We want You to provide us with
water.' Then it will be said to them 'Drink,' and they will fall down in
Hell (instead). Then it will be said to the Christians, 'What did you
use to worship?'

They will reply, 'We used to worship Messiah, the son of Allah.' It
will be said, 'You are liars, for Allah has neither a wife nor a son.
What: do you want (now)?' They will say, 'We want You to provide us with
water.' It will be said to them, 'Drink,' and they will fall down in
Hell (instead). When there remain only those who used to worship Allah
(Alone), both the obedient ones and the mischievous ones, it will be
said to them, 'What keeps you here when all the people have gone?'

They will say, 'We parted with them (in the world) when we were in
greater need of them than we are today, we heard the call of one
proclaiming, 'Let every nation follow what they used to worship,' and
now we are waiting for our Lord.' Then the Almighty will come to them in
a shape other than the one which they saw the first time, and He will
say, 'I am your Lord,' and they will say, 'You are not our Lord.' And
none will speak: to Him then but the Prophets, and then it will be said
to them, 'Do you know any sign by which you can recognize Him?'

They will say. 'The Shin,' and so Allah will then uncover His Shin
whereupon every believer will prostrate before Him and there will remain
those who used to prostrate before Him just for showing off and for
gaining good reputation. These people will try to prostrate but their
backs will be rigid like one piece of a wood (and they will not be able
to prostrate). Then the bridge will be laid across Hell." We, the
companions of the Prophet said, "O Allah's Apostle! What is the
bridge?'

He said, "It is a slippery (bridge) on which there are clamps and
(Hooks like) a thorny seed that is wide at one side and narrow at the
other and has thorns with bent ends. Such a thorny seed is found in Najd
and is called As-Sa'dan. Some of the believers will cross the bridge as
quickly as the wink of an eye, some others as quick as lightning, a
strong wind, fast horses or she-camels.

So some will be safe without any harm; some will be safe after
receiving some scratches, and some will fall down into Hell (Fire). The
last person will cross by being dragged (over the bridge)." The Prophet
said, "You (Muslims) cannot be more pressing in claiming from me a right
that has been clearly proved to be yours than the believers in
interceding with Almighty for their (Muslim) brothers on that Day, when
they see themselves safe.

They will say, 'O Allah! (Save) our brothers (for they) used to pray
with us, fast with us and also do good deeds with us.' Allah will say,
'Go and take out (of Hell) anyone in whose heart you find faith equal to
the weight of one (gold) Dinar.' Allah will forbid the Fire to burn the
faces of those sinners. They will go to them and find some of them in
Hell (Fire) up to their feet, and some up to the middle of their legs.

So they will take out those whom they will recognize and then they will
return, and Allah will say (to them), 'Go and take out (of Hell) anyone
in whose heart you find faith equal to the weight of one half Dinar.'
They will take out whomever they will recognize and return, and then
Allah will say, 'Go and take out (of Hell) anyone in whose heart you
find faith equal to the weight of an atom (or a smallest ant), and so
they will take out all those whom they will recognize." Abu Sa'id said:
If you do not believe me then read the Holy Verse:--

'Surely! Allah wrongs not even of the weight of an atom (or a smallest
ant) but if there is any good (done) He doubles it.' (4.40) The Prophet
added, "Then the prophets and Angels and the believers will intercede,
and (last of all) the Almighty (Allah) will say, 'Now remains My
Intercession.

He will then hold a handful of the Fire from which He will take out
some people whose bodies have been burnt, and they will be thrown into a
river at the entrance of Paradise, called the water of life.

They will grow on its banks, as a seed carried by the torrent grows.
You have noticed how it grows beside a rock or beside a tree, and how
the side facing the sun is usually green while the side facing the shade
is white.

Those people will come out (of the River of Life) like pearls, and they
will have (golden) necklaces, and then they will enter Paradise
whereupon the people of Paradise will say, 'These are the people
emancipated by the Beneficent. He has admitted them into Paradise
without them having done any good deeds and without sending forth any
good (for themselves).' Then it will be said to them, 'For you is what
you have seen and its equivalent as well.'"

-------------------------------------
The following traditions are also narrated in Bukhari.

Narrated Jarir:

We were sitting with the Prophet and he looked at the moon on the night
of the full-moon and said, "You people will see your Lord as you see
this full moon, and you will have no trouble in seeing Him, so if you
can avoid missing (through sleep or business, etc.) a prayer before
sunrise (Fajr) and a prayer before sunset (Asr) you must do so." (See
HadithNo.529,V1)

Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah:

The Prophet said, "You will definitely see your Lord with your own
eyes."

Narrated Jarir:

Allah's Apostle came out to us on the night of the full moon and said,
"You will see your Lord on the Day of Resurrection as you see this (full
moon) and you will have no difficulty in seeing Him."

-------------------------------------

The above traditions have been taken from:

Dr. Mohammad Muhsin Khan
Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara

Sahih Muslim,
Rendered into English by Abdul Hamid Siddiqi
Printed at Hafeez Press,
Sh.Muhammad Ashraf

Kashmiri Bazar, Lahore(Pakistan)


