The Way That the God Fills the Hell
===================================

As you have realized by now, The God has a shape as human, 30 meters
tall, two legs with a special sign on one of his legs. This leg is very
helpful. Once it would be used to say "shut up" to the Hell. I am also
curious to know how many of you will use your feet to shut off the fire.
Thanks.

Narrated Abu Huraira:

(that the Prophet said) "It will be said to the Hell, 'Are you filled?'
It will say, 'Are there any more (to come)?' On that Allah will put His
Foot on it, and it will say 'Qati! Qati! (Enough! Enough!)."

Narrated Abu Huraira:

The Prophet said, "Paradise and the Fire (Hell) argued, and the Fire
(Hell) said, "I have been given the privilege of receiving the arrogant
and the tyrants.' Paradise said, 'What is the matter with me? Why do
only the weak and the humble among the people enter me?' On that, Allah
said to Paradise.

'You are My Mercy which I bestow on whoever I wish of my servants.'
Then Allah said to the (Hell) Fire, 'You are my (means of) punishment by
which I punish whoever I wish of my slaves. And each of you will have
its fill.' As for the Fire (Hell), it will not be filled till Allah puts
His Foot over it whereupon it will say, 'Qati! Qati!' At that time it
will be filled, and its different parts will come closer to each other;
and Allah will not wrong any of His created beings. As regards Paradise,
Allah will create a new creation to fill it with."

Also, this Hell can not bear its hot environment on itself. I just do
not understand how such hot environment can creat cold weather too
!!. -

Narrated Abu Huraira:

Allah's Apostle said, "The (Hell) Fire complained to its Lord saying,
'O my Lord! My different parts eat up each other.' So, He allowed it to
take two breaths, one in the winter and the other in summer, and this is
the reason for the severe heat and the bitter cold you find (in
weather)."

All traditions are from Sahih Bukhari:

The translation of the meaning of Sahih al-Bukhari Arabic-English

Dr. Mohammad Muhsin Khan
Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara

Kaze Publications.

1529 North Wells Street, Chicago. ILL.60610(USA)
(3rd revised, 1977)(4th revised Edition, March 1979)

Subject: Abu Hurairah or Paul?

Perhaps you have heard of the name "Paul" (spelling?). There was a Paul
as the disciple of Jesus. But this famous Paul is not that one. He is a
person who (some say) did not see Jesus himself except in his dreams. He
was against the christians on those days, and after a revelation in a
dream, he became christian, and he became the father of todays'
christianity. Nobody asked him those days:

Where have you been my son when Jesus was on the cross?

Why do you claim that you can now expand, explain, and defend the
religion which you fought for a few years?

My point is that: He became the base of christianity and the source of
revelation. Everything, then, came through him. Several rules and
theology of christianity, all came through his sentences which were not
in the original religion at the beginning. How many sentences, you
think, caused christians to deviate from their true roots?

There is a person named as Abu Hurairah whose history I will bring
after a while. This man says himself:

Narrated Abu Huraira:

There is none among the companions of the Prophet who has narrated more
Hadiths than I except 'Abdallah bin Amr (bin al-'As) who used to write
them and I never did the same.

All nine volumns of Sahih Bukhari contains 7068 traditions. From these
traditions, about 1100 traditions are narrated from this man, in other
words, 15.56% of the whole traditions in Sahih Bukhari (almost 1/6). (I
will soon give you the number of traditions narrated by Abu Hurairah in
Sahih Muslim.)

As I showed on "Abu Huraira or Loui Pasteur", he contradicted himself
as well as science. The following hadith is another one where he clearly
narrates a hadith which is not in accordance with what Aisha and Umm
Salamh narrate. If we accept that Aisha and Umm Salamh were in the house
of the prophet more than any other wives, we can easily see the problem
here.

{This is in page 81, in a section titled as:

Is a fasting person gets up in the morning in the state of Janaba (will
his fast be valid?)

This hadith is translated by the translator ONLY up to the end of the
first paragraph. He then stopped translating. However, the arabic text
is still there. The rest is my own translation. If you do not want to
trust me, I suggest you refer to the arabic text. In addition, I will
bring you more sources for the explanation and translation I made.

Narrated Aisha and Umm Salam: At times Allah Apostle (may peace be upon
him) used to get up in the morning in the state of Janaba after having
sexual relations with his wives. He would then take a bath and fast.

Marwan said to Abdu-arrahman ibn Hareth: Swear to God that by (hearing)
this, Abu Huraira will scream. At this time, Marwan was in Madinah. Abu
Bakr said: Abd-arrahman did not like this. Then it happened that we
gathered in Dhi-Hulaifah where Abu Hurairah had a piece of earth.
Abd-arrahman told Abu Hurairah: I am telling you this, and if Marwan did
not ask me (by swear) for this, I would not have been mentioning this to
you.

Then he mentioned the (traditions) narrated by Aisha and Umm Salamh. He
(Abu Hurairah) said: al-fadhl Ibn Abbas narrated me so and he is more
knowledgeable. Hammam and Ibn Abdullah Ibn Umar narrated from Abu
Hurairah that the prophet ordered for opening the sawm (and not to
fast), (obviously) the first chain (from Aisha and Umm Salam) is more
trustable.

-------------------------------------
The above traditions are taken from:

The translation of the meaning of Sahih al-Bukhari Arabic-English

Dr. Mohammad Muhsin Khan
Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara

Kaze Publications.
In article elrabaa@sun14.vlsi.uwaterloo.ca (M. ElRabaa) writes:

Again Kamran is spelling his misconceptions into the net ...

1) Abu-Hurirah (RA) stayed very close to the Prophet (alihi assalato
wassalam) for few years, he did not go to markets Dear Brother Mohammad,
I would like to ask you the following question:

Do you know for how long Abu-Hurirah Has stayed with the Prophet?

The answer is found in the following sunni referances:

1. al-Milala wa al-Nihal, by iben al-Jawzia, Pub. Egypt.
2. Sirat iben Hisham, Pub. Egypt.

Abu-Hurirah became a moslem only two years before the Prophet (s.a.w)
died. Therefore, How can he report some 2000 hadith in the Saheeh
al-Bukhari alone, while there are olny very few hadiths are reported by
Imam Ali, Imam Al-Hasan,Imam al-Husain, or Fatimah al-zahrah. How would
you explain such things ? I am intrested in your objective and
scientific answer supported by some referances.

Prophet (alihi assalato wassalam) almost 24 hrs a day !!! That is why
he narrated a lot of ahadith ...

2) He also narrated a lot of ahadith which he heard from other sahaba
(RAA) ... sahaba were good muslims and trusted each other, so he took
some ahadith from the sahaba ...

As for the example of contradiction Kamran gives, all I can say is
this, go and check a fiqh book !!!

I mentioned this before several times ... to make a ruling of ahadith,
you have to check fiqh books ... it is not a straight forword matter ...
if someone is interested and does not have a fiqh book (like Fiqh
El-sunnah) pls Dear brother, I have The above mentioned book, Fiqh
al-sunnah, by Said Sabiq, Published in Egypt. Would you kindly give me
the page number so that I could look by myself.

On the other hand, since you have Fiqh al-Sunnah book please notce that
when Said Sabiq ( one of very respected sunni scholars and the auther of
the well konwn books such as the above mentioned book) talk about some
issues , he some time refer to the Shiat point of view of that issue.
For example : Zawaj al-Mutah, Qanoon al-Hawal al-Shakhesaih (the Low of
Marriage).Also, notice his tone when he talk about the shiat moslems or
scholars!

Please, after you look at the above two chapter of the book let me know
what you think.


The only hadith in this article was taken from:

**The translation of the meaning of Sahih al-Bukhari
Arabic-English
Dr. Mohammad Muhsin Khan
Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara**

Among all sahabah and those who visited the prophet, only a few
narrated MOST of the traditions inside Sehah. Their number is fewer that
the number of fingers. While other traditions say that at least 1400
people were acompanied the prophet in Hudaybiyah. The Madinah itself had
more than 3000 inhabitants.In the Battle of Macca (Fath-al-mobeen), more
than 10,000 people were participant.

In the last Hajj of the prophet, more than the same number were with
the prophet. From all of these people, only a few have been mentioned
inside Sehah. Some of these people, such as Abu Hurairah were converted
to Islam only three years before the death of the prophet. Another, for
example, is Aisha, the mother of faithful. She narrated a lot of
traditions too. Let see how old she was:

Narrated Hisham's father:

Khadija died three years before the Prophet departed to Medina. He
stayed there for two years or so and then he married 'Aisha when she was
a girl of six years of age, and he consumed that marriage when she was
nine years old.

Some simple computations say that:

1)- The prophet engaged with Aisha one year before his movement to
Madinah. (One year before Hijrah). At that time, Aisha was six years
old. (Another hadith narrated by Aisha herself says that she was playing
with baby-tools on those days.)

2)- The prophet married her in the SECOND year of Hijrah, when Aisha
was 9 years old.

3)- Assuming that the prophet lived only 10 years after Hijrah, Aisha
lived only 8 years with the prophet in her adult age.

One more point should be added that , as I will give the exact
references, a female easily forgets exact wordings, or the words
themselves. This is the nature of woman. Aisha did not have a superior
nature of humanity too. It is normal to expect that she might have
forgotten some of traditions in its true form.

Let us see some numbers now. I am going to give you some statistics
about the number of traditions narrated by different people. I do not
claim these numbers are accurate, since I did not count them by finger.
The only persons whose traditions are counted by me and in person is
Ali-Ibn-Abitaleeb and his sons. Some of traditions which are written
repeatedly by Imam Bukhari are also considered in the following numbers.
As the result, you have to sometime reduce 100 from them.

-----------------------------------------------
Total number of traditions in 9 volumns of Bukhari:

-----------------------------------------------

Aisha the mother of faithful: 1250 (17.68%)


Abu Hurairah: 1100 (15.56%)

Ibn-Umar, son of Umar: 1100 (15.56%)

-----------------------------------------------

Anas-Ibn-Malik: 900 (12.73%)

Abdullah-Ibn-Abbas: 700 (9.9%)

-----------------------------------------------

Jobair-Ibn-Abdullah: 275 (3.89%)

Abu-Musa-Ashari: 165 (2.33%)

Abu-Said-Al-Khedri: 130 (1.84%)

-----------------------------------------------

Ali-Ibn-Abitaleeb: 79 (1.11%)

Umar-Ibn-Khattab: 50 (0.71%)

Umm Salamh: 48 (0.68%)

Abdullah-Ibn-Masud: 45 (0.64%)


Muawiyah-Ibn-Abusofyan: 10 (0.14%)

----------------------------------------------

Hasan-Ibn-Ali: 8 (0.11%)

Ali-Ibn-Husain: 6 (0.08%)

Husain-Ibn-Ali: 2 (0.03%)

---------------------------------------------- (83% on the whole)

As you can see, there is so few traditions narrated from
Ali-Ibn-Abitalib, and specially his sons. I have not given other numbers
for other narrators, yet. The author of this book, Imam Bukhari was
living in the life time of Imam Bagher, son of Ali-Ibn-Husain, and Imam
Jafar.

He did not narrate ONE single hadith from them. This is when that Imam
Jafar and Imam Bagher were narrating hadith from their fathers up to
Ali-Ibn-Abitaleeb and finally from the prophet himself. In other words,
Imam Bukhari did not accept that these sons of Ali-Ibn-Abitaleeb are
WORTHY of narrating hadith, and he thought that they are liars.

If you look at the sources of Hadith of shiat, you will find that these
people were not silent. They narrated a lot traditions from their
fathers up to Ali-Ibn-Abitaleeb, and finally from the prophet. Is it not
interesting?

**Subject: Abu Huraira (Part 1: A confession?)**

The following hadith is not strange as far as the content of the hadith
goes. At the beginning, Abu Huraira is narrating the hadith from the
prophet. When people asked him whether he heard this hadith from the
prophet or not, he said that he did not, and he narrated by his
ownself.

1)- What I would like you to do for me is to use your keyboard and
clearly partition the first hadith to two parts:

a)- The part that is spoken by the prophet, and
b)- the part that is spoken ONLY by Abu Hurairah.

2)- I would like you to clearly tell me why people asked him whether
these words are spoken by the prophet. As far as my knowledge says,
people asked this question only if the hadith was really strange to
them, such as the traditions which are talking about future and some
events which were unbelievable for them, and is taking place these days.
What was strange in this hadith, and why people asked Abu Huraira
whether he is telling what he heard from the prophet or not.

3)- I would like you to clearly tell me what would have happened if
people did not ask Abu Huraira whether any part of the hadith is truly
spoken by the prophet or not.

4)- If people did not ask Abu Huraira whether the hadith is told by the
prophet or not, apparently, people would have considered the whole
hadith as the words of the prophet. The truth was, in any case, that Abu
huraira said something of his own and attached some EXTRA words to a
hadith narrated (perhaps) spoken by the prophet. I would like you to
clearly tell me why do you trust such person who adds some words of his
own to the words of the prophet.

5)- Would you kindly quote all the traditions which are narrated by Abu
Huraira and accepted by Imam Bukhari and Muslim, and clearly draw a line
between parts which are spoken by the prophet and the words spoken by
Abu Huraira.

I really do not understand how a man allows himself to say something
which has not heard from the prophet and to attach it with prophet words
without even warning in advance. Or, why he tells something of his own
before clearly stating at the beginning of his own words that these are
his words and not the prophet?

The second example clearly shows that Abu huraira has added to what the
prophet (probably) said. How about cases where nobody has reported the
something is extra given by Abu Huraira?

Narrated Abu Huraira:

"The Prophet said, 'The best alms is that which is given when one is
rich, and a giving hand is better than a taking one, and you should
start first to support your dependents.' A wife says, 'You should either
provide me with food or divorce me.' A slave says, 'Give me food and
enjoy my service." A son says, "Give me food; to whom do you leave me?"
The people said, "O Abu Huraira! Did you hear that from Allah's Apostle
?" He said, "No, it is from my own self."

-------------------------------------

I would like to know why Abu Huraira USED TO add some other places as
well?

Anas bin Malik said:

Allah's Apostle said, "Do not make drinks in Ad-Dubba' nor in
al-Muzaffat. Abu Huraira used to add to them al-Hantam and An-Naqir.

-------------------------------------

The above hadith is taken from:

**The translation of the meaning of Sahih al-Bukhari
Arabic-English
Dr. Mohammad Muhsin Khan
Islamic University, Medina al-Munawwara**

**Subject: Abu Huraira (Part 2: The origin of Abu Huraira?)**

Sunni brothers usually quote a few verses from Quran to show that the
sahabah who participated in the pledge of Hudaibyia have high standard
(virtue) and are considered very respectfully. Fine. I do not want to
discuss the correctness of this interpretation and understanding here.

Did you know that Abu Huraira was not muslim on those days, and was not
among muslims on those days, and certainly did not witness the plegdge
of Hudaibyia? Yes, Abu Huraira never witnessed the plege of Hudaibyia.

Abu Huraira was a Jew, became muslim on the day of Khaibar which took
place one year after the pledge of Hudaibyia, and spent ONLY three years
with the prophet.

1)- Abu Huraira became muslim on the day of Khaibar. This is testified
by Jabir ibn Abdullah. (Second hadith)

Abu Huraira came to the Prophet during the day of Khaibar.

I do not need to emphasize this point that the battle of Khaibar took
place between muslims and Jews. Abu Huraira was a Jew before he became
muslim.

2)- Abu Huraira was with the prophet only three years. (He himself
testifies in the first hadith.)

I enjoyed the company of Allah's Apostle for three years

3)- Perhaps, you better know how others greeted him when he became
muslim on that day.

Narrated Abu Huraira:

I enjoyed the company of Allah's Apostle for three years, and during
the other years of my life, never was I so anxious to understand the
(Prophet's) traditions as I was during those three years. I heard him
saying, beckoning with his hand in this way, "Before the Hour you will
fight with people who will have hairy shoes and live in al-Bariz."
(Sufyan, the sub-narrator once said, "And they are the people of
al-Bazir.")

Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:

That he fought in a Ghazwa towards Najd along with Allah's Apostle and
when Allah's Apostle returned, he too, returned along with him. The time
of the afternoon nap overtook them when they were in a valley full of
thorny trees. Allah's Apostle dismounted and the people dispersed
amongst the thorny trees, seeking the shade of the trees. Allah's
Apostle took shelter under a Samura tree and hung his sword on it.

We slept for a while when Allah's Apostle suddenly called us, and we
went to him, to find a bedouin sitting with him. Allah's Apostle said,
"This (bedouin) took my sword out of its sheath while I was asleep. When
I woke up, the naked sword was in his hand and he said to me, 'Who can
save you from me?, I replied, 'Allah.' Now here he is sitting." Allah's
Apostle did not punish him (for that).

Through another group of narrators, Jabir said, "We were in the company
of the Prophet (during the battle of) Dhat-ur-Riqa', and we came across
a shady tree and we left it for the Prophet (to take rest under its
shade). A man from the pagans came while the Prophet's sword was hanging
on the tree. He took it out of its sheath secretly and said (to the
Prophet ), 'Are you afraid of me?' The Prophet said, 'No.' He said, 'Who
can save you from me?' The Prophet said, Allah.'

The companions of the Prophet threatened him, then the Iqama for the
prayer was announced and the Prophet offered a two Rakat Fear prayer
with one of the two batches, and that batch went aside and he offered
two Rak'a-t with the other batch. So the Prophet offered four Rakat but
the people offered two Rakat only."

(The sub-narrator) Abu Bishr added, "The man was Ghaurath bin al-Harith
and the battle was waged against Muharib Khasafa." Jabir added, "We were
with the Prophet at Nakhl and he offered the Fear prayer." Abu Huraira
said, "I offered the Fear prayer with the Prophet during the Ghazwa
(i.e. the battle) of Najd." Abu Huraira came to the Prophet during the
day of Khaibar.

Narrated 'Anbasa bin Said:

Abu Huraira came to the Prophet and asked him (for a share from the
Khaibar booty). On that, one of the sons of Said bin al-'As said to him,
"O Allah's Apostle! Do not give him." Abu Huraira then said (to the
Prophet ) "This is the murderer of Ibn Qauqal." Sa'id's son said, "How
strange! A guinea pig coming from Qadum Ad-Dan!"

Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle sent Aban from Medina to Najd as
the commander of a Sariya. Aban and his companions came to the Prophet
at Khaibar after the Prophet had conquered it, and the reins of their
horses were made of the fire of date palm trees. I said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Do not give them a share of the booty." on, that, Aban said (to
me), "Strange! You suggest such a thing though you are what you are, O
guinea pig coming down from the top of Ad-Dal (a lotus tree)! "On that
the Prophet said, "O Aban, sit down ! " and did not give them any
share.

Narrated Said:

Aban bin Said came to the Prophet and greeted him. Abu Huraira said, "O
Allah's Apostle! This (Aban) is the murderer of the Ibn Qauqal." (On
hearing that), Aban said to Abu Huraira, "How strange your saying is!
You, a guinea pig, descending from Qadum Dan, blaming me for (killing) a
person whom Allah favored (with martyrdom) with my hand, and whom He
forbade to degrade me with his hand.'


