Women' Treatment By Unbelievers
===============================

In a society which is governed by superstition, ignorance and self
interest of the elite, the female gender is oppressed to the fullest
extreme and she is always considered as a lowly being in comparison to
men. Her rights are usurped by the influential class and she seldom has
the opportunity to voice her grievances.

The Qur'an detests such a mentality which considers females to be of a
lower worth than males, for we are clearly told that in the sight of
God, every human child, regardless of race, gender, or social
affiliation is equally honored and worthy of respect:

"And indeed We have honored every Human Child.." (17:70)

The Qur'an informs us that in a society of unbelievers, the female
gender is despised and a son is preferred over a daughter. In Sura Al
Nahl their mentality is identified:

"When news is brought to one of them of (the birth of) a female (child)
his face darkens and he is filled with inward grief! With shame does he
hide himself from his people because of the bad news he has had! Shall
he retain it on (sufferance and) contempt or bury it in the dust? Ah!
what an evil (choice) they decide on?" (16:58-59)

In such a society, the female gender is not only despised, but she is
also deprived of the nourishment that was to be meant equally for her as
well as her male counterpart. The unbelievers are identified to restrict
females from the sustenance that was meant for the consumption of both
the genders, on the basis of self made traditions:

"They say: "What is in the wombs of such and such cattle is specially
reserved (for food) for our men and forbidden to our women; but if it is
still-born then all have share therein. For their (false) attribution
(of superstitions to God) He will soon punish them: for He is full of
wisdom and knowledge." (6:139)

Such is the treatment imparted by the unbelievers to the feminine
gender. In any society, where males are preferred over females, where
females are deprived of their essential nutrition, such should be
identified as a society of disbelievers in the divine values, for Allah
has informed us in His Book, that the birth of a male or a female is in
accordance with His laws of nature and not something to raise
discrimination against:

"Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He creates what
He pleases; He grants to whom He pleases daughters (in accordance with
His laws) and grants to whom He pleases sons (in accordance with His
laws). Or He makes them of both sorts, male and female; and He makes
whom He pleases barren (in accordance with His natural laws) ; surely He
is the Knowing, the Powerful." (42:49-50)

A child is born not only of a father, but also a mother, therefore it
should not be subjected to any bias on account of its birth:

"O mankind! We created you from a single (pair) of a male and a female
and made you into nations and tribes that ye may know each other (not
that ye may despise (each other). Verily the most honoured of you in the
sight of God is (he who is) the most righteous of you. And God has full
knowledge and is well acquainted (with all things)." (49:13)


Now let us proceed to see what would be the status of women in a
society which is governed by Quranic principles.

**Right To Acquire Education**

The Qur'an has stated that the acquisition of education is compulsory
for all the believers. About the messenger it is stated that he taught
the Book of Allah to his audience, which included men as well as
women:

"He it is Who raised among the inhabitants of Mecca a messenger from
among themselves, who recites to them His verses and provides
development to their personalities, and teaches them the Book and the
Wisdom, although they were before certainly in clear error." (62:2)

For imparting knowledge, no fee was charged:

"Say: I do not ask you any reward except that any who wills, may take
the way to his Sustainer." (25:57)

In the acquisition of knowledge, women are also included, as the wives
of the Nabi (S.A.W) were commanded:

"And keep to mind what is recited in your houses of the communications
of Allah and the wisdom; surely Allah is Knower of subtleties, Aware."
(33:34)

Thus the Qur'an has stipulated that women should also be educated and
trained to know the realities of life.


