Women's Participation in Government
===================================

The Qur'an states that one of the most important duties of the
organization of Believers which enforces the Qur'anic laws is to "order
that which is recognized by the divine laws and forbid what is
unauthentic".

The Qur'an has a specific term for this duty which is known as "amr bil
maruf wa nahy an il munkar". This means ordering all things recognized
by the law of Allah as right and forbidding all that which is
un-authentic. This was among the functions of Nabi (SAW) as he was the
first leader of the Islamic state:

"He orders them with Al-Maruf (what is recognized by the divine laws)
and forbids them from Al-Munkar (that which is termed unauthentic by the
divine laws), and makes lawful to them the good things and makes
unlawful to them impure things, and removes from them their burden and
the shackles which were upon them." (7:157)

This function of ordering with Al-Maruf and forbidding from Al-Munkar,
is not just a matter of mere sermons from mosques only, but the Qur'an
states that this is the duty of an Islamic government:

"Those who, if We establish them in the land, establish Salat and give
Zakat and order with Al Maruf (what is recognized by the divine laws)
and forbid from Al-Munkar (that which is termed unauthentic by the
divine laws); and Allah's is the end of affairs."(22:41)

In this most crucial responsibility of an Islamic government, the
Qur'an has included men as well as women:

"And (as for) the believing men and the believing women, they are
guardians of each other; they order with Al Maruf and forbid from Al
Munkar and establish Salat and give Zakat, and obey Allah and His
messenger; (as for) these, Allah will show mercy to them; surely Allah
is Mighty, Wise." (9:71)

Thus both men as well as women run the government together in a state
which is established on Qur'anic principles. Women are also to take an
active part in running the affairs of the state. The Qur'an has also
narrated the example of Queen Saba, who was the leader of a Nation and
this implies that women are capable of being equal participants in
government along side with men. See Sura 27:23-44.

**Girl's Share In Inheritance**

Often it is cited that Islam discriminates against women by giving them
a lesser share in inheritance than their male counterparts. However this
view is not quite correct. The Qur'an has given equal share to women
with the exception of the daughter of the deceased. For just this
instance we are informed by the Qur'an that the share of a son is equal
to that of two daughters:

"Allah enjoins you concerning your children: The male shall have the
equal of the portion of two females.." (4:11)

To comprehend the reason for this division, it should be understood
that the Qur'an establishes a society in which responsibility of
acquiring livelihood lies with the men and it is not an obligation on
women to provide for her husband and family. A woman is also
incapacitated during certain periods due to her natural disposition
(pregnancy).

It is thus apparent that a man should get a larger portion from the
division of resources, as he has been laid with the responsibility of
the provision of maintenance to his family. That is why, in inheritance,
boy's share has been kept twice as much of a girl.

Daughters have neither been made responsible for their own, nor their
family's expenditure. But on the other hand, a son has to maintain not
only himself, but his wife and family as well. As such, he should be
vested with a larger share.

Where the dispersion of inheritance is amidst the people of the same
generation, as is the case of a brother and sister (in case the deceased
was issue-less and parents were still living) each of them gets one
sixth (equal).

"..and if a man or a woman leaves property to be inherited by neither
parents nor offspring, and he (or she) has a brother or a sister, then
each of them two shall have the sixth.." (4:12)

For parents, it is again one sixth each for mother and father.

"..and as for his parents, each of them shall have the sixth of what he
has left if he has a child.." (4:11)

Therefore, it is not correct to state that the Quran has made a general
rule that the woman's share is half of the man's; it is only so for sons
and daughters, members of the future generation or others where the
situation is similar that the male is alloted more than the female.

On the other hand, in a situation in which men are neglecting this duty
of theirs and it is feared that the woman would be rendered
impoverished, the Quran gives authority that, in a will, a person can
divide his property as he pleases according to the dire straits of the
circumstances.

The division of inheritance as given in the Quran is only applicable if
a person dies without leaving a will, or if his will does not cover all
his whole property. Thus it is evident that apportioning a lesser share
for a daughter neither lessens her rights nor degrades her status in the
society as against the man.

**Are Men A Degree Above Women?**

People having a narrow look at the guidance of Allah's Book, are often
seen intimating that men are superior to women. They back up this
statement just by a portion of verse 2:228 of Sura Al-Baqara, and do not
present the whole context, but rather reach this short sighted
conclusion and imply that Islam maintains the superiority of men against
women.

It is an irony that the very verse which equates rights and obligations
of gender is usually quoted to say that men are superior to women.

What they fail to realize is that in matters of biological construction
men and women are different and have certain rights related to that
aspect (i.e. maternity leaves are for women, not men) but apart from
biological disposition, both men and women are equal according to Qur'an
and both are equally capable and responsible for developing those
qualities in themselves which the Qur'an has said are essential for
believers. The Qur'an says:

"..And they (women) shall have rights similar to the rights against
them in a just manner.." (2:228)

In other words, for every responsibility given to them, they acquire a
right. This is the equality they have been granted. Thus men and women
have same rights as each other. The above verse continues to say:

"..and they have rights similar to the rights against them in a just
manner, and the men are a degree above them.." (2:228)

It would be contradictory to conclude from the statement: "li Rijaale
alayhenaa darja" "men are a degree above them" that men are superior to
women, as at one hand the verse says that women and men have rights
similar to each other, and the implication that men are superior, will
contradict this impression..

One gender cannot be superior to another if their rights and
obligations are equal. The word used by the Quran is "Daraja" meaning
"degree". This "degree" can be understood easily by reviewing the whole
verse. The context of this verse informs us that it deals with the
conditions attached to remarriage after divorce. The verse is:

"And the divorced women should keep themselves in waiting for three
courses; and it is not lawful for them that they should conceal what
Allah has created in their wombs, if they believe in Allah and the last
day; and their husbands have a better right to take them back in the
meanwhile if they wish for reconciliation; and they have rights similar
to those against them in a just manner, and the men are a degree above
them, and Allah is Mighty, Wise." (2:228)

The context of the verse makes it clear that Divorcees should refrain
(from remarriage) for three menstrual cycles, so that whatever has been
created by Allah becomes pronounced etc, then it goes on to say that men
have one advantage. This advantage given to men is that they can remarry
right away and women have to wait almost three months, or more if found
to be pregnant, before they can re-marry).

Obviously, an advantage in a peculiar situation does not mean one is
superior than the other. It is only for this reason only that men have
one degree above women, because of their biological construction they do
not have to wait for a stated period ("Iddah") for the purpose of
getting married again upon divorce or if their spouse dies. Only in the
matter of "Iddah", that men have a degree higher than women, but apart
from this both have equal rights.


