Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

***“Verily the Qur'an doth guide to that which is*** ***most right (or
stable) (to run societies), and giveth the glad tidings to the Believers
who work deeds of righteousness, that they shall have a magnificent
reward”***[^1]***.***

***“We have sent down to thee the book explaining all things, a Guide, a
Mercy, and Glad tidings to Muslims"***[^2]***.***

***“When those come to thee who believe*** **in** ***Our Signs, say:
'Peace be on you: Your Lord hath inscribed for Himself (the rule on
Mercy; verily, if any of you did evil in ignorance, and thereafter
repented, and amended (his conduct), Lo! He is oft-forgiving, Most
Merciful”***[^3]***.***

The light of Islam is illuminating hearts of individuals in nearly all
parts of the world, in spite of heavy barriers and careful controls and
religious interrogation exerted by not only many governments of
non-Muslim nations, but also in some Muslim countries, against their
believing people, especially during the years after the Islamic
Revolution of Iran.

The effective influence of the light of the truth together with the
speed in the movement of the Age has brought forth a more vital exchange
of thought and religious ideology in connection with the Holy Qur'an.

In regard to this, we refer to what the Messenger of Allah (S) has said
about it:

*When afflictions surround you like the dark night refer to the Qur'an,
because, it is an Intercessor whose intercession is accepted. It reports
the evils (of people) which will be confirmed. It leads the person to
Heaven who puts it in front of himself (follows it); and he who puts it
behind himself (neglects it) will be driven to Hell.*

*This very Qur'an is the best guide to the best ways. It is a Book* in
*which there are useful explanations, statements and gaining (of goals).
It is the Separator (of right and wrong).*[^4]

Obviously, those people whose language is not Arabic can refer to the
Holy Book in English, because this is an international language and it
is possible for all nations with any native language, to read and
understand it in English. As far as we know, there are more than 50
different English translations of Qur'an available in Iran alone, and
probably others exist in libraries (and homes) throughout the world.

This makes it easy for the lovers of truth to obtain the knowledge of
the Holy Qur'an and Islamic ideology, through the medium of English,
which formerly was acquired directly by the Arabic and Persian
languages.

But, a fact should be mentioned here that not all of the words of Allah
are easily understood by ordinary people and need explanatory
commentary, i.e. 'Tafsir’.

Alongside this path, there are some problems that those eager to learn
the Qur'anic truth should know and be careful of. Hence, we deal here
with some of the difficulties we were involved in and recognized when we
were preparing this endeavour; the fruit of our humble labour of more
than three years, a translation of the commentary of over one section
(of the 30 sections) of the Holy Qur'an from different commentary
sources.

The work is based upon popular commentaries accepted by Muslim scholars.
We consulted other books and present living scholars, learned in the
Qur'anic Sciences for our work to produce this commentary in a simple
standard of English easily understood by the laymen.

The style of writing here is a mixture of British-English and
American-English, understandable for all the readers; even for those
acquainted with only one of them. However, excuse us for using
interchangeable spellings. If both are used, from time to time, they are
acceptable; for example, honour and honor.

**Not All English Versions of Quran Are Acceptable**

Some Western translators of the Holy Qur'an; not all of them, and some
producers of literature on Islam in the English language, are the
anti-Muslim elements which are busy in distorting the facts about the
faith to create disruption in Islamic ideology.

These hostile minds have attempted to black-list the Holy Prophet (S)
and the religion of Islam, through their purposeful and subtle
mis-translations, mis-interpretations, mis-representations and
distortion of the facts.

The distortion and the misinterpretations are so skilfully decorated in
linguistic excellence and delusive logic that the blind lovers of the
English language, who are hardly or even totally unaware of the actual
Qur'anic factors of their own faith, get caught up in the falsehood
tempered with eloquence and they swallow the 'sugar-coated poisonous
pills of deceit' allowing themselves to become duly conditioned to serve
the purpose of the publications of the hostile camps.

The current standing of Evil has always been against the Truth in the
history of man, even before written history, when the sons of Adam came
into existence.

When these antagonistic elements have successfully extended their active
influence upon our own religion, ideology and social tradition, we are
also duty bound to Allah, His Final Word (the Holy Qur'an), the Faith,
and to Islam, to do our best to present to every sincere seeker of
Truth, a selection of a translation of the verses of the Holy Qur'an of
the original Arabic text, and the 'Tafsir' (commentary) of them.

By the way, we believe that it is the essential belief of 'Shi'a' that
the present Qur'an, that which is in our hands today, is the Holy Book
of Allah, revealed to the holy Prophet Muhammad (S), as arranged and
compiled during his lifetime and read out to him and it contains nothing
less or more than what was revealed.

And it should be noted that,

***"Nay, but it is a Glorious Qur'an, (inscribed) in a tablet
preserved."***[^5]**,**

whose present arrangement is the order in which the various verses were
sorted and arranged at the command of the Holy Prophet (S), himself.

This is the uncorrupted or undisturbed Word of *Allah,* the preservation
of which has been guaranteed by *Allah,* Himself:

***"We have, without doubt, sent down the Message; and We will assuredly
guard it (from corruption)"***[^6]**.**

Furthermore, the English translations, along with the Arabic text of the
verses, in this book, are selected from different translations of
English versions of the Holy Qur'an, (whose names are listed at the end
of the book under the title of **'References'**) which are from the best
available sources in which some better styles and more proper meanings
are employed. The translator and editor did their best to preserve this
divine message and in conveying the Qur'anic facts in English.

In a few instances this writer, the translator, changed a word of those
existing translations to a better one, from the existing material which
was employed in this work.

What is a 'Commentary'?
-----------------------

A pure, correct, accurate translation of the Qur'an is necessary, but
sometimes it is difficult for the readers to understand all of the
apparent and hidden meanings and it is the duty of every Muslim, man or
woman to read, understand and contemplate on the Holy Qur'an according
to his own capacity:

***"...read you, therefore, of the Qur'an as much as may be easy for
you.."***[^7]***.***

This reading has to be done not only with the tongue, voice and eyes; a
mere recitation, but, also, with the best light that our intellect can
supply, and even more, with the truest and purest light which our heart
and conscience give us.

However, it is not always possible to fully understand the Holy Book as
*Allah* says:

***"That is indeed a Qur'an most honourable,"Which none shall touch but
those who are purified"***[^8]***.***

Thus, some additional information is needed. For example, it is
sometimes necessary, for understanding the text, to refer to the
particular occasion for the revelation of a particular verse; or to know
the philological changes of a word used at the time of revelation or
before it and the meaning that it has in Arabic, today.

Or the alphabetical symbols which evidently and undoubtedly are secrets,
and especially the ambiguous /mutashabihat/; the knowledge of which has
been announced to be with the /rasixuna fil 'ilm/; those deeply
established in knowledge.

They are some things that only 'the particular ones, the sinless ones',
besides the Prophet (S), himself, viz, Ahlul-Bait, knew with all the
Qur'anic facts and talked about them in their traditions and narrations
(as He says:

***"And whom We had taught knowledge from Our own Presence"***[^9]**.**

For instance, the Apostle, himself, answered the questions which used to
be asked by people as to the meaning of certain words in the verses
revealed, or details of certain historical or spiritual matters on which
they sought more enlightenment. These answers and explanations or in
other words, the commentaries were gathered by some Companions /ashab/
and were afterward written down which are called 'Hadith' or
'traditions'.

Of course, the holy Prophet (S) had openly declared in Hadith-uth-
Thaqalayn that the Qur'an is with the Ahlul-Bait, and to avoid going
astray, the Muslims should be attached to these two. Later, the
Ahlul-Bait's explanations and narrations, were added to them and
together with the effect of expert religious scholars, in the past and
present, established 'Exegesis' (explanation of Qur'an) which became a
science in itself and was called 'Tafsir', commentary.

'Commentary' shows how every verse, or group of verses, were revealed to
the holy Prophet (S) on a particular occasion, but which also has a
general meaning. The particular occasion and the particular people
concerned have passed away, but the general meaning and its application
remain true for all time.

This is also one of the miracles of the Qur'an that with the help of
'commentary' it is always open and it is always new for those new
generations to come.

The Current Commentary
----------------------

As was mentioned earlier, the light of Islam is enlightening every
corner in the world and seekers of truth, having referred to the
translations of the Holy Qur'an, find that they need 'Tafsir',
(commentary).

Some of them, Shi'a believers in particular have been led to this
Center; Imam Ali (a) Library, requesting a clear, concise English
Tafsir; 'a commentary of the Holy Qur'an'.

From the beginning of Islam until today (although many times the Holy
Qur'an has been translated into English and a few of them are published
with brief, detailed commentary, as footnotes, there has rarely been, as
far as we know, a fairly complete commentary in English sufficient for
them to find their answers. So the decision was made to supply this
commentary.

Ayatullah Mujahed Al-Hajj, Allamah Sayyid Kamal Faqhih Imani, the
founder and responsible party of this Islamic Scientific Research
Center, approached us and reported the situation to scholars and
appropriate research societies.

Then 12 people, who had varying nationalities and educational
backgrounds, especially from the point of the English language and
Islamic Theology, gathered. In their first gathering, which was held on
28th Safar, 1412 (1370 H. / 1991), they concluded that the commentary of
the whole Qur'an which they intended to supply in English, would take
many years to produce.

In order to quench the thirst of the lovers of Truth who had demanded it
again and again, they decided to supply the commentary of the last
section of the Qur'an, as a sample, and after its publication and
receiving constructive comments by the readers and with a better
skillfulness of the ones involved, the translation of the commentary
would begin from the beginning of the Holy Qur'an.

Therefore, they thought it would be better that the sample, entitled
**'An Enlightening Commentary Into the Light of the Holy Qur'an',**
begin with Surah Insan, the end of the 29th Section, because the Qur'an
was revealed for the improvement of Man and this Surah is about Man and
his creation from a lowly life-germ which can develop unto the highest
point where no other creature can ascend.

But, after several weeks the number of us dwindled to a handful and
after some months, until the present, we remain two people; the
translator and the editor. During this period of more than three years,
a few people have tried their hands at this task to have a share in the
translation, but, for different reasons, they were not successful.

However, we are completely grateful for their efforts and extend our
thanks for their attempts, as well as to those who had any involvement
in this work.

Attributes Needed for Working on This Kind of Commentary
--------------------------------------------------------

This endeavour needed not only the knowledge and skillfulness in the
English language, but also the knowledge of Arabic, and Islamic science
and culture, because Tafsir is an attempt to analyze and explain the
meaning of verses in the Holy Qur'an.

Moreover, Allah, Himself, says:

***"We have sent down to thee the book explaining all things, a Guide, a
Mercy, and Glad Tidings to Muslims"***[^10]**.**

Then, it needs that those involved know a little bit about almost all
sciences and knowledge that human beings are concerned with when working
with the commentary. Also, the phonetic sound systems of the two
languages, English and Arabic, are different. Therefore, when an Arabic
word from the Qur'an is mentioned in the English text, it is shown with
the phonetic alphabet and in its special phonetical sign, i.e.: / /, to
avoid using 'Arabic script' in the book, as far as possible.

A transliteration table of the Arabic letters and sounds and the
corresponding phonetic signs, applied in this book, is given at the
beginning of the book.

The Problems in Translating
---------------------------

We tried to avoid mixing up our own personal theories and conclusions
with the interpretation of the text itself. With the help of Allah*,* we
did our best; at times asking for guidance from some learned religious
men (Ruhaniyan), and used all the knowledge and experience we possessed
in the service of the Holy Qur'an for its commentary, hoping that
*Allah* accepts it.

The nature of this sort of endeavour is so that, in the course of
translation, some difficulties arise from various causes.

For instance, cultures in the Arabic language and English language are
different so that some of the words like /amrun bayn al amrayn/ in the
case of fatalism and freewill are nearly impossible to translate into
English, because of the difference in the concept in English literature;
or the meaning of a word like 'prostration', in English, is rather
different with what /sajdah/ exactly means in Arabic.

In such cases, we selected the meaning of the words from among what the
earlier commentators and phililogists used and where they were not
unanimous, we also used the ideas of new writers, who had reasonable
advantages in their interpretations, when the senses adopted with the
commentary sources that we were taking and translating materials from.
Explanations, of course are always helpful which we took benefit from,
too.

It is noteworthy that there are some circumstances in the text, of the
commentary, in which a verse or verses of Qur'an from other Suras rather
than the Surah under discussion are mentioned as evidence or, thereby,
for strengthening the idea.

The text of these verses and also the traditions and narrations from the
holy Prophet or Ahlul-Bait (a) is printed in bolder type than the
running commentary in order to distinguish, at a glance, the substance
from the shadow. Also, the mentioned verses are generally taken from A.
Yusuf Ali's translation.

It Was Only By His Merciful Will!

Translators Note
----------------

Both the editor and the translator have interesting factual stories to
tell of how the way of this endeavour was paved by Providence and how
they were divinely led to be absorbed into this task, Alhamdulillah. A
few words given here in this regard are not to be misunderstood as a
display of vanity for any peculiar distinction; for there is none.

It is purely to attract the attention of the readers to a living
instance of the Providential implementation of the divine plan and how
man drifts to his assignment and how matters are automatically
manipulated, though, they seem yet only to be circumstantial.

***"He said: Our Lord is He Who gave to each (created) thing its form
and nature and further gave (it) guidance"***[^11]***.***

For example, once, on a night, the writer of these lines, the
translator, had seen in a dream that the Holy Qur'an, was placed,
honourably, on a high position, wide open, high above a very great crowd
of people amongst whom he was standing, watching. The full name of his
was clearly written in the midst of the writings on the right page of it
with magnificent bold letters.

The dream was obviously a good one, but it did not mean vividly to him
at that time.

It was four years before he found out, in the course of translating the
commentary of verses 11-16 from Surah 'Abasa No. 80, both the meaning of
that dream and the cause of later changes in his career of twenty years,
as a manager of a profitable Foreign Language Center, thanks to Allah.

It is always true what the Qur'an says:

***"You will not unless Allah wills, surely Allah is All-Knowing,
All-Wise"***[^12]*.*

By His graceful arrangement this writer was separated from his almost
material gains, of this fleeting world, to be set toward the assured,
perfect, pure, spiritual rewards of the next, everlasting world from
Him, Allah willing, when he began translating the commentary of the
Qur'an and entered this great Divine Ocean of light, he found out that
from earlier times such a success had been appointed and bestowed to him
by Allah.

Therefore, all changes and graceful arrangements directly are from Him
and it was His helpful Will that planned His graceful design and
showered the ability and insight upon us to lead us to the present
point. We are eagerly in hopes that He will help us and guide us in all
cases to complete the task successfully so that He accepts it from us.

Editor's Note
-------------

In my case, it is a fact that only by the grace of Allah have I come to
be at the helm working, side-by-side with the translator, on this
commentary of the Holy Qur'an. Editing and checking this translation of
**'An Enlightening commentary into the Light of the Holy Quran'** has
been a most important and rewarding experience for me.

To be of value in this work several things were necessary; my mother
tongue, English, was almost at the top of the list. Then, having the
ability to use a computer and printer, which involved me having to learn
and use a Farsi program named Zarnegar, produced in Tehran, Iran, I was
able to make use of the wonderful array of fonts it contains; necessary
to type the Arabic and English languages.

Next, living in Iran, for four years, has made it possible for me to
become acquainted with the native language and customs. However, the
greatest asset, of all, is that I am a Shi'a Muslim woman.

It is fifteen (15) years from now, that in America, I became enlightened
to the existence of the Holy Qur'an and accepted it as a better way of
life. Over this period of time it has put me in touch with the purity of
the religion and the logical answers to the religious questions I had as
a Catholic.

My father told us (during our childhood) that if we ever wanted to know
anything we should go to the source and to always have the correct tools
on hand to do the job right.

When I started hearing and seeing, on television, the upheaval of the
Islamic Revolution, in Iran, and the speech of a brave and courageous
man they called Ayatullah Khomeini, I became very intense on knowing why
it was happening and in knowing who this man was who had been exiled and
was making his return to his homeland.

***"Our Lord! We have heard the call of one calling (us) to faith,
'Believe ye in the Lord,,*** ***and we have believed. Our Lord! Forgive
us our sins, blot out from us our iniquities, and take to Thyself our
souls in the company of the righteous"***[^13]***.***

It was something more spectacular than I had ever read about in my high
school history books. There was a charge in it that I could not explain,
and up until that time, I had never really heard anything about Islam,
Prophet Muhammad or Muslims, for that matter.

I bought ***A. Yussuf Ali's English Translation of the Holy Qur'an,***
basing my decision on my father's counsel and I began from page one.

It was talking about the same things I had already learned; Adam and Eve
in the Garden, disobeyed God due to the wiles of Satan and then, were
expelled to Earth; Moses is given the scripture and leads his people out
of Egypt, but they forfeited their covenant for a golden calf; Abraham,
Ismail and Issac of the religion true, and there, Mary.

***Hail Mary! Chaste, pure, chosen above other women, given glad tidings
of a Word from Him; his name will be Christ Jesus, son of Mary, held in
honor...***[^14]

And it went on: Practise charity, take care of the orphans, speak a
speech that is just, beware of the deceits of the Unbelievers...I was in
awe as I neared the end. No place was any obscenity found -no trace of
ugliness which I found in the Bible -nothing but pure scripture; a
complete religion, the one and only continuing from the first of
Abraham. So, it became crystal clear to me that Islam is the final,
refined message from God.

True, just, undeniable, containing what I had always felt and that is
this: There is only One God; unique, needing no partner, powerful, and
yet merciful and kind. How could God be more than one; Creator of such a
vast universe and more?

With this understanding, though, came many tests to my new-found-faith;
albeit necessary tests. Did I really believe - did I really submit to
His Will - was I really worthy?

I began by only putting on a scarf, covering all of my hair.

***"And say to the believing women...that they should draw their veils
over their bosoms and not display their beauty except to their husbands,
their fathers..."***[^15]

Immediately the responses that I encountered proved the rightness of it
all. I was chided, spit at, hit and cursed. Well, of course, a great
deal of this was due to the propaganda which caused mass hysteria
against Iran and not having their facts straight about the religion of
Islam, however, it hurt just the same, but I had learned forgiveness and
perseverance from my mother.

It was difficult for my family in the beginning; this change I was
making, however, we are very close at heart, today, due to my faith and
reliance on Allah**.**

***"And out of kindness, lower to them the wing of humility, and say:
'My Lord! Bestow on them Thy Mercy even as they cherished me in
childhood.'"***[^16]

Almost at once the veils over my understanding fell away and I started
rejecting a lot of the 'big-business' propaganda that had infiltrated
into my life.

***"Let there be no compulsion in religion: Truth stands out clear from
error; whosoever rejects Evil and believes in God bath grasped the most
trustworthy hand-hold, that never breaks..."***[^17]

The 'Big Sell' eats away at the very fabric of human society to the
point that life has only a superficial meaning and high value is put on
every inanimate object which man can produce.

***"The life of this world is alluring to those who reject faith, and
they scoff at those who believe. But the righteous will be above them on
the Day of Resurrection; for God bestows His abundance on whom He will
"***[^18]***.***

I had developed an intense desire to go to Iran--the country of martyrs;
having an air so thick with emotions, direction and goal, at that time,
and having the presence of an undeniable strength caressing it in the
hands of an unseen power.

Ten years after I started practicing the tenets of Islam the opportunity
presented itself for me to be able to fulfil my desire.

***"Not equal are those Believers who sit (at home) and receive no hurt,
and those who strive and fight in the cause...God has granted a grade
higher to those who strive...”***[^19]

I wished very much to become involved in some type of work regarding the
Holy Qur'an and in due time I was approached to work with a group of
people on a commentary of the Holy Qur'an.

**"*****And for those who fear God, He prepares a way out" "And He
provides for him from (sources) he never could imagine..."***[^20]

Those of you who know anything about the rigors of editing know that it
is very time-consuming and attention to detail is very necessary.

Spending many hours discussing the meaning of a single word, or phrase,
can cause the ordinary soul to become frustrated, but that frustration
is ultimately quelled when peace and tranquillity cover the heart at the
point where there is that final agreement and gives those involved
renewed enthusiasm to continue.

Sometimes you will notice more spacing than usual on a line or within
the phonetic brackets *(/ /),* but this is due to the fact that the
Zarnegar program is a Farsi program and it took much time trying to
place the little phonetic line over, or the little dot under, the
correct letter, because English is written from left to right and Farsi
is written from right to left, so, I had a bit of anarchy on my hands
for a time.

I leave you, now, in the hopes that you, too, will be provoked to
question and seek. (Seek and you will find). Looking back, I feel that
Allah does consider me worthy.

***"God is the protector of those who have faith; from the depths of
darkness He will lead them into light"***[^21]***.***

Wa Salam.

[^1]: 17:9

[^2]: 16:89

[^3]: 6:54

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi, vol 2, p. 599.

[^5]: 85:21, 22

[^6]: 15:9

[^7]: 73:20

[^8]: 56:77, 79

[^9]: 18:65

[^10]: 16:89

[^11]: 20:50

[^12]: 76:30

[^13]: 3:193

[^14]: 3:42-45

[^15]: 24:31

[^16]: 17:24

[^17]: 2:256

[^18]: 2:212

[^19]: 4:95

[^20]: 65:2-3

[^21]: 2:257


