Section 6: To Return Good For Evil and to Be Patient
====================================================

Surah al-Mu’minun - Verses 93-95
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل رَبّ‌ِ إِمَّا تُرِيَنّـِي مَا يُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبّ‌ِ فَلاَ تَجْعَلْنِي فِي الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِنَّا عَلَي أَن نُرِيَكَ مَا نَعِدُهُمْ لَقَادِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***93. “Say: ‘My Lord! If You show me what (chastisement) they are
promised, ’”***  
***94.“My Lord! Then set me, not among the unjust people.”***  
***95. “And verily We are able to show you that which We promise
them.”***

These verses are addressed to the Prophet (S), but they have the same
objective as the previous verses; that is, they threaten the unbelievers
and polytheists with Divine punishment.

In the beginning, Allah commands His Prophet (S):

***“Say: ‘My Lord! If You show me what (chastisement) they are promised,
’”***

(Meaning their punishment in the War of Badr), then put me not among the
wrongdoing folk. This means that when Allah decides to send down the
punishment upon the unbelievers, He would separate the Prophet away from
them so that by Allah’s grace and mercy he would not be involved with
the affliction of the oppressors at that time.

There is no doubt that the conduct and program of the Prophet (S) could
not make him subject to Divine punishment. It is also a fact that the
Divine law is not indiscriminate and would not suffer the good to be
punished with the guilty. Even if there were one dutiful worshipper of
Allah in a whole society of evildoers, Allah would save that individual.

The verse says:

***“My Lord! Then set me not among the unjust people.”***

By this prayer of the Prophet (S) Allah intends to warn the unbelievers
that the issue is so serious that by Divine command the great Prophet of
Islam himself sought the protection of Allah from the consequences of
their beliefs and actions, and secondly it is a lesson for the followers
of this Prophet that they are not safe from Allah’s punishment and must
always seek His protection regardless of whatever state they might be
in.

But what kind of punishment is it? Most interpreters believe that it
refers to the worldly punishments that Allah had inflicted upon the
polytheists, including the disastrous severe defeat they had suffered in
the Battle of Badr.[^1] There are other interpreters, however, that
think that the verse probably includes the punishment both in this world
and in the Hereafter.[^2]

Bearing in mind that this Sura was revealed in Mecca when the believers
were forced to undergo many hardships, these verses gave them much
solace and comfort.

The next verse emphasizes the fact that Allah is Almighty, and removes
any doubt and uncertainty about the victory of the believers over their
enemies and gives them solace.

The verse says:

***“And verily We are able to show you that which We promise them.”***

As history has ever shown, this power of Allah has been demonstrated
over and over in different places and on different occasions after the
Battle of Badr where a much smaller military force inflicted a major
defeat upon a much larger and well equipped enemy by Allah’s command.

Allah gave His Prophet solace by saying that He had the power to punish
the unbelievers but He often postpones their punishment for various
reasons some of which have been listed below:

1. They are given time and opportunity to repent.

2. They are given a final argument.

3. In their future generations some believers are going to be born.

4. For the sake of the Prophet (S) who is the cause of blessings and
grace.

Surah al-Mu’minun - Verses 96-98
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ السَّيّـِئَةَ نَحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا
يَصِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُل رَبّ‌ِ أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ هَمَزَاتِ الشَّيَاطِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ رَبّ‌ِ أَن يَحْضُرُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***96. “Repel evil with that which is best. We know best what they
describe.”***  
***97. “And say: ‘My Lord! I seek refuge in You from the suggestions of
Satans, ”***  
***98. “And I seek refuge in You, my Lord, lest they attend me’.”***

The Prophet (S) has been taught by Allah and has been called upon to
treat the enemies of Islam in the best manner.

Evil can be repelled with evil, but this method is not appropriate for a
spiritual leader. Thus, the Prophet (S) has been explicitly ordered to
behave with this group with moderation, compassion and justice, to repel
their evil deeds with indulgence, forgiveness, and goodness, and to
answer their unpleasant words with reason and intelligence.

The Noble Qur’an in this holy verse says:

***“Repel evil with that which is best...”***

***“...We know best what they describe.”***

The verse means that Allah knows that they aggravated the Prophet (S)
with inappropriate deeds, harsh words, and various kinds of
persecutions, but he was not commissioned to reciprocate their violence
and vilifications in like manner, rather he should respond to their evil
deeds against him with good manner which is one of the best ways to
awaken the ignorant and those who have been deceived.

In addition to this, the Prophet (S) should rely on Allah, as the verse
suggests:

***“And say: ‘My Lord! I seek refuge in You from the suggestions of
Satans, ”***

It means that not only should he (S) seek refuge in Allah from the
suggestions of Devils, but he should also take refuge in Allah in order
to prevent them from coming to him and taking part in his assemblies
causing hurt and temptation by their presence.

So the next verse says:

***“And I seek refuge in You, my Lord, lest they attend me’.”***

### Note to Some Points

1) The Qur’anic word ‘hamazat’ is the plural form of the word ‘humazah’,
meaning intense release, discharge, and stimulation. The Arabic letter
‘hamzah’ is called by the same name because it is articulated with force
at the back of the throat.

Some interpreters are of the opinion that the Arabic words ‘hamz’,
‘qamz’ and ‘ramz’ have the same meaning, but ‘ramaz’ is light, ‘qamaz’
is stronger than ‘ramaz’, and ‘hamaz’ is even more so.

Regarding the fact that the Arabic word /šayatin/ is plural, it refers
to all Satans whether manifest and concealed, man and jinn.

In the Commentary by Ali ibn Ibrahim we read that the Imam (as)
concerning the meaning of the verse:

***“And say: ‘My Lord! I seek refuge in You from the suggestions of
Satans, ”***

said that it meant that which of the satanic suggestions that enter your
heart.[^3]

When the Prophet (S), who is infallible and divinely protected from sin
and error, asks for such a thing from Allah, the Almighty, it becomes
quite clear to others that this command is even more imperative for
those who do not enjoy this infallibility.

All believers must seek the protection of Allah, their Owner and Lord,
from the evil temptations of devils and that He should not leave them
alone on their own. Not only must they not let themselves be tempted by
evil suggestions, but also they must not take part in satanic gatherings
and assemblies.

Thus, all those who want to follow the Truth must constantly avoid the
satanic suggestions and always refuge in Him from this aspect.

2) One of the most effective ways of striving against obstinate and
stubborn enemies is to reciprocate their evil with good. This may create
an upheaval and revolution in their consciences and this matter causes
the wrongdoers in many instances to end up being severely reproached and
reprimanded, leading them to abandon their activities.

By studying the biographies of spiritual leaders and the practical
method of the Prophet (S) and the immaculate Imams (as), we see that
they used to reciprocate the worst offenses some persons committed
against them with goodness and they showed kindness towards their
oppressors.

This behaviour used to bring about a spiritual revolution and upheaval
in the souls of their enemies and often led such wicked people back to
the Path of Truth.

The Holy Qur’an reminds Muslims many times to keep this principle in
mind when they find themselves confronted by wrongs done against them
and the result of this action is that the severe enemies may become a
warm friend.

For example, in verse 34 of Sura Fussilat, No. 41, it says:

***“...Repel (an evil deed) with that which is better, then will he
between whom and you there was enmity become as though he were a bosom
friend.”***

However, it must be noted that this command refers to those instances
that the enemy does not exploit and misuse it, or counts it as a
weakness and becomes bolder because of this command.

The meaning of this sentence also is not to yield to the temptations of
the enemy. Perhaps because of this very reason, after giving this
command in the above verses, the Prophet (S) is immediately ordered to
take refuge in Allah from the temptations of Satans and their
attendance.

[^1]: Majma‘ ul-Bayan, The Commentary, Al-Mizan, The Commentary, Abul
ul-Futuh, the Commentary, and ruh ul-Ma‘ani

[^2]: The great commentary of Fakhr Razi

[^3]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, Vol. 3, p. 552


