Sura An-Nur, Chapter 24
=======================

**(Revealed in Medina)**  
**64 verses in 9 sections**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

The Grand View of Sura An-Nur
-----------------------------

This Sura contains 64 verses and it has been sent down in Medina.

The reason why it has been named An-Nur (light), is its thirty fifth
verse in which Allah has been introduced as:

***“the Light of the heavens and the earth”.***

Since this holy Sura has recommended all believers, and specially women
to be virgin and chaste, Islamic narrations do give much prominence to
teaching and reciting this Sura by women.

In fact, it can be considered as the Sura of virginity, chastity, and
struggle against sexual defilements, because the main part of its
commandments is about removing society from sexual defilements through
different ways, and this aim has been set in several steps:

1) It is the statement of severe punishments of adulterers and
adulteresses which is mentioned with full decisiveness in the second
verse of this Sura.

2) Executing this severe prescribed punishment is not an easy issue, and
from the view of Islamic judicial scales it has strict condition. If a
man accuses his wife of adultery, the program ‘Li‘an’ (Conjugal
anathema) must be carried out, we will explain it later.

And if a person accuses someone of fornication, that person must present
4 witnesses. Even if someone accuses other person of fornication, but he
cannot prove it in the court of Islamic judgment, he will be extremely
punished (one forth of prescribed punishment of fornication), so that no
one can easily think of Islamic punishment of others by accusing them,
otherwise that penalty will be imposed on himself.

3) Then, in this connection, the famous tradition known as ‘Ifk’ and the
accusation that was pinned on one of the wives of the Prophet (S) are
mentioned.

The Holy Qur’an follows this issue, so that it becomes completely clear
that how great the sin of inventing rumour about virtuous persons is.

4) In order to prevent this thought that Islam is only content with
punishing wrongdoers, the Sura mentions one of the important ways of
preventing sexual defilements.

It in details explains the issue of preventing men from gloating women
and preventing women form casting amorous, coquettish, or lecherous
glances at men, because one of the important factors of sexual
deviations is voyeur and non-veiling of women.

And defilements would not be expunged unless these are eradicated.

5) Again, to prevent engaging in unchaste actions, the commandment of
easy and simple marriage is issued, so that unlawfully satisfying sexual
instinct will be struggled by its lawful way.

6) Some of the rules of etiquette and principles of training offspring,
concerning parents, are mentioned; stating that there are some times
when husband and wife may want to be alone and isolated, so that issues
must not enter their rooms without permission, for offspring may deviate
intellectually thereby.

For this end, it states some other rules of family life, though they may
be unrelated to sexual matters.

7) Some of the discussions that are about monotheism, origin,
resurrection, and resignation to the command of the Prophet (S) are
mentioned before these discussions, because what support all practical
and ethical programs are the very doctrinal issues and the belief in
origin, resurrection, and rightfulness of prophecy.

There will not be any branch, leaf, flower, and fruit, if such a root
does not exist.

Meanwhile, in connection with discussions about faith and righteous
deed, the establishment of the worldly government by the believers is
stated and some of other Islam commandments are brought up. On the
whole, the Sura has formed a comprehensive collection.

Virtue of Sura An-Nur
---------------------

The Prophet (S) in a tradition has said:

*“Whoever reads Sura An-Nur (and applies it in his life), for each
faithful woman and man who were in the past and will be in the future
Allah will give him 10 good acts as reward.”*

Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*“Protect your property and preserve your chastity by reading Sura
An-Nur and immunize your own wives against deviations through obeying
its commandments, because whoever continues reading* *this Holy Sura in
every day and night none of his family members will commit indecency as
long as he lives.”*[^1]

Paying attention to the content of the Sura which stands against
immodesty through various ways of efficient struggles with factors of
deviation from the path of chastity makes clear the main idea of the
above-mentioned tradition as well as its practical concept.

[^1]: Majma‘ ul-Bayan under the verse, the Thawab ul-’A‘mal by Saduq (As
it is narrated from Nur-uth-Thaqalyn Vol. 3, p. 568)


