Section 3: Slandering Chaste Women
==================================

Sura An-Nur - Verse 21
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا لاَ تَتَّبِعُوا خُطُوَاتِ
الشَّيْطَانِ وَمَن يَتَّبِعْ خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ فَإِنَّهُ يَأْمُرُ
بِالْفَحْشَآءِ وَالْمُنكَرِ وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ
وَرَحْمَتُهُ مَا زَكَي مِنكُم مِن أَحَدٍ أَبَداً وَلَكِنَّ اللَّهَ
يُزَكّـِي مَن يَشَآءُ وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “O you who believe! Do not follow the steps of the Satan. And
whoever follows the steps of the Satan, then verily he commands
indecency and wrong. Had it not been Allah’s grace and His mercy on you,
not one of you would have ever been pure. But Allah purifies whom He
pleases; and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”***

The Arabic word /xutuwat/ is the plural form of the word /xutwat/ that
means ‘step’. The holy Qur’an has used the phrase /xutuwatiš šaytan/
(‘the footsteps of the Satan’) when it is the matter of calumny and
lust, in order to indicate that Satan encourages man step by step to do
some sins.

Though these verses do not follow the subject of ’Ifk, they complete the
content of that matter. It is a warning for all believers that evil
thoughts and deeds sometimes penetrate gradually and invisibly.

If they are not controlled and hindered in their first steps, man will
get alerted when the die is cast. Thus when the first temptations of
spreading lewdness or any sin get manifest, they must be immediately
withstood, so that defilement does not get prevalent.

In the first verse, addressing the believers, it says:

***“O you who believe! Do not follow the steps of the Satan. And whoever
follows the steps of the Satan, then verily he commands indecency and
wrong...”***

If ‘Shaytan’ is interpreted into the vast meaning of the word, as any
‘ruinous, felonious, cunning creature’, the extensiveness of this
warning in all dimensions of life becomes clear.

A pure and faithful man can never be all of a sudden involved in
corruption, but it is done step by step:

First step: hobnobbing and getting familiar with wicked persons

Second step: attending their parties

Third step: thought of sin

Fourth step: committing questionable examples and errors

Fifth step: committing lesser sins

Finally he will do the worst sins and he is just like a person on whom
an offender’s yoke is laid and the offender leads him to precipice step
by step, so that he falls down and will be ruined. Yes, these are ‘the
footsteps of the Satan’.[^1]

Then the verse refers to one of the most important Divine favours and
blessings which are bestowed on man in the path of guidance.

It says:

***“...Had it not been Allah’s grace and His mercy on you, not one of
you would have ever been pure. But Allah purifies whom He pleases; and
Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”***

Undoubtedly, Divine grace and bless rescue men from defilements, sins
and deviations, because He has conferred, on one hand, the gift of
intellect and, on the other hand, the grace of the existence of the
Prophet (S) and ordinances that have been sent down by revelation.

Moreover, His special help, and supernatural aids that cover deserving,
receptive, and apt men are the most important factors of purification
and cleanness.

The Qur’anic holy phrase /manyaša’/, as we have said repeatedly, does
not mean unreasonable will and desire, but Allah does not do any
guidance and does not confer any grace, unless attempt and exertion is
carried out by servants. One who has decided to go this path and tries,
Allah will hold his hands, saves him from devils’ temptations and so
leads him to the destination.

In other words, Divine grace and bless has sometime religious aspect,
that has come forth through mission of prophets, revelation of heavenly
books, legalization of ordinances, glad tidings and warnings.

And it is sometime genetic or inherent, that comes forth through Divine
spiritual helps. The verses in question (out of indication of the
sentence ‘man yasha’) mostly concern the second section.

Meanwhile, we must pay attention that the words ‘Zakat’ and ‘Tazkiyah’
originally mean ‘to grow’ and ‘to cause to grow’, but in most cases they
have been applied in the sense of: ‘to become clean’ and ‘to clean
something’. They may have one root, because no growth and development
occurs when evils and corruptions are not got rid of.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 22
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ يَأْتَلِ اُولُواْ الْفَضْلِ مِنكُمْ وَالسَّعَةِ أَن يُؤْتُوا
أُولِي الْقُرْبَي وَالْمَسَاكِينَ وَالْمُهَاجِرِينَ فِي سَبِيلِ
اللَّهِ وَلْيَعْفُوا وَلْيَصْفَحُوا أَلاَ تُحِبُّونَ أَن يَغْفِرَ
اللَّهُ لَكُمْ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “And let not those who possess dignity and ease among you swear
against giving to the near of kin and the needy, and fugitives for the
cause of Allah. And they should pardon and overlook. Do you not like
that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

The Arabic word /Safaha/ means to ignore, which is more important than
forgiveness. Some have said that /safh/ is a forgiveness that is without
rebuke and reproof.

Some commentators have narrated an occasion of revelation for this holy
verse, which shows how this verse is related to the pervious verses.

They say that this holy verse was revealed about some Companions of the
Prophet (S). After the event of ’Ifk, they took an oath to withdraw
their financial helps from those who were involved in that event and
spread this great calumny.

They decided to give them no generous succour, in anything. But this
noble verse prevented them from this violation and harshness. It orders
them to be forgiving and lenient.

This occasion of revelation has been quoted by Qurtabi in his commentary
narrated from Ibn Abbas;and Dahhak, as well as the deceased Tabarsi,
have narrated it from Ibn Abbas and other persons, and it is general.

But some Sunni commentators insist that this verse is revealed about Abu
Bakr who terminated his financial help to Mastah Ibn ’Athathah, his
maternal aunt’s son or his sister’s son, who helped to the circulation
of ’Ifk.

However all pronouns that are used in the verse are plural. This matter
shows that a group of Muslims decided to put an end to their helps unto
these wrongdoers, and this verse prohibited them from this decision.

Anyway, we know that the verses of Qur’an are not limited to occasion of
revelation, and they involve all believers till Doomsday. The holy verse
implicitly recommends Muslims not to be influenced by hot vehement
feelings and they should not make rough and excessive decisions against
wrongdoers’ errors and faults.

With regard to this occasion of revelation, we return to the commentary
of the verse.

The holy Qur’an says:

***“And let not those who possess dignity and ease among you swear
against giving to the near of kin and the needy, and fugitives for the
cause of Allah...”***

This way of saying shows that a group of those who were involved in ’Ifk
were from among the Emigrants in the way of Allah. They were deceived by
hypocrites and because of their past records Allah did not allow them to
be ostracized from Islamic society and He did not let the Muslims decide
some horrible things about them that were more than the limit they
deserved.

Meanwhile the Qur’anic holy phrase /la ya’til/ is whether derived from
the word /’iliyyah/ (on the rhythm of /‘itiyyah/), meaning to take an
oath, or from the word /‘alw/ (on the rhythm of ‘Dalw’), meaning to
abandon and to shrink.

Thus, the verse, according to the first meaning, prohibits taking an
oath to terminate such helps. And, according to the second meaning, the
verse precludes withdrawal of such action.

Then to encourage Muslims to continue such good deeds, it adds:

***“...And they should pardon and overlook...”***

As we expect Allah’s forgiveness, we must not forget to forgive others.
The verse continues saying:

***“...Do you not like that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.”***

It is interesting that, on one hand, the companions of ’Ifk were
severely reprimanded, but, on the other hand, to prevent extremists from
resorting to measures beyond the norm and to control their feelings, 3
sentences, each of which is more interesting and remarkable than the
others, were used: first, it is ordered to be forgiving and condoning.

Then it says:

***“...Do you not like that Allah should forgive you?...”,***

(so you must forgive). Finally, two of Allah’s attributes that are
‘Forgiving’ and ‘Merciful’ are mentioned as an emphasis. It indicates
that they could not be more legalistic than Allah’s commandment. Allah,
Who Himself has issued this judgment, is Forgiving and Merciful. He
enjoined them not to terminate the helps, so what did they want to say?

Undoubtedly, all Muslims who were involved in ’Ifk affair did not have a
before-hand scheme, but some pseudo-Muslim hypocrites set it and a group
of deceived Muslims followed them. Certainly all of them were on the
wrong side of the law and were guilty, but there were a lot of
differences between these two groups. They could not be treated alike.

Anyway, the above-mentioned holy verses are today and tomorrow a great
lesson for Muslims and all future generations; when some persons commit
a sin or make a mistake we must not exceed in the limits of punishment.
They must be excluded from Islamic society and must not be barred from
helps so that they resort to enemy and become one of foes.

The above verses, in fact, portray the balance of Islamic repulsion and
attraction; the verses of ’Ifk and the severe punishment of those who
made false statements about people’s wives compose the great power of
repulsion. The verse in question, that mentions Allah’s mercifulness,
forgiveness, and clemency, represents the attraction!

Sura An-Nur - Verse 23
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَرْمُونَ الْمُـحْصَنَاتِ الْغَافِلاَتِ الْمُؤْمِنَاتِ
لُعِنُوا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالاَخِرَةِ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “Verily those who accuse chaste, believing women unaware (of
evil), are cursed in this world and the Hereafter, and for them shall be
a grievous chastisement, ”***

Of course unbelievers, murderers, advocates of illegitimate rulers,
hypocrites, mischief-makers, polytheists, the arrogant, oppressors,
liars, perjurers, and those who disclaim the Truth have been cursed in
the Qur’an, but the curse of the world and the Hereafter along with
great punishment, covers only those who stigmatize pure persons.

Imam Sadiq (as) considers this verse as evidence for the fact that
unjust accusation of pure and chaste women is one of the great sins.[^2]

Thus, in this verse the Qur’an returns to the issue of Qathf and
accusing chaste faithful women of unchaste action, and it decisively
says:

***“Verily those who accuse chaste, believing women unaware (of evil),
are cursed in this world and the Hereafter, and for them shall be a
grievous chastisement, ”***

In fact, three attributes are mentioned for these women. Each of these
attributes is a reason for the importance of the oppression that is
imposed on them through calumny.

These attributes are: ‘Mohsanat’ (‘virtuous women’), ‘Qafilat’ (‘far
from and unaware (of any pollution)’), and ‘Mu’minat’ (‘believing
women’). In this way it is indicated how oppressing and unfair is
accusing these persons of inadmissible accusations and this action
deserves a great punishment.[^3]

By the way, the application of the Qur’anic word /qafilat/ is an
interesting meaning. It specifies the ultimate of their pureness from
any deviation and unchasteness. It means that they are so heedless of
sexual defilements that as if they are not at all aware of it.

For sometimes the attitude of a person toward sin is in a way that
thought of sin goes out of his mind, as if there were not existed at all
such an action. This is the supreme grade of piety.

Another possibility is that the purpose of /qafilat/ is the women who
are not aware of the unjust accusations attributed to them; therefore,
they do not defend themselves.

So, this verse mentions a new matter about such accusations, because the
pervious verses referred to the calumniators who could be recognized and
then would be punished, but, here, the rumour-fabricators, who have
hidden themselves from punishment and religiously prescribed punishment,
are brought up.

The Qur’an implies that they should not think that by this action they
can escape from the Divine punishment forever. Allah, the Almighty,
curses them in the world and, in the Hereafter, they will have an awful
chastisement.

With regard to the fact that the above verse is placed after the story
of ’Ifk, and it seems that its revelation had some relation with this
affair, but like, many verses that are sent down for a special case and
their content is general, this verse is also not limited to a certain
case.

It is strange that some commentators such as Fakhr-i-Razi, in his book:
‘Tafsir-i-Kabir’ and some others insist that the content of this verse
is limited to calumniation of the Prophet (S)’s wives. They mainly equal
this sin to paganism and consider the word /lu‘inu/ (cursed), mentioned
in the verse, as reason for it.

Of course calumniation is a great sin and if it is about the wives of
the Prophet (S), it is greater and more cardinal, yet it does not by
itself bring paganism.

Thus, the Prophet (S) did not treat those who were involved in that
affair as apostates, but, as we explained in the commentary of the holy
successive verses, he recommended the Muslims to be being merciful
toward them and not to be excessively violent toward them, which is not
consistent with paganism.

The word /la‘n/ is ‘being away from Allah’s bless’, which is applied to
pagans and those who commit cardinal sins. Therefore, in the verses that
are about the punishment of Qathf (in the ordinances of /li‘an/
(conjugal anathema)), the word /la‘n/ has been applied two times about
liars.

In Islamic narrations, the word /la‘n/ (curse) is frequently applied to
those who commit great sins. The tradition which says:

*“Allah has cursed ten groups concerning wine...”*[^4]

is very famous.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 24
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَشْهَدُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَلْسِنَتُهُمْ وَأَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَرْجُلُهُم
بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. “On the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet
testify against them as to what they used to do.”***

The issue of testimony of body’s limbs is many times brought up in the
Qur’an. Therefore in this verse it specifies how this group of
calumniators will appear in Allah’s great court.

It denotes that they will have an awful chastisement in Hereafter, when
it says:

***“On the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet testify
against them as to what they used to do.”***

Their tongues will move, in spite of their reluctance, and they express
the truth. These wrongdoers will confess their sin in spite of their
willing when they see all Divine unquestionable evidences and reasons.

In spite of their inner willing, they will explicitly reveal everything,
because they will see they can no longer disclaim. Their own hands and
feet will also speak. According to the verses of the holy Qur’an, even
their body’s skin will start talking. It seems that they have been voice
recorders that have recorded man’s voices, and signs of sins are stored
on them during lifetime.

Yes, on the Day of manifestation, all of these things will appear.

If we see that some of the verses of the holy Qur’an refer to the Day of
Judgment and say,

***“This day We seal up mouths, and hands speak out and feet bear
witness as to what they used to earn”***[^5]***,***

there will be no inconsistency with the concerned verse, because it is
possible of first that tongues get disabled and other limbs testify and
when testimony of hand and foot discovers truths and they say what they
must say, then tongue moves and confesses the sins.

Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“This testimony of the limbs is not against the believers, but it is
against someone whose punishment is inevitable.”*[^6]

Sura An-Nur - Verse 25
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَئِذٍ يُوَفّـِيهِمُ اللَّهُ دِينَهُمُ الْحَقَّ وَيَعْلَمُونَ
أَنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْحَقُّ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “On that day Allah will pay them their just due, and they will
know that Allah, He is the (very) Manifest Truth.”***

It is only in the Hereafter that retributions will be given in full.

The Arabic word /din/, mentioned in this holy verse means either
retribution or religion. Therefore, the holy verse either implies that
Allah fully pays people's retribution in hereafter, or that the real and
true divine religion will be represented to people and all fantastic
religion-founders will realize that Allah is the real deity Who is true,
right, and obvious.[^7]

Since full retribution cannot be materialized in this world for its
limitations, for example, how we can in this world punish a pilot who
has bombarded a city and has killed thousands of people. But there is no
limitation in the Hereafter and a criminal can be burnt many times in
the Hell and each time he will be alive again.

The verse says:

***“On that day Allah will pay them their just due, and they will know
that Allah, He is the (very) Manifest Truth.”***

If today, in this world, they doubt in the rightfulness of Allah, or
they lead people astray, in the resurrection day the signs of Allah’s
magnificence, power, and rightfulness are so obvious that will make the
most stubborn people confess.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 26
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْخَبِيثَاتُ لِلْخَبِيثِينَ وَالْخَبِيثُونَ لِلْخَبِيثَاتِ
وَالطَّيّـِبَاتُ لِلطَّيّـِبِينَ وَالطَّيّـِبُونَ لِلطَّيّـِبَاتِ
اُوْلَئِكَ مُبَرَّءُونَ مِمَّا يَقُولُونَ لَهُم مَغْفِرَةٌ وَرِزْقٌ
كَرِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. “Impure women are for impure men, and impure men for impure
women. Good women are for good men, and good men are for good women;
such are innocent of that which they say: For them is forgiveness and a
bountiful provision.”***

This verse propounds a general principle and it does not imply that if a
man or a woman is good, his or her spouse necessarily is also good,
forgiven and is one of the people of the Heaven. For the Holy Qur’an
counts faith, piety, and good deed as the criterion, therefore, in spite
of the fact that Noah and Lut (as) were pure and faithful, their spouses
were evil and Hellish.

The Arabic word /tayyib/ means pleasant and nice. In the Qur’an this
word has been used in description of property, offspring, discourse,
city, spouse, food and sustenance, home, angle, tree, and greeting. Its
contrary word is the Qur’anic term /xabi/ with the sense of: malicious
and evil. It has also been used in description of property, man, spouse,
speech, deed, and tree.

This verse can be interpreted in different ways:

1. With regard to the previous verses that were about chaste women and
the affair of ’Ifk and with regard to the sentence:

***“...such are innocent of that which they say...”,***

the verse means that the evil words such as calumny and slander are
appropriate for malicious people, and pure and nice words are suitable
for pure persons.

2. It is possible that the purpose of the verse is intellectual,
doctrinal, ethical conformity, so as to say that man and wife must be
matching and soft-hued with each other. It means that every person
naturally seeks an individual of the same wavelength. In other words,
vile persons are after evil ones and on the contrary good persons are
after good ones.

The verse says:

***“Impure women are for impure men, and impure men for impure women.
Good women are for good men, and good men are for good women...”***

3. It is possible that the purpose of the verse is stating a religious
ordinance, meaning that marriage of good persons with malicious ones is
unlawful.

It is like the third verse of this Sura, which says:

***“The fornicator shall not marry save a fornicatress or an
idolatress...”.***

Imam Baqir (as) in a tradition confirms this meaning, too.[^8]

Therefore, the words ‘Khabithat’ and ‘Khabithun’ refer to women and men
who are unchaste and, on the contrary, the words ‘Tayyibat’ and
‘Tayyibun’ refer to chaste women and men, and the purpose of the verse
is apparently this.[^9]

In the end, the verse refers to the recent group that is pure men and
women.

It is said:

***“...such are innocent of that which they say...”***

Therefore Divine pardon and forgiveness as well as valuable sustenance
awaits them.

The verse concludes:

***“...For them is forgiveness and a bountiful provision.”***

[^1]: We have discussed about the difference about ‘(lewdness) in
decency’ and ‘abominable acts’ in the commentary of verse 90 from Sura
An-Nahl, No. 16, p. 511

[^2]: Bihar, Vol. 76, p. 9

[^3]: Al-Mizan, Vol. 15, p. 122

[^4]: Khisal, by Saduq, Chapter ‘Asharah

[^5]: Sura ya-Sin, No. 36, verse 65

[^6]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, ’Usul-i-kafi, Vol.2 p. 32

[^7]: Al-Mizan, the Commentary

[^8]: Majma‘ ul-Bayan, and Wasa’il-ush-shi’ah, Vol. 14, p. 337

[^9]: We read in the narrations concerning Nikah (marriage) that some of
the companions of Imams sometimes asked about ‘KhabIthah’ and they were
answered negatively. This itself shows that the word ‘khabithah’ refers
to unchaste women, not evil ‘words’ or evil ‘deeds’.


