Section 4: Control and Regulation of Morals
===========================================

Sura An-Nur - Verse 27
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا لاَ تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتاً غَيْرَ
بُيُوتِكُمْ حَتَّي تَسْتَأْنِسُوا وَتُسَلّـِمُوا عَلَي أَهْلِهَا
ذَلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “O you who believe! Do not enter houses other than your own
houses until you have asked permission and saluted those in them. That
is better for you, so that you might be admonished.”***

The Arabic word /’istinas/ means to ask permission and to declare one’s
entrance or coming in. According to some Islamic narrations, entrance to
a place can be stated by saying Allah’s name, or by footfall, or by
greeting calling hello, and the like.[^1]

Some one asked the Prophet (S) whether he had to ask permission for
entering his mother's house.

He said:

*“Yes.”*

That man said:

*“Except her no one lives in the house, and except me no servant she
has!”*

The Prophet (S) said:

*“Do you like to see your mother nude?”*

The man said:

*“No.”*

Then the Prophet (S) said:

*“So ask permission.”*

There is another narration in which the Prophet (S) prohibited men from
entering the houses in which women’s guardians are not present.[^2]

In narrations we read that we must ask permission for three times so
that those people in the house may have time enough to get ready. (Of
course, permission is asked only for entering others’ house. Man can
enter his house without prior notice.) For saving a person who is
sinking in the water, the oppressed and one who is trapped in fire no
permission is needed.[^3]

Whenever the Prophet (S) wanted to enter a house, he did not stand in
front of its door for asking permission, but he stood either on the left
or right so that his blessed look might not fall inside the house.[^4]

In another authentic narration we read that when the Prophet (S) wanted
to enter the house of his daughter, Fatimah (as), he put his hand on the
door and then pushed it aside a little.

Then he said:

*“Peace be upon you!”*

Fatimah (as) answered her father.

Then the Prophet (S) said:

*“May I enter?”*

Fatimah (as) said:

*“Yes, O’ Messenger of Allah (S)!”*

The Prophet (S) said:

*“May my companion enter the house, too?”*

Then she said:

*“I have no veil on my head.”*

When she veiled herself in an Islamic way, the Prophet (S) made
salutation again and Fatimah (as) answered. Again he (S) asked
permission for himself. And after her agreement, he asked permission for
his companion, Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah.

This tradition shows well how exactly the noble Prophet (S), who was a
paragon for common Muslims, observed these matters.

Even in some narrations we read that 3 times we must ask permission. The
first time for hearing the voice of the person who asks permission. The
second one is for getting ready. The third one lets the household to
issue permission or not.

Even some say that some time must be passed between each time of getting
permission so that if landlord has not worn a proper clothing, or he is
in a state that he does not like anyone to see, or sometimes room is
messed up, or there are some secrets in the house that must not be
discovered, he may have time to get ready.

And if he does not give permission, we must leave him without getting
upset.

Anyway, we must always withdraw anything that may violate modesty or
reverence.

Thus in this noble verse, some of proprieties and social orders of Islam
that have a very close relation with the issues of saving common
chastity are stated, and that is how to enter people’s homes and how to
ask permission for entrance.

The verse says:

***“O you who believe! Do not enter houses other than your own houses
until you have asked permission and saluted those in them...”***

So, in this way the announcement of your decision to enter the house is
expressed beforehand and the household’s agreement is always achieved.

It is interesting that, here, the Arabic phrase /tasta’nisu/ has been
used, not the word ‘Tasta’ǒinu’, because the second word only refers to
asking permission, but the first word which is derived from the Arabic
word /’uns/, implies a permission that is along with kindness,
familiarity, and truthfulness.

It shows that even begging permission must be done politely, friendly
and without any violation.

Thus if we split the sentence, many of customs that are related to this
matter are summarized in it. It means not to cry, not to knock at the
door hard, not to use harsh obscene words for begging permission, and
also that when permission is given we must not enter the house without
greeting, a salutation that is the sign of peace, tranquility, and
messenger of kindness and friendship.

It is worth-studying that this ordinance, whose humane and sentimental
aspect is clear, is accompanied with two sentences: /ǒalikum xayrun
lakum/

***(“That is better for you”),***

and /la‘allakum taǒakkarun/

***(“...so that you might be admonished”).***

This way of statement indicates that such ordinances are rooted in
humane sentiments, ration, and intellect. If man contemplates them, he
will get aware that they are good for him.

The verse continues saying:

***“...That is better for you, so that you might be admonished.”***

Anyway, purification and self-edification are achieved through observing
people’s rights and applying Islamic customs. When we want to enter
common centers, we must remember Allah and we must know that Allah
watches our thoughts and behaviour.

The Qur’an says:

***“...and Allah knows what you proclaim reveal what you
conceal.”***[^5]

Sura An-Nur - Verse 28
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِن لَّمْ تَجِدُوا فِيهَآ أَحَداً فَلاَ تَدْخُلُوهَا حَتَّي يُؤْذَنَ
لَكُمْ وَإِن قِيلَ لَكُمُ ارْجِعُوا فَارْجِعُوا هُوَ أَزْكَي لَكُمْ
وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. “And if you find no one therein, still do not enter them until
permission is given to you. And if it is said to you: ‘Go back’, then go
back, for it is purer for you; and Allah is cognizant of what you
do.”***

Entering people’s house needs permission, whether the giver of
permission is its owner or he is some legal person.

Thus, in this holy verse, it says:

***“And if you find no one therein, still do not enter them until
permission is given to you...”***

Maybe it implies that sometimes there are some persons at home, but
someone who is in charge or someone who is the head of household is not
present, in this case we are not allowed to enter the house.

Or there is not any person in the house. Or it is possible that the
landlord is in neighbour’s home or is near to his house, so when he
hears our voice or our knocking at the door, he comes and allows us to
enter.

In this case we can enter the house. Anyway, what is important is that
we can not enter a house without permission.

Then the verse continues saying:

***“...And if it is said to you: Go back, then go back, for it is purer
for you...”***

It refers to the matter that we must not get upset because of a negative
answer. Maybe the landlord is in a condition that he does get displeased
if we see him in that way. Or his home or his room is not ready for
receiving any guest.

Since when we hear a negative answer, we become curious to know its
reason and so we start thinking of looking from some hole or
eavesdropping in order to find out some secrets from the inside of the
house; at the end of the verse, it says:

***“...and Allah is cognizant of what you do.”***

Sura An-Nur - Verse 29
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتاً غَيْرَ مَسْكُونَةٍ
فِيهَا مَتَاعٌ لَّكُمْ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تُبْدُونَ وَمَا
تَكْتُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. “ (It is) no sin for you that you enter uninhabited houses
wherein you have some goods, and Allah knows what you reveal and what
you conceal.”***

Public places that have no special inhabitants, such as: hotels,
caravanserais, shops, and baths which are open to all and people can
enter and enjoy their advantages, are treated differently than personal
homes and require no permission for entrance.

Therefore, in view of the fact that each ordinance has some exceptions
through which problems and difficulties are solved rationally, in this
verse it says:

***“ (It is) no sin for you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein
you have some goods...”***

In the end of the verse, the Qur’an adds:

***“...and Allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal.”***

The above phrase perhaps refers to this matter that some individuals may
sometimes misuse this exception and enter uninhabited homes on the
pretext of this ordinance to find out some secrets. Or they sometimes
enter some inhabited houses on the excuse that they did not know they
are inhabited.

But Allah (s.w.t.) is aware of all of these affairs and knows well about
those who misuse. Thus, going to public centers while having no
beneficial aim and only for wandering or meandering is often forbidden.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 30
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لّـِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يُغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَيَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ذَلِكَ أَزْكَي لَهُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
يَصْنَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their
modesty. That is purer for them, verily Allah is All-Aware of what they
do.”***

### Occasion of Revelation

In Kafi book there is a narration by Imam Baqir (as) about the occasion
of revelation of this noble verse. A young man of The Helpers met a
woman on his way while her veil was put behind her ears (naturally some
part of her neck and breast was visible).

The woman’s face attracted the young man and he gazed at her and when
the woman passed by him he was still looking at her while she was going
her own way. Then he entered a narrow alley, and still he was looking
behind himself, when suddenly his face hit against the wall and the
sharp point of a bone, or a piece of glass, that existed in the wall cut
his face!

Then the woman went away when the young man came to his senses and saw
that blood was pouring forth from his face and his clothes and chest
were stained with blood. He became very displeased. He said to himself:

*“I take oath by Allah that I will go to the Prophet (S) and retell him
this event.”*

When the Prophet (S) saw him, he asked the young man what the matter
was. The man told him the event. At this time Gabriel, the harbinger of
Allah’s revelation, came down and brought the above verse.[^6]

Sin must be prevented from its origin and piety must be set out from
eyes. Immodesty and ogling prevent man’s spiritual development to grow
up.

We said before that this Sura is in fact the Sura of chastity and
purification from sexual deviations. So its discussions, from this point
of view, have a clear coherency. The verses in question mat state the
ordinances of looking, ogling, and veil are also related to this matter.
Moreover, the relation of this discussion to the discussions that are
about accusations of immodesty is known to everyone.

At first, the verse implies that the believing men should be told to
lower their gaze from a woman who is related within forbidden degrees
and from what is illegal to look at, and be modest.

The verse says:

***“Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their
modesty...”***

The Arabic word /yaquddu/ is derived from the word ‘Qazz’, which
originally means to decrease or to lessen. In many cases it is used in
the sense of: to lower voice or to lessen looking. Thus the verse does
not say that the believers must close their eyes, but it says that they
must lessen or shorten their looking.

This is a delicate way of speaking, because if a man really wants to
close his eyes when he sees a woman who is related within forbidden
degrees, he can no -longer walk, but if he casts down his gaze and does
not look at her face and her body, it is as though he has shortened his
gaze and has totally deleted the scene, that is forbidden, from the
scope of his eyes.

It is worth-studying that the holy Qur’an does not specify the thing
that a person must cast down gaze from (so as to say complement of the
verb is omitted), in order that it will be a general rule; that is, one
must cast down gaze from whatsoever is unlawful to look at.

But, with regard to the context of these verses, specially the following
verse that mentions veil, it will be clear that it means not looking at
women who are related within forbidden degrees (or are marriageable).
The occasion of revelation, mentioned at the beginning, confirms this
matter, too.

From what was said this matter is understood that the verse does not
signify that men must not gaze or stare at women's face so that some
people misuse it and say that not staring look is permitted.

However, its purpose is that when a man looks or sees, the scope of his
vision is vast, and at the time of entering a woman who is related
within forbidden degrees in the scope of his vision, he must cast down
his look in a way that the woman exits the scope.

It means he does not look at her, but he must see his way and path; and
that it is said that the word /qacld/ has been applied with the sense of
‘to decrease’ means the same.[^7]

The second command that is mentioned in the verse is to guard ones
modesty and to be modest.

The Arabic word /farj/ in fact means a split or opening between two
things, but in such cases it connotes pudendum. In Persian language, is
used instead of it, for keeping its-connotative meaning.

The purpose of ‘being modest’, according to Islamic narrations, is
covering the pudendum for not to be seen by others.

In a tradition by Imam Sadiq (as) we read:

*“Every verse of the holy Qur’an that mentions ‘guarding modesty’
indicates warding of fornication, except this verse that means keeping
it from others’ look.”*[^8]

Since sometimes it comes to mind that why Islam has prohibited this
action that is in line with one’s lust and wish, at the end of the verse
it is added:

***“...That is purer for them...”***

Then those who look at women flirtatiously, amorously and consciously,
and sometimes they consider it unintentional, are warned:

***“...verily Allah is All-Aware of what they do.”***

In other words, Allah is aware of whatever kind of manner they have;
whether they look openly or secretly, or other forms.

### A Few Traditions Upon Gaze

1. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Whoever supplies his eyes with what is unlawful, in Hereafter his eyes
will be filled with fire, unless he repents.”*[^9]

2. We read in a tradition that all the eyes will shed tear in Hereafter,
except 3 groups of eyes: the eyes that have shed tears out of Allah’s
fear, the eyes that are closed to sins, and the eyes that are open for
the sake of Allah.[^10]

3. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“If your look is cast on a woman (who is related within forbidden
degrees) for the first time, there will be no problem, but if your
looking is continued, (there will be problem, because) it causes
disorder and temptation.”*[^11]

4. We read in a tradition[^12] that the Prophet (S) said:

*“Do not sit on the way of people!”*

The audience said:

*“We have no choice.”*

The Prophet (S) said:

*“Then honour what is true and right!”*

They asked:

*“What is the right?”*

The Prophet (S) said:

*“Withdrawal from ogling and bothering people, answering others’
salutation, enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong.”*[^13]

5. Hadrat ‘Isa (as) said:

*“Withdraw from looking at women who are related within forbidden
degrees, because it plants the seed of lust in the heart and only this
is enough to get man involved in seduction or temptation.”*[^14]

6. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“The eye drags the heart.”*

*“The eye is Satan’s trap or snare.”*

(Guarding eyes is the best way for being away from lusts.)[^15]

7. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Evil look is one of Satan’s fatal arrows. Whoever closes his eyes for
the awe of Allah, Allah will bestow him a faith that he feels its
sweetness and taste in his inward.”*[^16]

8. Concerning permissible looking at a woman, Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Looking at her face, palms, and front part of the feet is lawful (but
purely and chastely).”*[^17]

9. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Allah’s wrath is very severe against a married woman whose eyes are
filled with individuals other than her husband (and persons related in
forbidden degrees) (looking deliberately and lustfully at a man who is
not related within forbidden degrees).*

*When she does so, Allah, Almighty and Glorious, rejects and nullifies
all good deeds and worships she has done.When she lies with a person
other than her husband, Allah has right to burn her after He chastises
her in the purgatory world.”*[^18]

10. The Prophet (S) said:

*“A man who funs a woman who is not related to him in any form of
marriage contract, Allah will confine him in chastisement for a thousand
years for every word that he has jested her.”*[^19]

11. The Prophet (S) said:

*“One who dominates neighbor’s house and looks at a man’s pudendum or a
woman’s hair or part of their body will be rightly and definitely
gathered by Allah with hypocrites who intended to look at women’s
covered limbs.*

*And until Allah Almighty defaces him in the world he will not leave
this world. Allah also will divulge all his sins and faults in the
Hereafter and disgrace him before other men (therein).”*[^20]

Sura An-Nur - Verse 31
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُل لّـِلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِنَّ وَيَحْفَظْنَ
فُرُوجَهُنَّ وَلاَ يُبْدِينَ زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلاَّ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا
وَلْيَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلَي جُيُوبِهِنَّ وَلاَ يُبْدِينَ
زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلاَّ لِبُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ ءَابَآئِهِنَّ أَوْ ءَابَآءِ
بُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَآئِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَآءِ بُعُولَتِهِنَّ
أَوْإِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي أَخَوَاتِهِنَّ
أَوْ نِسَآئِهِنَّ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُنَّ أَوِ التَّابِعِينَ
غَيْرِ اُوْلِي الإِرْبَةِ مِنَ الرّ‌ِجَالِ أَوِ الطّـِفْلِ الَّذِينَ
لَمْ يَظْهَرُوا عَلَي عَوْرَاتِ النّـِسَآءِ وَلاَ يَضْرِبْنَ
بِاَرْجُلِهِنَّ لِيُعْلَمَ مَا يُخْفِينَ مِن زِينَتِهِنَّ وَتُوبُوا
إِلَي اللَّهِ جَمِيعاً أَيُّهَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and guard their
modesty, and do not display their adornment except that which is
(ordinarily) apparent of it, and to draw their veils over their bosoms,
and not to reveal their adornment save to their own husbands or their
fathers or their husbands’ fathers, or their sons or their husbands’
sons, or their brothers or their brothers’ sons or their sisters’ sons,
or their women, or those whom their right hands possess (their slaves),
or the male attendants void of sexual stimulant, or the children who
know naught of women’s nakedness. And let them not stamp their feet (in
walking) so as to reveal what they*** ***hide of their adornment. And
turn unto Allah all together, O’ believers, in order that you may
succeed.”***

Allah has not mentioned the number of units (Rak’at) in ritual prayers
and that of ritual circumambulation of the Ka‘bah and has charged the
Prophet (S) with the task of stating the amount and measure of alms-tax
and many other issues, but Allah has paid attention to minimum issues of
family, upbringing, and moral corruptions.

By using female pronoun 25 times in this verse, Allah has paid attention
to women.[^21]

Thus, in this verse, the women’s duties and responsibilities are
mentioned; first, it refers to the ones that are like the men’s
responsibilities and duties when it says:

***“And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and guard their
modesty...”***

Therefore ogling is forbidden to women as it is to men. As all men are
obliged to veil their pudendum, all women are also obliged to veil their
pudendum from the eye of other women and men.

Then in three sentences the issue of veil, which is the women’s
characteristics, is referred to:

***1) “...and do not display their adornment except that which is
(ordinarily) apparent of it...”***

Upon the purpose of the adornment which women must not display, as well
as the visible adornment which women are allowed to display, mentioned
in the verse, commentators have stated different ideas.

Some of them say that hidden adornment is the very natural adornment
(women’s beautiful body), whereas the Arabic word /zinat/ has rarely
been applied in this sense.

Most of commentators have considered it as the place of adornment,
because the display of adornment itself such as ear-rings, bracelet, and
armlet is not forbidden. But displaying where they are used such as
ears, neck, arms and hands is forbidden.

Therefore, women totally are not allowed to display their adornments
that are usually hidden, although their limbs are not shown.
Consequently showing special ornate clothes that women wear under their
usual clothes or veil (chador) is not permitted, because the holy Qur’an
prohibits the display of such adornments either.

In many traditions narrated from Imams of Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) we see the
same matter that the interior adornment, in Arabic, is interpreted as
‘Qalladah’ (necklace), ‘Dumlaj’ (armlet), ‘Khalkhal’ (anklet).[^22]

Moreover, since in many numerous Islamic narrations, the apparent
adornment has been interpreted as ring, eyeliner, and so on, we see that
the purpose of interior adornment is also the adornments that are
hidden.

2) The second ordinance that is brought up in this verse is:

***“...and to draw their veils over their bosoms...”***

The Arabic word /xumur/ is the plural form of /ximar/, which originally
means veil, but it is usually applied to the thing with which women veil
their head (scarf).

The Arabic word /juyub/ is the plural form of the word /jayb/, that
means the collar of a shirt which is rendered to the throat and it is
sometimes applied to the upper part of the breast, because it is located
near it.

It is understood from this verse that before the revelation of this
verse, women wore their scarf in a way that they put their scarf behind
their head so that their neck and a part of their breast were visible.
The Holy Qur’an enjoined them to wear their scarf in a way that that
part of their neck and breast that are visible to be veiled.

3) In the third ordinance both the cases in which women are allowed to
unveil themselves and display their inward adornment are specified.

The verse says:

***“...and not to reveal their adornment save to...”***

They must not display their adornment except in twelve instances:

1. To their own husbands

***(“...their own husbands...”)***

2. To their fathers

***(“...or their fathers...”)***

3. To their husbands’ fathers

***(“...or their husbands fathers...”)***

4. To their sons

***(“...or their sons...”)***

5.To their husbands’ sons

***(“...or their husbands’ sons...”)***

6. To their brothers

***(“...or their brothers...”)***

7. To their brothers’ sons

***(“...or their brothers’ sons...”)***

8. To their sisters’ sons

***(“...or their sisters’ sons...”)***

9. To their women

***(“...or their women...”)***

10. To their slaves

***(“...or those whom their right hands possess (their slaves)...”)***

11. To those who do not have desire for women

***(“...or the male attendants void of sexual stimulant...”)***

12. To kids who know nothing of pudendum

***(“...or the children who know naught of women’s nakedness...”)***

4) Finally the fourth ordinance is stated in this way, saying:

***“...And let them not stamp their feet (in walking) so as to reveal
what they hide of their adornment...”***

Women must be so exact and strict in observing chastity and avoiding
affairs which kindle lust in men's heart and may cause deviation from
the path of chastity that they must withdraw from letting strange men
hear their anklet sound. This indicates how exact and precise Islam is
in these affairs.

In the end of the verse, all the believers, irrespective of men and
women, are invited to repent and return to Allah, where the Qur’an says:

***“...And turn unto Allah all together, O’ believers, in order that you
may succeed.”***

If they have committed such sins, now that the facts of the ordinances
of Islam are explained, they must repent their wrong actions and go to
Allah for salvation and deliverance, because successfulness is found
only with Him. On our way there are slippery slopes from which no one
can be saved, and we must trust to Allah!

The Prophet (S) said about the commentary of the Qur’anic sentence:
/’ilia libu‘ulatihinna/ (save to their own husbands):

*“Allah has cursed those women who do not apply cosmetics to their hair
and face for the sake of (their) husband or do not fulfil what the
husband demands.”*[^23]

### The Philosophy of Veil

1. Undoubtedly in our age, which some persons have called the age of
sexual liberty and nudism and Western exponents who regard women’s
promiscuity as part of women’s liberty, speaking about veil is not
welcomed by them and sometimes it is considered as legends of the past
times!

But umpteen corruptions and increasing problems and difficulties that
are caused by these unrestrained freedoms cause gradually some people to
pay attention to such words.

The issue is that whether women (I ask your pardon) must be at the mercy
of all men for abuses through various aural, visual, and physical means
(save sexual intercourse), or they must be limited to their own
husbands.

The question is that whether women must be engaged in a contest for
showing their body and stirring men’s lust and defiled low desires or
whether these issues must be removed from the society and be confined to
family environment and the life of man and wife.

Islam is in support of the second plan and veil is part of this plan,
while western-fascinated persons are in favour of the first plan.

Islam says that sexual gratifications, including sexual intercourse and
physical, visual, aural relishing, are only limited to spouses. Anything
other than that will defile and corrupt the society.

The sentence /aǒka lahum/:

***“...That is purer for them...”,***

mentioned in the previous verse, refers to this matter.

The philosophy of veil is not something hidden and invisible, because:

A) Women’s nakedness that naturally has the consequences such as:
applying cosmetics, coquettishness and the like, sets men, specially
young ones, in a state of continual temptation (always tempts them), and
that subjects them to tension and stress.

It causes nervous diseased excitements and sometimes it is the source of
psychological abnormalities. How much can human bear such excitements?
Do not all psychotherapists say that continual excitement is the cause
of illness?

We must specially pay attention to this fact that sexual instinct is
man’s most powerful and deepest instinct and in the course of history it
has sowed the seeds of fatal events and gruesome crimes and so it is
said:

*“No important event there is save a woman plays a role in it!”*

Is not it playing with dynamite to stir this instinct through showing
naked women? Is it a rational job?

Islam wants Muslim men and women to have a calm psyche, a sound nerve,
and pure eye and ear. This is one of the philosophies of veil.

B) The documented figures show that divorce and separation in spousal
relationships has constantly increased with the increase of nakedness in
the world, because whatever eye sees heart often desires it. And
whatever heart, that is unrestrained low desires, wants man pursues it
at any price it may be, and so every day he is after one woman and says
goodbye to the other one.

In a community that vile exists (and other Islamic conditions are
observed) two spouses belong to each other and their sentiments, love
and feelings are limited to each other.

However, in ‘the open market of nakedness’ in which women have been
practically turned into common products (at least at the level of
non-sexual intercourse), sacredness of marriage contract is no longer
meaningful, and families will be quickly and easily destroyed, like
spider web, and children will be without guardian.

C) Spreading indecency and the increase of illegitimate children are the
sorest consequences of unveiling, which do not need any statistics and
figures, we think. Its reasons are especially so fully visible in
western countries that they need no explanation.

We do not say that the main factor of indecency and illegitimate
children is only unveiling. We do not say that shameful colonialism and
destructive political issues are not playing role in it, but we say that
one of its most influential factors is nakedness and unveiling.

With regard to the fact that ‘indecency’ and worse than that
‘illegitimate children’ have been and are the source of kinds of crimes
in human societies, the perilous dimensions of this issue will be made
clearer.

D) The issue of ‘woman’s meanness’ and her degradation is very important
after all, which does not need statistics and figures, too. When society
desires nakedness of woman, it is natural that every day it demands her
more make-up and more ostentation and display.

When woman is used as a means for attracting tourists and sight-seers in
waiting rooms and shops, because she is physically beautiful and
attracting, woman’s personality is degraded to a doll or a valueless
product and her high humane values are totally forgotten.

And her only pride is her youth, beauty and display. Thus, she turns
into a means for satisfying unrestrained desires of some wicked,
deceiving, beastly men.

How can a woman with her moral characteristics achieve high status and
show her knowledge in such a society?

It is really sorrowful that, in western countries and western-influenced
countries, lewd and promiscuous women are most famous and acquire the
highest earning and every thing is in favour of them, who are known as
artist and actress.

Wherever they go, they are welcomed by organizers of defiled places, in
which people fall over themselves for them. We had, of course, such a
situation in Iran before Islamic Revolution.

We thank Allah that it is wound up in Iran and woman is changed from
being just a doll, worthless product and wickedness into a personality
who has found her status again. She veils herself, but she is not
isolated from society. She has participated in all good and edifying
activities and even in the holy defense she has appeared with veil.

This was a part of clear philosophies of veil in Islam, the philosophies
that are appropriate to our discussion.

2. The commentary of the Qur’anic sentence: ***/’ulil
’irbat-i-min-ar-rijal/*** (the male attendants void of sexual
stimulant).

The Arabic word /’irbah/ is derived from the word /’arab/. As Raqib says
in Mufradat: It means desperate need that man finds ways to gratify it.
And it is sometime used as absolute need.

The purpose of the phrase /’ulil ’irbat-i-min-ar-rijal/ here is those
persons who have sexual desire and need spouse. Therefore the Qur’anic
phrase /qayr-i-’ulil ’irbah/ includes the ones who do not have such
desire.

That to whom this sentence refers, is a matter of discussion between
commentators:

Some of them say that it refers to the old men who have sexual desire no
longer, such as /’al-qawa’idu min-an-nisa’/ (the women who are unsexed
or the women who are beyond the conventional age for marrying).

Some other commentators say it refers to men who are castrated.

And some commentators say that its purpose is those who are neuter, that
is: they have no sex organ at all.

However, what must be emphasized and it is mentioned in some valid
traditions by Imam Baqir (as) and Imam Sadiq (as) is that the purpose of
this sentence is those insane men who have no sexual desire at all.
These men are usually hired to do simple jobs and work as servants. The
application of the Arabic word /’at-tabi‘in/ also strengthens this
meaning.[^24]

Since this quality, that is the quality of the lack of sexual desire, is
correct about a group of old men, it is possible that this verse can
include such old men. Imam Kadhem (as) emphasized such group of old men
in a tradition.

However, the verse does not imply that such men are like those who are
unmarriageable. It is certain that veiling some part of head or some
part of hand, and the like, before such men is not compulsory.

3. Which children are the exceptions of this ordinance?

We said that the 12th group before whom veil is not compulsory is
children who have not yet enjoyed sexual desire.

The Qur’anic sentence /lam yazharu/ has sometimes been interpreted as
/lam yatta li‘u/ (are not aware), and sometimes as /lam yaqdiru/ (are
not able), because this word has been used in both meanings and in the
Holy Qur’an it is sometimes used to mean this and sometimes to mean
that.

For example, in Sura Al-Kahf, No. 18, verse 20 we read:

***“...if they prevail against you, they, will stone you...”***

And in verse 8 from Sura At-Taubah we recite:

***“How (can be?) For if they prevail against you, they will observe
towards you neither ties of relationship nor treaty...”***

However this differentiation in the concerned holy verse has no
significant influence on the conclusion of discussion. Its purpose is
children who are neither perceptive nor potent because of lack of sexual
desire.

Therefore ladies must veil themselves before those children who have
reached an age in which such a desire and ability is dully developed.

4. Every kind of tempting factor is forbidden!

The last matter is that at the end of this verse the Qur’an implies that
women should not walk in a manner that the sound of their anklet can be
heard. This shows that Islam is so exact and fastidious in the issues
concerning common chastity that even such a thing is not allowed.

Of course a fortiori, things that set youths' lust on fire, such as
circulation of tempting pictures, blue movies, sexy novels and stories,
are not permitted. Undoubtedly Islamic society must be free from such
matters that lead people, girls and boys, to centers of corruption and
wickedness.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 32
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنكِحُوا الاَيَامَي مِنكُمْ وَالصَّالِحِينَ مِنْ عِبَادِكُمْ
وَإِمَآئِكُمْ إِن يَكُونُوا فُقَرَآءَ يُغْنِهِمُ اللَّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ
وَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “And marry those among you who are single and the righteous among
your servants, male or female. If they are poor, Allah will enrich them
out of His grace, and surely Allah is Ail-Embracing, All-Knowing.”***

Marriage is venerated and emphasized in Islam. Islamic society is
responsible for marrying off those who are celibate. Parents who do not
marry their offspring are partner in sin that their issues commit.

Thus, from the beginning of the Sura up to here various calculated ways
have been brought up for preventing sexual defilements, the ways each of
which are playing an influential role in preventing or struggling
against these defilements.

In this verse, one of the most important ways of struggling against
wickedness that is simple, easy, sincere, friendly marriage, is
mentioned. Because it is obvious that in order to wind up the issue of
sin the approach of satisfying and gratifying the instincts is applied.
In other words, no ‘negative struggling’ is successful without ‘positive
struggling’.

Therefore, in this verse the Qur’an says:

***“And marry those among you who are single and the righteous among
your servants, male or female...”***

The Arabic word /’ayama/ is the plural form of /’ayyim/, which
originally means a woman who has no husband. Then it has also been
applied to man who has no wife. Thus, the totality of all unmarried men
and women, whether they are virgin or widower or widow, are included in
this verse.

Although marriage is an optional affair and depends on the will of two
parties, the general idea that is derived from the word /’ankihu/
(marry) is to prepare preliminaries of marriage by giving financial aids
if necessary, finding a proper spouse, encouraging others to get
married, and finally mediating for solving problems that will not be
settled without intercession of others.

Summarily the concept of the verse is so extensive that it includes
every word or action which is for this sake.

Without doubt, the principle of Islamic cooperation necessitates Muslims
to help each other in all cases and fields, but emphasizing on this
matter which is specified in marriage is for the reason that marriage is
specially important.

This is so important that Imam Ali (as) in a tradition said:

*“The best intercession is to mediate between two persons for the sake
of marriage so that they get married.”*[^25]

In a tradition by Imam Kazem Musa Ibn Ja‘far (as) we read:

*“There are three groups who are under protection of Allah’s Throne in
the Day of Resurrection, the day in which no protection exists save
Allah’s: the man who prepares the preliminaries of his Muslim bother’s
marriage; those who help another Muslim who needs help; those who hide
other Muslim brother’s secrets.”*[^26]

The Prophet (S) said:

*“For each step one takes and each word one says in this way the reward
of one year worshiping that in its nights the one establishes prayers
and in its days he fasts, will be recorded in one’s book of
deeds.”*[^27]

Since an almost public pretext for escaping marriage is poverty and not
being financially supported, the holy Qur’an answers them and implies
that you should not be afraid of their poverty; because, as the verse
says:

***“...If they are poor, Allah will enrich them out of His grace, and
surely Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.”***

And Allah is powerful to do such a thing, because He is so omnipotent
that His power covers the entire universe and He is so omniscient that
He is aware of every one’s intentions; especially He is aware of the
intention of those who decide to get married in order to save chastity
and virginity. He blesses and favours all such ones.

Therefore, Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Life will be prosperous by getting married.”*

Again Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“One who does not get married for fear of poverty is suspicious of
Allah.”*

And the same Imam (as) said:

*“Two unit (rak‘at) prayers performed by a person who is married is
better than 70 unit (rak‘at) prayers which is performed by a person who
is not married.”*[^28]

There is a famous tradition by the Prophet (S) who said:

*“Get married so that generations will be increased, because in the Day
of Resurrection I will be glorified before other nations with increase
of your population even with aborted children.”*[^29]

In another tradition by the Prophet (S) we read:

*“One who gets married has saved one half of his religion and must
protect the other half.”*[^30]

The Prophet (S) said:

*“The worst of you is the one who is unmarried.”*[^31]

The Prophet (S) said:

*“After Islam no favour and blessing is better than having a Muslim wife
and spouse, because when he looks at her he will be happy and when he
enjoins her she obeys and when he is absent she protects his property
and reputation.”*[^32]

The Prophet (S) in a tradition said:

*“Marry virgin girls because their mouth is sweet and charming and their
uterus is more proper and they learn soon and their kindness is more
stable.”*[^33]

Sura An-Nur - Verse 33
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلْيَسْتَعْفِفِ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَجِدُونَ نِكَاحاً حَتَّي يُغْنِيَهُمُ
اللَّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ وَالَّذِينَ يَبْتَغُونَ الْكِتَابَ مِمَّا
مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُمْ فَكَاتِبُوهُمْ إِنْ عَلِمْتُمْ فِيهِمْ خَيْراً
وءَاتُوهُم مّـِن مَّالِ اللَّهِ الَّذِي ءَاتَاكُمْ وَلاَ تُكْرِهُوا
فَتَيَاتِكُمْ عَلَي الْبِغَآءِ إِنْ أَرَدْنَ تَحَصُّناً لِتَبْتَغُوا
عَرَضَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَن يُكْرِههُّنَّ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ مِن
بَعْدِ إِكْرَاهِهِنَّ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***33. “And let those who do not find the means to marry keep
(themselves) chaste until Allah enriches them out of His grace. And
those of your slaves who seek a writing (of emancipation), write it for
them if you know any good in them, and give them of the wealth of Allah
which He has bestowed upon you; and do not compel your slave girls to
prostitution when they desire chastity, in order that you may make a
gain in the life of the world; and whoever compels them, then (unto
them), verily after their compulsion, Allah will be Forgiving,
Merciful.”***

Not having spouse will not give someone permission to commit sin, so one
must be patient and chaste. In order to save public chastity and purity,
both the youth must try to save themselves and government must get down
at it and the rich must embark on it.

***“...and give them of the wealth of Allah...”***

Of course, authorities of the society and the rich must be first
recommended to do something, and then unmarried individuals must be
advised to be chaste and pure.

But since in spite of all attempts and endeavours carried out by
individuals and others, marriage does not take place and one has to,
willingly or unwillingly, remain single for a length of time, so this
person must not think that he is permitted to be sexually defiled.
Therefore in this holy verse the command of purity is issued though
observing it may be difficult for them.

It says:

***“And let those who do not find the means to marry keep (themselves)
chaste until Allah enriches them out of His grace...”***

In this crucial and trial phase the unmarried ones should not get
involved in this defilement and exempt ones’ selves, because no excuse
is accepted, but the power of faith, personality, and piety must be
tested in this phase.

Today the issue of marriage gets so complicated that it is turned into
an arduous or impassable path because of wrong customs and even
superstitions, yet marriage is, regardless of all these manly-added
things, an innate matter and in line with the rule of creation.

Man needs a sound and healthy marriage for continuation of human
generation, for tranquility of psyche and body, and for solving problems
of life. And man must protect himself from any kind of pollution.

Then, in view of the fact that in any occasion that slaves are
mentioned, Islam pays a special attention to their freedom, the verse
turns from the discussion of marriage to the discussion of manumitting
and freeing slaves, which is done through ‘Mukatibah’ (entering a
written contract in which slaves work and pay their employer some money
by installment and then they will be free).

It says:

***“...And those of your slaves who seek a writing (of emancipation),
write it for them if you know any good in them...”***

The purpose of the Qur’anic sentence /‘alimtum fihim xayran/ (if you
know any good in them) is that they (slaves) must have grown enough and
be competent enough to carry out such a contract.

They must be able to live independently when the amount of money they
promised to pay is shelled out completely. But if they cannot do it and
on the whole this matter causes them losses and consequently they will
be a burden to society, this matter should be delayed until the time
that they are competent and able.

Then, in order to make no trouble for slaves when they pay this money by
installment, it is said:

***“...and give them of the wealth of Allah which He has bestowed upon
you...”***

Commentators have different opinions upon the purpose of this ‘wealth’
that must be given to slaves:

Many commentators say: its purpose is to pay them a part of alms-tax, as
it is said in verse 60 of Sura At-Taubah, so that they can pay their
debt and then be free.

Some others say: its purpose is that the owner of the slave spares some
of the debt and if he has received it he returns it to them so that they
can afford more to get freed from slavery.

Another possibility is that at the beginning when slaves begin working
and they do not have financial means, the owner must give them subsidy
or some capital so that they can start a business and can manage their
life and carry out their installments both.

Of course the above three comments are not inconsistent and it is
possible that all of them to be included in the concept of the verse.
The real purpose is to get Muslims help this poor and oppressed group so
that they get freed sooner.

It is clear, of course, that the matter of slavery is a social
phenomenon, which was prevalent before Islam and Islam did not develop
it. Therefore Islam not only does not approve it, but also it sets
various ways and methods to limit this phenomenon and wipe out this evil
tree.

Islam first struggled against the interests of slavery. In the old times
if a debtor could not afford his debts, he would become the salve of the
leaner. Islam barred this approach. In old times defeated soldiers
became the salves of victorious army.

Islam freed those who were defeated in the Battle of Badr on the
condition of teaching those who were illiterates and also Islam freed
some through paying compensation. Then Islam paved grounds in Islamic
society to make the path of getting free for slaves.

One of the uses of alms-tax is buying and freeing slaves. In Islam, if
an owner wounds his slave, that salve is free. Breaking fast, accidental
homicide and failing in performing an oath must be atoned and it is
possible that a person frees some slaves as atonement.

One of the ways is ‘Mukatibah’ that is recommended in the above verse
and it is advised that if there is some good in slave you may free
him.Possibly this is its purpose that if there is benefit for the slave
to be free you must answer his request positively.

There happen many times that this freedom is not good for him, and maybe
it is because of this that Islam has struggled with slavery gradually.

The Arabic word ‘Mukatibah’ is derived from the word ‘Kitabat’ and the
word ‘Kitabat’ is derived from the Arabic word ‘Kataba’, which means to
gather. The act of writing in Arabic called ‘Kitabat’ because alphabets
and words are gathered in a phrase.

And since in ‘Mukatibah’ a contract is usually written between the owner
and a slave, it is called ‘Mukatibah’. Contractual enfranchisement is a
contract that is between these two persons; wherein the slave is obliged
to obtain some money through free business and pay to his owner by
installment and so regains his freedom.

The payment must be in a way that the slave can afford. And it has been
commanded that the sum of these successive payments must not be more
than the value of the slave.

And if the slave cannot pay his debts for some reasons, his debts must
be paid by allocating a part of ahns-tax (Zakat) as well as through
Muslim public treasury. Even some Islamic jurists specify that if the
owner is to pay alms-tax, he himself must substitute his slave’s debts
for his ahns-tax that is to be paid.

Moreover, if Muslims are the victorious party of a war and take war
prisoners, there are some different choices to treat these prisoners:

1 . To free all prisoners at once and in this case war begins again.

2 . To kill all of them and that is the sign of Muslims’ cruelty.

3 . To set up a camp for them and sustain them by using Muslim public
treasury. In this way innocent people must pay the expense of the
wrongdoers.

4. To sent them among Muslims so that they view Islam and Muslims
morals. In this way they may gradually be influenced and become Muslim,
and then we free them through various ways. This plan is the best and
Islam's plan is the same.

Let us pass this matter, for the system of war was in this way at that
time, that a prisoner was used as a slave and Islam reciprocated it. As
today prisoners are kept in camps and we also must observe international
rules of war to the extent that these rules are consistent with our
religion.

Then one of the evil acts of some worldly persons toward slaves is
mentioned in the verse, where it says:

***“...and do not compel your slave girls to prostitution when they
desire chastity, in order that you may make a gain in the life of the
world...”***

Some of commentators have said about the occasion of revelation of this
phrase: Abdullah Ibn ’Ubayy had six salve girls. He compelled them to
sell their honour for earning money for him.

When the ordinance of Islam about struggling against unchaste acts (in
this Sura) was issued, the slave girls came to the Prophet (S) and
complained about this matter. Then, at this time, the above verse was
revealed and prohibited this action.[^34]

This verse shows that people were so much involved in immoral corruption
and deviation in the Age of Ignorance that even after the advent of
Islam some people used to continue their previous acts.

This status existed until the time when this verse was sent down and put
an end to this condition. But unfortunately in our age, in some
countries (that they advocate civilization and human rights, ) this
action is seen very easily.

Even in our country, when the previous regime was ruling, this matter
was carried out terribly, where the innocent girls and ignorant women
were deceived and led to the centers of wickedness, and they were forced
to be unchaste by means of devilish schemes. They could not escape at
all. In this way a lot of money was earned and explanation of this
poignant matter cannot be done here.

Slavery does not apparently exist as before but, in this so-called
civilized world, some crimes are committed which are worse than the age
of slavery. May Allah save the people of the world from these
pseudo-civilized men! We thank Allah that such shameful crimes have
considerably been wound up in Iran after Islamic Revolution.

It is necessary to mention that the purpose of the Qur’anic sentence:
/’in aradna tahassunan/

***“...when they desire chastity...”***

is not that if women themselves would like to do this evil act, there is
no problem to force them. When there is compulsion to do something,
willingness to do it is not meaningful. Reluctance is true when there is
lack of willing or tendency, otherwise, being unchaste and encouraging
others to be unchaste is a great sin, anyway.

This sentence is for the fact that if the owners of these salve girls
had a little jealousy, their jealousy would be hurt. The concept of this
verse is that these slave girls who were apparently at a lower social
level would not like to be unchaste, why did they go along with this
wickedness?

At the end of the verse, as it is the approach of the Holy Qur’an, the
path of return is not closed to wrongdoers and they are encouraged to go
back, repent and atone.

It continues saying:

***“...and whoever compels them, then (unto them), verily after their
compulsion, Allah will be Forgiving, Merciful.”***

As we said before, this sentence may refer to the condition of the salve
girls’ owners who were penitent for their gloomy and evil past and they
were ready to do repentance and edify themselves. Or it refers to the
women who were compelled and forced to this unchaste action.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 34
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدَ أَنزَلْنَآ إِلَيْكُمْ ءَايَاتٍ مُّبَيّـِنَاتٍ وَمَثَلاً مِنَ
الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِن قَبْلِكُمْ وَمَوْعِظَةً لّـِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. “And certainly We have sent down unto you clear revelations, and
an example of those who passed away before you, and an admonition unto
the pious ones.”***

This noble verse, as it is the method of the Qur’an, refers to the
pervious discussions as a summery or conclusion, and says:

***“And certainly We have sent down unto you clear revelations, and an
example of those who passed away before you, and an admonition unto the
pious ones.”***

In other words, the addressee of this noble verse is all those who are
fully capable from the time of descending of the Qur’an to the time of
the universe destruction. What the holy Qur’an says is divided here into
3 parts:

First part: (clear verses). They are about the reasons of monotheism,
stating the mission of prophets, the characteristics of Resurrection,
stating the religious ordinances, whether they are obligatory or
religiously prohibited or conventional, and fair virtues and other
religious duties that are all clear and in line with wisdom and common
good.

Second Part:It is about the life of past prophets and nations who gained
their consequences as the result of Faith. It is also about those
nations who were each chastised in a way because of corruption,
polytheism, paganism, oppression, and denial of prophets.

Third part: It consists of some advise, admonition, and exhortation, but
only the pious uses and get profit from them because they accept them.
And wrongdoers will be chastised because of their deeds.

It is often of no avail to give advice to the dark hearted persons.
Their likeness is the iron nail which naturally does not go into a
stone.

[^1]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, the Commentary

[^2]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn

[^3]: Tafsir-i-Kabir by Fakhr-i-Razi

[^4]: Tafsir-i-Kabir, and Fi Zilal

[^5]: Sura Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 99

[^6]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi’ah, Vol. 14, p. 139, Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, Al-Mizan,
and Ruh ul-Ma‘ani

[^7]: Take care

[^8]: ’Usul Kafi and the commentary by Ali ibn Ibrahim, Nur-uth-Thaqalyn
Vol.3, p. 587

[^9]: Bihar ul-‘Anwar, Vol. 76, p. 336 and Man layahdaroh ul-Faqih

[^10]: Kanz ud-Daqa’iq, the Commentary

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: recorded in Sahih Bokhari

[^13]: Ruh ul-Bayan, the Commentary

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Urar ul-Hikam

[^16]: Bihar ul-‘Anwar, Vol. 104, p. 38

[^17]: Kanz ud-Daqa’iq

[^18]: Man Layahduruh ul-Faqih

[^19]: Ibid

[^20]: E’aqaab Al-A’amal

[^21]: Qurtabi, Commentary

[^22]: Ali-ibn-Ibrahim, the Commentary

[^23]: Nur-uth-Thaqallyn, the commentary

[^24]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi’ah, chapter 124, Tradition 8

[^25]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi’ah, Vol. 14, p. 27

[^26]: Ibid

[^27]: Ibid

[^28]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn

[^29]: Safinah-tul-Bihar, Vol. 1, p. 561

[^30]: Ibid

[^31]: Majam‘ul-Bayan, under the verse

[^32]: Man la Yahduruh ul-Faqih, Vol. 3, p 255

[^33]: Bihar ul-Anwar, Vol. 103, p. 237

[^34]: Majma‘ ul-Bayan and Qurtabi Commentary


