Section 5: Allah is Light
=========================

Sura An-Nur - Verse 35
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضِ مَثَلُ نُورِهِ كَمِشْكَاةٍ
فِيهَا مِصْبَاحٌ الْمِصْبَاحُ فِي زُجَاجَةٍ الزُّجَاجَةُ كَاَنَّهَا
كَوْكَبٌ دُرّ‌ِيٌّ ٌّيُوقَدُ مِن شَجَرَةٍ مُبَارَكَةٍ زَيْتُونَةٍ لاَّ
شَرْقِيّـِةٍ وَلاَ غَرْبِيَّةٍ يَكَادُ زَيْتُهَا يُضِيءُ وَلَوْ لَمْ
تَمْسَسْهُ نَارٌ نُّورٌ عَلَي نُورٍ يَهْدِي اللَّهُ لِنُورِهِ مَن
يَشَآءُ وَيَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الاَمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ وَاللَّهُ بِكُلّ‌ِ
شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***35. “Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The similitude
of His light is as a niche wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass.
The glass is as it were a glittering star, lit from a*** ***blessed
olive-tree, neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil would almost
glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched it. Light upon light,
Allah guides unto His Light whom He pleases, and Allah sets forth
similitudes for mankind, and Allah is All-Aware of all things.”***

‘Light’ is something that is itself bright and causes the brightness of
other things. In Islamic culture, several things have been mentioned as
‘light’, including: The Holy Qur’an, tradition, knowledge, wisdom,
faith, guidance, Islam, the holy Prophet (S), and the Infallible Imams
(as).

Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Nothing I saw unless I saw Allah before it, after it, and along with
it.”*[^1]

Concerning the Pure Essence of Allah a famous Persian poet says:

*When I look at desert,*

*I see You.*

*When I look at sea,*

*I see You.*

*Whatever I look at, mountain and plain,*

*I see a sign of Your elegant stature.*

For commenting on the above verse, there have been said many words, and
commentators, philosophers, and Islamic mystics have discussed a lot.

The relation of this verse with the previous verses is in this way that
in the former holy verses the discussion focused on chastity, struggling
against indecency by means of various ways, and since what guarantees
the execution of all Divine ordinances, especially controlling
unrestrained instincts, more importantly sexual instinct, which is the
most powerful one, can not be done without having 'faith' as support,
finally the discussion is led to ‘faith’ and its powerful influence,
when the verse begins saying:

***“Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth...”***

What a nice, interesting, and valuable sentence! Yes Allah is the Light
of the heavens and the earth. He is the brightness and illuminator of
all of them.

Some commentators have interpreted the word ‘Light’ here as guider and
leader[^2]; and some of them have interpreted it as ‘lighter’ and some
as ‘beautifying’.

All these meanings are true, but the concept of the verse is still more
inclusive.

In the Qur’an and Islamic Narrations some entities are called as
‘light’:

1. The Glorious Qur’an:

As Sura Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 15 is recited:

***“...indeed there has come to you light, from Allah, a Light and a
clear Book.”***

Also recite in Sura Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 157:

***“...Then those who... and follow the light which has been sent down
with him: these are they that are the prosperous ones.”***

2. Faith:

We read in Sura Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 257:

***“Allah is the Guardian of those who have faith; He brings them out of
darkness into the light...”***

3. Divine Guidance and clear-sightedness:

As it is mentioned in Sura Al-An‘am, No. 6, verse 122:

***“Is he who was dead (with ignorance and polytheism) and We gave him
life (by Our guidance), and provided him with a light by which he walks
among the people, as one whose likeness is in the utter darkness (of
ignorance and polytheism) whence he cannot come forth from them?...”***

4. Islam Religion:

It is said in Sura At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 32:

***“...and Allah refuses but to perfect His Light, though the infidels
detest it.”***

5. The Prophet (S):

In Sura Al-Ahzab, No. 33, verse 46 we read about the Prophet (S):

***“And as a summoner unto Allah by His permission, and as a
light-giving torch.”***

6. Imams and the Infallible Leaders:

As we read in Ziyarat-i-Jami‘ah:

*“Allah created you (as) lights, then He set you encircled (His
Throne).”*

In the same Ziyarat we read:

*“You are the light for the good ones and guiders of those who do good
deeds.”*

7. Science and Knowledge:

This is also mentioned as light, as we read in a famous tradition:

*“Knowledge is a light that Allah casts in any heart that He
wills.”*[^3]

The above mentioned matters are on one side and, on the other side, we
must study carefully the special characteristics of light some of its
properties and qualities are as follows:

a. Light is the most beautiful and delicate entity in the world of
material. It is the source of all beauties and delicacies.

b. As scientists say, light has got the highest velocity in the world;
300, 000 kilometers per second. Light can circulate the earth 7 times in
less than a second (in a wink), therefore, extraordinarily great
astronomical distances are only measured by the speed of light per year.
It means the extent that light, with its extraordinary speed, can go in
a year.

c. Light is a means for making things comprehensible and for viewing
different creatures of the world. Without it we cannot see anything,
therefore, it is both visible and making visible.

d. The light of the sun, which is the most important light of our world,
grows flowers and plants. It is in fact the secret of all living
creatures’ survival, and it is impossible for any one or any creature to
continue to live without light (directly or indirectly).

e. Today, it has been proven that all the colours that we see are the
result of sunlight or other similar lights, otherwise, creatures have no
colour in absolute darkness.

f. All existing energies in our environment, except atomic energy, are
resulted from sunlight. The movement of Winds, falling of rain, movement
of rivers, floods, and waterfalls and, finally, the movement of all
living creatures are derived from sunlight.

The source of warmness, heat and what warms creatures is the very
sunlight. Even the heat of fire that is gained from wood of trees or
coal or petroleum and its derivatives are from the heat of sun, because
all of them go back, according to scientific researches, to plants and
animals that have acquired heat from sun and have stored it in
themselves.

Therefore, the movement of engines is because of it, too.

g. The light of sun kills kinds of microbes and harmful insects. And if
there were not the shining of this blissful light, the earth would turn
into a great hospital whose inhabitants would be coming to grips with
death.

Shortly, as we look more and closely at this strange phenomenon of the
world (light), its valuable benefits and blesses will be more obvious.

Now, with these two introductions, if we want to choose a parallel or
comparison from among sensible creatures of this world for Allah’s Pure
Essence (although He, the Almighty, is higher than any comparison), can
we select any word other than ‘light’?

He is the same Lord Who is the Creator of all universe. He is the
Lighter of the world of creation, all living creatures are alive because
of His command, and all creatures are sustained by Him, so that if for a
second He stops His blissful looking at creatures, all will be
inexistent.

It is interesting that as much as any being is related to Him, it
acquires luminousness with respect to it:

The Holy Qur’an is light, because it is His words.

Islam is light, because it is His religion.

The prophets are light, because they are His messengers.

Infallible Imams (as) are Divine lights, because they are guardians of
His religion after the prophets.

Faith is light, because it is the secret of relationship with Him.

Knowledge is light, because it brings familiarity with Him. Therefore,

***“Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth...”***

If we consider a wider meaning for light, that is: ‘anything whose
essence is obvious and apparent and clears other things’, in this case
applying the word ‘light’ to His Pure Essence is not likening, because
nothing in the world of creation is more apparent and obvious than Him,
and all other things than Him are apparent because of Him.

In the book named: Tauhid we read a tradition by Imam Ali Ibn
Mus-ar-Rida (as).

That Imam was questioned about the interpretation of the verse,

***“Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth...”,***

and he said:

*“He guides both the inhabitants of the earth and the inhabitants of the
heavens.”*

In fact, this is one of the qualities of the Divine Light, but it is
certainly not limited to it. Thus, all the mentioned commentaries of
this verse can be included in what was said. Each of them refers to one
of the dimensions of this unique Light.

It is interesting that in the 47th part of Jushan Kabir supplication,
which is a collection of Allah’s attributes, we read:

*“...Oh Light of lights! Oh Lighter of lights! Oh Creator of lights! Oh
Administrator of light! Oh Measurer of light! Oh Light of all lights! Oh
Light before any light! Oh Light after any light! Oh Light that is
superior to any light! Oh Light that has no parallel!”*

Therefore, all lights of universe come from His Light and return to the
Light of His Pure Essence.

Mentioning the above fact, the holy Qur’an specifies the manner and the
way of Divine Light by means of an exact and nice similitude.

It says:

***“...The similitude of His light is as a niche wherein is a lamp. The
lamp is in a glass. The glass is as it were a glittering star, lit from
a blessed olive-tree, neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil
would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched it. Light
upon light, Allah guides unto His Light whom He pleases, and Allah sets
forth similitudes for mankind, and Allah is All-Aware of all things.”***

To explain this example, paying attention to some matters is necessary:

The Arabic word /miškat/ is, in fact, a hole and a tiny place which was
used to be created in a wall and old common lanterns were kept in it in
order to be protected from wind and storm.

And sometimes a ledge was made in the room and the side of that part of
the wall, toward the yard, was covered with glass. Thus, both inside of
the room and the yard were lighted, meanwhile the lantern was saved from
any wind and storm.

Again ‘***Mishkat***’ was also applied to the glass cases that were made
in the form of cubic rectangle, which had a lid and on the top of it
there was an opening for letting air out and it was used for putting
light in it.

In short, ‘***Mishkat***’ is a case for protecting light against wind
and storm and, since it was often made in wall, the light was focused
and reflected.

The Arabic word /Zujajah/ means glass. In fact, it is applied to
transparent stones and since glass is made of stone materials and it is
transparent, it is also called /zujajah/. Here it means a bulb that is
put on the lamp to protect its flame and to lead the movement of air
from bottom to the top and to increase the lightness of the torch.

The Arabic word /misbah/ means a lamp that usually has a wick and a
flammable oil material and the wick is burned.

The Qur’anic sentence:

***“...lit from a blessed olive-tree, neither of the East nor of the
West...”***

refers to an energetic material which is particularly suitable for this
lamp, because olive oil is pressed from a blissful and fruitful tree. It
is one of the best oils for burning.

It comes from a tree that all its branches and stems must be equally
exposed to sunlight and it must be neither located in the eastern part
of the garden near wall nor in the western part of it, where one side of
it is in expose of sunlight, otherwise, its fruits will be half ripe and
half unripe nor its oil will be pure.

Now we realize that for having a full light of this lamp, we must have 4
factors: a lantern which protects the lamp completely, and focuses light
without decreasing its light. A bulb that regulates the movement of air
and it must be so transparent that does never prevent lighting.

A lamp that produces light by using wick. And, finally, an energetic
material that is pure and clean and must be so flammable that as though
it is going to be burnt without touch of fire.

All of these, on one side, show the reality of material and its
appearance. On the other side, great Islamic commentators have different
opinions about the concept of this likening; or, in other words, to what
Divine Light it is likened:

Some say that its purpose is that guiding light that Allah casts in the
heart of the believers; in other words, its purpose is ‘faith’ that is
placed in the hearts of the believers.

Some say that it is the holy Qur’an that casts light in the heart of
man.

Some say that the similitude refers to the noble Prophet (S).

Some say that it refers to the reasons of monotheism and Allah’s
justice.

Some commentators have interpreted it as the spirit of piety and
obedience, which is the cause of goodness and prosperity.

In fact, all the extensions that are for the spiritual light in the holy
Qur’an and Islamic narrations are mentioned here as commentary. The
spirit and concept of all of them is, in fact, one thing and that is the
light of ‘guidance’, which comes from the holy Qur’an, revelation, and
prophets, and it develops by reasons of monotheism and its result is
submitting to Allah’s command and piety.

Note: The light of faith that is in the heart of the believers has all
these 4 factors which exist in a lighting lamp.

“***Misbah***” is those very flames of faith that appear in the heart of
the believer wherefrom the light of guidance comes.

“***Zujajah***” and bulb is the heart of the believer that controls
faith in his entity. And “***ieshkat***” is the chest of the believer
or, in another word, it is the collection of his personality, knowledge,
sciences, and thoughts that saves his faith from mishaps.

The meaning of the Qur’anic phrase which says:

***“...a blessed olive-tree...”***

is the very Divine revelation whose essence is fully pure and sincere
and the believers’ faith is fruitful and flaming by it.

In fact, this is the Light of Allah, the light which illuminates the
heavens and the earth, and it comes from the center of the believers’
heart and lights all their entity and being.

The reasons that are gained through wisdom and intellect are mixed with
the light of revelation and will be the extension of ‘***light upon
light***’.

And it is by this that the receptive hearts are guided to the Divine
light, and the concept of

***“...Allah guides unto His Light whom He pleases...”***

is applied to them.

Therefore, for saving this Divine Light (the light of faith and
guidance), a collection of Islamic teachings, knowledge,
self-edification, and ethic is necessary to protect this “**Misbah**” as
a “***Mishkat***” does.

It also needs an apt and receptive heart to regulate this program like
‘zujajah’. And help through revelation is needed to give energy to it,
like the blessed olive tree.

And this light of revelation must be free from deviating money-oriented
tendencies that are western and eastern and cause decay, evilness and
darkness.

It must be so pure, and clear, free from deviation that it mobilizes all
man’s powers without help of anything and becomes the extension of:

***“...whose oil would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire
touched it...”***

Any kind of interpretation by personal opinion, incorrect prejudice,
personal tastes, imposed ideas, inclination to west and east, and any
superstitions that defile the fruit of this blessed tree will decrease
the luminosity of this lamp and sometimes put out the light.

This is the example that Allah has stated for His Light in this verse
and He is All-Aware of all things.

We understand from the above matters that if we see in narrations by the
infallible Imams that ‘**Mishkat**’ is interpreted as the heart of the
Prophet (S), ‘Misbah’ as the light of knowledge, ‘***Zujajah***’' as
Imam Ali (as), his successors, and ‘***Shajaratin Mubarakah***’ (***the
blessed tree)*** as ’Ibrahim Khalil who is the root of this family, and
the Qur’anic sentence:

***“neither of the East nor of the West”***

as negation of inclination to Judaism and Christianity, these are in
fact the other face of that light of guidance and faith and are the
statement of a clear extension of them, but it is not limited to them
only.

And also if some commentators have interpreted this Divine Light as the
holy Qur’an or intellectual reasons, or the holy Prophet (S), it has a
root in common with the commentary of the above verse, too.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 36
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللَّهُ أَن تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ
يُسَبّـِحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالْغُدُوّ‌ِ وَالآصَالِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. “ (This lamp of guidance is found) in houses which Allah has
allowed to be exalted and that His name be mentioned therein. There
glorify Him therein in the mornings and the evenings, ”***

Up to now we behold the characteristics of this Divine Light, the light
of guidance and faith, through likening it to a very luminous lamp, now
we must see that where this lamp is located and how its place is. By
specifying its place, all the things that are necessary for this will be
clear.

Therefore, this verse implies that this lamp is found in the houses
which Allah hath allowed its walls to be exalted so that enemies,
devils, and the promiscuous ones can not reach it. They are houses that
His name shall be remembered therein and the verses of the Qur’an and
the facts of revelation are read in them.

The verse says:

***“ (This lamp of guidance is found) in houses which Allah has allowed
to be exalted and that His name be mentioned therein...”***

Many commentators consider the above verse to be related to the pervious
verse, as we have commented on it; but some say that it is related to
the next sentence, the relation which does not seem very correct.

But that some say what effect the existence of such lamp in the houses
whose characteristics are stated has, we must say that a house, whose
walls are exalted and decisive alert men guard it, guarantees the
protection of this luminous lamp. Moreover those who seek such source of
light will be aware of its place and hasten to enjoy it.

But what is the purpose of the Qur’anic word /buyut/ (Houses)? Its
answer will be clear in the characteristics mentioned in the rest of the
verse, where it says:

***“...There glorify Him therein in the mornings and the evenings, ”***

### Some Points

1. We read in Ziyarat Jami‘ah, when we address the Imams (as) of
Sh‘iite:

*“...and Allah has placed you in houses that Allah (s.w.t.) has
permitted to be exalted...”*

Therefore, the sanctuaries of the infallible Imams (as) are counted as
one of the extensions of the Qur’anic phrase /fi buyutin/ (in houses)
mentioned in this holy verse.

2. The Arabic word /turfa‘/in the verse means the height of a place,
too, such as the verse which says:

***‘And (remember) when Abraham and Ishmael raised up the foundations of
the House...’***[^4]

3. Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Those houses are the houses of prophets, sages and the infallible
Imams.”*[^5]

Tha‘labi says in his commentary that one day the Prophet (S) was
reciting this verse when then Abubakr said:

*“Is the house of Ali (as) and Fatimah (as) the extension of this
verse?”*

The Prophet (S) said:

*“Yes, it is the best extension of this verse.”*[^6]

4. Imam Kazim (as) said:

*“The purpose of the phrase*

***‘...in the mornings and the evenings”,***

*mentioned in the verse, is the punctual ritual prayers.”*[^7]

5. In the Holy Qur’an, there are many cases in which ‘glorification’ is
used instead of ‘ritual prayer’. Sura ’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 41:

***“...and glorify (Him) in the evening and early morning.”***

Sura Ta-Ha, No. 20, verse 130:

***“...and glorify your Lord by praising Him before the rising of the
sun and before its setting...”***

Sura An-Nur - Verse 37
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِجَالٌ لاَّ تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلاَ بَيْعٌ عَن ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
وَإِقَامِ الصَّلاَةِ وَإِيتَآءِ الزَّكَاةِ يَخَافُونَ يَوْماً
تَتَقَلَّبُ فِيهِ الْقُلُوبُ وَالاَبْصَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. “Men whom neither merchandise nor any sale diverts from the
remembrance of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and paying the
poor-rate; they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes will be
overturned;”***

Men of Allah try their best for their worldly life while they are not
ignorant of the Hereafter, because abandoning business is not a value,
but if business is done along with remembrance of Allah, praying and
giving alms-tax, then it will be respected high.

Therefore in this noble verse it is implied that those men who are not
prevented from remembering of Allah, performing ritual prayer and paying
alms-tax by neither business nor selling and buying, fear the day in
which hearts and eyes will be capsized.

The verse says:

***“Men whom neither merchandise nor any sale diverts from the
remembrance of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and paying the
poor-rate; they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes will be
overturned;”***

These characteristics show that the aforementioned houses are the very
centers that are fortified by Allah’s commandment and Allah is
remembered in them. In these centers Islam facts and Allah’s ordinances
are circulated.

In this extensive and comprehensive meaning, mosques are the houses of
prophets and saints; especially the house of the Prophet (S) and the
house of AM (as) are included.

There is no reason for the matter that some commentators in their
commentaries have limited it only to the mosque or houses of prophets
and such like.

And there are some narrations in which its clear extensions are
mentioned:

Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“This verse refers to the houses of prophets and the house of Imam Ali
(as) is included in it, too.”*[^8]

Another tradition indicates that when the Prophet (S) was reciting this
verse he was asked:

*“What is the purpose of/buyut/ (houses)?”*

The Prophet said:

*“The houses of prophets”*

Again Abubakr asked:

*“Is this house (pointing to the house of Fatimah (as) and Ali (as))
included in it, too?”*

The Prophet said:

*“Yes, it is the best of them.”*[^9]

All of these denote the clear examples.

In another tradition upon the commentary of this verse by Imam Sadiq
(as), recorded in the book Raudah Kafi, he has said:

*“Verily* ***Mishkat*** *is the heart of Muhammad (S), and* ***Misbah***
*is the very light of knowledge (and guidance), and* ***Zujajah*** *is
the heart of Ali (as) or his self, (in which Misbah was placed after
departure of the Prophet (S)).”*[^10]

Also in the book Tauhid, by Saduq, we read a tradition by Imam Baqir
(as) who said:

*“Verily* ***Mishkat*** *is the light of knowledge in the heart of the
Prophet (S) and* ***Zujajah*** *is the heart of Ali (as)... And /**nurun
‘ala nur**/ is Imams who are from the family of the Prophet (S) and they
come one after the other.*

*These Imams are assisted by the light of knowledge and wisdom. And this
trend has been since the creation of Adam and will continue to the end
of the world. These are the very testamentary guardians who are
appointed as caliphs by Allah in the earth.*

*There is not and there will be not any age or time that the earth can
be empty of one of them. They are Allah’s Authorities over His
servants.”*[^11]

In another tradition by Imam Sadiq (as), ‘Mishkat’ has been interpreted
as Fatimah (as), ‘Misbah’ as Hassan (as), and ‘Zujajah’ as Hussayn
(as).[^12]

There is another authentic tradition by Imam Baqir (as), in which
Ghattadah, a famous Islamic jurist from Basrah, had a conversation with
Imam (as) and he expressed his heartily amazement concerning Imam’s
peculiar grandeur. Imam said to him whether he knew that where he was
sitting; in front of those about whom Allah has said:

***‘(This lamp of guidance is found) in houses which Allah has. allowed
to be exalted and that His name be mentioned therein. There glorify Him
therein in the mornings and the evenings, ’***

***‘Men whom neither merchandise nor any sale diverts from the
remembrance of Allah and the keeping up of in prayer and paying the
poor-rate...’.***

Then Imam said:

*“You are what you said (a jurist from Basrah), and we are what the holy
Qur’an says.”*

In answer, Ghattadah said:

*“You are true, may Allah make me your sacrifice! By Allah that the
purpose is not stone and clay houses (but its purpose is the houses of
revelation, faith, and guidance).”*[^13]

In another tradition it has been narrated about this group of Divine men
who guard revelation and guidance:

*“They are businessmen who are not ignorant of Allah’s remembrance
because of trading or doing business. When it is the time of prayer,
they pay its due unto Allah therein (perform prayer).”*[^14]

This refers to the matter that while they are carrying out economic good
activities, all of their actions are overshadowed by Allah’s name and
they consider nothing preceding it.

Yes, any place or center which is set by Allah’s command and Allah’s
name is mentioned in it and every morning and evening some believing
men, who do not forget Allah’s remembrance because of worldly life,
praise Allah and perform prayer, is the center of Divine lights
(Mishkat), faith and guidance.

In fact, this kind of house has some characteristics:

First, it is set by Allah’s command.

Second, its bases and walls are so exalted and fortified that they
protect it from the penetration of Satan.

Third, it is the center for remembering Allah.

Fourth, some men guard it who praise Allah every morning and every
evening, and the worldly beguiling attractions do not make them ignore
the Truth.

These houses with such characteristics are the sources of guidance and
faith.

It is also important to mention the matter that in this verse both the
Arabic word /tijarat/ (merchandise) and the word /bay‘/ (sale) have been
used. Although it seems that both of them mean one thing, the difference
between them may be that /tijarat/ refers to a continuous job and /bay‘/
refers to an impermanent action which is done for one time.

It is also necessary to pay attention to the matter that it does not say
that ‘they are men who do not do business or sale’, but it says:

***“Men whom neither merchandise nor any sale diverts from the
remembrance of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and paying the
poor-rate...”***

They always fear the day of Hereafter and Allah’s justice court, in
which hearts and eyes will be capsized because of its awe.

(The Arabic verb /yaxafun/ is a form of verb which in the Arabic
language indicates the continuity of their fear of the resurrection day.
It is a sort of fear that compels them to their duties and missions.)

Moreover, great commentators have different opinions about the Qur’anic
phrase /nurun ‘ala nur/

***(‘Light upon light’):***

In Majma‘-ul-Bayan, the deceased Tabarsi says: it refers to prophets who
come one after another from one root and continue the path of guidance.

Fakhr-i-Razi says: it refers to gathering of light rays and their
concentration, as it is said about believers:

‘*A believer has 4 positions. If he receives a favour or bless, he
thanks Allah. If he receives a disaster, he is patient and withstands
it. If he says a word, he tells the truth. If he judges, he seeks
justice. He is like a living man among the dead when he is among
ignorant people.*

*He moves among 5 lights: his saying is light. His deed is light. His
place of arrival is light. His place of exit is light. His aim is the
light of Allah in the Day of Hereafter.*’

It is also probable that the first light in the verse refers to the
light of Divine guidance through revelation, and the second light refers
to His guidance by means of intellect. Or the first light is the light
of religious guidance, and the second light is Divine guidance,
therefore, it is

***‘light upon light’.***

Thus, this holy phrase is sometimes interpreted as different sources of
light (prophets), and sometimes as various kinds of light, and sometimes
as its various phases, while all of them are possible and can be
included in the meaning of the verse and, therefore, its concept is
vast.[^15]

### Some Notes to Be Studied

1. Some traditions indicate that the objective of the persons mentioned
in this noble verse is those businessmen who stop working and get
prepared to perform ritual prayer when they hear the call to
prayer.[^16]

2. Business is not the only factor that entertains man and prevents him
from remembering Allah, but there are also other factors mentioned in
the Qur’an, such as: multiplication of wealth, desires, bad friend and
offspring.

3. Olive tree has been described as ‘blessed tree’ in the above verses.
And if in that age the importance of this phrase was not clear when the
Qur’an was descended, now we know it fully, for great scientists have
spent many years to study the different properties of plants and they
tell us that this tree produces a blessed fruit which contains one of
the most useful and valuable oils and it plays an important role in the
health of body.

Ibn ‘Abbas says that all parts of this tree is valuable and good, even
its ash has also got property and benefit. It is the first tree that
after the Flood of Noah (as) grew, and prophets have uttered invocation
prayed for it to be a blessed tree.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 38
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَجْزِيَهُمُ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنَ مَا عَمِلُوا وَيَزِيدَهُم مِن فَضْلِهِ
وَاللَّهُ يَرْزُقُ مَن يَشَآءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. “That Allah may reward them with the best of what they have done,
and increase for them out of His grace. And Allah gives sustenance to
whom He pleases without stint.”***

Allah compensates all shortages of Allah’s men’s deeds and gives them
full reward. This noble verse points to the great reward of these
guardians of the light of guidance who are the lovers of truth and
reality.

It says:

***“That Allah may reward them with the best of what they have done, and
increase for them out of His grace...”***

There is nothing to get surprised at, because Allah’s grace is not
limited for those who deserve His Grace;

***“...And Allah gives sustenance to whom He pleases without stint.”***

Upon the purpose of the Qur’anic phrase:

***/ahsana ma ‘amilu/ (‘the best of what they did’),***

mentioned in the verse, some say it refers to all good deeds, including
recommended duties and compulsory ones, great or small.

Some others say it refers to the fact that Allah rewards a person who
does a good deed tenfold, or sometimes 700 times or even more, as we
read in Sura Al-’An‘am, No.6, verse 160:

***“Whosever brings a good (deed), he shall have ten times its
like...”***

And in Sura Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 261, we read:

***“The likeness of those who spend their wealth in Allah’s way is as
the likeness of a grain (of corn) that grows seven ears, with) a hundred
grains in every ear. And Allah multiplies (in abundance) for whom He
wills...”***

Upon the commentary of the above-mentioned phrase, there is also this
probability that the purpose of it is that Allah will reward them all of
their deeds according to the measure of their best deeds. Even their
insignificant and middle deeds will be rewarded in the row of their best
deeds.

This manner is not beyond the grace of Allah, because when justice and
punishment are in contemplation, equality is necessary, but when grace
and generosity come in, bounties and remittal are without stint, since
His Pure Essence is infinite and His bless is unlimited and His
generosity is endless.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 39
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَسَرَابٍ بِقِيعَةٍ يَحْسَبُهُ
الظَّمْاَنُ مَآءً حَتَّي إِذَا جَآءَهُ لَمْ يَجِدْهُ شَيْئاً وَوَجَدَ
اللَّهَ عِندَهُ فَوَفّاهُ حِسَابَهُ وَاللَّهُ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***39. “And (for) those who disbelieve, their deeds are as a mirage in a
desert, which the thirsty one supposes to be water until when he comes
unto it he finds it naught, and finds Allah with him Who pays him his
reckoning in full; and Allah is swift in taking account.”***

Since the previous verses spoke about Allah’s light, the light of faith
and guidance, the above verse speaks about obscurity of disbelief,
ignorance, , faithlessness, dark-hearted pagans and hypocrites in order
to complete the discussion and to make their position clear, and compare
their status with others’.

The verse speaks about those whose entity is:

***‘layer upon layer of darkness’;***

in contrary to the believers whose life and thoughts are:

***‘light upon light’.***

Here the word is about individuals who are after mirage instead of water
in the dry and hot desert of life and then lose their life because of
thirst, while the believers have found the clear spring of guidance
under the auspices of faith and have settled beside it.

At first, the verse says:

***“And (for) those who disbelieve, their deeds are as a mirage in a
desert, ...”***

Then it continues saying:

***“...which the thirsty one supposes to be water until when he comes
unto it he finds it naught, and finds Allah with him Who pays him his
reckoning in full; and Allah is swift in taking account.”***[^17]

The Arabic word /sarab/ is derived from the word ‘Saraba’, which means:
‘walking in a slope’, and the word ‘Sarb’ means: ‘an inclined way’.
Therefore, ‘Sarab’ is applied to a shine that appears from a distance in
deserts and slopes and it seems that there is water over there, while it
is nothing but a reflection of sunlight.

The Arabic word /qi‘ah/ means ‘a vast area and ground that has no water
and plant’, and, in other words, it is applied to arid deserts in which
mirage is often seen.

Commentators of the Qur’an and lexicologists consider this word singular
and its plural form is /qi‘an/ or /qi‘at/.[^18]

Physicists say that when the air gets warm, the layer of air, that is
directly above the earth, gets less dense and becomes different than the
adjacent layer, then the waves of light are broken and mirage is because
of this.

An English dictionary defines a mirage as:

*‘It is caused by the refraction of light rays from the object through
layers of air having different densities as the result of unequal
temperature distribution.’*

Sura An-Nur - Verse 40
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ كَظُلُمَاتٍ فِي بَحْرٍ لُجّـِيٍّ يَغْشَاهُ مَوْجٌ مّـِن فَوْقِهِ
مَوْجٌ مِن فَوْقِهِ سَحَابٌ ظُلُمَاتٌ بَعْضُهَا فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ إِذَآ
أَخْرَجَ يَدَهُ لَمْ يَكَدْ يَراهَا وَمَن لَّمْ يَجْعَلِ اللَّهُ لَهُ
نُوراً فَمَا لَهُ مِن نُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***40. “Or (the Unbelievers’ deeds) is like utter darkness in a vast,
abysmal sea. There covers him a wave, above which is another wave, above
which is a cloud; (with layers of) darkness one over the other. When he
holds out his hand, he can hardly see it. And for whomever Allah does
not appoint light, for him there is no light.”***

Each deed that a believer does is light and each deed that a disbeliever
does is darkness. Instead of opening way for them, disbelievers’ deeds
mislead them more and it will be veil upon veil.

Therefore, in this noble verse the Qur’an says:

***“Or (the Unbelievers’ deeds) is like utter darkness in a vast,
abysmal sea. There covers him a wave, above which is another wave, above
which is a cloud; (with layers of) darkness one over the other. When he
holds out his hand, he can hardly see it...”***

Yes, the true light in men’s life is only the light of faith, and life
will be dark and obscure without it, but this light of faith comes only
from Allah.

The verse continues saying:

***“...And for whomever Allah does not appoint light, for him there is
no light.”***

To understand this example fully, it is first necessary to pay attention
to the meaning of the Arabic word /lujjiy/. It means: ‘a vast and very
deep sea’, and, in fact, it is derived from the Arabic word /lijaj/
which means: ‘to go after or insist on a job, (usually bad ones)’. Then
it has been applied to the succession of waves of the sea and to their
standing behind each other.

Since if a sea is deeper and vaster, its waves are more, this word is
applied to the deep and vast seas.

Now, consider a wavy and rolling sea which is very deep, and we know
that sunlight, the strongest light, penetrates into the sea to a certain
level and its last ray will disappear in almost a depth of 700 meter, so
that in deeper parts continual darkness and eternal night rule, for no
light penetrates there.

We know also this fact that if water is clear and calm, light will be
reflected better, but wavy water breaks light ray, and a little amount
of it can go deep into water.

And if, above a wavy sea, a dark cloud stands, the resulting darkness
from it will be very dense.

First the darkness of the depth of sea, second the darkness of wavy sea,
and third the darkness of dark cloud are the layers of darkness that are
placed on each other. It is obvious that in such a darkness the closest
objects can not be seen, and even if man holds his hand close to his
eye, he can not see it.

A disbeliever who has not the light of faith is like someone who is
involved in such triple darkness. On the contrary, fair-minded believers
are the extension of ‘light upon light’.

Some of commentators have said that this triple darkness in which
faithless people are involved, is as follows: the darkness of incorrect
belief, the darkness of wrong speech, and the darkness of bad behaviour.

In other words, the deeds of faithless people are dark both from the
point of fundamental and from the view point of their reflection in
their speech, and also because of their full harmony with their other
evil deeds.

Some other commentators have said that this triple darkness is the
phases of their ignorance: 1) They do not know. 2) They do not know that
they do not know. 3) Nevertheless, they think that they do know. And
this phase is that compound and multiplied ignorance.

Some other have said since the main factors of cognizance, according to
the text of the Qur’an, are 3, that is: heart (in the sense of
intellect), eye, and ear, as Sura An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 78 says:

***“And Allah has brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers
(while) you knew nothing, and He appointed for you hearing and sight and
hearts...”.***

But disbelievers have lost both the light of heart, and the light of
eye, and the light of ear and they are plunging in darkness.[^19]

It is obvious that these 3 comments are in harmony and it is possible
that the verse refers to all of them.

Anyway, we conclude from these couple of verses that the deeds of
disbelievers are likened a false light that appears like mirage in a dry
and hot desert, and not only does not it quench their thirst, but also
their thirst increases because of running.

Then, after this false light, which is the faithless hypocrites’
specious deeds, there is the inward of these deeds, which is full of
darkness and dense horrible obscurity. This awful inward deranges all
man’s senses and the closest objects will be invisible to him, even he
cannot see himself, let alone others.

It is obvious that in such a terrible darkness, man is totally lonely
and ignorant. He can neither find the way, nor does he have any fellow
traveler, nor does not know his status, and he does not have any means,
because he has not enjoyed the source of light, that is Allah, and he
has covered with the veil of ignorance and conceit.

If you do not forget, we have said that light is the source of beauties,
luminosities, life, and movement, but darkness is the source of the
ugliness, death, mortality, immobility and silence. Darkness is the
center of fear and hate. It is accompanied with coolness and depression.
This is the status of those who lose the light of faith and plunge in
the darkness of disbelief.

### Some Tradition About ‘Light’ and ‘Darkness’

1. Once Imam Sajjad (as) was asked:

*“Why are those who stay awake during the night and make supplication to
Allah facially the best?”*

He said:

*“Because they have private communion with Allah and Allah covers them
with His light.”*[^20]

2. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“Since I heard the Prophet (S) said: ‘Night prayer is light.’, I have
not lost one night to perform night prayer.”*[^21]

3. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Prayer is light.”*[^22]

4. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Anyone who testifies rightly in order to restore a Muslim’s right by
it, his face will be luminous on the day of dooms and his face emit
light as far as the eye can see and people know him by his name and
family.”*[^23]

5. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“There is truth with any right matter and there is light with any right
thing.”*[^24]

6. A man said to the Prophet (S) that I would like to be mustered on the
Day of Hereafter luminously. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Do not commit oppression upon anyone (so that) you will be mustered in
light on the Day.”*[^25]

7. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Be in awe of injustice, because it causes darkness in the Day of
Hereafter.”*[^26]

8. Sura Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 257:

*“Allah is the Guardian of those who believe. He brings them out of the
darkness into the light; and those who disbelieve, their guardians are
false-deities (taqut). They bring them out of the light into the
darkness; they are the inhabitants of the Fire, wherein shall they abide
forever.”*

[^1]: The Commentary book: ‘Nur’, following of the verse, and for more
information, you may refer to Kitab ul-Wafi, Vol. 1, p. 382, and
Tauhid-i-Saduq, chapter Ar-ru’yah, p. 107

[^2]: Burhan and Safi commentary, because of this noble tradition by
Imam Rida (a.s): “Allah guides all dwellers of the skies and the earth
to what is their best”

[^3]: Bihar, Vol. 1, p. 325; and Mizan ul-Hikmah, p. 6016

[^4]: Sura Al- Baqarah, No. 2, verse 127

[^5]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, the Commentary

[^6]: Ruh ul-Ma‘ani, the Commentary

[^7]: Bihar, Vol. 23, p. 326

[^8]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, Vol. 3, p. 607

[^9]: Majma‘ ul-Bayan, following the verse

[^10]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, Vol. 3, p. 602 & 603

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Ibid

[^13]: Ibid, p. 602

[^14]: Ibid, p. 609

[^15]: Take care

[^16]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn

[^17]: Imam Ali (as) was asked about how Allah reckons all people
together. He said: “As He provides all sustenance in one time.” (Majma‘
ul- Bayan)

[^18]: Majma‘ ul-Bayan, Ruh ul-Ma‘ani, the Commentary by Qurtabi, and
Tafsir-i-Fakhr-i-Razi

[^19]: Tafsir-i-Fakhr-i-Razi, following the verse

[^20]: ‘Ilal-ush-Sharayi‘, Vol. 1, p. 366

[^21]: Bihar, Vol. 41, p. 71, and ’Allhar us-Sadiqin, Vol. 11, p. 91

[^22]: At-Taqib wat-tarhib, Vol. 1, p. 156

[^23]: Bihar, 104/311/9

[^24]: Kafi, 2/54/04

[^25]: Kanz ul-Abraham‘mal

[^26]: ’Usul Kafi, Vol. 4, p. 17


