Section 8: Respect For Domestic and Personal Privacy
====================================================

Sura An-Nur - Verse 58
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا لِيَسْتَأْذِنكُمُ الَّذِينَ مَلَكَتْ
أَيْمَانُكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ لَمْ يَبْلُغُوا الْحُلُمَ مِنْكُمْ ثَلاَثَ
مَرّاتٍ مِنْ قَبْلِ صَلاةِ الفَجْرِ وَحِينَ تَضَعُونَ ثِيابَكُمْ مِن
الظَّهِيرَةِ وَمِن بَعْدِ صَلاَةِ الْعِشَآءِ ثَلاَثُ عَوْرَاتٍ لَكُمْ
لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلاَ عَلَيْهِمْ جُنَاحٌ بَعْدَهُنَّ طَوَّافُونَ
عَلَيْكُم بَعْضُكُمْ عَلَي بَعْضٍ كَذَلِكَ يُبَيّـِنُ اللَّهُ لَكُمُ
الاَيَاتِ وَاللَّهُ عَليمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. “O you who believe! Do let those whom your right hands possess,
and those of you who have not reached to puberty, ask permission of you
at three times (for coming into your room): before the morning prayer,
and at midday when you put off your clothes, and after the night prayer.
(These are) three times of privacy for you. It is no sin for you or for
them (if) after those (three times), some of you go round attendant upon
the others. Thus does Allah make clear the revelations for you; and
Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.”***

Faithful parents are responsible for teaching Divine religious
ordinances to their children. The place where parents habitually sleep
must be separate and far from the sight of the children, otherwise,
there was no need for taking permission, as man must allocate some hours
for his wife during 24 hours and issues must not disturb them.

Islam is a religion for life and it is completely comprehensive. It has
programs and plans for both common trivial issues such as entrance of
children in parent’s room (mentioned in this verse) and important
matters such as the establishment of universal government.

Anyway, as we said before, the most important issue that is
comprehensively discussed in this Sura is the matter of public chastity
and righting against any sexual deviation.

This verse also is about one of these affairs that relate this issue and
it explains its characteristics; the matter is concerned to the mature
and immature issues’ taking permission when they want to enter the room
which belongs to their parents.

At first, it says:

***“O you who believe! Do let those whom your right hands possess, and
those of you who have not reached to puberty, ask permission of you at
three times (for coming into your room): before the morning prayer, and
at midday when you put off your clothes, and after the night
prayer...”***

As Raqib says in his book, Mufradat, and Firuz’abadi in Qamus, the
Arabic word /zahirat/ means midday and about noontime when people take
off their outer clothes and man and wife may be together privately.

***“... (These are) three times of privacy for you...”***

The Arabic word /’aurat/ originally is derived from the word /‘ar/
meaning shame and fault. Since showing genital organs is the cause of
fault and shame, in Arabic language it is called /’aurat/. Sometimes the
word /’aurat/ is also used to mean an opening and cut in wall and dress
and the like.

Sometimes it means absolutely fault. Anyway, using this word for these
three times is for the matter that people do not compel themselves to be
veiled fully as in other times they do and they consider these times
their privacy.

It is obvious that this command only involves parents who must force
their issues to do this, for children have not come of age yet so that
they are not obligated to carry out divine duties, therefore parents are
addressed here.

Moreover, the verse is applied to both girls and boys, and the word
/’allaǒina/ (those) that is a masculine pronoun is not against
generality of the concept of the verse, because in many cases this word
is used for all people, as we read in the verse that obligates all
Muslims to fast, in which the word /’allaǒina/ is used to address all
Muslims.[^1]

It is necessary to mention that the verse is about children who can
discern and comprehend sexual issues and genital organs, etc, because
the matter of taking permission itself indicates that they at least
understand what taking permission means. Using the phrase ‘Thalatha
’aurat’ (Three times of privacy) is another evidence for this meaning,
too.

Whether this verse covers male slaves only or it covers female slaves,
too, there are various narrations. The verse apparently involves all,
that is, it refers to both groups, so the narrations that are in harmony
with the appearance of the verse can be preferred.

In the end of the verse, the Qur’an says:

***“...It is no sin for you or for them (if) after those (three times),
some of you go round attendant upon the others. Thus does Allah make
clear the revelations for you; and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.”***

The Qur’anic word /tawwafun/ is originally derived from the word
/tawaf/, meaning walking about or around something, and since it is used
in the form of exaggeration, it means frequency of this matter.

With regard to the Qur’anic phrase

***/ba‘dukum ‘ala ba‘din/ (some of you ... upon others)***

that has come after it, the concept of the sentence is that you are
allowed to do each other favour and to go and to come in other than
these three times.

As Fazil Mighdad says in Kanz-ul-‘Irfan, this sentence indicates that
there is no need for taking permission in other times, because if they
want to come and go frequently and they have to take permission, every
time it will become a difficult job[^2].[^3]

Sura An-Nur - Verse 59
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِذَا بَلَغَ الاَطْفَالُ مِنكُمُ الْحُلُمَ فَلْيَسْتَأْذِنُوا كَمَا
اسْتَأْذَنَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ كَذَلِكَ يُبَيّـِنُ اللَّهُ
لَكُمْ ءَايَاتِه وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***59. “And when the children among you reach puberty then let them ask
permission even as those before them used to ask it. Thus does Allah
make clear His revelations for you. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise.”***

Wet dream is a boundary of reaching the religious puberty.

The Arabic word /hulum/ and the word /’ihtilam/ means to see a wet dream
when one is sleeping, and it is one of the signs of puberty. Of course,
the signs of puberty for girls and boys are various and they are
mentioned in detail in the treatises of authorities of imitation.

In this holy verse the ordinance of those who have reached puberty is
mentioned.

It says:

***“And when the children among you reach puberty then let them ask
permission even as those before them used to ask it. …”***

The Arabic word /hulum/ means ‘intellect’ and implies puberty which is
usually accompanied with an intellectual and mental mutation. It is
sometimes said that the word /hulum/ means ‘dream’ and ‘dreaming’, and
since, after puberty, the youth see some scenes in dream that cause them
ejecting semen, this word has been used to mean puberty ironically.

Anyway, it is understood from this verse that the ordinance for those
who have reached puberty is different from those who have not reached
this status, because immature children are obligated to take permission
only in three times, according to the previous verse, since their life
is so mixed with their own parent’s that if they want to take permission
every time, it will cause them difficulty.

Moreover, their sexual feelings are still undeveloped, but according to
this verse, which has obliged them to take permission absolutely,
matured youth in any condition must take permission every time they go
to their parents.

This ordinance is for the place where parents are taking rest,
otherwise, entering public room (if there is such a room), especially
when others are there and there is nothing to cause problem, needs no
permission.

It is also important to mention that the Qur’anic sentence:

***“...even as those before them used to ask it...”***

refers to the adults who were obligated to take permission whenever they
wanted to enter their parents’ room and, in this verse, those who have
just reached puberty are like the adults who were enjoined to ask
permission.

In order to emphasize and attract the attentions, at the end of the
verse, it says:

***“...Thus does Allah make clear His revelations for you. Allah is
All-Knower, All-Wise.”***

This is just like the sentence that was at the end of the previous
verse, but in that holy verse the word /al’ayat/ (the revelations) was
used and in this verse the word /’ayatihi/ (His revelations) is used.
However, there is not much difference in their meanings.

### Some Details About Philosophy of Taking Permission:

Only giving heed to executing fixed punishments and flogging wrongdoers
is not enough to eradicate a social mischief such as immodest unchaste
actions. Such a treatment does not produce a good result in any one of
social issues.

In fact we must have a package which includes intellectual cultural
teachings, which is along with ethical and sentimental rules and correct
Islamic teachings, and we must also create a sound social environment
and then punishment can be considered as a factor along with them.

Consequently, this holy Sura, which is the Sura of chastity, begins with
the act of flogging and punishment of adulterer and adulteress, and
covers the issues such as paving ground for a sound marriage, observing
Islamic veiling, prohibiting ogling, banning the act of accusing people
to unchaste pollution, and, finally, children's taking permission at the
time of entering parents’ room.

This shows that no subtle thing about chastity is ignored in Islam.

Servants must take permission when they want to enter a room in which
wife and husband exist. Matured children must take permission when they
want to enter such a room, even immature children, who are always with
parents, are also taught not to enter the parents’ room without
permission at least at three special times, (before morning ritual
prayer, after night prayer, and at noon time when parents are taking
rest).

This is a kind of Islamic politeness which is unfortunately observed
less today. Although the holy Qur’an has mentioned it explicitly in the
above holy verses, we see that this Islamic ordinance and its philosophy
is less discussed in lectures and writings and it is not clear that why
this decisive ordinance of the holy Qur’an has been ignored.

Although the verse apparently obligates people to observe this
ordinance, even if we suppose that this ordinance is recommended, it
must be talked about and its details must be discussed.

Contrary to what some simple-minded individuals, who think that children
do make nothing of these issues and servants do not pay attention to
them, it is proven that children (let alone adults) are extraordinarily
sensitive to this matter and sometime parents’ carelessness and children
looking at scenes that they must not see, are the source of ethical
deviations and even psychical maladies.

We have experimented the individuals who themselves confessed that as a
result of the carelessness of their parents to this matter and that they
observed them busy having a sexual intercourse those individuals had
reached such a stage of sexual stimulation and psychical complex that
they felt the enmity of their parents in them, nigh to kill them or
perhaps, nigh to commit self-murder.

It is here that the value and magnificent of this Islamic ordinance
appears that the issues and matter that scientists have found today,
Islam foresighted in its ordinances fourteen centuries ago.

It is also necessary to recommend parents to take these matters earnest
and to make their children accustomed to taking permission of entrance.
They also must avoid actions, such as sleeping together in a room
discerning children sleep, which may excite children as much as
possible. You must know that these affairs have got extraordinarily
educational effect on children’s fate.

It is interesting that there is a tradition from the Prophet (S) who
said:

***“Be careful that you do not have sexual intercourse while a child is
looking at you from cradle.”***[^4]

Sura An-Nur - Verse 60
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْقَوَاعِدُ مِنَ النّـِسَآءِ اللاَّتِي لاَ يَرْجُونَ نِكَاحاً
فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْهِنَ جُنَاحٌ أَن يَضَعْنَ ثِيَابَهُنَّ غَيْرَ
مُتَبَرّ‌ِجَاتٍ بِزِينَةٍ وَأَن يَسْتَعْفِفْنَ خَيْرٌ لَهُنَّ
وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***60. “And (as for) women advanced in years, who have no hope of
marriage, it is no sin for them if they put off their (outer) clothes in
such a way as not to show adornment. And if they refrain themselves, it
is better for them; and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”***

Islam rules are in accord with realties, necessities, needs, and social
abilities. Therefore we should slacken it for an old woman who does not
have inclination for husband and does not apply cosmetics.

Thus in this verse an exception for the ordinance of the veil of women
is mentioned by which exempts old women from this ordinance. It says:

***“And (as for) women advanced in years, who have no hope of marriage,
it is no sin for them if they put off their (outer) clothes in such a
way as not to show adornment...”***

In fact, there are two conditions for this exception:

1. Reaching an age in which there is usually no hope of marriage in
them. In other words, they have lost any sexual attraction completely.

2. They should not have any cosmetics when they take away their veil.

It is clear that with these two conditions there will be no mischief
when veil is discarded in them. For this reason Islam exempts them from
this ordinance.

It is also obvious that its purpose is not to be naked and to take off
all clothes, but it means to remove outer garments that in some
narrations it has been interpreted into veil (chador) and scarf.

In a tradition Imam Sadiq (as) about this verse says:

*“The purpose (of it) is veil (chador) and scarf.”*

The narrator says he asked Imam:

*“Before every one?”*

Imam said:

*“Before every one, but she must not apply cosmetics and she must not
wear adornments.”*[^5]

Some other narrations with the same content are narrated from Imams,
Ahl-ul-Bayt (as).[^6]

It is added at the end of the verse implying that yet if they refrain
and cover themselves it is better for them, because from the view point
of Islam the more a woman observes her veiling and chastity, she will be
more admirable, pious, and pure.

The verse says:

***“...And if they refrain themselves, it is better for them...”***

Since some old women may misuse this calculated and lawful freedom and
so have possibly improper talking with men and have impure thoughts
altogether, in the end of the verse, as a warning, it says:

***“...and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”***

He hears what is told and He knows what is in the hearts and what is in
minds.

In short, the matter of veiling is one of the stable and necessary
ordinances of Islam, but the issues of how the veil should be is
depended on the matter of not stirring sexual desires and saving
chastity and modesty.

So, the principle that this group of women are excepted from the
ordinance of veiling is not a matter of discussion among Islam scholars
and learned people, because the text of the Qur’an expresses it, but
there are some words about its characteristics, including: the age of
these women, in what age the ordinance of ‘women advanced in years’
covers women.

In some Islamic narration, it has been interpreted as old women.[^7]
While in other narrations it has been interpreted as women retirement
from marriage.[^8] But some Islamic jurists and commentators think that
it means the end of menstruation, the age of barrenness and people’s
reluctance to marry such women.[^9]

Apparently, all of these meanings refer to one reality that women must
get so old that no one would like to marry them, although some of such
women may rarely get married.

Moreover, about the part of the body that these women can show, there
are some different interpretations in Islamic Traditions, while the Holy
Qur’an says vaguely that there is no problem for such women to take off
their garments, of course, their outer clothes.

In some narrations we read the answer of this question that which
garments can be taken off;

Imam Sadiq (as) has said:

*“Chador.”*[^10]

While in other narration it has been interpreted as chador and
scarf.[^11]

Apparently, there is no inconsistency between these Islamic traditions.
The purpose is that there is no problem for such women to uncover their
head and to bare their hair, neck, and face. Even in some traditions and
jurists’ words, the wrist is exempted, but we have no reasons about more
than this very extension for its exemption.

Anyway, all of these are for the time that such women do not apply
cosmetics, and to cover their hidden adornments as others are enjoined
to do. Also they must not wear garments that attract attentions and, in
other words, they are permitted to go out without (chador) and scarf
while wearing a simple garment and without applying cosmetics.

Yet, this ordinance is not obligatory, but if they do veil themselves as
other women do, it is more preferred, as it is explicitly mentioned in
the end of the verse, because there is the possibility of deviation and
offence in such people, although very rarely.

Sura An-Nur - Verse 61
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ عَلَي الاَعْمَي حَرَجٌ وَلاَ عَلَي الاَعْرَجِ حَرَجٌ وَلاَ
عَلَي الْمَرِيضِ حَرَجٌ وَلاَ عَلَي أَنفُسِكُمْ أَن تَأْكُلُوا مِنْ
بُيُوتِكُمْ أَوْبُيُوتِ ءَابَآئِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ أُمَّهَاتِكُمْ أَوْ
بُيُوتِ إِخْوَانِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ أَخَوَاتِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ
أَعْمَامِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ عَمَّاتِكُمْ أَوْبُيُوتِ أَخْوَالِكُمْ أَوْ
بُيُوتِ خَالاَتِكُمْ أَوْ مَا مَلَكْتُم مَّفَاتِحَهُ أَوْ صَدِيقِكُمْ
لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَأْكُلُوا جَمِيعاً أَوْأَشْتَاتاً
فَإِذَا دَخَلْتُم بُيُوتاً فَسَلّـِمُوا عَلَي أَنفُسِكُمْ تَحِيَّةً
مّـِنْ عِندِ اللَّهِ مُبَارَكَةً طَيّـِبَةً كَذَلِكَ يُبَيّـِنُ
اللَّهُ لَكُمُ الاَيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “There is no blame upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor
any blame upon the sick nor on yourselves that you eat from your houses,
or the houses of your fathers, or the houses of your mothers, or the
houses of your brothers, or the houses of your sisters, or the houses of
your fathers’ brothers, or the houses of your fathers’ sisters, or the
houses of your mothers' brothers, or the houses of your mothers’
sisters, or (from that) whereof you hold the keys, or (from the house)
of your friend. No sin shall it be for you whether you eat together or
apart. But when you enter houses, salute one another with a greeting
from Allah, blessed and good. Thus does Allah make clear His revelations
for you, so that you might understand.”***

Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Before Islam the blind, the lame and the sick were not allowed to eat
food with healthy people. This verse permitted them to eat food in
group, with healthy people or if they wanted they could eat food
lonely.”*[^12]

Anyway, since the previous verses talked about taking permission at
certain times or when entering special place of parents, the concerned
verse is, in fact, an exception from this ordinance, indicating that a
group can enter their relatives’ home and the like in certain conditions
and without taking permission, and they can even eat food without having
permission.

At first, the verse says:

***“There is no blame upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor any
blame upon the sick nor on yourselves that you eat from your
houses...”***

According to some narrations, before converting to Islam, the people of
Medina prevented the blind, the lame and the sick to eat with them at a
table. They did not eat with those people and they hated such a matter.

And, on the contrary, after Islam some people thought that this kind of
people must eat lonely, not because they hated eating with them, but
maybe because they thought that the blind could not see the existing
good food while they could and they ate, which was against ethics, and
also the lame and the sick were not as fast in eating as healthy people
were so they tarried.

Anyway, they did not eat food with such people for any reason they had ,
so the blind, the lame and the sick withdrew themselves, because it was
possible that they caused others to worry and also thought that this was
a sin.

This matter was presented to the Prophet (S) and this verse was sent
down, indicating that there is no blame upon the blind, nor any blame
upon the lame nor any blame upon the sick, nor on yourselves that you
eat food with together.[^13]

The writer of Jawami‘-ul-Jami‘ says: In the advent of Islam, some of
believers brought the disabled and the afflicted persons to the houses
of their wives, to the houses of their own offsprings, their relatives’
houses, and their friends’ houses, and they fed them.

Gradually these believers thought that this job might be counted a sin
for them, and so they avoided this deed. Then this verse was sent down
and indicated that this deed is not as sin.

The purpose of:

***“There is no blame ... nor on yourselves...”***

is that there is no heaviness and sin for you and for the believers who
are like you.

Some have said that the sick and the poor did not eat and associate with
other people, because they thought people might not like their company.

Some others have said that when Muslims wanted to go to war, they gave
the key of their houses to the disabled so that these people could eat
whatever they found in those houses. But they thought that this
interference might be unlawful for them, then they avoided eating food
of their houses. Then Allah said that there is no blame on them and you
in this eating.

Then the holy Qur’an adds implying that there is not any blame on
yourselves if you eat from these houses without permission: from your
houses, (the objective is the children and wives which have been
rendered into ‘your houses’).

The verse continues:

***“...or the houses of your fathers, or the houses of your mothers, or
the houses of your brothers, or the houses of your sisters, or the
houses of your fathers’ brothers, or the houses of your fathers’
sisters, or the houses of your mothers’ brothers, or the houses of your
mothers’ sisters, or (from that) whereof you hold the keys, or (from the
house) of a friend. No sin shall it be for you whether you eat together
or apart...”***

It seems that, at the advent of Islam, some Muslims avoided eating food
lonely and if they could not find anyone as company for eating food,
they would remain hungry for a time. Then the Qur’an taught them that
eating lonely, or with other persons, is lawful.[^14]

Some commentators have also said that some Arabs believed that, as a
respect, the food of their guest must be served separately and they
ought not to be with him during eating food (lest the guest might become
shy or feel uneasy). This verse removed these considerations and taught
them that this was not an admirable custom.[^15]

Another group of commentators have said that some people believed that
the poor must not eat with the rich, and class division must be observed
even at the time of eating food. The holy Qur’an rejected this wrong and
unjust custom with the above sentence.

There is no problem if this verse refers to all of above affairs. Then
the verse refers to another ethical matter, where it says:

***“...But when you enter houses, salute one another with a greeting
from Allah, blessed and good...”***

And finally it says:

***“...Thus does Allah make clear His revelations for you, so that you
might understand.”***

That which houses are the purpose of the Qur’anic word /buyut/ (houses),
some say that it refers to 11 houses that are mentioned in above.

Some others say it refers specially to mosques. But, as it is clear, the
verse is unconditional and it embraces all houses, including those 11
ones which a person enters for eating food, or other houses such as:
friends’ houses and relatives’ houses and so on, because there is no
reason for limiting the vast concept of the verse.

There are some commentaries on the purpose of the Qur’anic phrase: /fa
sallimu ‘ala ’anfusikum/ ‘saluting one another’:

Some say that it means ‘to salute one another’ as in the story of the
Children of Israel the holy Qur’an says /faqtulu ’anfusakum/:

***“...and slay one another (the wrong doers)...”!***[^16]

Some commentators say that , it means to greet to wife, issues and
family, because they are considered as man himself and therefore, it is
stated in the verse in the form of/’anfus/.

In the verse of mutual cursing (Sura ’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 61) we
see such a meaning, and it shows that sometime when a person gets
relationally closed to one another the word /’anfus/ (self, man himself)
will be used, as Imam Ali’s closeness to the Prophet (S) is stated in
this way.

Some commentators say that this verse refers to the houses in which no
one lives and when one wants to enter them one salutes himself with this
sentence:

***“Our greeting and peace will be from our Lord.”***

or

***“Our peace be upon us and upon Allah’s righteous servants, ”***

We think there is not any inconsistency between these commentaries;
entering every home we must salute, believers must salute believers,
household must salute each other, if there is no one we must salute
ourselves, because all of these, in fact, refer to saluting oneself.

On the commentary of this verse, Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“The purpose of saluting household at the time of entering home is that
they will naturally answer him and returns peace and salutation on
himself, and this is saluting oneself.”*[^17]

Again, Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“When a person enters his home and sees some one there so he must
salute him (or her), and if there is no one there, he must say, peace be
upon us from Allah, as Allah has said in the holy Qur’an:*

***‘...a greeting from Allah, blessed and good...’”***[^18]

### Some Points

1. Do we not need to take permission for eating others’ food? As the
above verse has mentioned, Allah has permitted man to eat food from
close relatives’ houses and some friends’ houses and such like (on the
whole these houses are 11).

In this verse taking permission was not mentioned as its condition and
certainly it does not need taking permission, because when permission is
taken we can eat everyone’s food and it will not be limited to these 11
houses. But, is obtaining inward consent necessary as a condition
because of intimacy and close acquaintance that is between two parties?

The holy verse apparently rejects this condition, too, and considers it
enough if only he or she is likely consent.

But if the status of two parties is in a way that certainly there is no
assent, although the verse apparently includes all cases from this
viewpoint, it is not impossible that the verse excludes such a case,
especially when such people are rare and general applications do not
cover these rare people.

Therefore, the above verse particularizes, in a certain field, verses
and narrations that limit using others’ property to having permission
from their owners save in a special boundary; but we repeat that this
particularization is inside a certain field, such as eating food as it
is necessary and without immoderation.

What was said above is well known among our Islamic jurists and some of
it is mentioned explicitly in narrations from Ahl-ul-Bayt (as).

We read in an authentic narration that when Imam Sadiq (as) was asked
about the Qur’anic phrase /’a sadiqikum/ (or of a friend), he said:

*“By Allah! Its purpose is that man enters his friend’s (brother’s) home
and eats food without having permission.”*[^19]

There are numerous narrations mentioned that have the same concept and
in them it is said that taking permission is not necessary in these
cases.

On ‘lack of corruption and immoderation’, some narrations have also
mentioned it explicitly.[^20]

The only thing that remains is a narration that is about this matter. It
says:

*“Only special nutritional materials can be eaten, not every food.”*

But since this narration is objected by Islamic jurists, its document
would not be valid.

Some Islamic jurists have excepted some foods which are superior and
special, and possibly the landlord has kept for himself or for an
honored guest or for some particular times. It is not impossible that
the verse excepts this case.[^21]

2. The philosophy of this Islamic ordinance:

Comparing with other severe divine ordinances that prohibit usurpation,
this ordinance may raise question how Islam permits such a thing while
it is very exact and fastidious in the issue of usurping others’
property.

We think that this question is proper for fully material environments,
such as western societies, in which parents may force their children to
go out of their house when they become a little old! And when parents
get old and disable, they will be dismissed!

They do not want to be kind and gratitude towards them, because in those
societies all affairs are based on economical and financial
relationships and usually humane sentiments do not exist.

With regard to the Islamic culture and humane profound sentiments,
especially between the members of the family, relatives and particular
friends, which dominate this culture, there is nothing to get surprised
at.

In fact, Islam considers close relationships of relatives and friends as
being superior to these issues. This, in fact, indicates the ultimate
friendship and peacefulness that must dominate an Islamic society, and
conceits, exclusionisms, and selfishness must be wiped out from it.

Undoubtedly, the ordinances of usurpation exist in fields other than
this, but in this special field Islam gives priority tosentimental
issues and humane relationships and it is, in fact, an example for other
relations of relatives and friends.

3. Who does /sadiq/ mean?

Undoubtedly friendship and friendliness has got a vast meaning, and here
its purpose is certainly those special and close friends that have very
close relationship with each other and whose relation necessitates going
to each other’s house and to eat from their food.

In such cases, as we said before, there is no need for being sure about
the consent of other party, if only someone is not sure about the
discontentment of that one, this will be enough.

Thus some commentators have said about this phrase that the purpose is a
friend who treats sincerely with you in his friendship. Some others say
that the purpose is a friend that usually has outwardly and inwardly the
same relation with you. Apparently, all of these statements refer to one
matter.

Meanwhile, in short, it gets clear that those who are not in this extent
generous and forgiving toward their friends, are not in fact friend.

It is appropriate here to mention a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq
(as) who declared comprehensive conditions of friendship and its vast
concept.

He (as) said:

*“Friendship is materialized only when its conditions and terms are met.
Count a person who has all of these terms, or some of them, as friend.
And a person who has nothing of these terms is not a friend. (Conditions
and terms of friendship)*

*A) His outward and inward are the same for you.*

*B) He considers your honour, reputation, and enhancement as his and he
counts your fault and gracelessness as his.*

*C) His rank, wealth and status do not change his position toward you.*

*D) He does not withhold from you what he can do.*

*F) A person who has got all of the above attributes does not leave you
alone when you are down on your luck.”*[^22]

4. The commentary of /mamalaktum mafatihahu/ (‘(***from that) whereof
you hold the keys***’):

In some occasions of revelation we read that at the advent of Islam,
when Muslims went to war, they sometimes gave the key of their house to
the disabled who could not fight and even permitted them to eat whatever
food was in the house, but they avoided eating food, because they
thought that this might be sin.

According to this narration, the purpose of this phrase is

*‘the houses that you have become the owner of whose keys’*[^23]

It has been narrated from Ibn Abbass who said the purpose of this
sentence is man’s lawyer or agent due to his domestic animals, farming,
ground, and water. Such person is permitted to eat fruit from the garden
and to drink milk from the animals as much as he needs. Some others also
have interpreted it as storekeeper who has the right to eat some of the
foodstuff.

But, with regard to other groups that are mentioned in this verse, it
seems that the purpose of the phrase is those who give the key of their
house to other person for the sake of close relationship and trust.
Their close relationship has caused them to be like close relatives and
friends, whether he is formally lawyer or not.

If we read in some narrations that this phrase has been interpreted as a
lawyer who is responsible for someone’s property, it is, indeed, only
expressing the extension of the meaning and it is not limited to it.

5. Salutation and greeting:

As we said before, the Arabic word /tahiyat/ is derived from the word
/hayat/ (life) and it means to pray for someone’s health and life,
whether this prayer is in the form of ‘Salamun ‘Alaykum’ (peace on you),
or ‘As-Salamu ‘Alayna’ (Peace on us), or ‘Hayyaka Allah’ (Allah salutes
you).

But usually every kind of expression of kindness that is done in the
beginning of a meeting is called ‘Tahiyyat’.

The purpose of the sentence:

***“...a greeting from Allah, blessed and good...”***

is to join greeting with Allah in a way, that is, the purpose of
‘Salamun ‘Alaykum’ will be that ‘Allah salutes you’ or ‘I ask Allah your
health.”, because in the opinion of a believer every prayer that is in
this form is both full of blessings (Mubarak) and pure (Tayyib).

Some Islamic traditions on salutation and its importance and obligation
to answer every kind of greeting:

1. The Prophet (S) said:

*“The stingiest person is the one who is reluctant to salute (and to
greet), and the most generous person is one who spends his wealth and
his life in the path of Allah.”*[^24]

2. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Salutation is recommended and answering salutation is
obligatory.”*[^25]

3. Imam Hussayn (as) said:

*“Salutation has got 70 good points of which 69 belong to one who begins
salutation and one belongs to one who answers it.”*[^26]

4. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“ (This is the sign) of modesty that you salute to whom you meat.”*

5. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“One who starts saluting is more prior to (have the blessing and favour
of) Allah and the Prophet (S).”*

6. Imam Rida (as) said:

*“One who salutes the poor in a way that is different from the way he
salutes the rich will meet Allah, Almighty and Glorious, on the Day of
Hereafter while He is angry at him.”*[^27]

7. The Prophet (S) said:

*“The stingiest individual is one who meets other Muslim and does not
salute him.”*[^28]

8. Imam Ali (as) said:

*“When someone salutes you, you salute him in a better way, and when
someone confers you a blessing, you confer him a better blessing. But
prior is the one who has started saluting and offering blessing.”*[^29]

[^1]: Sura Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 83

[^2]: Kanz-ul-‘Irfan, Vol. 2, P. 225

[^3]: If we look one more time to this Sura from the beginning, we find
that the policy of prevention from indecency is behind its verses. For
example, adulterer and adulteress should be punished before others’ eye
(verse 1), their marriage is limited (verse 3), if without four
witnesses false accusation is made, 80 stripes should be beaten (verse
4), those who falsely accuse the Prophet’s wife will be severely
chastised (verse 11), if you heard a false accusation, you must deal
with it (verse 12), if one likes spreading indecency, he will be
severely chastised in couple (verse 19), do not follow the steps of
satan (verse 21) those who accuse pure women falsely will be roughly
punished (verse 23), the foul language is uttered by the wicked persons
not you (verse 26), do not enter others’ house without taking permission
and if they say you must return, you must accept and go back (verses
27-28), men and women must not gaze at the one who is within forbidden
degrees (verses 30-31), women must not show their ornaments and must not
dance everywhere and you must try for the marriage of those who are
celibate and you must not fear from poverty (verse 32), and in this
verse, your children and slaves must not enter your private room at
times when you are at your ease and alone with your wife. Yes, all these
commands are for preventing immodesty and immature puberty and saving
face and decency.

[^4]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 103, p. 295

[^5]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi’ah, the book of An-Nikah, Vol. 14, p. 147, Ch. 110

[^6]: For more explanation refer to the above book (the same reference)

[^7]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi’ah, Vol. 14, the book of An-Nikah, C. 110,
Tradition No. 4

[^8]: The above book

[^9]: Jawahir, Vol. 29, p. 85, and Kanz-ul-‘Irfan, Vol. 2, p. 226

[^10]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi’ah, the book of An-Nikah, C. 110, Tradition No. 1

[^11]: The above book, Traditions 2 & 3

[^12]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, the Commentary

[^13]: Dur-ul-Manthur and Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, following the verse. A part
of other commentators also have mentioned this narration in their books
such as: Tabarsi in Majma‘-ul-Bayan, the deceased Fiyd in
Tafsir-us-Safi, Fakhr-i-Razi in Tafsir-ul-Kabir, and Shaykh Tusi in
Tibyan.

[^14]: Tibyan, the Commentary, following the verse

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Sura Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 54

[^17]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, vol. 3, p. 627

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, Vol. 16, p. 434, the book of “At‘imah wa
Ashribah”, chapters of ’Adab-ul-Ma’idah, C. 24, Tradition No. 1

[^20]: Ibid

[^21]: For more explation refer to the book Jawahir-ul-Kalam, Vol. 36,
p. 406

[^22]: ’Usul-i-Kafi, Vol. 2, p. 467

[^23]: Qurtabi, the Commentary, following the verse

[^24]: Bihar, Vol. 73, p. 12

[^25]: Ibid

[^26]: Bihar, Vol. 75, p. 471

[^27]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, Vol. 5, p. 442

[^28]: Bihar, Vol. 75, p. 12

[^29]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, Translated by Fiydul-Islam, p. 1114


