Section 1: The Apostle Muhammad, A Warner to the Whole World
============================================================

Sura Al-Furqan - Verse 1
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَارَكَ الَّذِي نَزَّلَ الْفُرْقَانَ عَلَي عَبْدِهِ لِيَكُونَ
لِلْعَالَمِينَ نَذِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Blessed is He Who sent down the Furqan (The Distinction of right
and wrong) upon His servant that he may be a Warner to the worlds;”***

The Qur’anic word /tabaraka/ may be is derived from the word /baraka/ in
the sense of ‘stable’ and ‘fixed’. Or it is possible that it is derived
from /barakat/ that means ‘abundant goodness’.

It implies that He Who descended the Holy Qur’an is the source of many
blessings and one of His blessings, as an example, is this very
descending of the Qur’an. Yes, what blessing is more important than the
divine law that has led milliards of people from darkness to the light
of guidance in the course of history?

The Qur’anic word /nuzul/ means to send down at once and immediately, if
it is in the form of the word /’anzalna/, and it means to send down
gradually if it is in the form of the word /nazzala/.

But the holy Qur’an has enjoyed both kinds of descending; one time is in
the Night of determination (Honour) in which Qur’an was revealed to the
Prophet (S) at one instance, about which, it says:

***“Surely, We sent it (the Qur’an) down on the Night of Honour.”***[^1]

And the other time is done gradually during 23 years.

The Qur’an says:

***“And (it is) Qur’an which We have divided (in sections) so that you
may read it to the people at a slow pace and We have sent it down
gradually in portion.”***[^2]

And in another occurrence it says:

***“...He Who sent down the Furqan (the Distinction of right and wrong)
upon His servant...”***[^3]

Anyway, the Qur’an has come from a blessed source, thus, through the
first verse, it says:

***“Blessed is He Who sent down the Furqan (The Distinction of right and
wrong) upon His servant that he may be a Warner to the worlds;”***

It is interesting that the blessedness of Allah’s Essence is introduced
by descending of Furqan, that is Qur’an, the separator of truth and
falsehood. This shows that the best favour and blessing is that man has
got a means for cognition, knowing the difference between truth and
falsehood.

Another interesting thing is that the Qur’anic word Furqan has sometimes
been used in the sense of Qur’an and sometimes it means the miracles
that distinguish truth from falsehood. Sometimes it is applied to Torah,
but here, with regard to the context of this verse and the other verses,
it means the Qur’an.

In some narrations we read that when Imam Sadiq (as) was asked about the
difference between the Qur’an and Furqan, he said:

***“The Qur’an refers to these celestial Books wholly, and Furqan refers
to the clear verses.”***[^4]

This noble narration is not in contrast with Furqan being distinguisher
of all verses of the Qur’an and its purpose is that clear verses have
got a clearer and more obvious extension of Furqan and distinguishing of
truth from falsehood.

The blessing of ‘distinguishing and knowing’ is so important that the
Glorious Qur’an has been introduced as the great reward of those who are
pious, where it says:

***“O you who have Faith! If you be in awe of Allah, He will assign for
you a discrimination (between right and wrong) ...”***[^5]

Yes, distinguishing truth from falsehood is possible only through piety,
for sins, love and hatred cover truth with a thick veil and they blind
man’s perception and insight.

Anyway, the Glorious Qur’an is the best Furqan. It is a means for
distinguishing truth from falsehood in all life system of man. It is a
means for knowing truth and falsehood during personal and social life
and it is a criterion for thoughts, beliefs, laws, judgments, customs,
rules and ethics.

This matter is also important that the verse says:

***“...Who sent down the Furqan (The Distinction of right and wrong)
upon His servant...”***

Yes, it is the sincere servitude and submission that makes a man
deserving and worthy for receiving Furqan and accepting the criteria of
knowing truth and falsehood.

Finally, the last matter mentioned in this verse is that the ultimate
aim of Furqan is to warn people of the world, a warning that leads man
to feel responsibility for duties and obligations that are put on his
shoulder.

The Qur’anic phrase /lil ‘alamin/, meaning: ‘(the peoples) of the
worlds’, shows that Islam religion is universal and is not limited to a
certain region, race and tribe.

But some have used it for the Prophet (S) as being the seal of the
prophets, for the word /‘alamin/ not only is not limited to place, but
also it is not chronologically limited to a special time and it includes
all the future generations, too.

Sura Al-Furqan - Verse 2
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضِ وَلَمْ يَتَّخِذْ وَلَداً
وَلَمْ يَكُن لَهُ شَرِيكٌ فِي الْمُلْكِ وَخَلَقَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ
فَقَدَّرَهُ تَقْدِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. “He to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and
He has not taken any son (unto Himself), nor has He any partner in His
dominion, and He created everything, then ordered them in due
proportions.”***

Polytheists, Jews, and Christians each believed in a way that Allah has
got a partner or child, and the holy Qur’an has rejected these false
beliefs many times, including this verse that describes Allah, Who has
descended Furqan, with four attributes one of which is, in fact, the
base and the rest are its results and branches.

First it says:

***“He to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the
earth...”***[^6]

Yes, He is the ruler of all universe, the skies and the earth, and
nothing is out of His sovereignty.

With regard to the matter that the Qur’anic word /lahu/ has come before
the phrase /mulk-us-samawat/, and according to Arabic literature it is a
reason for limitation and exclusivity, it is understood that the real
domination and authority of the skies and the earth belongs to Him
(s.w.t), for His rulership is general, perpetual and real, contrary to
other rulerships that are unstable, insignificant, and, in the meantime,
dependent on Him.

Then polytheists’ beliefs are one by one rejected:

***“...and He has not taken any son (unto Himself)...”***

Basically needing child, as we said before, is whether for using his or
her physical power, or for having him or her at the time of loneliness.
Certainly none of the above needs are part of His Pure Essence.

In this way, the Christians’ belief that Jesus Christ (as) is the Son of
God and the belief of the Jews that Ezra is the Son of God both are
rejected. Moreover, Arab polytheist’s belief in this regard is rejected.

Then the verse continues saying:

***“...nor has He any partner in His dominion...”***

Arab polytheists believed in partner or partners which they considered
as partner of Allah. When they wanted to worship, they turned to them
for the sake of intercession and they asked their help for fulfilling
their needs so that they explicitly uttered ugly and polytheistic words
and sentences when they wanted to say ‘Labbayk’ (at your service) at the
time the rites of Hajj, saying:

*“I accepted Your call, oh Lord, Who has no partner except the partner
that belongs to You and You are the Owner of this partner and You are
the Owner of what he owns.”*

The holy Qur’an rejects all these vain imaginations. In the last
sentence, it implies that not only Allah has created all things but also
He has precisely defined their proportions and administrations.

The verse says:

***“...and He created everything, then ordered them in due
proportions.”***

The dualists’ belief, which implies that part of the world creatures is
created by Lord and the other part is created by Devil, is also
rejected.

According to dualists, creation is divided between Lord and Devil,
because they believe that the world is a collection of the bad and the
good, while a real monotheist believes that except goodness there is
nothing in the world, and if there is any bad it is relative or negative
or it is the result of our deeds.

### Some Points

1. Exact measurement of creatures: Not only the calculated stable system
of the world is among the strong reasons of monotheism and knowing Allah
(s.w.t.), but also its exact measurement is another clear reason.

We cannot consider measurement of various creatures of this world and
its calculated quality and quantity as effect of accident. It is not in
line with probability theory.

Scientists have studied about it, and uncovered some mysteries which
cause the astonishment of man so much that he unintentionally begins to
praise Allah’s magnificence and might. Here we refer to some of them:

Scientists say that if the outer cover of the earth were 10 feet
thicker, there would be no oxygen, a vital material of life.

Or if the depth of seas were several feet more than what is today, all
oxygen and carbon of the earth would be absorbed and it would be
impossible to have a vegetable or animal life on the earth, and when
most probably the crust of the earth and the water of the seas would
absorb the whole existing oxygen, and for his growth and man would have
to wait for the growth of plants so that through them he could use
needed oxygen.

According to studious researches, it gets clear that it may be possible
to gain needed oxygen for human from various sources, but the important
matter is that this amount of oxygen is as much as the amount that has
scattered in the air for man’s use.

If the earth atmosphere were a little thinner than what is today,
heavenly bodies and shooting stars, that cannot reach the earth, would
hit the earth million times a day.

These heavenly bodies move 6 to 40 miles per second and if they hit any
place, that place will be burnt and destroyed. If their speed were less
than what it is, and for example equal to the speed of a bullet, all of
them would come to the earth and it is clear that they would destroy
everything.

If man himself were placed on the way of one of the smallest heavenly
bodies, the intensity of the heat of them, that move 90 times faster
than a bullet, would rend and destroy him.

The density of the earth atmosphere is to the extent that it allows
cosmic rays pass as much as the growth of plants needs. And all harmful
microbes are destroyed in the atmosphere and beneficial vitamins are
created by them.

While there are various vapors that have come out of the depth of the
earth during many centuries, nevertheless, the air of the earth does not
get polluted and it is always well balanced for the continuity of man’s
life.

The great machine that creates and keeps such strange balance is the
very seas and oceans from which vital and nutritional materials, rain,
moderation of air and plants and finally man himself originate. Every
person who is able to understand must bow down before the sea and thank
it for its favours.

2. Strange proportion and very exact balance that is between oxygen and
carbonic acid gas, that is for creating animal and vegetable life, has
attracted the attention of all thinkers and scientists and make them
think about it.

The importance of carbonic acid gas is still uncovered to many people.
It must also be mentioned that carbonic acid gas is the gas that is used
for making fizzy drinks.

Carbonic acid gas is a heavy and dense gas that is fortunately near the
surface of the earth. It separates from oxygen uneasily and with
problem.

When a piece of wood is set on fire, wood, which includes oxygen,
hydrogen and carbon, is analysed chemically and carbon will be mixed
with oxygen very quickly and carbon acid gas is so created. Its hydrogen
is quickly mixed with oxygen and water vapour will be created. Smoke is
pure carbon which is not mixed up.

When man breathes, he inhales some oxygen. Blood takes it to all places
of body. Oxygen burns food in various cells slowly and with a weak heat.
Its vapour and carbonic acid gas goes out. Carbonic acid gas that is
created by burning of food in cells returns to lung and with later
breathings it goes out of the body. Thus all living creatures inhale
oxygen and exhale carbonic acid gas.

3. How wonderful the way of controlling and balancing in this world is.
Because of this natural balance, animals cannot dominate the world, no
matter how much they are huge or brutal. Only man can change this
natural balance and transfer animals and plants from one place to other
places. By the way, he pays the fine of his impudence, because blights
and pests cause him irretrievable harms.

The following story is a good example that shows how man must observe
this balance for the sake of his life:

Some years ago in Australia a famous plant named Cactus was planted near
farms fences and because no pest could harm it at that time it started
to grow a lot strangely. Very soon it covered an area that was as big as
England and people had to escape from villages and hamlets. It destroyed
all their farms and made farming impossible.

The local inhabitants used whatever they had, but nothing they could do.
Australia confronted the danger and threat of stubborn Cactus army.

Scientists and researchers started to find a solution for this dangerous
problem. At last, they found out that there is an insect that only feeds
on stem, leaf and root of Cactus and except this food it eats nothing.
And it multiplies easily and no enemy it has in Australia.

In this case animal defeated plant and there is no danger of Cactus
today. And when Cactus was destroyed, that insect also disappeared. Only
some of them remained so that they control the growth of Cactus.
Creation has set this balance in the nature and it is very beneficial,
too.

What has happened that malaria mosquito has not spread all over the
world and has not destroyed man generation, while common mosquitoes can
also be found even in polar areas?

Or what happened when the mosquito of yellow fever came near New York
but did not kill all people of the world? Or what has happened that
tsetse fly is created in a way that can live only in equatorial areas
and has not vanished the human generation throughout the world? (All of
these have been prevented by a very calculated system.)

It is only enough to remember the fact that with what pests and maladies
we have fought during many centuries. How wonderfully we were formerly
protected against these maladies while we did not know any health
matters![^7]

Sura Al-Furqan - Verse 3
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّخَذُوا مِن دُونِهِ ءَالِهَةً لاَ يَخْلُقُونَ شَيْئاً وَهُمْ
يُخْلَقُونَ وَلاَ يَمْلِكُونَ لاَنفُسِهِمْ ضَرّاً وَلاَ نَفْعاً وَلاَ
يَمْلِكُونَ مَوْتاً وَلاَحَيَاةً وَلاَ نُشُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. “Yet they have taken gods, besides Him, gods that do not create
anything while they are themselves created and they do not own for
themselves any hurt or profit, nor can they control death nor life nor
resurrection.”***

The reason of man’s servitude is Allah’s power in solving problems and
knotty affairs, while idols cannot do such thing.

***(‘They do not own’)***

This holy verse continues the previous discussion about struggling with
polytheism, idol worshipping, and baseless claims of idol worshippers
about their idols and then-accusations of the holy Qur’an and the
Prophet (S) mentioned in former verses.

First, polytheists are in fact called to trial and, to pick
then-conscience with a clear, simple, decisive logic, it says:

***“Yet they have taken gods, besides Him, gods that do not create
anything while they are themselves created...”***

The real deity is the Creator of the universe, but they did not have
such a claim about idols and they knew them as creatures of Allah.

But what was their motivation for worshipping idols? Idols that possess
not hurt nor profit for themselves, and possess not death nor life, nor
power to raise the dead (let alone others).

The verse in this regard says:

***“...and they do not own for themselves any hurt or profit, nor can
they control death nor life nor resurrection.”***

The principles that are important for man are as follows: profit, loss,
death, life, and resurrection.

Does one who is the owner of these affairs deserve worshipping? But
idols cannot do such things for themselves, let alone they want to
protect and support their worshippers?

What a shameful logic is that man follows a creature and worships it,
while it cannot even control itself let alone others. Neither does this
idol solve a problem in this world nor can it do anything in the other
world.

This sentence shows that this group of polytheists, who have been
addressed in this verse, had accepted resurrection in a way (although
not physical one but spiritual resurrection). Or the Qur’an was certain
about their lack of belief in the resurrection and talked to them in a
certain and decisive way.

This is usual that sometimes man faces one person who denies truth, but
he expresses his own ideas and beliefs resolutely without paying
attention to that person's thoughts. Especially when there is an implied
reason for resurrection in the verse, because when a creator creates a
creature and is the owner of creature’s loss and benefit, he must have
an aim for his creation.

And this aim concerning man is impossible without accepting the issue of
resurrection, for if everything ended with the death of man, life would
be nonsense and it would be a reason indicating that that creator was
not wise.

Meanwhile if we see that the issue of loss has come before the issue of
benefit, it is because man first fears loss and the sentence ‘protection
from loss is prior to the achievement of benefit’ has turned into an
intellectual rule.

And if ‘loss’, ‘benefit’, ‘death’, ‘life’, ‘resurrection’ have been
mentioned indeterminately, it is for the fact that these idols are not
controlling benefit, loss, death, life, and resurrection even in one
case, let alone all people.

And if the Qur’anic phrase /layamlikuna/ (they possess not) and
/layaxluquna/ (they create naught) are mentioned in the masculine,
plural, wise form (while stone and wooden idols have got no wisdom and
sense), it is for the matter that these phrases are not only about
wooden and stone idols, but also there was a group that worshipped
Christ or angels and because sage and non-sage are all included in the
meaning of the verse, all of them are mentioned as wise.

Or according to the opinion of the opposite party, it is said for
showing their weakness and inability. It implies that they believed that
these idols had intellect and sense, but these idols cannot protect
themselves from loss and can not achieve any benefit!

Sura Al-Furqan - Verse 4
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِنْ هَذَا إِلآَّ إِفْكٌ افْتَرَاهُ
وَأَعَانَهُ عَلَيْهِ قَوْمٌ ءَاخَرُونَ فَقَدْ جآءُوا ظُلْماً وَزُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. “And those who disbelieve say: ‘This (Qur’an) is nothing but a lie
which he (our Apostle) has forged, and other people have helped him at
it; so indeed they have done injustice and (uttered) a falsehood.”***

The Arabic word /ifk/ means lie, and the word /zur/ means a false
word[^8]. In all of the Holy Qur’an only here the words /zulm/
(iniquity) and /zur/ have come together, because pagans prevented others
from being guided by means of false accusation of the Prophet (S) and
belying the heavenly Book.

So this noble verse is about pagans’ analysis or, in better words, their
pretext-seeking against the call of the Prophet (S) when it says:

***“And those who disbelieve say: ‘This (Qur’an) is nothing but a lie
which he (our Apostle) has forged, and other people have helped him at
it...”***

In fact, in order not to shoulder the Truth - as those who in the course
of history decided to be against divine leaders - they first accused him
to calumny and falsehood, and especially, in order to scorn the Holy
Qur’an, they used the word /haǒa/ (this).

Then, in order to prove that he could not say such words by himself,
because saying such meaningful words needs at least a lot of knowledge
and they did not want to accept it, and in order to say that this was a
calculated program, they said that he was not alone and others have
helped him at it and that there was a conspiracy and they must stand
against him.

Some of commentators have said that the purpose of/qaum un ’axarun/
(other people) is a group of Jews. And some others have said that the
objective is three persons of the People of The Book, that is ‘Adas’,
‘Yasar’, and ‘Hibr’ (or ‘Jibr’).

Anyway, since such matters did not exist among the polytheists of Mecca
and some part of it, such as: the story of the former prophets, was
among Jews and the People of The Book, they had to drag the People of
the Book into this accusation so that the people became less astonished
and bewildered by hearing these verses.

But, in their answer here, the Holy Qur’an says only one sentence:

***“...so indeed they have done injustice and (uttered) a
falsehood.”***[^9]

It is /zulm/ (a wrong action) because they, as well as some of the
People of the Book, accused a trustworthy, veracious and pure man such
as the Prophet (S) of giving a false impression of Allah and they did
wrong action towards themselves and people.

It is false and invalid, because their words were completely baseless
and the Prophet (S) had repeatedly called them to present some verses
and Suras like those of the Holy Qur’an and, confronting this challenge
of the Qur’an, they were somehow unable to achieve it.

This shows that these verses are not the product of man’s mind, because
if it were so, they could also present such verses with the help of the
Jews and the People of the Book. Therefore, their inability to do it is
the reason of their lie and their lie is the reason of their iniquity.
So the short sentence saying:

***“...so indeed they have done injustice and (uttered) a falsehood.”***

is a clear and expressive answer to their groundless claims.

The Arabic word /zur/ is in fact derived from a word that means the
upper part of the chest. Then it was applied to whatever that inclines
from the middle and, because lie deviates from truth and inclines toward
falsehood, it is called /zur/.

Sura Al-Furqan - Verses 5-6
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا أَسَاطِيرُ الاَوَّلِينَ اكْتَتَبَهَا فَهِيَ تُمْلَي عَلَيْهِ
بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَنزَلَهُ الَّذِي يَعْلَمُ السّـِرَّ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضِ
إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفُوراً رَّحِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. “And they say: ‘(Qur’an is) the stories of the ancients he has got
them written, so they are dictated before him morning and
evening’.”***  
***6. “Say: ’He sent it down Who knows the secrets in the heavens and
the earth. Verily He is ever Forgiving, Merciful‘.”***

Pagans both found fault with the content of the Holy Qur’an, that these
are old fables, and expressed doubt about the holy Prophet (S), that he
had made copy and they considered some unreal companions for him:

***(“...they are dictated to him...”).***

The purpose of ‘old fables’ is whether they believed that some persons
wrote for him, or they said the Prophet (S) was literate and negated his
being uneducated.

In these holy verses, one of their derivative analyses and meaningless
pretexts about the holy Qur’an is talked about.

It says:

***“And they say: ‘(Qur’an is) the stories of the ancients he has got
them written...”***

This means that he, in fact, has nothing by himself. He has no knowledge
and innovation, let alone revelation and prophethood. Some persons have
helped him to gather some old legends and named it heavenly book.

In order to achieve this aim, he is helped by others every day. The
verse continues saying:

***“...so they are dictated before him morning and evening’.”***

He is helped in the morning and evening when there are few people out.

This is, in fact, explanation of the false accusations that were
mentioned in the previous verse.

By these short sentences, they intend to impose some weak points on the
holy Qur’an: First, the holy Qur’an has got no new matter or subject and
it is some old legends. Second, the Prophet (S) can not continue his job
without others’ help and every morning and evening matters must be read
out to him and he writes them. Third, he can write and read and if he
says that he is not educated, he is lying.

As a matter of fact, they intended to break up people who were with the
Prophet (S), but all wise persons who had lived for a time in that
society knew well that the Prophet (S) had not been educated by anybody
and had nothing to do with the Jews and the People of the Book.

If he were inspired by others every day and night, how would it be
possible to remain hidden from others? Moreover the verses of Qur’an
were revealed to him in journey, among people, in solitude and in all
conditions.

Additionally, the holy Qur’an was a collection of doctrinal teachings,
religious ordinances, laws and some part of the story of the prophets.
When all of the holy Qur’an was sent down, it was not like what was in
Old and New Testaments as well as Arab superstitious legends.

If we compare both of them, we see what the truth is, because those
scriptures were full of superstitions while these verses were free from
any superstition.

Therefore, answering these groundless accusations, the last concerned
verse says:

***“Say: ‘He sent it down Who knows the secrets in the heavens and the
earth...”***

It refers to this matter that the content of this Book and its various
mysteries that are about sciences, the history of former nations, laws,
man’s needs, even some secrets of nature and news about the future, all
indicate that it is not the product of man’s mind and it is not compiled
by the help of such and such persons.

It is in fact generated by One Who knows mysteries of heavens and the
earth and nothing is out of His knowledge realm.

Nevertheless, the path of return is open to those who are liar and evil
thinkers, and, in the end of the verse, it says:

***“...Verily He is ever Forgiving, Merciful’.”***

In agreement with His Mercy, He has sent prophets and heavenly Books,
and in agreement with His forgiveness, He pardons our countless sins in
the light of faith and penance.

Sura Al-Furqan - Verses 7-8
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا مَالِ هَذَا الرَّسُولِ يَأْكُلُ الطَّعَامَ وَيَمْشِي فِي
الاَسْوَاقِ لَوْلآ اُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مَلَكٌ فَيَكُونَ مَعَهُ نَذِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ يُلْقَي إِلَيْهِ كَنزٌ أَوْ تَكُونُ لَهُ جَنَّةٌ يَأْكُلُ مِنْهَا
وَقَالَ الظَّالِمُونَ إِن تَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ رَجُلاً مَّسْحُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. “And they say: ‘What sort of a Messenger is this that he eats food
and he walks about in the markets? Why has not an angel been sent down
to him, to be a warner with him?”***  
***8. “Or why has not a treasure been bestowed on him, or why has he not
a garden to eat of it?’ And the unjust say: ‘You follow none other than
a man bewitched’.”***

### Occasion of Revelation

Imam Hassan ‘Askari (as) said that he asked his father, the tenth Imam,
whether the Prophet (S) argued against seeking pretext and reproaches of
the Jews and pagans. His father said:

*“Yes, it happened many times, including the day when the Prophet (S)
was sitting beside Allah’s house and ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi-Omayah Makhzumi
came to him and, standing in front of him, said:*

*‘Oh! Muhammad, you have made a great claim and are stating terrible
words! You think that you are the messenger of the Lord of the peoples,
but it is not appropriate for the Creator of all* *creatures and people
to have a messenger like you, a human like us. You eat like us and walk
in markets as we do!’*

The Prophet (S) said:

*‘Oh Allah! You hear all words and speeches and know all things. You
know what Your servants say. (You Yourself answer them.)’*

At this time the above verses were revealed and their seeking pretext
were answered.”[^10]

Since the former holy verses mentioned pagans’ objections about the
Glorious Qur’an and they were answered in them, the concerned verses
bring about another part that is about the mission of the Prophet (S)
and it is also answered.

The verse says:

***“And they say: ‘What sort of a Messenger is this that he eats food
and he walks about in the markets?...”***

They wanted to say that what a prophet he is. He needs food as other
people need. He walks in markets for business and buying what he needs.
This is neither the tradition of the messengers nor the custom of the
kings, while he wants both to declare Divine invitation and to rule us!

They fundamentally believed that the outstanding persons must not go by
themselves to market for buying what they need, but they must send
servants and agents for this matter.

Then they said:

***“...Why has not an angel been sent down to him, to be a warner with
him?”***

Very well! Suppose that a man can be a messenger of Allah, but why is he
poor and destitute?

The verse says:

***“Or why has not a treasure been bestowed on him, or why has he not a
garden to eat of it?’...”***

They did not get satisfied only with these and finally they accused him
of insanity.

In the end of the verse we read:

***“...And the unjust say: ’You follow none other than a man
bewitched’.”***

They believed that sorcerers can influence the intellect and
intelligence of individuals and own the faculty of reasoning!

It is understood from the above holy verses that they found some
illusive faults with the Prophet (S) and in every phase they retreated
from their views.

They first believed that the messenger must be an angel. That he eats
food and walks in markets shows that he is not an angel.

Then they said that if he is not an angel, an angel must be sent by
Allah for helping him.

Again they took retrograde step and said that supposing Allah’s prophet
is a man, a treasure must be sent down to him from the heaven, so that
it will be a reason for the matter that he is supported by Allah!

In the last phase they said supposing he has none of these, but he must
be at least not a poor man. Like a wealthy farmer he must have a garden
for marinating him. But he has none of these and still he is saying that
he is a prophet.

As a conclusion, they said that his great claim in such conditions is
the sign of insanity!!

[^1]: Sura Al-Qadr, No. 97, verse 1

[^2]: Sura Al-’Issra’, No. 17, verse 106

[^3]: The verse under discussion

[^4]: Burhan, Vol. 3, p. 155

[^5]: Sura Al-’Anfal, No. 8, verse 29

[^6]: According to Raqib in Mufradat, the word /mulk/ means: ‘To take
something in one’s authority and having dominion on it.’

[^7]: Extracted from the book ‘The Mystery of Man Creation’, pages
33-449

[^8]: Lisan-ul-’Arab

[^9]: Thr word /ja’u/ means to come, but here it means to bring.

[^10]: Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, Vol. 4, p. 6


