Surah al-Mu’minun, Chapter 23
=============================

**Surah al-Mu’minun (The Believers) (23)**

**(Revealed in Mecca)**

**118 verses in 6 sections**

The Virtues of the Recitation of Sura Al-Mu’minun
-------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

There are many virtues have been stated about this Sura in the recorded
narrations quoted from the Prophet (S) and the Imams (as).

On the virtue of reciting this Sura, for example, Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*“Frequent recitation of this Sura, especially on Fridays, brings bliss
in this world and the Hereafter, and it also leads to the enjoyment of
the company of the Divine prophets in the lofty Paradise.”*[^1]

In a tradition by the Prophet (S), we read:

*“On the Day of Hereafter, the angels will give whoever recites Sura
al-Mu’minun good tidings about the breath of life and a Garden of
delight, and when the Angel of Death comes to take his soul, he will
give him such good tidings that he will be delighted.”*[^2]

Imam Sadiq also said:

*“Whoever reads Sura al-Mu’minun and continues reading it every Friday,
Allah will render the end of his life blissful and his place will be
raised high in Paradise alongside the prophets and the messengers.”*[^3]

It is necessary to reiterate this point that mentioning the virtues of
reciting the Suras of the Qur’an never means reading them without
pondering upon them and practicing them, for this heavenly Book is a
book with a practical program for the training and education of man.

If someone really harmonizes his practical and doctrinal programs with
the content of this Sura, or even with a few of the verses which are
found at the beginning of it that refer to the attributes of the
believers, on the Day of Judgment, all these glories will certainly be
granted to him.

Thus, in some Islamic narrations we read that when the first verses of
this Sura were revealed, the Prophet (S) said:

*“Ten verses have been revealed to me (that) whoever puts them into
practice will enter Paradise.”*[^4]

Using the Arabic word /’aqama/ (put into practice) instead of the word
/qara’a/ (recite) refers to the same fact mentioned above, that the main
aim is not only bare reading them but applying the meaning of these
verses to everyday life.

The Content of the Sura
-----------------------

As the name of this Sura suggests, its content is mostly about the
special attributes of the believers, and, at the end, it mentions some
statements upon the beliefs and practice that complete these attributes.

The contents of this Sura can be divided into seven parts:

### The First Part

Beginning with the noble verse:

***“Successful indeed are the believers”***

and continuing for several verses afterwards, this Sura mentions some of
the attributes that lead to the salvation and deliverance of the
believers. These practical attributes are so comprehensive and accurate
that they also cover various aspects of social and personal life.

### The Second Part

Since their essence is totally belief and monotheism, these verses
proceed to mention the different signs of knowing Allah and His signs in
the macrocosm and microcosm of the world of existence. It recounts some
examples of the wonderful system of the world of creation, such as the
sky, the earth, and the creation of man, plants and animals.

### The Third Part

To complete the practical dimensions of the noble Sura, the verses here
cite the instructive biography of some of the great prophets such as
Noah, Hud, Moses, and Jesus (peace be on them) as a few examples by
mentioning certain aspects of their lives.

### The Fourth Part

This part addresses the arrogant, sometimes by appealing to their
logical reason and sometimes by warning them in harsh tones in order to
arouse the consciences of the receptive ones and find their way back to
Allah.

### The Fifth Part

This part contains some concise discussions on the subject of
Resurrection.

### The Sixth Part

It speaks about both Allah’s Sovereignty over the world of existence and
irresistibility of His command over the entire universe.

### The Seventh Part

The Resurrection, the weighing of deeds, the reward for those who do
right and the punishment for those who do wrong are again mentioned
here, and the noble Sura ends by mentioning the aim of the creation of
man.

Thus, the content of this holy Sura is a collection of some cognitive
issues that encourages us to reflect, and the doctrinal and practical
lessons, and from the beginning of the Sura to the end talk about the
entire path the believers must pave.

As was mentioned before, this holy Sura was revealed in Mecca, yet some
commentators of the holy Qur’an have said that some of its verses had
been revealed in Medina. This is because it contains a verse that refers
to the alms-tax (zakat).

Since the alms-tax was legislated for the first time in Medina, this
fact has led them to think that the complete Sura could not have been
revealed in Mecca, because it is known that alms-tax was at first
legislated in Medina and after the revelation of the verse:

***“...Take alms out of their possessions...”***[^5]***,***

the Prophet (S) ordered alms-tax collectors to go around and collect
this tax from the people.

With respect to this issue we must be aware, however, that the alms-tax
also has a general meaning that includes both obligatory and recommended
alms-taxes. Its meaning is not limited to the obligatory alms-tax alone,
for we see in the Islamic narrations that the ritual prayer and the
payment of this tax have often been mentioned together.

A narration by Imam Sadiq and Imam Baqir (as) says:

*“Allah has made the alms-tax along with the ritual prayer
obligatory.”*[^6]

Moreover, some Islamic scholars believe that the alms-tax had, also been
obligatory in Mecca, but it was general and undefined, meaning that
every one was obliged to give some part of his possessions to the needy.

When the Islamic government was established in Medina, a precise system
was devised for regulating, collecting and distributing the alms-tax
along with specifying the minimum value of property upon which it should
be levied and collected by the Prophet’s agents.

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^2]: Majma‘ ul-Bayan, The Commentary, Vol. 7, p. 98

[^3]: Majma‘ ul-Bayan, Vol. 7, p.98

[^4]: Ruh-ul-Ma’ani, Vol. 18, p.2

[^5]: Sura At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 103

[^6]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol.93, p. 14; and Fru‘-i-Kafi, Vol. 3, p. 496


