Section 2: Allah Saves Noah and His Followers
=============================================

Surah al-Mu’minun - Verse 23
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحاً إِلَي قَوْمِهِ فَقَالَ يَاقَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا
اللَّهَ مَا لَكُم مِنْ إِلَهٍ غَيْرُهُ أَفَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “And indeed We sent Noah unto his folk, and he said: ‘O’ my
people! Worship Allah. You have no other god save Him. Will you not keep
from evil?’ ”***

In the previous verses, Allah spoke of the creation of man and what
supplies his material needs. Now in these verses, He attends to the
supply of man’s intellectual and doctrinal food.

In other words, the previous noble verses mentioned monotheism,
knowledge of Allah, and the reasons of His majesty in the world of
creation. This matter has been told from the mouths of the great
prophets and by using the events that have unfolded in their history in
this verse and the ones that follow.

It first begins with Noah, an arch-prophet and the bearer of the news of
monotheism, the verse says:

***“And indeed We sent Noah unto his folk, and he said: ‘O’ my people!
Worship Allah. You have no other god save Him. Will you not keep from
evil?’ ”***

To serve other than Allah is impiety and recklessness.

Surah al-Mu’minun - Verse 24
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ الْمَلاَُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِن قَوْمِهِ مَا هَذَآ إِلاَّ
بَشَرٌ مّـِثْلُكُمْ يُرِيدُ أَن يَتَفَضَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلَوْ شَآءَ
اللَّهُ لأَنزَلَ مَلآَئِكَةً مَاسَمِعْنَا بِهَذَا فِي ءَابَآئِنَا
الاَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. “But the chiefs of those who disbelieved from among his people
said: ‘This is nothing but a mortal like you who intends to gain
superiority over you. And if Allah had pleased (to send any prophet), He
surely could have sent down angels. We have not heard of this
(invitation) among our ancestors of old’.”***

The elite were the most intractable of those who opposed the prophets.

The prophets (as) had come to guide mankind but the unbelievers used to
say that a heavenly messenger should not be a human being! Because of
this the rich and conceited elite among Noah’s folk, used to say: This
is only a mortal like you who seeks to dominate you.

The verse says:

***“But the chiefs of those who disbelieved from among his people said:
‘This is nothing but a mortal like you who intends to gain superiority
over you...”***

Thus, they saw Noah’s humanity as a defect and accused him of self
aggrandizement and that all he had said about Allah, about monotheism
and religion, were merely plots to achieve this aim.

Then they added:

***“...And if Allah had pleased (to send any prophet), He surely could
have sent down angels…”***

And, to complete this unfounded argument, they said:

***“...We have not heard of this (invitation) among our ancestors of
old’.”***

Of course, when facing correct logic, one must not rely on national
culture and the imitation of one’s ancestors to defend the existing
situation, instead one must follow the Divine call of His prophet.

Surah al-Mu’minun - Verses 25-26
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ هُوَ إلاَّ رَجُلٌ بِهِ جِنَّةٌ فَتَرَبَّصُوا بِهِ حَتَّي حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبّ‌ِ انصُرْنِي بِمَا كَذَّبُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “He is just a man in whom is a madness, so bear with him for a
while.”***  
***26. “He (Noah) said: ‘My Lord! help me against what they Belie’.”***

Obstinacy and conceit lead some individuals to attribute madness to
their prophet, the wisest of people. The elite among the blasphemers
imagine the call of the prophets to be a mental aberration and ask
others to wait until he ceases asserting his claims.

***(“...so bear with him for a while.”)***

These baseless words, however, did not affect the soul of this great
prophet, and Noah continued his mission without the slightest sign of
self aggrandizement in what was he doing.

When they saw that their accusations were not supported by reality they
made another accusation, saying that he was insane, a charge that had
been leveled upon all Divine prophets and veracious leaders in the
course of history.

They said:

***“He is just a man in whom is a madness, so bear with him for a
while.”***

It is very interesting that they used the Arabic word /jinnatun/ (a kind
of madness) in the accusation they leveled at this great arch-prophet,
suppressing the fact that the life and speeches of this prophet were the
best indicators of his knowledge and reasonableness.

In truth, they intended to say that, granted his behavior might be
correct and sound, but madness could have many faces among which is that
very appearance of reasonableness and knowledge.

The Qur’anic sentence /fa tarabbasu bihi hatta hin/

***(“...so bear with him for a while”)***

may refer to the possibility that they were anticipating Noah’s death
when they would get peace of mind; or it may mean that they were waiting
until he was cured from the sickness of madness that they had attributed
to him!

At any rate, they made three kinds of unfounded and paradoxical
accusations, each of which they advanced as a reason to deny his
prophecy:

1) The claim of prophecy by a human being is a lie! Such a phenomenon is
unprecedented.

***“...And if Allah had pleased, He surely could have sent down
angels”***

2) He is a man who seeks after self-aggrandizement and uses this claim
to gain it.

3) He does not have sound reason and what he says is due to insanity.

Since the answer of these baseless accusations and objections is
obvious, and is mentioned in other verses of the Holy Qur’an, no more is
said by the Qur’an about it here.

It stands to reason that naturally a leader of human beings must himself
be a human being, for he should existentially be cognizant of the needs,
pains and problems of being human. Moreover, the prophets had always
been human in their nature.

On the other hand, it is clearly understood from the lives of the
prophets that brotherliness, humility, and the absence of any form of
self aggrandizement have been of their most outstanding attributes, and
their reason, intelligence and insight were not unknown to their foes
for they acknowledged them in their own words.

Noah’s enemies did not confine their molestation and annoyance to
leveling unjust accusations against him. From other verses of the Qur’an
it is understood that they put great pressure on him in other ways as
well. Noah tried his best to guide and save them from the clutches of
blasphemy and polytheism.

When he despaired in his efforts, he asked for Allah’s help, as we read
in the verse which says:

***“He (Noah) said: ‘My Lord! help me against what they belie’.”***

Of course, he asked Allah’s help for the victory of faith over
disbelief, not for the victory of himself as an individual over another.
Therefore, he said: “Help me against what they belie” and he did not say
help me against them.

Surah al-Mu’minun - Verse 27
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَيْهِ أَنِ اصْنَعِ الْفُلْكَ بِاَعْيُنِنَا
وَوَحْيِنَا فَإِذَا جَآءَ أَمْرُنَا وَفَارَ التَّنُّورُ فَاسْلُكْ
فِيهَا مِن كُلّ‌ِ زَوْجَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ وَأَهْلَكَ إِلاَّ مَن سَبَقَ
عَلَيْهِ الْقَوْلُ مِنْهُمْ وَلاَ تُخَاطِبْنِي فِي الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا
إِنَّهُم مُّغْرَقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “Then We revealed unto him: ’Build the Ark before Our eyes and
(according to) Our revelation. Then, when Our command comes and the oven
gushes (water), take into it a pair of every kind (of animal) and (also)
your family, except those of them against whom the word has already gone
forth. And plead not with Me on behalf of those who are unjust, for
verily they shall be drowned.”***

Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Noah (as) called people to monotheism both secretly and openly for 950
years, until Allah told him:*

***‘...None of your People will believe except those who have believed
already...’***[^1]

*Then Noah said:*

***’... they will mislead Your servants and will beget none save lewd
ungrateful (children)’***[^2]***.”***[^3]

*Then Allah issued the command for him to make the Ark and preparations
were made to save Noah and his few companions and to destroy the
obstinate polytheists. So He says:*

***“Then We revealed unto him: ‘Build the Ark before Our eyes and
(according to) Our revelation...”***

The Qur’anic phrase /bi ’a‘yunina/ (before Our eyes) refers to the fact
that Noah’s effort and endeavor for this end was in the presence of
Allah (s.w.t.) and He supported him, so Noah continued his task with a
tranquil soul arid without being afraid of or concerned about anything.

The Arabic word /wahyina/ (Our revelation) shows that Noah learned the
technique of making the Ark through the Divine revelation. Such a thing
(as history shows) was unprecedented at that time. Consequently, Noah
made the ship according to Allah’s direction, so it did not fall short
of perfection for his aim.

The verse continues saying:

***“...Then, when Our command comes and the oven gushes (water), take
into it a pair of every kind (of animal) and (also) your family, except
those of them against whom the word has already gone forth...”***

(This last sentence refers to Noah’s wife and one of his children)

Then the Qur’an adds:

***“...And plead not with Me on behalf of those who are unjust, for
verily they shall be drowned.”***

Of course, this warning was because Noah could have been moved by human
sentiments or fatherly affection that might lead him (as) to intercede
on behalf of them while they no longer deserved intercession.

Surah al-Mu’minun - Verses 28-30
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا اسْتَوَيْتَ أَنتَ وَمَن مَّعَكَ عَلَي الْفُلْكِ فَقُلِ
الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي نَجَّانَا مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُل رَبّ‌ِ أَنزِلْنِي مُنزَلاً مُّبَارَكاً وَأَنتَ خَيْرُ
الْمُنزِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَاتٍ وَإِن كُنَّا لَمُبْتَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28.“And when you, and those with you, are settled on the Ark, say:
‘all praise belongs to Allah Who has delivered us from the unjust
people!’ ”***  
***29. “And say: ‘My Lord! Cause me to land with a blessed landing, for
You are the Best to cause to land’.”***  
***30. “Verily in this there are signs; and indeed We put (men) to
test.”***

First, we must be grateful to Allah for all His previous blessings then
we ask Him for a new favour. The historical subjects of The Holy Qur’an
are guiding signs and a cause for our development, they are not for the
purposes of entertainment or for simple story telling.

In this noble verse, addressing Noah, Allah said:

***“And when you, and those with you, are settled on the Ark, say: ‘All
praise belongs to Allah Who has delivered us from the unjust people!’
”***

Then in the second verse, Noah is told that after praising Allah for the
first great blessing, that is being saved from the clutches of the
oppressors, he should beseech Allah in this way:

***“And say: ‘My Lord! Cause me to land with a blessed landing, for You
are the Best to cause to land’.”***

The Arabic word /manzil/ perhaps here is a noun of place, that is to say
that after the storm ended Allah would land Noah’s ship on a land that
was blessed with abundant favours, so that he could live on it
comfortably.

It may also be an infinitive, that is to say that Allah would land
Noah’s Ark with a good way, because after that the storm ended, many
dangers would face the ship when it was about to land, such as the lack
of a proper place to live, the shortage of food, and different kinds of
diseases, so Noah asked Allah to land the ship with a blessed landing.

Finally, the last verse of this group of verses refers to the whole
story in which Noah overcome the oppressors; and the severe punishment
of these people is considered as a sign for the possessors of intellect.

The verse says:

***“Verily in this there are signs; and indeed We put (men) to test.”***

The above sentence may indicate that Allah frequently tested the people
of Noah and when they could not pass the test, He caused them to perish.

It may also point out that Allah tests all mankind in every age, and the
verses above are not only peculiar to the people of Noah’s age. Mankind
is tested in various forms in all ages and, as a result of them, those
who are thorns on the way of human development are removed, so that
humanity would continue its journey of perfection unhindered.

It is interesting that in the verses above, only the making the Ark and
the embarkation of Noah and his companions are mentioned. Details of
what ultimately happened to the wrongdoers is not mentioned in the
Qur’an, but by the Divine promise which says:

***“...verily they shall be drowned”***

It becomes certain that such a fate befell them, for Allah’s promise is
always fulfilled.

It is also necessary to mention that more information about the story of
Noah and his struggle with the unbelieving people of his folk, as well
as the events of making Ark, gushing water, the occurrence of the storm,
and when Noah’s son was drowned, there are much explanation which can be
found in the books about the history of the prophets.

Surah al-Mu’minun - Verses 31-32
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَنشَأْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ قَرْناً ءَاخَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَرْسَلْنَا فِيهِمْ رَسُولاً مّـِنْهُمْ أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ مَا
لَكُم مِنْ إِلَهٍ غَيْرُهُ أَفَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “Then, after them, We produced another generation;”***  
***32. “And We sent among them a messenger from among themselves
(saying): ‘Worship Allah. You have no other god besides Him. Will you
not keep from evil?’ ”***

As His way of treatment, Allah has appointed a prophet for every nation.

The prophet must be from among the people themselves, so that they have
a practiced and forbearing example among them. Thus, these verses
discuss upon the nations that have come after Noah (as) and explain
their gloomy fate. They also show that the logic of the unbelievers of
later generations were similar to those of the former generations.

At first, it says:

***“Then, after them, We produced another generation;”***

The Arabic word /qarn/ is derived from the word /’iqtiran/, which means
proximity, therefore the generation that lives in a particular single
age is called a ‘qarn’. Sometimes the time, characterized by a certain
generation, in Arabic is called a ‘qarn’.

The measurement of the length of a ‘qarn’ as 30 to 100 years is only a
convention and is dependent upon the traditions of various nations.

Then the next holy verse implies that since man cannot be without a
Divine leader, Allah sent a great prophet to them that he would teach
them monotheism, the religion of Truth and justice, and would call
people to them, as the verse says:

***“And We sent among them a messenger from among themselves (saying):
’Worship Allah. You have no other god besides Him. Will you not keep
from evil?’ ”***

This is what has formed the basis of the call of all Divine prophets.
Indeed it has been the call of monotheism that has formed the main
substructure of all individual and social reformations.

Then the prophet asks the question whether they would not shun
polytheism and idol worship, when they are called to monotheism:

***(…Will you not keep from evil?)***

The prophet and the nation, to which he had been sent, have not been
identified in the Qur’an, but with regards to their identities in other
verses of the Qur’an, there are two possibilities offered by the
commentators:

1) It was the people of Thamud who used to live in an area located in
the north of Hijaz, whose prophet was Salih, a great Divine prophet that
was appointed to guide those people. They disbelieved in his message and
rebelled and were finally destroyed by a heavenly cry (or a deadly
thunderbolt).

The evidence of this interpretation is the punishment of the Cry which
is mentioned at the end of the holy verses under consideration, and it
is also found in Sura Hud, No. 11, verse 67 which clearly is about the
people of Salih.

2) It was the people of ‘Aad whose prophet was Hud. Their story is told
in other verses of the Holy Qur’an immediately after the story of Noah
(as). This itself is a flame of evidence whereby it is possible to
interpret the holy verse mentioned above in this way.

However, considering that this nation’s punishment was a very fierce
wind that continued for seven nights and eight days destroying them, as
verses 6 and 7 of Sura Al-Haqqah have mentioned, it becomes clear that
the first interpretation is more correct.

Anyway, we see what the reaction of this obstinate nation was to this
great prophet’s call of monotheism.

[^1]: Sura Hud, No. 11, verse 36

[^2]: Sura Noah, No. 71, verse 27

[^3]: Bihar, Vol. 11, p. 331


