[Introduction]
==============

The word ‘religion’ means different things to different people. At one
extreme it represents everything primitive and superstitious that we
have struggled to eradicate over the last three hundred years, and at
the other extreme it represents a quiet joy of recognition and warmth in
the heart for everything we hold most precious. Hence, to use the word
properly is to recognise the spectrum of its reception. The word
‘postsecular’ on the other hand represents little to anyone, because it
is recently coined and not much in circulation. The term implies that
there might emerge, or already be emerging, a quality of thought that
goes beyond the secular, a thinking that celebrates our hard-won
democratic rights and freedoms, but which is more open to the spiritual
than the secular mind has generally been. In the late 20th century an
increasingly casual atheism became central to Western culture, if not to
Western society. This casual atheism was a precocious and extraordinary
part of Marx’s thought in 1860, but by 1960 most Western schoolchildren
would be culturally impelled to adopt it, almost without question.

The origins of the secular mind in the 17th century are complex. It is
useful to think of Western thought as following a presecular form up to
the 17th century, and then, over a three-hundred year period, developing
into the secular form familiar in the middle-late 20th century. The
emergence of a possible postsecular mode of thought has to be dated from
about 1980, and its origins, rather ironically, may lie in science. In
the 1980s Fritjof Capra in ‘The Tao of Physic’ and Gary Zukav in ‘The
Dancing Wu Li Masters’ popularised the parallels between mysticism and
quantum theory. Commentators from a wide spectrum of thought began to
see quantum holism and quantum indeterminacy - which these books
explained to a lay audience - as undermining the classical mechanistic
view of the universe, and allowing new modes of thought to surface. This
is ironical because it was physics that underpinned the Age of
Enlightenment, and which led to the secular, even atheistic, late 20th
century outlook. It looks like physics is again underpinning a
transition, this time from the secular to the postsecular.

I shall quote just one recent notable event in support of this idea: the
award of the million-dollar Templeton prize for progress in religion to
the British physicist Paul Davies in 1995. Davies won the prize on the
basis of a series of books including ‘God and the New Physics’ which
ends with the proposition that ‘science is a surer path to God than
religion.’ This ought to be considered remarkable, at the very least
prompting the reflection that religion must be rather unsure of itself
to reward such a statement with such a prestigious prize (other
recipients include Mother Teresa of Calcutta and the Rev. Dr. Billy
Graham). It is also part of the irony previously raised when one
considers that Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake in 1600 for his
views on science and religion - these views, when compared to Davies’s
statement, now look mild indeed. (Many consider Bruno to have been
condemned to death for his Copernicanism, but it now looks more likely
that it was merely his heterodoxy and quarrelsomeness. However he could
never have conceived of anything as radical as the above statement by
Davies.)

We might sum up the religious trajectory of the last four centuries in
the West as follows: in the middle of the 17th century thinkers were all
theists with a few deists appearing; in the middle of the 18th century
thinkers were mostly deists with a few agnostics appearing; in the
middle of the 19th century thinkers were mostly agnostic with a few
atheists appearing, and in the middle of the 20th century atheism
dominated Western thought. This atheism ranged from casual, as in
Marxism, to vituperative, as in writers like Richard Dawkins and Gore
Vidal. Indeed it is often surprising how vehement the rejection of
religion can still be today, when our secular freedoms have been so long
guaranteed in the West. What the postsecular begins to question is the
assumption that the spiritual impulse itself has to inevitably create
the presecular religious hierarchies that we so rightly reject as
inimical to freedom and democracy. It is an accident of history that
religion is associated with feudalism, and a Western accident in
particular that it is associated with spiritual intolerance and
persecution. Neither is a rejection of the spiritual a necessary outcome
of the scientific worldview but rather an accident of a parallel
historical process that had falsely identified religion as a repository
of*knowledge* . We begin to see the Western prejudice against the
spiritual as arising out of a series of accidents, and not as an
inevitable process. This opening up of thought is what we are
characterising as postsecular.

To say that the spiritual life of the new millennium has to some extent
found an ally in science is to state only part of the current dynamic
however. A renewal of the spiritual life as a genuinely 21st century
phenomenon, as opposed to the embattled survival into the secular world
of presecular religion, emerges in a variety of contexts. We can list
these as:

1- the 'new' sciences of quantum mechanics, relativity and chaos
(complexity) theory, which challenge the deterministic, mechanistic and
reductionist worldview

2- the emerging field of consciousness studies

3- transpersonal psychology from Jung to Wilber

4- sections of Postmodern thinking including Heidegger and Levinas

5- sections of Christian theology, in particular the 'Radical
Orthodoxy', inspired by Postmodernism

6- the creative arts in the 20th C, for example artists from Constantin
Brancusi to Bill Viola who have explored a wide range of conventional
and unconventional spiritualities in their art

7- Deep ecology and ‘ecosophy,’ mystical approaches to Nature, from
Thoreau to Dillard.


