Postmodernism
=============

Amongst postmodern philosophers the hospitality to the spiritual is
mixed. In general the postmoderns, while rejecting most of the
Enlightenment project - including the remnants of religious thinking -
created small intellectual spaces where the spiritual could flourish.
This is because they also rejected the modernist insistence on a
scientific description of a ‘given’ rational universe. These lacunae
were permitted as long as they did not arrogate themselves to the status
of a system, and as long as any central spiritual discourse was
near-buried under the weight of postmodern terminology. We can better
understand this phenomenon if we look back to the 17th century. At its
dawn stood the sobering spectacle of Giordano Bruno’s murder by the
Church, a warning to the thinkers of that age. Descartes’s ideas were
banned, Newton kept his heretical Arianism a secret, and Spinoza was
unable to publish at all. It is perhaps Spinoza’s ‘Ethics’ that best
demonstrates the lengths that these thinkers had to go to in order to
hide their ideas. They firstly avoided any direct expression of their
religious insights, and secondly were seduced into using the emerging
language of maths, physics and reason. As a result the postmoderns
inherited an intellectual tradition of extreme circumlocution - Derrida
is one of its most eloquent practitioners. The phenomenological
tradition of Edmund Husserl, Martin Heidegger, Maurice Merleau-Ponty and
Emmanuel Levinas offers many opportunities for spiritual discourse, and
the exchanges between Levinas and Derrida are a unique encapsulation of
an ancient creative tension between the Hebraic and the Hellenic in
Western culture and spiritual thought.


