Deep Ecology
============

The terms ‘Deep ecology’ and ‘Ecosophy’ were introduced by Norwegian
philosopher and mountaineer Professor Arne Naess in 1973, and attempt to
convey something beyond ecology as a branch of the biological sciences.
At the same time there has been a history of nature writing since the
mid-19th century that either verges on the mystical or is explicitly
spiritual, including Walt Whitman, Henry Thoreau, Ralph Waldo Emerson,
John Muir, John Burroughs, Richard Jefferies, Aldo Leopold, Jiddu
Krishnamurti and Annie Dillard. More recently the ‘Gaia’ hypothesis, as
put forward by scientist James Lovelock, has had a wide influence.
Journals like ‘Resurgence’ edited by Satish Kumar promote the spiritual
aspects of ecology, while the lesser-known ‘The Trumpeter’ provides a
forum for deep ecology and ecosophical thinking. All these strands can
find a common ancestry or debt in the pioneering work of John Muir
(1838-1914), credited with being the founding father of the ecological
movement (he set up the National Park system in the USA in response to
his perception of the wilderness as under threat). Less well understood
is his profoundly spiritual vision of the natural world, a spirituality
perhaps inherited from his pastor father, but at the same time in revolt
against the constraints of Victorian Christianity. While conventional
ecological thinking today bases its arguments on survival of the
biosphere, and can be reduced to a utilitarian philosophy, the spiritual
or holistic impulse in Muir and his modern-day inheritors speaks of an
additional imperative: a*transcendent* vision of nature. This
transcendence can only be understood by drawing on mystical traditions,
or by examining Buddhism, or through the ideas of transpersonal
psychology, or by pitting the rational mind against the limits of
science, or by engaging with the aesthetics of the sublime in art. In
other words by engaging thoroughly with the whole postsecular context.


