[Conclusion]
============

With these seven contexts I am suggesting that the postsecular is
emerging from the secular in a patchy way, with elements contributing to
it that run at different speeds and over different timeframes, and that
they include science, art, and postmodernism. But what of the
relationship between the presecular and the postsecular, that is between
the religions of old and the emerging spiritualities? We have to observe
that parts of this even larger picture run with still greater variation
of speed, there being entire sectors of contemporary society that are
untouched by modernity and postmodernity, let alone the postsecular.
There are estimated for example to be 70 million Christian
fundamentalists in the US today. The presecular survives in great
swathes into the secular world, but the fact is that it contributes very
little to popular or highbrow*culture* . We might say that religion
flies below the cultural radar of the West, largely due to the
intellectuals of the West having poured their energies into less
problematic projects, such as science and politics. It is also rather
shocking that Eastern ideas have been known in the West since the
mid-18th century, but, with the exception of Schopenhauer, they have
been ignored by almost all important thinkers, whether modern or
postmodern. The presecular religions of the West have therefore been
largely insulated both from modern and postmodern thought, and from
exposure to the East. Yet religion up to the 17th century - and Eastern
religion prior to its contact with the West - has historically shown
itself to be remarkably adaptable and even an engine for progress and
change. By contrast, in the secular world of the 20th century it has
been ghettoised and insulated from the crucibles of change that have
forged the contemporary worldview, making the adherence to it almost as
embarrassing today as frankness in sexual matters was in the Victorian
era. The result is that presecular religion may not be able to make the
transition to a postsecular world, rather that entirely new forms of
spirituality may emerge, perhaps the most promising arising out of deep
ecology / nature mysticism.

But the postsecular lays a potential trap for new spiritualities as they
emerge, and we can anticipate this from the seven contexts suggested
above. Each one extracts a price for allowing its practitioners the new
freedom to engage with the spiritual. These include the scientisation,
the psychologising, the philosophisation, the theologising and the
ecologising of the spiritual, in other words a dynamic that requires the
spiritual to be interpreted by each discipline, to be given a language
from each discipline. It is science of course that poses the greatest
danger, and hence my article “Against Scientific Magisterial
Imperialism” mentioned above. However the psychologising of the
spiritual is just as big an obstacle to recovering a genuinely spiritual
language and a genuinely spiritual sense of self, indeed the ‘self’ is
almost entirely understood today in psychological terms. (It was not
always so.) Not that science and psychology do not have a great deal to
contribute to the new spiritualities, far from it, and not that
imperialisms of one kind or another are not being questioned: the
logical positivism of the last century is for example less of an
influence today. But the spiritual needs to assert its own language
again, independent of the past, and independent of science and
psychology, and even for that matter, philosophy. Possibly the simplest
way to do this is to make sure that the postsecular impulse does not
draw on one of the seven contexts alone, but cross-references each one
of them. Art - by which I mean all the creative fields, including
poetry - is a great corrective to science, and the creative fields,
where they have explored the spiritual impulse in the 20th century,
yield many insights. For example the series of paintings by Mark Rothko,
the American Abstract Expressionist, which were hung for many years in
the ‘Rothko room’ at the Tate Gallery in London, point to a non-verbal
language of the spiritual which invoked spiritual insights for
generations of gallery visitors.

With these points in mind I have set up a Centre for Postsecular Studies
at London Metropolitan University. Its focus will be to support
research, including Doctoral studies, from a range of disciplines in
such a way as to foster an open enquiry into the spiritual. It is
fitting that a University should be the setting for this. In the Middle
Ages Universities supported the intellectual efforts of religious
Scholasticism, in the Modern period Universities defended the secular
freedom to question authority, and in a postsecular spirit, perhaps the
University setting can restore the creativity and vigour of intellect to
spiritual questions. The key to the work of the centre will be
interdisciplinarity, which is always a challenge to traditional subject
divisions. Yet the very word ‘university’ originated from a perception
that a universality of mind was required to study any specialism, for
unless one knew the topology and boundaries of other disciplines and the
nature of the intercourse within and across them, one could not claim to
have a rounded university education, or any proper insight into the
world. I have suggested that the postsecular emerges from the seven
contexts listed above, but these are not exhaustive and only a guide.
Debate and research in postsecular studies will undoubtedly take many
new turns and draw from unexpected sources. However, it will be
characterised by a respect for what I have called ‘epistemological
pluralism.’ We are seeing this broader respect for different forms of
‘knowledging’ in Universities in the example of the relatively new
practice-based Doctorate in Fine Art. This allows art practitioners to
submit a body of work which encapsulates their research, and is
examined, usually in conjunction with a written contextualisation, by
experts who can ‘read’ the artwork as well as the dissertation. This
would have been unheard of 20 years ago when positivism held sway within
University research degree committees.

But, looking somewhat into the future, what shape might a postsecular
society take? In essence it will celebrate a spirituality that has
emerged out of the confrontation with the scientific worldview, and as
such it will owe much to it. While the intensely secular nature of the
20th century has involved the very real loss of provision for a
fundamental need of the human spirit - a need expressed in the etymology
of the word religion ‘to re-bind or re-connect’ - it has provided
humanity with a profound recognition of the worth of the individual. The
spirituality of the postsecular era cannot but reflect this in a
‘bottom-up’ spirituality, forms of communal spiritual practices that
listen rather than preach. More important still is the ecological
imperative, a possible doomsday clock set ticking by technology,
anticipated by science, and only resolvable by a science harnessed
through a spiritual sense of union with nature and the planet. This is
an ecology that goes beyond utilitarian survival or obligations of
stewardship, but which instead makes nature a site for a profound
spiritual love. This is an ecology that can succeed. Of course a
futurology is to be avoided, in particular a futurology of the
spiritual, but one cannot help asking also whether culture might change.
The fact is that, barring the Sunday ‘godslot,’ and ‘televangelism’ -
that is TV channels paid for by religious organisations and found mainly
in the USA - the cultural outpourings of the west through TV, cinema,
journals, newspapers, novels and other media, portray an intensely
secular worldview. Portrayals of the spiritual are either through
worn-out and faintly embarrassed stereotypes of the presecular
religions, or they fall into the X-Files category: a culturally
permissible indulgence in the spooky or occult, also found in a range of
science-fiction genres. Where is the cultural excitement provoked by the
discovery in 1945 of the Gospel of Thomas in the Nag Hammadi excavation,
comparable to the interest taken in the human genome project?
Christianity, immune to the power of intellectual curiosity driving the
rest of the world, dismissed it as heretical, while the secular world
was not even tempted to read it. Only in the recent film ‘Stigmata’
(starring Patricia Arquette and Gabriel Byrne) did a phrase from Thomas
turn up as a central and sobering theme in an otherwise rather
melodramatic invention. Still, maybe the film is a harbinger of more
thoughtful treatments of spiritual issues marking the shift towards a
postsecular culture.

The Network could be involved in the work of the new Centre in several
ways. It could participate in the general discussion around the concept
of the postsecular, and, more practically, members could put themselves
forward as potential Doctoral supervisors. My aim, within the Centre for
Postsecular Studies, is to form a kind of clearing house for
interdisciplinary research in this field, by providing a register of
suitable and willing supervisors. I would also be delighted to hear from
any members interested in undertaking doctoral studies themselves. I
anticipate that many applicants will be mature practitioners in their
field, possibly already holding higher or research degrees, or even
amongst the so-called ‘third age.’ After all, in the spiritual life, is
this not the time when one grows closer to the eternal?

In conclusion I want to consider how the Doctorate in Postsecular
Studies might take shape and serve the Network. The Doctorate has
traditionally provided a period of reflection and study, structured in
such a way as to cement a community of thought through the twin tracks
of consolidation and innovation. Consolidation means that the doctoral
candidate makes an assessment of the field in both a broad sense, which
may rather skim the surface, and in a deeper sense where it homes in on
the research questions being posed. Innovation means that a substantial
and original contribution to the field is made. The doctorate also
implies an intellectual or creative*rigour* . While intending no
criticism of Network members, I would guess that many of us have at
times read articles or heard presentations where we felt that this
rigour was somewhat lacking, but might not necessarily be able to pin
down why. I suspect that while our training in science or medicine has
given us the instinct for rigour, our cultural lack of exposure to
rigorous discourse around the spiritual has created the context where it
often goes out of the window. In other words a*spiritual literacy* is
needed, a point I argued at one of the Network’s annual gatherings some
years ago. Hence my vision for this programme of doctoral studies would
include breadth, drawing on the seven contexts outlined above, rigour,
as we have learned through science (though not degenerating into a
scientism), and a spiritual literacy.

Of central importance to the Network is the relationship between science
and religion, and this provides many potential topics for doctoral
research. In a postsecular society one of the most pressing questions
would be to re-examine the assumptions made about the origins of modern
science and thought in the seventeenth century. All the scientists of
that time were deeply religious individuals, who could not possibly have
anticipated or relished the idea that science would be held up in later
centuries as contradictory to their spiritual impulses. Even
Pierre-Simon Laplace, famous for his remark to Napoleon about God: "I
have no need of that hypothesis," is now known to have been a genuine
Catholic all his life, requesting not one but two priests to administer
his last rites. (Atheists of the less thoughtful variety still seize on
Laplace’s remark as a vindication of their secular views.) A postsecular
examination of the three great ‘rationalist’ philosophers of the period,
Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz, also reveal not just deeply religious
men, but spiritual geniuses whose spiritual thought has never been
examined or allowed to take its rightful place in the spiritual life of
the West. (Poor Descartes in particular needs rehabilitation having been
long and unfairly vilified as the author of the mind-body ‘split.’) It
is as though we still believe that priests are the only ones allowed to
contribute to religion, whereas it is clear that great scientific minds
are very often great spiritual minds.

It is with that last thought that I approach the Network regarding these
ideas concerning a possible postsecular society.


