Lesson Nine: The Sovereignty of the Spirit
==========================================

We are aware of two realities in our being: one the external compound
that is our body, fully accessible to empirical science, and the other,
consisting of thought and perception, love and affection, hatred, and
conscience. These cannot be considered as a mere series of sensory needs
or bodily reactions; they are beyond the scope of empirical science and
cannot be measured by material criteria.

They represent realities that are both different from the material body
and superior to it, being capable of dominating it. For example, a
person might be ready to die in the course of a hunger strike in order
not to suffer the shame of servility at the very same time that
biological forces are destroying his body and urging him to surrender
and eat. In other circumstances, too, a person may be hungry, but he
continues to fast.

Here we have a perfectly concrete and observable case of an iron will
sacrificing the body for the sake of an idea, an abstract ideal. This is
something that cannot be explained by the logic of materialism.

Those who claim that man is simply a collection of physiological and
material functions have to provide a serious and logical explanation of
cases such as this. If I am nothing more than my material form, how is
it possible that I should command my body and make it obey me?

The answer, of course, is that there is a reality separate from the body
and empowered over it. The fact that the will can issue commands and
establish a kind of inner dominion over man's various instincts and
bodily aspects is a clear proof for the existence in man of a sublime,
supramaterial element from which his will draws its power.

The duality of these realities in man, and the dominance exercised by
one of them over the other, points us to the existence of something
higher than matter. The Noble Qur'an proclaims:

**“*****By the soul and the One Who created it in perfection and
inspired in it knowledge of good and evil deeds”*** **(91:7-8).**

This means that man has been adorned with an essence which possesses
perception and motion: it has perception because it has received
inspiration, and it has motion because it is the origin of a series of
deeds oriented either to piety and virtue or to corruption.

What is this essence that is qualified by awareness and ability?

None of the parts of man's earthly body possess these properties. There
must therefore be an essence which is autonomous and separate from the
body and yet accompanies it while possessing the attributes just
mentioned.

Matter reacts in a uniform and predictable way to external stimuli.
Water solidifies when confronted with extreme cold; metals expand when
confronted with extreme heat these reactions are natural and unchanging.
But man is capable of manifesting the most varied and even contradictory
reactions, and this is in itself a proof that the powerful spirit and
will of man are non-material, for they transcend the properties of
matter.

\* \* \* \* \*

The process whereby perception takes place shows that there are two
factors involved: the means of perception (the eye, for example) and the
faculty of perception. It is a law of physics that you can never
perceive a motion while you are yourself a part of that motion; the
motion can be perceived only outside itself.

It is possible for you to perceive a moving object only when you stand,
as it were, on a platform that is outside the sphere of the motion. This
enables you to see the passage of things in front of you and to sense
the motion of time. It is not possible for man to sit down on the ground
and measure the rotation of the earth, nor can he stand on the moon and
measure its rotation. Motion is visible only from outside itself.

So if our faculty of perception were not located outside the range of
unceasing motion, we would never be able to perceive motion and the
passage of time; the fact that we are able to perceive the passage of
time is a clear proof that our faculty of perception is beyond the reach
of time.

If, for example, our faculty of perception were to change and to move
each instant, in keeping with the perpetual motion of time, we would be
unable to perceive the passage of time, for our faculty of perception
would be shattered into disconnected fragments.

So since we perceive time, our faculty of perception must exist outside
the scope of time and transcend it.

This distinguishes our faculty of perception from our bodily form, and
it might be said, indeed, that one half of the reality of man becomes
worn out, old and exhausted, while the other half escapes dissolution in
the whirlpool of time and pursues its own life.

The Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon him, said:

“O people, we have been created to live eternally, not to perish.
However, you will change your place of residence, and move forward from
one stage to another. Make provision, then, for the world to which you
will go after this transient abode and in which you will reside
eternally.” (*Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. V, pt. 2, p. 182)

The Great Storehouse of Mental Images
-------------------------------------

The existence of a specific relationship between a container and a thing
contained is one of the properties of matter; a larger thing can never
be made to coincide entirely with a smaller one.

If for example we stand on some great elevation, and gaze over the vast
plains that surround us, with all their trees, verdure, and birdlife,
their hills and their vales, their great rocks piled up on top of each
other, and if we then try to picture all these items in our minds, they
will appear before our spirit, our inner vision, like a great picture,
with all the attributes they possess.

Here we may ask whether all these varied images, with the extensiveness
that they possess, both in the external world and in our minds, are
stored up in our brains, with their very small and delicate cells?

Does such limited matter have the capacity to accommodate precisely and
without any diminution so vast a series of images?

Without doubt, reason and logic compel us to answer in the negative, for
anyone can understand that it is impossible to make a larger object
conform while retaining its exact quantity to a smaller one. For is it
not the case that the container must either be larger than the object
contained or at least equal to it? It is impossible, for example, to
typeset on a single small sheet all the contents of a thousand-page
book.

We can easily picture in our minds a big city with all of its buildings,
streets, parks, cars and other vehicles, and population. But basing
ourselves on the principle that “the large cannot be made to conform to
the small,” we must conclude that such extraordinarily large mental
images cannot be accommodated in the minute cells of our brain; for it
self-evident that such conformity can take place only when the object
contained is equal in size to the container or smaller than it. In
addition, our capacity of perception possesses attributes and properties
that do not correspond to those of matter, and it cannot therefore be
dependent simply on a series of physical relationships that accompany
its functioning.

The only conclusion open to us is, then, that in the formation of mental
images we possess a dimension of existence that is additional to certain
physical and chemical prerequisites, a dimension that possesses,
moreover, properties which transcend those of our material form. One of
those properties is precisely the ability to accommodate vast images
within itself, and another is the ability to preserve and maintain the
images that are perceived.

\* \* \* \* \*

The materialists say: “These images are like a voluminous book stored up
in our brain on microfilm; when necessary, the brain displays the
contents of the book in reduced form, and if man wishes to obtain the
true dimensions of the object in question, he magnifies the images to
restore to them their true size. It is the reduced images that are
present in the brain cells.”

However, one question remains: where in the brain or the nervous system
do these magnified images come into being? Either one must negate the
possibility of these large images occurring in the mind or one must find
a suitable location for them there. Now no one can deny the existence of
those images, and if what we call “the spirit” be purely material, with
perception being synonymous to the activity of the brain and the nervous
system, it is impossible for the small cells of the brain to accommodate
such large images. They would need a location proportionate to their
size, while all the microfilm is capable of doing is to accommodate
small, reduced images.

In order to clarify the whole matter, one must therefore accept the
existence of an element not susceptible to sense observation. It is this
non-material entity that is capable of creating and observing large
mental images, after the brain and the nervous system have accomplished
certain preliminary functions. Once we accept this, the whole problem is
solved and we have no need to resort to inadequate explanations.

Furthermore, when we compare mental to material phenomena, we must
acknowledge that a significant difference exists between them; they have
not the slightest resemblance to each other with respect to properties
and qualities.

Matter is constantly accompanied by a series of general properties such
as the assumption of different forms, something which is not true of
mental images. This disparity of mental and material phenomena is
another indication of the autonomy and non-material nature of the
spirit.

The Bed of Memory
-----------------

Another aspect of material existents is their subjection to gradual
change within time and space, for anything subject to development and
gradual change necessarily requires a certain space, and motion in
itself creates time. The ineluctable fate of all material existents is
therefore to waste away and perish in the course of time.

Again, it is not possible to think of a single material existent that is
not capable of division into constituent parts, whether that division
takes place by means of special instruments or by means of some other
cause.

None of this holds true of the phenomena of the spirit.

We build vast structures in our minds without needing time. All kinds of
faces, forms, colors, names, numbers, words, and indications are stored
up in the storehouse of our minds without being confused with each other
and without encroaching on each other.

The mind perceives and records all kinds of scenes and images, all kinds
of events, great and small; it then records them and places them in its
archive. Even things that we sometimes think we have forgotten are not
in fact erased from our minds; they remain in place and come again to
the fore through the action of certain factors.

What secret archive is hidden in the brain capable of storing all these
figures, inscriptions and images, in such a way that they do not mingle
with each other and can instantaneously leap forth in the mind like a
flash of lightning?

Where is the reservoir of these mental images, which are like a
bewildering riddle? Is the materialistic interpretation realistic; does
it do justice to the facts of the matter? Are our memories material
accidents, impressions made on our brain cells? Do the cells and
arteries of the brain record events and occurrences, and when we
remember something, does the mind simply hand over, carefully and
faithfully, the images that it stores?

The Materialist Interpretation Contradicts Reality
--------------------------------------------------

When we perceive a certain image we compare it with images previously
perceived and then judge whether or not it is identical to them. When we
are engaged in this, is not some reality at work as other than the
material reality of our body? How can the brain cells undertake the task
of comparison? How can they decide that two images are identical, that
the second one seen is the same as the first? If we locate judgement in
the brain, how can we understand the matter correctly?

Were the brain to be the true location of memory, the memories that are
dependent on the brain cells would disappear as the cells themselves
decay and their content vanishes.

The material that makes up our brain cells changes numerous times in the
course of a single lifetime, but the faces of friends and acquaintances
from our childhood remain intact and unchanged in the storehouse of our
mind.

If all the contents of our brain were to be changed, including knowledge
acquired in the past, in conjunction with the replacement of old brain
cells by new, all access to past knowledge would be impossible.

New perceptions could only be similar to past perceptions, not identical
with them, whereas our perceptions of matters previously perceived
constitutes only a renewal of memory, not a renewal of knowledge. To put
it more generally, if our mental concepts were material in nature, it
would be impossible to gain access by way of memory to knowledge
previously acquired.

When we memorize a few lines of poetry or a page from a book, how does
the memorization occur in our brain cells? By what method can we assume
this process to take place? When we forget something we have memorized,
is a certain imprint effaced from our brain cells?

If the memory in question is indeed destined to vanish and disappear,
how is it that we can recall it by means of careful reflection? If, on
the contrary, the imprint left on our brain cells is immune to
destruction, why can we not find it in our minds?

How can we explain the fact that after forgetting something we have
memorized, we sometimes hear a sentence from the book or a line from the
poem in question, and then the remaining sentences or the rest of the
poem spring back to mind. If the imprint left by the book or the poem
had been completely effaced from the tablet of our brain, how can it
suffice to hear part of what we have memorized for the rest to come back
to our mind? But, on the other hand, if the imprint left by memory is
not effaced and remains secure in its place, what is the meaning of
forgetting?

The celebrated scholar Henri Bergson has the following to say:

“When we examine the observations we make it becomes clear to us that
physiological explanations of memory are inadequate; we cannot possibly
attribute memorization to the brain.

“Our observations also make it plain that it is quite possible to
discern the traces of the continuous expansion of memory, beginning from
the point at which the memory mobilizes itself to put forth the effort
needed for its function at that instant and ending when the memory lays
out the past in the mind in imperishable form.

“We can compare the memory to a pyramid; we begin our examination of its
functioning at its apex and work our way down to its base. We must be
aware that only the apex of the pyramid is located in matter; as soon as
we move away from the apex, in the direction of the base, we begin to
enter a different realm.

“What is this realm? We can call it that of the reflective or meditative
spirit, for we can clearly sense the existence in this world of a subtle
essence or spirit that is independent of the body. Given the fact that
an important part of the functions of the spirit are independent of the
body even in this world, it is definite that the spirit as such must
enjoy permanence after death.” (*Du Sarchishma-yi Akhlaq va Din,* pp.
388-389)

No equation can be established between damage to the brain on the one
hand and the phenomenon of forgetting on the other hand. If there were
such an equation, every lessening or defect in a given memory would
bring about a corresponding lessening or defect in the brain cell to
which it is connected.

If certain brain cells are damaged, a person begins to experience
difficulty in speaking, but his memories are preserved intact. When the
brain suffers serious damage as the result of infection, the equilibrium
between memory and the brain is disrupted. Once forgetting sets in, it
follows a fixed and regular pattern; the patient forgets first the names
of his friends and those around him and then, in later stages, the words
used to designate various activities.

Here no relationship is to be seen between damage to the brain on the
one hand, and the decline over time in clarity and quantity of memory on
the other. According to the logic and analysis of the materialists,
there ought to be a direct and proportional relationship between the
lessening of memory and the damage suffered by the brain.

All of this shows that the brain is only a means and an instrument for
the retention of memories, and that the function of the brain with
respect to memory is restricted to the transfer of mental images to
verbal form. In other words, it establishes a link between the world of
the spirit and the world of matter.

In the acquisition of memories and mental images we need therefore
something more elevated than our brain cells, which is none other than
our spirit, which is non-material, independent of matter, and our
thoughts, images, and memories are all governed by its laws.

Professor Gayton, says in his book on physiology, which is regarded as a
reliable source on the subject:

“The most complex problem that confronts us in our study of awareness,
thought, memory and retention is that we do not know the nervous
mechanism of a single thought.”

The Indivisibility of the Acts of the Spirit
--------------------------------------------

Judgements and affirmations are indivisible. They do not have any
location within the cells of the brain, nor can they be divided in
either primary or secondary manner. This is because our perceptions and
affirmations are dependent on a non-material entity.

For example, when we say that such-and-such a bird is green, the bird
itself is certainly divisible, and likewise its greenness with respect
to its locus in the bird. But our affirmation of the greenness of the
bird is indivisible.

If we regard thought and reflection as the exclusive product of matter,
affirmation together with the other acts of the spirit ought to be
capable of division, whereas we clearly see that this is not the case.
The conclusion can therefore be drawn that since one of the functions of
the spirit thought and reflection does not possess the material
attribute of divisibility and is therefore non-material, so too the
spirit, the organ from which thought arises, must also necessarily also
be non-material. The non-materiality of thought thus serves as an
indication of the non-materiality of the spirit.

Materialists are submerged in their illusory deductions and take delight
in denying all belief in the existence of supranatural entities. All
their arguments for such vital phenomena of life, awareness and
perception are based on unprovable hypotheses, and they can, in any
event be refuted with firm and convincing arguments.

Theories such as those they advance cannot remove the veil from the
mysteries of life, nor can they solve the knotty problems we confront.
Empirical science has in fact demonstrated its inability to explain the
nature of the phenomena we have been discussing.

The whole philosophical scheme of materialism, with its inability to
answer the questions we have raised, ought to be jettisoned just like
coins that have lost their currency. As human thought and awareness
progress and man frees himself from narrow and mono-dimensional
thinking, materialism will in fact be cast on the refuse heap which is
the final destination of all obsolete and discredited beliefs.


