Lesson Ten, The Evidence of Experience part 1
=============================================

Were the phenomenon of the spirit, which is non-material in all its
aspects, to be made the subject of experimentation, so that its
autonomous existence became fully proven, despite its remoteness from
sense perception, it would have a profound effect in causing men to
believe more fully in the spirit. This would be the case particularly
with those who are unable to understand subtle and complex questions and
who are more inclined to accept empirical scientific data than they are
the truths of philosophy.

\* (1) \*

Spiritualism, the practice of communicating with the spirits of the
dead, reached its highpoint in the nineteenth century when it became
codified as a science. Numerous personalities throughout the world have
observed the possibility of such communication, which may be counted as
a living proof for the autonomy and immortality of the spirit.

Divesting themselves of all partiality and prejudice and impelled by
genuinely scientific motives, a number of scholars have devoted
themselves to painstaking research and study in order to discover the
truth of the matter. With their achievements they have been able to
demonstrate that the existence of the spirit is no longer a theoretical
matter but something clear and straightforward.

Carefully executed experiments have shown that it is definitely possible
to establish communication with the spirits of the dead. One may engage
in conversation with them and ask their help in solving difficult
problems. It often happens, indeed, that people who are utterly unable
to solve the most complex problems confronting them are able to solve
them through communication with the spirits of the dead.

Spirits have also been shown to possess the remarkable capacity of
raising bodies from ground without the intervention of any material
cause or bodily energy. (*Alam-i Pas az Marg,* section 11)

One of the prominent traits of those who enter a trance to communicate
with the dead is that they function both as receivers and as
transmitters. It may sometimes happen that while in that state they
speak in languages they had never learned. They may also find themselves
divulging secrets they were not in a position to know.

Still more remarkable is the fact that mediums are able while in a
trance to read and to copy inscriptions on objects contained in sealed
boxes, although they are quite illiterate!

In short, mediums engage in such inexplicable acts that we are obliged
to follow them into the invisible realm of the spirit in our attempt to
find an answer.

All we have mentioned has been proved by experiment and it constitutes a
refutation of the claims of the materialists, for if the spirit were
simply an effect of matter, a physicochemical property of the brain, it
would be impossible to explain all these varied phenomena that have been
verified experimentally.

We can escape the impasse to which materialist thought leads only when
we admit the existence of a supramaterial force that creates such
phenomena, for it is not conceivable that they should be the product of
material factors.

Although age is not an important consideration for those who establish
communication with spirits, those who enter on this path generally
choose mediums from among children to receive messages from spirits.
This removes the likelihood of trickery, deceit, and recourse to various
contraptions, and thus puts an end to all possible objection.

At the same time, experienced and specialized researchers also take part
in the sessions where contact is established with spirits. Repeated and
careful experiments are carried out in order to remove any lingering
doubts, to clarify all ambiguity, and to dispel any notion of
autosuggestion on the part of the participants.

Although we can accept the matter under discussion as an established
reality, it is like many other truths and realities exploited by those
whose trade is trickery and deceit; they demean and dishonor it. One
cannot therefore either trust all who claim to be able to communicate
with spirits, or reject them with inappropriate arguments; both courses
would be contrary to logic. It is a careful examination of the matter
that will lead to a perception of the truth and the ability to
distinguish the illusory from the real.

Farid Wajdi, author of the *Twentieth Century Encyclopedia*, lists the
names of a handful of European and American scientists from among the
many thousands that have worked in this field, and cites the clear
evidence provided by the objective experiments they carried out. Many of
them were skeptical or negative about the possibility of communicating
with the spirits of the dead until it was proven to them; in fact they
first entered the field with the intention of totally disproving its
bases.

If someone had insisted on the possibility of proving scientifically
communication with the spirits of the dead, they would have dismissed it
unhesitatingly as an absurdity. But when they saw that whatever
experiment was undertaken ended up supporting the claims of their
opponents, they surrendered and accepted the facts. Earlier scholars had
never taken the trouble to test the claims of the spiritualists, they
even regarded the idea of conducting experiments on the subject with
repugnance.

Farid Wajdi adds that specialists in the field believe in the principle
that the spirit is not annihilated with the death of the body, because
they are unable to explain the extraordinary phenomena that take place
in their sessions except in terms of activity by the spirits of the
dead.

\* \* \* \* \*

Those who do not have any serious arguments to offer try to explain
these experimentally tested realities in terms of the unconscious.

Can we reasonably accuse all the scholars and experts who work in the
field of having been straightforwardly duped by the tricks of swindlers
and of placing the seal of scientific approval on a series of delusions?
Of affirming the correctness this science without exercising any
caution, under the influence of the mediums?

It would be completely irrational and illogical to attribute error to
all those scholars.

Alfred Russell Dulles, Darwin's partner in discovering the law of
natural selection, declared his view on the matter as follows:

“When I began investigating the mysteries of communication with the
spirits of the dead, I was an absolute materialist and denier of the
spirit. No trace existed in my mind of non-material entities or a
supranatural world. On the contrary, it was my intention to prove by
scientific means the incorrectness of all belief in such things. But as
I confronted the experiments that had taken place and the realities they
had proven, I gradually came to believe in them myself. The reality of
the spirit came to have such an effect on me that I came to believe in
it firmly before I was able to find any explanation for it in my mind. I
can neither turn away from it in denial nor can I find any material
cause for it.” (*Ibid.,* p. 72)

Krokis, the head of the Royal Academy of Science in England, writes the
following in his book entitled *Spiritual Phenomena:*

“Since I do indeed believe in the existence of these phenomena, it would
be a kind of fear or literary cowardice if I concealed my testimony from
fear of the criticism of mockers who know nothing at all of the subject
and are unable to free themselves of their illusions. I will set forth
in my book as clearly as I can what I have seen with my own eyes and
tested repeatedly through careful experimentation.”

From all the experiments that have taken place in sessions for summoning
up the spirits of the dead and the conclusions scholars have drawn from
them, it is plain that man possesses an energy and personality that
outlive his death. That energy undertakes various activities without any
need of the physical body. Under certain special circumstances it is
possible for the inhabitants of this world to establish communication
with the spirits of the departed.

\* (2) \*

Another scientific advance that has contributed to the understanding of
the autonomy and immortality of the spirit is hypnotism. This consists
of concentrating the gaze for a lengthy period of a point of light to
the accompaniment of prolonged suggestion, with the result that the
subject enters an artificial dream state, quite distinct from ordinary
dreams.

After the subject has fallen asleep, he hears out of all sounds that
surround him only those produced by the hypnotist all of whose commands
he obeys in his extreme impressionability.

The English scholar James Breed was able to build on the investigations
of his predecessors to turn hypnotism into a fully fledged science by
clarifying the principles according to which hypnotism functions.

After him other scholars in America and Europe devoted their efforts to
further developing this science; we can mention in particular Richet,
Emile Kue, Van Ouls and Charcot. The most important achievement of the
last of these was his classification of the different degrees and stages
of hypnotic sleep.

In artificial sleep, the hypnotist is able to make the subject submit to
his will in such a way that he unhesitatingly executes his commands. The
senses of the sleeper cease functioning; he shows no sign of being able
to see or to hear, and his senses of touch and taste lack their
customary power. Finally, the one thus put to sleep is so overcome by
weariness and lassitude that he feels no pain, however much pressure be
brought to bear on his body. (*Usul-i Ravankavi-yi Freud*)

Dr. Philip Carrot, a British anesthesiologist and specialist on
hypnotism, wrote the following in the British Journal of Public Health:

“Many patients needing surgery have been successfully anaesthetized
through the use of hypnotism.” He went on to state his belief that it is
easier and better to use hypnotism on patients undergoing surgery,
because it is a simpler and less dangerous procedure than drugging them.
One of the advantages of hypnotism is that it is possible to keep the
patient unconscious for many hours without his feeling any pain.
(*Ittila'at* for 23/6/43)

\* (3) \*

Magnetism is another branch of knowledge pointing to the autonomy of the
spirit. It consists of a mysterious force present in everyone to
different degrees. Magnetism differs from hypnotism in that when a
person cultivates the magnetic force within him he will be able to
influence animals as well as human beings. In addition, magnetic force
can be exploited directly, whereas hypnotism requires the use of certain
means in order to become effective. The power of magnetism is so
effective in man that it enables one to render one's prey or enemy
motionless.

Since the most ancient times, people have been aware to some extent of
the effects of this mysterious power. It was however at the end of the
eighteenth century that it was put forward for the first time as a
scientific discovery. Specialists began to use magnetic waves as a means
for curing the sick, and as research progressed, it became apparent that
hypnotic trances might be induced by means of magnetism.

Psychiatrists make use of artificially induced dreams to discover the
causes for certain psychiatric disorders; they attempt to plunge into
the depths of the mind and to discover the true thoughts of the
unconscious, the thoughts that the patient would be reluctant to tell
the doctor while in a waking state, out of embarrassment or other
reasons. Likewise, the patient frankly confesses to certain things that
he would never reveal while in a waking state.

The one sent into a trance is so fully subject to the influence of the
magnetic force that he does whatever he is told by the one who puts him
in the trance, without his own will having the least power to decide.

At more advanced stages, the body itself becomes totally numb, and if
one of its limbs is rubbed it will be unable to move, resembling an
entirely motionless body. The subject will be unable to hear sounds
surrounding him; he sees and hears only the one in whose power he
stands.

This passivity sometimes goes so far that he feels the pain of a needle
inserted in by the one who controls his trance; and likewise if the
controller begins to feel happy, so too will the subject! Other emotions
anger, nervousness, excitement will be similarly reflected.

Persons in a magnetic trance are able to speak in languages they have
not learned; they know of things that lie beyond the range of their
knowledge; and their spirits travel to distant regions. Materialists
attempt to explain all this in terms of suggestion and the loss of
customary will on the part of the subject. However, their explanations
are not convincing. For in addition to that which the material sciences
attempt to explain there is a reality within man capable of
accomplishing acts that are inexplicable in terms of material criteria.
Anyone who tries to discover the truth of the matter will be led to
accept this conclusion, step by step. (Farid Wajdi, *Da'irah
al-Ma'arif,* Vol. X, p. 420)

What energy is it that can thus subdue the will of another person and
rob his limbs of motion and feeling?

If man reflects carefully, will he not be convinced that his existence
includes a spirit that is both mysterious and eternal? (*Alam-i Pas az
Marg,* p. 46)

Is it not the method of science to base general laws on objective
observations and to strive against delusion?

Without any doubt, every new discovery in the fields discussed above
decreases still further any appeal the materialistic distorters of
reality might have.

\* (4) \*

Although men have been aware of telepathy at least to some degree for a
long time, no careful scientific study of the subject was undertaken
before 1882. Beginning with that date, the English Society for Psychic
Research has carried out numerous experiments and proven the reality of
the phenomenon.

The communication of thoughts between two people is possible over both
long and short distances. Communication over short distances takes place
by means of the two people standing opposite each other and transmitting
their thoughts to each other without speaking or making any gestures.

As for communication over a long distance and the size of the distance
is of no importance at all it is enough for the two persons, at a
prearranged time, to concentrate their thoughts on a single point in
order to transmit their mental messages to each other.

These phenomena have been repeatedly tested and proven by specialists
and they can be regarded as another remarkable manifestation of the
spirit, acting in utter independence of the body.

Ought we not then to believe that the energy ruling over the mechanism
of our body is fundamentally different from material energy and the
phenomena it produces? As the psychiatrist Kennington puts it, “for the
brain to exist and function a few centimeters outside the body is just
as impossible as it would be for digestion or the circulation of the
blood to take place outside the body.”

Henri Bergson writes: “The phenomena declared to exist by psychic
science, at least some of which must be regarded as true, cause us to
ask why we have waited so long to undertake such a study.

“We will not repeat the subjects we have already discussed, but instead
restrict our discussion to a point that appears more certain than
anything else. If after the accumulation of thousands of testimonies
consistent with each other concerning manifestations of telepathy
scientists still insist on denying the reality of this phenomenon, then
we can only conclude that human testimony is unacceptable to science and
rejected by it.

“It is true of course that we have to choose among the various results
that psychic science presents to us; that science itself does not regard
all its results as equally conclusive; and that it distinguishes between
what is certain and what is merely probable or possible.

“But if we take into consideration only that part which psychic science
regards as definite, it suffices to give us a sense of a vast and
unknown realm that psychic science has only just begun to explore. (Du
*Sarchishma-yi Akhlaq va Din,* p. 354)


