Lesson Twelve: The Ineluctable Final Moment of All Things
=========================================================

There can be no doubt that one day the world as it now exists will
become the scene of a terrifying event. The world which has been the
setting for man's unceasing efforts and triumphs throughout his
existence, his endeavors that have extended from the depths of the
oceans to outer space, this world will fall prey to a horrifying fate
and dissolve in a single catastrophe.

The heavenly bodies will collide and collapse; neither light nor warmth
be left in the heavens; lofty mountains will be uprooted; a fire will
erupt as if a spark were to have fallen on a heap of cotton that has
been built up over centuries; oceans will surge up and burst over the
land; tombs will split open and merge with each other; and the earth
itself, in obedience to divine command, will reveal and surrender all of
its contents and the trusts that have been deposited in the course of
many epochs. The whole world will be turned into a great cloud of dust,
as if everything that existed were being ground in some gigantic mortar.

This simultaneous mingling and dispersion of all elements, in such a way
that no phenomenon can any longer be distinguished, is the future
destiny of our regular and well-ordered world.

The Noble Qur'an reminds man that the existing order of creation is of
limited duration and that it will not last for ever:

***“Have you not ever considered that God has created the heavens and
the earth and all that lies between them in justice and for a set
duration? Many are those who do not believe they will meet their
Lord”*** **(30:8)**.

The Qur'an also proclaims that the occurrence of this event is
inevitable and that on the day when all creatures will be stripped of
the garment of life only the Pure and Sacred Essence of the Creator will
remain.

Let us hear the description the Qur'an itself gives of that terrifying
day on which all things shall perish:

***“O men, fear the wrath of your Creator! The earthquakes and
explosions of resurrection will be mighty and awesome. On that day
suckling mothers will forget their infants and pregnant women will be
delivered of their burden. You will see men as drunken from the terror
of that day, but they will not be drunken, for the doom of God is fierce
and painful”*** **(22:1-2).**

***“When the earth begins to move and shake violently, the mountains are
torn asunder and scattered like atoms of dust ...”*** **(56:4-6).**

***“Man asks: \`When the day of resurrection will be?' (Say:) \`It well
be the day when the sight of man is confounded in terror, when the moon
is darkened and the sun and the moon are joined. On that day man will
ask where he might flee and to what shelter'“*** **(75:6-10).**

***“When the stars are put out, and when the heavenly bodies are
scattered”*** **(82:2)**.

\* \* \* \* \*

Flammarion, the well-known astronomer, says in his book *The End of the
World:*

“The appearance of life in all its splendor is the result of the
submission of the solar system to the universal pull of gravity and
centrifugal motion. It is gravity that interrelates all the parts of the
universe, from the atom to the star, and controls and regulates their
movements with the aid of centrifugal motion. Thus a universal order
comes into being throughout creation. This order will, however,
inevitably collapse; the stars will die and the heavenly bodies will
scatter like the beads of a broken necklace.”

As can be deduced from verses of the Qur'an and reliable narrations, the
order of creation will suddenly collapse as the result of a happening
the exact nature of which is unknown to us: the life of the sun, the
stars and the whole of creation will come to an abrupt end.

Rill, the British astronomer, says:

“The universe came into being some ten or fifteen billion years ago as
the result of an explosion. It used half of its energy or its matter to
dispatch the stars to the depths of space, and the other half to
assemble the galaxies and prepare them for the final explosion.”

The Qur'an says:

***“On the day when We shall roll up the heavens like a scroll ...”***
**(21:104)**.

***“When the oceans shall be aflame ...”*** **(81:6)**

***“On the day that the heavens shall be molten like brass...”***
**(70:8)**.

The last two of these verses contradict the theory of many scientists of
the past who maintained that the end of the world would come about as
the result of a decrease in the heat of the sun and the freezing of all
creatures. They tell instead of heat of the sun being intensified at the
time of resurrection, in such a way that no living thing will be able to
endure. Many prominent scientists now describe the coming of such a day
in accordance with the relative knowledge they possess.

Thus Georges Gamoff writes:

“The radiation of the sun will increase over time, and once the amount
of hydrogen in the sun has attained its maximum amount, the energy
emitted by the sun will increase about a hundred fold. Our studies of
the production of energy by the sun thus point to conclusions that
contradict completely classical quasi-official theories on the subject.

“Instead of saying that everything will freeze one day as a result of a
decrease in the activity of the sun, we must say that it will be as a
result of the continuing intensity of the sun's heat, during the last
stage of its development, that life is condemned to destruction.

“If the temperature on the earth's surface comes to exceed the
temperature at which water boils, rocks and the hard crust of the earth
will probably not melt, but the oceans will certainly begin to boil, and
since no highly evolved species can live in boiling water, most forms of
life will come to an end. It is therefore probable that all the higher
species will have died out before the temperature of the earth reaches
an intolerable level.” *(Paydayish va Marg-i Khurshid,* p. 131)

Elsewhere the same writer remarks:

“It is expected that in the course of several hundred million years
after the formation of the earth's crust, the volume of the sun will
come to exceed that of Venus. Its light will be multiplied ten to thirty
million times, and the oceans will be brought to boiling point.”
(*Madda-yi Zamin va Asman,* p. 533)

The Two Trumpet Blasts of Resurrection
--------------------------------------

The Noble Qur'an describes the occurrence of resurrection as follows:

***“They will blow on the trumpet and everything in the heavens and the
earth will be swallowed up by death, save only that which God wishes to
preserve. Then another trumpet blast will be sounded and all creatures
will suddenly rise up to behold the plain of resurrection”***
**(39:68).**

There will be then two blasts on the trumpet. The first will be swift
and of brief duration, like a roar in the heavens, a universal
proclamation that will cause the whole expanse of creation to be folded
up; the people of the world will suddenly fall to the ground while they
are still engrossed in their daily struggles. This first blowing of the
trumpet will bring about the death of all living beings, and all
creatures in the heavens and on the earth, including even the angels.

The Qur'an says:

***“On the day when the summoner (Israfil) summons mankind to awesome
resurrection the unbelievers will come forth with their eyes humbled,
like locusts scattered abroad, hastening to respond to the summoner to
resurrection. The unbelievers shall say to each other: \`This is the day
of hardship!'“*** **(54:6-8).**

The second blast on the trumpet will be the awe-inspiring summons that
brings men back to life and ushers in resurrection. Men will suddenly
rise up from their graves and they will ask, their whole beings filled
with fear:

***“Who is it that thus raises us from our slumber?”*** **(36:52)**.

Then they will open their eyes and say:

***“This is none other than what God promised; the prophets indeed spoke
the truth”*** **(36:54)**

Every now and then explosions take place in the heavenly bodies.
Occurring in remote galaxies and the outer regions of space, these
explosions do not disrupt the order of the universe or the norms of
creation; their causes and effects remain, however, unknown.

It is a terrifying universal explosion that will cause the structure of
the heavens and the earth to collapse, putting an end to the life of the
world and its inhabitants together with the norms that have regulated
creation. The powerful waves of sound, the death-bringing blast that is
a means for the implementation of the divine command, will be so intense
and overwhelming that in the shortest time conceivable it will bring to
an end the existence of all living things.

This collapse of the world through the sound waves emitted by the
trumpet of Israfil will take place at a time when people are going about
their daily business and are unaware that such a terrifying event is
about to occur.

The Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, said:

“At that time, some people will be in their own homelands, and some will
be traveling. Some will be swallowed up by death as they are about to
place a morsel of food in their mouths. Some will be talking to their
friends and their souls will be taken from them before they are able to
complete their words. In the end death will have overtaken all human
beings, but Israfil will continue blowing on his trumpet until all
springs and rivers, all buildings, trees, mountains, and oceans, are
intermingled and buried in the heart of the earth.

“As the dead fall to the ground, some will be on their backs, and other
will lie face down. People will still have the food in their mouths the
food that death gave them no chance to swallow.” (*Tafsir al-Burhan,*
Vol. IV, p. 38)

\* \* \* \* \*

Israfil's blasts on the trumpet may be compared to the sounding of a
horn that announces to an army the beginning of battle; it is like a
command to get ready. The second blast is like a command to move off and
attack the enemy. The trumpet has then two aspects: one of universal
death and one of universal revival.

In the verses that speak of this utter reversal and transformation of
the natural order, we see that terror and confusion overwhelm the whole
of creation. The heavens and the earth, young and old, men and animals,
all created things will be bewildered; fear will sunder all natural
relations, and people will think only of themselves.

This will be the general state of all people. In addition, the impious
and impure will be subject to their own special terror; they will
fruitlessly desire to return to the earth in order to make up for their
shameful past of disobeying God and His messengers.

But it will be too late; a fearful and majestic silence will embrace all
things and none will be able to disobey God. All will set out for the
divine presence in obedience to the divine summons.

God therefore calls on people to awake now in order to avoid the painful
fate that ineluctably awaits sinners in the hereafter:

***“O man what deceives you concerning your Lord and makes you
impudently arrogant?”*** **(82:6)**.

He also warns mankind as follows:

***“Before resurrection occurs and you are compelled to return to your
Lord answer the summons of your Creator. For on that day you shall have
no shelter to protect you from your shameful punishment or to avert from
you your well-deserved chastisement*****” (42:47)**.


