Lesson Thirteen: The Resurrection of Man in Both His Dimensions
===============================================================

Now let us see what the nature of life will be in the hereafter. Will
resurrection be exclusively corporeal, so that man is restored to life
in the material form that characterizes his body, or will his eternal
life be exclusively in the realm of the spirit, without any kind of
attachment to the material body? Or will his return to life have on the
contrary both dimensions, spiritual and semi-corporeal?

Our use of the word “semi-corporeal” implies that what comes to life is
a subtle body, one that may be regarded as the essence of his present
form. Finally, since the nature of man is a compound of body and spirit,
will man's life after resurrection embrace both these dimensions, so
that neither will his body that element which gives rise to a whole
series of physical and chemical reaction perish completely, nor will his
spirit be the separated from his bodily form?

All these represent various theories put forward concerning the nature
of resurrection; let us now examine each one in turn.

Some scholars espouse the first theory and say that when death overtakes
the body and its physical and chemical reactions are brought to an end,
everything reaches its point of termination. However, when resurrection
takes place, the scattered form of man is reassembled out of the
particles that have been buried in the earth, scattered in the air, or
drowned in the ocean. When the body thus begins its new life, the spirit
which counts as one of the properties of the mechanism of the body is
bound also to come back to life.

The second theory has also been espoused by many philosophers. They
believe that since the spirit represents both the source and the essence
of human existence and its very structure predisposes it to continual
life, it bids eternal farewell to the material body when death occurs
for the structure of the body predisposes it to perishing. After
enjoying for a brief time the life-giving rays of the spirit, the body
finds that its role is at an end.

The compound nature of the body permitted it to house the abstract
spirit only for a limited time, after which it inevitably fell prey to
decay and death. The spirit, by contrast, being ultimately free of the
body and its properties, remains eternal and immortal, and it is
therefore the spirit alone which appears on the plain of resurrection.
Were this not the case, resurrection would have no meaning. This theory
implies, of course, that punishment and reward are exclusively moral or
spiritual.

There is no firm evidence in support of this theory, but it used to have
many supporters. Now it has very few followers, for the realistic
theories put forward by scholars have thoroughly undermined it.

The third analysis of the question is that which was made by a number of
ancient philosophers. They said that when we die, our body is indeed
destroyed: its elemental and material elements are dissolved in such a
way that they cannot be reassembled.

The spirit then remains, but not in a state of utter abstraction; it is
lodged in a subtle body that is not capable of physical and chemical
reactions but nonetheless resembles our present body. This subtle body,
also known as the imaginal body, is extraordinarily active and has the
ability to transcend all obstacles, and is able to live eternally.

There is yet a fourth theory, which is held by many theologians and
philosophers both of the past and the present. It is based on the
principle that resurrection represents a complete and comprehensive
return to life for nothing that pertains to man can ever be fully
destroyed. Man resumes his life in the next world with all his qualities
and properties, the only difference being that his resurrectional life
unfold in a more elevated realm than this world. On that plane we will
attain a state in which matter and spirit retain their separate essences
but become so closely interrelated that their existence becomes manifest
as a single unit.

The reality of resurrectional life must be envisaged, according to the
view, as containing both dimensions of man, not separate but joined,
just as was the case in this world.

\* \* \* \* \*

No intellectual argument can be advanced as evidence for the nature of
life after death; it is only the necessity of resurrection and its
simultaneously spiritual and physical nature that are topics for
philosophical and rational analysis. Philosophy and the intellect have
no key for unlocking the mystery of which, out of all possible forms,
will definitely occur in the hereafter.

Nonetheless, when we look at the way in which the last of the theories
outlined above seeks to answer this question, we see that it contains an
element of truth, for it points in the same direction as the
authoritative texts of Islam and is compatible with them.

The Qur'an which is the principal source for all such topics repeatedly
states that resurrection will be bodily. It proclaims, clearly and
unmistakably, that man will be resurrected with the body he has had in
this world. The verses in question are indeed so explicit as to leave no
room for symbolic interpretation. Consider, for example, these verses:

***“God begins creation, then He renews it, and after that causes it to
return to Him”*** **(30:11)**.

***“Does man imagine that We will not gather together his bones? We are
able to recreate even the tips of his fingers”*** **(75:3-4).**

The second of these two verses states that those who imagine the body to
be incapable of renewed life, after the dissolution and scattering of
its particles, are, in reality, unaware of God's infinite power; they do
not understand that the reconstruction of human life out of the
scattered particles of the body, even to the extent of reproducing the
minutiae of the fingertips, represents a small and insignificant task
for the boundless power of the Creator.

***“Say: \`He will give life to the bones Who created them for the first
time; certainly He is aware of all His creation.”*** **(36:79).**

A Story from the Qur'an
-----------------------

The Noble Qur'an presents narratives concerning the prophets \`Uzayr and
Ibrahim, the Friend of God, each of which includes a living example of
bodily resurrection. God clarifies the matter for each of these great
prophets by placing before them a concrete example of dead forms being
restored to life once the necessary circumstances come to obtain by
divine order: the spirit becomes manifest anew in the body so that its
life resumes.

We read in the story of \`Uzayr that mounted on his donkey he once came
across a ruin in the course of a journey. In that ruin he was confronted
by the dreadful sight of the rotting bones of men who had long since
died. He plunged deep into thought and asked himself, “How will God
bring these back to life?”

At that very moment God took his soul, but one hundred years later He
brought him back to life. He asked him, “How long have you been here?”
He immediately answered, “One day or less.”

\`Uzayr was then informed that he had been in that place for a hundred
years, lying lifeless on the ground exactly where he had fallen. He was
instructed to look at his donkey, and saw that its body was thoroughly
decomposed: then God brought it back life.

In the story of \`Uzayr, we also see that in order to demonstrate the
limitlessness of His power God preserved water and foodstuffs intact for
a hundred years, objects that decay or vaporize more quickly than living
beings on account of their exposure to natural factors such as heat,
sunlight, wind and dust. He addressed \`Uzayr as follows:

***“Look at your food and drink; it has not changed and it shows no sign
of age. Look too at your donkey, so that its story becomes apparent to
you and We may make of you a proof for people so that they no longer
deny resurrection. Look at the rotten bones, and see how We bring them
together and make flesh grow on them. When all this was shown clearly to
him (the verse continues), he said, \`I know now for certain that God is
empowered over all things'“*** **(2:259).**

The Qur'an depicts another concrete instance of bodily resurrection in
one of the narratives concerning Ibrahim, upon whom be peace. It tells
with the utmost clarity how Ibrahim witnessed with his own eyes the
reassembling of the scattered particles of a body:

***“When Ibrahim said: \`O God, show me how you bring the dead back to
life, \` God responded, \`Do you not believe?' He said, \`I do, but I
wish my heart to be reassured.' So God said, \`Choose four types of
birds, and mix their flesh together, and place portions on the top of
mountains. Then summon the birds, and they will come hastening to you.
You will then know that God is empowered over all things and is aware of
the truth of all things.”*** **(2:260).**

Ibrahim was rationally and logically convinced of the truth of
resurrection, but he wished also to witness it in sensory fashion. He
posed the very wise question of how the dead are brought back to life.

One may believe in a variety of things without being aware of their
precise nature, a simple example being that we believe in the reality of
radio and television without knowing anything of how the sounds and
images reach us.

Ibrahim believed in the principle of resurrection and the renewal of
life, but he wished also to understand how the dead are brought back to
life, to know it directly by means of a concrete example, and to satisfy
his inner feelings by means of sensory experience.

After Ibrahim witnessed that remarkable scene, he was instructed to
ponder upon it and to realize that God is capable of all things and that
given His infinite knowledge and power it is a small matter for Him to
identify and reassemble the scattered particles of the dead.

Imam al-Sajjad, upon whom be peace, said:

“At the time of resurrection men's bodies will grow out of the ground
like plants. The particles that were transformed into earth will rejoin
each other, through the will and the power of God, so that if even a
thousand people should have been buried in the same grave and their
flesh and their rotting bones intermingled, they will separate on the
day of resurrection; the earthly remains of each dead person will be
quite distinct.” (*Li'ali al-Akhbar,* p. 456)

There are many clear verses in the Qur'an, additional to those we have
cited, which point clearly to the nature of resurrection. They refute
all restriction of renewed life to the spirit, Using such expressions
such as

***“God will certainly resurrect the dead from their tombs”***
**(22:6)**.

In another verse we read,

***“You will return to Him just as He created you”*** **(7: 29).**

In concise and eloquent fashion, this verse draws the attention of man
to his original creation, reminding him how the form of his body was
fashioned from the various solid elements of the earth and from water.
The different elements which were compounded in him had first existed in
the form of foodstuffs fruits and vegetables scattered over the face of
the earth or drops of water taken from the depths of the ocean to be
transformed into vapor and rain.

Why then should man not believe that those same materials, separated
from each other and scattered by wind and by storm, will be gathered
together again and resume their previous shape and form? If the
restoration of life is impossible, how is it that an exactly similar
process took place at the beginning of creation?

From the moment that the spirit is connected to the human body, a
special kind of union between the two comes into existence which becomes
deeper and more complete with the passage of time. A precise and subtle
affinity and harmony comes to prevail, as a result of which spirit and
body fall under each other's influence; attributes of the spirit appear
in the body, and attributes of the body appear in the spirit.

Even the occurrence of death and the separation of the spirit from the
body combined with its transfer to another world do not bring this
affinity to an end. The various changes that the spirit and the
particles of the body separately undergo also fail to affect this
affinity, and although the earthly particles of the body exist in
different material circumstances from before, they retain their links
with the spirit.

Thus the material body and the non-material spirit are linked through
the very circumstances of their origin; acquiring a whole series of
shared characteristics that further join them together, they retain
their affinity throughout the changes and motions they separately
undergo.

A corollary of this is that hidden within every drop of sperm are both
spiritual characteristics and physical properties.

The affinity between body and spirit causes each spirit to incline in
the direction of the body and its particles, by means of the appropriate
motions that have come to adhere to the spirit, and also attracts each
body towards the spirit, in accordance with a particular set of
circumstances and a series of divinely decreed norms. After passing
through various stages of change the body leaves its earthly form behind
and by an act of God is transformed into a more perfect form, in which
it resumes its close link and union with the spirit.

It is worth mentioning that the changes mentioned above are also
repeated in the world of being. The earthly particles of our present
body are the result of transformations that have taken place because of
a specific set of causes. Not only does the body take shape by means of
those transformations; each body also is constantly renewed through the
decay of the elements and particles that compose it and the replacement
of those elements and particles by new ones.

The Noble Qur'an says the following about the comprehensive and
all-embracing transformation by means of which the whole order of being
will be changed into something other than itself:

***“The day on which the heavens and earth will be changed into other
than the heaven and earth, and all will be brought before God, the One
and All-Powerful”*** **(14:48)**.

The earthly particles of the human body follow therefore the general
transformations that the whole order of being undergoes; they are
transformed, in fact, in conjunction with the totality of that order,
taking on a more complete aspect in which their true nature becomes
apparent and man recovers his true being.

It must be remarked that although the body man will possess in the
hereafter is fashioned from the particles of his present body and has
the same shape, it will nonetheless have acquired new characteristics
which are incompatible with the recognized criteria of this world and
are inconceivable to our minds. Our body in the hereafter will be
capable of new effects fully compatible with that realm, the
comprehension of which, together its interrelations and the norms that
govern it, requires a higher consciousness than we now possess.

\* \* \* \* \*

The Qur'an says the following, in expounding another matter concerning
bodily resurrection;

***“When they enter hellfire, their eyes and ears and the skins on their
bodies shall give witness against them on account of the sins they have
committed. They will address their skins asking them, \`Why do you give
witness against us?' They will receive this answer: \`The Lord Who gave
speech to all things and Who first created you has given speech to us,
too; certainly you will return to him.'“*** **(41:20-21)**

Here a remarkable, indeed shattering scene is described. No one expects
the organs of his own body to rise up and bear witness against him in
the tribunal of the hereafter. The skin of the body, which is closer to
man than any other part of his physical being, has been chosen to
testify concerning him.

Those who used to sin and do wrong in secret, because of their defective
notions about the reach of God's knowledge, who strove to conceal the
ugliness of their acts from the view of others, will see on that day
that their eyes and the skin of their bodies, transformed into an organ
of vision, have stood up to give testimony against them. In their
astonishment they will therefore ask the organs of their bodies: “Why
are you giving testimony against us?” They will receive a firm answer,
delivered in tones of reproach by their bodily organs, “He is the
Creator Who first brought you into existence and to Him you will
return.”

\* \* \* \* \*

The Commander of the Faithful, \`Ali, upon whom be peace, said:

“Matters will succeed each other and ages will pass away, one after the
other, until resurrection finally arrives. Then God will bring men forth
from the pits of their tombs, from the nests of ravenous birds, from the
lairs of wild animals, and from battlefields. They will hasten toward
the divine presence, in obedience to God's command, to be sent on to
their eternal abode. They will stand before Him, silent and in groups.
Although their numbers will be vast, none of them will be hidden from
God's limitless knowledge and penetrating vision.” (*Nahj al-Balagha,*
ed. Subhi Salih, p. 108)

Certain verses also mention the body that man will have at resurrection
as being similar to his body in this world. An example is:

***“Although the skin on their body will burn, We will clothe them in
new skins so they may taste the severity of our torment.”*** **(4:56)**

A terrifying panorama of prolonged sensory torment is conjured up here,
showing that the painful punishment of the sinners will be constantly
repeated.

Verses such as this in no way contradict the verses previously quoted,
because the constantly renewed skins are fashioned from the same
original skin; it is there alone that change and increase or decrease
may take place.

It will be fitting an explanation given by Imam as-Sadiq, on whom be
peace, which clarifies the lack of contradiction involved.

Someone once asked Imam as-Sadiq what sin those various skins had
committed to make them deserving of chastisement. He answered that from
one point of view they are the same as the original skin and from
another point of view different from them. The man then asked him to
explain the matter further by means of a comparison. The Imam said:

“Have you ever seen someone break a brick, and then pour it in a mold
and restore it to its original shape? From one point of view the second
brick is identical with the first, and from another point of view it is
different from it.” (*Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. VII, p. 38)

Once the Prophet of Islam was speaking about bodily resurrection, a
subject that was baffling, inexplicable and even unacceptable for the
polytheists. They reacted therefore with their customary stupidity.

In that milieu where obsolete criteria and destructive superstitions had
taken the place of free thought and decay had spread like the plague
destroying the fabric of society, it was the aim of the Qur'an to guide
the ailing minds of men to a search for the truth. The Qur'an thus
reproduces the words of those foolish ones as follows:

***“The unbelievers shall say: \`Shall we show to you a man who says
that after you die and the particles of your body are scattered, you
will be brought back to life? Is such a person a liar against God or is
it lunacy that impels him to utter such words?' No, it is those who do
not believe in resurrection who will suffer torment in the hereafter and
here they are misguided, far distant from salvation.”*** **(34:7-8)**

All these clear and categorical verses, which leave no room for symbolic
interpretation, speak unmistakably of bodily resurrection.

To approach the matter from a different point of view, certain
deductions can be made that permit us to conclude that the body and the
soul are two entities linked together the mutual inclination of which
brings man into being: whatever motion or activity arises from man in
this world bear within it a part of both elements.

If we view the matter in this way, not only is there no need to
postulate a separation between body and soul; we are also provided with
a realistic indication that the two must necessarily be compounded anew
in life after death.

We know that neither body nor soul represents a complete entity in
itself if isolated from the other. The body is an instrument of the
soul, and the role it plays in assuring the continuous activity of the
soul is crucial.

All legislators throughout history have regarded legal and penal
provisions as being addressed to man in both the dimensions of which he
is compounded, the bodily and the spiritual, so that neither of these
dimensions is forced to bear the burden of responsibility alone. In
similar fashion, both dimensions are called to account jointly for their
deeds when the final reckoning is made on the plain of resurrection.

Is it, indeed, conceivable that man should be held as legally
accountable in this world with both dimensions, but in the hereafter all
responsibility should be placed on the fragile shoulders of his spirit?

The fundamental purpose of resurrection is that human beings should
attain ultimate felicity and complete the final stages of their
development, by virtue of the pure belief they have held and the good
deeds they have performed. The attainment of such an aim requires
careful and precise planning, and all divine religions have therefore
laid down a series of precepts and commands the fulfillment of which
will enable man to reach the lofty summit for which he is destined.

The most practical and effective method for the fulfillment of this plan
consists of simultaneously encouraging man and inducing fear in him; on
the one hand establishing reward and giving the glad tidings of the
infinite blessings of paradise, and on the other hand threatening him
with punishment and warning him of torment and unendurable pain. Both
reward and punishment must be recognizable and perceptible to ordinary
human perception for the final outcome of good deeds and the abandonment
of evil to become firmly rooted in man's inner being.

Purely spiritual rewards and punishments would not be comprehensible for
the masses of humanity; it is corporeal enjoyment and torment that are
capable of arousing their attention. They both encourage man to do good
deeds, in obedience to the law, and inspire in him fear of the
consequences of violating the law.

For most people, the concept of pleasure is simultaneously corporeal and
spiritual; few indeed are those who could adequately grasp the notion of
purely spiritual pleasure or punishment.

This being the case, to promise men infinite joys of a spiritual nature
or to warn them of an exclusively spiritual torment would not work a
transforming effect in the depths of men's soul; it would be unable to
control the disparate tendencies at work within man or to prevent him
from entering the forbidden zone of sin.

It is only those whom God has chosen as His friends and possess
accordingly sublime minds in whose souls the anticipation of
non-material rewards will arouse the desire to obey even to love God's
commands.

In addition, God's abundant favor and wisdom necessitate that He bestows
all conceivable material and non-material blessings on His pure,
sincere, and devoted servants, and that He should punish bloodthirsty
and bestial tyrants with a comprehensive punishment that is both
material and non-material. The comprehensiveness both of blessedness in
the hereafter and of requital can be assured only by man being
resurrected in both his dimensions.

The Qur'an promises both material and spiritual blessings to the
virtuous and the pious:

***“God promises the believers, both women and men, that He will cause
them to enter a paradise where rivers flow beneath the trees, and have
them dwell in splendid palaces. He will also bestow on them His pleasure
and satisfaction, which is greater and loftier than material bounties.
This spiritual reward is, in truth, the supreme achievement for the
pure”*** **(9:72).**

\* \* \* \* \*

The Limited Capacity of the Earth
---------------------------------

Some people might voice the objection that the globe cannot possibly
accommodate on the day of resurrection all the human beings who have
lived upon it throughout time. This objection is, however, completely
unfounded, because as the Qur'an makes entirely clear, the orderly
rotation of the heavens will be thoroughly disrupted when the end of the
world comes.

An awesome power will grind the mountains into dust and scatter them in
every direction; the sun and the moon will lose their familiar splendor
and light and grow dark; and the whole coherent order of the universe,
formed of sublime phenomena that are fashioned from the crudest of
materials, will utterly collapse. An entirely new order and structure of
creation will come into being on the silent and dead ruins of the old.

It can, then, be easily understood that any objection based on an
alleged lack of space on the globe is quite unwarranted.

Those whose system of thought is opposed to the view of believers in God
and who are accustomed to raising all kinds of objections also raise
another question. They point out that the cells in the human body are
replaced annually so that every individual changes his physical form
several times in the course of his life, gradually and imperceptibly.

Now it is obvious that every body performs acts, in the course of its
specific lifespan, that deserve reward or punishment; which body will it
be, however, that must ultimately held responsible for those deeds at
the time of resurrection?

The answer to this objection in obvious. Given the fact that each new
cell inherits the characteristics and attributes of its predecessor so
that even the external appearance of the body is indistinguishable from
the old, it is plain that the final body of man represents a compendium
of the attributes of all the preceding bodies.

The resurrection of the last body which is visible to us is therefore
tantamount to the resurrection of all its predecessors.

Scarcity of Matter and the Multitude of Men
-------------------------------------------

Another objection which is raised is that of the limited nature of the
earthly materials which contain in themselves the remains of countless
men who have been turned into earth. It is said that the amount of earth
presently available will not suffice for the fashioning anew of so many
people.

The baselessness of this objection, which does not originate in any
serious search for the truth, becomes obvious when we make the following
calculations.

Every square kilometer of earth is enough for making a hundred million
men. This amount occupies a very paltry portion of the earth's surface,
but it would be enough for refashioning twenty times the present
population of the world.

Based on this calculation, an extremely small plot of land would yield
enough material for making anew the bodies of billions upon billions of
men, so the objection that the raw materials needed for resurrecting so
many people would be lacking turns out to be groundless.

Furthermore, one of the properties of matter is that it takes on
different forms. If for example the atoms comprising one cubic meter of
stone are split, they can occupy millions of cubic meters of space;
their dimensions expand to an unimaginable degree.

The Qur'an proclaims:

***“A day will come on which the earth will be transformed into other
than itself”*** **(14:48)**.

The Eater and the Eaten
-----------------------

There is a very ancient and interesting objection that we should not
pass over in silence. This relates to the transformation of the
particles of the bodies of the deceased into substances that are then
consumed by others, causing those particles to become intermingled with
the bodies of others.

It is true that not a single human body can be found which is entirely
free of contamination by other elements. However, this intermingling
with alien substances is so slight, in the circumstances of this world,
both quantitatively and qualitatively, as to be imperceptible. However,
it is conceivable that when bodies are reconstructed in the hereafter a
kind of rivalry and struggle for the possession of certain materials may
take place.

It is entirely possible that this struggle should not be confined to two
individuals, taking place instead among a number of claimants each
seeking possession of a certain particle as its true owner. Who should
in fact take possession of it?

This then is the problem.

When we look back to the first sign of life, we see that we began as
monocellular beings. Then our body took shape through the multiplication
and growth of the different parts and limbs of our body. In the past, it
was imagined that our personality and our physical characteristics were
contained only in the mass of reproductive cells, but it is known now
that they are present within each individual cell. Each cell acts
separately as a mirror in which the whole appearance of man is
reflected. This holds true not only of man but also of all other living
creatures.

This being the case, if even a single cell from man's body, with the
entirety of his personality inscribed within it, is placed in suitable
circumstances, it is capable of undertaking by itself the entire task of
reconstructing the body, through dividing and giving birth to new cells.

Now if particles of the body become absorbed into the structure of
another, the particles belonging to that individual will return to their
original locus. By thus returning the particles it had borrowed from a
stranger, the second body will in fact be preserving its own original
being. It should also be stressed that since each of the two bodies
retains its respective characteristics even though their constituent
elements become intermingled, there is nothing to prevent each of them
from displaying anew its respective identity. Even if the original
particles left over from each body be exceedingly few even if, for
example, only a single cell survives it will still be possible for that
body to reconstruct itself, and nothing can prevent it from doing so.

In any event, irrespective of whether the work of repair and
reconstruction be completed swiftly or gradually, every particle retains
the capacity of building anew the original body, just as that body once
emerged from a single drop of sperm.

The same problem can be solved in another way.

As we know, the body is engaged in constant dissolution and replacement.
The entire bodily frame changes once every few years, gradually and
imperceptibly. If a person appropriates elements of the being of
another, directly or indirectly, using them to nurture himself, it is
obvious that only a part of that stranger becomes intermingled with him,
for he is, after all, a complete person in his own right. Out of all the
nutrition that a person consumes, only three percent is absorbed into
his body. Why then should the remaining ninety seven percent which is
not absorbed into the body, not be available for the resurrection of the
individual with whom they originated?

Apart from this, in accordance with the laws of physics, all forms of
energy in the world may be transformed into each other, given the
appropriate conditions. Man is himself a source for the production of
energy and even after his death his body is transformed from one form of
energy into another. At the time of resurrection, all the energies of
living beings will exist in utter freedom, and they will be able to
return to their original form by means of a kind of inverted reaction.
The mere fact that we do not know precisely how this change will take
place does not give us the right to dismiss it as impossible.

As for punishment in the hereafter, it should be realized that what
causes pain and torment has a connection to the spirit, so that if part
of the body of a believer become attached to that of an unbeliever, it
is the unbeliever that will suffer the pain of torment not the believer.

In addition to all the foregoing, it must be stated that it is entirely
possible for God to restore life to a body that has changed, gradually
and imperceptibly, the cells composing its brain, nerves and bones, as
much as ten times in the course of a lifetime. Any individual today is
different from what he was ten years ago. It is a matter of indifference
to which of those versions of the body the spirit be rejoined at
resurrection, for that upon which the humanity of an individual depends
and which serves as the guarantor of the uniqueness of his personality,
is the non-material spirit, which is charged with the administration and
governance of his body from its first appearance until death.

From the first beginning of creation down to the present, billions of
human beings have come into existence, and even if they now lie
intermingled with each other, the spiritual characteristics of each of
them remain utterly distinct. If a person committed a crime ten years
ago, it cannot be said that since his physical form has changed, he
should not be tried in place of that person who committed the crime ten
years ago.

If we offset a book, the new printing will be exactly the same as the
old, although the paper and binding may be different.

Since man needs matter as the means whereby he manifests his existence,
he must necessarily be resurrected with his body. However, it is not at
all necessary that an individual come back to life at resurrection with
all the forms his body has had from birth to death; it can be said that
they all appear together in a single form at the time of resurrection.

If this be true, it completely disposes of the objection that particles
which have transferred from one body to another cannot be simultaneously
present in two persons at the time of resurrection.

Furthermore, the real dimensions of the body are composed of a single
insignificant atom; the rest is made up of empty space. If some powerful
form of pressure were brought to bear on the body, making it compact and
eliminating the spaces between its electrons, the basic matter of the
body would be seen to be a minute atom visible only to a microscope.

It is therefore not at all necessary for the spaces between the
particles of the body to be recreated at resurrection; it will be quite
sufficient for the particles themselves (either some of them or all of
them) to return.

None of the possibilities mentioned above should be regarded as
categorical answers to the problems posed by the restoration of life to
man; they are merely avenues to understanding that lie within our reach.
We cannot restrict our reflections on this subject to the arguments set
out above. Our aim has been only to prove that doubts and objections
such as those we have reviewed should not be allowed to affect our basic
belief in resurrection and the restoration of life to the body which is
so strongly emphasized by the revealed religions, especially, the
Qur'an.


