Lesson Sixteen: Man's Situation in the Intermediate Realm
=========================================================

The present existence of an intermediate realm and of separate
destinations there for the virtuous and the wicked is a well-founded
religious belief. There can be no doubt that after death the spirits of
men the only element within them that is truly essential are transferred
to the vast expanse of the non-material world.

Just as the spirit appears in man's body and material form after it has
been fashioned to completion, the spirit retains its attachment to the
body as long as the body retains the capacity for a harmonious relation
with the spirit. Once this capacity vanishes as a result of external
factors so that the union of spirit and body is sundered, the spirit
separates from the body and pursues its existence under a different
order and set of conditions.

What we mean by this order is the intermediate realm, the first stage
reached by man after his migration from the world. He pauses there in
the course of his journey to the meeting with God. He enters a realm
with its own specific characteristics and properties, remaining there
until the coming of resurrection.

A further change then brings about the transformation of the
intermediate realm, and man enters the plain of resurrection, the next
stage in his journey toward God.

A limit or boundary separating two things is called barzakh in Arabic,
which explains why the intermediate realm that separates the temporary
and evanescent life of this world from the eternal life of the hereafter
is also called barzakh. Life there is characterized by the liberation of
the spirit from the fetters of the material body.

The spirit is no longer harassed by passion and instinct, and thanks to
the absence of time and space, the horizons of man's vision are vastly
enlarged. In just the same way that there is no question of time or
space in the world of dreams, in the intermediate realm, too, man can
observe and examine everything in a single instant.

The Qur'an says:

***“The intermediate realm extends from now until the time of
resurrection”*** **(23: 100).**

In the same connection, the Qur'an describes the state of the martyrs
after their death:

***“Do not imagine those who have been killed in God's path to be dead;
rather they are alive and receive sustenance in the presence of their
Lord”*** **(3:169)**.

The verse refers, of course, to willingness to defend the sanctity of
Islam and the Qur'an, to the virtue of heroically resisting the
unbelievers and atheists even to the point of attaining martyrdom. This
is the highest point the believer can reach: the desire to sacrifice
himself for the sake of his pure goals and thereby to join the caravan
of martyrs.

He regards it as a great duty to guard God's religion and to strive for
the implementation of the commands of the Qur'an, and he therefore
exerts great effort to secure the security and survival of the religion
of God. Such a protector of the true faith must necessarily begin by
purifying himself and avoiding all kinds of pollution by sin and
disobedience to God.

It is only then that he may properly return his soul the loftiest trust
which he has been given to God, its true owner, while fighting for the
sake of His religion. He will then receive the reward of life
everlasting in the company of God's chosen elite.

The Qur'an says:

***“God has bought the properties and souls of the believers in exchange
for paradise. They are to strive in the path of God, destroying the
enemies of religion or themselves being killed. This is a firm promise
of God, binding upon Him, contained in the Torah, the Gospels and the
Qur'an, and who is more faithful to his promises than God? O believers,
rejoice in this transaction, for it truly guarantees great happiness”***
**(9:111).**

The Qur'an also draws attention to the punishment being suffered before
the occurrence of resurrection by those bound for hellfire:

***“Hellfire has already encompassed the unbelievers”*** **(9:49)**.

After death, the spirits of the virtuous will rejoice in liberation from
the constricting cage of this world, they will delight in their ability
to roam freely through the infinite. Life on the earthly plane is
concerned only with the limited amount of matter that is visible on the
surface of the earth.

By contrast, the spirits of the virtuous know no limitation of space or
time as they continue their upward ascent. Each in accordance with its
rank advances joyfully to its specific station and degree, and
everywhere it enjoys unhindered access. The eyes of the blessed witness
pure and uncontaminated sources of eternal beauty in comparison with
which the beauties of this world are slight and inconsequential.

The spirit is no longer subject to the limits imposed on it by a weary,
heavy body; it is not accompanied by the broken and suffering
countenance of old age.

Nothing exists here for the righteous servants of God except beauty,
luminosity, love, familiarity and affection, and pure, sincere
friendship with the servants and friends of God.

The Qur'an promises those who have made obedience to divine command
their guiding principle in this world that they shall enjoy the company
and fellowship of God's chosen elite.

The companionship of those upon whom God has bestowed His blessings in
full measure is indeed a source of great pride for the virtuous.

This is the promise contained in the Qur'an:

***“Those who obey the commands of God and His Messenger shall be
resurrected together with, and enjoy the company of, those upon whom God
has bestowed His kindness and favor in full measure the prophets, the
sincere devotees, the martyrs and the righteous. What noble and precious
companions they are!”*** **(4:64).**

It should be remarked, of course, that enjoying the company of God's
chosen elite does not imply equality with them in terms of spiritual
station and degree. While being in close contact with them, the virtuous
will enjoy God's favor and blessings to an extent commensurate with
their own ranks and degrees of closeness to God. Not everyone will enjoy
an equal share, in just the same way that not everyone attains the same
degree of ascent.

\* \* \* \* \*

One of the companions of Imam as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace, relates that
he once posed him the following question:

“O descendant of God's Messenger! When the true believer finds himself
on the threshold of death, is he grieved by the taking of his soul?”

The Imam answered:

“Never! When the messenger of death comes to take his spirit, he is at
first distraught. But then the angel consoles him and says: \`O friend
of God, do not distress yourself. I swear by the Lord Who sent Muhammad
as His Messenger that we will treat you more kindly and gently than your
father. Open your eyes and look at us.'

“Then the Messenger of God and the other preceptors of religion will
appear before him, and the angel entrusted with the task of taking his
soul will say to him: 'This is the Prophet and the leaders of religion
who will be your friends and companions.'

“He will then open his eyes partly, and hear God calling him as follows:
O soul that has found tranquillity in the protection of Muhammad and his
pure family, now return to your Lord. You have accepted as truth the
authority of the Imams, and because of this you are now happy. Be
certain that you have also earned thereby the pleasure of your Lord.
Come now and be the companion of My chosen elite, and take up the abode
that has been prepared for you in paradise everlasting.'

“Nothing could be more desirable for the believer at that moment than
for his soul to take flight and receive all that it has been promised.”
(*Furu al-Kafi,* Vol. III, pp. 127-128)

The Painful State of the Impure
-------------------------------

The spirits of the impure are meanwhile caught up in terrible darkness
and gloom. Overwhelmed by misery and disaster, they mourn their lives of
sin. Realizing that neither their relatives nor the material wealth they
accumulated can do anything to deliver them, they torment themselves in
their wretchedness.

Still more terrible than their fate is that of cruel, vicious and
arrogant tyrants. The sighs and laments of their oppressed victims are
like so many daggers plunged in their hearts. The specter of those whom
they have wronged assaults them mercilessly with constant blame and
reproach, augmenting constantly the pain and misery they suffer.

The vision of these spectacles of terror is like a tormenting flame
consuming the heart of the criminal.

The Qur'an depicts the catastrophic destiny of aggressive tyrants as
follows:

***“They will be brought to hellfire every morning and evening, and the
descendants of Pharaoh will be punished most severely”*** **(40:46)**.

They will then recall vividly the repeated warnings of the prophets and
men of religion who told them of the disasters that awaited them. They
will begin to blame themselves for not following the commands of the
prophets and not heeding their kindly advice, for had they done so, they
would not have cast themselves into perdition.

In the course of the Battle of Badr, some of the leaders of Quraysh were
killed and their bodies were thrown in a pit. After the victory of the
Muslim army, the Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him
and his family, leaned over the edge of the pit and addressed them as
follows:

“We have attained all that God promised us; are you now convinced of the
truth of God's promises?”

Some of the companions then said: “O Messenger of God, you are talking
to the dead, to bodies that have been thrown into a pit; do they
understand anything of what you say?”

The Prophet answered them: “They hear more clearly than you do.” (*Bihar
al-Anwar,* Vol. XIX, p. 346)

One of the companions of the Commander of the Faithful, upon whom be
peace, said:

“Once I left Kufa in the company of the Imam. He stopped in the cemetery
at Wadi al-Salam, standing there like someone about to address a
gathering. I remained there standing with the Imam until I grew tired
and sat down. Another long time passed, and I grew tired of sitting. So
I stood up again and remained standing until once again I grew tired and
sat down. Finally, I arose once more, and said to the Commander of the
Faithful: \`I fear for you, seeing you standing so long; rest a little.'

I then spread out my cloak on the ground for the Imam to sit down. He
said: \`O , Habba! I am standing here engaged in conversation with the
believers.' I then asked him: \`Do they also engage in conversation with
each other?' \`Yes,' he said. \`Once the veil is lifted you will see
them gathered in circles conversing with each other.' I said: \`Are you
speaking of their bodies or their spirits?' \`Their spirits,' he
answered.” (*al-Kafi,* Vol. III, p. 242)

From this narrative it can be deduced that the spirit does not entirely
sever its relations with the body. It is true that after the death and
the cutting of the link between the spirit and the body, the spirit
leaves for a different realm. However, on account of the union that
existed between them in this world, some weak connection persists, in
the form of a certain affinity. On account of this affinity and its
former union with the body, the spirit is oriented toward the remains of
the body in way that it is not oriented to anything else.

Islam has laid down certain instructions relating to the body after
death. The reason for them is the continuing affinity of the spirit for
the body and the trials and turmoil the spirit encounters in the
unfamiliar realm of the *barzakh*, governed as it is by new principles
and criteria.

In the intermediate realm men encounter each other in bodily forms
specific to that realm. The pure and virtuous are gathered together, in
groups determined by their spiritual rank and degree. The unbelievers
and the evil also find themselves in each other's company. The dealings
and relations of the pious with each other are based on familiarity,
intimacy, and pure love, and thus anticipate the states of paradise. By
contrast, the relations of the unbelievers with each other will
inevitably partake of the character of hellfire; mutual enmity, disgust
and envy will prevail among them.

It is self-evident that since all things will be determined in the
intermediate realm by the particular laws and criteria that prevail
there, the companionship and conversation of the blessed and the damned,
as well as the enjoyment of divine bounties by the former and the
experience of punishment by the latter, will also be marked by the
characteristics of that realm.

Although the bodies of men in the intermediate realm will in general
resemble the bodily form they had in this world, certain differences
will also be apparent, because every quality and attribute will take on
an external form commensurate with its inner nature. Thus the spiritual
light or darkness found within individuals will become clearly visible
in their faces.

Ibrahim b. Ishaq recounts that he asked Imam as-Sadiq, Upon whom be
peace: “Where are the souls of the believers?” He answered: “The spirits
of the believers are lodged in paradise, where they are given to eat and
to drink. They see and visit each other, and they say, \`O Lord, bring
about resurrection so that what You have promised us may be fulfilled.'“

Ibrahim next asked: “Where are the spirits of the unbelievers?” He
answered: “Their place is in the fire, where they are compelled to eat
the food of the fire and to drink its drink. They see each other and
meet each other and they say, \`O God, do not bring about resurrection
lest that which You promised us be fulfilled.'“ (*al-Mahasin,* p. 178)

Abu Basir relates that the question of the spirits of the believers and
the God-fearing was once being discussed in the presence of Imam
as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace. The Imam said: “The spirits of the
believers meet each other.” I asked: “Do they indeed meet each other?”
He replied: “Yes, and they talk to each other and recognize each other;
when you see someone there, you will say, \`This is so-and-so.'“
(*Ibid*.)

Those living in the intermediate realm can even establish contact with
the material world and its inhabitants. By virtue of the inner
capacities they developed and the deeds they performed while still in
the world, they can acquire information of a general kind about their
relatives and friends to the degree that is permitted by the special
circumstances of the intermediate realm.

The situation of people in the intermediate realm naturally differs from
one person to the next. In a sense, everyone there has his own world,
the nature of which is determined by the conduct he exhibited in this
world; not all the dwellers in the intermediate realm can communicate
uniformly with this world and its people. The degree to which an
individual may have awareness of the material world and communicate with
it depends on the spiritual rank and degree of development he has
attained.

Those who worship and fear God have, therefore, better and more
extensive capacity for gaining awareness of the material world. Within
the limits set by the particular circumstances of the intermediate realm
and depending on God's permission, they can be present wherever they
wish, simply through willing it and turning themselves in the proper
direction. As for the errant and sinful, their communication with the
world serves simply to increase their regret and torment.

Imam as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace, says:

“The believer visits his dear ones and relatives, and he sees what he
loves, while whatever he dislikes is concealed from him. The unbeliever
also visits his dear ones and relatives, but he sees what he hates and
dislikes, while whatever he loves is concealed from him.

“Among the believers are those for whom Friday is a day of visiting, and
there also those the balance of whose deeds permits them to see them.”
(*al-Kafi,* Vol. I, p. 62)

Someone relates that he asked the Commander of the Faithful, upon whom
be peace, whether the dead are able to visit their relatives. He
answered that they are, whereupon the questioner asked: “When and how
often?” He answered: “Every week, every month, or every year, depending
of spiritual rank and capacity.” (*Ibid*., Vol. II, p. 62)

The Qur'an speaks in the following terms of the constant torment and
punishment that are administered to the evil and corrupt in the
intermediate realm:

***“They are brought to the fire every morning and evening, and the
descendants of the Pharaoh shall be brought forth on the day of
resurrection with the severest torment”*** **(40:46)**.

It is obvious that this verse must refer to the intermediate realm, not
to resurrection, for after resurrection there will be neither morning
nor evening.

The Qur'an similarly says of the blessed:

***“Provision shall be brought to them every morning and evening”***
**(19:62)**.

This verse also contains mention of morning and evening, the reference
being probably to the morning and evening of the intermediate realm
which follow upon the morning and evening of this world. It cannot refer
to paradise, because the Qur'an says:

***“There (in paradise) they shall not see the sun nor experience severe
cold”*****(76:13).**

***“The people of paradise shall have on that day a better abode and the
fairest of places for repose”*** **(25:24)**.

In the second of these two verses, the word *maqil* which we have
translated as “place of repose” is of particular interest because it
refers to a nap taken before noon. It is true that sleep in the
intermediate realm cannot resemble exactly sleep in this world, but it
is nonetheless different from what will prevail after resurrection,
namely eternal wakefulness. This is indeed one reason why people are
described as qiyam “awake” or “alert” on the day of resurrection.

The degree of life possessed by those in the intermediate realm is, in
some sense, fuller than the life of this world, which may be what is
suggested by this tradition: “People are asleep, and when they die they
wake up.” (*Li'ali al-Akhbar,* p. 396)

This refers to the fact that when a person goes to sleep, his senses and
perceptions are weakened; he can almost be said to be half-alive. When
he awakens, he regains a full measure of life. Likewise, the degree of
life man enjoys in this world is less than which awaits him in the
intermediate realm; when he is transferred to that realm, his degree of
life is enhanced.

al-Ghazali says:

“When we are asleep we witness a world in which we do not imagine that
we are asleep. This particular state is only a part of the total scheme
of our life, the totality being represented by our waking state, and
indeed, as soon as we wake up, we realize that our state while asleep
represented only a part of our life, not the whole.

“This being the case, why should our present life not be like a period
spent asleep in relation to the hereafter? Our firm belief that our
present life in this world is equivalent to life as such is just like
the supposition of the sleeper.

“When we wake up, we say that we understand we were sleeping and
dreaming; whatever we experienced had no reality. By this we mean that
our sleep was only part of the greater reality which is constituted by
our waking state, for sleep is in itself a reality. Likewise, the life
of this world is real in and of itself, but compared with the more
expansive life that awaits us, it counts as a dream.” (Quoted in *Bist
Guftar,* p. 323)

In the intermediate realm, the spirits of men pursue their lives
according to the different degrees of consciousness that their belief
and awareness have made possible for them. Since life there is not
subject to the laws of matter, following instead its own particular
criteria, its conditions must naturally be different from those of our
present life. However, since man's perceptions are much sharpened in the
intermediate realm, the spiritual torment and pleasure which he
undergoes there escape our present powers of description.

The fruit of man's deeds becomes tangible for him in the intermediate
realm. Those who have never had the good fortune of doing good deeds
wish to return to the world to make up for their past. The Qur'an says:

***“Spend in the path of God a part of the sustenance We have bestowed
on you, before death overtakes you. Then the sinner will say, \`O Lord,
if You were to grant me a respite and postpone my death a little, I
would certainly do good and become one of The virtuous'“.***
**(63:10).**

As for the righteous and pious, they will joyously exclaim in the
intermediate world:

***“Would that our relatives and kin knew how God has forgiven us and
bestowed mercy and favor upon us”*** **(36:26-27).**

One of the characteristics of the intermediate realm is that both its
pleasures and torments are temporary, being brought to an end when
resurrection begins.

Certain verses of the Qur'an refer to the state of people intermediate
between belief and unbelief i.e., those who were deprived by various
circumstances or hardships of the opportunity of learning about Islam or
investigating its truth, or were prevented from migrating from one land
to another.

It is probable that such persons, if they have not committed any crimes,
will be enveloped in God's mercy and forgiveness on the day of
resurrection. In the intermediate realm, neither will they be punished
nor will they enjoy blessings; they will simply wait for their destiny
to be clarified.

The disquiet they endure will be comparable to that of prisoners whose
case is still under investigation and whose future is unclear.

The Qur'an says:

***“Those who have wronged themselves in this world will be asked by the
angels when they die what they have done. They will say, \`We were weak
and oppressed and unable to move.' Then the angels will ask, \`Was God's
earth not wide enough for you to travel in it (so that you might hasten
from the land of ignorance to that of faith and knowledge) ?'***

***The abode of These evildoers shall be hellfire; how evil and terrible
an abode! Excepted from this shall be those men, women and children who
were indeed unable to act or to move; they could not flee and they had
no path of escape. It may be that God will forgive and show mercy to
them, for He is Merciful and Pardoning”*** **(4:97-99).**

This verse clearly relates to the intermediate realm, because after
resurrection the status and destiny of everyone is made clear.

\* \* \* \* \*

In reality, then, the intermediate realm represents a small portion of
the reward or punishment that man will receive after resurrection; it is
like a window through which one can glimpse the ultimate outcome of his
affair.

There are numerous traditions concerning the state of the God-fearing in
the intermediate realm. They state clearly that although the God-fearing
do not yet enter paradise, a gate to paradise is opened before them
permitting them to glimpse the abode that awaits them and feel the
pleasant breezes that blow there.

Tolstoy, the great Russian author, writes:

“O God, it is You alone Who can open a door On the world of mercy to
Your servant who lies buried beneath the ground.

“Out of all these bones lying here, gradually rotting, Which belong to a
king, and which to a beggar? Which belong to a judge, and which to a
soldier? Which belong to a pious man who has bought heaven for himself,
and which to a sinner, who has been driven away from the kingdom of
heaven? Whatever we see is darkness, visions and ghosts O God, it is
only at the threshold of Your throne, only in Your heavens that we may
find a path leading to tranquillity and salvation.

“On the day that nothing remains of our earthly form except a pitiful
handful of dust and all the brilliance of our life has been buried in
the black earth, it is You alone Who can open a door on the world of
mercy to Your servant who lies buried beneath the ground.” (Quoted *in
Zibatarin Shahkarha-yi Shir-i Jahan,* p. 300)

The first reality that presents itself to man the moment he dies and
embarks on a new life is the voiding of all the customs, conventions and
norms that governed his worldly life. All outward causation and
instrumentality will come to an end, and man will enter a realm that is
utterly empty of all the varied phenomena found in this world. All the
aims and pursuits he has followed throughout his life will turn into a
mirage.

The Qur'an says:

***“If you were to see catastrophic misery of the oppressors when they
are caught in the throes of death! The angels lift their powerful hands
to seize their souls, telling them: \`Give up now your souls. Today you
shall suffer torment and humiliation because you spoke lyingly of God
and refused in arrogance to accept His signs.'***

***Certainly, you will return to Us, one by one, as We first created
you. You will leave behind all property and wealth We bestowed on you
(this being the cause of your arrogance), and all the intermediaries and
intercessors you thought you had shall be destroyed and separated from
you.”*** **(6:93-4)**

***“If you speak truly when you say there is no resurrection, why is it
that when you stand at the bedside of the dying, as their souls rise in
their throats, at a time when We are closer to them than you are
(although you do not realize this) Why is it that then, if everything is
indeed in your hands or the hands of nature, you do not return their
souls to their bodies?***

***If the one who dies is among those who have drawn nigh to God, their
place is in eternal rest and repose. If he is from among the Companions
of the Right, then give glad tidings that he is safe. If he is from
among the deniers and misguided, then his share shall be the boiling
water and his abode shall be the hellfire. All of this is truth,
concerning which there is no doubt.”*** **(56:83-95)**

Commenting on the part of the verse that refers to *“those who have
drawn nigh to God,”* Imam as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace, says that it
refers to the intermediate realm, while *“eternal rest and repose”*
refers to paradise. (*Tafsir al-Qummi*)

Imam as-Sadiq also said: “By God, I fear for you in the intermediate
realm.” \`Amr b. Yazid then asked him: “What is the intermediate realm?”
He answered: “The tomb in which you will stay until the day of
resurrection.” (*al-Kafi,* Vol. I, p. 66)

Man puts his trust in two things in this life. First, the worldly goods
of which he imagines himself to be the owner and which he regards as the
means for attaining his wishes and desires. Second, those persons
without whose help and influence he thinks himself incapable of
fulfilling his needs powerful friends, relatives and the like.

The Qur'an stresses that both of these pass away and have no ultimate
validity. Once man finds himself on the threshold of death, he is
compelled to sever all material attachments, and with a belated realism
that is forced upon him, he understands the emptiness of everything in
which he had placed his trust.

He even wishes for the impossible to return and warn his relatives not
to do anything which might plunge them into the same whirlpool of
eternal wretchedness as himself.

The Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, is reported to have said:

“The spirit of the dead will cry out after death: \`O family and
offspring! Take care not to be deceived by the world as it deceived and
misled me. I accumulated wealth, making no distinction between the licit
and the illicit, in the end leaving it behind for others to enjoy; all
that remains for me is misery. Take care to avoid what has befallen
me.'“ (*Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. III, p. 136)

Imam al-Hadi, upon whom be peace, compared the world to a marketplace
when he said: “The world is a market in which some people profit and
others lose.” (*Tuhaf al-\`Uqal,* p. 483)

The Qur'an likewise summons men to engage in a profitable trade in the
market of this world:

***“O believers, shall I guide you to a trade which will free you from
painful torment in the hereafter? Believe in God and His Messenger and
struggle in God's path with your property and your person”***
**(61:10-11).**

One of the companions of Imam as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace, said: “I
asked the Imam to counsel me. He answered: \`Make provision for your
journey, and make ready the goods that you will need on your voyage.
Take all the necessary measures yourself, and do not instruct another
after the end of your life to send on what you need.'“ (*Mishkat
al-Anwar,* p. 72)

The Commander of the Faithful, upon whom be peace, said:

“The world is a transient abode, not a permanent dwelling. People in
this world are of two kinds: those who have sold themselves, who have
deviated from the path of truth and are advancing toward perdition; and
those who have bought themselves, who have chosen the path of salvation
and liberated themselves.” (*Nahj al-Balagha*, section 133)


