Lesson Nineteen: The Assumption of Form by Our Deeds
====================================================

In the past it was believed by specialists in the empirical sciences
that an insurmountable barrier existed between matter and energy.
Further scientific research discredited this belief so that a new theory
entered scientific discourse, one to the effect that matter might be
transformed into energy. The transformation of matter is accepted today
as an incontrovertible truth. However, empirical science does not
propound the reverse of this the transformation of energy into matter.

Since the transformation of matter into energy has now been accepted, it
is entirely conceivable that future scientific progress may come to
prove the transformation of energy into matter by means of a similar
process. There is indeed no proof that energy once scattered cannot be
accumulated anew and take on corporeal form.

Every motion and act undertaken by man counts as a good or a bad deed,
and at the same time it represents a kind of deposit in the body that is
expended in the form of energy. The acts and even the speech in which a
person engages are, therefore, differing forms or manifestations of
energy, either auditory or mechanical energy, or, in some cases, a
mixture of the two.

The fuel our bodies consume is derived, for example, from foodstuffs,
and energy is released from the compounding of these foodstuffs with
oxygen. This energy in turn is transformed into various kinds of motion
and activity, ranging all the way from gentle speech to strenuous
physical exertion.

The stability of our mental reminiscences, of our awareness of the forms
which lie within the range of our knowledge, is itself an indication of
the permanence of our deeds. These forms sometimes lie hidden in our
minds for lengthy periods, but they can be brought forth at any moment
and exercise various effects upon us, both physical and psychological.

Among the effects that may be caused by the emergence of memories are
happiness and joy, sorrow and grief, the palpitation of the heart, the
blushing or paling of the face, and the occurrence of disequilibrium in
the glandular secretions.

It can therefore be said that our actions and words, dissolved in the
atmosphere in the form of energy, are not annihilated, and that whatever
we do in the course of our lifetimes is stored up in the archive of
nature, an archive which the powerful hand of God has established and
the permanence of which He has assured. The day will come on which
nature will return to its true Owner all the trusts that have been
deposited in it, and all the energies that have been accumulated in it
will display themselves.

Why should the energies that have been expended for the sake of good and
virtue, or evil and corruption, not take on a certain compressed form
that then assumes an appropriate corporeal form on the day of
resurrection? Those forms would be, respectively, unending bliss and
delight and unbounded pain and torment.

We have accepted the burden of accountability and we will see the
inevitable result of the way in which we have compounded our beings, in
terms of both actions and thoughts, for our deeds will themselves rise
up to requite us.

\* \* \* \* \*

It can even be said that the very pattern of creation imposes certain
effects on our acts and behavior without asking for our permission and
without our even being aware of it, the result being that they grow and
develop in ways we cannot suspect under our current circumstances.

With the passage of time a small seed is transformed into a great,
strong tree. Similarly, various factors set to work on sperms and bring
forth from them various creatures, great and small, that possess an
astonishing variety.

When an alcoholic is under the effect of alcohol throughout his life he
will exert a direct, undesirable long-lasting effect on his offspring.

Do not these cases furnish an analogy for the confrontation of man with
the consequences of his deeds whether punishment or reward in the
hereafter? Is it not conceivable that an act of brief duration should
earn man eternal misery or eternal happiness?

Although it is difficult for us at present to grasp this matter
completely, the continuous advances being made by science may help us to
understand it to a certain degree.

Experts are now able to capture and record sounds from the past. Since
all living beings emit a certain kind of radiation, and motion results
in the creation of waves, it has become possible to measure and record
the waves that are audible from centuries old pottery; it is as if the
sounds made by the potter can be heard anew after several centuries. It
is also possible to photograph the imprint left by the fingers of
thieves at the scene of a crime, thanks to the heat of their bodies.

If all this is possible in this world, why should something similar not
be possible for all our deeds in the hereafter?

The great observatories of the world can today record waves emitted by
distant galaxies, thanks to the complex receivers with which they are
equipped; this permits them to uncover many mysteries and secrets.

Together with the other evidence we have adduced, this permits us to
suggest that from a scientific point of view the transformation of
energy into matter and, therefore, the assumption of material form by
our deeds does represent a tenable hypothesis.

The Non-Existence of Time
-------------------------

Furthermore, time is relative, being the result of the motion of the
earth and the sun. If, for example, we were to travel to a certain
planet, the events that take place on earth would reach the planet after
the passage of a number of years determined by the distance of the
planet from the earth. We would then be able to observe precisely our
deeds and those of others after the passage of many years.

Similarly, certain stars that emit light and are visible to us today in
fact dissolved and disappeared several centuries ago. Nothing of them
remains and yet, on account of the distance that separates them from the
earth, their light still reaches us on account of the distance between
them and the earth.

Man's sensory powers can grasp only the surface aspect of things and are
unable to grasp their inner aspects. He is therefore unaware, while in
this world, of the deeds that he performs here and of the beneficial or
harmful effects they will have in the hereafter. In the next life,
however, whatever is hidden will become manifest, and once the book of
their deeds is laid open before them, all people will see clearly the
pattern their conduct has followed.

The Qur'an, that book imbued with ultimate truth, describes the events
that shall occur on the day of resurrection as follows:

***“That which was previously concealed from them shall become
apparent”*** **(6:28)**.

The criminals who are bound in the fetters of their own lusts and
desires will attempt to gain a measure of false tranquillity by hiding
from themselves whatever is likely to harm them and burying the
awareness of it deep within their beings. But the truth that they
attempt to conceal will come forth to confront them.

The Qur'an says:

***“We have made the good and evil deeds of every individual to be a
ring around his neck. On the day of resurrection We shall display the
record of his deeds, and the record shall be so clear that he will be
able to read all its pages at once. A summons will come to him, \`Read
yourself your own record of deeds, for it is enough that you yourself
assess and measure your deeds'“*** **(17:13-14).**

Another verse reads:

***“On that day man shall become aware of all the deeds, good and evil,
he has committed through out his life”*** **(75:13)**.

Someone once asked Imam as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace,

“Does man know what he will see in his record of deeds?”

The Imam replied: “God Almighty will remind him of them, so that there
will be no closing of an eye, no taking of a step, no uttering a word,
that he will not remember; it will be as if he had done all that the
moment before.” (*Tafsir al-Ayyashi,* Vol. II, p. 284)

From this tradition it can be deduced that the nature of the record and
of its reading will be utterly different from that of a book and its
reading in this world; it will be something akin to a powerful and
instant reminder.

It should also be kept in mind that the recording and registering of
deeds will include both the acts that man has engaged in directly and
the results and consequences of those deeds; it is the combination of
all this that will be subjected to assessment and accounting. Thus the
Qur'an says:

***“We shall restore life to the dead, and We record both the deeds that
occurred in the past and the effects to which they gave rise”***
**(36:12)**.

When in those critical moments the criminals look back at the corridors
of time in which they committed their deeds they will exclaim in
astonishment:

***“Woe Upon us! What kind of a book is this that records and enumerates
with precision all of our deeds, great and small?”…. (18:49).***

 The verse then proceeds:

**“*****They shall see all of their deeds, present before them, and God
shall not wrong anyone” (18:49)**.*

***“On the day that God raises up all men for the accounting to make
them aware of the results of all the deeds He has recorded and they have
forgotten; indeed God is a Witness to all creatures in the world”***
**(58:6)**.

Corrupt friends and evil companions are at the source of much of the
misguidance to which man is subject, in the realms of belief, action and
morality. When therefore man recognizes on the plain of resurrection
those who are the cause of his misfortune, regret will engulf him and he
will exclaim, according to the Qur'an:

***“Woe upon me! Would that I had not chosen such-and-such a one as my
friend, for his companionship prevented me from following God's path and
led me astray”*** **(25:28-29).**

This belated attempt at dissociation does not in any way exempt him from
responsibility for the sins he has consciously committed throughout his
life.

The Qur'an depicts for us a wrongdoer who bites his hands in regret:

***“On that day the wrongdoer shall bite the back of his hand in regret
and say: \`Would that I had followed the path of obedience in the world,
in the company of God's Messenger.'“*** **(25:27)**

***“Indeed the friendship of Satan earns man perdition and
misguidance.”*** **(25:29)**

They will blame Satan in order to justify themselves, but he will answer
them as follows:

***“God made a true promise to you, but my promise was false. My only
power over you consisted in summoning you to evil. You accepted my
summons, so blame yourselves, not me.”*** **(14:22)**

It is natural that regret should be the lot of those wretches who are
destined for hellfire. However, even the people of paradise are filled
with sorrow when they look at the infinitely higher stations occupied by
those who have drawn nigh to God; they ask themselves why they did not
exert themselves more strenuously during their brief sojourn in this
world, thus earning a higher station than that which they occupy.

The Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, said:

“There is no creature that will not be overtaken by remorse and regret
on the day of resurrection, but regret will be of no avail. When the
blessed look upon paradise and the infinite bounties that God has
prepared for the pure and the God-fearing, they will regret not having
performed righteous deeds equal to theirs. As for the wretched, the
people of hellfire, they will groan and lament when they see the fire
and hear its roar, and they will regret not having atoned for their sins
while still in the world.” (*Li'ali al-Akhbar,* p. 469)

Two Unequal Scenes
------------------

The true worth of everything can best be appreciated by measuring it
against its opposite.

The Qur'an therefore juxtaposes the grateful joy of the people of
paradise with regret of the people of hell, a regret to which is joined
the impossible wish to return to the world in order to make amends.
These two utterly distinct and unequal states are depicted as follows in
the Qur'an:

***“They will reside in gardens of eternity; they will be adorned with
bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments shall be of silk. They
will say: \`Praise be to God who has removed all sorrow from us: in
truth our Creator is merciful and just in dispensing reward. Out of His
bounty He has settled us in an eternal abode of bliss; no toil or
weariness shall touch us therein.'***

***The abode of the unbelievers shall be hellfire there neither shall
they die, nor shall their penalty be lightened; thus do We punish the
unbelievers! They shall cry out, \`O Lord bring us forth from here so
that we make work righteousness, not that which we used to do.' They
will be answered:*** ***\`Did We not give you enough life to receive
admonition as others did? Did not one come to warn you? Now taste your
punishment, for there is none to aid the wrongdoers.'“*** **(35:33-7)**

First these verses depict the tranquil and stable abode of paradise,
overflowing with blessings of both material and spiritual nature. There
the God-fearing shall enjoy both the satisfaction of their material
desires and spiritual peace and tranquillity. The dwellers in paradise
will therefore offer thanks to God for having been guided to eternal
bliss and rewarded for their deeds of righteousness. They will regard
the vast realm of paradise from which all trouble and pain are absent as
the result of God's generosity and favor, for they do not consider
themselves worthy of it.

When we look in the other direction, we see anxiety and the terror of
impending punishment engulfing the sinners. They kneel down in their
misery and shame and begin to give voice to their regret in tones of
despair. They wish to emerge from their fearful state in order to go
back and atone for the corrupt deeds they have done.

None of this avails them, for their brief life is past and now the
terrifying fire of hell burns them each second. They are not permitted
to die, nor is their punishment lightened.

In short, the two contrasting scenes are of joy and tranquillity on the
one hand, and misery, torment, and fruitless remorse on the other.

\* \* \* \* \*

Qays b. \`Asim relates: “I once set out from afar with a group of
companions to visit Medina. We came into the presence of the Most Noble
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, and I asked
him to bestow some counsel upon us. I said: 'Since we are desert
dwellers and only rarely come into the city, we wish to make use of this
opportunity and benefit from your eloquent words.'

“The Prophet replied: 'Pride is followed by humiliation, life is
followed by death, this world is followed by the hereafter. Everything
that exists is without doubt subject to an accounting, and there is one
who watches over all things. There is a reward for every good deed and a
punishment for every evil deed. There is a set period for everything.

“O Qays, you have a friend and companion who one day will be buried with
you. When you are buried, he will still be alive although you are dead.
If your companion is noble and a man of honor, he will honor you, and if
he is lowly and vile, he will torment and trouble you. He will be
resurrected together with you, and you will be resurrected together with
him. No questions will be put to you; they will all be directed to him.
Choose, then a worthy and righteous companion, for if your companion is
righteous he will comfort you, but if he be wicked, you will wish to
flee him in terror. That everlasting companion and friend is none other
than your deeds.'“ (*al-Amali al-Saduq,* p. 3)

Every wrongdoer shall be resurrected with the inward countenance that he
has fashioned for himself. The Qur'an says:

***“The wrongdoers shall be recognized by their countenances”***
**(55:4)**.

The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, said:

“The two-faced hypocrite shall be resurrected with two tongues. One
tongue will be at the back of his head, and the other in front. Flames
shall dart forth from both of his tongues, engulfing his body. Then it
will be said concerning him: \`This is the man who confronted people in
world with two faces and spoke with two tongues.'“ (*Iqab al-Amal,* p.
319)


