Lesson Three: Resurrection, a Manifestation of God's Far-reaching Wisdom
========================================================================

There can be no doubt that the volitional acts and motions of man, in
all their variety, proceed from inner motivations. All our strivings in
their different aspects, are reflections of our intentions and ideals,
as well as being attempts to fulfil them; they are like so many
affirmative responses to the summons of our inclinations and wishes.

Even if we imagine that some of our volitional and deliberate acts
completely free of personal motivation, we must not overlook the fact
that none of our modes of behavior is ultimately separable from a hidden
and unspoken goal. In the depths of every act a secret and apparently
unknown aim is concealed.

For example, when we conceive the intention of doing good to someone, we
are not inspired exclusively by a humanitarian desire or a generous
impulse, contrary to what we imagine. It is the desire for our own peace
of mind which is our primary motivation.

The same is the case with any natural factor within the realm of nature;
it, too, cannot lack an ideal and goal. The difference is that what man
undertakes as a result of knowledge and awareness arises in nature as
the product of a natural factor, totally unconnected to knowledge and
perception. In both cases, then, the essence of the matter is the same;
the presence of an aim and a goal.

The intellect that is free of illusion understands that the whole
structure of the universe has the implicit wish to nurture within it a
being that will be endowed with thought, capable of development,
empowered over its own destiny, and able to emerge from the confines of
subjection to the instincts, to move in the orbit of guidance by the
light of its own intelligence, and to choose freely the path of ascent
or that of decline.

\* \* \* \* \*

In addition, science presents to us the picture of a well-ordered
universe that is regulated by precise and unfailing laws and norms. It
is a universe in which all things the wing of a moth, the leaf of a
tree, a grain of sand follow precise systems peculiar to themselves and
regulating their motions with geometric precision. From the atom to the
galaxy which contains several suns within itself, from the galaxy to
infinite space which in turn contains numerous galaxies within itself,
the whole infinitude of being, ranging from the smallest particle to the
largest of heavenly bodies everything moves in accordance with a unique
and amazing regularity.

This being the case, it is quite incompatible with man's intelligence as
well as with his scientific thought to assert that in all the extensive
indeed infinite activities that take place in the world there is no
connection between the doer and the deed or the doer and his purpose.

Once we assume that the wondrous system of the universe has been created
by an infinite knowledge and power, we cannot believe that the Creator
should place in the very heart of the universe and all its creatures,
whether animate or inanimate, laws that regulate their functioning, and
equip each of those creatures with the means necessary for subsistence,
without pursuing a definite goal in all this planning and ordering.

A society composed of believers in the unity of God, recognizing Him to
possess all forms of perfection, also accept without equivocation that
the order of the world has a purpose.

How can one simultaneously bear witness to the infinite knowledge and
the eternal power and wisdom of the Creator and deny that all the
activity of that sublime being has an ultimate goal?

It is inconceivable that we should assert that the seed of purpose has
been sown in the smallest of our bodily organs and on the other hand
claim that the destination of man as a totality is emptiness and
aimlessness.

Beginning with the moment that his sperm is formed, man cannot be
conceived of as a being that is left to its own devices, to follow the
various stages of growth simply in accordance with natural instinct. It
is also not sufficient if out of all the concerns that are necessary for
him he contents himself only with assuring the means of existence.

\* \* \* \* \*

Generally speaking, the summons of all divine religions are based on the
responsibility and accountability of man. The prophets and messengers of
God have always declared, in the categorical manner that is peculiar to
them, that in the vast, indeed infinite, world which lies before man,
all of his deeds are subject to an accounting.

Accordingly, they have emphatically exhorted those who have accepted
their message to prepare themselves for the great event which will take
place throughout creation, causing it to enter a new stage, be submitted
to a new order and take on a new life.

They have further commanded their followers to make use of their
potentialities for growth, development and change in order to let all
dimensions of their existence flourish and to prosper and attain
salvation. They have warned them against doing anything which would earn
them misery and wretchedness in the hereafter and cause them to burn in
the fire of eternal regret.

With his own hand, man sows in this life the seed of his life in the
hereafter; he determines himself the fate that will be his in the next
world. To express it differently, his eternal life is formed from the
materials he himself provides in advance.

Imagine a skilful painter who spends a great deal of time in creating a
true work of art and then destroys it. Is it possible to regard such a
person as rationally sound? There can be no doubt that no intelligent
person would do such a thing.

Can the purpose behind the creation of the vast and magnificent scheme
of being, woven together with such consummate skill, or the creation of
man with all his restless faculties and powers, be the restricted,
confined life of this world, with all the contradictions it contains? Is
it the destiny of man to struggle hopelessly in a whirlpool of fantasy
and blind imaginings, to be the captive of false criteria of his own
fashioning, and then to be scattered like a handful of dust particles in
the infinitude of space once death closes the book on his life?

If this were to be the case, would it not make the Creator resemble that
hypothetical artist, nihilistic and purposeless? Would it not be quite
incompatible with the knowledge and wise power of that aware and
creative Being the light of whose far-reaching purposiveness is manifest
in the inner and outer aspect of every atom of creation?

Were the divine wisdom to be thus drastically reduced, it could no
longer be a broad river irrigating the whole plain of existence.

The caravan of being is bound, in the course of its journeying towards
perfection, ultimately to reach absolute perfection, and we, too, whose
source of being is God, will also return to that ultimate truth.

In the general order of the universe the coming of resurrection has a
certain natural inevitability. Just as darkness brings light and justice
emerges from oppression and injustice, so too the life of this world is
succeeded by resurrection. If we deny this truth, we are in effect
belittling the exact and precisely calculated ordinances that rule over
creation, as well as the vast expanse of nature and the world which is
too infinite and complex for our thought and vision to encompass. In
addition, we are forgetting the principle of advance towards perfection
that can be deduced from the careful observation of creation and the
motion of all parts of the universe.

How can we accept on the one hand that this principle prevails over the
entire system of creation, from the smallest particles of the atom to
the huge and awe-inspiring heavenly bodies, and suppose on the other
hand that the final result of the operation of this principle will be
obliteration and utter non-being?

If this be our concept of the order of the universe, it will be
incompatible with infinitude of creation and the countless phenomena
that it contains. Wisdom and intelligence will be unable to reconcile
with the wisdom of God, that infinite essence, the great planner of
creation, the choice of this transient, material life as an ultimate
goal.

Apart from the relative and transitional goals that can be observed
throughout the system of the universe, there is a point of termination
for all things, which the Qur'an describes as eternity and everlasting
life.

***“Whatever exists in the heavens and the earth belongs to God, and to
Him is the return of all things.*****” (3:109)**

***“Whatever exists in the heavens and on the earth belongs to God, and
to Him do all affairs revert and return.*****” (42:53)**

The Maker has created the sublime order of being with limitless power
and wisdom; He has brought into being countless creatures throughout the
expanse of the world; and from among them He has chosen man as the
supreme product of His workshop, even subordinating to his will all the
phenomena of creation. If this Maker were then to decree that the whole
existence of man should come to an end with his death, He would render
fruitless and meaningless the very foundation for the existence of the
world and the presence in it of so noble a creature as man.

However, based on the principle of growth towards perfection, the
attainment of everlasting life represents the last stage of perfection.
Otherwise, what growth would it be that after traversing a whole series
of motions and changes the final destiny of all beings should be
annihilation? For what is implied by the principle is progress and
advancement, not change and development leading to nothing. Even a
cyclical concept of motion and change would be meaningless, because it
too would lack a final outcome and goal.

Apart from all this, human knowledge and science exclude the possibility
of absolute annihilation for any phenomenon whatsoever; given the
imperishability of matter and energy, the material particles that make
up this world cannot be destroyed within the context of the present
order of things.

All things will attain the perfection they seek when another order,
based in immortality and eternity, comes to prevail over the scattered
elements of this world, irrespective of whether the universal movement
towards perfection takes place in the outer form of things or in their
essence and content.

This comprehensive process of change, this permanent motion, becomes
rationally acceptable and capable of being correctly understood only
when it has a direction and an aim toward which it advances.

With its regular and precisely calculated motion, the entirety of the
universe is moving forward to its final maturity i.e., resurrection just
like a child advancing to the higher stage of development that maturity
represents. In short, the universal and innate progress of all things
from defectiveness to a series of relative perfection has as its aim
absolute perfection, just as the Qur'an declares:

***“To Him you will return”*** **(10:4)**.

Thus not only does the wheel of material progress never stop, and the
entirety of the universe never cease advancing. At the same time, man's
inner and spiritual progress and his lofty ideals cannot be completed
under the conditions of his present existence. It is in fact the ending
of the present order of things that brings about the beginning of his
eternal life and the conditions that are required for him to attain
lofty degree and sublime station. Freed from all kinds of material
impurity, he discovers for himself a realm overflowing with both
material and spiritual pleasure; it is there that his faith and deeds
come to bear fruit, and everyone is requited for his convictions and
acts.

Thus the Qur'an says*:* ***“We did not create the heavens and the earth
and all they contain in vain and for no purpose”*** **(28:27)**.

Those who in all states standing, sitting, or lying remember God and
reflect constantly on the creation of the heavens and the earth, and
say,

***“O Creator, you did not create this magnificent universe in vain; You
are pure and exalted; preserve us from hellfire through Your grace.”***
**(3:191)**.

***“We did not create as a game the heavens and the earth and all they
contain; We created them in justice and in accordance with wisdom, but
most men know not”*** **(44:38-39).**

The one who is convinced of the far-reaching wisdom of God knows that in
this vast arena where all things are uniquely submitted to His
pre-eternal power nothing is left to its own devices or lacks fixed,
defined content. He knows that the order of the world in nurtured by
perfect wisdom and justice and that all the phenomena it contains are
constantly changing and advancing in accordance with an orderly,
harmonious, and ineluctable pattern.

Were rebellion and the violation of law to be the principle governing
the universe, were the foundation of all existent things to be error,
there would be no sign of harmony or orderliness in the world, and in
fact we would be obliged to condemn the whole world to non-existence.

The believer in God's wisdom knows that he possesses himself the means
of cultivating the inner world that will last unto eternity; he can
either build and cultivate his future life, or set it ablaze and turn it
into a ruin.

So if man has such a concept of the universe, he will never imagine that
all dimensions of human existence are annihilated once this life comes
to an end. He understands that the present order of things continues in
a profound sense, in a form that is both appropriate and glorious, and
that it is within that transformed order of things that his thirst for
exalted values and ideals may be finally quenched.

The infinite essence of God is perfect in every respect; lack and need
cannot assail His sacred being. It is, on the contrary, created things
that stand in need of Him. God bestows the blessings of life, together
with all powers and faculties, on man, and it is but natural that the
final outcome of His creation should revert to Him. Thus the Qur'an
says:

***“O mankind, you stand in need of God; it is only His unique essence
that is absolutely free of all need”*** **(35:15)**.

\* \* \* \* \*

God's wisdom thus necessitates that on a certain day men should be
called to account for their deeds. The Qur'an promises that such a day
will come:

***“Of a certainty, God will gather all His creatures on the day of
resurrection, all His deeds are inspired by knowledge and wisdom”***
**(15:25)**.

The ultimate perfection of which man is truly worthy is not attainable
in the sphere of this world. His growth towards perfection continues
until in the afterlife he reaches his ultimate aim and desire, which is
the attainment of union with the sublime origin of all being.

Men will come to meet their Creator in a way determined by their deeds,
characteristics, and their conduct in this world. This is true both of
the pure and the fortunate and of the wretched whose hearts are
blackened with sin. For all creatures must inevitably submit to the
irresistible will of God and the unfailing norms He has established;
willingly or not, they return to Him.

However, the way in which they meet God is determined by their conduct
while in this world and the attributes they have acquired Once the deeds
of men reach their conclusion, the results of their acts are revealed
and become apparent. The quality of men's meeting with God depends,
then, on the mode of behavior that has distinguished and characterized
them in this world.

Thus the Qur'an proclaims:

***“O man! To the degree that you strive to obey God you will in the end
meet your Creator”*** **(84:6)**.

***“Your ending will be with God Almighty”*** **(53:42)**.

***“He is God Whose might and power are supreme over His servants. He
sends angels as guards to watch over you, so that when the time for the
death of one among you arrives Our messengers drive him forth. They show
no lassitude in taking your soul. Then you will return to the Lord of
the Universe Who is in reality the master of His servants. Be aware that
judgement over mankind belongs to God, and He is swifter than anyone in
calling to account”*** **(6:61-62).**

As for those black-hearted ones who are destined for hellfire, they too
come face to face with the Most Sacred Essence of God. However, God does
not look upon them with favor and mercy, and they are deprived of His
favor. The Qur'an says:

***“There shall be no share for them on the day of resurrection: God
will not speak to them or look in their direction”*** **(3:77)**.

***“The faces of one group of men will be luminous and smiling on the
day when they meet God, while the faces of another group will be as if
covered with dust: mired in shame, these will be the unbelievers, evil
in conduct”*** **(80:38-42).**

Man possesses lofty religious and moral instincts that draw him to God.
Under the influence of these instincts he will come to believe in God
and desire to cross the boundaries which imprison him throughout his
material life. Accordingly, he will eagerly and in a spirit of high
aspiration renounce the outer, material life of this world for the sake
of great goals and valuable ideals.

Such a transformation in his outlook is made possible by the fact that
an eternal ideal wells up from his being and that he possesses lofty
instincts which are related to eternity. Those instincts draw him in the
direction of eternity so that ultimately he enters his true realm. All
of this means that there is innate within man the capacity for life
everlasting.

The deeds and conduct of man are like a seed from which eternal life
grows, a seed that can flourish and develop only in a life of eternal
bliss. The seeds that evildoers plant in this world also earn them a
form of eternal life, one in which they reap the fruits of their evil.

\`Ali b. Abi Talib, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon him,
remarked in this connection: “The world is a place of passage and the
hereafter a place of abode.” (*Nahj al Balaghah,* Sermon 203)

It is in truth the hereafter that gives meaning to the life of this
world.


