Lesson Four: Resurrection, a Manifestation of Divine Justice
============================================================

The question of divine justice a question which has numerous dimensions
must be raised at this point.

We observe that in this world the good and evil deeds of men are not
subject to any final accounting. Criminals and oppressive rulers, who
with their claim to absolute sovereignty encroach on men's lives and
their freedom, may enjoy opulence and luxury until the end of their
lives.

They shun no action that their polluted minds inspire in them, but they
are not caught in the firm grasp of justice and law, and they do not
suffer the natural consequences of their deeds. There is no power or
authority to prevent their oppression, to stop their encroachment on the
rights of others, or to restrict the scope of their power to their own
private affairs.

In the end both the oppressor and the oppressed, the one polluted with
sin, and the wise one who strives to gain mastery over his passionate
instincts and acquire virtue, who attains abundant spirituality through
the admixture of piety to his conduct all will close their eyes on the
world. It is true that religion forbids all forms of submission to
unbelieving rulers and the acceptance of the tyrannical edicts put forth
by oppressive governments, and that it regards resistance to all kinds
of aggression as a necessary dictate of religion and life.

Nonetheless, confrontation with oppressors does not always yield a
positive result, and in the course of the struggle people may be
trampled by the power of the oppressors and lose their lives. Were the
file to be closed in this world on the deeds of the good and the evil so
that they were buried for ever in the cemetery of nothingness, what
would become of the infinite justice, wisdom, and mercy that God
cherishes for His servants God, the traces of whose justice and wisdom
are manifest throughout His creation?

If we accept that God has created an environment in which numerous
evildoers and oppressors are able to continue on their chosen path until
the last moment of their lives, without recognizing any limit on their
behavior, to stoop to any vile act in order to gain power and gratify
their desires if we accept that this is possible without their being
called to account, and that the oppressed continue to writhe beneath the
lash of injustice and deprivation until their last gasp can all of this
be called anything but oppression and injustice?

Now we know that nobody who has the slightest notion of love and justice
would consent to such a state of affairs; how then could the most Sacred
Essence of God, from Whose being infinite pity, love, and justice flow
forth, accept such injustice and place on it His seal of approval? How
would the creative mind of man, the most sublime aspect of his being
that guides him to knowledge of himself and the universe judge this
matter?

It is true that God has not directly permitted the commission of a
cruelty against a given person. However, the fact that a certain
collectivity grants some criminal oppressor the freedom and power to act
as he wills and in the end exempts him from all punishment is in itself
a clear form of injustice. The link between God's justice and the need
for a precise accounting of men's deeds thus makes irrefutably clear the
necessity for resurrection.

In addition, certain crimes and evils are so extensive in their effects
that they cannot be adequately punished in this world, with its limited
time-span. Crimes are sometimes so grave that the punishment inflicted
by men is not equal to the task of imposing on the criminal the
punishment he deserves.

The criminal plunderer for whom the world is nothing but a carcass on
which to feed kills and consumes at will; his hands are stained with the
blood of hundreds or thousands of people whom he drags into the
slaughterhouse. He is so sunk in the mire of vice and injustice that he
is incapable of learning lessons from the past or thinking of a better
and more enlightened future. If despite all his crimes his soul were to
be taken in just the same way as that of one of his victims, the
punishment involved would be unjust and grossly unequal, for he would
then have been punished simply for one of his victims and all his other
crimes would remain unpunished.

Many crimes are, then, beyond the scope of worldly retribution. If we
wish to analyze matters more logically, we must look further, beyond
this world. There is also the consideration that no authority in this
world has the power to restore to men all the rights which have been
violated.

Similarly, the world does not have the capacity to reward virtue in a
fitting and complete manner. When we attempt to assess the value of the
unrelenting efforts that the pure and the virtuous expend in this world,
which is full of trouble and pain, we realize that the rewards available
here are very slight.

What reward commensurate with the value of his efforts can be given in
this world to one who has benefited millions of people with his treasury
of knowledge and learning or sincere and devoted service?

How and where in this world will one be rewarded who devotes all his
life to the worship of God and the support of His servants, whose
services extend in manifold ways to whole societies, and who ultimately
gives up his life for the sake of divine goals?

No life remains for him in this world to enable him to reap the fruits
of his devotion and self-sacrifice. The temporal limitation imposed on
life in this world does not even permit the pious to receive their
reward. The Qur'an says.

***“Shall We make those who believe in God and do good deeds like those
who work corruption on earth? Shall We requite pious and God fearing men
like the sinful and the doers of evil? Do those who have committed foul
and sinful deeds imagine that We will grant them a rank like that of
those who believe in God and do good works, so that they wilt be alike
in death and in life? Theirs is a false and ignorant notion. God has
created the heavens and the earth in justice, and ultimately every soul
shall receive the requital for its deeds, without any injustice”***
**(45:21-22).**

From the day that he first steps into this abode of dust until the
moment the earth draws him into its embrace, man has to struggle with
hardships, difficulties, problems and misfortunes.

The Commander of the Faithful, \`Ali, peace be upon him, depicts this
transient, pain-filled world as follows:

“The world is a dwelling the inhabitants of which are overcome by sorrow
and pain. It is a world well-known for its deceit and trickery and
lacking in all stability. Those who enter this dwelling will never enjoy
safety or tranquillity. Its circumstances are constantly changing, and
its pleasures are reprehensible and blameworthy. Repose and tranquillity
are nowhere to be found in it. Every instant it fires the arrow of
disaster at man, before finally dispatching him to the jaws of death and
destruction.”

Can it be believed that such a world, replete with pain, misfortune and
hardship, should be the final aim and goal of creation? That a God all
of Whose actions are based on excellence and order and the signs of
Whose justice and wisdom are manifest throughout creation, should have
created man only for the sake of such a world?

Comprehensive and Universal Order
---------------------------------

It must be remarked at this point that the order we see in the world is
a divine order, one that includes all things in its scope. All created
objects in the universe, whether large or small, ranging from the minute
particles of the atom to the countless planets that are scattered
throughout space, are created and take form from the justice that rules
the whole scheme of creation. This vast system of being does not escape
the direct influence of the rule of justice for a single instant; this
is a reality that can be deduced from all the phenomena in the world of
creation.

Should the component parts of this system deviate even so slightly from
their prescribed orbit, the necessary principles on which the order, of
the universe is based would collapse, resulting in its destruction.

Despite all his remarkable talents, man forms a part of this universal
order; he cannot be regarded as exempt from its comprehensive and
universal rules. The only factor that sets him apart is his possession
of freedom which enables him to be creative and inventive; it opens up
before him a path for attaining his goals and purposes. It is indeed a
source of pride for him that alone among all the creatures of the
phenomenal world he is able thanks to this unique quality and the
potentialities it yields to tame his destructive impulses and reconcile
them with his constructive activities. By creating man free, God has
demonstrated both the underlying order of the universe and the changes
that are brought about in that order by the disobedience of man.

Were man to be directed ineluctably toward the acquisition of spiritual
riches and the path leading to happiness, were a deterministic power to
conduct him toward lofty values, there would be no pride in this for
man. We must therefore accept that by receiving the gift of freedom and
will from God, man must one day stand in the court of God's justice to
be judged there according to the universal principle of all creation
justice. It cannot be believed that man should be exempt from the
justice of the Creator that prevails throughout the universe, thus
becoming an element of disharmony.

If we take into consideration on the hand the functioning of the
principle of justice throughout the entire scheme of being and on the
other hand the fact that many rewards and punishments cannot be
dispensed in this world, it becomes obvious that the nature of men's
deeds and accomplishments must be subjected to examination in another
world and at an appropriate time. The proof lies in the deduction that
can be made from man's essential nature (as a being possessing freedom),
for all the dimensions of his being, all his ideals and fundamental
needs, will come to fruition in the hereafter.

Thus we can understand well that God Who has no need for the creation of
man will never destroy or obliterate our being before it attains
perfection. This is unthinkable, and no intelligent person would consent
to such an erroneous notion.

The Requital of Deeds
---------------------

It is obvious that the deeds of all sinners cannot be fully requited in
this world. Nonetheless, some punishments do occur in this world, as can
be seen from those pages of history which record the disastrous fate of
certain wrongdoers. Indeed we ourselves witness time and again the
bitter and painful fates they undergo; after suffering torment and
humiliation, they go to their deaths in utter disgrace, although no one
had been able to predict such an inauspicious end for those powerful
tyrants.

The existence of such a remarkable linkage between corrupt action and
ultimate disgrace cannot be ascribed to simple coincidence; it must on
the contrary be regarded as an instance of requital taking place in this
world. The Qur'an says:

***“God will cause them to taste humiliation in this world, and the
torment of the hereafter will be much greater, if they but knew*****”
(39:26)**.

Such chastisements sometimes function as alarm bells, as warnings to the
sinners, encouraging them to come to their senses, to change direction
and reform themselves before it is too late. These warnings remind them
that good and evil are the two pans of the balance in which our deeds
will be weighed, and that no abomination or moral corruption will go
unpunished, in just the same way that no good deed will remain
unrewarded.

A Western philosopher writes:

“The world resembles a multiplication table; however much you manipulate
it, it retains its structure and shape and always yields the same
answer. Whatever method we may choose to solve a mathematical problem,
the figures that result will be the same. Nature silently but
ineluctably reveals all secrets: it punishes every crime, rewards every
virtue, and compensates for every act of oppression.

“What we call retribution is a universal need; it causes the whole to
appear from within its constituent part. If we see smoke, we are certain
that it has arisen from fire, and if we see a hand or a foot we have no
doubt that it is attached to a body.

“Every act carries its own requital. To put it differently, in
accordance with the law of which we have spoken, every act completes
itself in two ways: first by way of action and reaction within the thing
itself, in its objective nature, and then with respect to its outer
qualities. What we mean by outer qualities is none other than what is
commonly called retribution and punishment. The retribution that takes
place in the thing itself can be seen with the eye; the retribution that
takes place in the external quality of a thing is visible only to the
intelligence. This second form of retribution is inseparable from the
thing itself, and may not become apparent for some time.

“The consequences peculiar to a given sin may appear years after the sin
was committed, but they will definitely occur because they are
inherently attached to it, like the branch of tree to its trunk.
Alternatively we may say that both crime and punishment are the branches
of a single trunk. Retribution is the fruit that suddenly emerges from
the blossom of the pleasure that the sin yields.” (*Falsafa i Ijtima'i,*
p. 378)

\* \* \* \* \*

The appearance of the consequences of evil acts is a clear sign that God
Almighty does not accept corruption and wrongdoing, and that all sinners
will receive their due punishment in the next world.

In addition, the positive educational effect of requital should not be
underestimated, both on the individual and on society. The whiplash of
punishment should from this point of view be regarded as a form of mercy
and divine favor, leading to men's awakening and their aspiring to
purity. It is a form of compensation the payment of which earns men
abundant benefit.

In order for His justice to reach the fullest extent possible, God has
freed man of the shadow of determinism and granted him the divine trust
which even the mountains had been unwilling to bear. Ascent to the lofty
station of true humanity is possible only through effort and striving,
by passing through the furnace of trial. The Qur'an says*:*

***“Every man is a pledge for his own deeds”*** **(74: 38).**

What is meant by this is that whatever appears in this world in the form
of a sin or misdeed takes on in the hereafter the shape of the
implementation of justice and the punishment of the transgressor. It is
belief in the pre-eternal source of all existence and His all-embracing
justice that impels man to act correctly and with justice himself.

Imam al-Sajjad, upon whom be peace, made this supplication to God:

“O God, I know that there is no cruelty or oppression in any of Your
decrees or commands, and that You do not hasten to punish anyone, for
only he hastens to perform an act who fears he may miss the opportunity,
and only he who is weak and impotent feels the need to commit oppression
and cruelty. You, O Creator, are pure and exalted above both these
defects.”

A theologian says:

“It is better for all mankind that they spend their lives in the service
of the One God, for the spirit that serves God is the legitimate
commander of the body, and the mind that serves God brings under control
the passions and unruly emotions of man. I ask therefore what justice
can possibly exist in the person who does not serve God. It can plainly
be seen that such an individual does not rule over his bodily form by
means of his spirit, nor over his emotions by means of his intellect.”

For those who do serve God the ideal life is that which comes after
death. As the Qur'an says*:*

***“The hereafter is the abode of true life, and the life of this world
is but play and amusement”*** **(29:64)**.

Those devoted to God not only do not fear death, but even wait longingly
for the moment that the angel of death shall whisper melodiously in
their ear*:*

 ***“O sacred spirit, return to your Creator, satisfied and
well-pleased”*** **(89:27-28).**

These verses of the Qur'an are also relevant:

***“On that day your journeying shall bring you to the presence of your
Lord.*****” (75:12).**

***“Your return will be to your Lord”*** **(96:8).**

***“There is none in the heavens and the earth but will come before God
as His servant. He is aware of the number of all His creation, and they
shall all individually be present before Him on the day of
resurrection.”*** **(19:93-95).**

In the other realm happiness will be the essential goal of all beings,
and pleasures will be available for them that we cannot even imagine.

In short, this life full of confusion and oppression is only a small
part of the totality of life. One group will earn as the final result of
its deeds permanent abode in the propinquity of God's mercy, while
another group will find itself condemned to be the neighbors of Iblis in
eternal torment. Are these two destinies in any way equal the misery of
hellfire and the blessing of paradise? It is up to man to choose freely
between them.


