Lesson Six: Scientific Indications of Resurrection
==================================================

One of the valuable benefits that have been derived from the ceaseless
progress of experimental science is that it has proven the possibility
of the man's restoration to life. The advancement of human knowledge
has, in fact, opened up a very interesting area of exploration in this
respect, placing the matter in a new light and making it possible to
examine it with precision for the very first time.

This achievement contributes significantly to an improved understanding
of the topic, and it appears, moreover, that scientific investigations
of the matter are advancing toward still more highly developed theories.
The broader the scope of science becomes, the fewer ambiguities and
obscurities will remain in this area.

When early materialist scholars discussed the question of resurrection,
they regarded a return to life as impossible, and were therefore unable
to treat resurrection as a topic worthy of scientific discussion.

The first change that occurred as a result of continuing scientific
investigations of the matter was brought about by Lavoisier, the
celebrated French scholar and founder of modern chemistry. He refuted
previous theories and brought their dominance to an end, because in the
course of the researches to which he devoted the major part of his life
he reached the conclusion that the total quantity and mass of matter in
the world are stable, subject to neither decrease nor increase.

The discovery of radioactivity and the transformation of matter into
energy, the second important advance that was achieved in this area,
caused Lavoisier's law to be modified, but it has retained its validity
as far as the permanence of matter and energy is concerned.

Despite the chemical action and reaction which take place in the matter
of which the world is composed, causing it to change its form and shape,
no element of matter is ever buried in the cemetery of annihilation.
What we see and perceive is a collection of various beings possessing
mutable qualities. Thus the theory of the indestructibility of being
came to replace the previous law and to explain fully all the changes
and transformations that take place in matter.

A drop of water that falls on the ground and is absorbed; the smoke of a
cigarette that rises in the air; the various fuels that are consumed by
industrial machinery; the flame that arises from burning dry wood; the
candle that burns, scattering its particles in the air none of this is
utterly lost and destroyed. If we had the means of reassembling their
component parts we would obtain the same original materials, without the
slightest decrease. It is only our superficial way of viewing things,
our limited and inadequate way of thinking, that makes us imagine all
these things disappear.

\* \* \* \* \*

Man's body is formed of clay, and after passing beneath the wheels of
change and transformation it changes back into clay; i.e., it returns to
its original form. This is because the body carries within it
receptivity to change within it, but its existential core never tends to
non-being as a result of these changes. It loses only the particular
nature of its composition, like all other bodies, without ever
sacrificing anything of its essence.

Similarly, the dead and lifeless form of man is transformed into clay,
through the working of internal and external factors; it turns this way
and that, each time assuming a new form. For example, in the course of
time, a plant may grow from the soil where a person is buried and be
eaten by an animal, contributing to its growth. Thus variety has been
introduced into the matter of which man's body is composed, but the
substance and content of his body remain firm and indestructible
throughout all the changes that may occur.

The different forms taken on by our energy, good and bad deeds are
likewise imbued with stability and permanence; they are preserved in the
archives of the universe as the determining factor in our ultimate fate,
whether it be good or evil, eternal happiness or permanent torment. We
are obliged to submit to the consequences of our deeds.

The efforts of researchers to capture the sound waves emitted by men of
the past have enjoyed some success; to a limited degree and with the aid
of special equipment they have been able to recapture the sound waves
emitted by the makers of tools, imprinted on the surface of those tools
by the radiation of their hands.

These scientific accomplishments are in themselves an indication of the
reality of resurrection; they provide a method which joined together
with reflection may permit us to understand resurrection and prove it
scientifically.

Quite apart from all the foregoing, we may ask why God should not be
able to recreate the form of man which came into being out of scattered
particles of clay and was then again turned into earth. The Qur'an makes
repeated reference to this matter, saying for example:

***“We created you from earth and return you to earth, and then bring
you forth from it once more”*** **(20:55)**.

In this verse, our attention is drawn to the creative power of the
Maker. Through the presentation of the past and future of man in this
world and the hereafter in a single panorama, solace and assurance are
given to man's unquiet and skeptical soul. The thought of man being
swallowed up in death is shown to be irrational, and to speak of the
changes and transformations that man undergoes as aimless is
demonstrated to be absurd.

Life in the narrow sphere of this world is too petty to represent the
ultimate aim of creation. If we take into consideration the total
picture of creation, we will see that this petty realm taken in
isolation is unworthy of the lofty origins from which it sprang.

Addressing those incredulous people who imagine that the body of man
dissolves and disappears as a result of chemical actions and reactions
within the soil and that it cannot be restored to life, the Qur'an
says*:*

***“The unbelievers say: \`Is this not a strange thing that we should be
brought back after dying and turning to dust? Such a return is
impossible.' But We are fully aware of what the earth takes from them,
and it is We Who possess the Preserved Tablet”*** **(50:2-4).**

This verse refers, then, to a group of unbelievers who deny the
resurrection of the dead. It reminds them that God knows full well where
the elements are that once made up their bodies before being dispersed
and returned to the storehouse of nature. He will reassemble those
elements on the plain of resurrection, thus reconstructing the body in a
way the unbelievers thought impossible. This reconstruction will follow
entirely the structure and contents of the body as it previously existed
and be based entirely upon it.

The Persuasive Logic of the Qur'an
----------------------------------

When the Prophet of Islam, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, expounded the topic of resurrection to the pagan Arabs, a
Bedouin by the name of Ubayy b. Khalaf picked up a decayed bone and set
out for Medina to visit the Prophet. In the hope of refuting the
arguments of the Prophet and the logic of the Qur'an on which they were
based, he raised up the bone, as if it were a valuable and convincing
piece of evidence, and crumbled it to dust, scattering the pieces in the
air. Then, he addressed to the Prophet these crude, unadorned words,
inspired by his rebelliousness and ignorance:

“Who will restore to life the scattered particles of this rotten bone?”

He believed that he would thus be able to refute the arguments of the
Prophet and to destroy the belief of others in resurrection of the dead.
His ignorant mode of thought prevented him from having any correct
notion of the creation of being so that he imagined that the scattered
particles of a decayed bone could not possibly be brought back to life.
He obstinately maintained that the reassembling of the countless
particles of the body was unacceptable to man's reason.

The Qur'an replied with this convincing argument based on persuasive
logic:

***“(O Messenger,) say: \`God Who first brought them to life will
restore them to life. He has knowledge of all His creation.' ... Is the
Creator Who brought into being the heavens and the earth incapable of
creating the like thereof? Certainly He is the Creator and
All-Knowing”*** **(36:79, 81).**

\* \* \* \* \*

The Qur'an invites man to contemplate, the whole vast structure of
creation, together with the innumerable phenomena and minutiae it
contains, using his wisdom and intelligence which are his means for
recognizing the principles underlying the universe. Such reflection will
enable him to realize that the restoration of life to man through
resurrection is not more difficult than the initial creation out of a
mass of different materials that were compounded together.

It is thought and reflection that lead to correct comprehension; they
form the method by which man must acquire a true understanding of the
world in which he lives and they confirm, in a logical and profound
fashion, the concepts he holds. The Qur'an stresses the importance of
resurrection as follows:

***“Were We weakened by bringing forth creation the first time that We
should now be incapable of restoring it to life through
resurrection?”*** **(50:15)**.

The Qur'an wishes man to realize that although the restoration of life
to the dead appears impossible when measured against the capacities of
man, it is something straightforward when measured against the infinite
power of God Who first inhaled life in the inanimate form of man.

Man may well ask himself how the breath of life may be inhaled anew into
the particles of his body once they have been scattered in the recesses
of the earth, and how lifeless matter may be brought back to life
although its constituent elements have been dispersed.

But that dispersal does not result in their permanent alienation from
each other, and the human intellect can well understand that the
infinite and eternal creative power of God has no difficulty in
compounding anew those scattered elements so that they begin pulsating
with life anew.

The Noble Qur'an reminds man of God's unlimited ability to restore all
the minute qualities and precise details of man's limbs with the
following words:

***“Does man imagine that We are not capable of reassembling his decayed
bones? We are able even to restore his fingers to their previous
state”*** **(75:34)**.

This verse stresses that God is able not only to reassemble the bones of
the dead and restore them to life but even, through His boundless and
incomparable might, to gather together the scattered particles of their
beings and resurrect them.

When the power of God begins to restore to life the order of man's
being, in order to implement the ultimate purpose of all being, His
infinite power encounters no difficulty in bringing back even the
detailed physical characteristics of man, in just the same way that He
effortlessly caused the rays of life first to shine on the vast and as
yet inanimate plain of being.

In the verse that we have just cited God selects for mention out of all
the marvels of man's composition the lines in his fingers as an example
of His power. This is significant, because it is possible that
individuals should roughly resemble each other with respect to their
other limbs, but in the whole world two people cannot be found with
exactly identical fingerprints.

Sensory and empirical awareness teaches us that throughout all the
changes we undergo in life and all the quantitative transformations to
which our bodily composition is subject, the lines in our fingers remain
stable and unchanging. This is completely at variance with the
continuous changes that occur in our bodily condition.

If the skin on our hands is removed, for some accidental reason, a new
skin grows in its place with exactly the same features. Those who
specialize in these matters know that fingerprints are therefore the
best means for establishing the identity of a person. Throughout the
world police have recourse to fingerprints as the surest way for
establishing the identity of the author of a crime. This unique quality
of fingerprints, first indicated in the Qur'an, remained otherwise
unknown until discovered in 1884 by some British scientists.

Anyone whose mind is oriented to truth and reality will understand,
without any hesitation, that the powerful hand of God is at work in the
appearance of all these wonders; no intelligent person can accept that
some blind mechanical force should be capable of creating the precise
and miraculous phenomenon that is man.


