Lesson Eight: The Autonomy of the Spirit  as a Proof of Resurrection
====================================================================

The existence and independence of the spirit can also be adduced as a
decisive and convincing proof of life after death. Numerous theories
have been put forward by scholars concerning the riddle of the spirit,
and the greater becomes the scope of philosophical inquiry and the more
carefully use is made of human knowledge, the clearer and more
convincing become the proofs for the existence of the spirit and its
independence from the body. Of course, we cannot be completely
successful in clarifying the quiddity of the spirit, nor can we can lift
the veil from the numerous complex mysteries of this eternal entity.

For this reason, the Qur'an depicts the essence of the spirit as an
unknowable truth the complete cognition of which lies beyond man's
reach. When the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
was asked concerning the essence of the spirit, the Qur'an told him to
answer as follows:

***“O Prophet, they ask you concerning the nature of the spirit. Tell
them: The spirit is an affair of God, and its essence is unknowable to
man. Whatever understanding of it has been given to you is extremely
slight”*** **(17:85)**.

Fourteen centuries have passed since the Qur'an gave this answer. The
scope of human knowledge is today very much greater than it was in the
time of the Prophet, but very little has been added to this aspect of
man's awareness. The essential nature of the spirit still eludes man's
grasp, and nobody has been able to clarify it. Just as the Qur'an
proclaimed, it remains veiled in a halo of obscurity, and it is highly
probable that it will always remain so.

\* \* \* \* \*

Henri Bergson, the well-known philosopher, says:

“We can conform to Plato and offer a definition of the spirit that is
antecedent to experience. We can say that the spirit, being simple, is
indivisible, and that because it is indivisible it is also
incorruptible, and that it is therefore eternal in its essence.

“For two millennia men have reflected on this concept of Plato, but it
has not advanced our knowledge of the spirit in the slightest.” (*Du
Sarchishma-yi Akhlaq va Din,* pp. 388-389)

Dr. Chesser, an English scholar, writes:

“Some people say that the mechanical operations of our brain form the
ego or the self. Others say that it consists of the brain with the
addition of a mysterious spark which leaves our bodies at the time of
death. As you know, the philosophers have reflected a great deal on the
spirit: its nature, its locus in the body, whether it is mortal or
eternal, but none of these questions has yet been solved, despite the
continuing of efforts of scholars.

“Recently many scholars have decided to study the matter from another
point of view by putting the whole question of the spirit aside as too
complex and obscure and studying instead the mind or the soul i.e., the
totality of man's feelings, beliefs and thoughts.” (*Rushd va Zindagi,*
p. 134)

Indeed, if one takes into consideration the fruitlessness of all efforts
undertaken for understanding the spirit, how can he believe that it
contains some mysterious property which compels our submission and
veneration?

The Noble Qur'an says the following, in the course of some of its verses
concerning the creation of man:

***“We created man out of pure earth, then We made him into a drop of
sperm and lodged him in a safe place. Then We made the sperm into
coagulated blood, the coagulated blood into a formless piece of flesh,
and the flesh into bones, and finally We clothed the bones in flesh.
Thus We brought forth a new creation. Glorified be the perfect power of
the Best of creators!”*** **(23:12-14).**

***“Then God completed the creation of man and inhaled in him of His own
spirit and appointed for you eyes, ears, and a heart. How little you men
give thanks”*** **(32:9)**.

***“When I complete the outer creation of man and breathe into him of My
own spirit, prostrate yourselves before him, o angels!”*** **(15:29)**.

These verses describe the successive stages of creation that succeed the
coming into being of the drop of sperm, the final result of which is a
perfected human body; they indicate that something more valuable and
significant is at issue than the creation of a mere corporeal form. They
indicate that the infusion of the spirit into man's bodily form
constitutes itself a “new creation,” which belongs to a category
different from the various stages of the evolution of man's bodily form,
each of which is necessarily accompanied by the traces and properties of
matter.

The spirit is a different essence, bearing no similarity to the things
created before it. Infused into man's bodily composition, this spirit
which God relates to Himself and is thus the closest of all things to
Him is independent of the body and separate from it, beyond the reach of
matter and all its attributes and properties.

Even the materialists despite all the differences of opinion and
ideology that separate them from the followers of religion do not go so
far as to deny the existence of something called the spirit. They regard
sciences such as psychology and psychiatry as valid, but part company
with the theologians and metaphysicians on the existence of a second
reality in man that subsists apart from the material body and
independently of it; this reality has a nature peculiar to itself and is
the source of thought and reflection in man.

This does not mean that body and spirit are two realities that are
separate from each other, in the sense of each expressing itself
completely independently of the other. They are two realities that are
connected to each other while being utterly different in their essences.

Beliefs of the Materialists
---------------------------

The thoughts of the materialists on this topic are based on the
assumption that a substance called the spirit does not exist
independently of matter. They insist that all the activities of the
brain are controlled by the laws of matter and result from physical
causes and chemical reactions of the brain cells and nerves.

Our nervous system at all times links our perceptions to a central
organ, the brain, and these perceptions in turn give rise to a single
and indivisible whole. The phenomena that we associate with the spirit
are nothing other than physico-chemical reactions.

When the brain cells are exhausted and the reciprocal influence of the
bodily organs comes to an end, so that the cells cease motion and
reproduction, nothing is left of the essence of man save a material
form. It is therefore impossible to accept any kind of spiritual
immortality or the existence of an autonomous, independent, supranatural
entity in man, for both the first appearance and the subsistence of the
“spirit” were caused by a spatially and temporally determined
connection.

Here the materialist and religious schools of thought part company
decisively.

\* \* \* \* \*

If we accept the claims of the materialists, man will be like a machine,
put together from different components and parts, and all traces of life
and thought in him terminate utterly once the reciprocal influence of
his material components comes to an end. Such an interpretation of the
matter fails to do justice either to the reality of the human spirit or
to that of man himself.

It is true that the body submits involuntarily to physiological law, but
this observable reality does not lead to the conclusion that man is in
his entirety chained to the laws of matter with the force of a
mathematical equation. There is certainly a close connection between the
phenomena of the spirit and the cells of the brain; without having at
its disposition a certain number of instruments and tools, the spirit
cannot undertake any activity at all in this world. The brain cells, the
nerves, and the chemical reactions of the brain, all count as the tools
of the spirit by means of which it accomplishes its activity.

It must be asked whether not only the spirit but also its manifestations
such as will, determination, perception and so forth, are realities
independent of matter, or are themselves entirely material, dependent
upon it in all conditions and circumstances.

By way of analogy it may be asked if we conduct a long-distance
conversation by means of the telephone, whether we are the real hearers
or the telephone receiver?

Is the telephone simply the instrument by means of which we hear the
sound-waves, or is it the true and actual hearer?

Matters are the same with respect to the brain. The brain cells are the
tool of the spirit, not its creator. All that the proofs put forward by
the materialists establish is that there is indeed a link between man's
perceptions and his brain cells, not that the brain itself is engaged in
perception. In any event, no theologian maintains that thought takes
place outside the sphere of the brain cells.

The effects and necessary attributes of matter must inevitably be found
in all material beings; it is unacceptable that the properties of matter
should be absent from any material entity. If therefore an entity is
lacking in the effects and properties of matter, and the effects and
properties it does possess do not coincide with those of matter, there
can be no doubt that entity in question is not material.

As an objective reality, man is the source of a series of distinctive
effects which inseparably accompany his objective existence. Certain of
the realities that prevail in human existence can be explained in terms
of material criteria, but others do not accord with the properties of
matter and cannot be weighed by its criteria.

Here we encounter the fact that in man, in addition to his material
composition, an entity exists that is separate from matter and superior
to it; it is the source of various forms of perception that belong to a
different category than matter.

In fact, each of the perceptions of man, together with its special
properties and attributes, is in itself a clear proof and indication of
the existence in man of an entity other than his corporeal composition.

If those perceptions were to be the effect of man's physical makeup, his
particular bodily composition, if perception and reflection, hearing and
seeing, were simply a function of his nerves, they should be explicable
in terms of the laws governing his nervous system and his brain cells.
However, they are not.

Let us assume that seeing is the formation of an image in the brain;
still the question arises of who sees and perceives, who is the author
of the act?

Again, if we assume that man is nothing other than a certain type of
material composition in a certain part of which an image has been formed
again we ask whether the one that sees and perceives is the totality of
the bodily composition or only that small sector of it in which the
image has been formed?

The totality of the material composition cannot see and perceive the
image that has been formed in a small part of the whole, and it is also
impossible for that part to see and perceive; can a material thing see
and perceive the images that are formed in the thing itself? Were it so,
a painting or a piece of paper would be able to see and perceive the
paintings that the painter has executed on them.

Although scientists have been able to establish empirically that there
is a link between perception and consciousness on the one hand and
chemical reactions in the brain on the other hand, the only conclusion
they can draw is that the nervous system and the brain play a decisive
role in the occurrence of perception and various psychological states.
The experiments these scientists carry out do not at all permit the
conclusion that the essence of the spirit is equivalent to the activity
of these instruments of perception or to physical and chemical effects.
Finally, proving that the link exists is in no way sufficient to
defining the distinctive states and properties of perception and
awareness.

To draw an analogy, the spirit is like the electric power required to
set a machine in motion. Whenever the power is cut off, the whole of the
machine comes face to face with a kind of death, even though its
individual components may be quite sound and unimpaired.

Similarly, when man dies the link between his spirit and his body is
severed, but the severance does not mean the destruction and death of
the spirit. If our telephone, radio or television stops working, we lose
our means of communication, and we no longer hear distant sounds or see
distant images. Those sounds and images exist everywhere, but we do not
see them or hear them; we become aware of them only when our means of
communication is provided by the telephone, radio or television.

Sounds and images subsist, then, independently and separately from the
instruments required for their perception. Likewise the spirit of man is
independent of the body while being linked to it, and it does not perish
with the death of the body.

The Particular Properties of Perception
---------------------------------------

We know that a basic difference separates the functioning of the brain
from that of the various parts of the body, all of which have in one
sense roughly similar functions. The kidneys, for example, are
compounded as a result of various physical and chemical activities;
their function is related entirely to the inner organs of man's body. By
contrast, the phenomena of the spirit relate to the external world that
lies outside our personal existence.

It is obvious that external world has no ingress to our personal
existence; it is on the contrary we who must attempt to comprehend it in
order to become aware of external existents, a task of which our brain
cells are incapable. Like other dimensions of our body, the brain cells
receive effects from the external world but they cannot gain awareness
of the nature of matters in the external world. Were that not the case,
we ought to be able to perceive the external world with our stomach and
lungs. The special nature of our perceptions tells us, then, that
another entity rules over our beings.

Let us raise another question at this point: who is it that judges the
images that are formed in our brain?

If we meet two people, one of them old and the other young, and images
of both of them are formed in our brain, we compare the two images and
decide which person is old and which is young.

Several factors are at issue in this decision. First, the seeing and
perceiving of the two images that are formed in the brain. Second, the
comparison of the two images and the identity of the person that makes
the comparison. With respect to this second point, it may be asked how
man acquires the power to compare if he consists of nothing more than a
series of bodily compounds. Third, the perception of the old man as
being more aged than the young man, which follows on the comparison of
the two images; here, the perceiver must also establish a relationship.

If man consisted exclusively of his bodily form and lacked any
non-material dimension, he would be totally unable to establish such a
relationship. For a relationship does not have any sensory shape or form
that can express itself as an image; we cannot possibly explain the
establishment of a relationship through recourse to the criteria of
matter.

The fourth issue is perceiving one of the two men as being older than
the other. Again we can say that if man consisted only of his physical
being, he would not be able to determine which of the two images that
have formed in his mind represented an older person.

When we distinguish truth from falsehood, when we appreciate beauty and
separate it from ugliness, we are dealing with matters that are external
to us and judging them in accordance with certain criteria. The
existence within us of a capacity to distinguish truth from falsehood,
right from wrong, to measure phenomena external to us by criteria of our
own, demonstrates in itself the independence of the spirit. Judgement
and discernment are beyond the capacity of the nervous system; they
derive exclusively from the operation of thought and the activity of the
mind, and cannot be explained in sensory terms.

The unseen light within our inner beings that permits us to distinguish
good from evil, beauty from ugliness, right from wrong, is an absolute
reality and is none other than our eternal spirit. All temporal
occurrences revolve around it, for it is itself an immutable and
indivisible pivot of all things.

One of the precious properties of man is his ability to perceive
universals, which permits him, after analyzing his experience and
sensory perceptions to deduce permanent, fixed and unchanging universals
from the particulars that he has observed.

With his sense of touch, for example, man can feel the weight of iron.
After repeating this sensory perception, he engages in analysis and
reaches the universal conclusion that iron is heavy.

It is thus that man deduces the universal laws and realities that exist
in all the particular instances, by analyzing the particulars and
abstracting them from their temporal and spatial contexts. These
universals form an important part of man's knowledge, for they are the
source for his conclusions and judgements.

Were we to regard man as consisting exclusively of his bodily form and
to deny the existence of an autonomous spirit, we could not explain the
knowledge of universals in any acceptable way, for we would confront the
problem of how the processes of analysis or abstraction to which man's
sensory experiences and perceptions are subjected take place.

How could the physical composition of our bodily form undertake the
tasks of abstraction and the deduction of universal rules from
particular instances?

If we regarded the deduction of universals from particulars as a
reactive function of matter, precisely how would it take place? How can
we depict, as a material process, the perception of a universal
principle?

When we perceive a universal principle, we are in fact perceiving an
objective reality that is free of all material, temporal and spatial
characteristics; it is the existential effect of an entity superior to
matter.

If despite all this, some people wish to insist on a materialistic
explanation of the matter, their explanation must count as unrealistic,
baseless and far removed from the truth.

The Unity of the Personality
----------------------------

Another matter which can help us to appreciate the autonomy of the
spirit is the unity of the human personality which covers the entirety
of man's life. There can be no doubt that man's knowledge of himself is
different from his knowledge of beings external to himself. His
knowledge of those beings occurs by means of a reflection of them being
traced in his mind; it is thus that we gain the kind of knowledge that
is known as “acquired knowledge.”

As for the knowledge that man gains of his own self, it does not come
about through the occurrence of an image in his mind; it is present with
him at all times and is inseparable from him, being known therefore as
“present knowledge.”

This constant presence, which is not subject to change or diminution,
and possesses stability and permanence in its ability to feel and gain
awareness, represents the clearest and most evidential form of human
knowledge.

The entity which is exempt from change and impermanence (these being the
attributes of all external reality), which controls and rules the
material body, which is not subject to biological determinism, which
expresses itself as this entity is one and the same from the first
stages of life until its last moments. Man enjoys permanence by virtue
of the permanence of this entity. Its ontological level is infinitely
higher than that of matter and material beings, for the unity of the
human personality is preserved throughout all the stages of change an
individual undergoes in his lifetime.

Can this unchanging entity in any way be ascribed to or regarded as
identical with the brain cells?

The contents of the brain cells completely change during the life of an
individual through the absorption of matter external to themselves and
the transformation of it into energy. New material takes the place of
material that dissolves. In fact, every living creature may be
re-created several times over in the course of his life as a result of
the ceaseless changes of his molecules and the particles of his body.

Were we to be composed only of matter and were there to be no invisible
force controlling the mass of our cells and the structure or our bodies,
given the fact that the content of our nervous system and our brains
changes several times over in the course of, say, fifty years, and the
entirety of our physical form undergoes various fundamental changes, the
reality of our being would be entirely controlled by the attributes of
matter and we would no longer be the same distinctive person that we
were last year. We know, however, that there is a single stable and
immutable reality which comprises our personality and assures its unity
and distinctiveness.

That stable entity which exists in man is like the reflection of the
moon or the sun, shining night and day on the water. Although the waves
are in constant motion and flux, one wave advancing to have its place
taken by another, the reflection of the light of the moon or the sun is
stable and uniform:

*Time and again the water has changed in the stream,*

*But the light of the moon and the stars maintains its gleam.*

The stable and immutable spirit keeps shining down on the river of the
body, just like the light of the moon and the sun. Although the cells
and molecules of the body perish, the slightest change does not occur in
the essential personality of man.

Everyone can perceive the existence within himself of a spirit that is
both independent of the body and possesses a form of existence totally
different from that of the body. Everyone is aware within himself of an
identity that is autonomous, continuous, constantly present, and stands
in contrast to his material being which changes every day.

One cannot possibly regard an entity that thus dominates the body and
unlike the body is immune to diminution as being the product of matter
or subordinate to its rules. Any supposition of this type cannot explain
anything concerning the true nature of man.

Cressy Morrison writes:

“What is certain is that the creation of this world was not the outcome
of accident or chance, because the entire order of the world revolves
around specific laws.

“The appearance among the animals of man, endowed with thought and
intelligence, is too mysterious and too significant for us to imagine it
to be the result of material processes, without the hand of a Creator
being involved. If this is not the case man must be like a mechanical
instrument requiring someone also to set him to work. But then whose
hand would it be that sets him in motion?

“Until now, science has not been able to provide any explanation of who
this operator might be, only one thing is certain that the operator
cannot be a material compound.

“We have progressed only so far as to imagine God bestowing a flash of
His own knowledge on our existence. Man is still passing through his
infancy in the understanding of creation and is just beginning to
understand the existence of the spirit; he is gradually becoming aware
of this heavenly gift and its eternal, everlasting character.” (*Raz-i
Afarinish-i Insan,* pp. 180-181)

If the manifestations of the spirit are simply part of the effect and
properties of the body, the outcome of the activities of the brain, or
reducible to the total functions of the nervous system, how can we
analyze and explain the persistence of the human personality?

It is, after all entirely natural to suppose that an entity which
refuses to submit to the laws of matter should be permanent and
everlasting.

The explanation offered by certain materialists to the effect that the
self is relative and that it undergoes change and development while
possessing stability, is more of a poetic than a scientific nature; it
cannot in any way explain the unity preserved by the human personality
throughout life. For this incorrect theory arises from a theory of man
which is even more erroneous; it would imply that “I am not now that man
that I previously was; I am someone who has taken his place but I
somehow fancy that I am the same person as before. In addition, these
imaginings are my act and I am their source; it is not that my self
comprises the varied and ever-changing concepts that take form in my
mind.”


