The Revolution's Results
========================

What had Imam Husayn's revolution meant in history? Some people who are
not familiar with its motives, innocently inquire about its results.
Others have even questioned the wisdom of striking at a mighty force
like the Umayyads, which was fatal. Although the revolution's motives
have already been discussed, a brief review of the changes in the Muslim
World after Imam Husayn's revolution is appropriate;

**1.** Murdering Imam Husayn (as) the grandson of the Prophet (S) was a
great shock to the whole Muslim world. This is not to mention the way he
was murdered or the treatment given to his family who had the highest
esteem and respect of all Muslims. Consequently, all Muslims dissociated
themselves from the Umayyad's deeds and policies. Indeed, who wants to
share in the certain curse upon those who murdered the family of the
Prophet?

Thus, this revolution had done the task of unveiling the Umayyad's
un-Islamic character to the general public and left no doubt in any
person's heart about the Umayyad's substance.

Therefore, the concepts which the Umayyad's were propagating in order to
distort the ideals of Islam found no listening ear any longer, diverting
the Umayyad's mischief of changing Islamic concepts and ideals.

**2.** Imam Husayn's revolution set a lively example as to the duty of
Muslims in such conditions. It had deeply penetrated peoples’ hearts and
produced great pains within them for not doing their Islamic duty. This
feeling which pained people all the time transformed into repentance and
then to an open revolt against the Umayyad's regime. Thus, the
revolution provided the stimulant to move their spirit and set it in a
dynamic movement. Indeed, the Islamic movement was put to a new gear
throughout the rest of the Islamic history.

A series of revolutions manifesting Imam Husayn's revolutionary spirit
and reforms emerged at successive intervals. Tawabeen's revolution took
place immediately after Karbala's tragedy. Another revolution at Madina
was aiming at doing away with the Umayyads deviated regime. Al-Mukhtar
Al-Thaqafi led another revolution which stormed the Umayyad's regime in
Iraq and he was able to punish all principal collaborators in the
campaign against Imam Husayn in Iraq. Mitraf ibn Al-Mughira's revolution
against Hajjaj and Abdul Malik was another result.

However, there were a chain of revolutions in all parts of the Muslim
world which eventually did away with the Umayyad's regime. Imam Husayn's
revolution was the principal slogan of the revolutionaries against the
Umayyad's. The Abasides came and soon their conduct was exposed as not
that which the family of the Prophet was advocating. They realized that
the revolution’s results were stolen and before they could do anything,
the main personalities which carried the revolt through were
treacherously eliminated by murder, poison and imprisonment.

The attempts to restore Islamic conduct have never ceased throughout
Islamic history. Bitter experiences and intermittent material failures
are natural results of struggle. Most importantly is the triumph of the
Islamic spirit against intimidation and attempts to obscure its shining
face and glory. A ceaseless revolution in Muslim lives is a reality,
which the enemies of Islam failed to extinguish.

The secret key of this blessed revolution lies in the firm faith in God,
the unshakable conviction, which puts material supremacy and gain in an
inferior position to God's satisfaction. These ideals were demonstrated
by Imam Husayn when the Muslims were in need of such an example most.

The revolution of Imam Husayn was not solely for changing a government,
if it was so, then it would be wrong to call it a revolution. Imam
Husayn was advocating a drastic change in the social set up, the
economic and political structures and refining Islamic concepts from
foreign ideas which had crept into Muslims' minds and thoughts.

Imam Husayn wanted to change the life of Muslims to be in conformity
with Islamic laws and ideals. Indeed, this explains one main reason for
why Imam Husayn was let down by the tribes of Kufa after being promised
support, and his call was ignored by the rest of the Muslim world.
Hence, a revolution means a drastic change in one's life or the
collective life when applied to a large scale.


