The Islamic Message
===================

Islam is a philosophy of life, it gives reasons and a set purpose for
living. Furthermore, it defines the best ways to secure progress and
happiness. This is done by elevating the spiritual side and satisfying
the material needs of people.

Islam considers man as a Representative of God on earth. This status is
a fine one, but it is also critical that its requirements be satisfied.
Thus, because man is in an envied position, his acts and behaviours are
expected to conform with that high level he is occupying.

The Islamic concepts and its laws are inseparable parts of the Islamic
ideology. They are the practical expression of Islam in society and life
in-general. These concepts and laws are essentially concerned with
harmonizing people's relationships among themselves, with other beings,
and above all with the Creator.

The basic Islamic outlook to this life is that of an introductory
course. This worldly life is viewed as a prelude to another eternal
life. Therefore, this world is a preparatory stage for people in order
to attain the spiritual level which permits them to enter Paradise. The
other side of the picture is the horror of Hell for people who misuse
the powers at their disposal. Hence, success and failure are not
measured with this worldly or materialistic supremacy.

The Islamic measure differs from materialistic standards by accounting
for the life hereafter. The satisfaction of God is the sublime aim which
surpasses all other inclinations and wishes. This is by no account
neglecting materialistic supremacy, but putting it in its rightful
place. It is with the satisfaction of God that Muslims seek
materialistic supremacy.


