Who Is Imam Husayn?
===================

Imam Husayn's life and status in the Islamic history is formidable.
Indeed, it is not of obscurity but because of the vitality and the
significance of his contributions. The following account is only a very
brief record of his qualities.

He was one of two sons of Imam Ali (as) and Fatimah (sa), the daughter
of the Prophet (S). His father, Imam Ali, who needs no introduction, is
acknowledged by those; far and near as well as friend and foe, as being
openly declared by the Prophet, as Commander of the faithful. Needless
to mention his knowledge, bravery, steadfastness, brotherhood to the
Prophet, justice  
 and piety.

Fatimah (sa) was the dearest daughter to her father (S). Al-Tirmidhi
narrated through Usamah ibn Zaid that the Prophet (S) said 'The dearest
member of my family to me is Fatimah". She was declared by the Prophet
as the master of all women in the whole world. She and her husband were
members of the family who were signified for their qualities and roles.

They are examples of interest to Muslim men and women. Their role was an
extension of the Prophet's role, in the sense of leading the great
cultural transformation from the darkness of non-Muslim culture to the
brightness of heavenly light.

Historians recorded the birth of Imam Husayn as an exciting event for
the Muslims in Madina and especially to the Prophet of God. The Prophet
(S) was even concerned with the name given to his grandson, 'Husayn'. As
the news flared up in the sky, the Muslims congratulated each other for
the new child whom the Prophet considered as his own son.

The Prophet once declared, "Husayn is of myself and I am of Husayn, O,
God be pleased with those who please Husayn". This statement was not
accidental nor the result of emotional strain as it is wrongly claimed
sometimes. This declaration came from a responsible wise leader, the
Prophet of God who would never commit a mistake during the performance
of his Prophetic task. He was delivering the Islamic Message and
informing people of those who will act as springs and guardians for this
Message in the future.

Emotions and sentiments are not loose in a Muslim's life, but are
controlled by Islamic concepts and ideals. There has always been a
criterion for liking and disliking within Islam, which evolves from the
deeply rooted Islamic concept. For example; although Abu Lahab was the
Uncle of the Prophet, his extreme anti-Islamic behaviour made him cursed
till the Day of Judgment.

Another such statement which leaves no doubt of Imam Hasan's and
Husayn's role is, the Prophet of God (S) said "Hasan and Husayn are the
masters of youth in Paradise". This was presented as a credential to the
Muslim nation in order to hold firm to their leadership.

At a certain time the Muslims in Madina felt the Islamic Message's glory
and good results, so they intended to reward the Prophet for his effort
in guiding them. The gift they presented to the Prophet (S) was some
gold which they had collected. The Prophetâ€™s answer came in the
following verses which were revealed during this incident.

***"Say: 'No reward do I ask of you for this except being kind to those
of kin" (23:42).***

Al-Kashaaf narrated that when this verse was revealed, people asked the
Prophet "O Prophet of God, who are these of kin which this verse makes
their respect obligatory upon us?" The Prophet answered, "They are Ali,
Fatimah, and their two sons". However, this did not imply disrespect for
other Muslims, companions or the rest of kin to him.

Looking objectively at the message of the verse it will indicate first
of all reluctance to accept material reward, if a reward was not
suitable then it cannot be restricted to the material only. Hence, the
verse was indicating respect to some specific people, not because they
are his relatives as such, but the real reason behind this respect was
to safeguard the Islamic Message. The role they had to play in the
Islamic history required such respect in order to enable them to perform
their task.

Al-Hakim narrated through Abu Saaid Al-Khidri that the Prophet said, "He
who dislikes us, we the family, God will place him in Hell", this
implies those who dislike Islamic conduct and life. Jabir narrated that
the Prophet in his speech after performing the last pilgrimage, said, "O
people I am leaving the book of God and my family (Itrah) for guidance.
If you hold fast to them, surely you will never go astray". This Hadith
was narrated through some twenty different sources of trusted chains of
narrators, Muslim in his Sahih quoted some of them.

Another striking Hadith obtained through Abu Dharr where he quoted the
Prophet saying, "O people, let my family act as a head of a body of you,
and as eyes of a head among you."

These last few Hadiths are impressive in many respects; firstly they
were narrated by different sources of different inclinations which add
to them extra value, secondly the same content throughout all indicates
the consistency of the event.

Imam Husayn, as already stated, was one member of the family of the
Prophet. He was brought up within the Prophetic guidance where he
received the direct concern of the Prophet. The ideal atmosphere where
he had grown up with his grandfather, father, mother and elder brother
was the highest level ever attained.

Thus Imam Husayn acquired wisdom, generosity, bravery, piety and
letters; occupying outstanding posts during his father's reign in the
Islamic State.

During the terror and corruption which swept the Muslim World at the
hands of the Umayads, he was the sole hope of the Muslims to restore the
establishment of the Islamic laws which would bring the Muslims
prosperity, peace and happiness within the two worlds. He never failed
the Muslims, but acted as expected of a great ideological leader and
performed his duty to the best.


