Who Is Yazid?
=============

Yazid was the son of Muawiya ibn Abu Sufyan, from the family of Umayyah,
one of Quraish's families. Abu Sufyan was acting as the chief adversary
in the non-Muslim's campaign against Islam. Muawiya's mother, Hind, ate
the liver of Hamza, the Uncle of the Prophet, because of her burning
hatred and beastliness. Muawiya too was an active opponent to Islam.

Indeed, Abu Sufyan's family was active in strategic, financial and
morale boosting within in the non-Muslim's campaign against the Muslims.
Their efforts, wealth and diplomacy were of great burden in preventing
the spread of Islam among Arab tribes.

During the liberation of Mecca, it was suddenly besieged with enormous
forces of Muslims. The unbelievers at Mecca were struck with seeing the
Muslim fighters who had caught them unprepared. Thus, they the
non-Muslims had no choice but to abandon their arrogance which had
prevented them from accepting Gods sovereignty.

During this incident, historians recorded some peculiar stories about
Abu Sufyan's family. However, there is one thing for certain that they
accepted Islam unwillingly, and they were treated in a special way for
that.

For instance, they were given extra donations in order to gain their
hearts towards Islam. But whether this generosity had any influence to
produce a change in their materialistic thinking is a different matter.
Indeed subsequent events revealed no change in their way of thinking and
life.

Yazid was brought up in a family whose atmosphere was electrified with
the emotions of their dead family members who fought against Islam, in
addition to seeing those Muslims who killed them receiving full honour
and respect by society. Not to mention the wasted wealth, injured pride
and stripped privileges of their family.

However, Yazid had some unique qualities in the adverse sense; he was
known as a playboy during his youth. Historians recorded him being
drunk, committing adultery and in general leading a very corrupt life.
Some even quoted Yazid saying, "The family of Hashim staged a play to
get a Kingdom. In reality there was neither news from God nor a
revelation".

Even if we discarded this extreme, there is no escape from facing the
rest of his shameful  
 deeds and horrifying crimes. Not to mention his illegal claim to rule
the Muslim World, or misusing Muslims money, or intrusion upon peoples
dignity and lives.


