Origins of Deviation
====================

How did Muawiya ascend the ruling stage, and even dare claiming the
succession of the Prophet? What happened to the Muslim World to be
silent at the assumption of power by an ignoble person like Yazid?

Indeed, it is astonishing to witness the indifference and
irresponsibility shown by the vast majority of Muslims as if Islamic
values and ideals were totally alien to that society. What had happened
to the dynamic forces which had awakened the world, when the Prophet’s
voice had not yet died away?

Regarding the responsibility of Muslims, he once said, "He who sees a
cruel governor, violating Gods laws, breaking his Covenant, acting in
contract to the Tradition of the Prophet, doing mischief and intruding
upon people’s rights, then does not try to change that governor through
action or speech, God has promised him a suitable place in Hell".

We all may wonder over the causes of deviation that led to this
deplorable situation. We know for sure that Islam is a perfect and
practical religion, and there is no doubt of its ability to guide the
Muslims to a stable and prosperous life. Therefore, the question of
deficiency in its Islamic Message, or the way it was conducted by the
Prophet (S) has no place.

Therefore the only possible errors are confined to; the subsequent
status of the Muslims, their handling of affairs or their conformity to
the Islamic laws; besides the 'natural’ obstacles encountered in the
sequence of events.

This topic is so large that it cannot be dealt with in this short
review; nevertheless, it is important to review it.

It is well-known that the Islamic State vastly extended its borders,
embracing huge population sizes. In this short time of conquest, it made
cultural assimilation near to impossible; this was coupled with the
language difficulties and primitive means of communications and
propagation. This caused many Arab tribes to have fought against Islam,
after the Prophets departure to the next world, who were under the
political influence of Islam.

Needless to say that any real and thorough cultural transformation needs
time as a basic factor and a complete transition from one culture to
another might require many generations before the new culture is firmly
established.

The second factor in determining any cultural change is the presence of
any ideological leadership, especially one that has a deep insight into
the message and is potentially ready to sacrifice for its success.
Naturally, such a leader is expected to conform by the ideological
messages and orders, otherwise the aim of his presence would not be
realized.

The Muslims had elected Abu Bakr as the successor to the Prophet and the
events which  
 accompanied that election was sadly recorded by all historians. This is
by no means an objection to, nor an attack on the ability of the
respected companion Abu Bakr (may God be pleased with him). But careful
observation leads to the conclusion that Abu Bakr himself remarked that
there were other people who were more able than himself for the task.

It is indeed eye-catching, the many incidents and Hadiths in Islamic
history, which encourage Muslims to follow and proclaim the leadership
of Imam Ali after the Prophet.

In Tafseer Abi Ishaq, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim Al-Nisabouri
Al-Thaalibi, who died in 337 A.H., gave a commentary on the following
verse:

***“Your guardians are God, His Prophet, and the believers who pray and
give alms while prostrate to God. Regarding those who disobey God, His
Prophet and the believers, the party of God are the victors"
(5:58,59).***

He quoted Abu Dharr Al-Ghifari stating, "I heard the Prophet (S) with
these ears or would I be deaf, and saw him with these eyes or would I be
blind; the Prophet once said, "Ali is the leader of the best believers,
and the killer of unbelievers, the victor is he who supports him, and
weak who doesn't ".

Abu Dharr added, "One day we were praying with the Prophet, a beggar had
entered the mosque. The beggar was requesting people for help but none
helped him except Imam Ali. While Imam Ali was offering his prayer, he
donated his silver ring by pointing his finger to the poor man and the
latter took it filled with joy.

After this incident the Prophet prayed humbly to God and said, "O God,
my brother Moses asked You, "O my God, expand my breast; ease my task
for me; and remove the impediment from my speech, so that they may
understand what I say; and give me a Minister from my family, Aaron, my
brother; add to my strength through him, and make him share my task that
we celebrate thy praise without stint, and remember thee without stint".
And You answered: "Granted is thy prayer, O Moses". "O God I am your
servant and Prophet. Expand my breast; ease my task; and give me a
Minister from my family, Ali, my brother; add to my strength through
him, and make him share my task".

Abu Dharr concluded: "By God, as soon as the Prophet completed his
prayer the trustworthy Gabriel came with the following verses:

***"Your guardians are God, His Prophet and the believers who pray and
give alms while prostrate to God . . . !" (5:58, 59).***

Ibn Sinan narrated this incident in Sahih Al-Bukhari and Ibn Abbas
narrated this story in Asbab Al-Nuzol by Imam Wahidi. All interpreters
of Kanz Al-Umaal held the same opinion of the cause of the revelation of
this.

On a different occasion, the Prophet (S) told Imam Ali, "You are to me
as Aaron was to Moses, but there is not Prophet after me". But perhaps
the most outstanding occasion which sank into people's memories, is the
Prophet's speech during his last pilgrimage. Amongst a large
congregation of Muslims he declared, "He whoever I am his master, Ali is
his master too. O God assist whoever supports him and disgrace those who
have enmity towards him".

Indeed, whilst these are only a few of the quotations about Imam Ali,
their consistency and the number and variety of people who confirmed the
authenticity of the stories leaves no room for doubt that Imam Ali was
chosen by God and His Prophet to be the ideological leader after the
Prophet's departure. Hence it can be safely concluded that Imam Ali's
exclusion from his assigned duty marked the first major mistake. The
inevitable consequences were a slow deviation which ended up in a
turbulent stream of events, which no one was able to exercise control
over.

Abu Bakr's reign lasted approximately two years, which was an eventful
epoch. The dangers besieging the Muslims were so great that the very
existence of the Muslim community was threatened, only being eliminated
by the many sacrifices of the Muslim community.

Umar ibn Al-Khattab was appointed by Abu Bakr as the Caliph, his rule
being for ten years. His reign is particularly important because of the
vast changes and events which took place during his time. The conquest
of vast areas brought enormous wealth to the Muslims, but the way this
wealth was handled created complex problems, eventually forcing Umar to
admit their grave consequences. Indeed, he tried to reform the laws but
it was too late to act, for by that time he was murdered.

Umar ibn Al-Khattab was the first person in charge of Muslim affairs to
start uneven donation of provisions among Muslims. He used to prefer
some people to others for various reasons, generating social classes and
sparking off enmity and rifts within the Muslim society. His policies
were also not in conformity with the traditions of the Prophet or even
with Abu Bakr's policies.

Umar was sad when he saw the unrest and rifts within the Muslim
community, once declaring "I was informed that people have distinct
gatherings. When two sit together they talk of the different groupings
and separate entities, by God that is harmful to your religion, honour
and unity". Realising the cause of this social phenomenon he added, "I
used to allure people in order to gain their goodwill by preferring some
to others. But if I lived this year, the distribution of wealth will be
even among all people as the Prophet and Abu Bakr used to do."

A rather serious measure taken by the Caliph Umar ibn Al-Khattab was his
appointment of six nominees to the Caliphate post. This, it is believed
had induced a desire in the nominees to ascend one day to this powerful
and honorable position. Since it was only a matter of time for everyone,
they were engaged in preparing the way for their own ascents.

Eventually Uthman ibn Affan was chosen by Abdul Rahman ibn Auf to be the
next Caliph, after being turned down by Imam Ali. Imam Ali refused to
accept the Caliphate post because Abdul Rahman ibn Auf put a condition
which meant retaining the status quo and preventing any radical change.

Uthman's policies were resented by the vast majority of Muslims. His
monetary policy was the focus point of their resentment, because he
donated large amounts of money to his relatives while the rest of the
people were left empty handed (Muruj Al-dhahab 2/241 by Al-Masaudi
Al-Ansab and Al-Ashraf (5/25,-28,48,52) by Al-Baladhiri).

Indeed, the governors who were assisting in administering the Muslim
country had neither ability nor piety and is believed their appointment
was because of their kin to Uthman. For instance, Al-Waleed ibn Aqabah
ibn Abi Muaeet was appointed to govern Kufa. Al-Waleed was reputed to be
a drunkard and when the people’s dissatisfaction with his behaviour
peaked and Uthman replaced him, it was with Saaid ibn Al-As, who had the
famous statement "Iraq is Quraish's garden, we take or leave of it
whatever we like" (Muroj Al-dhahab 2/346 by Al-Masaudi).

Muawiya who was governing Damascus and Jordan during the reign of Umar,
Uthman added to his state Hams, Palestine, and Jazera. Egypt's governor
was Abdullah ibn Abi Sirah, with all of its previous governors being
Uthman's relatives. The most striking feature of this bunch of rulers
was their contempt for people's rights and dignity, they simply looked
at the whole Muslim country as their private property, as demonstrated
in Al-Waleed's aforementioned statement.

Moreover the principal treasury at Madina was not utilised in its
rightful ways. Many Muslims like the treasurer's trustees, Ammar ibn
Yasir, Abu Dharr and similar distinguished companions objected strongly
against Uthman"s monetary policies. Uthman's reply to those people was,
"We take from the treasury whatever we want inspite of some people's
objections".

These policies were not only foreign to Islamic conduct and ideals, but
caused tremendous sufferings and hardships to the majority of Muslims.
Many responsible Muslims played their role in warning Uthman against
these deviations but their advice was in vain. Thus, the situation
reached its danger point one day and exploded, resulting in Uthman's
murder. This act of violence as I believe could have been avoided by
using some peaceful methodology.

The chaotic conditions and the deterioration of the Muslims material and
social statuses forced them to rethink their past, present and future.
Perhaps it was like a film passing in their minds, reminding them of
previous events which were connected with their present. It is normally
the last incident and last speech which remain alive in peoples’
memories. Indeed, it was the Prophet's famous speech in Khum during his
last pilgrimage which was recalled.

Muslims remembered that significant event where there were more than one
hundred thousand Muslims present and the Prophet was briefing the
Islamic message to them. Being within the middle of that anxious crowd,
listening carefully to every word he (asa.h.f) uttered, and watching
every sign he made. The Prophet took Ali ibn abi Talib's hand and raised
it while saying "O, people who-ever I am his master, then Ali is his
master too. O, God, assist those who support him and disgrace those who
do not".

Thus after the cloud of events surrounding Uthman’s death settled, the
Muslims hurriedly went to Imam Ali (as) calling him to perform his
assigned duty, but the abnormal situation existing at that time made the
task difficult indeed. Indeed, the very acceptance of his duty during
such a situation was not healthy.

Imam Ali's reply to the Muslims was negative. He (as) said "Leave me
aside and seek someone else, we are heading at a subject which has many
facets and various colours, neither the hearts would rise to, nor the
minds would be firm upon. The horizons are black and gloomy while reason
is rejected. You should know that my acceptance means what I know will
he applied and obeyed. I shall not conform to ones ideas or listen to
others reproachment. On the other hand, leaving me aside means I am one
of you, listening and conforming to whom you have appointed for your
affairs. I am better a minister than commander for you".

In this speech, perhaps, he (as) wanted to gauge peoples’ interests and
determination. Moreover, he showed his disinterest for power and ruling
if that was an aim by itself. But the vast majority of Muslims were
determined to see the Prophets’ words and will be implemented, and they
left no choice to Imam Ali but to accept his rightful role of being the
ideological leader to the Muslim community.


