Imam Ali's Reform
=================

The major problems which were confronted at the time were; the existence
of a corrupt and incompetent administration, unjust social privileges
and a wide financial gap between the rich and the poor. Thus, Imam Ali's
reforms covered these three major fields.

1. Administration
-----------------

All previous governors were instantly expelled from their posts. And the
following people were put in charge, Uthman ibn Haneef for Basrah, Sahl
ibn Haneef for Syria, Qais ibn Saad ibn Ubadah for Egypt and Mousa
Al-Ashari for Kufa. It is noteworthy that all the mentioned governors
were not from Quraish tribe, and this was bitterly taken by Quraish who
were accustomed to ruling and getting the lion’s share of money and
authority.

It is also not out of place to mention that the new governors were not
only known for their piety and good conduct, but also possessed sound
administrative abilities. However, it must be taken into account that
the conditions in which they were operating and the unstable situation
of that period gave them no chance to fully manifest their talents. But
still the marks which they left in the society were so deep that they
survived and were remembered for generations.

2. Protection of Rights
-----------------------

The rights of Muslims whether social or financial were carefully
observed and protected. Thus Imam Ali (as) declared "O people, I have
the same rights and obligation as the rest of you". Therefore, he cut
the way of every intruder who wanted to exploit his position or kinship
or religious reputation.

Imam Ali also stated, "It should be known that whoever is an immigrant
(Muhajir) or a supporter (from Ansar) who accompanied the Prophet (S),
and think he is better than others for his companionship, then his
goodness will be rewarded by God in the Hereafter. Every person who
believes in God and His Prophet is entitled to the same rights and
obligations. Money belongs to God which must be divided equally among
people. No one will get a greater share than others, those pious people
would get their reward in the Hereafter'".

3. Fiscal and Monetary Policy
-----------------------------

The extravagant monetary policy of Uthman accumulated the treasury’s
wealth among his relatives and associates, which had seriously
imbalanced the society, so when Imam Ali (as) came to power, he had to
take some drastic measures against this existing imbalance.

Thus he warned all people, "I shall follow the Prophet's Tradition and
execute whatever he had commanded, every gift of which Uthman gave of
God's money will be returned to the treasury. Nothing will cancel its
belonging to the treasury even if it was married with, or distributed in
the wide country. Justice must be implemented, if someone feels hard to
accept justice then injustice is harder to accept".

Moreover, he condemned prodigals who run after the pleasures of this
life only while disguising in religious masks. In this respect Imam Ali
said, "There are some people whom life has absorbed completely. They
have built many houses, made rivers, rode beautiful horses, and took to
themselves slave-women which brought disgrace upon themselves. Whenever
I prevent them from indulging in bad deeds and give them no more than
their rights, they turn angry and object furiously. They say 'Ali ibn
Abi Talib has prevented us our rights".

Imam Ali’s new policies were aiming at stripping the Quraish completely
of their social privileges, financial statuses and authority. This
irritated the Quraishite as they no longer enjoyed their garden of Iraq
and the rest of the Muslim country and what they have already gained was
in danger of being restored to the Muslims’ treasury.

The Quraish not pleased with this new regime and worked continuously to
hinder the stabilization of the new authority. Dissents were sent and
wars were launched successively, shaking the whole state; economically,
socially, politically and morally. Meanwhile, the heads of Quraish who
were campaigning against Imam Ali's rule, realized it was not Imam Ali
as a person they were fighting, but it was the ideals and policies which
he (as) had advocated, it was once again Islam.

Thus the Umayyad's who accepted Islam under various conditions, found
that their materialistic thinking couldn’t reconcile with Islamic
values, so they decided to distort the Islamic values and ideals, since
opposing Islam openly was fatal, as they had experienced previously.
Muawiya then ordered the formation of a committee to fabricate Hadiths
and distort the interpretation of Qur'an.

Five years had lapsed, which were full of violent events; the battle of
camel in Basrah, the battle of Sifsin against Muawiya, the battle of
Nahrawan against Khawarij and many other ongoing campaigns. Thus the
opposition was able to feed unrest practically in every part of the
Islamic State, shaking the authority of the new administration.

Finally Imam Ali (as) was murdered at Kufa mosque and Muawiya was given
access to rule the whole country. The circumstances in which Muawiya
assumed power will be discussed promptly.


