The Revolution's Motives
========================

The motives for revolution were numerous, some were direct grievances of
the general people while others were ideological. The following were the
most apparent:

**1.** The most important motive was the attempt to distort Islamic
concepts and ideals. This aspect was of extreme importance and
preoccupied the minds of responsible Muslims at that time. The
fabrication of Hadiths was all too common, which had a poisonous effect
on the lives of Muslims. This was giving the Umayyads for a while, a
free hand to carry out their inhuman deeds and policies, but the mask of
religion which they used to hide their un-Islamic conduct was extremely
dangerous.

In the long run, this could have changed Islamic concepts of ruling and
inverted social ideals, thus, stripping off this mask and exposing the
true Umayyad's picture was of utmost necessity.

**2.** The state's structure was built on an un-Islamic basis. Quraish
was born to rule, Arabs were second class citizens, and non-Arabs
constituted the base of the society's pyramid. That was the general
social picture of the Muslim world under the Umayyads dynasty. Freedom
of thought and expression were denied, when one dared to express an
opinion contrary to that of the Umayyad's; prison became his home, his
property was robbed, and even his life was at stake.

**3.** The Umayyads considered the Muslim world to be their own
property. The alms (Zakat) and other Islamic dues were collected, but no
one knew nor could they question where that money went. Large gifts and
donations were given to a few cruel governors and tribal chiefs in order
to secure their allegiance. Large sums of money were wastefully spent on
racing, gambling, wine-making, and buying slave women to entertain
high-class people in power. Hence, the majority of Muslims were left
near starvation level while the ruling group all enjoyed the social and
material privileges.

**4.** The Muslims had apparently got used to the un-Islamic rule of the
Umayyads as time passed by. Their resistance slackened and some people
began adjusting themselves to the new conditions. Hence, the
revolutionary spirit of Islam began to disappear gradually from Muslimsâ€™
lives and thoughts. Therefore, a new stimulant to their souls was
necessary to activate their lives and try to restore Islamic conduct to
the society.


