Worship and Submission
======================

Allah the Almighty declares,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنسَ إِلاَّ لِيَعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I have not created the Jinns and mankind except to worship Me.”
(Qur’an, 51:56)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَضَى رَبُّكَ أَلاَّ تَعْبُدُواْ إِلاَّ إِيَّاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your Lord has decreed that you will not worship anybody but
Him.” (Qur’an, 17:23)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَّسُولاً أَنِ اعْبُدُواْ اللهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُواْ الطَّاغُوتَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And indeed We sent in every nation a Prophet saying, ‘worship Allah
and keep away from the rebellious ones.” (Qur’an, 16:36)***

Explaining the first verse, Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) says,

“He created them so that they follow His command, i.e. they worship
Him.”[^1]

Similarly, in another exegesis of the above verse, he (‘a) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَهُمْ لِلْعِبَادَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He created them for worship.”[^2]

Amir al Mu’minin (‘a), in the sermon of *Dhi-qar* elucidates,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…فَإِنَّ اللهَ تَعالى بَعَثَ مُحَمَّدًا – صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ و
آلِهِ – بِالْحَقِّ لِيُخْرِجَ عِبَادَهُ مِنْ عِبَادَةِ عِبَادِهِ إِلى
عِبادَتِهِ، وَمِنْ عُهُودِ عِبَادِهِ إِلى عُهُودِهِ، وَمِنْ طَاعَةِ
عِبَادِهِ إِلى طَاعَتِهِ، وَمِنْ وِلاَيَةِ عِبادِهِ إِلى وِلايَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Then surely Allah the Almighty raised Muhammad (‘s) with truth to bring
out His servants from the worship of His servants to His worship, from
the binding of His servants to His Own binding, from the obedience of
His servants to His Own obedience and from the mastership of His
servants to His Own mastership.”[^3]

To be a slave implies a sense of smallness and slavery. Vice-versa, to
be a master means to feel great and lordly. One who is king, is master
and the one who is a subject, is a slave. Allah, Who enjoys absolute
lordship dominates all affairs, possesses mastership and power of
governance over one and all, and His mastership entails commands and
prohibitions for everybody without exception. It is necessary that the
servants should feel a sense of slavery, submission and humility in His
presence. Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ الْعِلْمُ بِالتَّعَلُّمِ. إِنَّمَا هُوَ نُورٌ يَقَعُ فِي قَلْبِ
مَنْ يُرِيْدُ اللهُ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالى أَن يَهْدِيَهُ. فَأِنْ
أَرَدْتَ الْعِلْمَ فَاطْلُبْ أَوَّلاً فِيْ نَفْسِكَ حَقِيقَةَ
الْعُبُودِيَّةِ. وَاطْلُبِ الْعِلْمَ بِاسْتِعْمَالِهِ. وَاسْتَفْهِمِ
اللهَ يُفْهِمْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Knowledge is not acquired by learning. It is only a light which Allah
(Blessed and High is He) penetrates in the heart of one whom He intends
to guide. So, if you desire knowledge, then first seek in yourself the
reality of servitude. Then seek knowledge for its application. Ask Allah
for its understanding, He will make you understand it.” The narrator
says I enquired, ‘What is the reality of servitude?’ He (‘a) replied,

“It comprises of three things: Firstly, a person should never consider
himself to be the master of things endowed to him by Allah the Almighty.
He should consider every bounty and wealth to be Allah’s trust and
utilize it as Allah wishes.

Secondly, a person should not have any plan opposed to that of his Lord.

Thirdly, all his efforts should be focused on His commands and
prohibitions.

Thus, if a person does not consider himself as the master of the
bounties granted to him by Allah the Almighty, it is easier for him to
use them where Allah has commanded. And if a person does not plan
against the planning of Allah, it becomes much easier for him to face
the calamities and afflictions of this world. And if he uses all his
efforts to act on His commands and prohibitions, he will not have any
time left for disputing with the people or lording over them.

Hence, if Allah grants somebody these three things, the world, Iblis and
all the creatures will not hold any significance in his eyes. He will
not seek this world for lording over the people, he will not seek wealth
for the sake of power and superiority and will not forfeit this world of
a few days due to his laziness.

All these are from the first degree of piety. Allah the Almighty warns,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الدَّارُ اْلآخِرَةُ نَجْعَلُهَا لِلَّذِينَ لاَ يُرِيدُونَ
عُلُوًّا فِي اْلأَرْضِ وَلاَ فَسَادًا وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This is the house of the hereafter. We have made it for those who do
not seek any loftiness in the earth nor mischief.” (Qur’an, 28:83)***

Therefore, a slave is one who feels that his self and all his
possession, is under the dominion of his Master. Considering that
everything has come and will come into existence only on account of the
will *(mashi’at)* of Allah and nothing is independent of it, it will not
be incorrect to say that only Allah is the Master and rest everything
else is but His creation. For, the existence and survival of every
creature in this universe depends on His will and intention.

Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) declares,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَكُونُ شَيْءٌ فِي اْلاَرْضِ وَلا فِي السَّمَاءِ إِلاَّ بِهذِهِ
الْخِصَالِ السَّبْعِ: بِمَشيئَةٍ وَ إِرادَةٍ وَقَدَرٍ وَقَضَاءٍ وَ
إِذْنٍ وَكِتابٍ وَأَجَلٍ. فَمَنْ زَعَمَ أَنَّهُ يَقْدِرُ عَلى نَقْضٍ
وَاحِدَةٍ، فَقَدْ كَفَرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Nothing occurs in this earth and in the heaven except with the
following seven stages: Will, intention, destiny, decree, permission,
book and implementation. Then whoever thinks that he can reduce any of
these stages, then indeed he has disbelieved.”[^4]

Therefore, in the first instance, nobody has got any right of mastership
and superiority over the other and the real master and the true king of
one and all is only Allah. All are His subjects and it is obligatory on
them to fulfill the right of servitude. They must obey only Him and
subject themselves with utmost humility, modesty and lowliness in front
of Him. Considering anybody else as the master is a great sin and is
tantamount to denying Him and polytheism. Acknowledging anybody to be at
the same level or at par with Him is sheer polytheism.

Allah the Almighty says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّخَذُوا مِن دُونِ اللهِ آلِهَةً لِّيَكُونُوا لَهُمْ عِزًّا.
كَلاَّ سَيَكْفُرُونَ بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ وَيَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضِدًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they take gods other than Allah so that they become the cause of
might for them. Nay! Soon they will deny them and will turn into their
enemies.” (Qur’an, 19:81-82)***

Explaining the above verse, Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) says,

“Those who have taken to gods other than Allah the Almighty, on the day
of judgement their gods will be raised to oppose them and their
worship.” Then Imam (‘a) said, “Worship and servitude does not imply
prostration and bowing. In fact, worship means obedience and submission.
Whoever obeys a creature to disobey Allah, has in fact worshipped
him.”[^5]

Imam Al-Baqir (‘a) says,

“You (Shias) are that group who have refused to worship the rebels.
Whoever obeys an oppressor, has indeed worshipped him.”[^6]

Amir al Mu’minin (‘a) says,

“Allah deputed Muhammad (‘s) with Truth so that he may take out His
people from the worship of idols towards His worship and from obeying
Satan towards obeying Him.”[^7]

Anybody who thinks himself to be the master and ruler other than Allah
the Almighty, he deserves to be left to himself. And anyone who takes a
deity and lord besides Allah, He will hand him over to that deity and
lord. The Holy Prophet (‘s) says that Allah the Almighty has warned,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيَّمَا عَبْدٍ أَطَاعَنِيْ، لَمْ أَكِلْهُ إِلى غَيْرِي. وَأَيَّمَا
عَبْدٍ عَصَانِيْ، وَكَلْتُهُ إِلى نَفْسِهِ، ثُمَّ لَمْ أُبالِ فِيْ
أَيِّ وادٍ هَلَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whoever obeys Me, I will not hand him over to other than Myself. And
whoever disobeys Me, I will leave him unto himself. Then I won’t bother
in which valley he is destroyed.”[^8]

Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) said to Abbad Ibn Kathir Basri,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيْلَكْ يَا عَبَّادُ! إِيَّاكَ وَالرِّياءَ! فَإِنَّهُ مَنْ عَمِلَ
لِغَيْرِ اللهِ، وَكَلَهُ اللهُ إِلى مَنْ عَمِلَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Woe unto you O Abbad! Keep away from ostentation. For, whoever works
for other than Allah, Allah will hand him over to the one for whom he
worked.”[^9]

Hence, considering that His slaves and whatever is in their possession,
all are the creatures and possession of Allah, the limbs and organs of
this body and the entire existence is His property. Deriving benefit
from them depends on His permission and satisfaction. Thus, any
utilization which is not in conformity with His satisfaction and order,
will be deemed as prohibited (*haraam)*.

So Allah the Almighty has given power and authority to everybody over
their selves and wealth but has outlined their limitations through
divine laws and regulations. Consequently, none possesses authority and
domination over the other except that it has been granted by Allah the
Almighty. He declares in the Holy Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللَّهُمَّ مَالِكَ الْمُلْكِ تُؤْتِي الْمُلْكَ مَن تَشَاءُ
وَتَنْزِعُ الْمُلْكَ مِمَّن تَشَاءُ وَتُعِزُّ مَن تَشَاء وَتُذِلُّ مَن
تَشَاء بِيَدِكَ الْخَيْرُ إِنَّكَ عَلَىَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say O Allah! You are the King of the kingdom. You give the kingdom
to whomsoever You please and snatch it away from whomsoever You please.
You give respect to whomsoever You please and You degrade whomsoever You
please. In Your hand is goodness. Surely You have power over all
things.” (Qur’an, 3:26)***

It should be borne in mind that all perfection, power and authority that
has been endowed by Allah the Almighty to his servants is not because
they deserved it and it was not Allah’s duty to bestow these bounties
upon them. But it was His obligation and grace on them that He granted
these favors. Of course, this obligation too is not devoid of wisdom.

Allah the Almighty brought the servants to the realm of existence from
non-existence and granted them the lights of intellect, knowledge,
power, authority and freedom. Now, if they derive benefit from these
great bounties, lower their necks for His obedience and submission, act
with modesty and humility in front of Him, fulfil the duties of worship
diligently and express their gratitude for His bounties, they will draw
themselves nearer to their real Master and attain great heights and
perfection from His side.

But if they adopt the path of disobedience and transgression while He
intends to oblige them, He will snatch away the bounties from them so
that they may be attentive towards their poverty and dependence on Him.
And if He wants, He will increase their bounties and power so that their
disobedience is augmented, thereby becoming eligible for a very severe
chastisement in the hereafter.

Therefore, if somebody acts with sins and vices with the bounties that
he has received from his benevolent Lord, he should not think that these
gifts are due to his transgressions. Rather, these are for preparing him
for a great calamity in the next world. Allah the Almighty warns,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ يَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَنَّمَا نُمْلِي لَهُمْ خَيْرٌ
لِّأَنفُسِهِمْ إِنَّمَا نُمْلِي لَهُمْ لِيَزْدَادُواْ إِثْمًا وَلَهْمُ
عَذَابٌ مُّهِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Let not those who disbelieve think that the respite that We have
given them, is good for them. We have given them respite so that they
increase in sins and for them is a debasing chastisement.” (Qur’an,
3:178)***

So, it should be borne in mind that all the powers and authorities are
not in line with the power and authority of Allah. Only that power and
authority is in line with that of Allah’s which denotes obedience,
servitude, humility and modesty in front of Him.

And this government and authority is that of the divine Prophets (‘a),
their successors (‘a), those who have been permitted by them to take
care of the affairs of the people and do not violate the regulations
formulated by them.

Among all these divine luminaries, the persona with the maximum power
and authority is that of the Holy Prophet (‘s). All the Imams (‘a), all
the chiefs of the armies, governors of cities, judges, scholars,
guardians, etc. have all derived their mastership and authority from
Allah’s last messenger (‘s). Imam Al-Baqir and Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) say,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ فَوَّضَ إِلى نَبِيِّهِ – صَلّى اللهُ عليه وآله – أَمْرَ
خَلْقِهِ لِيَنْظُرَ كَيْفَ طَاعَتُهُمْ. ثُمَّ تَلاَ هذِهِ الآيَةَ: مَا
آتاكُمُ الرَّسُوْلُ فَخُذُوهُ وَ مَا نَهاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوْا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely Allah has delegated to His Prophet (‘s) the affairs of His
creation so that he overlooks as to how they obey Him. Then he (‘a)
recited the verse, **‘Whatever the Prophet gives, take it and whatever
he prohibits, refrain from it’.”** ***(Qur’an, 59:7)***[^10]

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (‘a) says,

“Certainly Allah delegated the matters of His creation to His Prophet
(‘s) and said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا آتاكُمُ الرَّسُوْلُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوْا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**‘Whatever the Prophet gives you, take it and whatever he prohibits,
refrain from it**. But He has not delegated to him the affairs of
creation and providing sustenance…Indeed, the Creator of everything is
Allah as He says, ‘

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهُ الَّذِيْ خَلَقَكُمْ ثُمَّ رَزَقَكُمْ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ
يُحْيِيْكُمْ هَلْ مِنْ شُرَكائكُمْ مَنْ يَفْعَلُ مِنْ ذلِكُمْ مِنْ
شَىْءٍ سُبْحَانَهُ وَ تَعالى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Allah is He Who created you, then provided you sustenance, then caused
you to die, then He brings to life (once) again. Is there anyone from
your partners who can do any of these things? **Glory be to Him and High
is He from what they associate.’**”(Qur’an, 30:40)[^11]

Imam Al-Baqir (‘a) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا حَرَّمَ رَسُولُ اللهِ – صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْه وآله – فَهُوَ
بِمَنْزِلَةِ مَا حَرَّمَ اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whatever the Messenger of Allah (‘s) has prohibited, then it is as if
Allah has prohibited it.”[^12]

The same status is enjoyed by the Holy Imams (‘a) who were from the
progeny of the Holy Prophet (‘s) and were his successors barring the
fact that making a thing permissible (*halal*) or prohibited (*haram*)
was beyond their domain. Under the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَطِيعُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَ أُولِي اْلأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘Obey Allah and obey His messenger and those in authority among
you’,*** (Qur’an, 4:59)

Imam Al-Baqir (‘a) explains,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هِيَ فِيْ عَلِيٍّ وَفِي اْلأَئِمَّةِ. جَعَلَهُمُ اللهُ مَوَاضِعَ
اْلأَنْبِيَاءِ، غَيْرَ أَنَّهُمْ لاَ يُحِلُّوْنَ شَيْئًا وَلاَ
يُحَرِّمُونَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This is about Ali and the Imams (‘a). Allah has placed them in the
position of the Prophets (‘a) except that they don’t make a thing
permissible or prohibited.”[^13]

Thus, it is evident that obeying any one of them is equal to worshipping
Him. Again, it is known that all power, authority and mastership returns
to Allah and they all ultimately belong to Him. So, if any one enjoys
any authority and mastership with Allah’s permission and order, then his
mastership and authority is considered as that of Allah’s and
subservience to such mastership will be considered as His worship.

Now, if anyone accepts his command and obeys him, then he has accepted
Allah’s command and obeyed Him and consequently, worshipped Him. But if
someone assumes authority and power without His permission and command,
then he has indeed usurped a position, placed himself as an opponent of
Allah and claimed a status in front of Him.

For, he will expect others to obey him and carry out his commands.
Needless to say, those who obey him will only obey him and this
obedience and obeisance has got nothing to do with Allah.

The same applies for the mastership, authority and control of a man over
his own self and his wealth. If he views them from this angle that they
are the endowments of Allah and their utilisation should be in
conformity with His commands and prohibitions, then this very thought
will be the obedience and worship of Allah the Almighty.

But if it used according to the satisfaction of Allah, unwittingly and
unintentionally, then it will not be considered as Allah’s worship.
Rather, all his expenditures and efforts will be for someone else and
thereby illegal (*haraam)*.

Describing the different aspects of mastership *(Wilaayah)*, Imam
As-Sadiq (‘a) says,

“Mastership is from two aspects: One is the mastership of the rightful
and just rulers who have been appointed as guardians of the people by
Allah the Almighty. The same goes for those appointed by them as masters
and this sequence till the lowest form of mastership. (i.e. all these
are rightful masters as they bear divine endorsement).

The second aspect of mastership is that of the oppressors and tyrants
and those appointed by them till the lowest form of mastership due to
whom people are misguided and deviated.

The legal of these two forms of mastership is obviously that of the just
masters whose recognition and mastership has been made obligatory and
enjoined by Allah. Obeying the sequence of these masters, down the line,
without reducing or adding anything from our side, or distorting his
statements, is compulsory and strengthening his position, a recommended
act.

For, under the shadow of the just master and those appointed by him,
rights are enlivened, justice is established and falsehood and
oppression are destroyed. Therefore, one who looks out for such a master
and helps him in his efforts is like the one who has made efforts to
strengthen the religion of Allah.

But the mastership of the tyrant masters, right from the top to the last
one appointed by them, has been condemned and following or assisting
them is prohibited because they are the cause of misguidance and
deviation of the people. Working with them and accepting their
mastership is totally illegal and non-permissible. Whoever does so,
becomes liable for a painful chastisement, even if his work is
insignificant.

For, any act which is done with the intention of helping and assisting
them, is in fact, direct disobedience of Allah and consequently, a great
sin. This is because under the shadow of a tyrant master, truth is
trampled and falsehood is enlivened. Oppression, tyranny and destruction
engulf the entire society, divine Prophets (‘a), their books and the
believers are thrown to the winds, mosques are destroyed, the traditions
of Allah and His laws are subject to distortion.

Therefore, to work with them or to assist them is prohibited (haraam)
except in a state of helplessness and coercion just as the occasion when
man is forced to drink blood or eat corpse.”[^14]

So, it is evident that the reality of servitude is submission. And the
reality of worship is humility, modesty and lowliness. The obedience of
someone is tantamount to being humble and lowly in front of him, thereby
resulting in his worship. Therefore, anyone who performs an action with
the intention of obeying his master has indeed worshipped him. And if
somebody has done something for the satisfaction of his self, then he
has worshipped his self.

So, those actions which are performed to gain paradise or for fear of
hell, cannot be said to be Allah’s worship, although Allah has ordered
the same. Because these actions have been performed out of the love of
one’s self.

But Allah, on account of His grace and nobility, has permitted His
servants to perform their actions with both these reasons and has
promised them rewards of worship for the same. But it should be borne in
mind that the right of worship is that it should be performed with the
intention of Allah’s love and proximity. Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) says,

“Surely the people worship Allah for three reasons: One group worships
Him to acquire His rewards and this worship is of the greedy. The second
group worships Him for fear of His hell and this is the worship of the
slaves. But I worship Him because of my love and affection for Him and
this is the worship of the liberals.”[^15]

Let us strive to worship our Lord for His love and affection and not for
the sake of the love of the self, or out of craving for the bounties of
paradise or out of fear for the punishment of hell, although Allah can
be worshipped even by these two approaches.

All praise is for Allah the Lord of the worlds as He is worthy and
blessings of Allah be on Muhammad (‘s) and his pure, immaculate
off-springs.

O Allah! For the sake of Muhammad (‘s) and the Holy Imams (‘a), hasten
the reappearance of our beloved Imam of the Time (May Allah hasten his
re-appearence).

[^1]: Ilalush shari’a, p. 13

[^2]: Ilalush shar’ia, p. 14

[^3]: Usul al Kafi, vol. 8, p. 386

[^4]: Usul al Kafi, vol. 1, p. 149

[^5]: Tafsir, al-Qummi, vol. 2, p.55

[^6]: Bihar ul Anwar, vol. 23, p. 361

[^7]: Nahj ul Balagha, sermon 147

[^8]: Wasa’il al shia, vol. 15, p. 235

[^9]: Usul al Kafi, vol. 2, p. 393

[^10]: Usul al Kafi, vol. 1, p. 266

[^11]: Uyun al akhbar Ar-Ar-Ridha’ (‘a)

[^12]: Bihar ul Anwar, vol. 17, p. 10

[^13]: Tafsir, al Ayyashi, vol. 1, p. 252

[^14]: Tuhaf al Uqul, p. 332

[^15]: Ilalush shar’ia, p. 12


