The Importance of Salat and Meeting Allah
=========================================

The highest aim and goal of the divine scholars and those who tread the
path of worship is the meeting with Allah and vision of the divine, a
meeting which can neither be expressed in words nor penned on paper.
For, a vision of the divine is the work of Allah Himself. And the work
of Allah, like His Being, does not have any method *(kaifiyyah)* like
other mortals, and therefore it cannot be expressed.

He introduced Himself to His servants and manifested His Own Self on
their hearts. By setting aside the veils of negligence and
forgetfulness, ignorance, disobedience, immorality, evil ethics, etc. a
person prepares his heart to receive this divine manifestation.

Purity of heart and sincerity in intention illuminates the divine light
further and becomes the cause for the servant to achieve great heights
in the field of divine recognition and reach his ultimate goal i.e.
meeting with Allah.

Imam Zainul Abidin (‘a) invokes,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلهِيْ، فَاسلُكْ بِنَا سُبُلَ الْوُصُوْلِ إِلَيْكَ. وَسَيِّرْنَا فِيْ
أَقْرَبِ الطُّرُقِ لِلْوُفُودِ إِلَيْكَ … وَأَلْحِقْنَا بِالْعِبَادِ
الَّذِيْنَ هُمْ بِالْبِدَارِ إِلَيْكَ يُسُارِعُوْنَ، وَبَابَكَ عَلى
الدَّواَمِ يَطْرُقُوْنَ، وَإِيَّاكَ فِيْ اللَّيْلِ يَعْبُدُوْنَ…
وَقَضَيْتَ لَهُمْ مِنْ وَصْلِكَ الْمَآرِبَ، وَمَلأَْتَ لَهُمْ
ضَمَائِرَهُمْ مِنْ حُبِّكَ، وَرَوَّيْتَهُمْ مِنْ صَافِيْ شِرْبِكَ،
فَبِكَ إِلَى لَذِيْذِ مُنَاجَاتِكَ وَصَلُوْا، وَمِنْكَ أَقْصى
مَقَاصِدَهُمْ حَصَّلُوْا… فَأَنْتَ لاَ غَيْرُكَ مُرادِيْ. وَلَكَ لاَ
لِسِوَاكَ سَهَرِيْ وَسُهادِيْ، وَلِقَاؤُكَ قُرَّةُ عَيْنِيْ.
وَوَصْلُكَ مُنى نَفْسِىْ … وَرُؤْيَتُكَ حَاجَتِيْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah! Make us tread the path that leads to Your meeting, and make us
travel on the road that is nearest to You… attach us with those servants
of Yours who are in haste to reach You. Those who incessantly knock on
Your door, and worship only You in the night…You have fulfilled their
desire by allowing them Your meeting, and You have filled their hearts
with Your love, and have quenched their thirst with Your pure drink.

Thus, because of You, they enjoyed the taste of Your supplications
(munajat) and have achieved their farthest aims (i.e. Allah)… Then only
You, O Allah, are my aim. And my being awake and up in the nights is
only because of You and not for anybody else. Your meeting is my love
and Your sight, my desire. Your vision is my only need.”[^1]

In another supplication, the same Imam (‘a) pleads,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَغُلَّتِيْ لا يُبَرِّدُهَا إِلاّ وَصْلُكَ. وَلَوْ عَتِي لاَ
يُطْفِئُهَا إِلاَّ لِقَاؤُكَ. وَ شَوْقِيْ إِلَيْكَ لاَ يَبُلُّهُ
إِلاَّ النَّظرُ إِلى وَجْهِكَ. وَقَرَارِي لا يَقِرُّ دُونَ دُنُوِّي
مِنْكَ … وَغَمِّي لا يُزِيلُهُ إِلاّ قُرْبُكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Nothing can quench my thirst but Your attachment, and nothing can
extinguish my burning desire but Your meeting. And nothing can
extinguish my craving for you except seeing Your face *(wajh)*, and my
restlessness cannot be done away with but by gaining proximity to
You…and My sorrow cannot be dispelled except by being near to You.”[^2]

Imam Al-Baqir (‘a) declares,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ – صَلّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ – بَابُ اللهِ
الَّذِي لاَ يُؤْتى إِلاَّ مِنْهُ، سَبِيلُهُ الّذِي مَنَ سَلَكَهُ
وَصَلَ إلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ. وَ كَذلِكَ كَانَ أَمِيرُ
الْمُؤْمِنينَ – عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ – مِنْ بَعْدِهِ وَ جَرى
لِلأَئِمَّةِ – علَيْهمُ السَّلامُ – وَاحِدًا بَعْدَ وَاحِدٍ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Then surely the Messenger of Allah (‘s) is the gate of Allah, without
whom He cannot be approached. He (‘s) is the path, if somebody walks on
it, will lead to Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He). After him, the same
applied for Amir al Mu’minin (‘a) and the Imams (‘a) following him, one
after the other…”[^3]

In a Hadith *al Qudsi*, Allah the Almighty declares,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَحْمَدُ، اَلْوَرَعُ يَفْتَحُ عَلى الْعَبْدِ أَبْوَابَ
الْعِبَادَةِ فَيُكْرَمُ بِهِ عِنْدَ الْخَلْقِ، وَيَصِلُ بِهِ إِلَى
اللهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Ahmad! Piety* (wara’) *opens the doors of worship for a worshipper.
Then through it, he is honored in the eyes of the people and gains
attachment with Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He).”*[^4]

The aforementioned traditions have discussed about meeting, uniting and
vision of Allah that leads to the contentment and softening of the
heart. According to Imam Al-Baqir (‘a), treading the path of the Holy
Prophet (‘s) and his Ahlul Bayt (‘a) is the cause of this meeting,
uniting and vision.

Therefore, this status cannot be achieved but by following the course
charted out by the Messenger of Allah (‘s) and through the mastership of
his infallible progeny (‘a). Hence, whoever intends to undertake the
journey of the levels and stages of recognition and to reach to its
highest grade i.e. meeting and seeing the Truth and finding His Lord, he
must fasten on to the Holy Prophet *(‘s)* and his Ahlul Bayt (‘a).

He should see to it that his deed conform to the divine commands {which
are the medium for following the Holy Prophet *(‘s)* and Ahlul Bayt
(‘a)}and should not take a single step without their permission. If he
fails to do so, he will never be able to reach to his destination. And
if he is steadfast in this path, Allah the Almighty will fulfil His
promise and grant him his desire.

Evidently, as the manifestation and recognition of Allah increases,
humility, modesty, obedience, gratitude, remembrance, attention,
glorification, praising, etc. in the service of his Lord and God also
increases. His compliance and submission to the divine laws increases
and he performs all his actions sincerely and purely in Allah’s way and
none else. Obviously, any act that bears the color of Allah and is
performed only for Him, will never be ruined. Allah the Almighty
declares,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلاَّ وَجْهَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Everything will be destroyed save His face.” (Qur’an, 28: 88)***

Imam Al-Baqir *(‘a)* explains this verse thus,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَ اللهَ أَعْظَمُ مِنْ أَنْ بُوصَفَ بِالْوَجْهِ؛ وَ لكِنَّ
مَعْنَاهُ: كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلاّ دِينَهُ وَ الْوَجْهُ الَّذِي
يُؤْتى مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah is greater than to be described with a face. But it (the word
‘face’) means, ‘Everything will be destroyed except His religion and
face is by which a thing is approached.”[^5]

In the traditions of the Ahlul Bayt (‘a), meeting with Allah has also
been implied for death. Allama Majlisi *(may Allah be satisfied with
him)* in his magnum opus, “*Bihar ul Anwar*”, volume 6, page 124, has
brought traditions explaining the above concept under the chapter, “The
Love of Meeting Allah and In Condemnation of Fleeing from Death”.

In some traditions, ‘meeting with Allah’ has also been interpreted as
resurrection and being brought out from the graves on the day of
judgement for questioning and examination of one’s deeds in this world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا قَوْلُهُ: ‘‘بَلْ هُمْ بِلِقاءِ رَبِّهِمْ كَافِرُونَ’’ يَعْنِي
الْبَعْثَ. فَسَمَّاهُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ لِقَاءَهُ. وَ ذَكَرَ
الْمُؤْمِنِيْنَ ‘‘الَّذينَ يَظُنُّونَ أَنَّهُمْ مُلاقُو رَبِّهِمْ’’.
يَعْني: يُوقِنُونَ أَنَّهُمْ يُبْعَثُونَ وَ يُحْشَرُونَ وَ يُجْزَوْنَ
بِالثَّوابِ وَ الْعِقابِ .... فَالِلّقَاءُ هَاهُنَا لَيْسَ
بِالرُّؤْيَةِ. وَالِلّقَاءُ هُوَ الْبَعْثُ. فَافْهَمْ جَمِيعَ مَا فِى
كِتَابِ اللهِ مِنْ لِقَائِهِ. فَإِنَّهُ يَعْنِي بِذاِكَ الْبَعْثَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Amir al Mu’minin Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a) explains,

“And His word, ‘Nay! They are unbelievers in the meeting of their Lord’
(Qur’an, 32: 10) implies ‘raising’ (**بَعْث**). Then Allah (Mighty and
Glorified be He) has named it as His meeting. And He has remembered the
believers “those who expect to meet their Lord,” (Qur’an, 2:46) means
‘they are sure that they will be raised, brought together and rewarded
and punished accordingly. Thus, meeting does not suggest physical
vision. Meeting indicates raising. And whenever the word ‘meeting (with
the Lord)’ has come in the Book of Allah, interpret it as
‘raising’.”[^6]

Hence, from the above, we can draw the following conclusion:

The meeting with the Lord can be achieved both in this world as well as
the hereafter. The only difference is that as in the hereafter, all the
veils will be set aside, people will rise from the sleep of negligence
and there won’t remain any room for disbelief and hypocrisy. But as this
world is the abode of examination and test, veils and negligence act as
a barrier in this meeting with Allah. And in order to achieve this
unison, as mentioned earlier, man has to bear tremendous pains and act
with utmost steadfastness so that he may succeed in setting aside these
coverings. Summing it up, Amir al Mu’minin (‘a) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ كُشِفَ الْغِطَاءُ مَا ازْدَدْتُ يَقِيناً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Even if the curtain is raised, my certainty will not increase.”[^7]

[^1]: Bihar ul Anwar, vol. 94, p. 148.

[^2]: Bihar ul Anwar, vol. 94, p. 150

[^3]: Usul al Kafi, vol.1, p. 198

[^4]: Bihar ul Anwar, vol. 77, p. 27

[^5]: Tauhid, p. 149

[^6]: Tauhid, p. 267

[^7]: Bihar ul Anwar, vol. 46, p. 134


