Meeting Allah in Human Mysticism
================================

In the school of sufism and human mysticism, to reach Allah and meet Him
is the last and final of the stages that a mystic treads towards the
arch of ascension. According to them, at this stage, the wanderer
reaches to the level of self-annihilation, joins with the Absolute
existence, i.e. the existence of the Truth and loses his own existence.
Now, for him, nothing remains except the existence of the Almighty. It
is at this level that claims like ‘I am the Truth’ (*An al-Haqq)*,
‘There is none in my robe except Allah’ *(laisa fi jubbati siwallah)*,
etc. are achieved.

Abdur Razzaq al Kashani says:

“Unification *(wasl)* implies returning after going away and ascending
after descent. For each one amongst us has descended from the highest of
stages and that is the position of *ahadiyyah* and unification with the
Eternal since eternity to the lowest of positions and that is the world
of elements and matter.

Then, some of us have fallen to the lowest level and remain in the pits.
While others, by treading towards Allah, and in Allah, by attachment to
His attributes, and through annihilation in His Being, have returned to
the state of unification. Thereby, through this real unison, as it was
in eternity, we shall continue to remain so in perpetuity.”[^1]

Explaining the term ‘*sawad al-wajhi fi al-dharain*’, he says, “To
annihilate ourselves in Allah with all our existence so much so that any
form of existence, apparent or concealed, worldly or of the hereafter,
does not remain for the mystic. This is true poverty and returning to
real non-existence. Thus, the sufis say, ‘When poverty reaches to
perfection, it is Allah.”[^2]

Sayyed Sharif Jurjaani elucidates the three levels of annihilation as
follows:

“*Mahq* is the annihilation of the servant’s existence in the Truth.
*Mahv* is the annihilation of his actions while *Tams* is the
annihilation of his attributes in the Truth.”[^3]

Jami, in *Lawa’ih,* seventh *La’iha,* p. 18, writes,

*‘In Your Being, make me free of my own existence,*

*So that I become free of my own existence as well as non-existence,*

*For annihilation is the method and poverty the ideology,*

*Neither manifestation, nor certainty, nor recognition nor religion (is
right),*

*He went away from everything, and only God remained,*

*That is, ‘When poverty reaches to perfection, it is Allah.’*

Sadruddin Shirazi says,

“Till the he-ness (ego) of the servant remains, he will continue to
remain in the veil of his existence and being. Perfect unison is not
possible for him to reach…But when he annihilates his being and destroys
the mountain of his I-ness, only then will he realise the Truth with
Truth. For his being immersed in Him, he becomes concealed and unknown
from everything including himself, his immersion and his observation.
For if he looks at his observation and gives preference to his
cognition,…his observation will conceal him from the Observed one and
his cognition will veil him from the Recognised one. Thus, he will not
be able to achieve the desired unison.”[^4]

Jaami is of the view that annihilation (*fana)* implies that nothing is
understood except him, through domination of the apparent being of Truth
over the concealed. And annihilation of annihilation *(fana-e-fana)* is
that even this understanding ceases to exist. It should be known that
*fana-e-fana* is within *fana*. For, if the annihilator understands his
own annihilation, then he will no longer be in a state of annihilation
because the attribute of annihilation and its described one is other
than God, the Glorious. Thus, its comprehension will be contradictory to
annihilation.” [^5]

To sum up, the Sufis are of the view that there is no existence except
that of God and He is the Absolute Existence. The existence of the
creatures is a display of non-existence. It is only imagination and in
reality, being is only the Truth. Apparently, the creatures possess
existence but in the concealed form, ‘there is none in the house except
the owner of the house’ (*laisa fi al-dar ghairuhu dayyar*).

These limitations and determinations are sheer imaginary and whimsical
that have been imposed on the Absolute Being and conceal the mystic from
the Truth. When the mystic does away with these illusory and imaginary
determinations and limitations, Truth becomes manifest. Therefore, the
unawareness of the mystic from the Truth, is due to the veil of I-ness,
determinations and limitations. When these veils are dispensed with,
unawareness turns to recognition, duality to unity and unison with Truth
is achieved. Recognition of Truth is achieved with the Truth itself.

In the book *‘Muhr e Taban’*, at the end of the interview between the
student and Allamah regarding the survival of the stable archetypes
*(a’yan e thabithah)* in the annihilation of the being, the former
opines:

“Annihilation of people in the Truth takes place in two ways. One is
that their natural lives and material existence remains and in this very
condition, they get the opportunity of annihilation. This type is
achieved before death. In this form, the sincere believers, who have
tread the path towards Allah, notwithstanding their worldly lives,
attain annihilation. Thus, for them annihilation is one of the various
conditions which they undergo.

We can say that Zaid finds himself in a state of annihilation just as we
can say that Zaid does not find himself in a state of annihilation. In
this form, annihilation and non-annihilation are two distinct states of
Zaid. Of course, as we said that Zaid finds himself, it is known that
these states are for Zaid and his determinations and limitations. But in
this form, the stable archetypes remain. The annihilation of all the
creatures from the stones, trees, mountains, skies, earth, stars, etc.
in the Truth is from this very category. For, by the survival of the
stable archetypes and their own existence, they are in a state of
annihilation and of humility and lowliness….

The second type of annihilation is for the one who loses his material
life and physical existence. He will inhabit the worlds of Barzakh and
Qiyamat after this world, is from the proximate and sincere ones and
remains in the Being of the Truth in a state of annihilation. He has
freed his body, exists sans physique, has left *barzakh* and *qiyamat*,
is without any form or spirit, has entered the Essence of the Almighty
and has dispensed with all the limitations and determinations.

Even his stable archetype does not exist anymore. There is no I-ness,
limitation, name or form…The change and transformation to this state of
annihilation is like the annihilation of a moth in a flame and the
dissolution of sugar into water. Thus, this change and transformation is
of essence and existential. It belongs to the being just as a dog is
transformed into salt in a salt pan and there remains no sign of his
being a dog. Similarly, for the one who treads the path of the Almighty,
there remains no sign of his existence whatsoever after his death.”[^6]

[^1]: Istihalat al Sufiyyah, p. 52

[^2]: Istihalat al Sufiyyah, p. 104

[^3]: al Tarifat, p. 89

[^4]: Sharh Usul al Kafi, vol. 3, p. 62

[^5]: Lawa’ih, 8th La’iha, p. 19

[^6]: Muhr e Taban, p. 200


