Meeting with Allah: Divine Cognition vis a vis Human Mysticism
==============================================================

After understanding the meaning of ‘meeting with Allah’ (*liqa Allah*)
in the school of divine revelation and human mysticism, we shall proceed
to understand the difference between the two. Meeting with Allah in the
school of revelation, as stated earlier, is a level higher than divine
recognition that is gained by Allah’s introduction and His manifestation
on the hearts of His servants. Moreover, this definition is the action
of Allah and the servant does not have any role in it except to put
himself in the place of this recognition through obedience, obeisance
and acting on the obligatory and recommended commands.

Of course, it should be borne in mind that this recognition is gained by
preserving the levels of the creature and the Creator (i.e. the creature
remains a creature and a distinct entity from the Creator). For, if the
creature loses his identity as a creature and merges with the Creator’s
existence, there would not remain any duality for which recognition
would be called for. Basically, such talks that existence is one and
that of the Creator, and the only difference between the Truth and His
creatures is that of determination and non-determination, limitations
and absoluteness, etc. do not hold water at all in the school of
revelation.

The Holy Qur’an and traditions of the infallible Imams (‘a) have clearly
refuted such concepts and called for a distinction between the Creator
and His creatures and that there exists no similarity whatsoever between
the two. The school of revelation considers the existence of creatures
bonded to the Creator’s Will *(mashiyah)* and Intention (*iradah*), both
of which are the actions of Allah. By His Intention, He initiates a
creation that did not have any prior existence and brings it forth from
the realm of non-existence. Similarly, whenever He pleases, He destroys
this creature which He had granted existence.

But in the school of mysticism, the Creator’s existence has worn the
robe of multiplicity. Every moment He takes a form and on losing that
form, He returns to His state of Oneness (*Ahadiyah*). That is, first He
descends and then He ascends. In reality, Creator and creature, Lord and
servant, do not exist. Rather, whatever exists is actually Him. The
difference lies in the levels of His Existence which, sometimes is in
the level of multiplicity *(Kasrat*) and sometimes in the level of unity
(*Wahdat*). In multiplicity, He is One (*Wahdat dar Kasrat*) and in
unity, He is many (*Kasrat dar Wahdat*).

Therefore, in the school of revelation, as the recognition of a person
increases, he realises even more his own servitude and the Lordship of
his Creator. Consequently, his humility, modesty, feeling of lowliness
and worship increase; he becomes engrossed in the remembrance of his
Lord with his entire existence, fulfils the duties of servitude with all
seriousness and earnest and considers the slightest disobedience of
Allah as inappropriate. At this level, he considers leaving the
abominable (*tark-e-awla*) as a capital crime. For, those who become
proximate to the Almighty, regard Allah’s esteem with such veneration
that they strive never to repeat their previous sins and in fact,
consider them as highly detestable. ‘*Hasanatul Abrar Sayyi’atul
Muqarribin*’ (The good deeds of the righteous ones are considered as bad
by the proximate ones).

But in human version of mysticism, when a mystic reaches to the state of
‘divine meeting’ and annihilation, for him all existence cease to occur
except the Truth. Neither there is any worshipper nor any worshipped one
for worship to take place; duality is removed and there remains no
existent save the Lord.

In this regard, Qaisari opines, “A person who reaches to the state of
unison observes that only Allah is existent. There is neither the one
who treads, nor the one whom towards whom the journey is undertaken nor
treading itself. The existence of the worshipper and his I-ness,
although present in the abstract self (*nafsul amr)*, does not observe
anything except His existence because the Light of Truth engulfs him.
Thus, for him neither the Lord nor the servant holds any meaning.

Only the One Lord exists. At this juncture, if the divine illuminations
that dominate the intellects and imagination attract the mystic, and
this attraction continues, he joins those enamoured by the Lord’s
beauty. And if this attraction does not continue, he will receive the
illuminations proportionate to its duration. Prayers, fasting and all
other religious obligations cease to become obligatory on receipt of
this illumination.”[^1]

Therefore, the difference between the two schools is basic and
fundamental. Here, this discussion will suffice and leaving the details
for some other place, we proceed with our main discussion.

The subject of our discussion was the importance, status and
significance of *Salat*. And before coming to the main topic, we
discussed the importance of meeting with Allah (*leqaaullah*) and also
stated that for a believer, there is no aim and goal higher and greater
than it. Now, let us proceed to the importance and significance of
*Salat*.

*Salat* which has been made obligatory on His servants by Allah the
Almighty and has not allowed them to forsake it in the worst of
circumstances, is the moment of ‘divine meeting’ and proximity with
Allah. It is during *Salat* that a pious and abstentious believer
attains great heights of divine recognition. *Salat* is attention
towards Allah and His remembrance. He says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اُذْكُرُونِي أَذْكُرْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You remember Me, I will remember you.” (Qur’an, 2:52)***

In fact, Allah remembers more those who worship Him than they remember
Him. Under the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَذِكْرُ اللهِ أَكْبَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘And Allah’s remembrance is the greatest.’ (Qur’an, 29: 45),***

Imam Al-Baqir (‘a) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذِكْرُ اللهِ لِأَهْلِ الصَّلاةِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ ذِكْرِهِمْ إِيّاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah’s remembrance of those who worship Him is greater than their
remembrance of Him.” [^2]

If a worshipper turns towards Allah only once, bows in front of His
greatness, feels humble and lowly in His presence, Allah the Almighty
will attend to him a number of times with grace, mercy and honour. How
sweet, important and honourable it is for a lowly, needy and degraded
servant that a Lord, High and Mighty that He is, turns to him and casts
His merciful glance and also remembers him!

Thus, O servants of Allah! Don’t consider your *Salat* as insignificant
and do not be negligent in its performance. For *Salat* it is that helps
a servant to reach unto his Master and provides satisfaction to him.
Amir al Mu’minin, Ali (‘a) explains the meaning of ‘Indeed the prayers
have been established’ (*qad qamat al-Salat)* thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَانَ وَقْتُ الزِّيَارَةِ وَ الْمُنَاجَاةِ وَ قَضَاءِ الْحَوَائِجِ وَ
دَرْكِ الْمُنى وَ الْوُصُولِ إِلى اللهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ، وَإِلى
كَرَامَتِهِ وَ عَفْوِهِ وَ رِضْوانِهِ وَ غُفْرَانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The moment of visitation, invocation and fulfillment of needs,
achievement of desires, and reaching to Allah (Mighty and Glorified be
He) and His honour, pardon, satisfaction and forgiveness has indeed
arrived.”[^3]

The Messenger of Allah (‘s) has said,

“*Salat* is from the fundamentals of religion and the satisfaction of
Allah, the Almighty lies therein. *Salat* is the method and path of the
Prophets (‘a). The one who prays, for him is the love of the angels,
guidance, belief, light of recognition, abundance in sustenance,
physical relief, hatred for the devil, conflict against the unbelievers,
acceptance of supplications and deeds. *Salat* is the provision of a
believer from this world for the hereafter and is an intercessor for him
in front of the angel of death. *Salat* is his companion and mate in the
grave and his reply for the questions of *nakir* and *munkar*.

The *Salat* of every believer is his crown on the day of resurrection,
light on his cheeks, robe for his body, a barrier between him and hell,
a help to cross the bridge of *sirat* to reach paradise and is his dowry
for the fairies (*hur)* and bounties of paradise. It is through *Salat*
that a person attains great heights. For, *Salat* is the purification of
Allah the Almighty, confessing ‘there is no god but Allah’, praising the
Creator, glorifying Him, respecting Him and honouring Him, conversing
with Him and to invoke Him and turn towards Him.”[^4]

Explaining the reason for imposing *Salat* as an obligation, Imam
Ar-Ridha’ (‘a) said to Ibn Sinan, “*Salat* is the confession of Allah’s
Lordship and purifying Him from any similarity or likeness. *Salat*
implies standing before Allah, the Powerful, with a feeling of
lowliness, poverty, confessing and seeking forgiveness for the past
sins.

A worshipper places his forehead five times a day on earth in front of
his Lord to express his respect for his Lord so that he does not forget
his Master and his Creator lest he becomes ungrateful and unmindful.
Moreover, while praying, a servant keeps away from sins and vices and
continues with the remembrance of Allah day and night. For, being
engrossed in the remembrance of his Lord and standing before Him, keeps
him away from the various types of sins and indecencies.”[^5]

[^1]: Risalah al-Tauhid wa al-Nabuwah wa al-wilaya, p. 32 narrating from
Falsafa e akhlaq, p. 141. Under this discussion, one can refer to Sharh
e Gulshan e Raz, p. 304, the fifth daftar of Mathnavi e Maulvi and Al
Isharat wa al-tanbihat, p. 394

[^2]: Tafsir, al Qummi, vol. 2, p. 150

[^3]: Ma’ani al akhbar, p. 41

[^4]: Al Khisal, p. 522

[^5]: Ilalush shar’ia, p. 317


