Adhan and Iqamah
================

Both *Adhan* and *Iqamah* are considered to be highly recommended and
emphasized acts in *Salat*. Numerous traditions have underlined their
significance and importance. *Adhan* and *Iqamah*, with their profound
meanings and concepts, prepare a worshipper to acquire proximity to the
Almighty in the way of worship and ascend to great heights. The Holy
Prophet *(‘s)* advised Abu Dharr (Allah be satisfied with him) thus:

“Allah always takes pride and boasts about three individuals to his
angels: (Among them is the) One who gets up in the desert without food
and water but says his Adhan and Iqamah and only then performs his
Salat. Your Lord says to the angels, “Look at My slave how he is
worshipping Me when he cannot see anybody other than Me.” Thereafter,
seventy thousand angels come forward and perform Salat behind him and
seek forgiveness for him till the morrow.

O Abu Dharr! When a person is hungry and thirsty on the earth, and does
Wudhu or tayammum and performs Salat after reading the Adhan and Iqamah,
Allah orders the angels to pray behind him in rows in such a way that he
cannot be spotted. They bow when he bows and prostrate when he
prostrates and say ‘Amin’ when he invokes.

O Abu Dharr! If somebody says only the Iqamah but forsakes the Adhan,
only two angels perform the Salat with him.”[^1]

Imam Husain (‘a) narrates,

“We were sitting in the mosque when the caller for prayers (mu’addhin)
went on the minaret and cried, ‘Allahu Akbar Allahu Akbar’. On hearing
this call, Amir al Mu’minin (‘a) wept profusely due to which even we
began weeping. When the mu’addhin completed his Adhan, Ali (‘a) said,
‘Do you know what did the mu’addhin say?’ We said, ‘Allah, His Messenger
and his successor know the best.’

He said,

‘If you knew what he said, certainly you would have laughed less and
cried more. The call of Allahu Akbar bears a few meanings:

One meaning of Allahu Akbar denotes the eternity, everlastingness,
knowledge, power, strength, benevolence, endowment, greatness and honor
of Allah the Almighty. By saying Allahu Akbar, the mu’addhin implies,
‘Allah is He to Whom belong the creation and the command. He brings
everything into creation by His Will. All that the creation possesses is
due to Him. Also, its return is unto Him. He is the First, before
everything, from eternity. He is the Last, after everything, and is
Everlasting. He is Evident, more than anything else, but cannot be
comprehended. He is the Hidden, more than anything else, but is sans
limits. (In other words, His being apparent is more evident than the
manifestation of anything else and His concealment is more hidden than
anything else).

The second meaning of Allahu Akbar is:

He is the All Knowing and All Aware. That is, He knows what has occurred
and what will occur before its occurrence.

The third meaning of Allahu Akbar is:

He is the All Powerful and commands authority over everything. His
dominion extends over whatever He wishes. He is Strong means that He has
power over His creation and rules them. His Strength is His Own and His
Power is dominant and established over all things. When He desires to
bring something into existence, He just commands ‘Be’ and it is.

The fourth meaning of Allahu Akbar connotes His Forbearance and Honor.
He is so Forbearing as if He does not know (our mistakes) at all. His is
so Forgiving as if He has not seen (our sins) at all. He conceals our
transgression as if there had been no obedience.

He does not hasten to punish or reprimand because of the aforementioned
attributes.

Another meaning of Allahu Akbar is:

He is Generous and Munificent. His endowments are plenty and His actions
honorable.

The fifth meaning of Allahu Akbar is:

He can neither be described nor does He possess any how-ness
(kaifiyyah). When somebody says Allahu Akbar it is as if he is
confessing that Allah is too Great than to be comprehended by the
attributes ascribed unto Him by the describers. These so-called
describers of attributes do so according to their own whims and
imaginations and not in correspondence with His Greatness. Allah is much
Higher than that the describers comprehend His attributes.

Yet another connotation of Allahu Akbar is that Allah is the Greatest
and Highest. He is Needless and can dispense with the actions (or
existence) of His creatures.

The statement ‘I witness that there is no god but Allah’ is an
announcement that testimony without recognition from the heart is
impossible. The announcer confesses:

I know that there is no god but Allah and every deity besides Him is
false. I hereby make a verbal admission and acknowledge from the depth
of my heart that there is no god except Him. I also witness that no
other god can provide refuge but Him and there is no asylum from evils,
mischief and corruption except in His Holy Being.

And the testimony, ‘I witness that there is no god but Allah’ for the
second time suggests:

I testify that there is no guide except Allah and none can acquire
guidance in religion except through Him. I take Allah as Witness that
there is no deity but Him. I take the inhabitants of the skies and the
earth and everything in between them, among the angels, mankind,
mountains, trees, wild animals, reptiles, in short, all existents of the
world of creation, as witnesses, that I bear testimony that there is no
creator except Allah. Also, there is no sustainer, no deity, none who
can harm, none who can benefit, none who can straighten things, none who
can grant salvation, no bestower, no restrainer, no adviser, none who
can cure, none who can advance matters or postpone them, except Allah
the Almighty. Creation and command is only in His authority. All the
goodness is only in His hands. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

And the announcement, ‘I witness that Muhammad (‘s) is the messenger of
Allah’, means:

I bear witness that certainly there is no god but Allah, Muhammad (‘s)
is His slave, His messenger and His chosen one. He has sent him (‘s) for
the guidance of the entire mankind and conveyed him the true religion.
He will make his religion dominate all ideologies even if the
polytheists detest it. And I take all the messengers and prophets (peace
be upon them) as witnesses, so also the angels and the entire mankind,
residing in the heavens and the earth, that Muhammad (‘s) is the master
of the first and the last.

And the announcement, ‘I witness that Muhammad (‘s) is the messenger of
Allah’, for the second time implies:

I testify that everybody needs Allah, the One, the Subduer, the Needless
from His servants, creatures and entire mankind. I witness that Allah
the Almighty sent Muhammad (‘s) as a giver of glad tidings, a warner, to
invite them towards Allah with His permission and be a shining lamp for
them. So, whoever denies or refutes him or does not believe in him (‘s),
Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He) will throw him in hell fire, which
shall be his eternal abode as he will never get respite from it.

The call, ‘Hasten for prayers’, indicates:

Hurry for your best deed, to the invitation of your Lord, towards
forgiveness and pardon of your God, to extinguish the fire that you have
kindled and to free your neck from the shackles that you have cast
around it. So that Allah may erase your evil deeds, forgive your sins,
convert your misdeeds to good actions, for He is the Master, the
Honorable, Possessor of the great obligation. And indeed He has
permitted us, the Muslim society, to enter in His service and to be in
His presence.

And the call, ‘Hasten for prayers’ for the second time, implies:

Stand up to invoke Allah, your Lord. Present your needs to your Lord,
seek from Him through His words, ask for His intercession through them.
Increase your remembrance (dhikr), your qunoot (the supplication in the
second unit of prayers), your bowing, your prostration, your humility,
your submissiveness, raise your hands to ask Him, for certainly, He has
permitted us for all these.

And the call ‘Hasten to success’, connotes:

Perform and hasten to the act that will last forever and will never be
destroyed, a safety that will never be annihilated, a life whose clue
can never be found by death, a bounty that will never end, a kingdom
that will never finish, a happiness that will never turn to grief, an
acquaintance that will never be a stranger, a light that will never see
darkness, a salvation that knows no bounds, a ceaseless splendor,
self-sufficiency that will never see want, a health that will never know
disease, a honor that will never witness disgrace, a strength that will
never turn into weakness, a glory that will remain unsurpassed, and
hasten to the joys of both this world as well as the hereafter.

And the call, ‘Hasten to success’, for the second time indicates:

Hasten to all the aforementioned bounties i.e. a great honor, a huge
obligation, a lofty bounty, an enormous deliverance, an eternal
munificence in the neighborhood of the Holy Prophet (‘s) in the abode of
truth and righteousness near the All Powerful King.[^2]

Again, the announcement, Allahu Akbar, suggests:

Allah the Almighty is Greater and Higher than that anyone among His
creatures can understand the bounties available with Him for His
obedient servant. A servant who possessed the following traits- obeyed
His commands, worshipped Him, heeded His warnings, was engrossed in His
remembrance, loved Him, was contented and satisfied with Him, relied on
Him, feared Him, pinned his hopes on Him, and fully submitted and
surrendered completely to His decree and destiny.

The announcement, Allahu Akbar for the second time indicates:

Allah is Greater, Higher and Majestic than that anybody can fathom the
extent of His honor towards His servants. Or understand His chastisement
for His enemies, the level of His pardon, forgiveness and bounties to
the one who answers His call and that of His messenger (‘s), and the
level of His punishment, wrath and reprimand for those who deny and
refute Him.

Then the call ‘There is no god except Allah’ means:

For Allah is the clear proof against the people through His messenger
(‘s), His message, His explanation and His call. And He is Majestic than
for anybody to possess any argument against Him. So whoever answers Him,
for him is light and honor. And one who denies Him, then indeed Allah is
Needless of the universe and He is the quickest in accounting.

And the call, ‘Indeed the prayer has been established’, in the Iqamah,
suggests:

The time for visitation, whispering, fulfillment of needs, reaching the
desire, uniting with Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He) and His honor,
forgiveness, satisfaction and forgiveness, has indeed arrived.”[^3]

If one pays a little attention to the above tradition and deliberates
over its various aspects, he will understand the importance and
significance of *Salat,* to a considerable extent, the pillar of
religion.

Whoever utters the sentences of the *Adhan* and *Iqamah* in the light of
their aforementioned interpretation, will find his heart full of divine
grace and honor and Allah’s manifestation in his heart will intensify
with every passing moment. Saying the *Adhan* and *Iqamah* is in fact
the remembrance of Allah.

And we have already stated that Allah the Almighty assures, “You
remember Me, I will remember You.” It is evident that when the Almighty
remembers His servant, His Power, Greatness and Kingdom encompass him.
Consequently, all his thoughts are focussed only on Him, and for the
sake of his heart’s contentment, he prepares himself for *Salat*, quiet
conversation with his Lord, and the fulfillment of his needs.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا بِذِكْرِ اللهِ تَطمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Know! Only with the remembrance of Allah do the hearts gain
contentment.” (Qur’an, 13:28)***

[^1]: Wasa’il al shi’a, vol.5, p. 383

[^2]: Shaykh al Saduq (ara) after narrating this tradition says, ‘The
narrator of this tradition has not mentioned the virtues of the
statement, ‘Hasten to the best of deeds’, on account of dissimulation
(taqiya)

[^3]: Ma’ani al akhbar, p. 38-41


