Takbirat ul Ihram and the Invocation of Attention
=================================================

When the worshipper finishes with his purification, *Adhan* and *Iqamah*
and prepares himself for the adoration of his Lord, by saying “*Allahu
Akbar*”- an element of Salat, he imposes on himself its prohibitions.
That is, till he does not terminate his prayers with the *salam*, he
prohibits certain things for himself, among them being turning away his
attention from Allah the Almighty.

And as *Takbirat ul Ihram* marks the commencement of prayers, the
worshipper while reciting it, should at least intend that whatever he
will do during the performance of this action, will be only and only for
the obedience of Allah.

Insofar as he continues with this intention in his prayers and does not
divert his concentration from it, he will find the reality of prayers
and realise the worship of Allah the Almighty in himself. In fact, this
only is the spirit and substance of prayers.

Before uttering the *Takbirat ul Ihram,* it is worthy that he recites
the invocation of attention *(doa-e-tawajjoh)* which, in the narration
of Abdullah Ibn Jafar Himyari (received in the *tawqee’* of Imam of the
Time (May God hasten his re-appearence) is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمواتِ وَ الأَرْضَ حَنِيفاً
مُسْلِماً عَلى مِلَّةِ إِبْراهِيمَ وَ دِينِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ هُدى أَمِيرِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ. وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ. إِنَّ صَلاَتِي وَ
نُسُكِي وَ مَحْيَايَ وَ مَمَاتِي لِلّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ. لاَ
شَرِيكَ لَهُ. وَ بِذلِكَ أَمِرْتُ. وَ اَنَا مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ.
اَللّهُمَّ اجْعَلْنِي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I turn my face towards the One Who has created the heavens and the
earth, being upright and submissive, on the nation of Ibrahim and the
nation of Muhammad and the guidance of Amir al Mu’minin. And I am not of
the polytheists. Surely, my prayers, my sacrifice, my life and my death
are (only) for Allah, the Lord of the worlds. There is no partner unto
Him. And thus have I been commanded. And I am from those who submit. O
Allah! Make me from those who submit.”[^1]

How great it is if somebody utters these words, synchronizes his heart
with his tongue, and gives his words a practical shape in its truest
sense, really turns his heart towards Allah, and removes all other
thoughts from his mind.

Yes! How good indeed is the servant who, at any given moment of his
life, does not do anything or commit any deed against the wishes of his
Master and Lord and even goes to the extent of dying in His cause. If at
all he does commit some sin or transgression, he immediately begs Him
for forgiveness and seeks His refuge.

May Allah make us, and all the friends of the Ahlul Bayt (‘a), from
those who submit to His wishes and may He not turn His attention away
from us even for a moment.

[^1]: al Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p.7; Wasa’il al shia, vol. 6, p.25


