Humility, Modesty and Concentration in Salat
============================================

After reading the *Takbirat ul Ihram* and *Dua e tawajjuh* and turning
your attention towards Allah, if you so desire, continue the *Salat* by
reciting the *Istighatha -* (**اَعُوْذُ بِاللهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
الرَّجِيْم** I seek refuge in Allah from the accursed *Shaitan*) that
you may seek protection from the whisperings of the devil in Allah and
dominate him through His grace.

Thereafter, you can proceed with the recitation of Surah Hamd, the
second surah, bowing, prostration, *qunoot, tasbihat, tashahud* and
*salam*, in the order prescribed. While performing the aforementioned
actions, strive to synchronize your limbs with your heart so that just
as the latter has become humble and modest, each part of the body feels
lowly, meek and submissive in the presence of the Almighty Creator.

Therefore, it is necessary that you gather all your attention, do not
pay attention to what is going around you, and distance yourself from
anything that diverts your attention. To achieve success in this,
endeavor to find a lonely, simple and unattractive place. Fix such a
time for your *Salat* when your thoughts are soothed and relaxed, and
there remains no room for laziness, physically as well as
psychologically.

It is also necessary that you obey the instructions of the infallible
Imams (peace be upon them) concerning the methods of *qiy’am*, bowing,
prostration, *tashhud* and *salam*. For, these instructions are indeed
very effective for concentration and humility. Moreover, recite the
wordings slowly and try to pay utmost attention to their meanings and
concepts unfailingly. Allah the Almighty says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي صَلاَتِهِمْ
خَاشِعُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely the believers are successful; those who are humble in their
prayers.” (Qur’an, 23:1-2)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لا تَقْرَبُوا الصَّلاةَ وَ أَنْتُمْ
سُكَارى حَتّى تَعْلَمُوا مَا تَقُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye who believe! Do not go near prayers while you are in an
intoxicated condition till you know what you are saying.” (Qur’an,
4:43)***

Imam Al-Baqir (‘a) explains,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تَقُمْ إِلى الصَّلاةِ مُتَكَاسِلاً وَ لاَ مُتَنَاعِساً وَ لا
مُتَثَاقِلاً. فَإِنَّهَا مِنْ خَلَلِ النِّفَاقِ. وَإِنَّ اللهَ نَهَى
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنْ يَقُومُوا إِلى الصَّلاةِ وَ هُمْ سُكَارى. يَعْنِي
مِنَ النَّوْمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not stand for prayers lazily, yawning or feeling heavy (i.e.
considering it to be a burden). For all these are from the traits of
hypocrisy. Allah has prohibited the believers from standing for prayers
while they are intoxicated i.e. (intoxicated) from sleep.”[^1]

Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) elaborates,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا كُنْتَ فِي صَلاَتِكَ، فَعَلَيْكَ بِالتَّخَشُّعِ وَ الإقْبَالِ
عَلى صَلاتِكَ. فَإِنَّ اللهَ تَعالى يَقْولُ: “الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي
صَلاتِهِمْ خَاشِعُونَ.’’
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When you are in your prayers, then it is obligatory for you to be
humble and welcome your prayers. For Allah the Almighty (while
describing the believers) says, ‘those who are humble in their
prayers.”[^2]

The same Imam (‘a) says,

“Certainly, I love the believer among you who while standing for the
obligatory prayers, turns his full attention towards Allah and cleanses
his heart from all worldly inclinations. His turns his face with his
entire heart towards Allah, Who in turn, turns towards him and makes his
heart overflow with His love and affection and Himself loves him
tremendously.”[^3]

Again, Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ صَلّى رَكْعَتَيْنِ يَعْلَمُ مَا يَقُولُ فِيهِمَا، انْصَرَفَ وَ
لَيْسَ بَيْنَهُ وَ بَيْنَ اللهِ ذَنْبٌ إِلاّ غَفَرَهُ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One who prays two units (rak’ats) of prayers knowing fully what he is
saying in it, he does not turn away from it (after completion), but
there remains no sin between him and Allah, that He does not
forgive.”[^4]

Imam Al-Baqir (‘a) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْعَبْدَ لَيُرْفَعُ لَهُ مِنْ صَلاَتِهِ نِصْفُهَا أَوْ
ثُلْثُهَا أَوْ رُبْعُهَا أَوْ خُمْسُهَا. فَمَا يُرْفَعُ لَهُ إِلاّ مَا
أَقْبَلَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْهَا بِقَلْبِهِ. وَإِنَّمَا أَمَرْنَا
بِالنّافِلَةِ لِيَتِمَّ لَهُمْ بِهَا مَا نَقَصُوا مِنَ الْفَرِيضَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed, from the prayers of the believers, 1/2 or 1/3rd or 1/4th or 1/5
th only is accepted. Thus, only that part of the prayers is admitted
which is performed with complete attention. And we have ordered the
recommended prayers (naafilah) only to cover the deficiencies of the
obligatory (prayers).”[^5]

Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) exhorts,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا صَلَّيْتَ صَلاَةَ فَرِيضَةٍ فَصَلِّهَا لِوَقْتِهَا صَلاَةَ
مُوَدِّعٍ يَخَافُ أُنْ لا يَعُودَ إِلَيْهَا أَبَداً. ثُمَّ اصْرفْ
بِبَصَرِكَ إِلى مَوْضِعِ سُجُودِكَ. فَلَوْ تَعْلَمُ مَنْ عَنْ
يَمِينِكَ وَ شِمالِكَ لَأَحْسَنْتَ صَلاتَكَ. وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّكَ بَيْنَ
يَدَي مَنْ يَرَاكَ وَ لا تَرَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When you perform your obligatory prayers, pray in its time as if it is
your last prayers and is never going to return to you ever again. Then
look at the place of your prostration. If you knew who is on your right
and left, you would have performed your prayers well. And know that you
are in front of the One Who sees you although you cannot see Him.”[^6]

In his famous Treatise of Rights, Imam Zain al Abidin(‘a) discusses the
rights of the prayers thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا حَقُّ الصَّلاةِ فَأَنْ تَعْلَمَ أَنَّهَا وِفَادَةٌ إِلىَ
اللهِ وَ أَنَّكَ قَائِمٌ بِهَا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللهِ. فَإِذَا عَلِمْتَ
ذلِكَ كُنْتَ خَليقاً أَنْ تَقُومَ فِيهَا مُقامَ الذَّلِيلِ الرّاغِبِ
الرّاهِبِ الْخائِفِ الرّاجِي الْمِسْكِينِ الْمُتَضَرِّعِ الْمُعَظِّمِ
مَنْ قَامَ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ بِالسُّكُونِ وَ الإطْرَاقِ وَ خُشُوعِ
الأَطْرَافِ وَ لِينِ الْجَنَاحِ وَ حُسْنِ الْمُنَاجَاةِ لَهُ فِي
نَفْسِهِ وَ الطَّلَبِ إِلَيْهِ فِي فِكاكِ رَقَبَتِكَ الَّتِي أَحَاطَتْ
بِهِ خَطِيئَتُكَ وَ اسْتَهْلَكَتْهَا ذُنُوبُكَ. وَ لا قُوَّةَ إِلاّ
بِاللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“As for the rights of the prayers, you should know that it is a means of
reaching towards Allah. And you are standing before Allah when you are
praying. When you are aware of this, then it is desirous that you stand
during prayers like the one who is disgraced, desirous (of rewards),
fearful, scared, hopeful, pauper, crying, respectful of the One Who is
before Him. Maintain a dignified calm, head down, limbs humble, tender
heart, praying with the best of invocations within yourself, seeking the
freedom of your neck from Him, an imprisonment caused on account of your
sins and a destruction caused by your misdeeds. There is no strength
except Allah’s.”[^7]

Therefore, it is necessary that one who prays, considering the position
and status of *Salat*, should pay full attention towards it with his
heart and soul, which is worthy of the praying ones. He should derive
benefits of both this world as well as the hereafter, from it and the
greatest reward of them all, that is, meeting with Allah, comes his way.

It does not befit him to become heedless of Allah, his creator, during
his prayers, and instead become engaged in himself. Although apparently
this may seem difficult, rather impossible – which is why it is
accompanied with such great rewards and compensation - but one should
never despair of it.

Perhaps, with Allah’s grace, and our efforts, belief and piety, the
difficulties will become easy and problems will be solved. For, if you
take one step towards Allah, He will pull you a hundred paces towards
Himself. Then, turn towards Him with your entire heart and soul. Don’t
allow laziness and indolence to dominate you and keep Shaitan away from
you. Abstain from ignorance and heedlessness that the path is paved and
the goal is near.

[^1]: Tafsir, Ayyashi, vol. 1, p. 242

[^2]: Usul al Kafi, vol. 3, p. 300

[^3]: Thawwab al ‘amal: 163

[^4]: Thawwab al ‘amal, p. 67

[^5]: Usul al Kafi, vol. 3, p. 363

[^6]: Thawwab al ‘amal, p. 57

[^7]: Tuhaf al Uqul, p. 258


