Invocation in Prayers
=====================

Previously, we have quoted on the authority of Amir al Mu’minin (‘a)
that *Salat* is the occasion of fulfilling the desires and achieving
one’s aims. The *qunoot* in *Salat* has been ordained to enable the
worshipper to place his desires and needs in front of his Lord. Also,
for prostration, specific supplications have been recommended. Moreover,
after the prayers, great emphasis has been laid to invoke and express
our needs in front of the Almighty. Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) exhorts,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكُمْ بِالدُّعاءِ فِي أدْبارِ الصَّلاةِ. فَإِنَّهُ مُسْتَجَابٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is obligatory for you to supplicate after Salat, for such
supplications are answered.”[^1]

Therefore, invocation is the expression of the need and paucity of our
own selves as well as of others along with the confession of the
self-sufficiency, generosity, honour, grace, affection and benevolence
of the Almighty. Anyone who desires something from others, turns and
pays attention towards him. As he finds himself in need and
impoverished, he strives to present his wants through pleas and
persistence, thereby attempting to attract the attention of the invoked
one. Traditions have stated that Allah loves importunity and persistence
in invocations. Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (‘a) assures,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهِ لا يُلِحُّ عَبْدٌ مُؤْمِنٌ عَلى اللهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ فِي
حاجَتِهِ إلاّ قَضَاهَا لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By Allah, no believer persists with Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He)
in his needs but that He fulfils it.”[^2]

Imam As-Sadiq (‘a) informs,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ كَرِهَ إِلْحَاحَ النّاسِ بَعْضِهِمْ عَلى
بَعْضٍ فِي الْمَسْأَلَةِ، وَأَحَبَّ ذلِكَ لِنَفْسِهِ. إِنَّ اللهَ
عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ يُحِبُّ أَنْ يُسْأَلَ وَ يُطْلَبَ مَا عِنْدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He) detests that people should be
importune and persistent while asking each other for some need but loves
the same for Himself. Certainly Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He) likes
that He is asked and sought for what is with Him.”[^3]

On the other hand, anyone who refuses to invoke Allah or express his
needs before Him, subjects himself to His wrath. For, he has considered
himself to be needless, great and haughty. Allah the Almighty warns,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ
جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely those who are arrogant regarding My worship (invoking Me),
will soon enter hell in a degraded state.” (Qur’an, 23:60)***

Imam Al-Baqir (‘a) interprets the word ‘worship’ in this verse as
‘supplication’ and then proceeds to say,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَفْضَلُ الْعِبَادَةِ الدُّعاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And supplication is the most superior form of worship.”[^4]

Hannan Bin Sudair relates from his father, who asked Imam Al-Baqir (‘a),
‘What is the best form of worship?” Imam (‘a) replied,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ شَيْءٍ أَفْضَلُ عِنْدَ اللهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ مِنْ أَنْ
يُسْأَلَ وَ يُطْلَبَ مِمّا عِنْدَهُ. وَمَا مِنْ أَحَدٍ أَبْغَضُ إِلَى
اللهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ مِمَّنْ يَسْتَكْبِرُ عَنْ عِبادَتِهِ وَ لا
يَسْأَلُ مَا عِنْدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is nothing better near Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He) than
that He is asked and sought for what is with Him. And the most hateful
and detestable person for Allah is he who is arrogant in His worship and
does not ask Him for what is with Him.”[^5]

Hence, we should not claim that Allah the Almighty knows our needs and
wants and thus there is no need for us to ask Him further, if as He
deems it proper, He will grant it. For, invocation and supplication is
this very attention towards Allah and reaching out to His wealth,
generosity, and grant.

At the same time, it is an expression of our being in His slavery and
bondage and confessing to His Lordship and Mastership. And this will be
the best form of Allah’s worship. Therefore, we must implore and beseech
Allah. Since apparent pleas without heartily attention is fruitless, we
must make efforts to ask Him from the depth of our hearts, even if we
don’t utter our demands orally.

So, invocation is loved and desirable in all states and at all times but
that invocation is more acceptable which is accompanied with its
etiquette and conditions of time and place. As said earlier, one of the
best times for supplications, is during prayers and after it, because it
is that time when a believer rises to converse with his Lord, attains
the elevated position of divine recognition and proximity, and his focus
and concentration towards his Master is increased.

We hope that Allah the Almighty makes our prayers as a channel towards
His nearness a means for the acceptance of our supplications and needs.

[^1]: Khisal, p. 488

[^2]: Usul al Kafi, vol. 2, p. 475

[^3]: Usul al Kafi, vol. 2, p. 475

[^4]: Usul al Kafi, vol.2, p. 466

[^5]: Usul al Kafi, vol. 2, p. 466


