Part 7 - Hussain's Sermon
=========================

At forenoon of the tenth of Muharram when the heat of the sun started
scorching the earth, Hussain, his household and companions began to feel
the severity of thirst. The enemy was adamant not to give them access to
the water of the River Euphrates out of Jahili'ite enmities and
Badri'ite grudges. Therefore, Aba Abdillah AI-Hussain, feeling the
strain of thirst, mounted his horse and opened the leaves of Al-Qur'an
over his head and stood in front of the belligerent camp and shouted,
"The Book of Allah and the Sunna (tradition) of my grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah (S) are the arbiters between you and me". He then
made them bear witness on his pure soul and that he was wearing the coat
of arms of the Prophet (S), his buckler and his turban.

They said that his statement was true. He then asked them what made them
decide on fighting him. Their answer was that it was out of obedience to
the Emir Obaidullah bin Ziyad. He then delivered this sermon:

![](books/0762-the_tale_of_the_martyrdom_of_imam_hussain/images/image002.jpg)

Hussain's sermon:

***"May grief and evil befall you, You wretched bunch! You distressfully
called upon us to come to your rescue and when we responded fully, you
unsheathed your swords against and pushed us unto the fire which we set
alight for our enemy as well as yours. You, therefore, played into the
hands of your enemy against your masters (the friends of God). Without
justice the enemy administered amongst you and without hope you placed
in them. Woe unto you! You abandon us while the sword is still
blemished, oneself is collected, and the mind is yet to be made up. Yet,
you rushed like the creeping bird and fell over yourselves like
butterflies crowding on a flower; then you wrecked it; to hell with you!
Oh you slaves of the bondmaid! Ahzab outlanders, forsakers of the Book
[of Allah], distorters of facts, bunch of evil, blow of Satan,
extinguishers of norms! Woe unto you! Have you chosen to support those,
and let us down? Yes, by the Almighty this emanates from an old
intrinsic treachery, fed to your origins and handed down to you;
therefore, you are like a malignant fruit - distressing to look at and
sickening when eaten."***

***"The bastard and the son of a bastard has left us but two choices,
either resorting to the sword or capitulating. How preposterous!
Humiliation is not our cup of tea! Allah shall never let this happen to
us; so shall His Messenger, the believers, and chaste and pure laps and
proud souls. For the sake of these values we would rather die in an hour
and not submit to the ignobles. Hence my march leading this family
albeit meagre in number and deserted by would-be supporters."***

*    Hussain thundered: "0, wretches you*

*    Before the swine pearls I threw.*

*    Don't venom spit in religion's name*

*    Comprehend I do, your noxious game.*

*    When degeneration marks its way*

*    An entire nation goes astray.*

*    Delusion, do not let you sway*

*    Confounded whims induce decay.*

*    For you is mild profoundest hell*

*    That infernal jail can't match you well.*

*    A hideous deed, sponsor not*

*    Save your conscience, mend your lot*

*    Erase and efface your sins' stains*

*    With tainted conscience, no one gains*

*    The lure, the virtuous to pursue*

*    The crass chase it, to grab it, run.*

*    This pathless desolation, do not tread*

*    'Tis disquietude, self-imposed dread*

*    Don't your conscience push and goad*

*    Vainly, trudge not a craggy road".*


