Part 9 - Is there any amongst Man to help us ?
==============================================

He then shouted, "Is there any one who can come to our rescue? Is there
any one who can protect the sanctity of the family of Allah's Apostle?"
The screaming and crying of women could be heard as a result of his
plea.

One by one the companions of Hussain (A) asked for permission to meet in
combat with the enemy bidding him farewell, saying, "Peace be with you
Oh Aba Abdillah!"; he answered. "Peace be with you; we will follow",
reciting, "...so of them is he who accomplished his vow, and of them is
he who yet waits, and they have not changed the least". (33:23)

Then the two Jabiri cousins, Saif bin al-Harith bin Sari' and Malik bin
Abid bin Sari' emerged crying and asked for permission to fight. Hussain
asked them, "What makes you cry? I am hopeful that you will after a very
short time have peace of mind and tranquillity". They answered, "We are
not crying for ourselves, but for you. We can see that you are
beleaguered, and we have no power to be of any good to you". Hussain
thanked them. They fought till death.

Then the two Ghifari brothers, Abdullah and Abdul-Rahman sons of Urwah
followed and fought and were killed close to Hussain (A).

A group consisting of Omar bin Khalid as-Saidawi, his servant Sa'ad,
Jabir bin Al-Harith as-Salmani, and Majma' bin Abdullah Al-A'aithi came
out and raided the enemy, the Kufi'ites; when they went deep into their
ranks, they were encircled by the troops and cut off. Hussain sent his
brother Al-Abbas in a bid to rescue them, which he did successfully. But
due to their severe wounds they were overpowered by the Kufi'ites and
were killed in one place.

Al-Hur bin Yazid ar-Riyahi attacked the enemy troops killing over forty
of them. When his horse got wounded he fought them on foot and fell to
the ground. Hussain stood over him wiping away soil and blood which was
oozing from his face, saying, "Congratulations oh you Hur! You are Hur
(free) as your mother named you". He passed away.

Wadhih, the Turkish servant of Al-Harth al-Mithiji came forward and
asked for permission to fight. He fought until he was severely wounded;
he called Hussain by name to come to his rescue. Hussain responded. But
it was too late as he was in his final moments of life. Hussain hugged
him. He said, "I am so lucky; the son of the Messenger of Allah putting
his cheek on mine". He died immediately after that.

Aslam, the servant of Hussain (A) was next. He fought bravely. When he
was badly wounded he called on Hussain for help. Hussain came to him and
hugged him. He was still alive. He smiled, thanked God for granting him
martyrdom and passed away.

Muslim bin Awsajah assaulted the enemy and fought very bravely. Amr bin
al-Hajjaj and a band of his companions counter attacked the camp of
Hussain from the direction of the Euphrates. When the two belligerent
forces clashed and the dust settled, Muslim bin Awsajah was found fallen
but still with a spark of life.

Hussain (A) and Habib bin Mudhahir walked towards him. Hussain said to
him, "May Allah have mercy on you oh Muslim!" and recited,***" so of***

***them is he who accomplished his vow, and of them is he who yet waits,
and they have not changed the least". (33:23)***

Habib bin Mudhahir approached him and said, "God knows how sorry I am
that you will die, Oh Muslim! the good news is that you will go to
heaven". Muslim replied in a faint voice, "May Allah bring good news to
you

Habib added, "If I am not absolutely sure that I will follow in your
foot steps I would have asked you to let me know of your will". Muslim
answered, "I urge you to take care of this", pointing to Imam Hussain,
"You should sacrifice your life protecting him". Habib said to him,
"Feel serene and be confident about that". He gave up the ghost to its
Creator.

When the followers of Ibn Sa'ad knew of the death of Muslim bin Awsajah
they shouted in elation. Shibth bin Rib'ii said to those who were around
him, "May your mothers be bereaved. You are killing yourselves with your
own hands and bring humiliation to yourselves Do you rejoice at the
death of Muslim? He has credit in the service of Muslims. I saw him at
the battle of Azerbaijan killing six atheists before the horsemen of the
Muslim army had the chance to re-group.

When the troops of Ibn Sa'ad suffered many casualties at the hands of
the followers of Hussain (A), Amr bin Al-Hajjaj shouted at his
followers, "Do you know who you are fighting? You are fighting
clear-sighted knights, bent on killing you; by the Almighty! if you
would use only stones against them you would have killed them!." Omar
bin Sa'ad retorted, "You are right. Tell the troops not to meet with
them in duel, for if you do so you will all perish".

Amr bin AI-Hajjaj attacked the right flank of Hussain's camp. The
remaining combatants withstood their ground, falling on their knees,
aiming their arrows at the enemy. Thus, forcing the horses of the enemy
to refrain from forging ahead. When they resumed their attack they came
under a hail of arrows from Imam Hussain's (A) followers causing many
casualties among their ranks.

Shimr bin Thil al-Jawshan took on the left flank of Hussain's (A) camp.
The combatants proved to be as steadfast as their companions in the
right flank. The result was complete failure of the enemy to break
through the solid defences of Hussain troops.

Among those who remained alive at this stage of the battle was Wahab bin
Abdullah Al-Kalbi who was with his mother and wife. His mother urged him
to come out and support the son of the daughter of the Messenger of
Allah. He answered, "0 mother! I will do my best". He came out chanting
these sonnets.

"You better deny me not as I am the son of Al-Kalbi. You will see me and
how fatal my blows are. How my assault and campaign seeking my revenge
and that of my companions. I repulse the attack in the wake of the
attack. For my struggle in the battlefield is not a playing matter."

Then he attacked the enemy killing some and wounding others, returning
to his mother, saying to her, "Are you satisfied with my deed?" She
answered. "Never! unless you are killed before Hussain (A)".

![](books/0762-the_tale_of_the_martyrdom_of_imam_hussain/images/image004.jpg)

His wife intervened asking him, "I put you to oath by the Almighty! Do
not bereave me by getting killed". His mother said to him, "Do not pay
attention to what she says; go back and carry on fighting in front of
the son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah; you will be worthy of
his grandfathers intercession on the Day of Judgement". He resumed
combat, killing nineteen horsemen and twelve infantry troopers. He lost
both his arms and was killed. May his soul rest in peace.

His wife walked towards his body and sat near his head, wiping away
blood and saying. "Congratulations for you are guaranteed a place in
heaven; I pray to the Almighty to bestow it on me to make me join you".
Shimr was very angry at the spectacle. He dispatched his servant to kill
her; he dealt a fatal blow to her head with a truncheon; she died
instantly. She was the first women among the companions of Hussain (A)
to be killed.

The enemy chopped off Wahab's head hurling it towards the tents of
Hussain (A); his mother hugged it and wiped the blood off his face. She
then was seen holding a tent pole and heading towards the enemy. Imam
Hussain (A) prevented her from engaging in combat saying, "Go back. May
Allah have mercy on you. You are relieved of jihad (holy war)". She
returned uttering, "Oh Lord! do not frustrate my hope". Hussain said to
her, "Allah will not do so".

Shimr attacked the tent of Imam Hussain (A) using his spear threatening
to set it ablaze. The ladies inside the tent fled screaming and were in
a distraught state. Hussain (A) called on him, "Oh you son of Thil
Jawshan! Are you calling for my house to be burned while my family are
inside? May Allah burn you in hell fire."

Shibth bin Rib'ii said to Shimr, "You have become a source of fright to
women. I have never come across neither a deed nor a stance worse than
yours". He felt ashamed and withdrew.


