Part 10 - The Martyrs Die - One by One
======================================

It was just after midday when the fighting was still raging. Aba
Thummamah as-Sa'idi approached Hussain (A) and said, "I can see that the
enemy is getting very close. By God! I will not let them kill you and I
am still alive. I wish to meet Allah, the Exalted after I have said my
prayers in your company". Hussain raised his head towards the sky and
said, "You remembered prayer! May Allah make you among those who say
prayer and invoke Him; indeed, this is the start of (Dhuhr) Noon
prayer". "Ask those people to give us a respite until we say our
prayer", he added. Al-Hosein (of the enemy camp) said, "It will not be
answered". Habib bin Mudhahir replied, "You claimed it will not be
accepted from the house of the Messenger. Would it then be accepted from
you? Al-Hosein attacked him dealing a sword blow to the head of his
horse causing it to rear; he fell of and was rescued by his companions.

Hussain (A) then got ready for prayer - several versions as to how and
what sort of prayers was said have been related. One version is that he
led what was spared of his followers at that stage of the battle in
'fright prayer'; Zuhair bin Al-Qain and Sa'eed bin Abdullah Al-Hanafi
together with half of the followers were in front of him. A second
version claims that they said their prayer individually i.e. not in a
congregational manner. A third story is that he led them in a quick
prayer.

When Sa'eed was badly wounded he fell to the ground and said, "Oh God
Almighty! Damn them as you have condemned the people of A'ad and
Thamoud; give my regards to Your Prophet and let him know of the pain I
am suffering; my aim is to be rewarded by You for defending the progeny
of Your Prophet (S.A.W.)". He turned to Hussain and asked, "Have I lived
up to my vow?" Hussain replied, "Yes, you are preceding me in entering
paradise". He perished. He was found to have received thirteen arrows
apart from wounds caused by swords and spears.

When Hussain (A) had finished his prayer he said to his companions, "Oh
you noble folk! The gates of paradise are ajar, its rivers are flowing,
its fruits are ready to be reaped; its dwellers - the Messenger of Allah
and the martyrs who were killed in the way of Allah are waiting to
welcome you; they yearn for your company. It is, therefore, incumbent on
you to protect the religion of Allah, and His Messenger; drive away the
enemy from his family. Their answer was, "Our souls are a protection to
yours and our blood for yours; By the Almighty no harm will befall you
and members of your kindred as long as we still breathe".

Omar bin Sa'ad ordered Amr bin Sa'eed who was in command of a group of
archers to stun the horses of the followers of Hussain (A). The result
was that no horseman was spared save Adh-Dhahhaq bin Abdullah
Al-Mashriqi. He said the sight of our combatants falling led me to enter
my horse in a tent to spare it destruction.

Abu Thamama as-Sa'idi came out and fought valiantly until he was
critically wounded. A cousin of his, who had a grudge against him, set
upon him and killed him.

Salman bin Mudharib al-Bajli, who is Zuhair bin Al-Qain's cousin, forged
ahead fought and got killed.

Handhala bin Sa'eed ash-Shabami shouted "Oh people! I fear for you the
like of what befell the (Al-Ahzab) parties, the like of what befell the
people of Nuh (Noah), and A'ad and Thamoud, and those who came after
them, and Allah does not desire injustice for (His) servants; 0 my
people! I fear for you from the day of calling out, the day on which you
turn back retreating; there shall be no saviour for you from Allah, and
whomsoever Allah causes to en, there is no guide for him. (40:30-93)

O my people! do not kill Hussain***"lest Allah should destroy you by a
punishment, and he who forges (a lie) indeed fails to attain (his
desire)". (20:61)***

Hussain rewarded him with a good recompense and said "May Allah's mercy
be with you; surely, they will deserve the punishment when they brushed
aside your call for them to follow the truth, and rose to shed your
blood as well as that of your coreligionists Just imagine how much more
would befall them as they killed your good brethren!.

He retorted. "You told the truth, 0 son of the Apostle of God! Is it not
then the time to leave for the hereafter? Hussain gave him the
permission to join the fray; he saluted Hussain and attacked the enemy
and got killed.

Meanwhile, Aabis bin Shabih ash-Shakiri approached Shawthab, the servant
of Shakir, who was a trustworthy follower in whose house Shia Muslims
used to gather together and talked of the exploits and virtues of Ahl
al-Bayt. Aabis said, "What do you like to do?" He replies, "I would like
to fight alongside you until I got killed. Aabis wished him well and
said to him, step before Hussain so that he can acclaim you as he did
with the others who preceded you for that which we can expect reward in
the hereafter". Shawthab saluted Hussain and pressed on, fought and got
killed.

Aabis drew near Hussain and said, "There remained neither a kindred nor
a friend who is dearer to me than you; if I am in a position to avert a
diversity from you with any-thing that is more valuable to me than my
own life, I would have never hesitated to do so. Peace be with you; I
bear witness that I have been on the right guidance of your father and
that of yours! He then advanced towards the enemy, sword in hand, and
shouting. Since they knew him to be a very brave man, no one stood his
ground in the face of his assault. Realising the danger, Omar bin Sa'ad
shouted, "Pelt him with stones". As he was overwhelmed by stone
throwing, he parted with his coat of arms and headgear and charged the
enemy troops who fled. They regrouped and managed to encircle him and
kill him. Dispute erupted among the troops each claiming the reward for
his killing. Ibn Sa'ad said, "He has not been killed by any of you
single-handed". He, therefore, denied them the recompense.

![](books/0762-the_tale_of_the_martyrdom_of_imam_hussain/images/image005.jpg)

John, the servant of Aba Thar, stood before Hussain asking for
permission to fight. He said to him, "0 John! You joined us in quest of
welfare; you are therefore, free to part my company". John knelt kissing
the Imam's feet and pleading with him "In felicity, I lick your bowls;
in adversity I will never let you down! Since my smell is bad, my
lineage is humble and my colour is black, I look forward to that day in
heaven when you breathe in me making my smell pleasant, my pedigree
honourable, and my complexion white. Nay! by God I am not parting with
you until this black blood of mine is fused with your blood!" Hussain
gave him the permission. He fought valiantly killing twenty five
soldiers. He then was killed. Imam Hussain attended his body and said,
"0 Lord! Whiten his face and sweeten his smell and gather him (on the
Day of Resurrection) with Mohammad and let him be identified with the
household of Mohammad". It was related that whomsoever passed by the
battlefield smelled the aroma of his body which was more pleasant than
musk.

Anas bin Al-Harith bin Nabih Al-Kahili, who was an elderly Companion saw
the Apostle, heard his talk, and took part with him in Badr and Hunain
battles, sought permission from Hussain, With his turban cloth, he
assaulted the enemy troops killing about eighteen before he was killed.
When Hussain sow him thus he wept and said,

"May Allah reward you!".

Amr bin Junadah Al-Ansari, a boy of eleven years, whose father was
already killed in the battle, approached Hussain for permission to join
the fight. Hussain was adamant not to let him do so saying, "This is a
boy whose father was killed in the early campaign; his mother may hate
to see him killed". The boy said, "My mother ordered me". He gave the
permission to fight. No sooner the boy was killed and his severed head
was thrown towards Hussain's camp. His mother took the boy's head, wiped
the blood from it and hurled it at a nearby man and killed him. She then
returned to the camp and fetched a tent pole, or some say a sword,
singing war poetry and assaulting the enemy. Imam Hussain returned her
to the camp after she had injured two men.

Al-Hajjaj bin Masrouq Al-Ju'fi fought until he was drenched with blood.
He returned to Hussain to tell him how happy he was to meet Hussain's
grandfather, Apostle of God, and his father the, vicegerent. Hussain
replied, "I will soon meet them too". He then returned to the
battlefield and got killed.

The Ansaris (Medinese) Sa'ad bin al-Harith and his brother Abul Hutoof
heard Hussain's cry for help and the wailing of members of his family.
They defected from Ibn Sa'ad army and joined Hussain's band. They fought
the enemy and got killed.

Abush-Sha'tha Yazid bin Ziad Al-Kindi, who was on Sa'ad's side did the
same by joining Hussain's. He was an archer. He knelt in front of
Hussain and shot a hundred arrows. Hussain used to pray for him, "0
Lord! Make his shot hit the target and reward him with paradise". When
his arrows ran out he stood up and said, "It seems as though I killed
five combatants". He attacked the enemy and killed another nine.

Bidding Hussain farewell, Swaid bin Amr bin Abil Muta' set forth and
fought bravely until he was critically wounded. He fell face down. It
was thought that he was dead; however when heard that Hussain was
killed, he got up brandished a knife, and attacked the enemy; he was
then set upon by the thugs and was killed. He was the last of Hussain's
companions to be killed before Hussain's martyrdom,

*    "Died other martyrs, one by one,*

*    All were fearless, coward none.*

*    Plucked were the Prophet's "blooms" in a day*

*    Leaf by leaf-on the sand they lay.*

*    Juveniles, adolescents, young and old,*

*    An army not; seventy-two, all told*

*    I groaned aghast as Hussain I saw,*

*    (His visage stately, with no flaw")*


