Part 11 - The Martyrdom of Ali al-Akbar
=======================================

The Martyrdom of Ahl ul-Bayt (A) - The Posterity of the Prophet (S)

Since none of the companions who fought with Hussain was spared, members
of his immediate family got ready to make the ultimate sacrifice in a
manner that was characteristic of the pedigree of the Prophet - sheer
determination, unrivalled bravery, and scant regard to personal safety.
They bade farewell to each other, The first to come forward was Abul
Hassan Ali al-Akbar who was twenty seven years old. He took permission
from his father, Hussain and mounted his horse and met in combat with
the Kufans. A man from amongst the crowd shouted, "O Ali! You relate to
Yazid - for his mother Layla was daughter of Maymoona daughter of Abi
Sufyan - and we want to respect this relationship. We may grant you an
amnesty and a refuge if you wish". He said "The kinship of the Apostle
of God should be second to none." He pressed on proclaiming who he was.

Imam Hussain could not hold back his tears and shouted at Omar bin
Sa'ad, "What has become of you? May Allah bereave you of your kindred as
you have made me bereft of mine, and did not respect my relationship of
the Prophet. May Allah set on you an adversary who will slay you in your
bed." He then raised his hands to the sky and said, "0 Lord! Bear
witness on those people for he who emerged to them is bearing a strong
likeness to Your Prophet in all departments - resemblance of
disposition, complexion, and logic. Hence we look at him when we crave
to see Your Apostle. 0 Lord! Deprive them of the riches of the land,
divide them, rend them asunder and turn them into smithereens. Never
make the rulers be happy with them, for they sent for us so that they
may support us but transgressed against us and killed us." He then
recited Allah's words, "Surely, Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the
descendants of Ibrahim and the descendants of Imran above the nations,
offspring, one of the other, and Allah is Hearing Knowing".

Ali al-Akbar continued fighting. He killed all those who had the guts to
meet him in duel. He killed scores of combatants.

Since thirst greatly contributed to his overstraining, he returned to
his father to rest and complain of what thirst had done to him. Hussain
cried, appealed for help and said, "You will soon meet your grandfather
who will water you from his tumbler that you will never be thirsty
again". He sucked his tongue to alleviate his predicament and gave him
his ring to put in his mouth.

Ali returned to the battlefield happy to be told by his father that be
would meet his grandfather, the Prophet. He delved into their ranks
dispersing them. It seemed as though it were his grandfather, Imam Ali
roaring in the battle ground fighting them. He killed more Kufans.

When the death toll mounted, Murra bin Munqidh al-Abdi made a pledge
saying, "I shall bear all the sins of the Arabs, if I do not bereave his
father." He ran his lance into his back and dealt him a blow on his head
causing it to split. He embraced his horse which took him to the enemy
camp where he was encircled by the troops who cut him into pieces.

![](books/0762-the_tale_of_the_martyrdom_of_imam_hussain/images/image006.jpg)

On the brink of dying, he could muster a shout, "0 Aba Abdillah!
Farewell. Here is my grandfather; from whose cup I have drunk. Never
again I will be thirsty. He says that there will be a cup waiting for
you". Hussain hurried to him bending on him, putting his cheek over
Ali's and murmuring, "Life is no longer worth living after your
departure. How dare they encroach on Allah and violate the sanctity of
the Prophet. Alas! It is hard on your grandfather and your father that
you call on them for help which they cannot provide".

He then scooped a handful of his pure blood and throw it to the sky; not
a single drop fell to the ground! That is why in the visitation ceremony
we used to address him, "May my parents be sacrificed for you as you
were wrongfully slain; for your blood which ascended to the heavens, for
your sacrifice before your father in anticipation of God's reward. Yet
he parted with you in extreme heart rending situation when he threw your
blood to the sky as an offering and none of it fell to the ground.."

Hussain ordered his youth to carry his body to the tent, where the free
females of the household of the Apostle of God gathered around him
crying, wailing beating their breasts, and plucking their hair. Zainab
al-Kubra (Senior), the pick of Bani Hashim threw herself on his body
cuddling it for she saw in his demise her waning strength, the departure
of the protector of her privacy and honour, and the crumbling of the
buttress of her house.


