Part 13 - The Killing of Al-Abbas and his Brothers
==================================================

When Abbas saw the death toll mounting amongst members of his family, he
said to his brothers, Abdullah, 0thman and Ja'far, "0 Sons of my mother!
Go forth to meet the enemy so that I may bear witness that you kept your
covenant with Allah and His Apostle". He turned to Abdullah who was
older than Othman and said to him, "Come forward, brother, so that I may
witness your killing and thus be considered (by God)". So, they all
fought in the presence of their brother, Al-Abbas till they were killed.

Al-Abbas reached the tether of his patience not to follow in the
footsteps of his brethren and companions, especially when he could see
that "The proof of the Time", Imam Hussain is getting increasingly
beleaguered, his supply root cut, the screams of women and the crying of
children, who were thirsty, filled his ears. He, therefore, asked his
brother to allow him to meet the enemy in combat. Since Abbas was the
most valued asset Hussain cherished because the enemy are wary of his
attack and fearful of his courage, and the women feel safe and secure so
long as they saw the standard hoisted, Imam Hussain did not wish to part
company with him and said, "0 Brother! You are the bearer of my flag".

*    "Hussain placated Abbas, with calm:*

*    Amity's balm seeks; hurt Islam*

*    Restrain your wrath, my brother brave,*

*    A battle, to precipitate, we don't crave,*

*    'Tis prudent, now to peer ahead,*

*    Don't let them act in haste - instead.*

*    Intellect, sound, they have none*

*    Antagonism, to them is a thrilling fun*

*    Nothing is worse than want of zeal*

*    Its lack can a nation's fortune seal*

*    But aimless zeal is folly's trap*

*    In wisdom's fort 'tis a mighty gap*

*    Their show of passion is not zeal*

*    This pseudo-zeal only varlets feel.*

*    Peoples sans vision were destroyed*

*    The prudent, e'er, vision employed*

*    Canting spivs they all are,*

*    Despicable insensates can't look far.*

*    We hope our "passive defence" does work,*

*    A "defence offensive" till last we shirk.*

*    My cool appraisal of this mess,*

*    Is a genuine effort to forestall distress.*

*    The stakes are dreadfully high,*

*    Staggering results it will imply.*

*    Erupt will battle - will get worse,*

*    They crave and yearn for the divine curse.*

Abbas replied, "I am sick and tired of these hypocrites, and I want to
exact my revenge on them". Hussain ordered him. to ask them for water
for the children. Abbas approached the enemy, preached and warned them
of the wrath of the Almighty but to no avail! He shouted as high as he
could,

"0 son of Sa'ad! This is Hussain the son of the daughter of the Prophet.
You have killed members of his family and companions."

"All what is left are his womenfolk and children who are thirsty. Quench
their thirst with water for they may die of it". He, nevertheless, was
pleading with them to let Imam Hussain and what was left of his
household to leave Hijaz for the land of the Romans or the Indians. His
words found sympathy with some of the crowd so much so that they cried.
But ash-Shimr shouted, "0 son of Abu Turab (one of Imam Ali's titles)!
Even if the whole of the earth's surface were awash and we were in
control, we would have never allowed you access to it, unless you pledge
allegiance to Yazid."

*    Left my bank my honoured guests*

*    Swamped was I by the swarm of pests.*

*    Shorn of the honour; I was robbed*

*    Wept through waves, through swells I sobbed.*

*    Lamented my ripples, my flow did wail,*

*    Inherit I did, thus, a dolorous tale.*

*    Water, my guests were refused, en bloc,*

*    Agonised I was, distraught, with shock.*

*    This torrid zone and simmering land,*

*    None (sans water) could stand*

*    Capture me if not they did*

*    To counter the foe's obnoxious bid*

*    if access to me they didn't attempt*

*    Die of thirst they will, it meant."*

![](books/0762-the_tale_of_the_martyrdom_of_imam_hussain/images/image007.jpg)

Abbas returned to his brother Hussain to advise him how the enemy were
adamant not to give them water. In the meantime, he heard the children
crying of thirst. He could not take it any more; his Hashimite ardour
left him no room for manoeuver nor more forbearance, He took the skin
water container with the intention of bringing water. He was surrounded
by some 4,000 troops who shot at him with their arrows. He did not fear
their multitudes. The standard hoisted over his head, He started
attacking them causing them to flee in front of him. His gallantry used
to remind them of

his father, Imam Ali who used to annihilate brave and formidable foes in
the battlefield. Thus, they did not stand their ground in the face of
his determined and ferocious attacks. He managed to reach the waterline
of the River Euphrates with fortitude.

He took a handful of water to drink whereupon he remembered the thirst
of Imam Hussain and those who were with him. He threw the water away
choosing not to drink out of empathy with his kinship.


