Part 14 - Abbas - the Lion Roars
================================

*    Abbas, his brother; fearless, grand,*

*    Thundered, with rage, took a bold stand:*

*    Proximity of water, deny you can't*

*    your witting Caliph's obnoxious flaunt*

*    !n sheer buffoonery, arrant nonsense*

*    Convey to him scorn, intense.*

*    Pompous pride I abhor, detest,*

*    Like the prismatic glass 'tis just a jest.*

*    His faith is dimmed by the lure of gold,*

*    And conscience, to rapacity he has sold.*

*    Drained off is his fount of sense,*

*    And creed abandoned to vain aberrance.*

*    Padlocked his brains, and mind is packed,*

*    Deposed his prudence, judgement sacked.*

*    An egregious scamp, pretentious fool,*

*    Egoism's caricature, asininity's toot*

The River recaptured (by Abbas)

*    The river he saw at paces few*

*    (The horizon scanned - had none in view)*

*    With the flag held high, he forward pressed,*

*    The dauntless cham his command stressed.*

*    Advanced; across the terrain he swept,*

*    Enlarged the territorial gain (and kept)*

*    The capture of the rill was underway,*

*    (A feat stupendous - least to say)*

*    The rill capture he did, with ease,*

*    (The "squatters" aberrant "lease" did cease)*

*    The stream, repossessed, he firmly held,*

*    (Thus showed how right at might excelled)*

*    His "post-repossession" earnest stance,*

*    His eminence (further) did enhance.*

*    (The priorities, apt, his balanced move*

*    His sound judgement amply prove)*

*    The rill captured (and the sway restored)*

*    With a firm resolve own drought ignored*

*    Serenely he waded in the water - at will*

*    A leathern container, with water did fill*

*    Leisurely emerged in a triumphant way*

*    His mighty sword kept the foe at bay.*

*    Exult did not at the blessed gain,*

*    Zealously adhered to his purpose - main.*

*    "Water must reach the camp inmates"*

*    (Elevated sense such resolve dictates)*

*    Enshrined in mind was "a camp inmate"*

*    He knew, his return his niece did wait.*

*    Shunned he did even a glimpse of peace,*

*    Unless the water did reach his niece.*

*    His mettle the apostates could not match*

*    The container, from him couldn't snatch.*

*    The fortunate ones who death escaped,*

*    Froze with terror, transfixed - gaped.*

*    Petrified, ventured not impede him,*

*    (Cocksure, their prospects were slim)*

*    As the abject terror played its role,*

*    The dragon of scare swallowed them - whole:"*

He filled in the skin container with water, mounted his horse, and aimed
towards the camp. Enemy soldiers cut him off, upon which he engaged
them; he managed to fend them off and gained a leeway.

Zaid bin ar-Raqqad al-Juhui was laying in wait for him behind a tree.
Helped by Hakim bin at-Tufail as-Sanbasi, he hit him on the arm and
severed it. He was indifferent about his right arm, forging ahead to
deliver the water to Hussain's children and household. Hakim in the
meantime was still laying in wait for him behind a tree. When Abbas got
passed him, Hakim dealt him a sword blow on his left arm and severed it.
Taking advantage of his weakened state, the rest of the troops took
heart and swooped down upon him. They rained him with arrows from every
direction; one arrow hit the water container and punctured it, spilling
its contents; another hit him in the chest. A man hit him with a pole on
the head, crushing his skull. Thereupon he fell to the ground calling,
"0 Aba Abdillah! Farewell". Hussain rushed to him only to find him
aimless, his forehead ruptured, an arrow embedded into the eye, the
brain strewn on the shoulders, the colours and water container beside
him. Hussain face showed signs of despondency Throwing himself down upon
him, sobbing and saying, "Now is the time my backbone broke; I can see
no way out, and my enemy is rejoicing at my misfortune".

*    Stealthily, a furtive foe appeared*

*    The arms of the valiant, brave, severed.*

*    The renegades' treacherous act did work*

*    They this cowardice, did not shirk*

*    The angel's saintly wings were clipped,*

*    The flag, he held high, lurched and dipped.*

*    The standard with his blood was red*

*    Its bearer brave lay cold and dead*

*    Stifled my waves, was shocked, alas!*

*    With grief I froze - it was Abbas."*

Despondent, sorrowful, weeping, wiping his tears with hit shin sleeves,
Imam Hussain returned to his camp only to see that the enemy soldiers
had already invaded it. He appealed to the crowd, "Is there not one from
amongst you who can respond to our cry for help? Who can grant us a safe
haven?.. Is there not a seeker of right who can lend support to us? Is
there not one, who is wary of hell fire, who can protect us?" Sukaina
approached and asked him about her uncle.

He told her that he had been killed! Zainab overheard him and screamed,
"0 Our Abbas! What a loss!". The women started crying and Hussain joined
them saying, "We are at a loss after your demise!".


