Part 17 - Surrounded by the enemies of Islam
============================================

Omar bin Sa'ad yelled, "Woe unto you! Attack him while he is busy with
himself and his family. By the Almighty! Once he is free neither your
right nor your left flanks would be more lucky." They swooped on him,
raining him with arrows which were so abundant that they lodged in to
the tent ropes; some found their way to the women's mantles, startling
and causing them to cry and enter the tent; they looked at Hussain in
the expectation that he might do something. Imam Hussain attacked the
enemy like a roaring lion, No sooner he could engage anyone he left him
dead. He received many wounds all over his body mainly as a result of
arrows.

![](books/0762-the_tale_of_the_martyrdom_of_imam_hussain/images/image010.jpg)

He returned to his position, repeating the saying, "There is neither
power nor strength save in God Almighty". He asked for water, Shimr
answered, "You are not going to taste it until you enter hell fire!"
Another one called him, "0 Hussain! can you not see the waters of the
River Euphrates flow, glittering like the belly of a snake? You are not
going to drink from it till you die of thirst". Imam Hussain invoked
God, "0 Lord! Let him die of thirst". It was then reported that the man
used to ask for water, once he drank, the water gushed out of his mouth.
He continued thus until he perished of thirst.

Abul Hutoof al-Ju'fai shot Hussain with an arrow which lodged into his
forehead, Hussain took it off causing the blood to stream down his face,
whereupon he said, "0 Lord! You are witnessing the transgression against
me by Your sinful creatures. 0 Lord! Do not let anyone of them get away

with it. Kill them all and do not let anyone of them live on the face of
the earth. Never forgive them their trespasses."

He shouted, "0 Bunch of evil! Shame on you. What bad guardians of the
household of the Prophet you turned out to be. Since there is no man of
my band left, you are not going to be deterred from killing anyone after
me, for killing me would make it a forgone conclusion. By God! I hope
that Allah bestow on me martyrdom, and avenge my death whence you do not
expect."

Al-Hosein said, "How is he going to exact revenge on us?" Imam Hussain
said, "He will sow enmity amongst you, shed your blood, and pour down
punishment upon you, pouring it in abundance".

As he was weakened, he paused to rest. A man hurled him with a stone
hitting him on the head causing the blood to stream down his face. He
took out a piece of cloth to wipe the blood from his face, whereupon
another archer aimed at him with a three-pronged arrow; it lodged into
his chest in the area of the heart. He said, "In the name of Allah, by
Allah, and following the path of the Apostle of Allah". He then raised
his head towards the sky and said, "0 Lord! You know full well that they
are killing a man there is not on the face of the earth, a son of the
daughter of the Prophet, save him!!".

He pulled out the arrow causing the blood to gush out. He put his band
underneath the gaping wound. When it was filled with blood he threw it
towards the sky and said, "My only solace is that what has befallen me
is in the way of Allah". It was reported that not a single drop of that
blood fell down. He filled it again. This time be stained his head,
face, and beard with it saying, "I want to meet Allah and my grandfather
in this state - splattered with blood".

Since losing blood weakened his body, he sat on the ground hardly
lifting his head, whereupon Malik bin an-Nisr approached him, called him
names, and hit him with his sword on his head which was covered with a
burnoose. The burnoose was drenched with blood. He took of the burnoose,
wrapped his turban on the cap and said, "May Allah deprive you of eating
with your right hand, and gather you [on the Day of Judgement] with the
oppressors".

Hani bin Thubait al-Hadhrami was quoted as saying, "I was one of a group
of ten people when Hussain was killed. I was looking to a boy from the
household of Hussain, who was wearing a shirt and loin cloth; two rings
dangling from his ears, clutching to a shaft; he was distraught turning
left and right. A horsemen headed towards him, leaning over the boy and
hitting him on the head causing his death". The boy was Mohammed bin Abi
Sa'eed bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib. His mother was overwrought by the
spectacle of witnessing the killing of her son.

After a short while the enemy troops came back to Hussain who was still
in a sitting position for he was overcome by the severity of his wounds.
Abdullah bin al-Hassan, an eleven-year-old boy looked towards his uncle
only to see him surrounded by the enemy. He rushed towards his uncle
after he managed to break free from his aunt, Zainab, When he arrived at
the scene near his uncle, Bahr bin Ka'b descended his sword to hit
Hussain. The boy yelled at him, "0 son of the bad woman! Are you dealing
a blow to my uncle?" He hit the boy who lift his arm to protect his head
causing it to be severed. The boy shouted, "0 uncle!" and fell into his
uncle's lap. Hussain

embraced him and said, "0 nephew! Be patient at what has befallen you
and consider it as a blessing for Allah, the Exalted will reunite you
with your noble ancestors". He then raised his hands in supplication and
said, "0 Lord! If You had granted them enjoyment for a while, cause them
to divide among themselves, disperse them into sects following different
ways, do not let the rulers be pleased with them for they called on us
so that they may be among our partisans, instead they transgressed
against and killed us". Harmalah released an arrow towards the boy,
whilst he was in his uncle's lap, and slew him.

Imam Hussain, fatally wounded, was left lying for a considerable time.
What prevented them from finishing him off sooner was the fact that
every tribe was relying on the other to do the job i.e. each tribe hated
to be seen as the one which killed Hussain.

Shimr yelled, "Why are you standing idly by? The man is critically
wounded. Attack and finish him off".

Zar'a bin Shariek hit him on the shoulder blade; al-Hosein shot him in
the mouth; another hit him on the shoulder, Sinan bin Anas lodged his
spear in the area of the collarbone, then in his chest; he also shot him
with an arrow in the throat, Saleh bin Wahab stabbed him in the loin.

Hilal bin Nafi' was reported as saying, "I was standing near Hussain as
he was on the brink of dying. By God, I never saw a person getting
killed with own blood all over his body in a better state than Hussain.
His face was exuding with light and awe! I was so overwhelmed by the
radiance of his face that I refrained from contemplating killing him! He
asked for water; they did not give him any to drink".

*    The torrent stem, keep him at bay*

*    Hold your own, and win the day.*

*    Hussain observed him, did not move*

*    Beckoning the renegade; to act and prove.*

*    Face to face when Hussain he saw*

*    The foe was overwhelmed, with awe.*

*    Ravished he was by the dazzling scene*

*    Such angelic face had never seen*

*    With celestial sheen his visage bestowed*

*    In propitious lustre glistened, glowed*

*    So intense was the divine hue*

*    His sight could not endure to view.*

*    By the glorious sight he was dazed*

*    But looked on still; gaped and gazed.*


