Part 18 - Hussain is killed on the Plains of Kerbala
====================================================

One from amongst the crowd said to him, "You are not going to drink
water until you enter hell fire, whereupon you can drink from its
boiling water". Imam Hussain replied, "I do not enter hell fire, but
enter unto my grandfather, the Apostle of God and stay with him in his
own house (in the seat of honour with a most powerful King) and complain
to him of that which you have done to me and your transgression against
me". All were very furious at his remarks as if Allah did not instil a
grain of mercy in their hearts.

![](books/0762-the_tale_of_the_martyrdom_of_imam_hussain/images/image011.jpg)

When his condition deteriorated, he raised his eyes towards the sky in
supplication and said, "0 Lord! You are mighty in Prowess, the Supreme,
the Possessor of every greatness and glory, not in need of the creation,
having mastery over everything; Your mercy is high, Truthful in your
promise, Giver of bounty and favour; You are close to those who invoke
You; encompassing all Your creation; You accept repentance from those
who repent, capable of exacting Your will, Having full knowledge of what
You are after, Thankful when thanked, remembering when remembered. I
invoke You as I am in dire need, ask You as I am poor! I seek refuge in
You for I am fearful, weep for I am grieved; I rely on Your succour for
I am weak; I put my trust in You alone. 0 Lord! You are the Arbiter
between our folk and ourselves for they trespassed against us, let us
down, betrayed us, and killed us not with-standing our kinship to Your
Prophet whom You chose for delivering the Message and made the
repository of revelation. Alleviate our predicament and relieve our
suffering for You are the Most Merciful".

"Forbearance with what You have destined is our solace, 0 Lord! There is
no god but You. You are the Deliverer of the distressed. I have no God
save You. Surely, You are the only Refuge for those who are without
one."

"There is no other one to worship apart from You. Forbearance with that
which you have resolved is our consolation. 0 Lord! You are the
Everlasting. 0 Lord! You are the Resurrector of the dead. 0 Lord! You
are

Watching over every soul and what it did. Adjudge between me and them
for You are the best of judges".

Hussain's horse started roaming around Imam Hussain and staining its
forehead with his blood, whereupon Ibn Sa'ad yelled saying, "Stop the
horse as it is a thoroughbred of the horses of the Apostle of Allah." A
company of horsemen surrounded him. He started galloping and kicking
with his forelegs killing some men and horses. Ibn Sa'ad ordered the
soldiers to leave the horse and to see what it was going to do. When the
horse calmed down and felt secure enough, it went back to Hussain's
blessed body staining its forehead with his blood, smelling him, and
neighing loudly. Imam Abu Ja'far al-Baqir was quoted as saying, "The
horse was saying: What an injustice was done to the grandson of the
Prophet by his own umma (community)."

*    His horse, in ecstasy, danced and pranced*

*    by his equestrian, was entranced*

*    A perfect horse, sans any defect*

*    With his head high, and neck erect.*

*    Had tiger's courage, and panther's zeal*

*    His sinews were akin to pure steel*

*    A thoroughbred's, all traits sustained*

*    His sire's blood, in the veins maintained.*

*    By innate courage, he was led*

*    In the thick of battle, had no dread*

*    His prancing steps, and goodly shape*

*    The admiring eyes, with awe, did gape,*

*    His amble faultless, a rhythmic flow,*

*    His steps measured, neither fast nor slow.*

*    His gait, the art of music graced*

*    Was on rhythm, and tempo based.*

*    The aggressor's will, to act, ruptured*

*    He was charmed, dazzled, captured.*

*    A feeble blow, the dastard tired*

*    Hussain parried, with contempt defied*

*    repeated strokes, the renegade rained*

*    Hussain remained placid, calm, restrained*

*    He hurled defiance, and braved it out*

*    Thus paved the way ft)r the dastard's rout.*

*    To keep his ground, stood firm*

*    His superior hold he did confirm.*

*    With lofty demeanour, at a serene pace*

*    Hussain advanced, with chivalrous grace.*

*    Moved ahead, with careless ease*

*    Less to liquidate him, more to tease*

*    The youth, in panic, turned his pack.*

The horse, still neighing, then headed towards camp. Once it was there,
the women saw the horse stained with blood and its saddle twisted, they
came out from their tents spreading their hair! unveiling their faces,
beating their cheeks, screaming, seeing their glory vanish, and
spontaneously taking

to the place where Imam Hussain fell and died, headed by Zainab who was
wailing On arriving at the scene, she put her hand under his body
raising it to the level of her breast where she left the body to rest.
She said, "0 Lord! Accept this sacrifice from US".

In the meantime Omar bin Sa'ad with a group of soldiers were
approaching the scene as Imam Hussain was at the point of death. Zainab
shouted at him, "Yes Omar! Abu Abdillah is being killed and you are
standing watching him perish?!" He turned his face away from her with
his tears streaming down his beard.

![](books/0762-the_tale_of_the_martyrdom_of_imam_hussain/images/image012.jpg)

She said, "Woe unto you! Is there not amongst you a Muslim?" Nobody
replied! Thereupon Ibn Sa'ad ordered the crowd, "Descend upon him and
administer the mercy shots to him". Shimr initiated the attack; he
kicked him, sat on his chest, got hold of his blessed beard, dealt 12
sword blows to his body, and finally beheaded him.


