References
==========

1- Absarul Ain Fi Ashabil Hussain - Mohammad bin at-Tahir as-Samawi,
Haydari Press, Najaf.

2- Irshadul Quloob Illas Sawab - Al-Hassan bin Mohammad ad-Dailami (d.
448 H.), Iran Print.

3- A'yan ash-Shia - Muhsin al-Amin al-Amili, Darut Ta'aruf, Beirut. 2nd
edition.

4- Al-Irshad - Mohammad bin Mohammad bin an-Nu'man al-Baghdadi, known as
ash-Sheikh al-Mufid.

5- Al-Amaali - Mohammad bin Ali bin Babaweih al-Qomi (d. 381 H.),
Al-Haydari. Press, Najaf.

6- Ansarul Hussain - Mohammad Mahdi Shamsuddin - ad-Darul Islamiyah
Press, Beirut.

7- Bihrul Anwar - Mohammad Baqir bin Mohammad Taqi al-Majlisi - Tehran
2nd edition.

8- Batal al-A'lqami - Abdul Wahid al-Mudhaffar - An-Najaf edition.

9- Tarikh Ibn Asakir - Ali bin al-Hassan bin Hibatillah ad-Dimashqi (d.
571 H.), Egypt edition.

10- Tarikh al-Umam wal-Mulook - Abu Ja'far Mohammad bin Jareer
at-Tabari, Al-A'lami Press, Beirut.

11- Tarikh al-Bidayah Wan-Nihaya - Ismail bin Omar bin Kathir ash-Shafie
(d. 774 H.), Egypt edition.

12- Tarikh al-Ya'qoubi - Ahmed bin Abi Ya'qoub, known as al-Ya'qoubi,
Dar Sabir Press, Beirut.

13- Tathkirat Khawwashil Umma - Yousuf bin Qaz'ali al-Baghdadi, known as
Sibt bin al-Jawzi (d. 654 H.), Al-Haydari Press, Najaf.

14- Al-Khasaa'is al-Hussainiyah - Ja'far bin Hussain ash-Shoushtari,
Tabriz edition.

15- Rawdhatul Wa'idheen - Mohammad bin al-Hassan bin Ali, known as
al-Fattal, Iran edition.

16- Zahr al-Aadaab Wathamar al-Albaab - Ibrahim bin Ali al-Ausari
al-Husari al-Qairawani, Cairo edition.

17- Sharh Nahjil Balaagha - Ibn Abil Hadeed, Egypt first edition.

18- Al-Fusool al-Muhimmah fi Ma'rifat Umoor al-A'imah -Ali bin Mohammad
al-Maliki, known as Ibn Sabbagh, Al-Adl Press, Najaf.

19- Kashfil Ghumma Fil M'arifatil A'imah - Ali bin Issa bin Abil Fath
Arbilli, Najaf edition.

20- Alluhoof Ala Qatlat et-Tuffoof - Radhiyiddin Ali bin Mousa bin
Tawoos, Najaf edition.

21- Al-Majalis al-Fakhirah - Abdul Hussain Sharafuddin al-Mousawi, Najaf
edition.

22- Muthirul Ahzan - Shareef bin Muhsin - Sahibul Jawahir, Najaf
edition.

23- Maqtalul Hussain - Abdul Razzaq al-Muqqarram, Darul Kital al-Islami,
Beirut.

24- Maqtalul Hussain - Mohammad Taqi Bahrul Uloom, Darul Zahra', Beirut.

25- Manaqib Aal Abi Talib - Mohammad bin Ali bin Shahrashob, Qom
edition.

26- Al-Muntakhab Fi Jam'il Marathi WM Khutab - Fakhruddin bin Mohammad
bin Tarech an-Najafi, Al-Haydari Press, Najaf.


