Introduction
============

Hussain - the Universalist
--------------------------

Hussain (4-62 AH. - 614 AD.) was the youngest son of Ali (A.D. 600-661)
by Prophet Mohammed's daughter Fatimah. Ali was the fourth Caliph of
Islam. When Yazid, son of Muawiyah, became Caliph he demanded allegiance
from Hussain. He refused because of Yazid's wayward ways. Ultimately he
had to confront Yazid. It had to be done, to preclude any further
deterioration and eventual disintegration of Islam. He had to clear up
the damage -the transgression of Islamic values, the frivolous social
behaviour, in the name of Islam - the sickening dashing of dreams about
future glories of Islam. Hussain had no illusions about the extent of
that damage. Was it to ask too much of Hussain to take the
responsibility? Certainly not. He as the Prophet's grandson had to do
his duty. But there was no easy option for him. He had to bear the
brunt. When a situation of this kind arose, a very heavy burden fell on
Hussain.

Atonality from Yazid's degenerated symphony
-------------------------------------------

Little wonder that Hussain's patience snapped when the Caliph firmly
demanded allegiance. He realised that the consequences of this prolonged
anarchy in Islam and a shattering triumph for immorality would
permanently deface and disfigure the true faith and a pseudo-religion
would emerge under the guise of Islam. Blasphemy would be practised till
it dulled the senses and mob psychology took over. Religion would be
compromised and its long term effects disregarded.

But for the men behind Islam, with their eyes on the future, this was
not to be tolerated at any cost. They had to act before it was too late
to halt or reverse the inexorable decline.

Hussain intensified his campaign. He was determined to accomplish his
mission by means more vigorous than had hitherto been used. He deserves
full credit for the exemplary courage and aplomb with which he handled
the ugly situation. He did not resort to aggression yet firmly resisted
Yazid's bluster.

Can man stand up to these conditions? When the scene moved to the
battle-field of Kerbala, Hussain managed to say daringly: "Man can - but
not necessarily with ease He, and a small group of followers including
his immediate family were mercilessly massacred. The day of this tragedy
is universally commemorated every year and is called "Ashura" (10th
Muharram, Islamic calendar) and is marked by processions and mourning.
It is observed as a national in holiday certain countries.

Hussain is buried in Kerbala (Iraq). His holy shrine is visited by
millions of people, from all over the world, as a mark of veneration.

It is in the very nature of great reformers that they belong to
everybody, everywhere. Hussain's noble deed is so relevant to the entire
human race, that I am sure there is a far bigger audience waiting for
him somewhere than the one he has already. All that is required is to
draw people's attention.

The contemporary society, irrespective of race and religion, would do
well to have a closer look at the Hero of Kerbala as his message
transcends the barriers of caste and creed, race and religion. Advocates
of human

rights, sociologists, reformers, theologians, all included, will find
"delightful wisdom, sweet instructions, and a meaning suited to their
mind", in his story. His message is certainly not an exclusive preserve
of any particular group. It embraces the entire human race. It was not a
power struggle. Hussain persistently and explicitly expounded: "what
matters to me is to 'correct', not conquer" - an affirmation that he
would die in the firm belief that a despot's idiosyncrasies could never
be an effective instrument of religious policies.

Yazid became too big for his boots and assumed the characteristics of a
despot who, almost as a condition of his position, made boastful and
frivolous claims that he alone could lead the nation.

Hussain was, however, committed to redeeming Islam and maintaining the
faith intact.

He hoped that matters will improve and kept a law profile to preserve
amity. He had a clear choice: stand aside and let Yazid act according to
his whims; (and thus join in and implicitly justify his abominable
escapades) or counter his devious bluster. Hussain had to decide: to
take the situation in its stride as a price worth paying for the "status
quo"; or view it as an ominous foretaste of the consequences of the
extensive damage done by the far-reaching anti-Islamic activities of
Yazid, the mammon of unrighteousness, whose lust for power prompted him
to beat the nation into the mould he favoured. He and his profane crew
conspired to scuttle the ship of Islam by worse than heinous deeds,
violating the aims for which Islam was born.

Hussain had no desire to live under such a corrupt Caliph. He wanted to
act as quietly and "spontaneously" as possible so as to limit the
possibilities of an open clash with the Caliph. But Yazid bargained
hard. Hussain could not take his effervescent nonsense perpetually and
did what was right.

If the moral standards of human behaviour were as high as they were in
the person of Hussain the world would be a better place to live in, is
the obvious inference. His incredible cool and superhuman moral courage
to achieve his mission stirs our deepest emotions. His exemplary
conduct, throughout, and adorable, conscience tore Yazid's monstrous
designs to shreds.

The virtuous people will continue to do their duty to maintain
righteousness in this world and in this they are entitled to universal
recognition and support. Hussain's acceptance of persecution in the
cause of humanity was most convincing and moving proof of God's
immanence in men. He was a man par excellence who maintained the highest
standards set by the martyrs and heroes of all ages. With a courage that
was more than human he managed to leave a message for the entire world:
"Do not submit to exploitation, of any kind; maintain a tenacious grip
on veracity; better die with honour than live in shame". He surely
deserves universal recognition. "He is an immortal heir of Universal
praise". Fourteen Hundred years have passed but the memory of that
adorable hero, who resolutely faced the soul-searing trials and
tribulations, has not diminished. On the contrary, it has grown in
intensity. Imbued with exemplary fortitude, moral fibre and aplomb,
Hussain has emerged as the most revered and meritorious martyr

the world has produced, who established the highest standards of
excellence of which humanity prides itself.

He was the odour of sanctity; the beauty of holiness. Here is a resolute
hero, well past the prime of life, who is prepared to brace himself to
confront the lurking menace and the acrimonious campaign of the powerful
Caliph - to forestall a social and moral disaster. By this action he
affirmed forever that it is both a social and moral duty to act when
confronted with such situations and people who do not act have only
themselves to blame if false values arc imposed on them. Virtuous people
who were endowed with sagacity and foresight always disliked sitting on
the fence just listening to scheming delinquent busybodies. They acted.
They were people who valued rectitude.

And all they asked of the party in power was that they enunciated edicts
which were not obnoxious and did not blatantly infringe the higher
values of life. The society would indeed pay a heavy price if it ignores
reformers and thus extrudes righteousness for good. Any social order, if
it seeks continuous satisfaction with a bad regime, of lives in constant
fear of it, when all is not well, is heading towards abject catastrophe
and total disintegration. These are the situations where a "Hussain" is
required. He positively had a clear concept of a healthy social order.
His endearing story could not have survived without the impetus of a
powerful personality behind it.

Faith and conviction prompted his motley band of men, women and
children, of widely differing ages, to defy the stupendous odds. The
youngest martyr was Abdullah, Hussain's infant son, the buoyancy of
whose innocent brood refloated the sinking ship of Islam. It seems
extraordinary that a handful of men, including small boys -some of them
hardly eight or nine years - could produce results that were not only
amazing but perfectly sustained through the long passage of time. It was
an intense collective action - immaculate, controlled, restrained and
selfless.

The conflict between good and evil remains perpetual. Both persist in
their efforts to sustain. We are besieged by irresistible evil forces.
We helplessly oscillate between the two and find ourselves pathetically
bogged down in this quagmire. But somehow "the foot prints" of Hussain,
"On the sand of time", show us the way. It is for us follow them or go
astray.

Our society is swamped by mindlessness. We find ourselves perpetually
obsessed by a nauseating craving for terrestrial and temporal
gratification, beckoned by the primrose path of pleasure, oblivious of
the values of life.

In this situation remember Hussain. Had he surrendered to Yazid, there
was "bed or roses" for him but he opted for "bed of thorns".

Total abandonment of the worldly pursuits and progress, for ordinary
mortals like most of us, (barring canoodling with debauchery and other
frivolous sensual pleasures which are certainly execrable), is neither
desirable nor feasible, in the present day world. But if we shift the
stress from temporal to spiritual gains we will neither get "icebound"
nor tossed around in the turbulent ocean of terrestrial life. This
inexorable logic is perfectly rational and a readily accessible
compromise. It would do us a deal of good. It would mean that we would
be able to devote more time to honest

activities. It has the simplest logical ways of making the world a
better and more peaceful place to live in. It sounds rather a grandiose
kind of idea but it is one that could be perfectly feasible, efficacious
and irrefrangible. There is nothing really demanding about such an
approach towards life, only a bit of self discipline and genuine
introspection will serve the purpose. Our lives will be characterised by
benevolence and magnanimity and through individual goodness a healthy
society will emerge, peace and justice would prevail.

Finally: Hussain realised that no common beliefs held him and Yazid
together. Hussain thought that Islam should be better acted, better
practised and better observed. In short, better presented to comply with
the holy text (Qur'an) and the divine will.

He administered a shock treatment, to achieve this aim, and the world of
Islam came out of the deep slumber, with a jolt, as a direct result of
his sacrifice. He deployed a singular strategy; lost the battle yet won
the campaign. The total effect was immensely impressive all of which
stemmed from his steadfastness that is to say faithfulness to the
religious principles. Hussain established a new moral and religious
consensus to which even (most of) his opponents felt constrained to make
obeisance.

*"Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so
few"* - Winston Churchill


