Part 4 - Hussain, the Grandson of the Prophet (S)
=================================================

"Oh people! Track back my lineage. Relate me and consider who I am. Then
look back and remonstrate with yourselves. Consider whether it is right
for you to kill me and encroach upon my integrity. Am I not the son of
your Prophet's daughter and the son of his vicegerent and cousin, the
first of the believers in Allah and his Messenger? Was not Hamza, the
master of martyrs, the uncle of my father? Was not the 'winged' Ja'far
my uncle? Have you not heard of the tradition of the Prophet (S)
concerning myself and my brother, "These are the two lords of the youth
of the inhabitants of paradise". Whether you believe in what I say - and
it is the truth, for I swear by the Almighty I have never told a lie
since I learnt that Allah hated people who told them - or you regard me
as a liar, and chose not to believe my statement, there are amongst you
who, if you asked them, would tell you! Ask Jabir bin Abdullah
Al-Ansari, Aba Sa'eed Al-Khudri, Sahl bin Sa'ad Al-Sa'idi, Zaid bin
Arqam and Anas bin Malik, to tell you that they heard these words from
the messenger of Allah (SAW) in favour of me and my brother."

"Is there not (sufficient) deterrent in this to prevent you from
shedding my blood?"

"If I understand what you are saying," interrupted Shimr bin Thil
al-Jawshan, "then I only worship God (very shakily) on the edge".

"I think that you worship God (very shakily) on seventy edges", said
Habib b. Mudhahir, "For I testify that you are right. You do not
understand what he is saying. For God has impressed (ignorance) upon
your heart".

"If you are in any doubt about this", Imam Hussain (A) told them, "you
are in doubt that I am the son of the daughter of your Prophet. By God
there is no son of a Prophet other than me among you and among the
peoples from East to West. Shame on you, are you seeking retribution
from me for one of your dead I have killed, or for property of yours I
expropriated, or for a wound I have inflicted?"

They did not say anything to him. Then he called, "Shabath b. Rib'ie,
Hajjar b. Abjar, Qays b. al-Ash'ath, Yazid b. al-Harith, didn't you
write: 'The fruit has ripened; the dates are ready for picking; come to
an army which has been gathered for you' ?"

"We don't know what you are talking about", said Qays b. al-Ash'ath,
"Submit to the authority of your kinsmen (the Umayyads). They have never
treated you with anything but what you liked".

"By God, I will never give you my hand like a man who has been
humiliated; nor will I flee like a slave", said al-Hussain (A). Then he
called out, "0 servants of God, I take refuge in my Lord and your Lord
from your stoning." (44:20). "I take refuge in my Lord and your Lord
from every haughty man who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning."
(40:27).

*    A holy war it means, indeed*

*    If waged to crush the devil's creed.*

*    No rancour, 'gainst you, I hold*

*    But faith do cherish - as I told.*

*    Islam I will resolutely shield*

*    Burnt will stand and never yield.*

*    Would welcome death (and make it tame)*

*    Would rather die than live in shame":*

*    "Your Prophet's scion I'm - you know*

*    At least some regard to his name show.*

*    His singular dictum is my creed*

*    "Universal good" I adore, indeed*

*    Ali, the paragon, the seraphic Imam*

*    Cham of the faith, the shield of Islam*

*    Inimitable, impeccable: I am his son*

*    His peerless attributes I have won.*

*    My heart is virtues' abode and nest*

*    Blessedness harbours in my breast*

*    Condone the rule of right, I do*

*    And believe, that right is might too*

*    Your vulgar sway vanquish I will*

*    This sacred duty will fulfil*

*    My soul is couched on eminence*

*    I was born with a divine sense.*


