Part 5 - Warning to the People of Kufa
======================================

He then dismounted his camel and ordered Aqaba bin Sam'an to hobble it
with a tie. The troops of the enemy marched towards him. Among them was
Abdullah bin Hawza al-Temimi who shouted, "Is Hussain amongst you?" He
said it three times. The followers of Hussain (A) replied, "This is
Hussain, what do you want from him?" He retorted, "Oh Hussain! You lied.
Be sure you will be consigned to hell". Hussain answered, "I come to a
Lord who is forgiving, generous, commanding and intercessor. But who are
you?" He replied, "I am Ibn Hawza". Hussain raised his hands very high
so much so that his armpit showed and said, "Oh Allah! posses him to
hell fire." Ibn Hawza became very angry and charged Hussain with his
horse; there was a stream between them; he fell from his horse but his
foot got entangled in the stirrup; the horse dragged him on the stones
and trees; his free leg was severed; the rest of his body was still
attached to the horse who threw him in the fire which was raging in the
trench; he was burnt to death.

Imam Hussain (A) raised his voice and said, "Oh Allah! We are the
Household of your Prophet, his progeny and his kinship, shatter those
who did us injustice and usurped our fight. You are All-hearing, Near".

Masrooq bin Wa'il Al-Hadhrami said, "I was at the forefront of the
horsemen which advanced to fight Hussain in the hope that I succeed in
dealing a blow to him in order to get a prize from Ibn Ziyad. But when I
saw what happened to Ibn Hawza, I was certain that the members of this
house (the Household of the Prophet) have sanctity from and position
with Allah. I then left their ranks and said to myself, "I am not
fighting those people lest I should be in hell fire".

When the followers of Hussain (A) saw the determination of the people of
the opposite camp to fight their Lord and Imam Hussain (A) Zuhair bin
al-Qain came forward and stood in front of them and addressed them, "Oh
people of Kufa! I warn you of the chastisement of Allah. It is incumbent
on every Muslim to give counsel to his fellow Muslim. We are still
brethren of one religion unless we resort to war. You need advice more
than we do. If you resort to the sword there will no longer be any bond
between us. We will be two nations (Ummas). Allah has entrusted us with
the progeny of His Prophet, Mohammad (S) as a measure just to see how
you and we behave towards them. We call upon you to support them and let
down the dictator Yazid and Obaidullah bin Ziyad. Under their rule, you
will only reap mistreatment, gouging of eyes, chopping of limbs, making
a dreadful example of you, hanging you on tree trunks, killing your good
men and reciters (of al-Qur'an) like Hijr bin Adi and his followers, and
Hani' bin Urwah and his likes". He was heckled and interrupted by the
people of Kufa; they swore at him and praised Ibn Ziyad and added that
they would not budge until they killed Hani's companion (Imam Hussain)
and those who were with him or sent them under escort to Ibn Ziyad.

Zuhair retorted, "Oh Men! the sons of Fatima have more right to befriend
and support than the son of Sumayya. If you do not support them I pray
to Allah that He guard you against killing them. You are therefore,
requested to dissolve this man from Yazid; upon my life! He will be
contented with your obedience without the killing of Hussain (A)".

Shimr shot at him with an arrow and said, "Shut up, May Allah silence
your camel; we are fed up with your excessive talk".

Zuhair said, "Oh! you son of the incontinent, I do not mean you in my
address for you are no more than an animal. I swear by the Almighty that
you cannot master not even two ayas (verses) of the Book of Allah
(Al-Qur'an). Surely, disgrace and chastisement will befall you on the
day of judgement".

Shimr said, "Allah will kill you and your companion in an hour's time".

Zuhair said, "Are you threatening me with death. By the Almighty! Death
with him is dearer to me than eternity with you".

Ziad then moved forward raising his voice and said, "Oh bondsmen of God!
do not let this rude ruffian and his like deceive you. By the Almighty!
Mohammad's (S) intercession is denied to those who shed the blood of his
Progeny, and killed their supporters who protected their women."

A man from Hussain's camp called him and said, "Aba Abdillah (Hussain)
says to you to come back. Upon my life! Like the faithful of the
Pharaohs, you counselled and warned those people to the best of your
ability. But alas! they do not seem to heed your admonition".

*    "When mortals to heinous gains are lured*

*    Their doom, eternal, is procured*

*    Wallow in lustful lap of wealth*

*    With a joyful face, sparkling health*

*    Gloat over, regale, waver not*

*    Indulge, frolic; then meet your lot*

*    Perpetual remorse, unceasing pain*

*    (Ceaselessly equate the ephemeral gain)*

*    Truth sustains, exists, prevails*

*    Knavery flops, infamy fails,*

*    Repent you surely will, I warn*

*    Callously, my "platitudes" you scorn.*

*    A dealer in platitudes, l am not*

*    Explicit support for the faith I sought*

*    Sanity, ethics, sense I preach*

*    Pursue I do whatever I teach.*

*    With effortless clarity I speak*

*    I never talk with tongue-in-cheek*

*    A torch, to light your way I show*

*    Follow its beam and safely go.*

*    Initiate don't an abject act*

*    'Tis futile if done and then retract.*

*    All discernible trends in human thought*


