Part 6 - Water is Denied
========================

As it was very hot, Hussain and his household, and supporters were very
thirsty. Therefore, Burair bin Khudhair Al-Hamadani who was an old
devout man, an authority on Qur'an recitation, and well placed and
revered by the Hamadani's asked to be permitted to address the people of
Kufa. He was given the permission. He called, "Oh you people! Allah has
sent Mohammad as a harbinger and warner, calling for the way of Allah,
and a shining lantern. And this is the River Euphrates, the water of
which is free for all kinds of animals pigs and dogs. Yet you have
denied the son of daughter of the Messenger of Allah access to it. Is
this the way Mohammad should be rewarded?".

A group of people from the camp of Ibn Ziyad retorted, "Enough of this
nonsense. By the Almighty! Hussain shall not quench his thirst with its
water like those who were denied to quench their thirst before him".

Burair said, "Oh you people! The heritage of Mohammad has ended up in
your midst. And these are his progeny, household, daughters and holy
members of his family. So what do you have to say and what are you going
to do with them?".

They replied, "We want Emir Obaidullah bin Ziyad to get hold of them,
and then decide what he would do with them".

He said, "Are you not satisfied that they go back whence they came? Oh
people of Kufa! Woe unto you! Did you forget the letters you wrote and
the pledges you made to me to which Allah bears witness? You invited the
progeny of your Prophet and claimed that you would protect them with
yourselves. When they responded and came to you, you want to hand them
over to Ibn Ziyad, and denied them access to the water of the River
Euphrates. What evil heirs to your Prophet and his progeny you turned
out to be! What has become of you! May Allah not give you a drink on the
day of judgement. What an evil folk you are!.

A group of them replied, "We do not know what you are talking about".

He said, "Praise be to Allah for making me more discerning. Oh Lord! I
seek refuge with you and disown the actions of these people. Oh Allah!
Sow discord among their ranks and make them use their fortitude against
each other until they meet with Your wrath."

The response from them was that they fired arrows at him which made him
retreat.

*    Enervate them, this tirade did*

*    The foe still sustained its bid.*

*    Woe to those whose hearts were sealed*

*    Their promiscuous prattle, thus unveiled:*

*    "Confound us not by harangues, Hussain*

*    Unleash not your diatribes, in vain.*

*    The Prophet, some message did convey*

*    Concede, that Yazid now shows the way.*

*    To usurp the Caliphate do not try*

*    Your revolt, does envy imply.*

*    What the Caliph avers, is verily best*

*    Submit, and don't his dictums test*

*    You shouldn't his celestial place dispute*

*    Withhold not allegiance, pay tribute.*

*    The Caliph pilots our faith and fate*

*    Divinely commandeers our love and hate.*

*    His words, divine truth contain"*


