Part 1: Interpretation of “Peace be upon Ilyasin”
=================================================

The Lord of the worlds has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يس
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Ya Seen. (Sura Yaseen 36:1)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلَامٌ عَلَى إِلْ يَاسِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Peace be upon Ilyasin. (Surah Saffat 37:130)***

Commentators have narrated quoting Amirul Momineen Ali and Imam Baqir
(a.s.) that Yasin is the name of the Holy Prophet (S) and in another
narration, Fakhruddin Razi has said that Nafe bin Aamir and Yaqoob have
read it Aale Yasin, adding the word aal to the word Yasin. Other
reciters have read it ‘IL’. About the first recitation, three reasons
have been given:

(1) Ilyas is the son of Yasin and so Ilyas is Aale Yasin (progeny of
Yasin).

(2) Aal is Aale Muhammad and Yasin is the name of Quran. There are many
Ahle Sunnat and Shia traditions that is should read Aale Yasin which
means the Aal (progeny) of Muhammad (S).

Ibne Hajar has, in *Sawaiqul Mohreqa*, quoted Fakhruddin Razi that the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) are equal to the Holy Prophet (S) in five matters:

1- In Salaam: The words Assalaamo A’laika ayyohan nabi… are for the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.): Salamun A’laa Aale Yasin

2- In Tashahhud: There is Durood on the Prophet and the Progeny of the
Prophet.

3- In Purity: [Taha] has been said about the dignity of the Prophet and
so also [to purify you a (thorough) purifying…] for the dignity of Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.).

4- Sadaqah is Haraam (prohibited) for both.

5- In love: For the Prophet it is said: Say: If you love Allah, then
follow me and so also Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but
love for my near relatives about the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Ali bin Ibrahim has said in his *Tafsir* quoting Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
‘Yasin’ is the blessed name of the Holy Prophet (S). The proof of it is
that thereafter Allah Almighty has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ لَمِنْ الْمُرْسَلِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most surely you are one of the apostles. (Surah Yasin 36:3)***

Also he has written explaining “Peace be upon Ilyasin” that ‘Yasin’
means the Holy Prophet (S) and Aale Muhammad are the holy Imams (a.s.).

In *Amali,* *Maniul Akhbar* and *Tafsir Ayyashi,* Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is
quoted explaining the verse “Peace be upon Ilyasin” that Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said: Yasin is Prophet Muhammad (S) and Aale Yasin are we.

In *Amali* and *Maniul Akhbar*, Abi Malik has mentioned that Yasin is
Prophet Muhammad (S). Again in both these books, Ibne Abbas is quoted to
have said that Aale Yasin means Aale Muhammad.

In *Maniul Akhbar*, in the explanation of “Peace be upon Ilyasin” Ibne
Abbas is quoted to have said that (it means) Salaam from the Lord of the
worlds on Muhammad and his Aal (progeny) and that on the Day of Qiyamat
protection from the punishment of Allah is for those who accepted their
Wilayat and loved them.

In *Maniul Akhbar*, Abdul Rahman Salami is quoted to have said that Umar
bin Khattab used to recite Salamun A’laa Aale Yasin; that Abu Abdul
Rahman said Aale Yasin are Aale Muhammad.

Ibne Mahyar has, in his commentary, quotes Sulaym Ibne Qays Hilali that
Ali (a.s.) said that one of the good names of the Holy Prophet (S) is
Yasin and it is we in whose praise Allah has said Salamun A’laa Aale
Yasin.

Ibne Mahyar and Furat have in their respective commentaries in a number
of ways quoted Ibne Abbas that in a lengthy tradition in which Imam
Ridha (a.s.) has disputed the stand of Ahle Sunnat Scholars regarding
the dignity of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), saying that the Hazrat asked them to
tell him about the Divine words “Yasin…. Mustaqeem” as to who are Yasin?
The scholars replied that it was Muhammad (S) and that nobody has any
doubt about it.

Then the Hazrat said: Then Allah has, because of this, granted to
Muhammad and Aale Muhammad such a dignity that no one can praise them
appropriately except the one who may ponder over it properly because
Allah has sent Salam only on Prophet and said: “Peace be upon the
progeny of Yasin” and “Peace be upon Ibrahim” and “Peace be upon Moosa
and Haroon” and “Peace be upon Nuh” and not said Peace be upon the
progeny of Ibrahim and Peace be upon the progeny of Moosa and Haroon but
He has said “Peace be upon the progeny of Yasin” that is Salam on the
progeny of Muhammad (a.s.).


