Part 3: Those who have the knowledge of Quran are the Imams
===========================================================

In the description that those who have the knowledge of the Quran and
who are perfect in knowledge and who fear the Quran are the Imams

Ibne Mahyar has, through reliable sources, quoted Imam Baqir (a.s.)
explaining the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمْ الْكِتَابَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَمِنْ هَؤُلَاء
مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(As to) those whom We gave the Book before it, they are believers in
it. (Sura Qasas 28:52)***

In this verse, what is meant by ‘those who are given the book’ are Aale
Muhammad (a.s.) who have been given the knowledge of Quran. And some
from this group are those who have believed in the book, the Hazrat said
that Ahle Imaan means some people of the tribe.

Kulaini and others have, from many sources reported that in explanation
of the Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ هُوَ آيَاتٌ بَيِّنَاتٌ فِي صُدُورِ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nay! these are clear communications in the breasts of those who are
granted knowledge... (Sura Ankabut 29:49)***

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Some clear signs (verses) of Quran are in the
hearts of those who have been given the knowledge, are the holy Imams
from Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and in their hearts are both the words and the
meanings of the Quran.

In *Basairud Darajat*, through reliable chains of narrators, Abu Baseer
reports that Imam Baqir (a.s.) recited this verse and then said: Allah
has not said that the Mushaf (text of Quran) is between two hardboard
covers. Rather He has said that it is in the hearts of those who have
been given the knowledge of it. Abu Baseer asked: are you those people?
The Imam replied: Who else can be?

This narration is quoted with nearly twenty chains showing that this
verse is describing their greatness. It is also possible that what is
meant by the aforementioned verse by the Hazrat is that the
clarification of Quran is in the hearts of the Imams and that none else
knows its meanings and secrets. Therefore only they must be approached
for understanding the Quran properly.

Ayyashi has, quoted Imam Sadiq (a.s.) as saying in the explanation of
the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمْ الْكِتَابَ يَتْلُونَهُ حَقَّ تِلَاوَتِهِ
أُوْلَئِكَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those whom we have given the Book recite it as it should be recited
and only they are the ones who have faith in it. (Sura Baqarah 2:21)***

That those who have been given the book are the Holy Imams (a.s.).[^1]

Kulaini has, with reliable chains of narrators, quoted Imam Sadiq
(a.s.), saying while explaining verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ هَذَا الْقُرْآنُ لِأُنذِرَكُمْ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***This Quran has been revealed to me so that I may warn you through it.
(Sura Anam 6:19)***

And in the explanation of “those who” (reach this rank), said that it
means those from the Progeny of Muhammad (S) who may reach Imamate. He
also warns people through Quran as the Holy Prophet (S) used to warn.
Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated that “those who reach this rank” means the
Imam. The Hazrat said that Muhammad (S) was warning (about Allah’s
anger) and so also do we.[^2]

Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated with reliable chains of narrators from Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) that the Holy Quran is the warner which creates love for
Paradise and make one try to save oneself from Hell. There are clear-cut
verses which give clear evidence of the meaning and the aim. And there
also are some verses which are not so clear (allegorical) from which
many meanings can be derived. Hence it is difficult to know their
meanings and aims. But you can act upon the Clear verses and put only
faith on the allegorical ones but you cannot act upon them. This is the
word of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَابَهَ
مِنْهُ ابْتِغَاءَ الْفِتْنَةِ وَابْتِغَاءَ تَأْوِيلِهِ وَمَا يَعْلَمُ
تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلَّا اللَّهُ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then as for those in whose hearts there is perversity they follow the
part of it which is allegorical, seeking to mislead and seeking to give
it (their own) interpretation. But none knows its interpretation except
Allah, and those who are firmly rooted in knowledge. (Sura Ale-Imran
3:7)***

And those who are perfect in knowledge are Aale Muhammad.

Likewise, Ali bin Ibrahim, the author of *Ikhtisas* has, with reliable
chains of narrators, quoted Imam Baqir (a.s.) saying that the Holy
Prophet (S) was most perfect in the knowledge and he knew what Allah has
sent to him in Quran and also its meaning, that is, he knew both the
apparent and the hidden of the Holy Quran, it had never so happened that
Allah sent him a verse but did not show him its meaning. Similarly his
legates who came after him also knew both the revelation and
interpretation of the Holy Quran.

In *Kafi* and *Basair*, a conclusion is made that Shias do not know its
interpretation but whenever anyone from *those who are firmly rooted in
knowledge* tell it to them they say: We have put faith in it; that all
of it is from Allah though the Holy Quran contains the special, common,
clear, allegorical, abrogator, abrogated, everything and all of it is
known to those who are *those who are firmly rooted in knowledge.*[^3]

Kulaini has, with true chains of narrators, quoted the Imam saying: We
are the one firmly rooted in knowledge, we know the meaning of Quran and
another reliable tradition says that the firmly rooted in knowledge is
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and after him the Imams (a.s.).

In *Basairud Darajat*, it is mentioned with reliable chains of narrators
that Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: In the Holy Quran, there is not a single
verse which does not have its outward and inward meaning and that there
is not a single letter which is not a sign showing what is happening and
its happening and appearing is being made known to the Imam of the time
and its meaning is known to the living and present Imam and so also to
the earlier Imam as Allah says: Its meaning is not known to anyone but
Allah and those who are firmly rooted in knowledge and it is we who know
it.

Ali bin Ibrahim has said that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) while explaining the
meaning of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ إِنَّ الْخِزْيَ الْيَوْمَ وَالسُّوءَ
عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The people of that group who have been given knowledge will say that
today’s disgrace and adversity is for the deniers (disbelievers) (Sura
Nahl 16:27)***

which reads ‘the group who have been given the knowledge are the Imams
(a.s.).

Similarly, while explaining the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَرَى الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ الَّذِي أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ
رَبِّكَ هُوَ الْحَقَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who have been given knowledge know what, O Messenger, has been
revealed to you from your Lord. (Sura Saba 34:6)***

The Hazrat said that it means Amirul Momineen (a.s.) who has testified
to whatever Allah sent to the Holy Prophet (S).

Kulaini has, with reliable chains of narrators, quoted Imam Baqir (a.s.)
saying that no one has ever claimed but falsely that he knows the entire
Quran as it has been revealed to the Holy Prophet (S) and that he has
collected it and that he has remembered (learnt) it by heart except Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and the Imams after him (they only have made such
a claim truly).

In another narration it is said that no one except the legatee of the
Prophet can claim that he has both the inward and outwards meanings of
the whole Quran.

In yet another tradition, it is mentioned: Among all the knowledge given
to us by Allah is the explanation and the commandments of the Holy Quran
and that we have also been given the knowledge of the changes taking
place in every time and age or era. And then added: We used to tell it
whenever we found any writer who would not reveal our secrets or to any
such person who could be informed of the secrets.

Likewise, with reliable chains of narrators, Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is quoted
that he said: By Allah, I know the Book of Allah from beginning to end
so thoroughly as if they are the two palms of the hand. In the Holy
Quran are the news of the earth and the heavens and the past and the
future. The Almighty Allah says that it has:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِبْيَانًا لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***A distinct explanation of all things. (Sura Yusuf 12:111)***

It is mentioned in yet another tradition that: Allah said in praise of
Asif bin Barkhiya, the vizier of Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) that the person
who had knowledge of the Book said: I will bring for you the throne of
Bilqis before your eye twinkles. Then the Imam placed his Holy hand on
his heart (the treasure of truths) and said: By Allah, we have the
knowledge of the entire Book.

It is also mentioned from true sources that Imam Baqir (a.s.) said that
Muawiyah bin Ammar asked him the explanation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَسْتَ مُرْسَلًا قُلْ كَفَى بِاللَّهِ
شَهِيدًا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَمَنْ عِنْدَهُ عِلْمُ الْكِتَابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who disbelieve say: You are not a messenger. Say: Allah is
sufficient as a witness between me and you and whoever has knowledge of
the Book. (Sura Ra’d:43)***

The Imam replied: After the Prophet, they are we and the one who is
better than us (Ali a.s.).

It is mentioned in *Basair* that a man came to Imam Kazim (a.s.) and
said: You are giving such explanation of Allah’s Book the like of which
we have never heard before from anyone else. The Hazrat replied: The
Holy Quran came to us before all others and we got its explanation
before it reached anyone else.

Therefore it is we who know the Halaal (legal) and Haraam (illegal) and
Nasikh (abrogator) and Mansookh (abrogated) of the Quran and we know
which verse was revealed while in journey and which at home and which at
night and which in the day. Hence we are the possessor of wisdom and
intelligence from Allah and we are the witness of Allah on the creation
and this is according to the words of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَتُكْتَبُ شَهَادَتُهُمْ وَيُسْأَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Very soon we will write down their testimony and they will be asked.
(Sura Zukhruf 43:19)***

The Hazrat said: the testimony is for us and questioning is for those
who include the entire Ummah (community). Therefore, this is the
knowledge of which you have been made aware and proof has been completed
which was incumbent on me. So if you accept it, be thankful and if you
reject, then Allah is witness to everything.

[^1]: The writer says: Some commentators have said that ‘Kitab’ (book)
is Taurat and that those who have been given its knowledge are those
among the Jews and Christians who had faith in the Holy Prophet (S).
Some say Kitab means the Quran and those who are given the Book are the
believers of this Ummah. The Tafsir given by the Hazrat is based on this
and is according to sequence of the verse because the right of
recitation depends on its knowledge along with its secrets and mysteries
and this is reserved only with these gentlemen. Hence faith in Quran
cannot be perfect but only through them.

[^2]: The writer says: Many commentators have said that it means:
Because I am warning everyone to whom the Quran reaches till the Day of
Judgement and on the basis of what has been mentioned in tradition the
pronoun will be connected with the subject.

[^3]: The translator says: These verses begin with “He, Allah, who has
sent this Quran to you” (wherein) are clear-cut verses and they are
original Quran, and there are some other verses which are similar to one
another and their meanings are not quite clear. So those whose hearts
are inclined towards untruth they cling only to these allegorical
meanings so that they may lead people astray and make them fall in
doubts and give meanings to them according to their desires. And no one
knows the meanings of the allegorical verse but Allah and those who are
firmly rooted in knowledge and the base of whose knowledge is
conviction. There is a difference in recitation. Some stop at Allah and
consider it the beginning of the Divine words and they regard ‘and they
say’ as its object, that is, ‘the firmly rooted in knowledge say: We
have put faith in the allegorical; that all of this is from our Lord
though we do not know their meaning. Some commentators do not stop at
(after) Allah and connect ‘and those firmly rooted in knowledge’ with
Allah meaning the ‘firmly rooted in knowledge’ also know the meaning of
the allegorical verse of the Holy Quran. There are many traditions
supporting the derivation of ‘firmly rooted’ that it means the Holy
Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams. In some narrations it is mentioned that
‘they say’ is the appellate of the ‘dialogue’ and its subject are the
Shias which means that when the Shias hear from their Imams who are
perfect in knowledge the meaning of the allegorical verses, they testify
to it and say: all this is from our Lord.


