Part 5: The Imams are the most exalted and the most respected
=============================================================

The Infallible Imams (a.s.) are the most exalted of the creatures and
the most respected of Ibrahim’s progeny. There are some verses in this.

The First Verse:

The Lord Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَوْرَثْنَا الْكِتَابَ الَّذِينَ اصْطَفَيْنَا مِنْ عِبَادِنَا
فَمِنْهُمْ ظَالِمٌ لِنَفْسِهِ وَمِنْهُمْ مُقْتَصِدٌ وَمِنْهُمْ سَابِقٌ
بِالْخَيْرَاتِ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَضْلُ الْكَبِيرُ.
جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ يَدْخُلُونَهَا يُحَلَّوْنَ فِيهَا مِنْ أَسَاوِرَ مِنْ
ذَهَبٍ وَلُؤْلُؤًا وَلِبَاسُهُمْ فِيهَا حَرِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then We gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom We chose from
among Our servants; but of them is he who makes his soul to suffer a
loss, and of them is he who takes a middle course, and of them is he who
is foremost in deeds of goodness by Allah’s permission; this is the
great excellence. Gardens of perpetuity, they shall enter therein. (Sura
Fatir 35:32-33)***

It means: We gave the book in heritage which is Quran or Torah or the
wholly books of Allah.

***whom We chose from among Our servants***

Some have said that the selected servants are the messengers of Allah
and some say that they are scholars in the Ummah of the Holy Prophet
(S). After this will be mentioned many traditions which will show that
these gentlemen are, specially, the Ahle-Bayt (a.s.).

***but of them is he who makes his soul to suffer a loss***

There is a difference of opinion about the source of the pronoun “of
them”. Sayyid Murtuza (r.a.) and a group of commentators have said that
this pronoun refers to “Servants” which means some among Our slaves are
oppressing themselves and some have said it refers to the selected
people.

but of them is he who makes his soul to suffer a loss, and of them is he
who takes a middle course, and of them is he who is foremost in deeds of
goodness by Allah’s permission; this is the great excellence.

Commentators have differed about the three groups mentioned in the
verse. Some say all of them will get salvation. Some say that those who
are oppressors will not be saved from the Divine punishment. Thus Qatada
said that the oppressors are “companions of the left hand” and the
“middle course” are “companions of the right hand” and “foremost” are
among the “who are drawn nigh (to Allah)”. Garden of And is their abodes
wherein they will enter.

The commentators have differed as to what the pronoun of “they shall
enter therein” refers. Some say that it refers to all the three groups
and hence all of them would be admitted to Paradise and some say it
refers to those selected persons about whom it has been said: “those
whom We chose.” And some are of the opinions that it refers to he who
takes a middle course and “foremost” and that he who makes his soul to
suffer a loss is not included in it as some traditions related to this
matter show.

For instance it is reported in Maniul Akhbar that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said
that the oppressor always obeys his desires and that a he who takes a
middle course always goes on thinking in his heart, that is, he is
always trying to improve his beliefs or is busy reforming his soul or he
worships constantly and that even in the matter of worldly affairs he
keeps religion in his mind. And the “he who is foremost in deeds of
goodness” revolves round his Lord and he empties his soul of all desires
and ambitions and is not concerned with anything but the pleasure of his
Lord.

Likewise, Imam Baqir (a.s.) is reported to have said that among the pure
progeny of the Messenger (S) of Allah the oppressor is the one does not
recognise the rights of the Imam and the middle course is one who
believes in the leadership of the Imam and the foremost in deeds of
goodness is the Imam himself.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is quoted in *Majmaul Bayan* that he adds after the
aforesaid quotation “all of them will be pardoned” and that *Gardens of
perpetuity, they shall enter therein…* means that the foremost and the
middle course ones would be admitted to the Gardens of Adn.

Similarly, according to reliable sources, Imam Baqir (a.s.) is reported
to have said that, (when people asked from him the explanation of the
above mentioned verse): It has been revealed in praise of we, Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).

Abu Hamza Thumali (r.a.) says I asked: Who from among you is the one who
oppresses his soul? The Hazrat replied: From us Ahlul Bayt such person
is he whose sins and rewards would be equal. He would be considered as
the one who oppressed his self as he has been found wanting in the
Worship of Allah. I asked: Who from you is of the middle course? He
replied: He is the one who worships Allah both in difficulties and in
ease or both when truth is dominant or untruth is in power until he
breathed his last.

Then I asked: Who is the foremost in deeds of goodness among you? He
replied: He who commands the people to walk on the straight path of
Allah and guides them to good deeds and the worship of Allah and
prevents them from evil and sins and does not help the deviated ones and
does is angry upon anyone on behalf of those who betray the trust and is
not pleased with the command of the oppressors except him who fears harm
to himself or to his religion at a time when he does not have helpers
who may oppose the sinners and hence he mixes with them by way of
Taqaiyyah [dissimulation].

Ali bin Ibrahim says that *“whom We chose from among Our servants”*
means the Imams (a.s.) and the oppressors among Aale Muhammad are,
excepting the Imams (a.s.) those who deny the right of the Imam but
accept the leadership of the Imam (a.s.). The foremost are the Imams.

And there is a narration from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) regarding *“about those
whom We chose from among Our servants”* that they are Aale Muhammad and
that the ‘foremost’ are the Imams.

Imam Baqir (a.s.) is reported to have said that this verse has been
revealed in our praise and that the ‘foremost’ is the Imam (a.s.).

According to another report, he has also said that ‘foremost’ is the
Imam and that this verse has been revealed in the praise of the sons of
Fatima and Ali (a.s.)

In *Kashaful Ghumma*, there is a narration from *Dalaile Humairi* that
Abu Hashmi Ja’fari said that I requested Imam Askari (a.s.) to explain
this verse. He said that all the three groups are from Aale Muhammad and
the one who is oppressor himself is he who does not accept the Imam. Abu
Hashim says: Hearing this, tears rolled down from my eyes and I wondered
what kind of ‘greatness’ is this which has been granted by Allah to Aale
Muhammad?!

The honourable Imam understood my confusion and said looking at me: The
matter of Imam is higher and the rank of the Imam is greater than what
has come to your mind about the honour and dignity of Muhammad (S). So
praise Allah for having connection with them and for you belief in their
Imamate. On the Day of Qiyamat, you will be called with them. So, O Abu
Hashim! Be happy because you are on the right path.

In *Majmaul Bayan*, Abu Darda is reported to have said: In the
explanation of this verse, I have heard the Holy Prophet (S) saying that
the ‘foremost’ would enter Paradise without questioning and the
questioning of the middle course ones would be easy and the oppressor of
his own soul would be detained during interrogation for a long time and
thereafter he would be admitted to Paradise. In short, these are the
people who would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي أَذْهَبَ عَنَّا الْحَزَنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(All) praise is due to Allah, Who has made grief to depart from us.
(Sura Fatir 35:34)***

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said that the oppressor of his own soul is the one who
commits both good and bad actions and the one of the middle course is
one who endeavours a lot in worship and the foremost are Ali, Hasan,
Husain (a.s.) and those from Aale Muhammad (a.s.) imply the martyrs.

Sayyid Ibne Tawoos has, in *Kitabus Saadus Saood* quoted from the
*Tafsir* of Muhammad bin Abbas and similarly, the author of *Tawilul
Aayaatul Bahira* has also narrated with his authority from Abi Ishaq
Sabeei that: I went for Hajj and met Muhammad bin Ali, that is, Muhammad
bin Hanafiya and asked him about the explanation of this verse.

He asked me: What does your community say about the meaning of this
verse? [He meant the people of Kufa]. I said: They say it means the
Shias. He said: Why do they fear when they are the people of Paradise? I
replied: I may be sacrificed for you, what do you say? He said: O Abu
Ishaq. It refers specially to us, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). But the foremost
are Ali, Hasan and Husain (a.s.) and also every Imam who would be from
us.

It is said in some books that he added ‘also every martyr from us’ and
the middle course one is he who fasts during the day and rises for
worship at night and the oppressor refers to those who repent and,
according to some narrations, which are for all, they are those who have
been mentioned as the forgiven ones.

So, O Abu Ishaq! The merciful Allah dispels your sins because of us and
He frees your necks from the ropes of disgrace and pardons your sins
because of us or repays your debts and initiates Caliphate and the
Imamate through us and also concludes it on us not on you. And like the
People of the cave it is only we who are the cave and the place of
shelter for you. And only we are like the Ark of Nuh (a.s.), the Ark of
salvation for you and, like the Gate of repentance of Bani Israel, we
are the Gate of repentance for you.

The Sayyid (r.a.) says that Muhammad bin Ayyash has narrated the meaning
of this verse in twenty manners with a slight addition or omission and
Furat bin Ibrahim has also quoted from the commentary of Muhammad bin
Ayyash with a little variance in the book *Aayaatul Bahira.*

It is narrated with trustworthy chains from Surah bin Kaleeb that: I
asked Imam Baqir (a.s.), the explanation of this verse. He replied: The
oppressor is one who does not know the Imam. I asked: Then who is the
middle course one? He said: One who knows the Imam. I further inquired:
Who is the foremost? He replied: He is the Imam. Then I asked: What
about your Shias? He said: They will be pardoned and their debts will be
paid and we are their Bab-e-Hitta and their sins will be forgiven
because of us.

Similarly, trustworthy chains quote Imam Baqir (a.s.) that: *“those whom
We chose from among Our servants”* are the Aale Muhammad (a.s.) who have
been selected by Allah and the one who does injustice to himself will be
destroyed and the ones of the middle course are the pious and righteous
people and the foremost is Ali (a.s.). The Lord of the worlds says:
*this is the great excellence. Gardens of perpetuity, they shall enter
therein* meaning that the Aale Muhammad will enter the palaces of
Paradise each one of which is made of a single pearl having no hole or
joint. It will accommodate all the faithful collectively. Their rooms
are made of Emeralds having two corridors, each one of which will be
twelve miles long.

Therefore Allah Almighty says that, while entering them, they will say:
*Praiseworthy is the Lord who removed grief and sorrow from us.* The
Hazrat (a.s.) said: The grief is what they had to suffer in the world,
that is, the troubles given to them by the people of their time.[^1]

The Second Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَى آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ
عِمْرَانَ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ. ذُرِّيَّةً بَعْضُهَا مِنْ بَعْضٍ
وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim (Aale
Ibrahim) and the descendants of Imran (Aale Imran) above the nations.
Offspring one of the other; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing. (Sura
Ale-Imran 3:33-34)***

Meaning that Allah selected Adam and Nuh and Aale Ibrahim from all the
people of the worlds and so the Holy Prophet (S) as well as the guiding
Imams who are from his progeny are also included in them. But there is
difference of opinions about Aale Imran as to who are they. Some have
said they are Moosa and Haroon and their progeny because Moosa and
Haroon are the sons of Imran. Some say they are Mary am and Isa (a.s.)
because Maryam was the daughter of Imran.

Shaykh Tabarsi (r.a.) says that in the *Furat* of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
instead of the descendants of Imran is mentioned the descendants of
Muhammad (a.s.) above the nations. And that as mentioned by the Imams
(a.s.) Aale Ibrahim (a.s.) means Aale Muhammad (a.s.)

Similarly Tabarsi (r.a.) has said that the people of a group which has
been selected by Allah should necessarily be free from all sins and
drawbacks and that they must be purified as well as infallible, because
Allah does not choose anyone but like them and He never selects those
whose inward may not be like their outward (appearance) and that
Infallibility, on the basis of “We chose” would be reserved for the one
who is from Aale Ibrahim and Aale Imran, be they Prophets or Imams.

‘Descendants’ means some of the sons and children. ‘They are some from
some’ means they are assisting one another in the affairs of religion or
they are from the race of one another because, indeed, they are the
progeny of Adam then of Nuh, then of Ibrahim. Hence Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is
reported to have said that those whom Allah has selected are some from
the progeny of some.

Here end the words of Tabarsi (r.a.).

Ali bin Ibrahim (a.s.) has mentioned that Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) said
that this verse was revealed as follows:

“And the descendants of Ibrahim (Aale Ibrahim) and the descendants of
Imran (Aale Imran) and the descendants of Muhammad (Aale Muhammad) above
the nations…”

The Aale Muhammad has been removed from the Quran.

Shaykh Tusi (r.a.) has, in *Majalis*, reliably quoted Ibrahim Abdus
Samad that he said: I have heard Imam Sadiq (a.s.) reciting this verse
in this way: “Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of
Ibrahim (Aale Ibrahim) and the descendants of Imran (Aale Imran) above
the nations.”

But Aale Muhammad (a.s.) has been removed from Quran.

The Hazrat said: This verse has been revealed like this only.

Imam Baqir (a.s.) is quoted in *Kitab Tawilul Aayaat* that the Holy
Prophet (S) said: Woe unto those people who become happy when they
mention Aale Ibrahim and Aale Imran but when Aale Muhammad are mentioned
their hearts become unhappy. By the same Allah in Whose control is the
life of Muhammad (S), if anyone of them had performed the good deeds of
seventy messengers, Allah will not accept them if the love and Wilayat
of me and of Ali (a.s.) is absent.

Similarly, Ibne Abbas is quoted that: I went to Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
and said: O Abul Hasan! Please let me know of the will which the Holy
Prophet (S) has made to you. The Amir (Ali) said: Doubtlessly, Allah has
selected the True Faith for you and preferred it for you and completed
His bounty on you because you were the most eligible among all for it.

And verily, Allah revealed to His Messenger that he should give me a
will. So he (the Holy Prophet (S)) told me: O Ali! Remember my will.
Maintain my surety, fulfil my promise, complete my oath, keep my Sunnah
alive and go on inviting people towards my faith because Allah Almighty
has selected me and preferred me.

So I remembered the prayer of my brother Moosa and I prayed: O Allah!
Appoint a vizier for me from my family as you had made Haroon, the
vizier of Moosa. Then Allah revealed to me that ‘I have made Ali your
vizier and your helper and, after you, your Caliph and your vicegerent.
O Ali! You are from the Imams of Guidance and so also from your progeny,
are Imams like you.

So, O Ali! You people are those who attract people towards guidance and
forgiveness and you people are the tree the root of which is I and you
people are its trunk and branches and whoever will turn from it would be
destroyed and enter the lowest region of Hell and you are the people
whose love and affection is made compulsory and He has made the
acceptance of your Imamate compulsory and you are the group whose
mention has been made for you by Allah in His Book saying: *Surely Allah
chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim (Aale Ibrahim) and the
descendants of Imran (Aale Imran) above the nations.* So you people are
selected by Allah from Adam and Nuh and Aale Imran and Aale Ibrahim and
you are the best tribe and group of Ismail (a.s.) and you are the
Progeny of Muhammad (S) who are to guide the creation.

Ayyashi has reported that Imam Baqir (a.s.), explaining the verse:
Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim (Aale
Ibrahim) and the descendants of Imran (Aale Imran) above the nations.
That: We are from the said descendants and Progeny.

According to another narration the Holy Prophet (S) said that peace,
ease, help, comfort and richness and pleasure and conquest over enemies
and the nearness to Allah and his Prophet are for him who befriends Ali
(a.s.) and who, after Ali (a.s.), obeys his legatees. I am bound to
intercede for them and it is incumbent on my Lord to accept my mediation
in their favor because they are my followers and the one who follows me
is from me. My case is just like that of Ibrahim who had said:

***then whoever follows me, he is surely of me*** ***(Sura Ibrahim
14:36)***

because Ibrahim is from me and I am from him and his religion is my
religion and my religion is his religion and his way (Sunnah) is my way
and my way is his way and my grace is his grace and I am superior to him
and the testimony to it is my Lord’s statement:

Offspring one of the other; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

Ibne Bitreeq in *Kitab Amadah*, quotes Thalabi through Abu Waail that he
said: I have read: And the descendants of Ibrahim (Aale Ibrahim) and the
descendants of Imran (Aale Imran) and the descendants of Muhammad (Aale
Muhammad) above the nations… in Abdullah bin Masood’s copy of Quran

The Third Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ وَسَلَامٌ عَلَى عِبَادِهِ الَّذِينَ اصْطَفَى
أَاللَّهُ خَيْرٌ أَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Praise be to Allah and peace on His servants whom He has chosen.
(Sura Naml 27:59)***

Ali bin Ibrahim said the selected servants are Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

The Fourth Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا إِنِّي أَسْكَنتُ مِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي بِوَادٍ غَيْرِ ذِي زَرْعٍ
عِنْدَ بَيْتِكَ الْمُحَرَّمِ رَبَّنَا لِيُقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ فَاجْعَلْ
أَفْئِدَةً مِنْ النَّاسِ تَهْوِي إِلَيْهِمْ وَارْزُقْهُمْ مِنْ
الثَّمَرَاتِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَشْكُرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O our Lord! surely I have settled a part of my offspring in a valley
unproductive of fruit near Thy Sacred House, our Lord! that they may
keep up prayer; therefore make the hearts of some people yearn towards
them and provide them with fruits; haply they may be grateful. (Sura
Ibrahim 14:37)***

This refers to the time when Ismail (a.s.) and his respected mother
Hajrah (s.a.) were taken by Ibrahim (a.s.) to Mecca by the order of
Allah and he had prayed to Allah saying: O Lord! Verily I have made some
of my family members dwell in a barren valley where there is no
agriculture nor is it tillable, it being mountainous [stony].

Near Your House which is respectable since eternity. O our Lord! So that
they may establish Prayer. So make some people’s hearts incline towards
them enthusiastically and lovefully or they may become their fast
friends, and grant thus provision of food, so they may thank Thee for
these bounties.

Ayyashi and Ibne Shahr Aashob have quoted Imam Baqir (a.s.) that: We are
the remnants of that Progeny.

In *Tafsir Furat Bin Ibrahim*, Ibne Abbas is quoted that the Holy
Prophet (S) said: The hearts of our Shias who race in our love and turn
towards us. And Imam Baqir (a.s.) is quoted that the Lord of the world
said: *make the hearts of some people* yearn towards them wherein the
pronoun refers to the Progeny because He has not used the words “towards
it” which would have made the pronoun refer to the Ka’ba.

Thus you imagine that Allah has made it a must for you to come towards
stones and rub your hands on it, and not to turn towards us and ask us
questions and to love us, the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)?! By Allah, Allah has
not made it compulsory for you to follow any religion except our
religion.

The Fifth Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهَذَا
النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most surely the nearest of people to Ibrahim are those who followed
him and this Prophet and those who believe and Allah is the guardian of
the believers. (Sura Ale-Imran 3:68)***

In *Kafi*, Imam Baqir (a.s.) is quoted that: “Those who put faith” are
the Imam (a.s.) and their followers.

In *Majmaul Bayan*, Umar bin Yazid is reported to have said that Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) said: O Umar bin Yazid! You people are from Aale Muhammad
(a.s.). Umar bin Yazid asked: We ourselves? The Imam (a.s.) averred
thrice: Yes, by Allah, you people are. Then the Hazrat looked at me and
I looked at him when the Hazrat said: O Umar! The Almighty Lord has said
in His Book: *Most surely the nearest of people.*

The Sixth Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ النَّبِيِّينَ
مِنْ ذُرِّيَّةِ آدَمَ وَمِمَّنْ حَمَلْنَا مَعَ نُوحٍ وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّةِ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْرَائِيلَ وَمِمَّنْ هَدَيْنَا وَاجْتَبَيْنَا إِذَا
تُتْلَى عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُ الرَّحْمَانِ خَرُّوا سُجَّدًا وَبُكِيًّا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***These are they on whom Allah bestowed favors, from among the prophets
of the seed of Adam, and of those whom We carried with Nuh, and of the
seed of Ibrahim and Israel, and of those whom We guided and chose; when
the communications of the Beneficent God were recited to them, they fell
down making obeisance and weeping. (Sura Maryam 19:58)***

The apparent translation of which is: They are group on whom Allah has
bestowed Reward. They are from prophets, from the progeny of Adam and
from the group whom We made ride the Ark of Nuh and from the progeny of
Ibrahim and Israel (Yaqoob) and from the group whom we guided and whom
We selected. These are the people who, when Allah’s verses are read out
before them they fall down in prostration, weeping.

With reliable chains of narrators, Muhammad bin Ilyas has narrated from
Imam Moosa bin Ja’far (a.s.) that people asked for the explanation of
this verse from him and he replied: We are the progeny of Ibrahim (a.s.)
we are those who rode the Ark with Noah (a.s.) and we are the chosen
ones of Allah and by these words of Allah: *“and of those whom We guided
and chose”* are meant our Shias whom Allah has guided towards our love
and affection and He has selected them for our religion.

So they live on our religion and die on our religion. Allah has praised
them and they worship Allah with courtesy and humility as He has said:
*“When the communications of the Beneficent God were recited to
them.”*[^2]

The Seventh Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ اخْتَرْنَاهُمْ عَلَى عِلْمٍ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly We chose them, having knowledge, above the nations.
(Sura Dukhan 44:32)***[^3]

Muhammad bin Al-Ayyash has in his commentary quoted Imam Baqir (a.s.)
that in the explanation of this verse, he said that it means: We have
granted to the Imams superiority over others.

[^1]: The writer says: The outcome of these traditions can be one of
these two: First: These pronouns refers to Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and the
entire progeny of the Hazrat will be pure and that the unjust and the
corrupt all will be from among them. ‘he who takes a middle course’ may
be their righteous ones and ‘he who is foremost’ may be the Imam. Thus
he will not be included in this division who might have made a false
claim of Imamate or his belief might not be correct in any other way.
The other possibility is that wherein unjust is he whose beliefs may not
be correct and yet he may not have done anything against Iman (Faith).
Hence ‘they shall enter therein’ will refers to ‘he who takes a middle
course’ and to ‘he who is foremost’, it cannot mean ‘he who makes his
soul to suffer a loss’ only both these will be meant according to the
apparent and the hidden meaning of the verse or from various secrets
aspects, and ‘by Allah’s permission’ would mean that Almighty Allah has
selected them in such way than He made them Legatees and Imams and
granted to everyone of them knowledge of the book and their greatness
can be for everyone of their progeny provided they do not waste it.

[^2]: The writer says: The explanation given by the Hazrat is based on
‘of those whom We guided’ is a reply to the query as is the opinion of a
group of commentators

[^3]: The writer says: Though the apparent pronoun of this verse refers
to Moosa (a.s.) and his community, but since the affair of Bani Israel
is similar to this community and as, instead of the prophets who were in
their Ummah and were their vicegerent in that Ummah, the vicegerents of
the Holy Prophet (S) are the holy Imams (a.s.).


