Part 6: Necessity of having love and devotion for Ahlul Bayt
============================================================

Necessity of having love and devotion for Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) because
their love is the recompense of Messengership.

Allah Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلًا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُمْ
أَزْوَاجًا وَذُرِّيَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And certainly We sent apostles before you and gave them wives and
children. 13:38

And says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَى وَمَنْ يَقْتَرِفْ حَسَنَةً نَزِدْ لَهُ فِيهَا حُسْنًا إِنَّ
اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ شَكُورٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives; and whoever earns good, We give him more of good therein;
surely Allah is Forgiving, Grateful. (Sura Shuraa 42:23)***

In the explanation of the first verse, Shaykh Tabarsi has quoted Ibne
Abbas that the unbelievers taunted about the multiple marriages of the
Holy Prophet (S) saying that had he been a messenger of Allah he would
have engaged only in spreading the message instead of marrying many
women.

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he recited this verse and
pointing towards his chest, said: By Allah, we are the progeny of
Allah’s Prophet (S).

And explaining the other verse he said that people have differed in the
matter of the cause of the revelation of this verse:

First opinion:

O Muslim! I do not want any return for the propagation work from you but
want love and affection of the thing which may be means of nearness to
Allah.

Second opinion:

That it may mean: Befriend me because of my nearness to you.

Third opinion:

The meaning may be that: I do not want from you any remuneration for the
job of Messengership except that you may befriend and love my relatives
who are my progeny and protect my honour in their favor.

Regarding this meaning Ali bin Husain (a.s.) and Saeed bin Jubair, Amr
bin Shuaib, Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and also a group have been
quoted and in *Shawahidut Tanzil*, Ibne Abbas is quoted that when this
verse was revealed the companions asked: O Messenger of Allah! who are
the people whom we have been commanded to love? The holy Prophet (S)
replied: They are Ali and Fatima and Hasan and Husain (a.s.).

Likewise, it is narrated from Abu Amama Baahili that the Holy Prophet
(S) said that the Lord Almighty Allah created the messengers from
various trees and I and Ali are the products of one and the same tree.
So I am the root of that tree and is its branches and Hasan and Husain
are its fruits and our Shias are its leaves. So whoever will hold any of
its braches will get salvation and whoever rejects them would be
destroyed and caught in the chastisement of Allah.

If one engages in worship for a thousand years between Safa and Marwah
until one breaks down, but without our love and affection in his heart,
Allah will hurl one into Hell, face down. Then he recited this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives. (Sura Shuraa 42:23)***

Zaadaan has narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that in the Ha Mim
Surahs there is a verse which calls for our Mawaddat (love) which only
every believer remember. Then he recited this verse.

Shaykh Tabarsi said in anyway there are two statements regarding this
Mawaddat. The first is that the exception (illa) is disconnected;
meaning this Mawaddat is because of Islam. Another statement is that the
exception is continual which means I require no wages from you except
Mawaddat because I am happy only with it and only you will be benefited
by this Mawaddat. In others words, I have not wished from you any wages
for myself.

Abu Hamza Thumali has, in his commentary narrated from Ibne Abbas that
when the Holy Prophet (S) arrived in Medina and Islam was established
firmly and when the Ansars jointly decided to see the Holy Prophet (S)
to tell him that: As your expenses are on the increase we are putting
our wealth at your disposal so that you may utilize it as you please.
You will not have to keep any account of it nor is there any restriction
for you. When they put forth this proposal respectfully, this verse was
revealed to the Holy Prophet (S):

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives. (Sura Shuraa 42:23)***

The Holy Prophet (S) read it out to them and said: You should, after my
departure be friendly, that is not inimical with these people nor should
you harm or harass them. Then they returned from the Holy Prophet (S)
giving him a promise of obedience. At that time the hypocrites said:
Muhammad has fabricated this verse because he wants to degrade us by
making us obey his near relatives. At that moment came this Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا فَإِنْ يَشَأْ اللَّهُ
يَخْتِمْ عَلَى قَلْبِكَ وَيَمْحُ اللَّهُ الْبَاطِلَ وَيُحِقُّ الْحَقَّ
بِكَلِمَاتِهِ إِنَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Or do they say: He has forged a lie against Allah? But if Allah
pleased, He would seal your heart; and Allah will blot out the falsehood
and confirm the truth with His words; surely He is Cognizant of what is
in the breasts. (Sura Shuraa 42:24)***

The Holy Prophet (S) called those hypocrites and recited this verse
before them. They started weeping as they considered it too difficult to
act upon this or to obey this command. So came the Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي يَقْبَلُ التَّوْبَةَ عَنْ عِبَادِهِ وَيَعْفُو عَنْ
السَّيِّئَاتِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons the
evil deeds and He knows what you do. (Sura Shuraa 42:25)***

So the Holy Prophet (S) conveyed this verse also to them and gave them
good tidings then he said that this means those people who were ready to
respond to the command of Allah beforehand.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَسْتَجِيبُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَيَزِيدُهُمْ
مِنْ فَضْلِهِ وَالْكَافِرُونَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He answers those who believe and do good deeds, and gives them
more out of His grace. (Sura Shuraa 42:26)***

Abu Hamza Thumali has narrated from Saddi that: *those who believe and
do good deeds* means the friendship of and affection for Aale Muhammad
(a.s.).

Imam Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.) is quoted in a correct Tradition saying in a
sermon which he gave to people that: I am from those Ahlul Bayt whose
Mawaddat has been must by Allah for every Muslim. He said: *Say: I do
not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near relatives…* And
added *good deeds* is the love of (for ) us (we) Ahlul Bayt. Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) has also been quoted saying that: This verse has been revealed in
praise of us (Ahlul Bayt) as we are Ashabe Aba (those whom the Holy
Prophet (S) had covered in his coat) here end the words of Tabarsi
(r.a.).

Allamah Hilli (a.s.) has written in *Kashful Haqaiq* that it is written
in Ahle Sunnat books like *Sahih Bukhari* and *Muslim* and in the
*Musnad* of Ahmad bin Hanbal and in the *Tafsir* of Thalabi that when
this verse was revealed the Companions inquired: O Messenger of Allah!
Who are your near ones, the love for whom has been made obligators by
Allah for us? The Holy Prophet (S) replied: They are Ali, Fatima and
their two sons. Now making love obligatory also makes obedience to them
a must.

Allamah Baidhawi has also mentioned this narration in his *Tafsir.*
Fakhruddin Razi who also is a great Ahle Sunnat scholar has narrated
from Ibne Abbas in his *Tafsir* that when the Holy Prophet (S) came to
Medina, he had to spend a lot of money because many Arab delegations
were visiting him and he had to entertain them suitably as guests and
his monetary condition was not so good.

Therefore the Ansars held consultations among themselves and thought
that since Allah guided us through this gentleman (the Holy Prophet) who
is our nephew also and he has come to you in your town. So let us save
and collect something from our wealth. Then they brought some amount to
the Holy Prophet (S). The Holy Prophet (S) did not accept that amount
and returned it to them. at that moments came down this Divine verse:

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives. (Sura Shuraa 42:23)***

Then he encouraged them to love his relatives.

He also quotes the author of *Tafsir Kashaf* that the Hazrat said: One
who dies with love in his hearts for Aale Muhammad dies a martyr’s death
and the one who dies with the love of Aale Muhammad in his heart dies
with repentance (with Tawbah) and the one who dies with the love of Aale
Muhammad in his hearts dies with full faith and the one who dies with
the love of Aale Muhammad in his hearts is given good tidings of
Paradise by the angel of death, then Munkir and Nakeer also give him
good news.

One who dies with the love of Aale Muhammad in his hearts will be led to
Paradise just as a bride is taken with embellishments to the house of
her groom. One who dies with love of Aale Muhammad in heart dies in the
path of the Sunnah (prophetic practice) and Jamat (congregation). And
one who dies with hostility towards Aale Muhammad dies the death of a
disbeliever and the one who dies with enmity towards Aale Muhammad in
heart will not even smell the fragrance of Paradise.

Fakhruddin Razi says that these traditions have been narrated by Kashaf
and I say that the Aale Muhammad are those people whose affairs are
taken to the Holy Prophet (S) and such people must be his Aal and there
is no doubt that Ali and Fatima and Hasan and Husain (a.s.) have the
strongest and closest relations with the Holy Prophet (S). This is known
through Tawaatur (widely narrated traditions) and it is certain that
they are his Aal.

People have differed in the meaning of Aal. Some say that the Holy
Prophet’s (S) blood relatives are his Aal. So according to it we may
considered them as his Aal. If we believe that those who accepted the
Holy Prophet’s (S) call (message) are his Aal even then they are his
Aal. Regarding others there are difference of opinion. Therefore as per
agreement, they are the Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

The author of *Kashaf* has narrated that when this verse was revealed
the people asked: O Messenger of Allah! Who from your near and dear ones
are those whose love has been made mandatory for us. The Holy Prophet
(S) replied: They are Ali and Fatima and both of their sons (a.s.). So
it is proved that these four persons are the Prophet’s near and dear
ones. When this is proved it also becomes obviously compulsory that they
must be given maximum respect and honour. There are several reasons for
this respect and honour.

The first reason is the Divine word *‘but love for my near relatives…’*

Another reason: When it is proved that the Holy Prophet (S) used to love
Fatima (s.a.) very much and when he has said that: Fatima is a piece of
my liver, the one who harms her, harms me. It is proved by widely
related traditions that the Holy Prophet (S) had the maximum affection
and love for Ali (a.s.), Fatima, Hasan and Husain (a.s.). Therefore it
also becomes obligatory for the entire Ummah to act upon the verse:
*Follow the Holy Prophet so that you may succeed* and Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَحْذَرْ الَّذِينَ يُخَالِفُونَ عَنْ أَمْرِهِ أَنْ تُصِيبَهُمْ
فِتْنَةٌ أَوْ يُصِيبَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Therefore let those beware who go against his order lest a trial
afflict them or there befall them a painful chastisement. (Sura Nur
24:63)***

And Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمْ
اللَّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: If you love Allah, then follow me , Allah will love you and
forgive you your faults. (Sura Ale-Imran 3:31)***

Then He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِي رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ لِمَنْ كَانَ
يَرْجُو اللَّهَ وَالْيَوْمَ الْآخِرَ وَذَكَرَ اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly you have in the Apostle of Allah an excellent exemplar for
him who hopes in Allah and the latter day and remembers Allah much.
(Sura Ahzab 33:21)***

Third reason: To pray in favor of the Aal of the Holy Prophet (S) is the
best duty of Muslims. Therefore, this Dua concludes Tashahhud in every
Prayer: O Allah bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad. And this
respect has not been given to anyone except the Aale Muhammad (a.s.).
All this proves that love is compulsory for Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

Following is couplets composed Shafei:

If the love for Aale Muhammad (a.s.) is Rafz,[^1]

Then let both the worlds be witness that I am a Rafizi.

The author of *Tafsir Kashaf* goes to say that Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
once complained to the Holy Prophet (S) about envy of the people against
him. The Holy Prophet (S) said: Ali! Are you not pleased with the fact
that you will be the fourth of those four persons who will enter
Paradise?

You, Hasan, Husain and our women will be on my right and left and our
sons will be behind our women.

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that Paradise is Haraam
(prohibited) for the one who may oppress my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and who
may give me sorrow regarding my Progeny and anyone who will do good to
any one of the sons of Abdul Muttalib and who may not repay that good I
will give him reward of that good.

Explaining the verse (42:23) Imam Baqir (a.s.) said that the Holy
Prophet (S) asked his followers to befriend his near and dear ones and
not to give them any pain. At that time this verse was sent by Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَى وَمَنْ يَقْتَرِفْ حَسَنَةً نَزِدْ لَهُ فِيهَا حُسْنًا إِنَّ
اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ شَكُورٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives; and whoever earns good, We give him more of good therein.
(Sura Shuraa 42:23)***

It is authentically mentioned in *Kafi*, *Manaqib Shahr Aashob*, *Qurbul
Asnaad* and *Khasais* that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) asked Mominuttaaq: Have you
been to Basra? He replied: Yes. Then the Imam asked: How did you find
those people’s inclination towards and enthusiasm for Shiaism and
towards the True Faith? He replied: By Allah, very less. Some in Basra
have paid attention to it but they are very few. The Hazrat said: You
should do reform work in the direction in which youth are inclined more
than the aged people.

Then the Hazrat asked: What do the people of Basra say about the verse
(42:23)? That companion replied: May I be sacrificed for you, they say
that this verse has been revealed concerning the near relatives and
Ahlul Bayt of the Holy Prophet (S). The Hazrat said: This verse is
revealed only in respect of we Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and they are Ali,
Fatima, Hasan, Husain (a.s.) and they are Ashabe Kisa (People of the
Cloak).

In *Qurbul Asnad* and *Ikhtisas* it is mentioned authentically that Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) said: When this verse (42:23) was revealed the Holy Prophet
(S) was standing amidst his companions. He said: O people! The Almighty
Allah has made a thing about us obligatory for you. Will you obey the
command? Hearing this, none of them replied. So the Holy Prophet (S)
returned. He came the next day and repeated the same question standing
among his companions but again nobody responded. The same thing happed
the third day and again there was no response.

Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: That duty is not of any monetary value
like gold and silver. They said: Please state, we are prepared to accept
it, and take upon ourselves the love of your Ahlul Bayt (we accept as
our duty). Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: By Allah, no one has
fulfilled this promise except seven, and they are Salman, Abu Zar,
Ammar, Miqdad bin Aswad Kindi, Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari, Shabeet (freed
slave of the Holy Prophet (S)) and Zaid bin Arqam.

Ali bin Ibrahim has quoted Imam Baqir (a.s.) authentically, in the
explanation of the verse of Mawaddat that it is regarding the Ahlul Bayt
of the Holy Prophet (S). The Imam said that once the Ansars (Helpers)
came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: We gave you shelter and
assistance, so in order to meet your expenses, kindly also accept some
money from us. At that time Allah sent down this verse: I do not require
any wages of Prophethood (message) from you except my wish that you
should love and befriend my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Thereafter the Imam said: Is it not a fact that if one has a friend and
that friend entertains enmity and ill will towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
(family members) of the former, then his heart is not clear in the
matter of his friends.

Likewise Allah wished that the Holy Prophet (S) may not feel any doubt
in his hearts from the Ummah and hence He made it obligatory for the
Ummat to love and befriend his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). So if they accept it
they accepted a duty and if they disobey, they disobeyed the command.
Thus when the Holy Prophet (S) recited this verse before his companions
and they got up and went away from the Holy Prophet (S), some of them
said: We present to you some of our wealth. The Holy Prophet (S) said:
You should maintain friendship and love (affection) for my Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) after my departure. Some said: The Holy Prophet (S) has said this
of his own and did not accept the affection of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). It was
at that time this verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Or do they say: He has forged a lie against Allah? (Sura Shura
42:24)***

After this Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ يَشَأْ اللَّهُ يَخْتِمْ عَلَى قَلْبِكَ وَيَمْحُ اللَّهُ
الْبَاطِلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But if Allah pleased, He would seal your heart; and Allah will blot
out the falsehood. (Sura Shura 42:24)***

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُحِقُّ الْحَقَّ بِكَلِمَاتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And confirm the truth with His words…(Sura Shura 42:24)***

‘With His words’ means through the Imams and Qaem Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَسْتَجِيبُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He answers those who believe and do good deeds, (Sura Shura,
42:26)***

The Hazrat said: Those who testified and said that the word of the
messenger is the word of Allah and said: good deeds (Hasanah) is the
acceptance of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and to behave nicely with them and to be
kind to them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَزِيدُهُمْ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***and gives them more out of His grace. (Sura Shura 42:26)***

It means ‘We will add to their goodness’.

It is mentioned in *Basair* that while explaining this verse, Imam Baqir
(a.s.) said that the Holy Prophet said: By Allah! Love for Muhammad and
his near and dear ones is the divinely imposed duty on His servants and
according to *Mahasin*, the Imam also said that ‘Qurba’ means the
Infallible Imams to whom Sadaqah is made impermissible.

Likewise it is narrated that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) asked Abu Ja’far: What do
Ahle Sunnat Scholars living near you say about the meaning of this
verse? He replied: Hasan Basri says it means all Arab relatives of the
Holy Prophet (S). The Imam said: Those from Quraishi who live near us
say that this verse applies both to you and to us. So we say: Tell us,
whenever the Holy Prophet (S) found himself in hardship whom did he call
for confronting the enemy?

At the time when it was time to invoke curse during talks with Najran
Christians, Holy Prophet (S) took Ali, Fatima, Hasan, Husain (a.s.) with
him and presented them for being cursed mutually (inviting Allah’s
anger) and the one whom the Holy Prophet (S) sent to fight first during
the battle of Badr were Ali and Hamza (a.s.) and Ubaidullah bin Hafs.
Thus you have been selected for sweet things and we for the bitter.

In *Tafsir Furat*, Imam Baqir (a.s.) is quoted saying: we are the tree
whose root is the Holy Prophet (S) and the trunk Ali (a.s.) and the
branch Fatima (s.a.) and the fruits Hasan and Husain (a.s.). So we are
the tree of Prophethood, house of mercy, key to wisdom, treasure of
knowledge, abode of Messengership, pathway of angels, place of Divine
secrets and that trust of Allah which, when presented before the skies
and the earth and the mountain and Allah’s great Sanctuary and the Holy
House and we have knowledge of people’s death and difficulties. We are
the decisions of Allah and the wills of the Holy Prophet (S) and we are
‘Faslul Khitab’ meaning the separators of truth from falsehood and we
know who is born Muslim and we know the race of the Arabs.

Undoubtedly the Imams were the radiance all around the divine thrones.
So when they glorified Him, the dwellers in sky joined their praise. The
‘Saafoon’ and ‘Musabbehoon’ (in Holy Quran) means these people, who
fulfilled Allah’s oath and who recognized Allah’s right and who denied
the right of those who denied Allah’s right. These people are the
guardians of Allah’s affairs and the treasures of Allah revelation and
heirs to Allah’s Book, the Holy Prophet’s (S) Progeny and his Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).

They are those who are liked by the flying angels and they are the ones
whom Jibraeel gave food by Allah’s command and they are the ones who
reside in Allah’s house and whom Allah has made the graceful and has
granted them His honour and strengthened them with His power and made
them steadfast by His revelation and made them the guiding leaders and
light for dispelling the darkness of mischief and has selected and
reserved them for His revelation and has made them superior in His
knowledge and granted to them that which has not been given to anyone of
His creation and He has made them the praised ones of His religion and
has entrusted His mysteries to them and has seated them on the pulpit of
His revelation and made them witness for His creation and has chosen
them and has made them light for cities and pillars for people and made
them His great signs and the salvaged ones and His near and dear ones.

These are the just and truthful judges appointed by Allah and the
guiding stars and they are the straight path and they are the way which
is the most straight. One who deviates from this path has, so to say,
strayed away from the true path of religion and the one who stays back
has, so to say, remained untrue and one who follows this path joins
them.

These people are the divine light in the souls of the faithful and the
rivers for the thirsty and a shelter for those who want safety and they
are the gates of safety who join with them and they invite people
towards Allah for the pleasure of Allah and remain obedient and
submissive to the Almighty Allah and act according to the commandments
of Allah and who speak according to the orders of Allah.

He has appointed His Messengers only from them and angels came down to
them and calmness (Sakina) came to their souls from Allah and Jibraeel
(a.s.) was sent to them. This is Divine Reward on them that He gave them
preference over others and bestowed His bounties on them and granted
them piety and righteousness and gave them strength with wisdom.

They are the people who are pious and holy and the trustees of pure and
clean knowledge and forbearance and they are the divine light of
intelligence and they are heirs and legatees of Prophets and the
remnants of the legatees. Among them is the holy and clean and pious and
chosen and unlettered Messenger Muhammad Mustafa (S) and from them also
is the lion-like man named Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib. Among them is the
Holy Prophet’s (S) uncle Abbas and also Ja’far Tayyar whom Allah gifted
two wings and who prayed towards two Qiblas and who migrated twice to
Abyssinia and who gave two Bayats (oaths of allegiance).

Also from them are the Holy Prophet’s (S) friend and his brother who is,
after him, the arguer and the explainer and the Amir (leader) of the
faithful and their Wali and the guardian of their affairs and the
legatee of the Holy Prophet (S), that is, Ali Ibne Abi Talib. These are
the people whose love and affection has been made obligatory for every
faithful man and woman by Allah. Explaining the verse 42:23 the Hazrat
(a.s.) said here ‘do good deeds’ means affection for us Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).

Likewise, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) is quoted that when Jibraeel (a.s.)
brought this verse, he said: Every religion has a root, a pillar, a
branch and a foundation. The pillar of this Religion is the confession
‘There is no god but Allah’ and root and branch are the love for the
Holy Prophet (S) and his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and his following according
to Haqq (truth).[^2]

Among the verses aiming at the love of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), according to
reliable traditions, is also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْمَوْءُودَةُ سُئِلَتْ. بِأَيِّ ذَنْبٍ قُتِلَتْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when the female infant buried alive is asked, For what sin she
was killed, (Surah Tawkir 81:8-9)***

Herein though the famous recitation is with Hamza, (on the weight of
Mafool), the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) have recited it with Fath (a) on the
letter Waw and Tashdeed on Daal and Shaykh Tabarsi has said that
MAWADDAH is a girl child who was buried alive and it was so done in the
time of ignorance (pre-Islam) that when the time of child-birth came,
the pregnant woman used to dig a pit and to sit on its brink.

If the new born was a girl she threw it in that pit and filled the pit
with earth making that pit that baby girl’s grave and if the new born
was a boy she maintained and nourished him, the translation of this
verse is: On the Day of Qiyamat that baby girl will be asked as to for
what reason (crime) she was killed. The aim of this verse is to threaten
the killer of the child as to why the poor girl was murdered. Some have
opined that this question will be asked to the killer.

Imam Baqir and Imam Ja’far (a.s.) are reported to have said that they
used to recite with Fath on Meem and Waw. Ibne Abbas has also narrated
likewise. The Imam says that the fact is that ‘Sile Rahm’ and care and
concern for the near and dear ones is for us and that the one who did
Qat-e-Rahm will be asked as to why did he do so?

Ibne Abbas also has narrated that the question will be asked about the
person who will be killed due to his affection for Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Imam Baqir (a.s.) is reported to have said that what is meant by this
verse is nearness to the Holy Prophet (S) and the one who got killed in
a Holy war.

And in another narration: The man who was murdered due to affection for
us Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) (in love and guardianship).

Ali bin Ibrahim has, authentically quoted Imam Baqir (a.s.) that this
verse points out to the one who got killed in our love (Mawaddat) and
Muhammad bin Ayyash has, in his *Tafsir*, quoted from Zain bin Ali bin
Husain (a.s.) that it means, by Allah, love for us and this verse has
been revealed only in our praise and Hazrat Sadiq (a.s.) is quoted to
have said that it means the one who is killed in our love and his killer
will be asked as to why he killed him. And he has quoted Imam Baqir
(a.s.) that it means the one who gets killed for loving us and in
another narration he said: It means the Shias of Aale Muhammad who will
be asked for which fault were they killed.

With proper proofs it is also narrated by the same Imam that it means
our love and this verse is revealed in our appreciation and he has
quoted Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that it refers to Imam Husain (a.s.).

In *Tafsir Furat*, Muhammad bin Hanafiya is reported to have said that
it means our love and Imam Baqir (a.s.) has said that it means: O
Muslims you will be asked about the love which has been revealed for you
as a grace as to for what sin did you kill those who loved us.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is quoted to have said that it means our love and it
is our right which is obligatory for the people and it is our love which
is compulsory for the creation and they killed our love.[^3]

[^1]: A derogatory term for Shias

[^2]: The writer says: These matters are found in many traditions but we
have considered this sufficient.

[^3]: The writer says: The basis of these traditions is the second kind
of recitation and in my opinion, this can be supported on four grounds:
first a noun in a possessive case be made compulsory in the word which
means the people of the love will be asked as to on what ground they
were killed. Secondly: The relation of killing with love maybe
figurative and the meaning may be the killing of people of love. Thirdly
it may be that in the killings one may have been figurative and the
destruction of love might have been called a murder figuratively and the
killing of love might mean negating of it and of not observing its
rights. Fourthly, we may take some of the narrations according to the
prevailing recitation (Qirat) and the love may mean Nafs (being) or the
soul which might have been buried in earth, may be alive or dead and
that it might be to convey that as they have been killed in the path of
Allah they are not dead, rather they are alive in the sight of Allah and
are getting provision as Allah says: And do not speak of those who are
slain in Allah’s way as dead; nay, (they are) alive, but you do not
perceive. (2:154). As if they have been buried and this reason is very
subtle.


