Part 8: Trust denotes Imamate
=============================

Trust (Amanat) denotes Imamate in Quran. There are two verses on this.

First verse

The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُكُمْ أَنْ تُؤَدُّوا الْأَمَانَاتِ إِلَى
أَهْلِهَا وَإِذَا حَكَمْتُمْ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ أَنْ تَحْكُمُوا
بِالْعَدْلِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ نِعِمَّا يَعِظُكُمْ بِهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ
سَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners and
that when you judge between people you judge with justice; surely Allah
admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah is Seeing, Hearing.
(Sura Nisa 4:58)***

Commentators have differed about the circumstances of the revelation of
this verse. There are several opinions. The first is that it is about
every person to whom anybody entrusts something. The trust of Allah is
his commands and prohibitions and the trusts of people are the things
like property for which some make others their trustees. This has been
mentioned in a number of traditions of Imams Baqir and Sadiq (a.s.). So
much so that in some narrations it is mentioned that: Even if the
murderer of Amirul Momineen entrusts me the killer sword to me, I will
return it to him (on demand).

Secondly, Shaykh Tabarsi (r.a.) has said about Caliphs and the people
(rulers) in charge (Vaaliyaan-e-Amr) that Allah has ordered them to rule
the masses with justice and to keep them obedient to the Religion and
the Shariah. People have quoted Imams Baqir and Sadiq (a.s.) that: Allah
has ordered every Imam to hand over the Imamate to his successor Imams
and it is so because Allah has ordered the masses to obey those in
authority and the Imams have said that there are two verses: One is for
us and the other for you. One is the aforesaid verse and another is:

O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you. 4:59

Tabarsi says that this statement is also included in the first statement
because this also is from among the things on which Allah has made the
truthful Imams (a.s.) the trustees.

Likewise Imam Baqir (a.s.) has said that the offering of Prayer,
Fasting, Zakat and Hajj also come under trusts and so also the
distribution of booty and charities as well as all the things concerning
the rights of the public as orders by Allah to the rulers-in-charge.

Thirdly, that the Holy Prophet (S) is being addressed to hand over the
key of the Ka’ba to Uthman bin Talha from whom it was taken when Mecca
was conquered and which was intended to be given to Abbas (r.a.).

In *Basairud Darajat* it is mentioned from reliable chains of narrators
that Imam Baqir (a.s.) said that this verse is revealed in our praise
(regarding us) and we seek help from Allah.

Likewise he is quoted that: It is obligatory for the Imam to hand over
Imamate to the next Imam and that he should not take it back from him to
pass it to another one.

According to another true narration he said that it means: We, the
Imams, and it is obligatory that the former Imam must hand over to his
successor the books which are with him and also the arms (weapons) of
the Holy Prophet (S): *and that when you judge between people you judge
with justice,* meaning ‘when you are appointed as Imam decide according
to the just commandments which are with you.

It is reported with reliable chains of narrators that Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
said, while explaining the verse: *Surely Allah commands you to make
over trusts to their* that it means handing over of the trust of Imamate
and the carrying out of legateeship.

It also is authentically reported that Imam Baqir (a.s.) asked Malik
Jahni as to about whom this verse has been revealed, he replied that the
people say that it is about all the people. The Hazrat said: Then all
can decide for (and issue orders) to all because, in this verse the
address is being made in plural, but it is not so, you must know that it
is revealed in our praise.

With authentic chains Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said that
the Imam can be recognized due to three virtues.

Firstly, from the aspect of lineage he should be better and nobler than
all like the Imam before him. Secondly, he must have Zulfiqar, which is
the weapon of the Holy Prophet (S). Thirdly, the previous one should
have made him his legatee (Wasee) as regards this the Almighty Allah has
said: *Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts* and said that the
weapon is with us like the Chest (Taboot) of Bani Israel and that the
Imamate and kingship is with the weaponry of the Prophet of Allah. The
Imamate is exclusively for him who has the weapons of the Holy Prophet
(S) as was the chest (Taboot) with Bani Israel and that to whomsoever
the Taboot went he became the ruler.

Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) is quoted in *Maniul Akhbar* in reply to
people’s query the meaning of this verse that: This is an address to us
alone. Allah has ordered all of us Imams that we must hand over the
Imamate to our successor Imam and to make him our legatee. Then this
verse applied to all the trusts of the people. My great father heard
from his father Ali bin Husain (a.s.) that the Hazrat told his
companions that making over trusts is a must for you so much so that had
my father, Imam Husain’s killer given me that killer sword as a trust I
would have returned it to him unhesitatingly.

Nomani has quoted Imam Baqir (a.s.) from authentic chains of narrators
that: This verse has been revealed in our praise. Allah has ordered all
of us, Imams, to entrust Imamate to his successor Imam. He should not
give it to anyone else. Have you not heard that after this, Allah says:
*and that when you judge between people you judge with justice* which
shows that the address is about orders (Ahkam).

Furat has quoted Shoba in *Tafsir* that he said about the meaning of
*Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts* that: I say without
anyone’s fear (other than Allah) that by Allah, this means the Wilayat
of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).

Second Verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا عَرَضْنَا الْأَمَانَةَ عَلَى السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ
وَالْجِبَالِ فَأَبَيْنَ أَنْ يَحْمِلْنَهَا وَأَشْفَقْنَ مِنْهَا
وَحَمَلَهَا الْإِنْسَانُ إِنَّهُ كَانَ ظَلُومًا جَهُولًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the
mountains, but they refused to be unfaithful to it and feared from it,
and man has turned unfaithful to it; surely he is unjust, ignorant.
(Sura Ahzab 33:72)***

There are many traditions in the explanation of this verse.

The first: It points to the previous verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُصْلِحْ لَكُمْ أَعْمَالَكُمْ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَمَنْ
يُطِعْ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ فَقَدْ فَازَ فَوْزًا عَظِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He will put your deeds into a right state for you, and forgive you
your faults; and whoever obeys Allah and His Apostle, he indeed achieves
a mighty success. (Sura Ahzab 33:71)***

The obedience to Allah and His messenger has been called ‘Amanat’
(Trust) because its carrying out is compulsory and that the meaning (or
aim) is that the greatness of obedience is so high (and weighty) that if
it is put on huge bodies (like mountains) having intelligence, they
would deny to carry it fearfully.

Yet despite his weakness and inability, man took it up. Therefore, its
reward is very much both in this world and in the hereafter. Doubtlessly
he has oppressed himself, as he did not do as he should have and he was
unaware of the consequence. This attribute (of weakness) refers to the
majority of people.

Secondly, ‘Amanat’ (trust) means obedience be it natural or intentional
and presenting, means demanding, be the demand addressed to the man in
power or otherwise and ‘Haml’ (carrying) means dishonestly concerning
the trust and its non-fulfilment. He who misappropriates the trust and
does not fulfil its conditions is called the Hamil-e-Amanat. It also
includes not doing the needful despite being able to do and to misbehave
by way of injustice, oppression and ignorance.

Thirdly, when Allah created these (celestial) bodies, He endowed them
also with intelligence and said: I am making a thing obligatory, I have
created Paradise for the one who obeys Me and I created Hellfire for one
who disobeys Me. All said: We are under the thing for which You have
created us and we have no ability to fulfil the duty and (therefore) we
do not require either reward or punishment. Therefore when He created
Adam and proposed to him the same things, Adam accepted and he was to
oppress himself, because he was loaded with a burden which was hard for
him to bear and he was unaware of its evil consequences.

Fourthly ‘Amanat’ means intelligence along with the responsibility and
the meaning of offering it to him is the consideration or taking into
account his ability to perform that job. The meaning of his refusal is
the natural disinclination, meaning inability and disqualification.
Man’s ‘Haml’, ‘Juhool’ means his being subject to passion and anger.
Some have said that ‘Amanat’ is indicating ‘Muhabbat’ (love). Sufis have
mentioned other causes and some of its explanations found in traditions
are like this; In *Kafi* and other books Imam Baqir (a.s.) is quoted as
saying that ‘Amanat’ means the Wilayat of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

It is reported in *Uyoon* and *Maniul Akhbar* that when people sought
the meaning of this verse the Imam said that ‘Amanat’ means Wilayat and
that the one who claims it falsely (without entitlement) is a
disbeliever.

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) with reliable chains of narrators
in *Maniul Akhbar* that ‘Amanat’ means Wilayat and that man is very
naughty and a hypocrite who made a false claim.

Ali Ibne Ibrahim has reported that ‘Amanat’ means Imamate and commands
and prohibitions, and the proof of its meaning Imamate is that Allah has
addressed the Holy Imams (a.s.) saying: *Surely Allah commands you to
make over trusts to their owners…* therefore its meaning is ‘Amanat’ was
offered to the skies and earth but all of them declined to claim it
falsely or to snatch it from the one who has its right.

So they feared its rightful possessor and man took it up (means snatched
it unlawfully) because he was an oppressor and ignorant so that the Lord
of the universe may punish the polytheist men and women and He may
accept the repentance of believer men and women and Allah is the
Forgiver and the Kind. This is the translation of the subsequent verse.

In *Basair* and *Kafi* with reliable chains of narrators it is reported
that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: ‘Amanat’ mean the Wilayat of Amirul
Momineen Ali (a.s.).

It is also mentioned in *Basair* that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said that the
meaning of ‘Amanat’ is Wilayat. The sky, earth and mountains denied to
carry it and thereby to become disbelievers. And the man who took it up
without his right was that same notorious hypocrite.

Ibne Shahar Aashob has reported from *Maqatil* in *Manaqib* that
Muhammad bin Hanafiya heard from Imam Ali (a.s.) that he, explaining
this verse said the Almighty Allah presented my Imamate to all the seven
skies with conditions of reward and punishment. They replied: O Lord! We
cannot bear it with the conditions of reward and punishment. We are
ready to carry it without reward and punishment. Then my Imamate and
Wilayat was presented to the birds. The first of the birds who believed
were while eagles and falcons and the first who refused were owls and
phoenix.

Therefore the owl cannot come out during the day due to the jealously of
all other birds for him and the phoenix hid himself in seas and hence
nobody sees it. And doubtlessly Allah presented my Imamate to the
earths. So the lands which believed have been made holy and pure by
Allah and He made their fruits and vegetable, sweet and made its water
also pure and sweet. And He made those parts the land which desired my
Imamate and Wilayat, barren arid and their fruits distasteful and bitter
and also made their water salty.

Then He said: *and man has turned unfaithful to it;* meaning: O
Muhammad! Your community has taken up Amirul Momineen and his Imamate
and Wilayat together with all its rewards and punishment. No doubt man
was very cruel (unjust) to himself and unaware of the order of his Lord,
that is, he did not honour the right of Wilayat along with its
obligations as he aught to have. So he was an oppressor who did
injustice to himself.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has been quoted in *Basair* that our Wilayat was
presented to the skies, earths, mountains and cities but they refused
like the people of Kufa.

It is mentioned in *Tafsir Furat* that Fatima (s.a.) said that the Holy
Prophet (S) said: During the Night of Ascension I was taken to the skies
and I passed through the farthest lote tree (Sidratul Muntaha) and
reached the stage of two bows (Qaabe Qausain) and I did not see Allah
with my physical eyes but saw Him through the internal eyes of my heart
and I heard the voice of Azan (call for prayer) and Iqamat and I also
heard an announcer saying: O My angels, and the residents of My skies
and earths and the bearers of My Arsh! All of you give witness that I am
the only one Allah and that I have no partners. All said: We give
witness and confess.

Imam Baqir (a.s.) says that whenever Ibne Abbas mentioned this verse, he
used to say that this is the Amanat (trust) which has been mentioned by
Allah in the verse: *Surely We offered the trust to the heavens and the
earth and the mountains* meaning, by Allah (in Amanat) Allah did not
give to anything from dinar or dirham or any of the underground
treasures before He created Adam and He revealed that I am making the
progeny of Muhammad (S) the Caliph so what will you do when he calls
you?

You should accept and help him in confronting his enemies and obey his
orders. Hearing this, the sky, earth, mountains all became afraid of the
obedience ordered by Allah but the progeny of Adam accepted it and so
this responsibility was imposed on them. Then Imam Baqir (a.s.) said
that though the children of Adam did accept it they did not fulfil
it.[^1]

[^1]: The translator says: The explanation of this tradition and other
traditions could be based on some reasons. Firstly ‘Amanat’ may mean
absolute duty and that Wilayat might have been mentioned particularly in
the meaning or sense that Imamate is the greatest of all conditions.
Also the cause of dispute or difference or disagreement in the Ummah and
the specific mention of Abu Bakr and others could be from the viewpoint
that though they gave allegiance in a hypocritical manner and then broke
it before all others and also became the cause of the breaking by
others, that is, their giving allegiance and the breaking of Amirul
Momineen’s allegiance became the cause of such breaking by others.
Therefore lifting, or carrying or taking up means the acceptance of
Wilayat. What support this is that Amanat means responsibilities and
Haml means accepting it as has been narrated by Ibne Shahr Aashob and
other writers that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was shivering at the time of
every Prayer and his face was becoming pale. In reply to people’s
question about the cause of it, he used to say that the time of repaying
of the Amanat (the trust) had arrived which, when it was presented to
the skies and the earths, all had declined to lift it and they feared
but man accepted it and I do not know whether I will be able or will not
be able to repay this burden (trust) which I have taken up. Secondly:
The Alif and Laam in Al-Insan are that of Ahd (oath) and it may mean Abu
Bakr and that Wilayat may be with Kasra (i) which may denote asking
whether you lay a false claim of Imamate and then bear Allah’s
chastisements; and that they feared and denied and, despite being aware
of the punishment, took up the burden on that day. Thirdly, due to both
the reasons, Haml (acceptance) might mean betrayal of trust i.e. not to
accept as has been mentioned earlier. But the second reason is more
appropriate.


