Part 17: 'Bounty' denotes Wilayat
=================================

According to the interpreters of Quran, ‘bounty’ denotes the Wilayat of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Also that the greatest bounty are these very
personalities. There are some verses about this.

First verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا
وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ. جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَهَا
وَبِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Have you not seen those who have changed Allah’s favor for
ungratefulness and made their people to alight into the abode of
perdition. Into hell, they shall enter into it and an evil place it is
to settle in. (Surah Ibrahim 14:28-29)***

Commentators have said that this refers to the unbelievers of Quraysh
because the Holy Prophet (S) was a blessing, and instead of this
‘bounty’ they accepted Disbelief, harboured hatred towards the Prophet
(S) and waged war against him.

This explanation is narrated from Ali (a.s.), Abbas (a.r.) and Ibne
Jubair.

Some have said that the original ‘bounty’ was converted to disbelief and
denied the bounty so the bounty was taken away from them and only their
disbelief remained.

The author of *Kashaf* and all the commentators have narrated from Imam
Ali (a.s.) and Umar that this verse was revealed for the two greatest
sinners of Quraysh: Bani Umayyah and Bani Mughira. Bani Umayyah is
having a limited period of grace, but Allah protected from the evils of
Bani Mughairah in the battle of Badr, because all the relatives and
friends of Abu Jahl were killed there.

It is narrated by Ayyashi and many other traditionists with many chains
of narrators that some people asked the explanation of this verse from
Imam Sadiq (a.s.). He said: This verse is about the two main tyrants of
Quraysh, Bani Umayyah and Bani Mughairah. Allah destroyed Bani Mughairah
and their relatives on the day of Badr, but Bani Umayyah remained till a
certain period. Then he said: We are the bounty of Allah with which He
has blessed His servants and whoever gets salvation, it is through us.

Kulaini has narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that why do they turn
away from the Prophet (S) and his legatee and go on other side and are
not afraid that the chastisement will come on them? After that the Imam
recited this same verse and said: We are the ‘bounty’ of Allah which
Allah has bestowed His servants and due to our grace they will get the
‘bounty’ on the day of Judgement.

Also there is a narration from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that this verse is for
all the Quraysh who harboured enmity towards the Holy Prophet (S),
fought with him and denied the Imamate of his legatee.

It is related through reliable chains that people asked the Imam the
explanation of this verse. The Imam asked: What do the Ahle Sunnat say
about this verse? The narrator said: They say it was revealed for Bani
Umayyah and Mughairah.

Imam said: By Allah! This verse is revealed for all the Quraysh. The
Almighty Allah addressed His Prophet: I have given excellence to Quraysh
upon all the Arabs and completed My ‘bounty’ on them and have chosen the
religion of Islam for them and have sent a prophet towards them. So they
have turned my ‘bounty’ into disbelief and destroyed their nation and
made them reach Hell.

There is a tradition from Hasani in Sahifa Kamilah by Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
that Allah has given all the news and happenings to the Prophet (S)
which were to take place in the regime of Bani Umayyah on the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) their friends and Shias. Then Allah revealed the following verse
about them:

***Have you not seen those who have changed Allah’s favor for
ungratefulness… (Surah Ibrahim 14:28)***

In this verse ‘favor’ refers to the Holy Prophet (S) and his Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). Their love is a part of faith which will take to Paradise and
their enmity is disbelief and hypocrisy which will take to Hell.

Second verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ لَتُسْأَلُنَّ يَوْمَئِذٍ عَنْ النَّعِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons. (Surah Takhathur 102:8)***

The commentators say that ‘boon’ means all the blessings which were
given in the world and some say that it means peace and health of the
body.

There is a tradition from Imams Baqir and Sadiq (a.s.) and also Shaykh
Tabarsi, Ayyashi and Qutub Rawandi have narrated in *Daawaat* that Abu
Hanifah asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.) about this verse. The Imam asked him
what according to your belief is the ‘boon’? He said: Eatables and cool
water. If on the day of Judgement Allah makes you stand before Him and
questions you about each and every thing you have eaten and drunk and
all that you have drunk, then surely you would have to stand for a long
time.

Abu Hanifah said: May I be sacrificed for you, what is meant by ‘boons’,
The Imam said ‘boon’ is Ahlul Bayt, that Allah has made us the boon for
His creatures and due to us He has given love between them, whereas
there was conflict among them and due to us He has made them loving and
made them brothers with each other whereas they were enemy of one
another and due to us and this blessing guided them which was bestowed
upon them and they are Holy Prophet (S) and his Progeny.

There is a tradition in *Uyoon Akhbar Ridha* that one day a group of
people was present before the Holy Prophet (S). He said that there is a
no real ‘bounty’ in the world. One of the Ahle Sunnat scholars who was
present in this gathering asked that Allah says:

***Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons. (Surah Takhathur 102:8)***

Whether this ‘boon’ is not in the world? The Imam replied loudly that
you give this explanation and people have given different explanations
about it. A group says that ‘boon’ means cold water. Some say delicious
food. And the truth is what my father has told me. All these things were
stated before my forefather Imam Sadiq (a.s.), by listening to which he
got angry and said Allah will not question His creatures about what He
has given by His grace and does not boast of His favors.

Whereas the boasting of favors by the people is considered bad, so why
such things are attributed to Allah, which the creatures themselves do
not like to be associated with? Listen! ‘Boon’ means the love of Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) and the acceptance of our Imamate. Allah would after asking
him about oneness (Tawheed) and Prophethood ask him about it and if he
answers them properly, Allah would send him to the blessings of Paradise
which shall never end.

Surely my father from his forefathers narrated from Imam Ali (a.s.),
that the Holy Prophet (S) said: When a person dies, the first thing he
will be questioned is about Tawheed and Prophethood and that you Ali are
their Imam and ruler due to the reason that Allah and I have appointed
you and whosoever confesses to it that it was his faith in the world and
the hereafter, he will go towards that ‘bounty’ which will never end.

Abu Zakvan who is one of the narrators of this tradition, says that
after listening to this tradition I was busy in eulogical poetry I
didn’t relate this tradition to anyone and one night I saw Holy Prophet
(S) in the dream that people were saluting him and he was replying to
their salutations. When I saluted him, he did not answer me. So I asked:
Am I not from your Ummat. He said: You are also from my Ummat, but make
my Ummat aware about the tradition of ‘the favor’ (Naem) which you had
heard from me.

Ibrahim and Shaykh Tabarsi have narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
‘favor’ refers to Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and you will be questioned about it.
So at some other place you have:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ مَسْئُولُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And stop them, for they shall be questioned. (Surah Saffat 37:24)***

It means they will be asked about the Wilayat of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says in the explanation of this verse that this Ummat
will be questioned about our Wilayat which Allah had given and the
blessings of Muhammad and his Progeny.

There is a tradition from Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) that: We are ‘favor’
for the believer and ‘khantal’ (a bitter fruit) in the neck of the
disbeliever.

Also there is a tradition from Abu Khalid Kabuli, in which he says that
he came to Imam Baqir (a.s.) and food was served for him. He says: Till
now I had not tasted such delicious food. The Imam said: Abu Khalid! Did
you see our food? He said: It was very good, but I remembered a verse of
Quran and the delicious food becomes tasteless for me.

He asked: What was that? I recited this verse and the Imam said: By
Allah you will never be asked about this food. After this the Hazrat
smiled, so much so that his blessed teeth showed. Then he asked: Do you
know what is the ‘favor’? I don’t know, I said. Imam said: We are the
‘favor’; it means safety, health and the Wilayat of Imam Ali (a.s.).

According to other traditions of Imams Baqir and Sadiq (a.s.) ‘favor’
means the Wilayat of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

There is a tradition in *Kafi* from Abu Hamza Thumali in which he says
that we were a group seated before Imam Baqir (a.s.). By the order of
the Imam food was brought, which were delicious, smelled good, was soft
and clear and so good that we were able to see our faces in it. A person
from us said: O son of the Holy Prophet (S) you will be asked about this
‘bounty’, which you utilize. Imam said: Allah is much greater, kind and
generous than to ask you on the day of Judgement about the food He gives
and makes Halaal (pure) for you and to take account of it, but you will
be questioned about the blessing of Muhammad and His Progeny which He
has given you as a blessing.

There is a tradition from Imam Baqir (a.s.) on this topic which says in
the end that you will be asked about that right which is about Wilayat
and Imamate. There are many traditions on this topic.

Shias and Ahle Sunnat have narrated that a person will be asked about
five things: 1. Filling of the stomach 2. Cold water 3. Sweet sleep 4.
About the houses where he lived 5. To be born without any defects.

Third verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَسْبَغَ عَلَيْكُمْ نِعَمَهُ ظَاهِرَةً وَبَاطِنَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And made complete to you His favors outwardly and inwardly? (Surah
Luqman 31:20)***

Some have recited it in the singular and some as plural and added a
pronoun to it. Some have said that it is the manifested ‘favor’. Some
have said about manifest ‘favor’ which can be touched and sensed, and
covered one is the ‘favor’ of Aql (intelligence). Or the open ‘favors’
are those whose which are known and the covered ‘favors’ are those which
are not known.

There is a tradition in *Manaqib* and *Kamaluddeen* from Imam Moosa bin
Ja’far (a.s.) that he said narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that he said:
The ‘outward favor’ means the Wilayat of we, Ahlul Bayt and to nurture
our love in the heart. Then the Imam said: By Allah! Those who accepted
this ‘favor’ only outwardly and did not accept it inwardly and whole
heartedly about them Allah says this in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ لَا يَحْزُنْكَ الَّذِينَ يُسَارِعُونَ فِي
الْكُفْرِ مِنْ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَلَمْ
تُؤْمِنْ قُلُوبُهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Apostle! Let not those grieve you who strive together in hastening
to unbelief from among those who say with their mouths: We believe, and
their hearts do not believe…(Surah Maida 5:41)***

The Imam said that Allah is not going to accept their faith but with our
love and Wilayat.

Fourth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny? (Surah Rahman
55:6)***

Ali Ibne Ibrahim has stated in its explanation that this address is
apparently to human beings and Jinns but actually it is addressed to the
first and second (caliph).

There is a tradition from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that this verse means the
two ‘bounties’, that of Muhammad (S) and Ali (a.s.), and which one
‘bounty’ would you deny?

In the report of Kulaini: Do you deny the Prophet of the legatee?

According to the tradition of Ibne Mahyar of the two which ‘bounty’ do
you falsify, Muhammad or Ali, because I have bestowed blessings on My
servants because of these two.

Kulaini has narrated through reliable chains from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
he recited this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاذْكُرُوا آلَاءَ اللَّهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…therefore remember the benefits of Allah, that you may be
successful. (Surah Araf 7:69)***

The Imam asked: Do you know what is the ‘benefits of Allah’? The
narrator said: No, we don’t know. Hazrat replied: It means the Wilayat
of us, Ahlul Bayt, the greatest ‘benefits of Allah’ on the servants of
Allah.[^1]

Fifth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْرِفُونَ نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ ثُمَّ يُنكِرُونَهَا وَأَكْثَرُهُمْ
الْكَافِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They recognize the favor of Allah, yet they deny it, and most of them
are ungrateful. (Surah Nahl:83)***

Ali Ibne Ibrahim said that the ‘favor’ of Allah are the Holy Imams.

Kulaini has related from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) regarding this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمْ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Only Allah is your Vali and His Apostle and those who believe, those
who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow. (Surah Maida
5:55)***

When it was revealed in the praise and Imamate of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.), the hypocrites gathered in the mosque of Medina and asked each
other: What do you say to this? Some of them said: If we refuse this
verse, we have to refuse many verses of Quran and if we bring faith on
this verse, it would be insulting ourselves as this verse empowers the
son of Abu Talib. Ultimately they proposed: As we know that Muhammad is
a truthful person, we will accept his Wilayat but we will not accept the
orders of Ali. At that time this verse was revealed:

***They recognize the favor of Allah, yet they deny it, and most of them
are ungrateful. (Surah Nahl 16:83)***

It means that they are aware of the Wilayat of Ali (a.s.), but many of
them are unbelievers in it.

Sixth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ بِفَضْلِ اللَّهِ وَبِرَحْمَتِهِ فَبِذَلِكَ فَلْيَفْرَحُوا هُوَ
خَيْرٌ مِمَّا يَجْمَعُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: In the grace of Allah and in His mercy… in that they should
rejoice; it is better than that which they gather. (Surah Yunus
10:58)***

Ibne Babawayh has narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) in *Majalis*, that one
day the Prophet (S) mounted and came out of Medina and Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) walked besides him. The Prophet (S) said: O Abul Hasan! Whenever
I ride you should also ride and when I walk you should also walk and
whenever I sit you also sit except in those cases where there is a
religious limitation.

And Allah has granted me status and grandeur and the same has also been
given to you. Allah chose me for Prophethood and made you my helper and
assistant, as you perform difficult and hard tasks within the limits of
Allah. I swear by that Allah, Who has made me the true Prophet, that
person has not brought faith on me who has rejected you and the one who
does not accept your Imamate is like that one who has not accepted my
Prophethood. That person does not believes in Allah who disbelieves in
you. Surely your grace is my grace and my grace is the grace of Allah.
This is the statement of my Lord: ‘Say: In the grace of Allah…’

Thus the grace of Allah is your Prophet (S) and the mercy of Allah is
the Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). The Hazrat said: ‘in that’
means due to the Prophethood and Wilayat, and the Shias of Ali should be
happy. ‘they should rejoice; it is better than that which they gather.’
It means that this is better for the Shias of Ali than what their
opponents gather in the world of wealth gold and Children. O Ali you
were not created but for that due to you people worship your Lord and
due to you the science of religion will be known and the ways of
guidance get corrected. Indeed that person is astrayed who has strayed
away from your Wilayat and he shall never be guided towards Allah that
does not get guidance towards you in your Wilayat, and it is the
statement of my Lord:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنِّي لَغَفَّارٌ لِمَنْ تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا ثُمَّ
اهْتَدَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And most surely I am most Forgiving to him who repents and believes
and does good…(Surah Taha 20:82)***

Surely my Lord has commanded me that I make your right obligatory just
as my right has become incumbent. Indeed your right is incumbent and
obligatory on everyone who brings faith in me. If you were not there,
Allah’s enemy would not have been recognized. One who meets Allah
without your Wilayat is as if he met without anything of the world and
religion, rather he has left the world sans faith. Indeed Allah has
revealed this verse on me:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ مَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord…
(Surah Maida 5:67)***

The Prophet (S) said: O Ali! It is about your Wilayat.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلْ فَمَا بَلَّغْتَ رِسَالَتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message…
(Surah Maida 5:67)***

The Hazrat said: Indeed, If I had not carried out what was commanded to
me about your Wilayat, all my deeds would have been confiscated and
anyone who meets Allah without your Wilayat, indeed on the day of
Judgement all his deeds shall be confiscated. He will be away from the
Mercy of Allah. And whatever I say about you is the saying of my Lord
that He has revealed upon me regarding you.

Kulaini has narrated from Imam Ridha (a.s.) on the explanation of this
verse that it means the Wilayat of Muhammad (S) and Aale Muhammad is
better than what their opponents gather.

Ayyashi has also narrated similarly from Imam Ali (a.s.) that Fazl
(grace) is the Holy Prophet (S) and Rahmat is Amirul Momineen (a.s.).
The Shias of Ali should rejoice on this because it is better than gold
and silver which is accumulated by the enemies of Ali (a.s.).

Seventh verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوْلَا فَضْلُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ لَكُنتُمْ مِنْ
الْخَاسِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…so were it not for the grace of Allah and His mercy on you, you
would certainly have been among the losers. (Surah Baqarah 2:64)***

Ayyashi has narrated through two sources from Imam Baqir (a.s.) and Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) that the ‘grace’ of Allah is the Holy Prophet (S) and the
‘mercy’ of Allah is the Wilayat of the Purified Imams (a.s.).

Eighth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يَفْتَحْ اللَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ مِنْ رَحْمَةٍ فَلَا مُمْسِكَ لَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whatever Allah grants to men of (His) mercy, there is none to
withhold it…(Surah Fatir 35:2)***

Ibne Mahyar has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that ‘mercy’ means
knowledge and wisdom, which Allah given to the tongue of the holy Imams
for guidance of the people.

Ninth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَهُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلَكِنْ يُدْخِلُ
مَنْ يَشَاءُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ وَالظَّالِمُونَ مَا لَهُمْ مِنْ وَلِيٍّ
وَلَا نَصِيرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if Allah had pleased He would surely have made them a single
community, but He makes whom He pleases enter into His mercy, and the
unjust it is that shall have no guardian or helper. (Surah Shuraa
42:8)***

Ali Ibne Ibrahim has said that if Allah wanted He would have made all
his creatures infallible like angels and the unjust are those who have
done injustice on the Progeny of Muhammad.

Ibne Abbas has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Mercy means the
Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).

Tenth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يَخْتَصُّ بِرَحْمَتِهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and Allah chooses especially whom He pleases for His mercy… (Surah
Baqarah 2:105)***

Dailami has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that ‘mercy’ means the Holy
Prophet (S) and his Vicegerent. Indeed Allah has created 100 mercies, of
which 99 have been gathered for Muhammad and Aale Muhammad, and only one
mercy is distributed among all the creatures.

Eleventh verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ
عَلِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***That is Allah’s grace; He grants it to whom He pleases… (Surah Juma
62:4)***

And also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَتَمَنَّوْا مَا فَضَّلَ اللَّهُ بِهِ بَعْضَكُمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And do not covet that by which Allah has made some of you excel
others…(Surah Nisa 4:32)***

The Imam said that both these verses were revealed in praise of Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.).

Twelfth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِتُكَبِّرُوا اللَّهَ عَلَى مَا هَدَاكُمْ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and that you should exalt the greatness of Allah for His having
guided you and that you may give thanks. (Surah Baqarah 2:185)***

There is a tradition in *Mahasin* that ‘thanks’ means the awareness of
the roots of religion or the Ma’refat of the Infallible Imams (a.s.).

Also in the explanation of this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَرْضَى لِعِبَادِهِ الْكُفْرَ وَإِنْ تَشْكُرُوا يَرْضَهُ لَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***...and He does not like ungratefulness in His servants; and if you
are grateful, He likes it in you… (Surah Zumar 39:7)***

The Imam says that ‘ungratefulness’ means the enmity of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) and ‘gratefulness’ means the Wilayat of the Holy Imams and their
recognition (Ma’refat).

Thirteenth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَجْعَلُونَ رِزْقَكُمْ أَنَّكُمْ تُكَذِّبُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And to give (it) the lie you make your means of subsistence. (Surah
Waqiah 56:82)***

There is a tradition in *Tawilul Aayaat*, that it denotes the ‘bounty’
which Allah bestowed for the sake of Muhammad and Aale Muhammad. And
with it a condition has been stipulated for you. You give thanks but
falsify his Vicegerent, Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوْلَا إِذَا بَلَغَتْ الْحُلْقُومَ. وَأَنْتُمْ حِينَئِذٍ
تَنظُرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Why is it not then that when it (soul) comes up to the throat. And
you at that time look on… (Surah Waqiah 56:83-84)***

When at the times of death the life is pulled upto the throat, you see
the Vicegerent of the Prophet, Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.), who gives good
tidings of Paradise to his friends and the bad news of Hell to his
enemies.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْكُمْ وَلَكِنْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We are nearer to it than you… (Surah Waqiah 56:85)***

And I am nearer to you than Amirul Momineen (a.s.),

***but you do not see… (Surah Waqiah 56:86)***

But you don’t know and you see not

[^1]: The writer says: Though apparently this address is to the past
nations, actually it is a warning to this nation. That is why in this
nation it refers to the Wilayat of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). It has come in
many traditions that it was the duty of all the nations to accept the
Wilayat of the Holy Prophet (S) and his Progeny.


