Part 1: Essentiality of the Imam and there not being any period without an Imam
===============================================================================

We should know that there is a difference of opinion among the religious
scholars whether the appointment of an Imam is essential or not after
the passing of the period of Prophethood. If it is obligatory, on whom:
on Allah or on the community? Anyhow, its being essential is a demand of
reason, that is, does mind call for his essentiality or the essentiality
is based on the heard arguments?

All the Shia scholars are unanimous that it is essential for Allah both
from the viewpoint of reason and the divine texts that He should appoint
the Imam. Some Mutazilite Ahle Sunnah and all Khawarij believe that it
is not at all necessary for either Allah or the people to appoint an
Imam. While the Ashairah, Ahle Hadith, Ahle Sunnah and some Mutazilites
say that people must appoint an Imam as a demand of textual proof and
not of intelligence. A group of the Mutazilites is of the opinion that
it is necessary for the people to appoint an Imam in the time of peace
to save them in the time of turmoil; that if there is a danger of
mischief then it is not necessary and some opine contrary to this also.

In the Arab lexicon, Imam means a leader and commander, and in the
terminology of the Najiyah Imamiyah group (Shias) mostly Imam means the
one who leads the group prayer and according to Scholastic theology
(Ilme Kalam) Imam means a man who has been appointed by Allah for the
deputyship of the messenger and sometimes this word applies to the
prophet too and it will, Insha Allah be known hereafter in the following
pages that, according to some reliable traditions the rank of an Imam is
higher than that of a messenger as Allah has, after (granting him
Prophethood) said to Ibrahim (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“I will make you an Imam of men." (Sura Baqara 2:124)**

Some researchers have said that Imam is the one who may be a ruler in
the worldly and religious affairs, from Allah through a man like a
messenger, but the messenger is one who, without the mediation of man,
(directly) quotes Allah’s commandments and that Imam quotes through a
man who is a messenger.[^1]

Relevant verses are as follows:

First Verse
-----------

Allah Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are only a warner (Munzir) and (there is) a guide (Haad) for
every people...*** **(Sura Ra’d 13:7)**

Some commentators have said: It means: (O prophet!) You are a warner for
every people from the divine punishment and are a guide. In this case
‘*Guide’* is connected to ‘*Warner*’ and some commentators have said
that it means that you are a warner for the apostates and the
transgressors and for every community there is a guide. In this case one
phrase will refer to another one, which proves that no period of time
remains without an Imam. According to this explanation there are many
traditions among both the Ahle Sunnat and Shias. Hence the Ahle Sunnat
have narrated from Ibne Abbas that when this verse was revealed the Holy
Prophet (S) said:

I am the warner and Ali is the guide. O Ali, the pathfinders will find
the path (will be guided) through you.

Abul Qasim Haskani has, in book *Shawahidut Tanzil* quoted Abi Buraida
Aslami that the Holy Prophet (S) called for water to make ablution. Ali
(a.s.) presented it. When the Holy Prophet (S) concluded the ablution he
caught the hand of Ali (a.s.) and, placing it on his own chest, said: “I
am the warner,” Then placed his own hand on the chest of Ali (a.s.) and
said: “After me you are the guide for all the people,” and added, “you
will provide light to people, you are the sign of guidance and the king
of the reciters of Quran and I give witness that you are so.”

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) is quoted in *Basairud Darajat* through
authentic narrations that the Prophet of Allah is ‘Munzir’ (warner) and
that, after him, there is a guide from us for every period that guides
the people to those things, which the Prophet (S) has brought from
Allah. After the Holy Prophet (S) the first ‘Hadi’ is Ali (a.s.) and
after him, the holy Imams will, one after another, be guiding people
until Qiyamat.

It is authentically quoted from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that, explaining this
very verse, he said that every Imam is a guide for his people among whom
he lives.

It is narrated authentically through Imam Baqir (a.s.) that the Holy
Prophet (S) is ‘Munzir’ and Ali is ‘Hadi’ and, by Allah, not a guide
from us is ever suspended, rather he will always be from us till
Qiyamat.

It is authentically reported from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that, explaining
this very verse, he said: The Prophet of Allah is Munzir and Ali (a.s.)
is Hadi. Then he asked the narrator: Is there any Hadi today among us?
That narrator replied: Why not, may I be sacrificed for you, the Hadi is
coming one by one from among you until that (rank) reached you. Imam
(a.s.) said: May Allah’s mercy be on you. Had it been so that after the
revelation of this verse to someone that person died and, after him,
there would not have been anyone to know the meaning of this verse and
to make this command applicable to the people, verily the Book of Allah
would have become dead, that is, meaningless and its command would have
been suspended.

But the Book of Allah is alive till Qiyamat, that is, the Divine
Command, through the agreement of the Ummah, is to exist till Qiyamat
and the duty imposed by Allah is never lifted up from or cancelled for
the people and if there is no such conveyer of Divine commands who is
sinless (never erring) and if anyone else explains the Divine command to
the people the Book of Allah will be rendered fruitless and if duty
remains it will entail ignorance and it is injustice and Allah never
commits injustice. This is one of the clear arguments, which makes it
essential that Allah has to appoint an Imam.

Ibne Babawayh has, in his book, *Akmaluddeen*, authentically quoting
Imam Baqir (a.s.) while explaining the verse (13:7) writes that it means
Imams who are the guides of people in their times in which they live.
Ali bin Ibrahim has also authentically quoted him saying that Munzir is
the Prophet of Allah and Hadi is Amirul Momineen, thereafter the holy
Imams, that is, in every age there is an Imam who guides people towards
Allah’s path and tells them what is permissible and what is prohibited.

Second verse
------------

The Lord of the worlds says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ وَصَّلْنَا لَهُمْ الْقَوْلَ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly We have made the word to reach them so that they may be
mindful… (Sura Qasas 28:51)***

That is We joined for them one verse after another and one story after
another and the promise with the warning and the admonishments through
stories which may provide lessons to them so that they may obtain
advice. In this connection many narrations are recorded from the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) to explain that it means the appointment of one Imam after
another as Ali Ibne Ibrahim has mentioned in his commentary and by
Shaykh Tusi in *Majalis* with authentic chains. He has said that,
explaining this verse; Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said that it means that We
appointed one Imam after another.

There are some probabilities in this explanation. First: it might mean
that We, by appointing one Imam after another, applied the word, that
is, statement of Truth and the propagation of the truthful commands and
codes, to the people. Second: By the consecutive appointment of the
Imams We made the word, that is, the statement of Truth and the
propagation of the truthful commands and the clear code for the people.
Third: this may be a hint towards the verse wherein Almighty Allah, at
the time of determining to create Adam (a.s.), said to the angels:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي الْأَرْضِ خَلِيفَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I am going to place in the earth a khalif. (Sura Baqara 2:30)***

That is, this promise of making a caliph in the earth is not exclusively
for the time of Adam (a.s.), rather it will continue till Qiyamat and
that there will be no period without an Imam therein. But the first
reason is clearer and, anyhow, perhaps this may be the explanation of
the inner meaning of this verse which, however, is not against the
apparent meaning as mentioned by commentators, Allah knows better.

In *Basairud Darajat*, there is a narration from Imam Baqir (a.s.) in
the explanation of the Almighty’s verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِمَّنْ خَلَقْنَا أُمَّةٌ يَهْدُونَ بِالْحَقِّ وَبِهِ يَعْدِلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And of those whom We have created are the people who guide with the
Truth and thereby do justice. (Sura Araf 7:181)***

Its apparent translation is: In the group created by Us there is a batch
who guide people with Truth and issue command to them with justice, Imam
(a.s.) said that this batch means the truthful Imams. The explanation of
this verse, Allah willing, will be given afterwards. According to
traditions in this regard, Ibne Babawayh has in his books *Majalis* and
*Kamaluddeen*, quoted Imam Zainul Aabedeen saying:

We are the leaders of the Muslims and the evidences of Allah for the
worlds and we are the Sadat (leaders) and the Mominoon (believers) and
the bright faces of Paradise and the chiefs of those having white hands
and feet, whose faces and hands and feet will be shining owing to the
radiance of Wuzoo (ablution for prayers) that is of the Shias and that
the Masters and Chiefs of the Muslims are we and we are the means of
protection of the residents of the earth from divine chastisement just
as the stars are shelters for the residents of the sky.

It means so long as we are on the earth Qiyamat will not occur and
punishment will not rain on people and so long as the stars are in the
sky the angels need not fear the occurrence of Qiyamat. Our being lifted
up is a sign of the suspension of the earthly arrangement and the death
of the people on earth just as the wiping off of the stars in the sky is
a sign indicating the upheaval in the skies and of the displacement of
angels from their stations.

The Hazrat said again that: We are the shelter: Because of our blessing
Allah protects the skies from falling on earth. But at the time of
Qiyamat, by His command alone, the skies will also be destroyed. Allah
keeps the earth safe because of our blessing from its tumbling and
falling along with its residents. And Allah sends rain with our
blessings and expands His vast Mercy and Allah shows the bounties of
earth due to us and if none of us is there on earth the earth
undoubtedly will go underground along with its residents.

In short the earth is never without the evidence of Allah ever since He
created Adam (a.s.). Be that argument of proof (Hujjat) apparent and
known or hidden and unknown, the earth will not remain without an Imam
till Qiyamat. If there is no Hujjat in the earth there will be no
worship of Allah because people learn the way of worship only from him
and only he orders people to worship Allah. The narrator asked how do
people benefit from Hujjat who are hidden from them? He replied: Just as
people benefit from the sun even when it is hidden behind clouds.[^2]

Kulaini and Ibne Babawayh etc. have with reliable chains of narrators
narrated that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) once asked Hisham bin Salim, who
was one of the scholars of his companions: What questions did you put up
before Amr bin Ubaid Basri, a Sunni Sufi scholar? Hisham said: May I be
sacrificed for you, O son of the Holy Prophet (S)! I feel ashamed in
narrating them to your honour and my tongue has no strength to describe
the same to you. The Hazrat said: When I am giving you a command, you
should comply with it. Hisham said: Very well. When I knew about the
claim of Amr’s “grace” and his sitting in the mosque of Basrah and of
his talking nonsense in the matter of religion, it pained me much.

So I went there to Basra on a Friday and attended the mosque where he
was sitting in the midst of a very big circle of people. He had wrapped
a black cloth on his waist and had also covered himself with a black
sheet and people were asking him questions. So I also advanced towards
him and sat on by knees in the last row.

Then I said: O scholar! I am an outsider and want to ask you a question
if you permit. He said: You may ask. So I asked him: Do you have eyes?
He retorted: O boy! What a question is this? I said: My question is only
like that. He replied: All right, then ask, though it is foolish to ask
such things. I repeated: Have you eyes? He said: Yes. I asked: What do
you do with them? He said: through them I see colors and the faces of
people. Then I asked: Do you have a nose? He replied: Yes. I asked: What
do you do with it? He replied: I smell fragrances.

I asked: Do you also have a mouth. He said: Yes. I asked: What do you do
with it? He said: I get tastes of things. I asked: Do you have a tongue
too? He said: Yes. I asked: What do you do with it? He said: I talk with
it. I asked: Do you have ears? He said: Yes. I asked: What you do with
them? He said: I hear things. I asked: Do you also have hands? He said:
Yes. I asked: What do you do with them? He replied: I hold things with
them.

I asked: Do you also have a heart? He said: Yes. I asked: Of what use is
it to you? He replied: I remove with its help if there is anything
doubtful to my other organs. I asked: Are your organs not sufficient as
you refer matters to your heart? He replied: No.I asked: Why? Why are
they not needless of the heart when all of them are hale and healthy? He
said: O boy! Whenever these limbs fall in any doubt about anything
touched or seen or smelled or heard they refer it to the heart and it
decides the matter, removes the doubt and creates certainty. I asked:
Then Allah has placed the heart in human body so that it may remove the
doubts faced by the limbs and organs. He said: Yes. Then I asked: If it
is so, then heart must always be in the body and if it is not there then
the knowledge of the organs is not firm and reliable. He said: Of
course.

Then I said: O Abu Marwan! Do you believe that the Lord of the universe
Who has not left your bodily organs without a leader or chief for the
pronouncement of truth, and the removal of doubts, but He has left the
entire creation in doubts, differences and bewilderments and did not
appoint any leader for them so that they may turn to him and so that he
(Imam) may keep them on the right path and may remove their doubts and
bewilderment? When I said this he kept quiet and did not give any reply.
Then turning towards me, he asked: Are you not Hisham? I said: No. He
asked: Did you live with him? I said: No. Then he asked: Where are you
from? I said: From Kufa. Then he said: Then you are definitely Hisham.

He got up from his place, lifted me up and placed me in his place and
did not utter a word until I sat there. When I concluded the narration
of this event, Imam Sadiq (a.s.) became very pleased and asked: O
Hisham! From where did you get this argument? I replied: O son of the
Holy Prophet (S)! it came to my tongue like that. In another version it
is written that Hisham said: I obtained these things from your honour
and then joined them approximately with one another. Hazrat said: By
Allah! This subject is written in the scrolls of Ibrahim and Moosa
(a.s.).[^3]

Kulaini and Shaykh Tabarsi have narrated from Yunus bin Yaqoob that once
a Syrian came to Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and said: I am expert in the
religious knowledge of Ilme Kalam (Scholastic theology) and Fiqh
(Jurisprudence) and Duties and Inheritance and so I desire to have a
dialogue with your companions. The Hazrat asked him: Is your knowledge
derived from the words of the Holy Prophet (S) or it is what your heart
says. He replied: Some things are taken from the words of the Holy
Prophet (S) and some are what my heart believes.

The Hazrat then asked: Then are you a partner of the Holy Prophet (S)?
He said: Of course not. The Hazrat said: Have you yourself heard the
revelation of Allah whereby He has conveyed to you His Commands
directly? He said: No. Then the Hazrat asked: Then is obedience to you
as compulsory as it is to obey the messenger of Allah. He said: No,
please. Yunus says: Then Imam Sadiq (a.s.) turned towards me and said: O
Yunus! This gentleman has, before starting his dialogue nullified his
talk because, a man on whom Allah’s revelation does not come and whom
Allah has not made commander whose commands must be obeyed by the
Faithful his talk in the matter of religion will be void, rather, he
will be claiming to be a partner of Allah. At that very moment Hisham
bin Hakam, who was a very wise and well-informed youth among the
Hazrat’s companions, arrived. The Hazrat welcomed him and made him sit
in his own place and said: You are our helper through your tongue and
pen.

Thereafter when the companions of the Hazrat talked with the Syrian and
could not succeed, the Hazrat said to the Syrian: Have a dialogue with
this youth. The Syrian then said to Hisham: Talk with me about this man
(Imam Sadiq). Hisham became furious hearing such disrespectful words of
the Syrian and said: O man! Is Allah more merciful to people or to
Himself? He replied: Allah is more merciful. Hisham asked: What did He
do to His servants by way of His Mercy? The Syrian replied: He created a
Hujjat (argument/proof) and a guide for them so that they may not be
disintegrated and no difference may arise between them, and the Hujjat
and Guide may keep them disciplined and may inform them about Allah’s
Commands, and our duty towards Allah.

Hisham asked: Who is that person (Hujjat or Guide)? The Syrian said: He
is the Messenger of Allah. Hisham asked: After the Prophet? The Syrian
said: Kitab (Holy Quran) and Sunnah (Prophet’s traditions). Hisham
asked: Has Kitab and Sunnah given us any profit in the matter of
removing our differences. He said: Yes. Hisham said: Then why even now
there is a difference between you and we. It is due to this difference
that you have come all the way from Syria unto here to have a dialogue.
The Syrian kept quiet, as he could not give any reply.

Hazrat asked him as to why he did not reply? He said: If I say that we
have no differences then I will be lying and if I say that the Book and
the Traditions will remove the differences, if referred to them, then
also it will be wrong because there can be doubts in the minds of both
regarding several matters and each one can follow his own opinion. If I
say that we do have differences but both of us are on the right then the
Kitab and Sunnah have not benefited us at all. But what I can do is that
I may return these things to him. Hazrat said: Do it so that you may
hear its reply also.

The Syrian said: Is Allah more merciful to people or people are more
merciful to themselves then Allah? Hisham said: Allah is more Merciful.
The Syrian asked: Has He created someone who may remove difference from
people and reform their affairs and make truth and falsehood manifest
for them?

Hisham asked: Are you inquiring about the time of the Holy Prophet (S)
or regarding today? The Syrian said: In those days, the Holy Prophet (S)
was available himself. Tell me who is in that position today? Hisham
said: This honourable person (Imam Sadiq a.s.) who is sitting here, and
to whom people come from far off places. He gives us news about heaven
because of the inheritance, which he has inherited, from his father and
forefathers. The Syrian asked: How can I understand this? Hisham said:
Ask him whatever you may. The Syrian said: You made me silent. Now I
must ask only him.

Hazrat said: May I tell you how was your journey? What happened to you
en route? Then the Hazrat told him all that he had passed through during
his journey. The Syrian said: You have said the truth. Now I have
believed in you and become a Muslim. Hazrat said: Rather you have
followed now. Before this when you were reciting the Kalimaate
Shahaadatain (attestation of beliefs) you were merely Muslim but Islam
(submission) comes always before Imaan (Faith).

Commands regarding inheritance, marriage, etc are based on it and the
reward of Hereafter is the result of Imaan. Until they do not have faith
in the Imamate of the holy Imams people are not eligible for Paradise.
The Syrian said: You have said the truth. Now I attest to the oneness of
Allah and the Messengership of the holy Prophet and give witness that
you are one of his legatees.

Kulaini, Babawayh and Kishi have, from authentic chains narrated from
Mansoor bin Hazim that he said: I said to Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Allah
Almighty is above (the position) than we may recognize Him due to the
creation, rather we must recognize or know the creation because of
Allah.[^4] The Hazrat said: You have said the truth. I said: A man who
knows that he has a Lord should also know that the Lord also has anger
and pleasure, that is, some deeds make Him angry and some make Him
happy. Then it must also be understood that His pleasure or unhappiness
can be known only through Revelation or a messenger. So the one who does
not get Revelation should seek prophets and when he meets them he must
accept them as the arguments of Allah along with the miracles and signs
given to them by Allah and that it is a must to obey them.

Mansoor says: I told the Ahle Sunnat: Was the Holy Prophet (S) a Hujjat
(proof) of Allah for the people? They said: Yes. Thereafter I asked:
After his departure who was the Hujjat? They said the Holy Quran. Then I
noticed that the fatalists and atheists who do not believe in the Holy
Quran also argue with people through this Quran and win. So I understood
that Quran cannot be the Hujjat of Allah but it must be through a man
who is able to explain the Quranic verses and who is fully aware of
their meanings and who can explain it thoroughly.

Then I asked the Ahle Sunnat: Who is such interpreter of the Holy Quran?
He said: Ibne Masood knows, Umar knows, Huzaifah knows. I asked: Do they
know the explanation of the entire Quran? He said: They know partly. In
short, I could not find anybody except Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) who
knew the meaning and the explanation of the whole Quran. So when in a
community if there is a thing about which everyone of them says: “I do
not know the whole of it” and if only one says that “I know it” and he
describes it correctly then it is only Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).
Therefore, I testify that he is the protector, explanator and maintainer
of the Holy Quran and his obedience is a compulsory duty of the entire
creation and he is the Hujjat of Allah after the Holy Prophet (S) and
whatever meaning of the Quran he may show or whatever commands he may
draw from it are all correct and true. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:

O Mansoor! May Allah have mercy on you.

Hearing this I got up and kissed his holy head and said: Imam Ali (a.s.)
did not pass away from this world until he appointed a Hujjat behind him
and that Hujjat after Ali (a.s.) was Imam Hasan (a.s.) and I give
witness that Imam Hasan was a Hujjat of Allah and his obedience was
compulsory for the creation. Then Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:

May Allah shed His mercy on you.

So I kissed his holy head, and said: I testify that Imam Hasan (a.s.)
also did not leave this world without nominating a Hujjat after him just
as was done by the Holy Prophet (S) and by his respected father and
after Imam Hasan (a.s.) Imam Husain (a.s.) was the Hujjat of Allah and
his obedience too was obligatory for the creation. Hearing this the
Hazrat again said:

May Allah be kind to you.

So again I kissed his head and said: I testify that Imam Husain (a.s.)
also did not depart from this world without nominating a Hujjat of Allah
behind him and that he was Ali bin Husain (a.s.) and to obey him also
was a must for all. The Hazrat said:

May Allah be Graceful to you.

So I once again kissed his holy head and said: I give witness that Imam
Ali bin Husain (a.s.) too did pass away before nominating a Hujjat of
Allah behind him and he was Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain (a.s.) and to
obey him also was the duty of the creation. Then the Hazrat said:

May Allah be pleased with you.

And I once again kissed his head and he smiled and this continued until
his own turn came and he knew that I was about to mention his name. In
short, I said: Your respected father did not leave this world until he
nominated his legatee as the Hujjat of Allah after him just as his
father had done and I give witness that, by Allah, that Hujjat are you
and it is the duty of all to obey you. Then the Hazrat said:

This is enough for you. May Allah be pleased with you.

I said: Kindly extend your holy head so that I may kiss it and he smiled
and said, “Inquire from me whatever you may want because after this I
will not keep anything hidden from you.”

Ibne Babawayh has narrated authentically from Jabir that Jabir said: I
asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.): Why people need a prophet and an Imam?
He said,

“So that the world may continue on the right path because the Merciful
Allah keeps the chastisement away from the people of the earth so long
as there is a prophet or an Imam among them as He says in the Holy
Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ اللَّهُ لِيُعَذِّبَهُمْ وَأَنْتَ فِيهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But Allah was not going to chastise them while you were among them."
(Sura Anfal 8:33)***

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

“The stars are the shelter for the inhabitants of the sky so that they
may not move from their places and my Ahlul Bayt are shelters for the
residents of the earth. When stars will be dispersed the residents of
the sky will witness what they do not like and when my Ahlul Bayt will
go away from the earth the people of the earth will see what they do not
like.”

Ibne Babawayh says Ahlul Bayt means the holy Imams about whom Allah has
said that obedience to them is obedience to Allah. It is mentioned in
the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from among
you. (Sura Nisa 4:59)***

They are infallible and clear of defects. They never sin. They are the
confirmers and the successful and the obstructers. Allah gives
sustenance to His servants because of their blessings and flourishes His
cities because of their mediation, pours rain, grows bounties from
earth; gives respite to sinners, does not hasten to chastise them. The
Holy Spirit does not separate itself from the Imams nor do they depart
from it and neither do they separate themselves from the Holy Quran nor
the Holy Quran separates itself from them.

There is an authentic narration from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that when the
period of the Prophethood of Prophet Adam (a.s.) came to conclusion and
his life was about to end Allah Almighty revealed to Him: O Adam! The
period of your Messengership has concluded and your age finished. So now
whatever you possess of knowledge, faith and prophet’s heritage and the
Isme Aazam etc, hand over all of it to Hibbatullah because I will not
leave the earth without a scholar through whom people may know about
worship and the religion of Muhammad (S) and salvation is for him who
may obey that scholar.

It is authentically quoted from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that in his
supplication he said: O My Sustainer! Do not leave the creation on earth
without a Hujjat, be he manifest or hidden, so that Your arguments and
proofs may not vanish.

It has been mentioned authentically by Yaqoob Sarraj that he says: I
inquired from Imam Sadiq (a.s.): Can the earth remain balanced without a
living scholar, whose Imamate may be manifest and in whom people may
take shelter and from whom they may know what is permissible and what is
prohibited? He said: If it so happens then there will be no worship of
Allah.

Ibne Babawayh, Saffar and Mufeed have authentically narrated from Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) that the earth will not remain balanced unless there is a
scholar who may know about the benefit or harm to religion so that if
the believers make any addition in religion he may make them return
towards the divine limits and if they curtail anything in religion he
may make it perfect. In short, that scholar will say: Take up the
religion totally and perfectly.

If it is not so then the religion of the faithful will become doubtful
in their eyes and they will not be able to differentiate between truth
and falsehood. Again he has said with many proofs that if the earth is
left without an Imam even for a moment it will doubtlessly be pushed
down.[^5]

Kulaini and Ibne Babawayh etc. have authentically narrated from the same
Imam (a.s.) that if only two men are left on earth one of them will be
the Imam and that the one who will die last will be the Imam so that no
one may be able to argue with Allah that “You left me without a Hujjat”.

Ibne Babawayh and others have authentically narrated from Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) that Jibraeel (a.s.) came to the Holy Prophet (S) and brought
news from Allah: “O Muhammad! I have not left the earth but in such a
condition that there has been a scholar between the period of one
prophet’s departure and next one’s arrival so that people may continue
to ascertain My Path and may get salvation. I never give total freedom
to Satan to misguide people in the absence of My Hujjat. There always
has to be a Hujjat calling people towards Me, who may be knowing My
religion.

Therefore I have appointed a guide for every community so that I may
guide the lucky ones and the unlucky may also have a Hujjat. Moreover he
has also narrated authentically from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that people do
not get guidance but through an Imam and that even if only two men are
left on earth one of them must be the Imam, the Hujjat of Allah.

According to yet another narration Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: By Allah, by
Allah! Allah has never left the earth without an Imam ever since Adam
(a.s.) passed away from the world so that people may get the path
leading to Allah through that Imam and there may be a Hujjat from Allah
and the earth cannot remain without a Hujjat at any time. Who does not
obey that Hujjat is destroyed and who obeys him gets salvation. This is
a must for Allah. Again the same Hazrat has said that the earth must
always have an Imam, either manifest or hidden. Another tradition says
that ever since Allah created the earth and skies they have never
remained without an Imam nor will they remain so till Qiyamat.

Kulaini, Ibne Babawayh and Shaykh Tusi have authentically narrated from
Abu Hamza Thumali that he says: I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.): Will the
earth ever remain in place without an Imam? He said: If it so happens it
will be destroyed.

Many authentic sources say that Imam Baqir (a.s.) has said that Allah
has never left the earth without an Imam who adds what has been
diminished (by wrongdoers) and what has been wrongly added in the
religion. Had He not done so, people would certainly remain in doubt all
the time.

Sulaiman Ja’fari once asked Imam Ridha (a.s.): Can the earth ever remain
without a Hujjat? He replied: If it remains without an Imam ever for a
split second it would certainly sink along with its inhabitants.

In another authentic tradition he says: Allah’s argument (Hujjat) is
neither established nor concluded but because of a living Imam whom
people know.

Humairi has narrated that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: The Holy Prophet (S)
has said: In my Ummat there is, in every age, a just Imam from my Ahlul
Bayt who removes the changes made by excessive people, false claims of
liars and wrong explanation of the ignorants.

Ibne Babawayh has narrated from Fazl Bin Shazan and he from Imam Ridha
(a.s.) that he (Imam Ridha) said that if somebody asks me why Allah has
appointed an Ulil Amr (one who is authorized to command) and why has He
ordained his obedience I will reply to him that there are several
reasons:

*First*: Allah has fixed for the people of the world a certain limit for
utilization so that they may not exceed that limit and thereby cause
corruption. Hence it has been necessary that an honest person must be
appointed over them who may prevent the people from crossing the limit
of permissible and from entering into the impermissible. Had he not been
there nobody would give up his self interest and pleasure to save others
from loss and trouble. In such circumstances there would be quarrel and
hostility among people. Therefore He appointed a strong leader who may
prevent mischief and keep people within the limits fixed by Allah.

*Second*: No community or group can remain lively in the religious and
worldly affairs without a chief or a ruler. Hence it was unbecoming on
the part of the Most Wise Allah to ignore this, which is essential for
the welfare and management of all. So it became incumbent that He may
appoint a man who say fight against his enemies and may distribute war
booty among people and may establish and maintain Friday and
Congregation prayers and may protect people from the oppressions of the
oppressors.

*Third*: Had Allah not appointed for the creation, such a firm, honest
and trustworthy Imam who may maintain public affairs and protect the
religion of Allah selflessly, and keep the secrets of the trusts of the
Holy Prophet (S), verily the society would become old and stagnant and
the religion of Allah would be displaced. There would enter changes in
the Sunnah and commands of the Prophet and innovators would add new
things in the religion of Allah as do the Sufis and the atheists would
make curtailments in the religion as did the Ismailis and would make
religion doubtful for Muslims who would find the society imperfect and
lacking in a proper trainer and incomplete due to differences in
thinking and desires.

Therefore, had Allah not appointed among them a Qaem and a protector who
may protect whatever the Prophet brought from Allah the people would
definitely have been misguided and the Shariats and Sunnahs (traditions)
and divine commandments and faith would have been altered and such
alterations would have resulted in wide-scale corruption.

It is reported from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that there had been a gap of five
hundred years between Isa (a.s.) and the Holy Prophet (S) and for two
and a half hundred years there was neither a prophet nor a manifest
scholar. The narrator asked: What were then the people doing? He said:
They had clinged to the religion of Isa (a.s.). He asked: How was their
condition? He said: They were believer, and added that the earth can
never remain without a scholar, that is, if the scholar is not manifest,
he is hidden.

Kulaini and Ibne Babawayh etc have authentically narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said: If the Imam separates himself from
the earth even for a moment, the earth, along with all its inhabitants,
would begin to waver just like a sea in storm.

Ibne Babawayh has authentically reported from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that:
Had the Hujjat of Allah not been on earth, the earth would certainly
have shaken and thrown down with all that is on or in it, because the
earth does not remain without an Imam even for a second.

It is also narrated from Imam Ridha (a.s.) that he said: We are the
Hujjats of Allah on earth, we are Allah’s trustees with His permission
and we are the caliphs of Allah among His servants and we are the Word
of Righteousness (Kalimah Taqwa) as mentioned in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَلْزَمَهُمْ كَلِمَةَ التَّقْوَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And made them keep the word of guarding (against evil)"*** **(Sura
Fath 48:26)**

That is to say, our Wilayat is the means of protection from the
chastisement of Allah and we are the ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’ meaning our
Wilayat and obedience is the strong chain which, if held by people will
not break, rather it leads them to Paradise. And we are the witnesses of
Allah among the people and the signs of His guidance. Allah keeps the
skies and the earth protected from moving or shaking from their places
and He pours rain because of our presence and He widens His bounty and
the earth can never remain without the existence of any of us and that
Imam is either visible or hidden. If the earth remains without an Imam
even for a day it will be stormed and it may drown along with all its
inhabitants; just as a storm in the sea destroys all.

It is reported with reliable chains of narrators that Imam Baqir (a.s.)
said: If the earth remains without an Imam even for a day it may get
pushed down along with all living on it and Allah may punish them with
His most severe chastisement because Allah has appointed us as His
Hujjat for the residents of the earth so that they may not be punished
and they may live in safety and peace, and safe from being drowned so
long as we are among them. When Allah will decide to destroy them
without giving them any respite He will lift us up from them and
thereafter He will enact His chastisement or punishment, as He wants.

It is authentically reported that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said that ever
since the earth was created it has never been without a scholar and a
Hujjat who enlivens the truths destroyed by people and then he recited
this verse of the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يُطْفِئُوا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَيَأْبَى
اللَّهُ إِلَّا أَنْ يُتِمَّ نُورَهُ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths and Allah
will not consent save to perfect His light, though the unbelievers are
averse.*** **(Sura Tawbah 9:32)**

It is mentioned in another narration that the Hujjat of Allah, meaning
the guide for the creation, was there before the creation and is with
the creation and will be there after the creation.

It also has been authentically reported from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that the knowledge which Adam (a.s.) had brought did not return because
the inheritance of knowledge reaches (is given to) us and whatever
knowledge and information is obtained through any sources other than the
prophets and messengers and the Ahlul Bayt of the Holy Prophet (S) is
false because Ali (a.s.) was the scholar of this Ummah and none from us
who are Ahlul Bayt, ever passes away from this world without appointing
someone in our place who knows similar knowledge as desired by Allah.

It is reported authentically from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Allah Almighty
has never left the world without a scholar whose knowledge is needed by
the people of the world and who needs nothing from their knowledge and
who knows what is permissible (Halaal) and what is Haraam (prohibited).
The narrator asked: May I be sacrificed for you, from where does he gets
that knowledge? He replied: Because of the heritage he acquired from the
Holy Prophet (S) and from Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).

Ibne Babawayh, Saffar and Barqi have narrated from Imam Ja’far (a.s.)
that, in the world, there always has been a Hujjat or a messenger or an
Imam who knew the permissible and the prohibited and who guided people
towards Allah and that the earth will not be without a Hujjat and a
guide but for the forty days immediately prior to Qiyamat. In short,
when that Hadi will be lifted the door of repentance will be closed and
thereafter the belief of a new believer will not give him any benefit.
Those who will believe after the passing away of the Hujjat will be the
worst of creation and thereafter will be Qiyamat.

It is authentically recorded from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that the Holy
Prophet (S) has said that in this Ummat the example of my Ahlul Bayt is
like the stars in the sky (for every star that sets another star rises).
Likewise whenever anyone of our Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) passes away from this
world as Imam, another takes his place.

Ibne Babawayh has authentically narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
Amirul Momineen, in his sermon delivered in the mosque of Kufa said: My
Lord! Verily Your earth is in need of a Hujjat who may be from You for
the creation and who may guide them towards Your religion and may teach
Your knowledge to them so that my Hujjat (argument) may not become
nullified and Your obedient friends may not go astray after being
guided.

Thereafter that Hujjat will appear and will be obeyed by people or he
will remain hidden and awaited for his appearance. Though in the time of
the government of falsehood he will remain hidden, his knowledge and his
viewpoint will remain firm in the hearts of the faithful and they will
act according to it till his appearance and they will cling only to
those things which antagonize others from them and because of which the
party of the misguided oppose them.

There is a narration from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) in *Basairud Darajat* that
people asked him: Can there be two Imams on earth at a time? He replied:
No, but in case when one Imam may remain silent and another Imam may
claim Imamate before him and he may be the Imam after his passing away
from the world.[^6]

[^1]: The writer says: This definition is also difficult because many
Non-Ulul Azm (Non-high ranking) messengers have been under (obeyed) the
Ulul Azm (High ranking) messengers and have followed their Shariats
(codes) and have been conveying commandments to the people. And we will
also quote many traditions stating that the holy Imams (a.s.) used to
benefit from the Knowledge of the Ever-existing Almighty Allah through
the mediation of angels and the Holy Spirit. Traditions also mention
some differences between an Imam and a Nabi (prophet) which will, Allah
willing, be stated afterwards. But the truth is that, in the matter of
conditions and virtues and attainments there is no difference between a
messenger and an Imam except what has been stated in the Traditions,
which shows the greatness and highness of the Holy Prophet (S) and it is
that he is the seal (last in series and concluder) of Prophethood.
Therefore, it is disallowed to use the name of the Holy Prophet (S) and
the words of equal value for anyone after him (Muhammad [S]). Shaykh
Mufeed (r.a.) has in his book Masail mentioned his belief in this matter
and has attributed it to ‘Firqa Najiya’ Imamiyah (the delivered sect)
and it is obvious that in previous communities, after the death of a
messenger and till the appointment of another Shariat-giving messenger,
there used to be a number of prophets who were the legatees of the past
messengers and the protectors of their codes of life. Therefore, from
the leader of the prophets (a.s.) there is a tradition: “The scholars of
my Ummah are like the prophets of Bani Israel and some narrations have
explained that here ‘ulama’ means the Imams’ (a.s.). It is obvious that
the benefit, which is derived from the existence of a prophet, is also
obtained from the existence of an Imam, that is, the deterrence of
corruption, protection of Shariat and to restrain people from oppression
and sins. Rational arguments showing that it is incumbent upon Allah to
appoint an Imam The delivered sect of Imamiyah holds many rational
arguments to show that it is mandatory on Allah to appoint an Imam and
thus arguments have been stated in detail in books like Shafi of Sayyid
Murtuza (r.a.) and Talkhees of Shaykh Tusi (a.r.) etc. and here, I
suffice with only two of them because the subject of this book is to
mention the narratory traditions (Naqali) which have reached us through
the Holy Quran and traditions of both the Shias and the Sunnis. First
Argument It is a mandatory Lutf (understood divine Mercy) of Allah to
appoint an Imam because it is essential for Him to do things which are
more beneficial for His servants from the viewpoint that, intelligence
demands that all the deeds of Ever-existing Allah should be always based
on wisdom and strategy and that a thing which is the best and most
preferable and most beneficial when there is no deterrent, giving it up
and its replacement except with a better one, is an act of giving
preference to a lower thing which, in the opinion of intelligent, does
not befit the deeds of the Most Graceful, Wise Almighty Allah. So now
when the incumbency of the best thing has been proved it is also
essential that Lutf should also be mandatory for Allah because Lutf
means a thing which makes it easy for man to obey the divine commands
and to refrain from His prohibited things unless in exceptional
difficulties because reward or punishment depends on the existence of
optional freedom. Therefore, those who are of the opinion that good and
evil are rational things and who believe that the best thing is
obligatory say that Lutf and Karam (grace and mercy) are obligatory for
Allah. The argument in its favour is that whatever Allah has made
obligatory for His servants in this world is always the cause of many
benefits and interests for people. In other words, duty includes grace
and grace is undoubtedly the best and better than anything else. So
Lutf, being the best, is mandatory for Allah. It is well known that the
existence of an Imam is a Grace (Lutf) because everybody knows that
people should have a commander who may prevent them from trouble,
mischief, corruption, oppression and sins and make them steadfast on
obedience of Allah, worship, justice and kindness. In such
circumstances, doubtlessly the affairs of the people will be conforming
with rules and well managed and nearer to betterment and farther from
evils and corruption. Second argument It is necessary that there should
be a protector of the Shariat of the Messenger of Allah (S) who may
protect it from deviation, change, addition and curtailment and since
the verses of the Holy Quran are comprehensive, many of the commands of
the Quran are not discernible from their apparent wordings. So it is
necessary to have a clarifier or explainer from Allah who can derive
divine commandments from the Holy Book. Contrary to this, when the Holy
Prophet (S), at the time of his demise, called for a pen and an ink-pot,
so that he may write down something for the Ummah so that it may never
go astray, Umar said: This man (Allah forbid) is talking senselessly.
The Book of Allah is enough for us, despite the fact he did not know the
explanation of even a single verse of the Holy Quran and whenever any
problem arose both he and his companions used to remain helpless and
they were obliged to get it solved by Amirul Momineen (a.s.). So much so
that the Ahle Sunnah have written that on seventy occasions Umar had
said: Had there not been Ali, Umar would have been destroyed. Had the
Book been enough, why there would have been so much difference of
opinion among the Ummah! In short, many arguments will be presented
henceforth while explaining the verses and translating the traditions.

[^2]: The writer says: This tradition shows that people get benefits and
graces even from a hidden Imam. If there is a common problem of doubt
among the people he guides them in such a manner that they do not
recognize him. Many a time it so happens that the hiding of Imam proves
to be a mercy or grace of Allah for a group because Allah knows that if
the Imam is apparent these people will not believe and most of the
people are like that because due to the appearance of the Imam they will
be required to carry out duties like jihad or fighting with the enemies
of religion while the eyes and hearts of many are almost sightless and
hence they will not be able to bear the radiance and dazzle and so also
his secrets. For example, bats cannot bear the brightness of the sun.
Also there are some rulers and arrogant people who believe in the Imam
when he is in concealment and they desire his appearance and when the
Hazrat appears and makes a king and a beggar equal in the eyes of
justice they cannot bear it and become apostates. For example, when
Amirul Momineen had made the hypocrites equal to a slave (while
distributing bounty) who was freed only a day before it became the cause
of their apostasy, whereby both their religion and faith were harmed.
And it is sufficient argument of the hiding of Imam being a mercy for a
person that believing in the Imam’s existence gives limitless reward.
Sayyid Murtuza (r.a.) has, in Shafi and Risala Ghaibat, given replies to
this objection, viz hiding of Imam does not give any benefit to the
creations. First: When the people always believe that the Imam can
appear at any moment, this possibility prevents them from many evil
deeds. Thus the difference between non-existence of Imam and the hiding
of Imam is clear. Second: Though Allah has completed the mercy, which
was incumbent for Him but the enemies of the Imam, are preventing the
creation from being benefited by the Imam. For example when the Holy
Prophet (S) was in Mecca the Quraysh used to prevent people from being
benefited by him, especially in those years when the Holy Prophet (S)
along with all of his relatives belonging to Bani Hashim, was held up in
the ‘Shobe Abi Talib’ and the unbelieving Quraysh were not allowing
anyone to meet the Holy Prophet (S). Similarly when the Holy Prophet (S)
was hiding in a cave till he arrived in Medina and these periods of his
non-appearance never came in the way of deriving benefits from his holy
being. Third: It is possible that the reasons of Imam’s hiding may be
related to friends, as Allah knows that if the Imam appears they will
not believe and it will make them apostates. Fourth: It is not essential
that the benefit of the appearance of the Imam must be public and for
all. It is also possible that one group sees the Imam and gets benefits
from him, as has been reported that there is a city in which the progeny
of the Hazrat lives. The Hazrat does visit that city though those people
do not see the Hazrat but they do obtain their requirements from him
either from behind curtain or in any other way. After mentioning some
reasons Sayyid Murtuza (a.r.) has prepared a preamble. He writes that
the benefit of the Ummah is not made complete by the Imam, but that,
from the direction of Allah, with certain things to benefit by any of
His choice and that some things should be obtained from the Imam and
some aught to be from us. The things which must be from Allah are that
He may create the Imam and appoint him with all requisite matters, like
knowledge and the conditions of Imamate and that He may issue texts
regarding his Imamate and make it obligatory for him to rise for the
sake of the affairs of the Ummah with them. And the things, which are
from the side of the Imam, are that he accept his responsibility and
make it obligatory for him to rise for the sake of the Ummah. And the
affairs, which pertain to the Ummah are that they may make the Imam in
charge of their affairs and remove the hindrances from his path and obey
him and act according to the plans made by him. In short, the things
from Allah in this connection only are main and that it is most
important that they may be effective first of all. Thereafter the
affairs pertaining to the Imam and Ummah are the auxiliaries of this
main. Therefore until what is pertaining to Allah and the Imam does not
become effective the Ummah is not bound in any way. Thereafter when the
things are made clear by Allah and the Imam, if any hindrance comes up
from the Ummah and if it makes it necessary for the disappearance of the
Imam, then it does no harm to the Grace of Allah. In such a time if the
Ummah does not carry out what it should concerning Allah and the Imam
then it will be considered at fault. Its details will, Insha Allah, be
given in the chapter about the occultation of the Imam.

[^3]: The writer says: Man is a miniature world and a specimen of the
greater world as has been said by Amirul Momineen (a.s.): “Do you think
that you are merely a tiny body? A great universe is hidden in you. The
bones in your body are like mountains of the earth and the flesh is like
dust. The big and small veins are similar to rivulets. Man’s head, which
is the centre of his strength and intelligence, is like a sky above the
body containing stars etc., which throw light on earth. The vapours
rising from stomach and reaching brain and after cooling drop from eyes
and brain are like those vapours, which rise from the earth and reach
the cold strata of upper space and then drop in the form of rain.
Moreover, the powers of brain reach the entire body through the back
brain nerves just as the starlight affects the earth. Just as there are
kings and commanders in the world on earth so also there are some
servants and rulers in the body too and their king is the faculty of
speech, which is also called Qalb (heart) from the viewpoint that first
its relation is with the animal spirit and then it is nourished by the
heart. Just, as the world’s habitation is in the north so also the
heart, which is the cause of the habitation of the body, is in the
north. Just as the kings have their ministers who distribute sustenance
to the ruled so also whatever is cooked in the kitchen of liver is being
distributed in the entire body. Just as some earthly wastes are disposed
through rivers such arrangement is also in the human physique. In short,
a detailed discussion of this topic demands much space for which this is
not an appropriate place.

[^4]: The writer says: There can be several reasons of Mansoor’s stating
that Allah cannot be known due to creation rather creation should be
recognized because of Allah. First: The knowledge of the maker is both
obvious and natural and therefore everyone on reaching the age of
understanding comes to understand that someone has created him. Even
those Kafirs who deny His existence due to their evil interests and
desires turn to Allah in times of calamity and helplessness in sea or
desert and seek only His help. When they empty their hearts of
selfishness and ponder sincerely they too understand that they are not
creators of themselves and they also follow that they are also not
created by any being like them as Allah Almighty says in the Holy Quran:
And should you ask them, who created the heavens and the earth? They
would most certainly say: Allah. (On the background that this Verse
might not be especially concerning the Polytheists of Mecca.) There are
several traditions to elaborate that we know the creation because of
Allah, that is, the truth becomes manifest due to some miracles which
Allah shows through the hands of His messengers and legatees. Second:
Allah cannot be recognized due to a resemblance with creation. Neither
can we say that Allah is like the light of stars nor can we say that
some perfections found in creation are in Allah. And we can know
creation because of Allah as it is He Who has created them and made them
manifest. The knowledge, recognition and truths of all things are all
obtained only from Him by the creations. Third: Perfect knowledge of
Allah and His Perfect Attributes cannot be known except through
Revelation (Wahy) and intuition (Ilhaam). Rather we can know Allah
through the intelligence given by Him and through the signs which He has
shown all around us and within ourselves is a proof of His existence and
perfect attributes. So also we can know the truth about His prophets and
messengers through the miracles, which He has shown through their hands.
Further explanation of this point is available in Biharul Anwar along
with other proofs. The argument of Mansoor bin Aazim in support of the
necessity of the Imam and the truth about the truthful Imams in stronger
than all other arguments. It goes to prove that Allah Almighty has not
created this creation aimlessly and uselessly. If they have no
responsibility of any kind and if they eat and drink and move about
merely like animals and if there is no other world, that is, the
Hereafter (the getting of the reward where is the main aim) then, of
course, this world can be called aimless and useless because the sorrows
and grief of this world are more than its happiness and relief and there
is not a single pleasure which does not involve or is not accompanied by
many sorrows and unhappiness. Even for preparing delicious food one has
to undergo a lot of labour and pain and many a time after dining one
suffers many troubles and illnesses. Similar is the case with one’s wife
from whom man gets a little pleasure but he has to undertake a lot of
labour and pain for providing her food and clothing and residential
accommodation etc. Likewise one has to deal with all social necessities
and even tolerate unpalatable behaviour of one’s mate. Likewise a riding
animal, if bought, does give comfort in a travel but one has to bear
many hardships for its maintenance and protection etc and in providing
all the things needed by the animal. No different is the case with
wealth of the world, which can give benefit, but for its earning and
then protecting it from thieves etc one has to take many troubles and
precautions etc. Rather each and every worldly pleasure is accompanied
by sorrows and grief (always and without fail). Therefore taking food
becomes the means of removing the trouble of hunger and drinking water
is the cause of quenching the unrest of thirst. Copulation provides the
way of removing the distress of semen. Similar is the case with all
other pleasures and all these delights turn into troublesome and
detestable things at the very thought (of the reality) that this world
is transient and passing and that death is sure to arrive and all these
things around us are to vanish. A very fitting example of this is that
suppose someone invites a group of people for a feast in a dilapidated
building about which people are of the opinion that it will fall down
any time and all the food etc provided therein will mix with debris and
that also many harmful insects and forest animals are likely to pounce
upon them. Now if in this condition the only aim of that feast is to
taste a few morsels of that food then every wise person will condemn the
idea as the Lord Almighty says in the Holy Quran: What! Did you then
think that We had created you in vain and that you shall not be returned
to us? (23:115) This verse shows that if there is no reward or
punishment on the Day of Qiyamat then the creation of the universe is in
vain and also aimless. It is thus known that their creation is for
gaining the Hereafter and it is also known that obtaining of that world
is not possible by doing anything without understanding. So it is
necessary that the Creator of the universe also should appoint guides
who may teach people the way of obtaining the Hereafter through
knowledge and worship. Therefore, in the time of the prophets the
prophets or messengers themselves were such guides. Thereafter it is
essential that there must be someone to protect the Shariat and draw
commands from the Holy Quran. So every argument, which demands
sinlessness and awareness of all commands of Allah in a prophet, also
calls for these attributes and qualifications in an Imam too. Hence it
is imperative that the Imam must have been appointed by Allah and the
entire Ummah is unanimous that such a divine order (Nass) is for none
but Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Therefore he is invariably the Imam, and
even when the Imamate has become doubtful among Ali (a.s.) and Abu Bakr,
Umar and Uthman, Imam Ali (a.s.) was the most courageous, pious and
honourable among all. Hence it is essential that he ought to be the most
suitable person for Imamate because intelligence says that giving a
higher rank to one of a lower capability is improper. Moreover, the
Almighty Lord says: Are those who know and who do not know alike? Only
the men of understanding are mindful. (39:9) And also: Is he then who
guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or he who himself does
not go aright unless he is guided? What then is the matter with you; how
do you judge? (10:35) When the angels had imagined that they were more
worthy than Adam for caliphate on earth, the Creator of the world had
concluded His argument before them through the knowledge of Adam (a.s.)
and when Bani Israel did not accept the kingdom and rulership of Taloot,
Allah Almighty had described Taloot’s superiority on the basis of his
knowledge and physique which was a must for courage saying: And He has
increased him abundantly in knowledge and physique. (2:247) And the
traditions of both the Shias and Sunnis have constantly agreed that all
the companions and the three caliphs used to approach Amirul Momineen
for understanding verses and difficult commandments and that he (the
Amir) had never to seek guidance from them for the meaning of any verse
or about any Islamic commandment. Similarly, in the time of Imam Hasan
(a.s.) when caliphate had become a matter of dispute between him and
Muawiyah, then, notwithstanding the disbelief of Muawiyah, no wise
person could have any doubt in the matter of Imam Hasan’s wisdom and
perfection and about the defects and shortcomings of Muawiyah. Likewise
there never was any doubt regarding the difference between Imam Husain
(a.s.) and Muawiyah/Yazid and thereafter between the innocent Imams and
the oppressive caliphs of their time. So it is on the basis of this
argument that the Imamate of all the Imams is proved.

[^5]: The writer says: This may mean disruption of management.

[^6]: The writer says: A discussion about the continuation of will
(Wasiyat) right from Adam (a.s.) to the last legatees has already been
made in the first volume of this book and that its repetition is
unnecessary.


