Part 19: The Imams are the 'strong rope' and 'firmest handle'
=============================================================

The Purified Imams (a.s.) are the Hablul Mateen (strong rope) and
Urwatul Wuthqa (firmest handle)

And there are many Quranic verses on this topic.

First verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ يَكْفُرْ بِالطَّاغُوتِ وَيُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ فَقَدْ اسْتَمْسَكَ
بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَى لَا انفِصَامَ لَهَا وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ
عَلِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…whoever disbelieves in the Shaitan and believes in Allah he indeed
has laid hold on the firmest handle, which shall not break off, and
Allah is Hearing, Knowing. (Surah Baqarah 2:256)***

We should know that the Shaitans are all (false) deities other than
Allah. In many traditions Imam (a.s.) has compared the false deities to
the unjust rulers and enemies of religion whether they be Jibt, Tagut or
Uzza and also considered the two hypocrites, the first and the second
(caliphs) one as the Sanam (idols) of Quraysh. (And it is narrated from
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that in the book of Allah our enemies are called
‘Fahsha’, ‘Munkir’, ‘Avsan’, ‘Jibt’ and ‘Taghut’.

Kulaini has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’ refers
to the faithful man. And in another tradition he says that ‘Urwatul
Wuthqa’ is to bring faith on only one God, Who has no partner.

There is a tradition in *Mahasin* by the same Imam that ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’
means monotheism and Ibne Shahr Aashob has narrated from Imam Baqir
(a.s.) that ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’ is the love of we Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and in
*Uyoon Akhbar Ridha* there is a tradition from the same Hazrat that the
Holy Prophet (S) said that those who want to board the ship of salvation
and get attached to ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’ and ‘Hablul matin’ hold of Allah,
should after me befriend Ali and be inimical to his enemies and follow
the Imams from his progeny.

Also from the same Hazrat it is narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) said
that those who want to hold ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’, should love Ali and my
Ahlul Bayt.

Also there is a tradition that the Holy Prophet (S) said: Those who
follow the Imams from the progeny of Imam Husain (a.s.) then without any
doubt they have followed Allah and those who disobey them are those who
have disobeyed Allah. They are ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’ and they are Wasilah
(medium) for the people to reach Allah.

According to another tradition Imam Ridha (a.s.) wrote to Mamoon about
Islam, Shariah and religion. It was also written that the earth is never
without the Hujjat (proof) of Allah. And they are ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’ and
Imams of guidance and proof of Allah on the people.

There is a tradition in *Tawheed* that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said that
I am ‘Hablullah-al-Matin’ and I am ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’.

There is a tradition in *Kamaluddeen* that Imam Ridha (a.s.) said: We
are the Hujjat (proof) of Allah on the people and we are the ‘words of
piety’ and ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’.

In *Maniul Akhbar* there is a tradition from the Holy Prophet (S) that
those who want to get attached to the ‘Urwatul Wuthqa’ which shall never
break, should attach themselves to my brother and my vicegerent, Ali
Ibne Abi Talib’s Wilayat. Without any doubt he will not be destroyed
that befriends him and has belief in his Imamate. And he will not get
salvation that regards him as an enemy.

In *Tawilul Aayaat* there is a tradition from Imam Ridha (a.s.) that the
Holy Prophet (S) said that those who want to catch hold of the ‘Urwatul
Wuthqa’, should be attached to the Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi Talib.

According to another tradition from Zaid Ibne Ali it is the true and
intense love for Aale Muhammad (a.s).

Second verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِحَبْلِ اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا وَلَا تَفَرَّقُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And hold fast by the covenant (rope) of Allah (Hablillah) all together
and be not disunited… 3:103

Third verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ الذِّلَّةُ أَيْنَ مَا ثُقِفُوا إِلَّا بِحَبْلٍ
مِنْ اللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Abasement is made to cleave to them wherever they are found, except
under a covenant with Allah… (Surah Ale-Imran 3:112)***

Many of the traditionists have said that it means those who remain
steadfast on the promise of Allah are protected.

There is a tradition from Ayyashi that Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) said
regarding the verse:

***And hold fast by the covenant (rope) of Allah all together and be not
disunited… (Surah Ale-Imran 3:103)***

That Ali Ibne Abi Talib is ‘hablulallah matin’. It means the tight rope
of Allah.

Another tradition from Imam Baqir (a.s.) says that the progeny of the
Holy Prophet (S) is the rope of Allah, for whom Allah has commanded in
this verse.

Also there is a tradition from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: We are
the rope of Allah.

Ali Ibne Ibrahim has narrated that ‘Hablullah’ means the Oneness
(Tawheed) of Allah and the Mastership (Wilayat) of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Also there is a saying of Imam Baqir (a.s.) on the verse:

***and be not disunited… (Surah Ale-Imran 3:103)***

The Imam said that Allah was knowing that this nation would be separated
from its Prophet and they will have difference with him. That is why he
stopped them from the difference as the nation which was before them was
prohibited. Therefore they were commanded that they should remain united
on the Wilayat of Muhammad and his Progeny and should not disunite.

Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that the ‘Habl of Allah’ is
the book of Allah and ‘Habl-e-Naas’ is Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).

In *Majalis* of Shaykh Tusi and *Manaqib* of Ibne Shahr Aashob it is
narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that: We are ‘Hablullah’ - the rope of
Allah.


