Part 20: Wisdom and 'those endowed with understanding' refers to the Holy Imams
===============================================================================

Wisdom and ‘those endowed with understanding’ refers to the Holy Imams
(a.s.)

Ali Ibne Ibrahim has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) on the explanation
of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُؤْتَ الْحِكْمَةَ فَقَدْ أُوتِيَ خَيْرًا كَثِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and whoever is granted wisdom, he indeed is given a great good…
(Surah Baqarah 2:269)***

It means that We have give wisdom to Luqman. The Imam said that wisdom
means to recognize the Imam of the time.

In *Mahasin* of Barqi, *Kafi* and *Tafsir* of Ayyashi it is narrated
from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) on the explanation of this verse:

***…and whoever is granted wisdom, he indeed is given a great good…
(Surah Baqarah 2:269)***

That the Imam said that wisdom means worship of Allah and the
recognition of the Imam.

Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that wisdom means the
awareness about the roots of religion and those who are learned in
jurisprudence and religious matters.

In *Basairud Darajat,* *Tafsir* of Ibne Mahyar and *Manaqib* of Ibne
Shahr Aashob there is a tradition from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) when asked
about the explanation of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِأُوْلِي النُّهَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…most surely there are signs in this for those endowed with
understanding. (Surah Taha 20:54)***

The Imam said that Allah had given all the news and information to the
Prophet regarding the future events that were to occur after his death.
The acquisition of Caliphate by Abu Bakr and after him Umar and then
Uthman and all the Caliphate of Bani Umayyah. The Holy Prophet (S)
conveyed all this to Ali (a.s.) and all those things happened exactly as
was said. And all the information reached us through Ali (a.s.), about
whatever was going to happen through the Caliphs of Bani Umayyah. So
this is the meaning of the verse about which Allah has mentioned:

***…most surely there are signs in this for those endowed with
understanding. (Surah Taha 20:54)***

It means that we are ‘those endowed with understanding.’ because
knowledge of all of them reached us and we have obeyed Allah, had
patience and submitted to whatever He has destined. So we are the
creatures of Allah, we follow and remain firm on His commands and we are
the trustees of His religion, and the protector of His religion and
knowledge and we keep it concealed from our enemies, in the same way as
Holy Prophet (S) had concealed, till Allah made him to migrate from
Mecca to Medina and gave him the permission to wage war against the
polytheists to conclude the religion, till Allah gives us the
permission.

Then we will propagate with the sword of religion and call the people
towards Him. This time we will fight the last time with sword in the
same way as the Holy Prophet (S) fought with the sword after making them
aware about Allah at the onset.


