Part 21: 'Companions of a Known place' and 'Carriers of the Heavens' denote the Holy Imams
==========================================================================================

‘Companions of a Known place’ and ‘Carriers of the Heavens’ denote the
Holy Imams (a.s.)

Allah says in the praise of angels:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مِنَّا إِلَّا لَهُ مَقَامٌ مَعْلُومٌ. وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ
الصَّافُّونَ. وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الْمُسَبِّحُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And there is none of us but has an assigned place. And most surely we
are they who draw themselves out in ranks(‘Saaffoon’). And we are most
surely they who declare the glory (of Allah). ‘Musabbehoon’ (Surah
Saffat 37:164-166)***

The commentators have said that angels say: There is none among whose
place of worship is not fixed. Indeed we are from those who glorify.

Ali Ibne Ibrahim, Ibne Shahr Aashob and Furat have narrated from Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) about the verse:

***And there is none of us but has an assigned place… (Surah Saffat
37:164)***

That it refers to the Imams and legatees from the Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

Also in the *Tafsir* of Ali Ibne Ibrahim from other authentic traditions
quote the same Imam that he said: We are the tree of Prophet, the mines
of prophethood and the place where angels come and go and we are the
promise of Allah, it means that we are the promise that Allah has taken
from people and we are the Love of Allah, it means our love is the love
of Allah.

We were some ‘Noor’ (light) and were in the row surrounded by the throne
of Allah. The creatures of the sky adored Allah because of us, till we
were sent to the earth, so we mentioned the holiness of Allah, so the
creatures of the earth learnt adoration from us. We are ‘Saaffoon’ and
‘Musabbehoon’, as Allah has said. Then those who fulfil our oath,
without any doubt he has fulfilled the promise of Allah, and whoever
breaks the promise with us, he has surely broken his promise with Allah.

Ibne Mahyar has narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said in
some of his sermons: We are Aale Muhammad (a.s.). We were some ‘Noor’
(lights) around the throne. Allah gave us the order to glorify (Tasbeeh)
Him. We glorified Him. And the angels glorified by imitating us. Then
Allah sent us on the earth and commanded us for to glorify Him and we
did it, so the creatures of the earth also recited glorifications like
us. That is why we are ‘Saaffoon’ and we are ‘Musabbehoon’.

Also, there is a tradition from Ibne Abbas when he was asked the
explanation of the above verse. He said that we were present in the
company of the Holy Prophet (S), that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) arrived.
When the Holy Prophet (S) saw the face of the Hazrat, he smiled and
said: What to say about the one whom Allah created 40,000 years before
Adam.

Ibne Abbas says that I asked the Holy Prophet (S): Was the son before
the father? He replied: Yes, Allah created me and Ali before all the
Prophets. After that He created all the things, and all the things were
created from me and Ali. Then Allah gave us the place near His throne.
Then He created the angels. We glorified Allah. When we recited the
‘Takbir’ (Allahu Akbar) the angels also did Takbir and all this was due
to my and Ali’s training. And it is from the very beginning in the
knowledge of Allah that the friend of mine and Ali will not go to Hell
and our enemy will not enter the Paradise. Indeed Allah has made some
angels in whose hands there is a silver vessel containing the nectar of
Paradise.

From the Shias of Ali, there is no Shia but that his father and mother
are pure, pious, chosen ones and believing in Allah. When anyone of them
intends to establish sexual relations with his wife, an angel from them
who has the water of Paradise in his hands, makes him drink a drop of
water due to which faith grows in him like vegetation.

That is why they from the side of Allah, from the side of his Prophet,
from the side of his Vicegerent, from the side of my daughter Fatima
Zahra, from her sons Hasan and Husain, from their children who are the
Imams will be on truth and right. I asked: O Messenger of Allah! Who are
those Imams (a.s.)? He said: They are eleven persons from the progeny of
Ali through Husain (a.s.). Then the Holy Prophet (S) said: I praise that
Allah, who has made the love of Ali the condition to enter Paradise and
also for salvation from Hell.

Ali Ibne Ibrahim has narrated that Abu Baseer asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
that who are more in number, angels or human beings?

The Imam said: By Allah in whose hands is my life, the angels in the
heaven are much more than the particles of the earth and in the skies
there is no space equal to a feet where there is not an angel who
glorifies and magnifies Allah. And there is no tree nor any pebbles on
the earth, but that there is an angel on it which everyday informs Allah
about its deeds and conditions, although Allah is more aware about the
angels and there is no angel but that everyday he goes to the proximity
of Allah with our Wilayat and the love of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and asks
forgiveness for our friends and curses our enemies and all the angels
ask Allah to send chastisement upon them as is the right.

After that in the explanation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَحْمِلُونَ الْعَرْشَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who bear the power (arsh)… (Surah Ghafir 40:7)***

Imam said that he is the Holy Prophet (S) and after him his Vicegerent
who are the bearers of knowledge of Allah and ‘Arsh’ means knowledge.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ حَوْلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and those around Him… (Surah Ghafir 40:7)***

The Imam said that it is the angels on all the four sides of ‘Arsh’.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسَبِّحُونَ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّهِمْ وَيُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَ
لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…celebrate the praise of their Lord and believe in Him and ask
protection for those who believe… (Surah Ghafir:7)***

The Imam said that they are the believers and Shias of Aale Muhammad.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَسِعْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ رَحْمَةً وَعِلْمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Our Lord! Thou embracest all things in mercy and knowledge… (Surah
Ghafir 40:7)***

It means Your mercy reaches everyone and everything and Your knowledge
surrounds everything.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاغْفِرْ لِلَّذِينَ تَابُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…therefore grant protection to those who turn (to Thee) (Surah Ghafir
40:7)***

It means forgive the community which has turned its face from the
Wilayat and Love of Bani Umayyah and the Unjust Caliphs.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّبَعُوا سَبِيلَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and follow Thy way…*** ***(Surah Ghafir 40:7)***

The Imam said that the path of Allah means the Wilayat and Imamate of
Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِهِمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ. رَبَّنَا وَأَدْخِلْهُمْ جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ
الَّتِي وَعَدْتَهُم وَمَنْ صَلَحَ مِنْ آبَائِهِمْ وَأَزْوَاجِهِمْ
وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And save them from the punishment of the hell: Our Lord! and make
them enter the gardens of perpetuity which Thou hast promised to them
and those who do good of their fathers and their wives and their
offspring, surely Thou are the Mighty, the Wise. (Surah Ghafir
40:7-8)***

The Imam said that good people means those who have the love of Ali Ibne
Abi Talib (a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِهِمْ السَّيِّئَاتِ وَمَنْ تَقِ السَّيِّئَاتِ يَوْمَئِذٍ فَقَدْ
رَحِمْتَهُ وَذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And keep them from evil deeds, and whom Thou keepest from evil deeds
this day, indeed Thou hast mercy on him, and that is the mighty
achievement. (Surah Ghafir 40:9)***

Imam says that success is for one who saves himself from the love of
unjust caliphs. Then Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا يُنَادَوْنَ لَمَقْتُ اللَّهِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ
مَقْتِكُمْ أَنْفُسَكُمْ إِذْ تُدْعَوْنَ إِلَى الْإِيمَانِ
فَتَكْفُرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who disbelieve shall be cried out to: Certainly Allah’s
hatred (of you) when you were called upon to the faith and you rejected…
(Surah Ghafir 40:10)***

It means you were called towards the Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.).

Also Ibne Mahyar narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that ‘for those who
believe’ refers to the Shias of Muhammad and his progeny and ‘those who
turn to Thee’ are those people who have repented from the Love of Unjust
Caliphs of Bani Umayyah. ‘Those who disbelieve’ means Bani Umayyah and
‘faith’ refers to the Wilayat of Ali (a.s.).

Kulaini has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that there are some angels
of Allah who clear the sins from the loins of the Shias as the wind
sheds leaves from the tree in autumn. This verse points towards this:

***…celebrate the praise of their Lord and believe in Him and ask
protection for those who believe: (Surah Ghafir 40:7)***

Imam (a.s.) said: By Allah! Allah has meant this only for you and no one
else.

Ibne Mahyar in *Uyoon Akhbar* has narrated that ‘those who believe’ are
those who brought faith on the Wilayat of Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Hazrat
said that angels are our and our Shias’ servants.

Ibne Mahyar has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that ‘those who bear the
power (Arsh)’ means these eight persons: 1. Muhammad 2. Ali 3. Hasan 4.
Husain 5. Ibrahim 6. Ismail 7. Moosa and 8. Isa (may peace be upon
them).

Ibne Babawayh has said in *Aqaid* that the throne (Arsh) will be borne
by eight people, four from the earlier nations and four from the later
ones. The earlier four are Nuh, Ibrahim, Moosa and Isa (a.s.) and four
later ones are Muhammad (S), Ali, Hasan and Husain (may peace be upon
them all). And it is conveyed to us from our Imam (a.s.) and reached us
in this way only.

Ibne Mahyar has narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said that
the fact of my superiority was revealed from the heavens to the Holy
Prophet (S).

…and ask protection for those who believe…

This verse was also revealed at a time when there was no believer except
me and the Holy Prophet (S) in the world.

It is narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that Ali (a.s.) said that the
angels continued to invoke blessings (Salawat) on me and the Prophet for
seven years and some months and in our praise the following verses were
revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَحْمِلُونَ الْعَرْشَ وَمَنْ حَوْلَهُ يُسَبِّحُونَ بِحَمْدِ
رَبِّهِمْ وَيُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
رَبَّنَا وَسِعْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ رَحْمَةً وَعِلْمًا فَاغْفِرْ لِلَّذِينَ
تَابُوا وَاتَّبَعُوا سَبِيلَكَ وَقِهِمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ. رَبَّنَا
وَأَدْخِلْهُمْ جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ الَّتِي وَعَدْتَهُم وَمَنْ صَلَحَ مِنْ
آبَائِهِمْ وَأَزْوَاجِهِمْ وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ
الْحَكِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who bear the power and those around Him celebrate the praise of
their Lord and believe in Him and ask protection for those who believe:
Our Lord! Thou embracest all things in mercy and knowledge, therefore
grant protection to those who turn (to Thee) and follow Thy way, and
save them from the punishment of the hell: Our Lord! and make them enter
the gardens of*** ***perpetuity which Thou hast promised to them and
those who do good of their fathers and their wives and their offspring,
surely Thou are the Mighty, the Wise. (Surah Ghafir 40:7-8)***

According to another tradition from the Holy Prophet (S): Without any
doubt, Allah and the angels were sending Salawat on me and Ali for many
years, because we used to pray and before us no one prayed.

It is related from many other chains from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said: By Allah! The seeking of forgiveness of the angels is for you,
Shias and not for all the creatures.

The Almighty Allah says regarding the greatness of the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّهَا تَذْكِرَةٌ. فَمَنْ شَاءَ ذَكَرَهُ. فِي صُحُفٍ
مُكَرَّمَةٍ. مَرْفُوعَةٍ مُطَهَّرَةٍ. بِأَيْدِي سَفَرَةٍ. كِرَامٍ
بَرَرَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nay! surely it is an admonishment. So let him who pleases mind it. In
honored books, Exalted, purified, In the hands of scribes (Safarah)
Noble, virtuous. (Surah Abasa 80:11-16)***

In the authentic traditions it is mentioned that ‘Sufra’ means the Holy
Imams (a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ لَا يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِهِ
وَيُسَبِّحُونَهُ وَلَهُ يَسْجُدُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who are with your Lord are not too proud to serve Him,
and they declare His glory and throw themselves down in humility before
Him. (Surah Araf 7:206)***

It is famous amongst the commentators that they are the angels. But it
has come in traditions that it refers to the Prophet and Imams (a.s.).
Also the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا اتَّخَذَ اللَّهُ وَلَدًا سُبْحَانَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they say: Allah has taken to himself a son. Glory be to Him…
(Surah Baqarah 2:116)***

He doesn’t have any son. But some people are honoured near Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ كُلٌّ لَهُ قَانِتُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…rather, whatever is in the heavens and the earth is His; all are
obedient to Him. (Surah Baqarah 2:116)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ وَهُمْ بِأَمْرِهِ يَعْمَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They do not precede Him in speech and (only) according to His
commandment do they act. (Surah Anbiyah 21:27)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ وَلَا يَشْفَعُونَ
إِلَّا لِمَنْ ارْتَضَى وَهُمْ مِنْ خَشْيَتِهِ مُشْفِقُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He knows what is before them and what is behind them, and they do not
intercede except for him whom He approves and for fear of Him they
tremble. (Surah Anbiyah 21:28)***

Ibne Mahyar and others have narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that when
the Hazrat recited these verses he pointed towards his chest. It means
that these verses were revealed in the praise of us, Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).[^1]

[^1]: The writer says: Most commentators say these verses were revealed
for those who claim that angels are the daughters of Allah. That is why
‘the obedient ones’ means the angels but from the Ziarats like
‘Ziarat-e-Jamea’ and from many supplications and other authentic
traditions it is clear that it refers to the Holy Imams (a.s.). On this
basis and there is a possibility that they should be refuted who believe
in the divinity of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the Holy Imams (a.s.). So
‘Ebdun Mukremum’ means they are the servants of Allah, whom consider as
gods. Another possibility is the refutation of those who believe that
angels are sons of Allah. So Allah has negated it, and that there are
some nearest persons to Him, whom He has exalted and made Caliphs; and
His selection does not mean that they are His children. On this basis it
is possible that it denotes the Holy Imams or generally it may be all
those who are near to Allah, like the angels, the Prophets and the
vicegerents.


