Part 22: The Satisfied folk in Paradise denote the Imams
========================================================

The Satisfied folk in Paradise denote the Imams (a.s.) and the people
bearing the punishments of Hell are their enemies

There are some verses in it.

First verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ اتَّبَعَ رِضْوَانَ اللَّهِ كَمَنْ بَاءَ بِسَخَطٍ مِنْ اللَّهِ
وَمَأْوَاهُ جَهَنَّمُ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ. هُمْ دَرَجَاتٌ عِنْدَ
اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is then he who follows the pleasure of Allah like him who has made
himself deserving of displeasure from Allah, and his abode is hell; and
it is an evil destination. There are (varying) grades with Allah, and
Allah sees what they do. (Surah Ale-Imran 3:162-163)***

Ibne Shahr Aashob and Ayyashi have narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
those *‘who follows the pleasure of Allah’* are the Imams of Aale
Muhammad.

By Allah these personalities are the standards for the believers. Due to
their love, friendship and recognition (Ma’refat) of whatever we have,
Allah will double the rewards of their deeds in this world and the
hereafter.

According to the report of Ayyashi he said: By Allah! Those who involved
themselves in the anger of Allah, are those who denied the right of Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). Due to this Allah was angry with them as they
deserved.

There is a tradition from Imam Ridha (a.s.) that as the stages of a
believer progress, the distances between two stages equals the distance
between the earth and the sky.

Second verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ اتَّبَعُوا مَا أَسْخَطَ اللَّهَ وَكَرِهُوا
رِضْوَانَهُ فَأَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***That is because they follow what is displeasing to Allah and are
averse to His pleasure, therefore He has made null their deeds. (Surah
Muhammad 47:28)***

Ibne Mahyar narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that, *‘what is displeasing
to Allah and are averse to His pleasure’* are those who dislike the
Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.), although Ali is liked by Allah and
the Prophet (S). And Allah has ordered about the Wilayat of Ali in Badr,
Hunain, Batn-e-Nakha and Tarvia and twenty two verses were revealed in
his praise in Hudaibiyah, Johfa and Ghadir-e-Khum, although the
unbelievers Quraysh had refrained the Prophet (S) from entering the
Masjidul Haram.

Ali Ibne Ibrahim has narrated in the explanation of this verse that the
friendship and Wilayat of unjust Caliphs and those who did injustice on
Amirul Momineen (a.s.), infuriates Allah. That is why Allah confiscated
their deeds and cancelled all the rewards the good deeds performed by
them.

Third verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ. ارْجِعِي إِلَى رَبِّكِ
رَاضِيَةً مَرْضِيَّةً. فَادْخُلِي فِي عِبَادِي. وَادْخُلِي جَنَّتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O soul that art at rest! Return to your Lord, well-pleased (with
him), well-pleasing (Him), So enter among My servants, And enter into My
garden. (Surah Fajr 89:27-30)***

Ibne Mahyar has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that this verse was
revealed in praise of Imam Husain (a.s.) and has also narrated from the
same Imam that: Recite Surah Fajr in obligatory and recommended prayers
because this Surah is for Imam Husain (a.s.) and take interest to recite
this Surah so that Allah may have mercy on you.

Abu Osama asked: How is this Surah special for Imam Husain? The Imam
replied: Have you have heard the verse: *‘ O soul that art at rest!’* It
refers to Imam Husain and he is the soul at rest, who was pleased with
the command of Allah and was liked by Him and his companions were from
Aale Muhammad (a.s.). And Allah is pleased with him and this Surah is in
the praise of Imam Husain (a.s.) and the Shias of Aale Muhammad and it
is specially for them. That is why if a person recites this Surah
regularly, he will be with the Hazrat in Paradise with his position, and
Allah is all powerful and wise.

Kulaini and Ibne Mahyar have narrated from Sudair Sarraf that he asked
Imam Sadiq (a.s.): May I be sacrificed for you, O son of the Messenger
of Allah, do you feel the pains at the time of death of a believer? The
Imam replied: By Allah when the angel of death comes to a believer, he
cries and is terrified, so the angel says to him: O friend of Allah, do
not scream. By Allah! Who has made Muhammad a Prophet, I am more kind to
you than your own father.

Open your eyes and see that the Holy Prophet (S), Amirul Momineen
(a.s.), Fatima, Hasan and Husain and all the Holy Imam (a.s.) come to
you. The angel of death says: They all are your friends. The believer
opens his eyes and sees those blessed personages, then a callers of
Allah calls his soul: O calm soul of Muhammad and his progeny, return to
your Lord, and due to their Wilayat and rewards you are liked, then you
be attached with my special servants. It means Muhammad, Ali and their
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and enter my Paradise and near believer there is
nothing more respected and Loved then this except this that his soul
should be taken and that he should get attached to those Holy persons.

Fourth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذْ يُبَايِعُونَكَ تَحْتَ
الشَّجَرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore
allegiance to you under the tree… (Surah Fath 48:18)***

Ibne Mahyar has narrated that Jabir asked Imam Baqir (a.s.): How many
people had taken the oath of allegiance? He said: They were 1200. Jabir
asked if Ali was also from that group. He replied: Yes, in fact he was
their leader and chief.[^1]

[^1]: The writer says: This refers to the allegiance of Rizwan which
took place in the Umrah of Hudaibiyah and the Holy Prophet (S) set out
with the intention of Umrah and the Quraysh stopped him and did not
allow him to enter Mecca. The Prophet (S) sent a message through Uthman
but it was rumoured that infidels have captured him. So the Prophet (S)
gathered his companions under a thorny or a berry tree and took
allegiance from them, that they would fight the unbelievers of Quraysh,
and not run away. At that time this verse was revealed. Then the Hazrat
said that Allah was pleased with the believers, thus the hypocrites were
excluded, and the first and the second (caliph) and people like them are
not included in this verse. Allah says in the same Surah: Therefore
whoever breaks (his faith), he breaks it only to the injury of his own
soul, and whoever fulfills what he has covenanted with Allah, He will
grant him a mighty reward. (48:10). Ali Ibne Ibrahim said that this
verse was revealed after verse 18, thus the pleasure of Allah depends on
the condition that the oath is not broken. So those who broke the oath
of the day of Ghadeer and snatched the right of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and
refused the ‘Nass’ of the Holy Prophet (S) have all become infidels.
They are not included in this verse of Rizwan. Other points on this
topic shall be discussed later on in some other book, Insha-Allah.


