Part 23: 'Naas' refers to the Ahlul Bayt
========================================

‘Naas (people)’ refers to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and ‘Semi-Naas’ refers
to their Shias and the others are ‘Not-naas’

Kulaini and Furat Ibne Ibrahim from authentic chains narrate from Imam
Zainul Aabedeen (a.s.) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that a person stood up and
asked Amirul Momineen (a.s.): You are an ‘Alim’ (learned), then tell me
who is ‘Naas’, ‘Shabih Naas’ and ‘Na-naas’. The Hazrat told Imam Husain
(a.s.) to reply. He said: ‘Naas’ is the Holy Prophet (S) and we are from
him only and included in the ‘Naas’ as Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَفِيضُوا مِنْ حَيْثُ أَفَاضَ النَّاسُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then hasten on from the Place from which the people hasten on… (Surah
Baqarah 2:199)***

It means pick up the load and go soon from the place where people load
themselves. He said that the Holy Prophet (S) loaded the things and went
away from Arafat with the people. That is why at this place ‘Naas’
refers to the Holy Prophet (S) and we Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) are included in
it. And we are included in what is applicable to the Prophet. ‘Ashbahun
Naas’ (resembling the people) are our Shias. They are from us and they
are similar to us. That is why Ibrahim said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ تَبِعَنِي فَإِنَّهُ مِنِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…then whoever follows me, he is surely of me… (Surah Ibrahim
14:36)***

And ‘Na-naas’ are our enemies and pointed with his hands towards his
opponents. And after that he recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ كَالْأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…they are as cattle, nay, they are in worse errors… (Surah Araf
7:179)***

That is they are worse than the quadrupeds.[^1]

[^1]: The writer says: Regarding this verse there is a difference of
opinion among commentators. Some say that Quraysh did not go to the
Arafat. During Hajj stayed at Masharil Haraam and then returned to Mina
and they used to say that they were the Owners of the sanctuaries of
Allah, and not like others that they should go out. When the Prophet (S)
also did not stay at Masharil Haraam and went to Arafat, it was
unbearable for the Quraysh, thus this verse was revealed. In short, some
commentators say that ‘Naas’ refers to Ibrahim, Ismail, Ishaq, and other
Prophets, and the explanation given by the Hazrat shows that it was
addressed to Quraysh. It means that do not go with the Prophet to Arafat
and from there, and from there itself pick up your things and go to
Mashar. So Allah addressed the Prophet as ‘Naas’ and the Ahle Bayt of
the Hazrat are included in it and man who is superior in excellence of
knowledge than all living beings. They are Muhammad and his progeny, and
their Shias also, as they have followed them and gained some of their
qualities. That is why they are also included. Others are neither human
nor similar to humans; rather they are animals and apparently seem to be
humans. In the field of knowledge and practice they are like ‘Na-naas’;
animals in human form. There is a difference of opinion about ‘Na-naas’.
Some say they are Gog and Magog and some say it is a creature in human
form, which is not human. The Ahle Sunnat have narrated that a tribe of
Aad disobeyed their Prophet, so Allah changed them and they become
‘Na-naas’. They have a hand on one side and leg on the other and they
graze like quadrupeds. In some traditions ‘Insan’ refers to Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) as Allah says: When the earth is shaken with her
(violent) shaking, And the earth brings forth her burdens, And man says:
What has befallen her? On that day she shall tell her news, Because your
Lord had inspired her. (99:1-5). Thus Ibne Babawayh has narrated that
during the time of Abu Bakr a severe earthquake occurred in Medina.
People came to Abu Bakr and Umar to seek refuge. They saw that these two
were also very much afraid and going towards the house of Ali
al-Murtuza. The people also went with the two and arriving at his door
saw that the Hazrat, calmly and fearlessly was coming towards them.
Looking at them the Hazrat said: Are you amazed at my confidence and
calmness? Yes, said the people. Imam said: I am the one about whom Allah
has said: And man says: What has befallen her. On the day of Judgement I
will ask the earth and it will tell me all about itself. According to
the tradition of Kulaini, he said that if it were the earthquake of
Qiyamat the earth would have answered me.


