Part 24: Ocean of pearls and corals denote the Imams
====================================================

Ocean of pearls and corals denote the Imams (a.s.)

Allah the most high says in Surah Rahman:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَرَجَ الْبَحْرَيْنِ يَلْتَقِيَانِ. بَيْنَهُمَا بَرْزَخٌ لَا
يَبْغِيَانِ. فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ. يَخْرُجُ
مِنْهُمَا اللُّؤْلُؤُ وَالْمَرْجَانُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He has made the two seas to flow freely (so that) they meet together:
Between them is a barrier which they cannot pass. Which then of the
bounties of your Lord will you deny? There come forth from them pearls
(lolo) and corals (marjan). (Surah Rahman 55:19-22)***

Most commentators say that two seas denote a salty one and a sweet one.
The sweet water enters the salty sea and by the power of Allah they mix
together and pearls come into existence where these waters mix together.
Some have said that it refers to the sea of the sky and the sea of land
and when the rain-bearing cloud rains on the sea the shells open their
mouth and pearls are made from it. Others have said that it refers to
the sea of Persia and the sea of Rome. In the explanation of these
verses many traditions has been narrated from the Ahle Sunnat and Shias.

Thalabi from Ahle Sunnat has narrated from Sufyan Thawri and Ibne Jabir
that the two seas are Ali and Fatima (s.a.) and the Holy Prophet (S) is
the ‘barrier’ and ‘pearls’ and ‘corals’ are Hasan and Husain (a.s.). The
big pearl refers to Imam Hasan and Husain is compared to a small pearl
or with coral, whose redness is associated with the martyrdom of Imam
Husain (a.s.).

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated from Salman Farsi, Saeed Ibne Jubair and
Sufyan, and Ibne Mahyar has also narrated this from Ibne Abbas and also
from Ahle Sunnat sources it is narrated from Abu Saeed Khudri and from
Shia chains from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that the two seas are Ali
(a.s.) and Fatima (s.a.). It means that neither Ali does injustice on
Fatima nor Fatima does injustice on Ali and Hasan and Husain were born
from them.[^1]

Ibne Mahyar has narrated through Sunni chains from Abu Zar that the two
seas are Ali and Fatima (s.a.) and ‘pearls’ and ‘corals’ are Hasan and
Husain (a.s.). And who has seen anyone like these four. Only the
believer befriends them and only the unbeliever hates them. So remain a
believer due to the love of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and do not become an
unbeliever by hating them, otherwise Allah cast you into Hell.

Ibne Babawayh in *Khisal* has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) on this
verse that Ali and Fatima (s.a.) are the two deep seas of knowledge,
none of whom does injustice on the other; and pearls and corals are
Hasan and Husain.

Ibne Shahr Aashob has narrated from Ibne Abbas that one day Fatima
(s.a.) complained to the Holy Prophet (S) about her poverty and
difficulties. The Prophet (S) said: O Fatima! Be content with your
husband because he is a Sayyid and a leader and he is the best of all
the creatures in this world and the hereafter. At that time Allah
revealed this verse:

He has made the two seas to flow freely…

Ali Ibne Abi Talib is the sea of knowledge and Fatima is the sea of
Prophethood who are connected to each other and I have connected them.
It means that there is a barrier between them which is the personality
of the Prophet (S), who refrains Ali from becoming sad in the world due
to poverty and refrains Fatima from saying anything against Ali.

So, O the nations of people and Jinn, which of the bounty of Allah—it
means the Wilayat of Ali (a.s.) or the love of Fatima (s.a.)–would you
deny? Because these two are the great blessings of Allah for you, that
is why ‘pearl’ means Imam Hasan and ‘coral’ means Imam Husain (a.s.)
because ‘lolo’ is big pearl and ‘marjan’ is the small pearl.

[^1]: The writer says: On the basis of traditions where there is no
mention of the Prophet (S) it is possible that ‘Barzakh’ denotes the
holiness and sinlessness of the two holy souls that restrains them from
revolt and oppressing each other.


