Part 25: Quranic Expressions denote to the Holy Imams
=====================================================

‘Maa-e-Maeen’ (Flowing water), ‘Be-ar-e-Motala’ (Deserted well),
‘Qasr-e-Mushayyad’(high palace), ‘Sahab, ‘Barish’, and ‘Favakeh’ and all
those apparent things which give benefits refer to the Pure Imams
(a.s.), their sciences and blessings

There are many verses in this regard.

First verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَصْبَحَ مَاؤُكُمْ غَوْرًا فَمَنْ يَأْتِيكُمْ
بِمَاءٍ مَعِينٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Have you considered if your water should go down, who is it then
that will bring you flowing water? (Surah Mulk 67 :30)***

There is a tradition from Ali Ibne Ibrahim that this means if your Imam
goes in concealment who is there who can bring an Imam similar to the
original one?

There is also a tradition from Imam Ridha (a.s.) that he said in the
explanation of this verse that your water from your Lord is at your door
and the Holy Imams are the doors of Allah towards you whom Allah has
opened for His creatures and the flowing water refers to the knowledge
of Imam.

Shaykh Tusi in *Ghaibat* narrates from Imam Moosa Kazim on the
explanation of this verse that he said: If you do not find your Imam, he
goes into occultation and you do not see him, then what will you do?

Ibne Mahyar has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that if your Imam goes
into occultation because of your bad deeds who will bring a new Imam for
you?

There are many traditions on this topic. Water denotes knowledge, as
water is necessary for the life of the body and in the same way the
Shias have got knowledge from their Imam and it is for keeping the soul
alive, because they have the trait of doing good and water is necessary
for a brief life on the earth and knowledge is necessary for the
everlasting life of the hereafter. And the inner meaning of the verse is
not against the outer one and both are applicable, because Quran has
seven interiors rather seventy interiors (meanings).

Second verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَلَّوْ اسْتَقَامُوا عَلَى الطَّرِيقَةِ لَأَسْقَيْنَاهُمْ مَاءً
غَدَقًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And that if they should keep to the (right) way, We would certainly
give them to drink of abundant water. (Surah Jinn 72:16)***

It means if they had remained steadfast on the right path, and strayed
to the path of misguidance We would have made them drink a lot of water.
There is a tradition from Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) in *Kafi* and
*Manaqib* that had they had remained steadfast on the Wilayat of Ali
Ibne Abi Talib and his successors and on their love and had a firm faith
in their Imamate, We would have filled their hearts with the pure faith.
The inner meaning of this verse is also as mentioned.

Third verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَأَيِّنْ مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ أَهْلَكْنَاهَا وَهِيَ ظَالِمَةٌ فَهِيَ
خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَى عُرُوشِهَا وَبِئْرٍ مُعَطَّلَةٍ وَقَصْرٍ مَشِيدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So how many a town did We destroy while it was unjust, so it was
fallen down upon its roofs, and (how many a) deserted well and palace
(Qasr) raised high. (Surah Haj 22:45)***

Most commentators say that it is the well located at the foot of the
mountain, Hadaramaut. And ‘Qasr’ refers to the palace on the top of that
mountain; and they were built by the people of Hanzala Ibne Safwan who
were the surviving people from the nation of Prophet Saleh (a.s.). When
Hanzala killed their Prophet, Allah destroyed them, and the well and the
palace became deserted.[^1]

Ibne Babawayh from authentic chains has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
that the deserted well refers to the silent Imam, whose right has been
usurped and due to fear of opposition he was unable to declare his
Imamate; whosoever desires can gain wisdom from that well and benefit
himself. The ‘palace’ refers to the speaking Imam, who can speak without
dissimulation (Taqaiyyah) and fear and can openly declare his Imamate
and that Imam is in occultation who does not speak and whose time of
Imamate has not come. The speaking Imam is the one who has appeared.

Also according to another tradition the ‘palace raised high’ refers to
Ali (a.s.) and the ‘deserted well’ is Fatima (s.a.) and her children and
the Imams who are away from rulership and kingship and their right was
snatched away.

In *Manaqib* it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that both ‘the
palace raised high’ and ‘the deserted well’ refer to Amirul Momineen
(a.s.).[^2]

Fourth Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْبَلَدُ الطَّيِّبُ يَخْرُجُ نَبَاتُهُ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِ وَالَّذِي
خَبُثَ لَا يَخْرُجُ إِلَّا نَكِدًا كَذَلِكَ نُصَرِّفُ الْآيَاتِ
لِقَوْمٍ يَشْكُرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And as for the good land, its Vegetation springs forth (abundantly)
by the permission of its Lord, and (as for) that which is inferior (its
herbage) comes forth but scantily, thus do we repeat the communications
for a people who give thanks. (Surah Araf 7:58)***

It is narrated by Ali Ibne Ibrahim that ‘the good land’ is a metaphor
for the Imams, whose knowledge is effortlessly gained from the Almighty
Allah and ‘inferior land’ denotes their enemies, whose knowledge is
dirty and invalid and if a little knowledge of theirs reaches the people
that also does not benefit.

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated from Ibne Abbas that Allah has given these
as similes of a believer and a disbeliever. Though all land is of one
kind, some are pure as they become soft due to rain and good vegetation
grows from them and production is also more from them and some are salty
and rocky on which nothing grows and if something grows, it carries no
benefit. In the same way the heart is made of flesh and blood, but some
hearts become soft due to good advice and some are hard, which do not
accept any advice. That is those whose hearts becomes soft due to the
remembrance of Allah, should thank Allah.[^3]

Fifth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ فَالِقُ الْحَبِّ وَالنَّوَى يُخْرِجُ الْحَيَّ مِنْ
الْمَيِّتِ وَمُخْرِجُ الْمَيِّتِ مِنْ الْحَيِّ ذَلِكُمْ اللَّهُ
فَأَنَّا تُؤْفَكُونَ. فَالِقُ الْإِصْبَاحِ وَجَعَلَ اللَّيْلَ سَكَنًا
وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ حُسْبَانًا ذَلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِ
الْعَلِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah causes the grain and the stone to germinate, He brings
forth the living from the dead and He is the bringer froth of the dead
from the living, that is Allah, how are you then turned away. (Surah
Anam 6:96)***

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that ‘grain’ refers to the
believer whom Allah takes as His friend and ‘stone’ refers to the
unbeliever who is far from everything.

According to another tradition the germinating of seeds refers to the
manifestation of the knowledge of the Holy Imams and ‘stone’ denotes
those from whom knowledge is away.

According another tradition ‘grain’ refers to the original clay (Teenat)
of the believer, in whom His love has been created and ‘stone’ refers to
the Teenat of an unbeliever. Allah brings life from the dead one means
that the Teenat differentiates an unbeliever from the believer and
according to another tradition He brings the believer out from the
‘loins’ of an unbeliever.

I have given the implicit explanation in *Biharul Anwar.*

Sixth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَصْحَابُ الْيَمِينِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْيَمِينِ. فِي سِدْرٍ مَخْضُودٍ.
وَطَلْحٍ مَنْضُودٍ. وَظِلٍّ مَمْدُودٍ. وَمَاءٍ مَسْكُوبٍ. وَفَاكِهَةٍ
كَثِيرَةٍ. لَا مَقْطُوعَةٍ وَلَا مَمْنُوعَةٍ. وَفُرُشٍ مَرْفُوعَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the companions of the right hand, how happy are the companions of
the right hand. Amid thorn less lote-trees and banana-trees (with
fruits) one above another. And extended shade, and water flowing
constantly, And abundant fruit, Neither intercepted nor forbidden, and
exalted thrones. (Surah Waqiah 56:27-36)***

There is a tradition in *Basairud Darajat* from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
all these refer to Imam (a.s.) and their sciences that benefit the
people.[^4]

Seventh verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَانِ الرَّحِيمِ. وَالتِّينِ وَالزَّيْتُونِ.
وَطُورِ سِينِينَ. وَهَذَا الْبَلَدِ الْأَمِينِ. لَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا
الْإِنسَانَ فِي أَحْسَنِ تَقْوِيمٍ. ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَاهُ أَسْفَلَ
سَافِلِينَ. إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ فَلَهُمْ
أَجْرٌ غَيْرُ مَمْنُونٍ. فَمَا يُكَذِّبُكَ بَعْدُ بِالدِّينِ. أَلَيْسَ
اللَّهُ بِأَحْكَمِ الْحَاكِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I swear by the fig and the olive, And mount Sinai, And this city made
secure, Certainly We created man in the best make.***

***Then We render him the lowest of the low. Except those who believe
and do good, so they shall have a reward never to be cut off. Then who
can give you the lie after (this) about the judgment? Is not Allah the
best of the Judges (Surah Tin 95:1-8)***

Commentators have said that Almighty Allah took the oath of Figs and
Olive because Fig is a pure fruit which gets digested soon and it is
medicinal too and has many uses and Olive is a fruit which is used to
make stew and it is a beneficial fruit.

Some have said that they are the names of two mountains.

And mount Sinai,

It is the mountain on which Prophet Moosa prayed.

And this city made secure,

It means the exalted Mecca.

Certainly We created man in the best make.

It means that We have created human beings implicitly and explicitly in
the best way.

Except those who believe and do good, so they shall have a reward never
to be cut off.

Then who can give you the lie after (this) about the judgment?

Strange things are narrated in the explanation of this Surah.

Ali Ibne Ibrahim narrates ‘Fig’ refers to the Holy Prophet (S) and
‘olive’ refers to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and ‘Mt. Sinai’ refers to Imams
Hasan and Husain (a.s.) and in this Surah ‘man’ refers to the first
unjust (caliph) who would go into the lowest compartment of Hell.

‘Except those who believe..’ refers to Amirul Momineen (a.s.). ‘so they
shall have a reward never to be cut off.’ means that Allah does not show
the obligation of the reward that He bestows. Thus Allah asks the
Prophet what all the people deny in the matter of religion? — it means
about the Imamate of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

Ibne Mahyar has through many sources narrated that ‘Fig’ refers to Hasan
(a.s.) and ‘olive’ refers to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and ‘the city made
secure’ refers to the Holy Prophet (S) because one who follows the
Prophet (S) becomes fearless of the punishment of Allah. ‘Certainly We
created man in the best make.’ refers to the first tyrant (caliph), from
whom Allah had taken the oath of His Lordship, the Messengership of
Muhammad (S) and the Imamate of his vicegerents, so he apparently
accepted those things, but afterwards he usurped the right of the Aale
Muhammad and did whatever injustice he liked upon them. So Allah has put
him in the lowest section of Hell.

Except those who believe and do good, so they shall have a reward never
to be cut off.

These denote Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and his Shias.

Then who can give you the lie after (this) about the judgment?

The Hazrat said that the verse was revealed in this way and ‘judgement’
refers to the Wilayat of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

There is a tradition in *Khisal* that ‘fig’ refers to Medina and ‘olive’
refers to Baitul Muqaddas and ‘Mt. Sinai’ is Kufa and ‘city made secure’
refers to Mecca.[^5]

[^1]: For details refer to Hayatul Qulub, Volume 1

[^2]: The writer says: On the basis explanations recorded in traditions
it is possible that the destruction of the town refers to their
spiritual destruction, their misguidance and deviation as they have
derived any benefit from the Silent Imam and the Talking Imam. These
explanations are based on the points stated earlier. The spiritual life
is compared to the apparent life and spiritual benefits are compared to
the physical benefits. Since all details are provided in Biharul Anwar
it is not possible to repeat them here.

[^3]: The writer says: From explanations recorded in traditions it is
possible that it is an indication towards good or bad; that a person
with good ‘teenat’ accepts the sciences of divine recognition and
accepts Allah’s graces in life, while those having a bad ‘teenat’ get
only ignorance and evil. They cannot benefit from the divine grace and
the guidance of Allah.

[^4]: The writer says: These explanations are deep and it is possible
that it may be that Paradise of the believers depends upon the
manifested Paradise, which would be bestowed by the Almighty in the
hereafter. Rather in this world too there is a spiritual Paradise for
them due to the blessings of the Holy Imams (a.s.) and they bestow the
shade of sympathy, help and intercession over the heads of the Shias,
and due to the spring of their knowledge and sciences the souls of the
believers become alive and the abundance of fruits are their different
types of wisdoms and recognition which are never ending and there is no
restriction for the Shias regarding them. ‘And exalted thrones’ refers
to their good manners and ethics, from which they acquire good manners
and happiness, and in the hereafter also their physical and spiritual
joy would increase as explained in Ainul Hayat and other books.

[^5]: The writer says: On the basis of explanations recorded in
traditions the word ‘teen’ (figs) refers to Imam Hasan (a.s.) because
the fig is the most delicious fruit and another tradition says that the
fig is the fruit of Paradise and it has many benefits and Imam Hasan
(a.s.) is created from the fruit of Paradise. It is the knowledge and
wisdom of the Prophet that reaches the world and increases the spirit of
the Shias. The olive denotes Imam Husain (a.s.) because it has many good
qualities. Fine oil is obtained from it that cures physical pains. In
the same way Imam Husain is the nearest one to Allah (the most loved
person) and his knowledge imparts strength to the hearts of the
believers and due to the Holy light of his Imamate which reached his
children and due to the Holy light of his children all the near
proximate ones of Allah get guidance. It is mentioned in the explanation
of the verse of Noor that Allah has compared his Holy light to the olive
and the ‘mountain’ refers to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) due to many reasons.
The first reason is that the merits of Imam Ali (a.s.) and his Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) were revealed to Moosa (a.s.) on this mountain as mentioned
in many traditions. The second reason is that Hazrat Moosa was having an
exalted status and was steadfast in religious affairs and in magnanimity
he was firm like a mountain. Thus on the day of his martyrdom Hazrat
Khizr (a.s.) addressed him: You were like a mountain in the matter of
religion— strong and firm and even the wind could not move it. In the
same way he was firm in belief in times of great calamities. The third
reason is that as mountains are pegs of the earth that hold it firm and
do not allow it to shake, in the same way as long as Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) or his descendants, the Holy Imams (a.s.), are present on the
earth, it would remain firm due to their blessings. As mentioned in many
traditions if the Imam is not there on the earth for a fraction of a
second, it would surely get destroyed. Shia and Sunni scholars narrate
that the Prophet (S) said: Ali is the peg of this earth due to which it
is firm and steady. The fourth reason is that the Prophet (S) is the
place where the holy lights are revealed, as it was the Mt. Sina. The
fifth reason is that the two sons of the Holy Prophet (S) are the
example of fig and olive. As the father so are the sons born through
him, and these two fruits grow best on mountains. The ‘secure city’
denotes the Prophet (S) for many reasons. Firstly, the Prophet (S) was a
resident of Mecca and the holiness of that place is due to his presence.
Secondly the Prophet (S) compared to other prophets is like Mecca having
superiority over other cities. Thirdly, one who brought faith on the
Holy Prophet (S) and his progeny entered the Wilayat (Mastership) of the
holy sanctuary and became fearless from the misguidance of this world
and punishment of the hereafter, in the same way as a person enters
Mecca becomes fearless about the problems and difficulties of this world
and if he enters with faith he would be saved from difficulties of both
the worlds. The Holy Prophet (S) said: I am the city of knowledge and
Ali is its door. Now all the explanations of those traditions, which I
had given earlier, can be understood easily. But ‘Insan’ denotes
‘na-naas’, and it is possible it is for the first one. The reason for
its revelation may that the verse is general or because he was the most
unjust one to enter the lowest position in Hell and the basis for the
evil of all his followers. Just as ‘those who believe’ denotes Ali
(a.s.) because he was the most perfect among believers and his faith
excelled over others. In this case the exception would be dropped. The
plural is used for respect or it includes all other Holy Imams (a.s.).
Allah knows best.


