Part 2: The Imam should be Infallible (inerrant-sinless) from all sins
======================================================================

We should know that the Imamite scholars have all agreed that an Imam is
always immaculate from all small or big sins right from his childhood to
the end of his life. He commits no sin either wilfully or by mistake.
None except Ibne Babawayh and his teacher Muhammad bin Al Hasan (r.a.)
have differed from this opinion. These gentlemen have justified that
excepting the Divine Commandments and the propagation of Divine
Messages, it is permissible that due to some hidden wisdom they (Imams)
can commit a sahv (slight oversight).

For example Sahv is allowed in Prayer and all other worship acts. But
white explaining or describing of the orders (divine) and in the
propagation of the divine message, they do not admit any kind of mistake
on the part of Imam. Excepting the Ismailis all Islamic sects do not
consider infallibility as a condition of Imamate.

According to the Imamis there are many logical as well as Naqali
(narrative) arguments in support of this belief. Some of them have been
described in volume one. Yet we quote some arguments below:

First Argument
--------------

The Imam is appointed because the people can make a mistake. So there
must be someone to protect them. But if that person were also likely to
make mistake then he too will be in need of another Imam, leader or
guide. Therefore it will require either continuity of such appointments
which is impossible or, ultimately, such an Imam will have to be there
who cannot err and then only will he be the Imam.

Second Argument
---------------

The Imam is the guardian or protector of the Shariat because the Holy
Quran does not contain details of the Shariat rules. Similarly each and
every detail of Divine code of conduct cannot be drawn from the Sunnah
and traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) nor can they be known through the
Ijma (consensus) of the Ummah. It is so because, in a gathering wherein
there is no Imam, and when everyone can err the entire gathering of such
fallible persons can also err. The required details cannot be known from
Qiyas (analogy) because, in arguments, in principles, deeds done
according it have been proved wrong.

Even if it is taken for granted it is impossible to guard and guide all
the orders of the Shariat nor of the original clearance
(Baraat-e-Asaliyah) because had it been possible to be acted upon it,
the appointment of prophet would not have been necessary. Therefore the
Shariat cannot be protected without an Imam. If it is believed that he
can also make a mistake then his word cannot be relied upon in the
matter of worship and responsibility fixed by Allah, and this is against
the aim of takleef (responsibility viz. the obedience of Divine
Commandments).

Third Argument
--------------

That if he can make a mistake then people must deny him, and this is
against his obedience being compulsory, vide Divine commandments:

***Obey Allah and obey the messenger and the Ulil Amr (those in command)
in you.*** **(Sura Nisa 4:59)**

Moreover, if he is not Infallible, it is possible that he may order a
sin and may prevent from Allah’s obedience and the people will have to
obey him and by obeying him in a sinful act it will result in one and
the same act being a worship on one hand and an offence on the other.
This is not possible.

Fourth Argument
---------------

That if he can make an offence then the aim of the appointment of an
Imam and the obedience of his words and deeds will become invalid and
this is against the appointments of an Imam. In short, it is not
possible to collect all the arguments based on reason in this book. So
whatever has been mentioned in the beginning of this book and also here
is enough for the purpose of the subject.

The Ahle Sunnat scholars that do not believe that an Imam must be
Infallible and also believe that oppression and wrongdoing cannot
nullify Imamate. That is why, they believe in the Imamate of the caliphs
of Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas despite their tyranny, injustices and
oppression. One of their famous scholars even says that an Imam cannot
be dismissed due to his oppression and injustice and Mulla Sa’duddin who
has written an explanatory book about his beliefs argues that, after the
rightly guided caliphs (Khulafaa-e-Raashideen) the Imams committed
injustice and tyranny though the earlier people were obedient and
submissive to them. Then he further explains that the wise men of the
Ummah have agreed upon the eligibility of the caliphs of Bani Abbas.

Then Mulla Sa’duddin writes in *Sharhe Maqasid* that Imamate gets
established through force and power even if he is a wrongdoer and a
sinner. Then he writes that if someone becomes an Imam by force and
thereafter someone else overpowers him and dismisses him then the latter
one (who overpowers the former) will become the Imam. These are
senseless words. Which wise one will believe that Imam can be a man of
the Hell? Allah has said that a transgressor is a man of Hell. At one
place He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ فَسَقُوا فَمَأْوَاهُمْ النَّارُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And as for those who transgress, their abode is the fire;*** **(Sura
Sajdah 32:20)**

At another place Allah says: do not rely on the news given by a
transgressor:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنْ جَاءَكُمْ فَاسِقٌ بِنَبَإٍ
فَتَبَيَّنُوا أَنْ تُصِيبُوا قَوْمًا بِجَهَالَةٍ فَتُصْبِحُوا عَلَى
مَا فَعَلْتُمْ نَادِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! If an evil-doer comes to you with a report, look
carefully into it, lest you harm a*** ***people in ignorance, then be
sorry for what you have done.*** **(Sura Hujurat:6)**

and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْفَاسِقِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah does not guide the transgressing people.*** **(Sura
Munafiqoon 63:6)**

So when it is proved that Infallibility is a condition for an Imam then
the Imamate of the first caliph became invalid because all agree that he
was not infallible and the Imamate of Amirul Momineen is proved correct
indirectly because the entire Ummah agrees that, after the Holy Prophet
(S), Imamate was disputed between Amirul Momineen and Abu Bakr and if
that of one is not proved, necessarily that of the other is confirmed.

It must be known that those who believe in Infallibility have disputed
whether the Infallible has control over his act of Infallibility or not.
So those who believe that the Imam has no control, some of them say
these is a speciality in the body or spirit of the Imam which demands
that it is impossible for the Imam to sin. Some say that to be able to
obey and not to be able to disobey (sin) is Infallibility.

Most of the scholars believe that Imam can sin (is able to sin) and some
of them have defined Infallibility saying that it is a favor of Allah
which brings a servant near obedience because of which a servant cannot
go forward in sinning, provided that it does not extend to the extent of
atheism and compulsion and coercion and some have said that it is a
spiritual power and that whosever attains it cannot commit a sin and
some have said that it is a Divine favor on a servant because of which
he cannot entertain a wish to disobey and to sin and that there are four
reasons for it:

*First*: There is such a speciality in his heart or body which gives him
power that prevents him from sinning and committing offences.

*Second*: He gets knowledge of the harms of sinning and blessings of
obedience.

*Third*: Being subordinate to Wahy (revelation) and Ilhaam (inspiration)
this knowledge becomes more effective.

*Fourth*: Allah’s arresting him on account of doing an undesirable thing
and of avoiding a desirable thing so that he may know that when Allah
catches hold of him because of avoiding non-obligatory deeds He would
surely not be lenient to him in the matter of obligatory duties, that
is, in avoiding compulsory things and indulging in prohibited matters.

In short, when these qualities join together in somebody he will be
sinless and it is true that his strength is not wasted in sinful deeds
otherwise he would not be worthy of praise for giving up sins. For him
there will be neither reward nor chastisement. In such circumstance he
will get out of responsibility. This is wrong according to Divine
principles and consensus of scholars.

Moreover, in these circumstances Infallibility will not have any
distinction or perfection and grace, because, in that case only he will
be Infallible whom Allah will put under pressure (no free will).
Research shows that it is because of man’s intelligence and wisdom and
maximum engagement in worship and self-discipline and Allah’s guidance
that man reaches a stage where his total attention is only to his Lord
of Lords; rather his heart becomes totally devoid of personal wishes and
desires as has been mentioned in the Divine Verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You do not desire anything except what Allah wants…*** **(Sura Insan
76:30)**

And, the servant sees through My eyes and hears with My ears and walks
with My legs*.* In this state it is impossible for one to give up
worship, indulging in sins and even avoiding a desired thing For
example, suppose there is a man who enjoys maximum love and kindness and
gifts and reward from the king. At the same time he is also well
convinced of the king’s power and strength and also loves the king
wholeheartedly. In these circumstances it is impossible for such person
to do anything against the liking of the king even if that thing is very
easy for three reasons:

*First* - extreme love, because, when a lover reaches the truth of love
it becomes totally impossible for him to do anything against the liking
of his beloved.

*Second* - feeling of shame and modesty, which does not allow him to go
against the wish of the beloved even in the absence of the latter. How
then will he do anything disliked by the beloved in his presence?

*Third* - fear and fright, because despite this speciality and ability
and free will if he does not care for His pleasure he would certainly be
liable to His wrath and he would not be safe from extreme punishment. In
the case of such a person which punishment can be more than a change in
love and being degraded from the position of nearness. It is quite clear
that it is impossible for such a person to do anything sinful.
Compulsion (Jabr) is also impossible because compulsion is a state
wherein man’s power and intention has no scope at all. At this stage
such a man’s ability and strength is never less than any other’s as is
the case with all sinners. For example, they can go forward in drinking
wine. An Infallible also has this strength (ability) and can do so.
Therefore, there is not even an iota of compulsion here. The verses
which prove the existence of Imam include the one in which Allah
Almighty has addressed Ibrahim (a.s.) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا قَالَ وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي قَالَ لَا
يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely I will make you an Imam of men.*** **(Sura Baqarah 2:124)**

Ibrahim said: And of my offspring?

My covenant does not include the unjust, said He.

Every sinner is oppressing his own self. Many traditions about
Infallibility have been quoted in the first volume of this book.

Ibne Babawayh has, in his book *Khisal*, writes under the Tafsir of the
captioned verse that a man who had ever worshipped idols and who had,
even for a second, made anything or anybody a partner of Allah is not
qualified for being an Imam, even if he had become a Muslim thereafter.
The definition of injustice or oppression is to put or place anything at
an improper or unfitting place, and the greatest injustice is to make
anyone or anything a partner of Allah. Allah Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الشِّرْكَ لَظُلْمٌ عَظِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely polytheism is the greatest injustice*****. (Sura Luqman
31:13)**

Similarly, unfit for Imamate is one who had ever committed a prohibited
deed, be it small or big; even if he had repented thereafter. And a man
who was ever convicted cannot convict anyone else. Thereafter it is
essential that an Imam must be Infallible and this Infallibility cannot
be known unless it is declared by Allah through a messenger in explicit
wording because such declaration (Nass) is not visible in creation like
whiteness or blackness etc. rather it is a hidden thing which is unknown
except when shown by Allah Who knows the unseen. Traditions relating to
this matter have also been quoted in the first volume of this book.

Ibne Babawayh has, in *Uyoon Akhbar Ar Ridha,* reported from Imam Ridha
(a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

Whoever wants to see and touch the tree of red ruby which has been
planted by Almighty’s own hand himself should believe in the Imamate of
Ali (a.s.) and his sons because they are the Imams who have been, among
the creations, selected by Allah and are free from every sin and fault.

Moreover, he has in most of his books, reported from Hasan bin Umair
that: During the companionship of Hisham bin Hakam, I have not obtained
anything better than this. One day I asked him whether an Imam is
Infallible. He replied: Yes. I asked him on which argument should he be
considered Infallible? He replied: There are always four reasons for the
commitment of a sin and never a fifth one. The four things are greed,
envy, anger and passion. An Imam has none of them. It is not possible
that an Imam can be greedy of the world because the entire world is
under him and he is the treasurer of Muslims so for what will he have
any greed? He cannot be envious also because a man envies the one who is
higher than him. So when no one is higher than Imam why should he envy
anyone?

Thirdly it is not possible that he should be angry about any worldly
thing as his anger is only for the sake of Allah because Allah had
appointed him to maintain limits (divine commands), that is, no one can
ever come in the way of the issuance of divine commands and in the
Divine religion mercy does not prevent the issuance of commands
(punishments).

Fourth it is not possible that an Imam may submit himself to the worldly
pleasures and passions and to adopt the world instead of the Hereafter
because Allah has made the Hereafter the most beloved thing in his eyes
just as this world is dear to us. So the Imam fixes his eyes only on the
Hereafter as our eyes are focused on this world. Have you ever seen
anybody who rejects a beautiful face for the sake an ugly one or who
gives up eating tasty foods for the sake of bitter things or who may
leave soft dress in exchange of coarse clothing and who rejects the
everlasting blessing and picks up a passing one?

In *Maniul Akhbar,* Imam Zainul Aabedeen (a.s.) is quoted saying that an
Imam is always Infallible and that Infallibility is not an apparent
creation which can be seen. So Imam can be only one who has been
appointed through a Nass (clear statement) by Allah and His messenger.
People asked: O son of the prophet! Then what is the meaning of
Infallible? He said: Infallible is the one who is Motasim (immune from
sin) and who clings to the rope of Allah and the rope of Allah is the
Holy Quran and the Imam. The Imam and the Quran will not depart from one
another till the Day of Qiyamat. The Imam guides people towards the
Quran and the Quran directs people to the Imam. The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَذَا الْقُرْآنَ يَهْدِي لِلَّتِي هِيَ أَقْوَمُ وَيُبَشِّرُ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ الَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ الصَّالِحَاتِ أَنَّ لَهُمْ
أَجْرًا كَبِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely this Quran guides to that which is most upright and gives good
news to the believers who do good that they shall have a great
reward.*** **(Sura Isra 17:9)**

That is, the path of following and believing in the true Imams.[^1]

It is also narrated that once Hisham bin Hakam asked about the meaning
of Infallible from Imam Sadiq (a.s.). He replied: Infallible is the one
who, by the guidance of Allah, prevents himself from all those things
which have been prohibited by Allah. Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَعْتَصِمْ بِاللَّهِ فَقَدْ هُدِيَ إِلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever holds fast to Allah, he indeed is guided to the right
path.*** **(Sura Ali-Imran 3:101)**

According to the hidden meaning (Ta’wil) explained by Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
the meaning of this verse is: A man who, under Allah’s Guidance, keeps
himself safe from every sin is doubtlessly guided towards the Right
Path,’

Karajiki has, in *Kanzul Fawaid*, reports from the Messenger of Allah
that he says: Jibraeel (a.s.) has informed me that the writers (two
angels appointed for recording the deeds) of Amirul Momineen say that
ever since we are with Hazrat we had found no occasion to write any sin
committed by him.

And he has, through the Ahle Sunnat sources, narrated that Ammar Yasir
said: the Holy Prophet (S) said: Those angels who are writing the deeds
of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) feel proud over all other writers of deeds
because they are in company of the one, none of whose deeds which we
took to sky was ever to the dislike of Allah.

It is mentioned in *Aqaide Imamiyah* that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said to
A’mash that all the messengers and all the Wasis (legatees) are clean of
sins and of all undesirable (lowly) habits.

It is mentioned in the *Aqaide Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)* that Imam Ridha (a.s.)
had written to Mamoon Rashid that Allah never makes it obligatory for
the creation to obey a man about whom He knows that he will become
disbeliever (apostate) and who will worship Him while obeying the devil.

It is written in *Ilalush Sharai* with reliable chains of narrators
through Sulaym Ibne Qays Hilali that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

Obedience of only Allah and the Messenger and the Ulil Amr is obligatory
and the obedience of the Ulil Amr is ordered only because they are pure
of sins and clean of evils, that is, only because they are thus
Infallible and never order to disobey Allah.

Shaykh Tabarsi has in *Majalis* and Ibne Maghazali Shafei has, through
Ahle Sunnat sources, reported from Ibne Masood that the Holy Prophet (S)
said:

I am the supplication (dua) of my father Ibrahim (a.s.).

I asked: O Prophet of Allah! How are you his Dua? The Prophet (S)
replied:

The Lord Almighty revealed to Ibrahim (a.s.): ‘I am going to make you
the Imam of the people. Ibrahim (a.s.) became very pleased to hear this
and wishing this rank also to remain in his progeny, he prayed for it.
Allah revealed: I will not give you any promise that I may not fulfil?
Ibrahim (a.s.) asked: O Lord! What is that promise which You do not wish
to fulfil? Allah said: I will not give the word that I will make anyone
from your progeny who is a tyrant an Imam. Ibrahim (a.s.) asked: O Lord!
Who is that tyrant who will not be an Imam? Allah replied: Anyone who
may have prostrated before an idol. I will never make such a person an
Imam. Then Ibrahim (a.s.) prayed:

***‘Protect me and my progeny from worshipping idols. O Lord, these
idols have misguided many people. (Sura Ibrahim 14:35-36)***

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

Thereafter the prayer of Ibrahim (a.s.) extended upto me and my brother
Ali (a.s.) because neither of us have at any time bowed before an idol.
So Allah made me the messenger and Ali my legatee.

Ibne Babawayh has quoted Ibne Abbas saying that he said: I have heard
the Holy Prophet (S) saying:

I, Ali, Hasan, Husain and nine sons of Husain (a.s.) are clean of every
defect and are Infallible (clean) of sins.

Ayyashi and others have narrated from Safwan Jamal that he said: We were
in Mecca when there began a discussion about the meaning of the
captioned verses. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:

Allah has concluded Imamate by Muhammad (S) and Ali (a.s.) and sons of
Ali (a.s.) saying that

***Offspring one of the other; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.*** **(Sura
Ali-Imran 3:34)**

And then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا قَالَ وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي قَالَ لَا
يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely I will make you an Imam of men. Ibrahim said: And of my
offspring? My covenant does not include the unjust, said He*****. (Sura
Baqara 2:124)**

Ibrahim (a.s.) said: O Lord! Fulfil the promise soon which You have
given to me about Muhammad (S) and Ali (a.s.) and make haste in aiding
and assisting them. This is an indication towards the Lord’s words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَرْغَبُ عَنْ مِلَّةِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ إِلَّا مَنْ سَفِهَ نَفْسَهُ
وَلَقَدْ اصْطَفَيْنَاهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَإِنَّهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ لَمِنْ
الصَّالِحِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And who forsakes the religion of Ibrahim but he who makes himself a
fool, and most certainly We chose him in this world, and in the
hereafter he is most surely among the righteous.*** **(Sura Baqarah
2:130)**

What it conveys is that who is there who will go against the religion
(Millat) of Ibrahim (a.s.) except who makes himself unwise and
senseless? Verily We have selected him in this world and, in the
Hereafter too, he is among the gentlemen. The Hazrat said: here Millat
means Imamate. When Ibrahim (a.s.) made his progeny to live in Mecca he
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا إِنِّي أَسْكَنتُ مِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي بِوَادٍ غَيْرِ ذِي زَرْعٍ
عِنْدَ بَيْتِكَ الْمُحَرَّمِ رَبَّنَا لِيُقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ فَاجْعَلْ
أَفْئِدَةً مِنْ النَّاسِ تَهْوِي إِلَيْهِمْ وَارْزُقْهُمْ مِنْ
الثَّمَرَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O our Lord! Surely I have settled a part of my offspring in a valley
unproductive of fruit near Thy Sacred House, our Lord! That they may
keep up prayer; therefore make the hearts of some people yearn towards
them and provide them with fruits…*** **(Sura Ibrahim 14:37)**

At another place it is mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ رَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَذَا بَلَدًا آمِنًا وَارْزُقْ
أَهْلَهُ مِنْ الثَّمَرَاتِ مَنْ آمَنَ مِنْهُمْ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ
الْآخِرِ قَالَ وَمَنْ كَفَرَ فَأُمَتِّعُهُ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ أَضْطَرُّهُ
إِلَى عَذَابِ النَّارِ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when Ibrahim said: My Lord, make it a secure town and provide its
people with fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and the last day.
He said: And whoever disbelieves, I will grant him enjoyment for a short
while, then I will drive him to the chastisement of the fire; and it is
an evil destination.*** **(Sura Baqarah 2:126)**

The apparent translation of the first verse is: ‘O Lord! I have made
some of my family members (progeny) to live near Your Holy House in such
a desert where no vegetation grows. O our Lord! So that they may
maintain Prayer. So make people’s hearts incline towards them and
provide fruits to them.

The translation of the other verse is: O Lord! Make this city a place of
peace and provide fruits to its inhabitants who may believe in Allah and
in the Day of Justice. The Hazrat said: When Ibrahim (a.s.) reserved
this prayer in favor of only believers fearing that, like the request
about Imamate, this prayer may also not be answered in favor of all
residents (of Mecca) as Allah has said: This promise of Mine will not
include the oppressor. In short, Allah said:

***I will give little provision only in this worldly life to the one who
will become disbeliever (unbelievers), then I will torture him through a
painful punishment of Hell which is a very bad place of return. (Sura
Baqarah 2:126)***

When Allah said this, Ibrahim (a.s.) asked: Who are those whose return
will be to Hell? Allah revealed to him that they will be tyrant caliphs
and their followers.

Kulaini, Shaykh Mufeed and others have narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
that the Lord of the universe has mentioned Ibrahim’s (a.s.) servanthood
before his Prophethood and called him a Rasool before calling him a
Prophet and He made him His Rasool before making him His Khaleel and
made him His Khaleel before making him Imam. So, when He gave him these
five high ranks then said: I made you Imam of the people.

So as in the sight of Ibrahim (a.s.) this rank appeared very high he
wished that this grace should not be detached from his progeny, he said:
O Lord! Give this Grace to people of my progeny also. Allah replied:
This promise of Mine will not apply to oppressors. Imam (a.s.) said: A
fool and a senseless man cannot be the leader of people.

It has also been narrated from the Infallible Imam (a.s.) that there are
four ranks of Prophets and Messengers:

*First*: there is the one who is a prophet only for himself and who does
not preach to others. He sees an angel in the sleep but not when awake
and hears only the voice of the angel and he is not appointed over
others and an Imam oversees him. For example Lut (a.s.) whose Imam was
Ibrahim (a.s.).

*Second*: A prophet who sees the angel both in sleep and when awake. He
also hears his voice. He is appointed over a group, be it a big group or
a small one. Allah Almighty says about Yunus (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَرْسَلْنَاهُ إِلَى مِائَةِ أَلْفٍ أَوْ يَزِيدُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We sent him towards a hundred thousand or more people. And there
was an Imam over him*****. (Sura Saffat 37:147)**

Third: The prophet who sees in dream and hears the voice also of the
angel and himself is an Imam. In the beginning Ibrahim (a.s.) was a
prophet, not an Imam until Allah told him: I have made you an Imam of
the people, and when he made a request regarding his progeny Allah said:
My Covenant shall not reach the unjust: meaning a man who will worship
any idol or a picture or a figure (cannot be an Imam).

Thalabi has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Allah has, by
saying Rijs (impurity), which is doubt and sin, hinted towards Ahlul
Bayt’s (a.s.) being pure (clean). He has said in the verse of
purification:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying*****. (Sura Ahzab
33:33)**

Muhammad Bin Abbas and Ibne Mahyar have, in their Tafsir, narrated from
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: The Lord of the Worlds does not leaves
us to our own condition. If He leaves us to ourselves, we also may
become like others in the matter of sin and error. But Allah has said
about us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Call upon Me, I will answer you*****. (Sura Ghafir 40:60)**

That is, Allah answers whatever supplication we make.[^2]

[^1]: The writer says: The explanation of Ismat which has been mentioned
as clinging to the rope of Allah is to show that Allah is to save him
from sins due to his clinging to the Quran or it means that the
Infallible about whom Allah has said that he is clinging to the Holy
Quran, that is he acts according to the whole Quran and knows the
meaning and purport of the entire (whole) Quran.

[^2]: The writer says: It must be understood that Scholars of the
Imamiyah have unanimously agreed about the Infallibility of the pure
Imams from all kinds of sins. But in many prayers, especially in the
supplication of Sahifa Kamilah, confession of Imams about sins has been
mentioned and is some traditions also there is a mention of some matters
similar to sins. This can be explained with some reasons: First:
Sometimes committing a detestable deed and giving up of recommended
(Mustahab) deed is also called a sin. Rather sometimes doing some
admissible deeds, due to the high rank of the doer and the lowliness of
that deed, is considered a sin. Hence the author of Kashful Ghummah has
said that most of their (Imam’s) time is passed in the remembrance of
Allah and in Maraqaba-e-Ilaahi (watchfulness) and their hearts are
attached to the residents of the heavens and so, when they get lowered
from this rank and indulge in acts like eating and drinking and
copulating and all other admissible things their deeds are called sins
and so they do Isteghfar (seek forgiveness). Do you not see that when
slaves incline towards such things before their masters it results in
the condemnation by the latter and therefore they will beg pardon for
it. Second: When they engage themselves in social affairs and family
member’s education etc. activities, which, of course, is a God-given
responsibility, and thereafter they turn towards remembrance of Allah
with prayers and supplication etc., which indeed is a higher thing, they
imagine it as a shortcoming and hence they again indulge in seeking
forgiveness and pardon by weeping. Again this state too develops with
Allah’s permission. This condition is, for example, like that of servant
who remains always in the court of the king who is sent, by the king
himself for some work away from him, which naturally results in being
distanced from his beloved king. Thereafter, when he returns to the
king, he thinks himself guilty of being away from his king. Third: As
their knowledge and distinction and sinlessness is entirely due to the
Grace and blessing of Allah, they duly feel that, had it not been for
the kindness of Allah, they too might have slipped into sins and errors.
So they say from the depths of their hearts: O Allah! Had it not been
for Your mercy we also would have erred. Fourth: Since the stages of
knowledge (Ma’refat) are countless and as the Prophets, saints, Walis
and legatees are always progressing constantly towards perfection,
whenever they, even for a moment, engage in any other work, they
consider it their shortcoming in the matter in their constant worship
and thereafter seek forgiveness. The Holy Prophet’s (S) assertion that
he seeks forgiveness seventy times a day, hints towards this state of
mind and heart. Fifth: Since the Imams have a perfect understanding and
awareness of Allah and they, more than all others, find themselves
grateful to Allah for His blessings and bounties, they, despite all
their continuous worships and prayers, find themselves defective and
below the desired level of obedience and so they go on seeking pardon
from Him imagining their shortcoming as sin. [Except the cause number
one above, all other explanations are the result of my own defective
reasoning (Author)]. I believe that anyone who has tasted even a drop of
the drink of love will testify to them. Ibne Babawayh has in Risala
Aqaid, said that the prophets, messengers and Imams are totally sinless
and faultless and they can never indulge in any big or small sin. They
never disobey Allah’s command and do only their duty imposed by Allah.
The one who does not accept their sinlessness has not recognized them.
It is our firm belief that, from the beginning to the end, in their
conditions they are perfect in their knowledge and that they have no
defect like ignorance, shortcomings and disobedience etc.


