Part 29: The Imams are 'those who examine'
==========================================

The Imams are ‘those who examine’. They can glance at a person and come
to know whether he is a believer or not

The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely in this are signs for those who examine. (Surah Hijr 15:75)***

The above verses are mentioned after the story of Lut (a.s.). The
commentators have said it means: We have mentioned about the destruction
of the people of Lut, in which there are signs for those who thinks and
ponder and those who derive lesson from it. Some of them said that
‘those who examine’ are those who recognize things through signs and
marks and understand the things through intelligence and insight.

There is a tradition from the Holy Prophet (S) that: Beware of the
sagacity of a believer because he sees with the Light of Allah.

It is narrated from the Prophet that he said: There are some servants of
Allah who know people through their knowledge and insight then the
Hazrat recited this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهَا لَبِسَبِيلٍ مُقِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And surely it is on a road that still abides. (Surah Hijr 15:76)***

It means that the town of the people of Lut which is between Medina and
Syria is on your straight path.

Kulaini, *Basair,* *Manaqib* and the *Tafsir* of Ayyashi and Ali Ibne
Ibrahim and all the books quote many traditions from the Infallibles
(a.s.) that: We are ‘those who examine’ and the way of Paradise and till
Qiyamat we are the ‘road that still abides’ and is firm.

In *Uyoon Akhbar Ridha* it is narrated that people asked the Imam that
what is the source through which you make people aware about the things
that are in their hearts. He said: May be you have not heard that the
Holy Prophet (S) said: Be afraid of the sagacity of the believer as he
sees through the light of Allah.

The narrator said: Yes O Hazrat I have heard it. He said: There is no
believer but that there is a sagacity in him and through whatever amount
of light of faith and intelligence that he possess he sees by the light
of Allah. And the Almighty Allah has gathered all the sagacity in us
that is distributed to all the believers in small measure and has said
in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely in this are signs for those who examine. (Surah Hijr 15:75)***

So the first of ‘those who examine’ was the Holy Prophet (S); after him
was Amirul Momineen (a.s.) then Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) and after
Husain (a.s.) the purified Imams (a.s.) from his descendants, till the
day of Judgement.

In *Basair* and *Ikhtisas* Abdul Rahman bin Kathir has narrated, that: I
went for Hajj with Imam Sadiq (a.s.). On the way the Hazrat went on a
mountain and looked towards the people and said: So many people are
reciting the ‘talbiya’ but of them there are very few whose Hajj is
accepted. Abi Sulaiman said: O Son of the Messenger of Allah (S) would
the prayers of all the people that we see be accepted by Allah? Hazrat
replied: Allah will not forgive the sins of those who have committed
polytheism, and the one who denies the Wilayat and Imamate of Ali
(a.s.), is like an idol-worshipper.

The narrator said: May I be sacrificed on you, do you recognize your
friend and your enemy? Hazrat replied: Woe upon you, when a child is
born, it is written between his two eyes. And whoever comes to us with
our Wilayat we see on his forehead where ‘believer’ is written and when
a person comes to us with our enmity ‘disbeliever’ is written on his
forehead, which we can read. We are ‘those who examine’, and Allah has
said in our praise:

***Surely in this are signs for those who examine. (Surah Hijr 15:75)***

And we recognize our friends and foes by this very sagacity.

Also in *Basair* and other books it is narrated that a person came to
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and posed a question. The Hazrat gave him the answer,
then another person came and asked the same question and the Hazrat gave
a different answer. Then a third person came and the Imam give him a
reply different from the first and the second one, then said: The
Almighty Allah has left upon us the affairs of the creatures on us and
we give them the reply according to their capability and understanding,
in the same way Allah had given Hazrat Sulaiman the authority over the
world and had said:

***This is Our free gift, therefore give freely or withhold, without
reckoning. (Surah Sad 38:39)***

The verse is in this way in the recitation of Ali. The narrator asked
that whether Imam knows about the religion and capability of each person
due to which he gives the suitable answer. Hazrat asked in surprised:
Glory be to Allah! May be you have not read the book of Allah that says:

***And surely it is on a road that still abides. (Surah Hijr 15:76)***

It means that these signs are on the path that abides and they remain
established that no one could go out of their circle, that is they are
with Imamate and Imamate can never go out of the circle of Ahlul Bayt.
Then he said: When the Imam sees anyone, he recognizes him. He knows his
colour and type, if he listens to his voice from behind the wall, then
also he recognizes him and comes to know who and what it is. He knows
his qualities because Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ خَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلَافُ
أَلْسِنَتِكُمْ وَأَلْوَانِكُمْ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ
لِلْعَالِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and
the diversity of your tongues and colors; most surely there are signs in
this for the learned. (Surah Rum 30:22)***

The Imam said: The Imams are the ‘learned’ whom Allah has mentioned in
this verse and the Imam knows the language of all the tribes and
communities and also knows whether the person who is speaking would get
salvation or go to Hell. That is why he gives a reply according to the
capability and condition of that person.

Also in *Basair* there is a tradition from Imam Ridha (a.s.) that he
said: We have eyes which are not like those of the common people. There
is a light in our eyes, in which there is no partnership of the Satan.

Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) in the explanation of this
verse that he said: Surely in the Imam there are certain conditions for
‘those who examine’. The Imam is firm on the right path and sees through
that Noor (light) which Allah has bestowed to his eyes and he speaks
from Allah and things are not concealed from him for whatever he
intends.

In *Basair, Ikhtisas* and other books there is a tradition from Imam
Baqir (a.s.) that one day Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was present in the
mosque of Kufa when suddenly a woman arrived, who had had a fight with
her husband. The Hazrat judged in favor of the husband. The woman (may
curse of Allah be upon her) said: By Allah! It is not like a right
judgement that you have given. You have to be equitable and must not do
injustice in your kingdom. You judgement was not liked by Allah.

Ali (a.s.) because angry and glared at her once and said: O audacious
woman! O the abusing one! O one that utters nonsense! O one that does
not menstruate like other women. When that cursed woman heard these
words, she turned and ran away saying: Woe upon me, woe upon me. The son
of Abu Talib revealed the things that were concealed and insulted me.

Seeing this Umar Ibne Harith, a leader of the Khawarij who was present
there ran after her and said: In the beginning I was pleased when you
spoke to the son of Abu Talib in that manner, but when he told you
something you started making a hue and cry? The woman said: By Allah, he
said those things about me that no one knew. I always menstruate from
behind.

After listening to this the cursed man came to Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
and said: O son of Abu Talib what was this fortune-telling that you did
to the woman? Hazrat replied: O son of Hurais it was not
fortune-telling, that some Jinn has informed. Indeed, two thousand years
before creating this world the Creator of the spirits before He placed
the spirits in the bodies, He wrote between their two eyes whether it is
a believer or a disbeliever and has also written all that which would
afflict him and all their good and bad things, also their record of
deeds has been written; whether that person is a believer or a
disbeliever and all those things that will afflict him. Then He also
revealed upon His Messenger the following verse:

***Surely in this are signs for those who examine. (Surah Hijr 15:75)***

The Holy Prophet (S) was of ‘those who examine’ and after him I am of
‘those who examine’. That is why when I looked at the forehead of that
woman her all conditions were revealed to me.[^1]

[^1]: The writer says: There are many traditions on this topic and they
are all explained in Biharul Anwar. According to most explanations
‘this’ denotes Quran. Sabeel points towards the Imam and in some
instance it is the way towards Paradise.


