Part 30: The last verses of Surah Furqan points to the Imams
============================================================

The interpretation of the last verses of Surah Furqan points towards the
Imams

Almighty Allah says in Surah Furqan:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِبَادُ الرَّحْمَانِ الَّذِينَ يَمْشُونَ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ هَوْنًا
وَإِذَا خَاطَبَهُمْ الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلَامًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the servants of the Beneficent God are they who walk on the earth
in humbleness, and when the ignorant address them, they say: Peace.
(Surah Furqan 25:63)***

Ali Ibne Ibrahim, Kulaini, Ibne Mahyar and others have narrated from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that these verse were revealed in praise of
the Imams (a.s.).

It means that in return of their ignorance they say something that keeps
them safe from sins or say something good to them or salutes them.

According to traditions this was also revealed in praise of the legatees
who do goodness with the enemy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَبِيتُونَ لِرَبِّهِمْ سُجَّدًا وَقِيَامًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they who pass the night prostrating themselves before their Lord
and standing. (Surah Furqan 25:64)***

Traditions say that this verse was revealed in praise of the Holy Imams
(a.s.) and Barqi in *Mahasin* from Sulaiman Ibne Khalid has narrated
that while reading Quran, when he reached this verse of Surah Furqan:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَدْعُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَهًا آخَرَ وَلَا يَقْتُلُونَ
النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا يَزْنُونَ
وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ يَلْقَ أَثَامًا. يُضَاعَفْ لَهُ الْعَذَابُ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَيَخْلُدْ فِيهِ مُهَانًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they who do not call upon another god with Allah and do not slay
the soul, which Allah has forbidden except in the requirements of
justice, and (who) do not commit fornication and he who does this shall
find a requital of sin. The punishment shall be doubled to him on the
day of resurrection, and he shall abide therein in abasement; (Surah
Furqan 25:68-69)***

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said these verses were revealed for us. And by Allah,
He has advised us although He knew we would never commit fornication.
Sulaiman says then I read this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا مَنْ تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ عَمَلًا صَالِحًا فَأُوْلَئِكَ
يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَاتٍ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا
رَحِيمًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Except him who repents and believes and does a good deed; so these
are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones… (Surah
Furqan 25:70)***

The Imam said: Wait! This verse was revealed for you Shias. Surely a
sinner believer will be brought on the day of judgement. He would be
made to account before Him, and made to count all his sins one by one
and would be told, you did that sin at that time. He would accept: Yes,
I have done them. At that time Allah, the most forgiving, would tell
him: I have concealed all your sins in the world and did not defame you
and today I forgive all of them. Then He would command the angels to
erase his sins and write rewards and worship instead. After that He
would raise his record of deeds, so that all can see it. At that time
people would exclaim in surprise: Glory be to Allah. There is not one
sin in his record. This is the meaning of Allah’s statement:

***…so these are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good
ones…(Surah Furqan 25:70)***

The Shaykh has narrated in *Amali* similarly from the Hazrat. Imam said
at end of the tradition that this verse was revealed for our sinner
Shias.

In *Basair* it is narrated from the same Imam that the Holy Prophet (S)
said: One who brings faith on their Wilayat and remains away from their
enemy, Allah will forgive their minor and major sins and convert their
sins into rewards.

There are many traditions on this topic that we shall mention at some
other place. Insha Allah.

Sulaiman has said in the tradition of *Mahasin* that I read the
remaining verses till I reached the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَشْهَدُونَ الزُّورَ وَإِذَا مَرُّوا بِاللَّغْوِ
مَرُّوا كِرَامًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they who do not bear witness to what is false, and when they pass
by what is vain, they pass by nobly. (Surah Furqan 25:72)***

It means that those who are not present in the gathering where music is
played and vain things are done or do not give false witness, when they
pass through useless and meaningless things, they pass with demeanour
and do not pay any heed to them. When I read this verse the Hazrat said:
This verse is in our praise and our qualities are mentioned in it. After
that I read this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِّرُوا بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ لَمْ يَخِرُّوا
عَلَيْهَا صُمًّا وَعُمْيَانًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they who, when reminded of the communications of their Lord, do
not fall down thereat deaf and blind. (Surah Furqan 25:73)***

The Imam said: This verse is revealed for you, Shias, that when the
verses, which are in our praise, are recited before you, you believe in
them and do not doubt it, rather you think and ponder over it. Sulaiman
says then I recited:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا هَبْ لَنَا مِنْ أَزْوَاجِنَا
وَذُرِّيَّاتِنَا قُرَّةَ أَعْيُنٍ وَاجْعَلْنَا لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
إِمَامًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they who say: O our Lord! grant us in our wives and our offspring
the joy of our eyes, and make us guides to those who guard (against
evil). (Surah Furqan 25:74)***

The Imam said: This verse is in our praise and Ali Ibne Ibrahim has
narrated that when this verse was recited before Imam Sadiq (a.s.), he
said: If it is only like this then a strange thing is being asked from
Allah that Allah should make them the leader of the pious people. He was
asked: Then how was this verse revealed? He said: *and make for us
guides (Imams) from those who guard (against evil).*

In another tradition Imam says: We are the Leader of the Pious people
and according to another tradition ‘wives’ refers to Khadijah and
‘offspring’ refers to Fatima (s.a.) and ‘joy of the eyes’ refers to
Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) and ‘guides’ refers to Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.).

Ibne Mahyar has narrated from Ibne Abbas that the Imam recited all the
verses and then said: Make us from the guiding people so that people can
acquire guidance from us, and this verse was revealed in the praise of
Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

Abu Saeed Khudri has also narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) asked
Jibraeel to whom does ‘wives’ refer? Jibraeel said: Khadijah (a.s.).
Then he said: To whom does ‘offspring’ refer? He replied: Fatima (s.a.).
Then he asked: Who are the ‘joy of the eyes’, that is the light of my
eyes? He said: Hasan and Husain (a.s.). Then he asked: To whom does
‘make us guides for those who guard’ refer? He said: Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.).

Ibne Shahr Aashob has narrated from Saeed Ibne Jubair on the explanation
of this verse: ‘O our Lord! grant us’ that by Allah this verse was
revealed in praise of Amirul Momineen and the Hazrat usually supplicated
in the same manner. That is: ‘O our Lord! Grant us in our wives’, which
means give me Fatima and ‘our offspring’ means Hasan and Husain (a.s.)
and ‘the joy of our eyes’ that is the purified Imams should be in the
progeny of Husain.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: By Allah I found my sons obedient to Allah
so my eyes illuminated and I become happy. Then he said: ‘and make us
guides to those who guard’. It means we follow the pious ones who were
before us and people who came after us should follow us.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ يُجْزَوْنَ الْغُرْفَةَ بِمَا صَبَرُوا وَيُلَقَّوْنَ فِيهَا
تَحِيَّةً وَسَلَامًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***These shall be rewarded with high places because they were
patient…(Surah Furqan 25:75)***

It means that in exchange of obeying Allah in the world and remaining
patient on the harassment of the enemies of Allah they would be given a
very high position in the Paradise. Saeed Ibne Jubair says that it
refers to Ali Ibne Abi Talib, Hasan, Husain and Fatima (s.a.).

***…And shall be met therein with greetings and salutations. (Surah
Furqan 25:75)***

It means that angels come to welcome them and give them news of peace
and salutations from Allah. They will forever remain in elevated houses
and palaces of Paradise.


