Part 33: Imam or Ummah in the Quran
===================================

Verses that mention Imam or Ummah; Their interpretation

First verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلْتَكُنْ مِنْكُمْ أُمَّةٌ يَدْعُونَ إِلَى الْخَيْرِ وَيَأْمُرُونَ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنْ الْمُنْكَرِ وَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And among from you there should be a party who invite to good and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and those it is that shall be
successful. (Surah Ale-Imran 3:104)***

Shaykh Tabarsi has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he used to
recite this verse in this way:

And among from you there should be Imams…

It means that there should be an Imam and leader amongst you, having
these qualities.[^1]

Second verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنْتُمْ خَيْرَ أُمَّةٍ أُخْرِجَتْ لِلنَّاسِ تَأْمُرُونَ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَتَنْهَوْنَ عَنْ الْمُنكَرِ وَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ
وَلَوْ آمَنَ أَهْلُ الْكِتَابِ لَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُمْ مِنْهُمْ
الْمُؤْمِنُونَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are the best of the nations raised up for (the benefit of) man,
you enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong and believe in Allah, and
if the followers of the book had believed it would have been better for
them, of them (some) are believers. (Surah Ale-Imran 3:110)***

Ali Ibne Ibrahim from good-like chain of narrators has narrated from
Ibne Sinan that: I recited this verse before Imam Sadiq (a.s.), and the
Hazrat said: Is this nation the best amongst all nations? One which has
martyred Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Imam Hasan and Imam Husain (a.s.)? I
said: May I be sacrificed for you, then how was this verse revealed? The
Imam replied: You are the best of Imams, who were created for the
guidance of the people. Then he said: Don’t you see that after this
Allah has praised them with qualities that are the qualities of the
Imams?

Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that this verse was revealed
in praise of Muhammad (S) and his vicegerents.

In another authentic tradition from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) in the explanation
of this verse it is mentioned that it is the nation on which the prayer
of Ibrahim became incumbent, as the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ يَرْفَعُ إِبْرَاهِيمُ الْقَوَاعِدَ مِنْ الْبَيْتِ
وَإِسْمَاعِيلُ رَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ السَّمِيعُ
الْعَلِيمُ. رَبَّنَا وَاجْعَلْنَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ لَكَ وَمِنْ
ذُرِّيَّتِنَا أُمَّةً مُسْلِمَةً لَكَ وَأَرِنَا مَنَاسِكَنَا وَتُبْ
عَلَيْنَا إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ. رَبَّنَا وَابْعَثْ
فِيهِمْ رَسُولًا مِنْهُمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِكَ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمْ
الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ
الْحَكِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when Ibrahim and Ismail raised the foundations of the house: Our
Lord! Accept from us, surely thou art the hearing the knowing, Our Lord
and make us both submissive to thee and (raise) from our offspring a
nation submitting to thee and show our ways of devotion and turn to us
(mercifully), surely thou art the oft returning (to mercy), the
merciful. Our Lord and raise up in them an Apostle from among them who
shall recite to them thy communications and teach them the book and the
wisdom, and purify them, surely thou art the mighty, the wise. (Surah
Baqarah 2:127-129)***

When Allah accepted the supplication of Ibrahim and Ismail and appointed
Imams from his progeny who will be obedient and from that nation and
appointed a Prophet who will read the verses of Allah and teach the book
and wisdom. After that Ibrahim recited another prayer that keep that
progeny away from polytheism and idol-worship and protect them from all
these things, so that Imamate can be from them, and that people may
follow them, and then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ رَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَذَا الْبَلَدَ آمِنًا
وَاجْنُبْنِي وَبَنِيَّ أَنْ نَعْبُدَ الْأَصْنَامَ. رَبِّ إِنَّهُنَّ
أَضْلَلْنَ كَثِيرًا مِنْ النَّاسِ فَمَنْ تَبِعَنِي فَإِنَّهُ مِنِّي
وَمَنْ عَصَانِي فَإِنَّكَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when Ibrahim said: My Lord! Make this city secure and save me and
my sons from worshipping idols. My Lord! Surely they have led many men
astray, then whoever follows me, he is surely of me, and whoever
disobeys me, Thou surely art forgiving Merciful. (Surah Ibrahim
14:36)***

The Imam said that Imams and the nation can be only those from whom the
Prophet has been raised and they will be from the progeny of Ibrahim.
That is why the ‘medium nation’ and the ‘best nation’ are the Aale
Muhammad from whom the Prophet was raised and the Almighty Allah has
turned the hearts of the people towards them and that is the aim of the
prayer of Ibrahim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاجْعَلْ أَفْئِدَةً مِنْ النَّاسِ تَهْوِي إِلَيْهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…therefore make the hearts of some people yearn towards them… (Surah
Ibrahim 14:37)***

Ibne Shahr Aashob has narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that he said: The
‘best nation’ are Ahle Bayt of the Prophet and according to another
tradition the Ahle Bayt of the Prophet are better than all Ahle Bayt who
are created for guiding the people.

Also, it is narrated that Imam Baqir (a.s.) recited the verse in this
way: *You are the best nation…* and said that Jibraeel had brought in
this way and it refers to Muhammad, Ali and the vicegerents from their
progeny.[^2]

Third verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ هَذِهِ أُمَّتُكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَأَنَا رَبُّكُمْ
فَاتَّقُونِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And surely this your nation is one nation and I am your Lord,
therefore be careful (of your duty) to Me. (Surah Mu’minin 23:52)***

Most commentators have said that ‘nation’ refers to community. Ibne
Mahyar and Ibne Shahr Aashob have narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that
‘nation’ refers to Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

Fourth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنْهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا لَمَّا صَبَرُوا
وَكَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا يُوقِنُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And we made of them Imams to guide by our command when they were
patient and they were certain of our communications. (Surah Sajdah
32:24)***

At another place after the mention of Firon and his army Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَدْعُونَ إِلَى النَّارِ وَيَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ لَا يُنصَرُونَ. وَأَتْبَعْنَاهُمْ فِي هَذِهِ الدُّنْيَا
لَعْنَةً وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ هُمْ مِنْ الْمَقْبُوحِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And we made them Imams who call to the fire and on the day of Qiyamat
they shall not be assisted. And we caused a curse to follow them in this
world, and on the day of Qiyamat they shall be of those made to appear
hideous. (Surah Qasas 28:41-42)***

Ali Ibne Ibrahim, Kulaini, Saffar, Ibne Mahyar and others with many
chains of narrators have narrated from Imam Sadiq and Baqir (a.s.) that
there are two types of Imams according to the book of Allah, because
Allah has said:

***And we made of them Imams to guide by our command... (Surah Sajdah
32:24)***

That is they guide people according to Allah’s command and not according
the wish and will of the people and they give preference to the commands
of Allah rather than their own. At another place He says:

And we made them Imams who call to the fire…

It means the leaders of disbelief and deviation who prefer their own
opinion to that of Allah and give judgements according to their whims
and fancies against the orders of Allah.

In *Basairud Darajat* there is a tradition from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
the world was never devoid of a good Imam and a bad Imam. The good
character Imam is the one who is mentioned in the first verse and the
bad character Imam is one who is mentioned in the second verse.

In another tradition he says: Only a just Imam reforms the people and
not an unjust Imam. After that Imam (a.s.) recited both the verses.

It is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that: From the Quraysh are
good character Imams for the good people and of them are bad Imams for
the evil people, then Imam read the second verse.

Furat Ibne Ibrahim and Ibne Mahyar relate from Imam Baqir (a.s.) on the
explanation of the verse:

***And we made of them Imams to guide by our command... (Surah Sajdah
32:24)***

That this verse was revealed for the Imams from the progeny of Fatima
and it is especially for them because they guide people according to the
commands of Allah.

Ibne Mahyar has narrated from the same Imam that this verse was revealed
for the Imams of the progeny of Fatima and the Holy Spirit (Ruhul Qudus)
brings divine revelation in their hearts.[^3]

Fifth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا لِتَكُونُوا شُهَدَاءَ عَلَى
النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In this way we have made you the medium nation so that you be witness
for the people. (Surah Baqarah 2:143)***

There are many traditions narrated by Pure Imams (a.s.) that we are the
medium nation and we are witness for the creatures of Allah and His
proof on the earth.

Sixth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ أحْصَيْنَاهُ فِي إِمَامٍ مُبِينٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and We have recorded everything in a manifest Imam. (Surah Yaseen
36:12)***

Most commentators have said that the ‘manifest Imam’ refers to the
Protected Tablet (Lauh-e-Mahfuz), but in many traditions related by the
Holy Imams (a.s.) it is mentioned the Manifest Imam refers to Amirul
Momineen (a.s.). The Almighty Allah has gathered the knowledge of all
the things in his person.

In *Maniul Akhbar* there is a tradition from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that when
this verse was revealed on the Holy Prophet (S), Abu Bakr and Umar were
standing near by and asked whether the manifest Imam refers to Taurat.
He replied in the negative. Then they asked whether it is Injeel and he
replied in negative. Again they asked that it must be the Quran. He
replied: No. At that Ali (a.s.) entered. The Prophet looked at him and
pointed towards him and said: He is the manifest Imam, to him Allah has
given the knowledge of all things.

There are many traditions on this topic, which will come in the life
sketch of that Hazrat, Insha Allah.

[^1]: The writer says: Even if this verse has ‘Ummat’ it would refer to
the Imams (because to order good and stop from evil is their effective
duty).

[^2]: The writer says: It is clear from traditions that in whichever way
the verse may be it addresses the Holy Imams (a.s.) only. Even if the
whole Ummat is meant, since they are the best, the verse refers to them
alone and not to every person of the Ummat.

[^3]: The writer says: There are many traditions on this topic but these
are sufficient for sensible people. If someone doubts that the first
verse was revealed after the mention of Moosa and Israel and the other
one after the mention of Ishaq and Yaqoob and all the Prophets and
similar to that and the other verse came after the incident of Firon and
his army. So how it is possible that the first be in the praise of Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) and the second verse about their enemies? The reply answer
is that many a times it is stated that Allah mentions the stories of the
past people so that this Ummat acquires advice from it and that it
should be an example for it. So apparently the verse is about the past
people, but in it allegorical meaning it is the example of the Holy
Prophet (S) and after him the Holy Imams (a.s.) and their enemies that
they are similar to Firon, Qaroon and Nimrod and people like them would
be similar to the Caliphs of this Ummat and they would be enemies of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). It has thus come that Firon, Haman and Qaroon are the
first, second and third (caliphs) and that Samri of this Ummat is the
second fellow and the calf is the first one because in Quran there are
many verses whose beginning portion is about one and the last portion
about some other.


