Part 37: The Ahlul Bayt are included in the sanctity of Allah
=============================================================

In the discussion that the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) are included in the
sanctity of Allah

Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ وَمَنْ يُعَظِّمْ حُرُمَاتِ اللَّهِ فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَهُ عِنْدَ
رَبِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever respects the sanctified ordinances of Allah, it is better
for him with his Lord. (Surah Haj 22:30)***

Respect is a matter in blessing whose observance is necessary and its
insult and disrespect is disallowed. Some commentators say that it
refers to the rituals of Hajj and some have said that it refers to the
Ka’ba, Mecca, the months of Haram (respect) and the Sanctified Mosque
(masjidul Haraam).

Ibne Babawayh narrates with authentic chains from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
there are three sanctities of Allah, and nothing equals them in this
regard. (i) the Book of Allah which is Allah’s wisdom and light (ii) The
holy Ka’ba which is the prayer direction (Qibla) for the people and a
person’s Prayer is not accepted if he prays in some other direction and
(iii) The Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

Among the Ahle Sunnat there is a tradition from Abu Saeed that the Holy
Prophet (S) said: There are some venerated things of Allah, Allah will
protect the religion and worldly matters of those who maintain their
respect. And one who does not maintain their respect the Almighty would
not protect any of his matters and those respects are-(i) Respect of
Islam, (ii) My respect and (iii) respect of my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

There is a tradition from Jabir Ibne Abdullah Ansari that he says: I
heard the Holy Prophet (S) that on the day of Judgement three things
would complain (i) Holy Quran (ii) the Mosque and (iii) My Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). The Quran would say: O Allah, changes have been made in me and I
have been torn apart. The Mosque would complain: I was left empty and
was disrespected. And my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) would say: O Allah, we were
killed by the unjust people and they removed us from our homes leaving
us homeless. At that time I would sit with folded legs to contend with
the people and the Almighty Allah would say: In this matter I have more
right to contend with these people.

Dailami from the Ahle Sunnat traditionists in *Firdausul Akhbar* has
narrated a tradition that Allah has five most celebrated respects (i)
Respect for the Holy Prophet (S) (ii) Respect for the Ahlul Bayt of the
Prophet (a.s.) (iii) Respect for the book of Allah (iv) Respect for
Ka’ba and (v) Respect of the believer.

Ibne Mahyar from authentic chains has related from Imam Moosa Kazim
(a.s.) and he quotes his respected father that: ‘And whoever respects
the sanctified ordinances of Allah’ refers to three venerated objects
and their respect is obligatory on everyone and whoever leaves even one
of them, has associated someone or something with Allah. First is the
respect of the Ka’ba which is made respectful by Allah, second rendering
ineffective the book of Allah and acting against it and thirdly to
severe our love and obedience which was made incumbent by Allah.[^1]

[^1]: The writer says: From this verse and from authentic traditions
from Shias and Ahle Sunnat it is apparent that to respect the Prophet
(s.a.) and the Guiding Imams (a.s.) in their lifetime or after their
passing away is obligatory. In the same way it is obligatory to accord
respect to all those things that are associated with them like their
Mausoleums and their tomb enclosures (Zarih), their relics, sayings,
descendants and the Sayyids who follows their way and the narrators of
their traditions and the scholars of their sciences, because their
respect is due to the respect of those noble personages.


