Part 38: Justice, goodness, equity and weighing scales mean the Wilayat of Imams
================================================================================

Verses that mention Justice, goodness, equity and weighing scales
actually mean the Wilayat of Imams and words like disbelief, evil,
transgression and disobedience stand for the enmity and rejection of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)

There are some verses in this:

First verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالإِحْسَانِ وَإِيتَاءِ ذِي
الْقُرْبَى وَيَنْهَى عَنْ الْفَحْشَاءِ وَالْمُنكَرِ وَالْبَغْيِ
يَعِظُكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah enjoins the doing of Justice and the doing of good (to
others) and the giving to the kindred and He forbids indecency and evil
and rebellion, He admonishes you that you may be mindful. (Surah Nahl
16:90)***

Ali Ibne Ibrahim said that ‘justice’ refers to witnessing the formula of
faith: “There is no god except Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah”. ‘Doing of good’ refers to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
‘indecency’, ‘evil’, and ‘rebellion’ refer to the three most unjust
persons (That is the Firon, Haman and Qaroon of this nation).

In *Irshad al-Qulub* there is a tradition from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that
‘Justice’ refers the confession to the Oneness of Allah, Prophethood and
‘giving to the kindred’ refers to Hasan and Husain and the Imams from
the descendants of Husain. ‘indecency’, evil’ and ‘rebellion’ are those
who did injustice on the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), killed them and usurped
their rights.

Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that ‘Justice’ refers to
confess the Oneness of Allah and ‘giving to the kindred’ refers to the
giving of Imamate by the Imam to the next Imam and ‘indecency’, ‘evil’,
and ‘rebellion’ is the love of the unjust Imams.

There is a tradition from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that ‘Justice’ refers to two
witnesses and ‘doing of good’ refers to the Wilayat of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and ‘indecency’ the first unjust (caliph), ‘evil’ is the second
unjust (caliph) and ‘rebellion’ is the third unjust (caliph).

According another tradition ‘Justice’ refers to the Holy Prophet (S).
Whoever follows the Prophet (S) has done ‘Justice’ and ‘good’ refers to
Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Whoever accepts his Wilayat has accepted
goodness and the ‘doer of good’ means one who performs good deeds his
abode is Paradise. And ‘giving to the kindred’ refers to the observance
of our relationship because Allah commanded the love and affection of
our sons and prohibited the people from ‘indecency’, ‘evil’ and
‘rebellion’. That is to love those who have revolted against us and
committed injustice upon us and called the people towards others.

Furat Ibne Ibrahim has narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that ‘Justice’ is
the Prophet, ‘good’ is Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and ‘giving to the
kindred’ is Fatima (s.a.).

Second verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا رَجُلَيْنِ أَحَدُهُمَا أَبْكَمُ لَا يَقْدِرُ
عَلَى شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ كَلٌّ عَلَى مَوْلَاهُ أَيْنَمَا يُوَجِّهُّ لَا
يَأْتِ بِخَيْرٍ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي هُوَ وَمَنْ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَهُوَ
عَلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Allah sets forth of two men, one of them is dumb, not able to do
anything, and he is a burden to his master, whenever he sends him, he
brings no good, can he be equal with him who enjoins what is just, and
he (himself) is on the right path? (Surah Nahl 16:76)***

Some commentators have said that the Almighty Allah has mentioned this
example of Himself and the Idols. Some say that it is the example of an
unbeliever and a believer. Ali Ibne Ibrahim has narrated that this
example is for Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the Imams (a.s.) and their
special companions because Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the holy Imams
(a.s.) used to command the people with justice by their words and deeds
and they were on the right path. Allah says or it is the saying of the
Holy Prophet (S) that whatever is your way the same was theirs and the
unjust Imams, all of them were dumb in mentioning the right thing and
guiding the people.

Since no divine matter was effected by them how can the two be equal? On
the basis of this interpretation it is possible that master refers to
Allah or the Prophet (S) because in whenever the Prophet (S) sent them
in a battle they used to run away and no good action was performed by
them. This interpretation of the verse is much more suitable than
others.

Third verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْعَهْدَ كَانَ مَسْئُولًا. وَأَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ إِذَا كِلْتُمْ
وَزِنُوا بِالْقِسْطَاسِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِ ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ
تَأْوِيلًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(Every) promise shall be questioned about. And give full measure out,
and weigh with a true balance, this is fair and better in the end.
(Surah Israa 17:35)***

Sayyid Ibne Tawoos in the *Tafsir* of Ibne Mahyar relates from Imam
Moosa Kazim (a.s.) and he from his Lord that ‘promise’ refers to that
which the Prophet (S) had taken from the people about the love and
obedience of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and that they would not oppose him,
not prefer themselves to him in caliphate and neither would they cut of
relations with him and he also told the people that on the day of
Judgement Allah would question them how they dealt with the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) of the Prophet (S) and the book of Allah. ‘Balance refers to the
Imam who rules the people with justice and the command of the purified
Imams is the scale of Justice, that is why He says that that it is
better he knows best the interpretation of the Quran. He knows how rule
among the people.

This tradition is supported by the one related by Kulaini in the
explanation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَضَعُ الْمَوَازِينَ الْقِسْطَ لِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We will set up a just balance on the day of resurrection… (Surah
Anbiya 21:47)***

That the Imam said that the ‘just balance’ is the Prophet and his
vicegerents.

Fourth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذْ الْعَفْوَ وَأْمُرْ بِالْعُرْفِ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنْ الْجَاهِلِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Forgive people and enjoin towards good and remain away from the
ignorant ones. (Surah Araf 7:199)***

Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that ‘good’ refers to the
Wilayat of the Infallible Imams (a.s.).

Fifth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَزِيدُ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا خَسَارًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And it adds only to the perdition of the unjust. (Surah Israa
17:82)***

Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) said that it refers to those
who have committed injustice on Aale Muhammad and those who have usurped
their rights. The verse was brought by Jibraeel in this way: And it adds
only to the perdition of the unjust who committed injustice with their
right of Aale Muhammad.

Sixth verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا حَرَّمَ رَبِّي الْفَوَاحِشَ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا وَمَا
بَطَنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: My Lord has only prohibited indecencies, those of them that are
apparent as well as those that are concealed. (Surah Araf 7:33)***

Commentators have said that it refers to fornication whether it be
apparent or concealed.

And Kulaini and Nomani have narrated that there is the apparent meaning
of Quran and there is also the inside and that which is prohibited in
Quran, its apparent also prohibited and its inside are the unjust rulers
and the enemies of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and all those things which are
permitted in Quran, its apparent is also permissible and its inside
means the right Imams (a.s.).

Seventh verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا فَعَلُوا فَاحِشَةً قَالُوا وَجَدْنَا عَلَيْهَا آبَاءَنَا
وَاللَّهُ أَمَرَنَا بِهَا قُلْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَأْمُرُ
بِالْفَحْشَاءِ أَتَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ مَا لَا تَعْلَمُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when they commit an indecency they say: we found our father doing
this, and Allah has enjoined it on us. Say: Surely Allah does not enjoin
indecency, do you say against Allah what you do not know. (Surah Araf
7:28)***

Kulaini has narrated that Muhammad Ibne Mansoor asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
about the meaning of this verse. Imam replied: Have you have seen or
heard anyone claiming that Allah has commanded me fornication or
drinking wine or to do similar prohibited deed? He said: No.

The Imam said: Then what are these indecent acts and bad deeds about
which they claim that Allah has ordered them? The narrator said: Allah
and His Wali know better. Imam said: This verse was revealed for the
unjust rulers about which the opponents claim that Allah has ordered us
to follow them, so Allah made it known that they are attributing
falsehood to Allah. Allah has mentioned their obedience as indecency
because it is a sin that degrades a person.


