Part 39: 'Side of Allah', 'Face of Allah' and 'Hands of Allah' denote the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imams
=========================================================================================================

Terms like ‘Side of Allah’, ‘Face of Allah’ and ‘Hands of Allah’ denote
the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (a.s.)

There are many verses about them:

First verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّبِعُوا أَحْسَنَ مَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ مِنْ
قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَكُمْ العَذَابُ بَغْتَةً وَأَنْتُمْ لَا
تَشْعُرُونَ. أَنْ تَقُولَ نَفْسٌ يَا حَسْرَتَا عَلَى مَا فَرَّطْتُ فِي
جَنْبِ اللَّهِ وَإِنْ كُنْتُ لَمِنْ السَّاخِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And follow the best that has been revealed to you from your Lord
before there comes to you the punishment all of a sudden while you do
not even perceive lest a soul should say: O woe to me! For what I fell
short of my duty to Allah (Jambullah), and most surely I was of those
who laughed to scorn. (Surah Sad 38:55-56)***

The dictionary meaning of ‘jamb’ is the side rib, but here it has a
metaphorical meaning. Most commentators have said that ‘fell short of my
duty’ refers to a decrease in Allah’s obedience or in Allah’s proximity.
It has come in many traditions that the ‘Jambullah’ is the metaphor of
the holy Prophet and the guiding Imams (Peace be upon them) and their
obedience and Wilayat.

Thus Ali Ibne Ibrahim have said in the Tafsir of both the verses that,
what ‘has been revealed to you ‘ is the Quran and the ‘best’ thing
mentioned in the Quran, is the Wilayat of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the
pure Imams (a.s.). That is why ‘Jambullah’ refers to the Imam.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said that we are ‘Jambullah’.

In *Ihtijaj* there is a tradition from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that a
person asked Ali (a.s.) the explanation of difficult verses of Quran.
Imam replied: ‘Jambullah’ refers to the chosen ones and the friends of
Allah. He wanted that to appoint a proof for them in the Quran so that
the position of the Vicegerent of Allah and his nearness becomes
apparent. Don’t you know that when a persons says that a person is
sitting by the side of another person, it means he is a near one of him?

Similarly it a metaphor used in the Quran to show the nearness of
special persons which the Imams appointed by Allah and their friends can
understand and their enemies may not make any changes in it, and may not
remove it from the Quran as other verses were excluded. Allah has made
their eyes and hearts blind and they did not understand this verse.

From the same Hazrat it is narrated that he said: We are the treasurers
of the religion of Allah and the lamps of His knowledge. Every Imams
that leaves the world, another one appears to guide the people and that
person is misguided who does injustice upon us. So do not be separated
from us in greed of his things, because they would soon leave you.
Whoever gives preference to this world over the hereafter or over us, on
the day of the Judgement he shall have a great regret in his heart.

Kulaini has narrated from Imam Moosa Ibne Ja’far (a.s.) in the
explanation of this verse that he said: ‘Jambullah’ is Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and after him his successors with that high status which they
shall have till the end.

Also Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has said that: I am ‘Ainullah’ (eyes of
Allah), ‘Yadullah’ (hands of Allah), ‘Jambullah’ (side of Allah),
‘Babullah’ (door of Allah).

Ibne Shahr Aashob has narrated from Abu Zar that the enemy of Ali (a.s.)
would be brought blind and dumb and he would fall and get up again and
again in the darkness of the day of the Judgement and continue to
remember: O woe to me! For what I fell short of my duty to Allah
(Jambullah). There would be a collar of fire around his neck.

Ayyashi has narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Ali (a.s.) is the
‘Jambullah’.

Ibne Mahyar has related from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that: We are the
‘Jambullah’, Allah has made us from His Light, that is why when the
unbelievers would be cast in Hell they shall say: O woe to me! For what
I fell short of my duty to Allah (Jambullah). Alas! I did a mistake in
not accepting the Wilayat (Mastership) of Muhammad (S) and his progeny.

In *Maniul Akhbar* and *Tawheed* it is narrated with authentic chains
from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Ali said in one of his sermons: I am the
guided one and I am the father of orphans and the destitute and the
husband of widows. I am the refuge for every weak one and the fort of
safety for every fearful one. I am one to make the believers reach
Paradise and I am the firm rope of Allah (Hablulla-ul-Matin) and I am
the firmest handle (Urwatul Wuthqa). I am the ‘word of piety’, I am the
eyes of Allah, the truthful tongue of Allah and the side of Allah
regarding which Allah says: O woe to me! For what I fell short of the
side of Allah (Jambullah). And I am the hands of Allah that Allah has
made wide for His creatures for mercy and forgiveness and I am the gate
of repentance ‘Bab-e-Hitta’ for this Ummat.

Whoever recognizes me and my right has recognized his Lord, because I am
the Vicegerent of His Prophet (S) on the earth and the proof on His
creations. Only those can deny it, those who reject the statements of
Allah and His Prophet.

There is a tradition in *Tawheed* from other sources from the same Imam
that Ali (a.s.) said: I am the knowledge of Allah, I am His
knowledgeable heart, I am His seeing eyes, I am His speaking tongue, I
am His side, I am His hands.

There are many traditions in the same strain. Some have been mentioned
and some would be mentioned later. Insha Allah.

Second verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(وَلَا تَدْعُ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَهًا آخَرَ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ كُلُّ
شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ) إِلَّا وَجْهَهُ لَهُ الْحُكْمُ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Except the face of Allah everything will get destroyed. (Surah Qasas
28:88)***

Most commentators have said that ‘face’ means the self of Allah and
everything would be destroyed before the day of Judgement and then
created again. Some have said that it means the religion of Allah and
His worship.

Ibne Babawayh in *Tawheed* has narrated from Ibne Khusaima that I asked
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) about its explanation and he replied: The face of
Allah is the religion of Allah and the Holy Prophet (S) and Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) were the religion of Allah and creatures of Allah they
were the eyes of Allah who used to see their action by the light of
Allah and they were the tongue of Allah, as Allah used to converse
through them. And these gentlemen used to convey the knowledge of Allah
to His creatures.

And they were hands of Allah, that is they were His mercy upon His
creatures and we are the face of Allah, as people can reach Allah
through us. As long as Allah desires that the conditions of His
creatures should remain all right He would keep us among and whenever He
wants to punish them and does not see any goodness in them, He would
remove us from them. After that He would send whatever chastisement He
likes upon them.

There is another authentic tradition from the same Imam that: Allah has
made us in the best creation and bestowed us the best form (face) and
appointed us as the caretaker of His creatures and bestowed us a tongue
that testifies for Him and made us His wide hands for His creatures and
appointed us as the face of Allah as we guide the people towards Him.
And we are the treasurers of Allah in the Heavens and the earth. By our
blessings trees bear fruits and reach perfection, and rivers flow.

Due to our blessings rain falls from the sky and vegetation grows on the
land. The worship of Allah is performed by witnessing our worship. If we
were not there Allah would not have been worshipped. That we have taught
the people the method of worshipping Allah as complete worship of Allah
is not possible by others or because our Wilayat (Mastership) is a
condition for acceptance of worship. If our Wilayat was not there no
worship would have been accepted.

Ibne Shahr Aashob and other traditionists narrate with many chains of
narrators from Imam Baqir and Sadiq (a.s.) on the explanation of this
verse that: We are the face of Allah. One should go towards Allah from
our side.

Ibne Mahyar and Saffar have narrated that Salaam bin Mustashar asked
Imam Baqir (a.s.) about its explanation. The Hazrat said: By Allah, we
are the face of Allah. We will remain till the day of Judgement, and
would not be removed. Allah has ordered people regarding our obedience
and Wilayat. Whenever one from us leaves this world, surely from us
other one rises up for Imamate. This shall continue till the day of the
Judgement. And according to the tradition of Saffar that he will not get
destroyed on the day of Judgement, who believes in our Imamate and also
obey and follow us.

Ali Ibne Ibrahim from authentic chains has narrated from Imam Baqir
(a.s.) that he said in the explanation of this verse: Do the people
think that everything would be destroyed and the face of Allah shall
remain? Allah is greater than this, that He should be compared with
qualities of His creatures. And that He should have a mouth like others.
The verse means that everything will be destructible and mortal, but the
religion of Allah would remain established, and we are that face,
through which the religion of Allah and His recognition and His worship
should be learnt.

Till Allah requires the creatures, that is, till He considers them fit
for His worship and recognition, He would keep us amongst them and when
He sees no goodness in His creatures, He would take us up towards His
mercy and magnanimity. Then He would bring in action whatever He thinks
to be fit.

Ibne Babawayh and Kulaini have narrated that Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: The
oath that Allah had taken from our Prophet are we, the face of Allah who
walk on the earth among you. Whoever recognized us has recognized us and
whoever has not recognized, death is before him and he will recognize us
after death, at that time the recognition would be of no use.

Third verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ مَنْ عَلَيْهَا فَانٍ. وَيَبْقَى وَجْهُ رَبِّكَ ذُو الْجَلَالِ
وَالْإِكْرَامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Everyone on it must pass away, and there will endure forever the
person of your Lord, the Lord of glory and honour. (Surah Rahman
55:26-27)***

The majority says that ‘face of Allah’ is His divine Being and Ali Ibne
Ibrahim has said that it means the religion of Allah.

From authentic chains Imam Ali Ibne Husain (a.s.) said that: We are the
face of Allah, that due to us people turn towards Allah.

From authentic sources Imam Baqir (a.s.) says on Allah’s statement:

And there will endure forever the person of your Lord, the Lord of glory
and honour. 55:27

Imam said: We are the glory of Allah, due to which Allah keeps His
creatures honourable, although our obedience is obligatory on them.[^1]

[^1]: The writer says: The Holy Quran was revealed in Arabic and the
Arabic language is based on idiom and metaphors, and any spoken or
written matter that does not have any idiom, metaphor and simile etc. is
not considered eloquent. The Holy Prophet (S) and the holy Imams (a.s.)
also spoke like this. The non-Arabic languages also depend upon this.
Therefore it is said, that such and such person’s mouth is with the
people that is such and such person is respected among the people. Face
is used to denote direction and hand mostly denotes blessings, as Arabs
say that a person’s hand is over someone. That is such and such person
is getting benefits from the other. Hand refers to power and strength,
that a person has prepared his hand means that the person has acquired
strength. In the same way the holy Imams (a.s.) are the face of Allah;
that is Allah honours them just as the face is most honourable among all
the parts of the body. Also when a person goes towards another, he goes
with his face towards him. In the same way those who desire the path of
Allah and His nearness should come through them. Also these people are
the direction and Allah has ordered the people that they should go
towards them and everything would be destroyed except their religion and
way. ‘Ain’ denotes the eyes, a spy and also being concerned with
everything. These holy people are the eyes of Allah. It means they are
looking at the people and are witnesses of their deeds. Just as a person
sees with his eyes and comes to know about the situation, in the same
way Allah has authorized them over the people and they know their
conditions and supervise them on behalf of Allah. It means they are
chosen by Allah. That is why Ibne Athir has narrated from the Ahle
Sunnat scholars that a man was staring at Muslim women during the Tawaf.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) slapped him and he complained to Umar who said:
An eye from the eyes of Allah has beaten you rightly. Ibne Athir said
that it means he was one of the chosen ones of Allah. Also it is said
that they are blessing and mercy of Allah for the creatures or the
purified power of Allah. They are the side of Allah from the aspect that
they are from Allah’s side. That Allah has ordered the creatures that
they must go towards them. They are the nearest ones to Allah from
amongst all the creatures and one who wants to be near to Allah, should
acquire their nearness and follow them. Kafami has narrated from Imam
Baqir (a.s.) that ‘Janbullah’ means that no one is nearer to Allah than
the Holy Prophet (S), and no one is nearer to the Prophet than Ali
(a.s.), who is his successor. Thus in the nearness of Allah they are as
if they are at His side. As mentioned in the Holy Quran: “Woe upon me
that I didn’t acquire the Wilayat of the friends of Allah.” It is said
that the holy Imams (a.s.) are the door of Allah, because Allah is
unseen due to the holiness of His self and He manifested His Prophets
and their successors for the people and gave His knowledge to them so
that people may get His Ma’refat (recognition) and whatever is needed by
them of the commands and the prohibition from them. That is why they are
called the doors of Allah and are His supervisors and protectors,
because the Holy Prophet (S) has taught all knowledge and wisdom to
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and said: I am the city of knowledge and Ali
(a.s.) is its gate and Allah has made incumbent the obedience of Imam
Ali (a.s.) as mentioned in the incident of Bani Israel that: Enter the
gate with humility and respect and say: ‘Erase all our sins’ so that I
can forgive your sins and I am going to reward the good people very
soon. And the Prophet said about his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.): My progeny in
this Ummat are like the gate of Bani Israel. That is why “Ummat” refers
to that Ummat, that people should follow, and respect them. Then he said
that ‘good people’ refers to those who do not doubt the status and
position of this gate and at another place Allah says: Enter the houses
through their doors. Doors refers to the holy Imams (a.s.) who are the
houses of knowledge and mines of wisdom and they are the doors of Allah
and the source (Wasilah) to reach Allah and they are those who invite
towards Paradise till the day of the Judgement and they guide towards
Him.


