Part 41: The love and regard of the Angels for the Holy Imams
=============================================================

Verses that indicate the love and regard of the Angels for the Holy
Imams and their Shias

The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَحْمِلُونَ الْعَرْشَ وَمَنْ حَوْلَهُ يُسَبِّحُونَ بِحَمْدِ
رَبِّهِمْ وَيُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
رَبَّنَا وَسِعْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ رَحْمَةً وَعِلْمًا فَاغْفِرْ لِلَّذِينَ
تَابُوا وَاتَّبَعُوا سَبِيلَكَ وَقِهِمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ. رَبَّنَا
وَأَدْخِلْهُمْ جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ الَّتِي وَعَدْتَهُم وَمَنْ صَلَحَ مِنْ
آبَائِهِمْ وَأَزْوَاجِهِمْ وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ
الْحَكِيمُ. وَقِهِمْ السَّيِّئَاتِ وَمَنْ تَقِي السَّيِّئَاتِ
يَوْمَئِذٍ فَقَدْ رَحِمْتَهُ وَذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who bear the power and those around Him celebrate the praise of
their Lord and believe in Him and ask protection for those who believe:
Our Lord, thou embraces all things in mercy and knowledge, therefore
grant protection to those who turn (to Thee) and follow Thy way, and
save them from the punishment of the Hell: Our Lord! And make them enter
the gardens of perpetuity which Thou hast promised to them and those who
do good of their fathers and their wives and their offspring, surely
Thou art the mighty, the wise. And keep them from evil deeds this day,
instead Thou hast mercy on him, and that is the mighty achievement.
Surely those who disbelieve shall be cried out to: Certainly Allah’s
hatred (of you) when you were called upon to*** ***the faith and you
rejected, is much greater than your hatred of yourselves. (Surah Ghafir
40:7-10)***

Kulaini has from authentic chains related from Abu Baseer who narrated
from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said that there are some angels of Allah who sins
of our Shias fall off from their backs like the wind makes the leaves
fall from the tree in autumn.

As Allah says in Quran:

And ask protection for those who believe.

By Allah! O Abu Baseer it refers to none but you Shias and their seeking
forgiveness is for you.

In *Uyoon* there is a tradition from Imam Ridha (a.s.) that he said:
Angels are the servants of our Shias. Then the Hazrat recited this verse
and said that in this verse ‘believers’ denote those who brought faith
on our Wilayat.

Ali Ibne Ibrahim has narrated from reliable chains that people asked
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) whether angels were more numerous of or human beings.
The Imam said: By Allah! In Whose hands is my life, there are more
angels in the heavens than the particles of the earth. There is not an
empty space in the heavens to place a foot where there are no angels who
glorify and praise Allah. And there is no tree or pebble on the earth
but that an angel is appointed on it who reports its deeds to Allah,
even though Allah knows much better about its deeds and every day he
seeks the proximity of Allah through expression of the Wilayat of we
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) asks forgiveness for our friends and lovers and curses
our enemies and asks Allah to send a terrible chastisement on them.

Also Imam Baqir (a.s.) remarks on the words of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ رَبِّكَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنَّهُمْ
أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And thus did the word of your Lord prove true against those who
disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire. (Surah Ghafir
40:6)***

That they are Bani Umayyah and ‘*Those who bear the power’* denotes the
Holy Prophet (S) and after him his successors, who are the carriers of
divine knowledge and ‘those around him’ are the angels who glorify and
praise Allah and ask forgiveness for those who brought faith and they
are the Shias of the progeny of Muhammad (S).

…therefore grant protection to those who turn (to Thee)…

That is may Allah forgive the sins of those who have repented from the
love of those who committed injustice on the progeny of Muhammad (S) and
the Bani Umayyah.

…and follow Thy way…

That is those who followed the Wali of Allah, Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

…and those who do good of their fathers and their wives and their
offspring, surely Thou art the mighty, the wise.

It means those who are good and pious from among his ancestors,
grandfathers, children and their women. The Hazrat said that the pious
are those who have accepted the Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and
accepted him and his sons as Imams.

And keep them from evil deeds this day, instead Thou hast mercy on him,
and that is the mighty achievement.

It means those who protect their Wilayat in this world would be the
recipient of Your mercy on the day of Judgement. This is the great
victory for those who are saved from the love and the Wilayat of the
enemies of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Surely those who disbelieve

That is the Bani Umayyah.

…when you were called upon to the faith and you rejected...

Faith refers to the Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s).

Ibne Mahyar has narrated all the discussions from Jabir Johfi from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.).

It is also narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said: My praise
in the context of this verse was revealed to the Holy Prophet (S). That
is:

Those who bear the power…

Because when this verse was revealed no one had yet brought faith on the
Holy Prophet (S) except me.

Also, there is tradition from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that the angels
did not do repentance for seven years and some months for anyone except
the Holy Prophet (S) and me. That is why these verses were revealed in
our praise because there was no believer except us.

Also it is related through the Ahle Sunnat chain of narrators that
angels sent Salaams on Ali (a.s.) for many years because except the
Hazrat none had brought faith and none had prayed the Prayer.

From authentic sources Imam Sadiq (a.s.) is reported to have said that
‘Sabil’ (path) refers to Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) in this verse. ‘Those
who believe’ refers to the Shias of Ali (a.s.).


