Part 4: It is mandatory to know the Imam of the time
====================================================

It is mandatory to know the Imam of the time, that people are not
helpless in the matter of discarding the obedience of the true Imam,
that the one who dies without knowing the Imam of his time will die a
death of Kufr and Nifaq (Disbelief and Hypocrisy).

It must be understood that among the Shias, the confession of (belief)
in the Imam is one of the principles of faith, and that the one who
discards it will be, in the hereafter, with the disbelievers and the
polytheists. It should also be known that, in the worldly affairs, they
are being dealt with like Muslims. But those who display and express
enmity against the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), like the Kharijis, are considered
like disbelievers in the matter of worldly affairs. It is understood
from some narrations that, at a time when the Imam is not in power, such
inimical fellows too, for relief to the Shias, are being apparently
considered as Muslims so that there may be no difficulty in social
dealings with them.

But on the reappearance of Hazrat Sahibul Amr (Imam Mahdi a.s.) they
will be considered as disbelievers. Most of the Shia scholars are of the
opinion that, excepting those who are very weak in their faith, all of
such people will remain permanently in Hell. There is hardly anyone
among Shia scholars who believes that such inimical people will also get
salvation from Hell after remaining therein for a long time.

The Mustadaf (having weak belief) if the one who cannot distinguish
between truth and falsehood because of weak sense or the one whom the
argument proving the truthfulness of the true faith has not convinced
despite the absence of guilt. For example, those who might have been
grown up in the palaces of Sunni kings and might not have heard about
the difference in faith and who might not have found anyone who could
have shown them the truth about of the Shia belief. Such people can hope
to be forgiven in the hereafter. The truth is that none save the weak
ones (Mustadafeen) can hope to get salvation from the divine
chastisement. They will suffer Allah’s punishment forever.

Both the Ahle Sunnat and the Shias have reported through continuing
narrations that the Holy Prophet (S) says: The one who dies but does not
know the Imam of his time will have died the death of ignorance. [Those
who died on ignorance and disbelief before the appointment of the Holy
Prophet (S) being ignorant of the roots and branches of the faith.]

As regards some prejudiced Sunni speakers who have said that Imam of the
time means the Quran, every wise man knows that, to take Book as Imam is
against both the open and the hidden knowledge. Moreover the addition of
the word ‘Zamana’ (time) makes it clear that there is an Imam in every
time and Quran is the same for all times. So this second reason defeats
the arguments that what the Prophet of Allah meant by Imam is the Holy
Quran.

Moreover, an Imam of the past is not called ‘Imam-e-Zaman’ (leader of
the time). So it is understood that there must be an Imam for every age
whom people may recognize. Excepting the sect of Imamiyah, no sect
believes that there is an Imam in every time and that no age remains
without an Imam.

Barqui has narrated with reliable chains of narrators through Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) said: One who dies but does not know
the Imam of his time has died on the religion of ignorance. So it is
compulsory for you to obey the Imam of your time. Doubtlessly you have
seen companions of Amirul Momineen. What happened to those who did not
follow him? So you should not follow anyone else because you are not
unable to recognize what is ignorance and who is the Imam. There are
verses in the Quran praising us, that is, the verses which talk about
our gracefulness and we are the group the obedience of whom has been
made compulsory by Allah. All the lands are our booty and the chosen
booty is due to us.

It is reported through reliable sources that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: The
earth does not possess the ability to remain still and to exist but due
to the Imam and that the one who died without knowing the Imam of his
time has died the death of ignorance. Everyone of you is in a dire need
of the knowledge about the Imam when his soul reaches here (pointing his
hand to his chest) and said: he will say at that moment that I was on
the proper path and the right faith and this is the time when the events
of the Hereafter come before his eyes and he observes his condition
clearly.

It is narrated with good chains of narrators that Husain bin Abil Ulaa
said: I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.) about this word of the Holy Prophet (S)
that if a man who dies without knowing his Imam, his death is the death
of ignorance. The Imam replied: Yes, it is true. Had the people followed
Imam Ali bin Husain (a.s.) and had they left Abdul Malik Marwani, they
would have gained the guidance. We said that the one who dies and does
not recognize his Imam dies the death of disbelief. The Hazrat said: No,
rather he dies on a path other than that of his prophet.[^1]

Moreover, it is mentioned with reliable chains of narrators, that Imam
Baqir (a.s.) said if a man dies and he did not have any Imam, he had
died a death of ignorance and people are not unable to recognize the
Imam and a man who dies while knowing his Imam will not be harmed by the
appearance of the Imam, be it before that person’s death or after it and
a man who dies knowing his Imam is like the one who is with the Imam in
his tent [camp].

It is written in *Akmaluddeen* with reliable chains of narrators that
people asked Imam Ridha (a.s.): If a man dies without knowing his Imam
has he died the death of ignorance? The Hazrat said: Yes, a man who
doubts the Imamate of the Imam or desists from him is a denier and the
one who denies the Imamate of the Imam or shows enmity towards the Imam
is a polytheist, that is, like an idol-worshipper.

Kulaini and Nomani have, with reliable chains of narrators, narrated
from Ibne Baseer that people sought the Tafsir of this verse from Imam
Ridha (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنْ اتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ بِغَيْرِ هُدًى مِنْ اللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And who is more erring than he who follows his low desires without
any guidance from Allah?*** **(Sura Qasas 28:50)**

The Imam replied: It means the man who acts, in his religion, according
to his own opinion without following any of the right guidance of an
Imam.

Also Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has said that if a man associates the Imamate of
an Imam who has been appointed by Allah with the Imamate of anyone else
who is not appointed by Allah is a Mushrik (polytheist) and is like the
one who has associated someone with Allah.

Nomani has, with strong chains, narrated from Ibne Abi Yaqoob: I asked
Imam Sadiq (.a.s): What about a man who loves you and is fed up with
those who are your enemies, recognizes your Halaal as Halaal and your
Haraam as Haraam and also believes that Imamate does not go anywhere
else from your lineage, but, at the same time, he also says that there
are leaders who have differed from this and so, when all will become
unanimous I will also become believer in their Imamate. The Hazrat
replied: If he dies with this state of mind, he will die a death of
ignorance.

Many other similar narrations are there in this connection.

Ali bin Ibrahim and Ibne Babawayh etc have, with reliable chains of
narrators, narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that the Lord of the universe
will, on the Day of Qiyamat, not let anyone remain so helpless as to say
that: O Nourisher! I did not know that the sons of Bibi Fatima (s.a.)
are the rulers and guides over all the creation. This verse has been
revealed in favor of the Shias of Fatima (s.a.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا عِبَادِي الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَى أَنْفُسِهِمْ لَا
تَقْنَطُوا مِنْ رَحْمَةِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ
جَمِيعًا إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O my servants who have oppressed yourselves by committing numerous
sins! Do not be disappointed about the mercy of Allah. Verily, if Allah
wishes, He will forgive all sins. Doubtlessly He is the Forgiver and
most Kind.*** **(Sura Zumar 39:53)**

What the Hazrat means to say is that they are only the Shias of Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) who are entitled to be forgiven. Others do not have this
right and that the others will always remain in Hell.

Humairi has, through correct chains of narrators, conveyed from Imam
Ridha (a.s.) that the one who likes that there should not be any curtain
or veil between him and Allah and who wants to get the mercy of Allah
and wishes that Allah also may look mercifully at him should love and
befriend the Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and should be aloof from their enemies
and follow the Imamate of one of the twelve Imams. Hence the one who
does like this will always look towards the mercy and kindness of Allah
and the Divine look of mercy and kindness will also not ignore him.

The same gentleman has mentioned in *Uyoon Akhbar* that the Hazrat has,
quoting his forefathers, said that the Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said that
if a person dies without having faith in anyone of the Imams from our
progeny, dies the death of ignorance and Allah will punish him for all
his deeds during Islam and ignorance (during his entire life).

In connection with the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنِّي لَغَفَّارٌ لِمَنْ تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا ثُمَّ
اهْتَدَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Verily I will forgive the one who left bad deeds and believed and did
good deeds and got guidance… (Sura Taha 20:82)**

Shaykh Tusi (r.a.) has written in *Majalis* that the Hazrat said: By
Allah, if someone repents from polytheism and puts faith in Allah and
the Day of Judgement and does good deeds but does not get guidance
through our Wilayat and love and through understanding our grace, he
will not get any benefit. So the better faith and its part and
perfection are the belief in the true Imams and their obedience.

It is mentioned in *Ilalush Sharai* that Hannan bin Sudair asked Imam
Sadiq (a.s.): Why is it necessary to know all the Imams who came after
the Holy Prophet (S) and not those who were before him? The Hazrat
replied:

The reason for this is that the code of life of the Imams who were prior
to the Holy Prophet (S) was different from his Islamic Shariat and hence
we are not bound to follow their codes. Therefore, it is not compulsory
to have their recognition (Ma’refat). On the contrary, the Imams who
came after the Holy Prophet (S) are the protectors of his Shariat and
hence it is obligatory to know them.

It is mentioned in *Maniul Akhbar* with reliable chains of narrators
that Sulaym bin Qays asked Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) about the smallest
thing which misguides a man. The Imam (a.s.) replied: It is not to be
aware of the man whose obedience is made a must by Allah Almighty and
whose guardianship and love has been made obligatory and who has been
designated as His Proof on the earth and also His witness over the
creations. Sulaym asked: Who are those persons? Imam (a.s.) replied:
They are the ones about whom Allah has said that their obedience is His
obedience and His Messenger’s obedience and has mentioned:

***Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and the Ulil Amr who are from you…
(Sura Nisa 4:59)***

Hearing this, Sulaym kissed his holy head and said: You have convinced
me and have removed my confusion and all doubts from my mind and heart.

In *Ilalush Sharai*, it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that one day
Imam Husain (a.s.) came out of his house and went to his companions and
said: O People! Allah has not created His servants for any other purpose
except that they may know Him. When they will know Him they will worship
Him and when they will worship Him this worship of His will make them
needless of worshipping others. Hearing this someone asked: O son of the
holy Messenger! May my parents be sacrificed for you, what does the
recognition (Ma’refat) of Allah means? The Imam replied: It means
knowing the Imam of every time whose obedience is compulsory for the
people.[^2]

It is mentioned in *Iqabul Amaal* through Sunni chains of narrators
quoting Abu Saeed Khudri that once the Holy Prophet (S) was sitting
along with Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.) and the companions when the Holy
Prophet (S) said: One who said *Laa Ilaaha Illallaah* will enter
Paradise. Hearing this the Shaykhain (Abu Bakr and Umar) said: we do say
*Laa Ilaah Illallaah.* The Hazrat said: Saying *Laa Ilaah Illallaah*
will not be accepted because of this, that is, because of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and his Shias. Then both the persons (Shaykhain)
repeated: We say *Laa Ilaah Illallaah.* Then the Messenger of Allah (S)
passed his holy hand over the head of Ali (a.s.) and said:

The sign of the acceptance of your witness is that you should not break
his allegiance and should not snatch his rank and should not ascribe
falsehood to his word.

According to reliable sources, Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: From us only is
the Imam whose obedience is obligatory. One who denies this and dies,
dies the death of either a Jew or a Christian. Allah has never left the
earth without an Imam ever since He sent Adam (a.s.) in the world. There
always has been an Imam because of whom people got guidance from Allah
and he was a Hujjat (proof) of Allah over people. Whoever opposed his
obedience was being destroyed and whoever obeyed him used to get
salvation. It is incumbent on Allah that it should be so always.

Kulaini has, with reliable chains of narrators narrated from Imam Baqir
(a.s.) that: He does not worship Allah who does not know Allah. But the
one, who does not know Allah, does worship with deviation (misguidance).

The narrator asked: What is the knowledge (Ma’refat) of Allah? The Imam
(a.s.) replied: He should testify Allah, testify His messenger and have
faith in the Imamate of Ali (a.s.) and also obey them and also obey the
Imam’s guidance. He must also be disgusted with their enemies. This is
how Allah should be known.

Kulaini, Barqui and Nomani have, with true and reliable chains of
narrators, narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that if someone worships
Allah and takes trouble in his worship with utmost care but who does not
believe in the just Imam who has been appointed by Allah then. Surely,
his trouble and care in worship of Allah will not be accepted. He is
misguided and wayward. His example is like that of a lamb which has gone
away from its shepherd and its folk and it might have wandered
throughout the day.

Then at night it saw another fold of lambs with another shepherd and
joined it and passed the night with it. Next morning when that shepherd
took his lambs to the grassland it realized that neither that fold is
its own nor that shepherd. Therefore it departed from them and wandered
for the whole day in search of its own group and shepherd. Then it saw
another fold and wanted to join it but that shepherd rebuked it saying
‘Go and join your fold as you lost your group and are anxiously
wandering.’ Hearing this it returned worried and fearful, as it had
neither a shepherd who would lead it to the grazing land nor to its
home. Suddenly a wolf saw it and in such condition attacked and devoured
it taking the benefit of its loneliness.

Similarly if there is a man in this Ummah who has no divinely appointed
Imam and who may be just, he too will go on wandering in misguidance
anxiously and if he dies in such condition he will have died the death
of Kufr (blasphemy) and Nifaq (hypocrisy). So understand that the true
Imams and their followers are on the path of Allah and those false Imams
who are away from Allah’s Path and who are deviated and who also
misguide others are like the ash that is scattered by whirlwind. Such
people are not in control of whatever they earn except a far-fledged
misguidance.[^3]

Ibne Babawayh has, with reliable chains of narrators, narrated from Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) that the Imam is an Alam (standard) and a Sign between the
Creator and the creation. So the one who recognizes (knows) him is a
believer and the one who does not know him is a disbeliever (denier).

Nomani has, with reliable chains of narrators, narrated that Muhammad
bin Muslim asked Imam Baqir (a.s.): Please inform me about the condition
of a man who denies any Imam among you. The Imam said:

A man who denies (disbelieves) an Imam who has been appointed by Allah
and who shows disgust towards our faith is a disbeliever and he is an
apostate who has left Islam because the Imam is from Allah and his faith
is the faith of Allah. So when that fellow shows disgust towards the
faith of Allah his blood becomes permissible(to be shed) unless he
returns to the faith and repents before Allah for whatever he had said.

[^1]: The writer says: it is possible that what is meant by this
tradition is that he cannot be called a Kafir in this world or it means
people of weak faith as is narrated by the same gentlemen in other
reliable tradition, that is, their death occurs in a state of disbelief,
misguidance and hypocrisy.

[^2]: The writer says: The knowledge of the Imam has been called the
knowledge of Allah because we cannot know Allah except through the Imam.
Or it may be because the knowledge of Allah does not give any benefit
but through the knowledge of the Imam. Or it may be because if a man
knows Allah as such existence [someone] Who left people wandering and
Who did not appoint any guiding Imam for them has not known Allah with
His attributes of wisdom, tenderness and Mercifulness.

[^3]: The writer says: This example is given on the basis that, for
example, a man who has a true Imam but who does not obey his vicegerent
but goes to anyone of the false leaders. There he observes things which
are against what he had seen and heard from the true Imam. So he hates
his leader and goes to yet another false leader and finds the same wrong
things. Then the false leader also, seeing the opposition of that
person, drives him away fearing that he would take away his other
followers too. This continues until, Satan, who is the wolf on the path
of religion, taking benefit of the anxiety of that person, drives him
totally out of the fold of religion or destroys him by luring him
towards the obedience of any false Imam.


