Part 5: The one who denies one Imam is like the one who denies all Imams
========================================================================

Kulaini and others have, with reliable chains of narrators, narrated
from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that:

One who denied one Imam has denied all Imams.

Ibne Babawayh, Nomani and others have, with reliable chains of
narrators, narrated from Aban bin Uqaab that: I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
is he a believer who knows all the past Imams but denies (does not
recognize) the Imam of his own time? He replied: No. I asked: Is he a
Muslim? He said: Yes. Ibne Babawayh says that Islam means confession of
three facts whereby his life and property become secure and the reward
of the Hereafter depends on Faith. The Holy Prophet (S) has said: The
one who testified to the Oneness of Allah and my Prophethood has secured
his life and property, (from being executed or confiscation of property)
and his accountability is with Allah on the Day of Judgement.

He has also narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that: You should know that
if someone denies the Messengership of Isa (a.s.) and believes in the
Prophethood of all other messengers is not a believer. Seek the path of
Allah by search and want of that Imam whose sign is Haqq (truth) and
when your Imam is hidden, search for the signs, writings and words of
the Imams, which are before you and perfect your religious affairs. Then
you will have believed in your Lord.

He has narrated with authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ridha
(a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

O Ali! You and the Imams from among your sons are, after me, the Hujjat
(proofs) of Allah over the creation and they are the signs of the path
of Allah for the people. The one who denied anyone of them denied me and
who disobeyed anyone of them disobeyed me and the one who oppressed any
of them has oppressed me and the one who behaved nicely and righteously
with them has behaved, loved fully and affectionately with me. Whoever
obeyed you has obeyed me who befriended you has befriended me and who
became your enemy has become my enemy because you are born of me and my
loins and I am from you.

Nomani has narrated from Bin Numaa, that I said to Imam Ridha (a.s.)
that such and such person is your slave and a Shia and sends salutation
(Salaam) to your honour and says: You please be my surety in Qiyamat and
assure that you will intercede in my favor. The Hazrat asked: Is he from
our Shias and friends? I said: Yes. Then the Hazrat said: He does not
need to make a request for intercession.

Then I said: There is a man who befriends Ali (a.s.) but does not
recognize the legatees (Wasis) thereafter. The Hazrat said: He is
misguided. Then I said: He believes in all the Imams but the denies the
Imam of the last age (Aakhiruz Zaman). The Hazrat said: He is like the
man who testifies the Messengership of Isa (a.s.) but denies the
Prophethood of Muhammad (S) or believes in Muhammad (S) but denies Isa
(a.s.). I seek refuge of Allah against the one who denies any of the
Proofs (Hujjats) of Allah.[^1]

Kulaini and Nomani have narrated with reliable chains of narrators from
Muhammad bin Muslim that he said to Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that a Yemeni says
that if you know the last Imam of the time (your time) it is enough and
that there is no harm if you do not recognize the prior (earlier) Imams.
The Hazrat said: Curse of Allah be on him. I look at him, as an enemy
even though I do not either knows him or do not recognize him. He cannot
know the last Imam but through the earlier Imam.

Kulaini has narrated with authentic chains of narrators from Imam Baqir
(a.s.) that the Hazrat said: A servant (anybody) cannot be a believer
unless he knows Allah and the Messenger and all the Imams and the Imam
of his time and turns towards him for clarification of doubtful matters
and obeys him. Then he added: How can he know the last Imam when he does
not know the first Imam and is not aware of his Imamate?

Moreover, he has narrated from Zurarah (r.a.) with correct chains of
narrators from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that he says: I asked Imam Baqir
(a.s.): Will you kindly let me know whether it is compulsory for the
entire creation to know the Imam? The Hazrat replied: The Lord of the
worlds has appointed Prophet Muhammad (S) with His Messengership over
the entire creation and he was the Hujjat of Allah for the entire
creation on earth.

So who believes in Allah and His Prophet, obeys him and has testified
about him is required to know the Imam. And a man who did not put faith
in Allah and does not follow and testify him and does not recognize his
right, how can such a person be made incumbent to know the hidden Imam
when he neither believed in Allah and His Prophet nor recognized their
rights? Zurarah said: Then what do you say about a man who put faith in
Allah and His Messenger and testified to all the things revealed to His
messenger? Is it incumbent on such person to know you?

The Hazrat said: Yes. Do not the Ahle Sunnat, consider it necessary and
compulsory to recognize Abu Bakr and Umar despite their weakness?
Zurarah said: Yes, they do. Then the Hazrat said: Do you imagine that
Allah has put the recognition of the two in their hearts? No, by Allah,
none but the devil has put it in their hearts and, by Allah, none but
Allah has put our recognition in the hearts of the believers.

He has also narrated with reliable chains of narrators from Jabir who
says that he heard Imam Baqir (a.s.) saying: No one either knows or
worships Allah but the one who knows Allah and knows the Imam of his
time from us Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). And the person who does not recognize
Allah and Imam of his time from we Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), of course knows
[believes in] others than Allah and worships other than Allah and, by
Allah, he goes astray due to ignorance and misguidance.

Also he has narrated with reliable chains of narrators from Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Hazrat said: You people cannot be righteous and good
until you know the Imam and you cannot get the required knowledge unless
you do not testify and you did not testify until you obey and follow the
four things mentioned in the verse.

The four things which are true are repentance, faith, good deeds and the
guidance gained through the guardianship (Wilayat) and obedience of the
Imams. Then he added….their beginning is not improved but through the
end of Imamate and they cannot benefit but through Wilayat and those who
do not believe in the said three things are wayward.

Verily Allah does not accept but good deeds but then He does not accept
the good deeds but with the completion and fulfilment of the conditions
mentioned in the verse. Therefore the one who fulfils the conditions put
by Allah and acts upon the things about which Allah has taken an
undertaking from them in the Holy Quran, then only he gets the rewards
which have been promised to him by the Lord of the world. Verily Allah
has made His servants aware of the true path and He has also put signs
on that path and has informed them how to proceed on this path saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللَّهُ مِنْ الْمُتَّقِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only accepts from those who guard (against evil). (Sura Maida
5:27)***

So the one who fears Allah regarding the matters commanded by Allah
meets Allah with Faith in the things brought by Muhammad (S). Alas,
alas, how distant this group is from Grace. Many groups passed away
before gaining guidance through the obedience and Wilayat of the true
Imams and their people were imaging that they had believed in Allah
though they had, due to their ignorance, indulged in polytheism by
associating others with Allah.

The one who enters the house from its door is rightly guided and the one
who enters from any other door treads the path of destruction and the
gate of the knowledge of the messenger are the true Imams, as the Holy
Prophet (S) has said: I am the city of knowledge and wisdom and Ali is
its gate and Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيْسَ الْبِرُّ بِأَنْ تَأْتُوا الْبُيُوتَ مِنْ ظُهُورِهَا وَلَكِنَّ
الْبِرَّ مَنْ اتَّقَى وَأْتُوا الْبُيُوتَ مِنْ أَبْوَابِهَا وَاتَّقُوا
اللَّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And it is not righteousness that you should enter the houses at their
backs, but righteousness is this that one should guard (against evil);
and go into the houses by their doors and be careful (of your duty) to
Allah, that you may be successful. (Sura Baqarah 2:189)***

Allah has connected the obedience of the Ulil Amr (one vested with
authority), that is, of the true Imams, with the obedience of the
Prophet and joined the obedience of the prophet with His own obedience
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ فَإِنْ تَنَازَعْتُمْ فِي
شَيْءٍ فَرُدُّوهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ إِنْ كُنتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ
بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you; then if you quarrel about anything, refer it
to Allah and the Apostle, if you believe in Allah and the last day; this
is better and very good in the end. (Sura Nisa 4:59)***

So the one who discards the obedience of the true Walis has obeyed
neither Allah nor the messenger. And their obedience is the confession
of what Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذُوا زِينَتَكُمْ عِنْدَ كُلِّ مَسْجِدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Decorate yourself near every mosque… (Sura Araf 7:31)***

It is understood from traditions that the mosque means prayer and
decoration means both bodily as well as spiritual beauty and among the
spiritual beauties, the best is the beliefs of faith without which
worships are not accepted and among them the best is Wilayat and
obedience of the true Imams. Then added: Seek those houses about which,
Allah has said, in Surah Noor, which is revealed in praise of the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللَّهُ أَنْ تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ
يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالْآصَالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In houses which Allah has permitted to be exalted and that His name
may be remembered in them; there glorify Him therein in the mornings and
the evenings… (Sura Nur 24:36)***

Which, according to the explanation by traditions, means that this
Radiance (Noor) is found in those houses in which Allah has allowed it
and decided that they should always remain high in fame and rank and
that the remembrance of Allah must continue therein. Thereafter the
Hazrat said: You have been certainly informed as to which are those
houses and who are their residents. It is mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِجَالٌ لَا تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلَا بَيْعٌ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
وَإِقَامِ الصَّلَاةِ وَإِيتَاءِ الزَّكَاةِ يَخَافُونَ يَوْمًا
تَتَقَلَّبُ فِيهِ الْقُلُوبُ وَالْأَبْصَارُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the remembrance
of Allah and the keeping up of prayer and the giving of poor-rate; they
fear a day in which the hearts and eyes shall turn about… (Sura Nur
24:37)***

Then the Hazrat said:

Surely Allah has chosen the messengers and prophets for His affairs, viz
for the guidance of the creation and for the explanation of the
conditions of Shariat (religion). Then He selected a group from them who
may testify to the warning given by the messenger as Allah has expressed
through the tongue of his messenger:

There is no community in which Allah did not send a warner of
chastisement. The one who is unwise is restlessly wandering and the one
who is wise is guided and that here sight means the heart as says the
Lord of the universe:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّهَا لَا تَعْمَى الْأَبْصَارُ وَلَكِنْ تَعْمَى الْقُلُوبُ
الَّتِي فِي الصُّدُورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Eyes are not blind but blind hearts within their chests. (Sura Haj
22:46)***

How can the one get guidance whose heart is blind and how can one be
seeing who does not ponder over verses and traditions? Follow the Holy
Prophet (S) and his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and confess what has been revealed
by Allah and follow the signs of guidance which are the true Imams.
Doubtlessly they are the signs of trust, religiousness and
righteousness.

Also it has been reliably narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Abdullah
bin Alkawar, who was a Khariji, went to Ali (a.s.) and requested for the
explanation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى الْأَعْرَافِ رِجَالٌ يَعْرِفُونَ كُلًّا بِسِيمَاهُمْ
وَنَادَوْا أَصْحَابَ الْجَنَّةِ أَنْ سَلَامٌ عَلَيْكُمْ لَمْ
يَدْخُلُوهَا وَهُمْ يَطْمَعُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And on the most elevated places there shall be men who know all by
their marks, and they shall call out to the dwellers of the garden:
Peace be on you; they shall not have yet entered it, though they hope.
(Sura Araf 7:46)***

The Hazrat said: It is we who will be in the elevated planes (Araaf) and
who will recognize our friends from the signs on their foreheads. We are
the Araaf whom the world-lovers cannot know except through our
recognition. We are the Araaf through whom Allah will send our friends
and foes to the Sirat bridge. So no one will enter Paradise but the one
who will recognize us and whom we know and none will go to Hell but the
one whom neither we know nor who knows us. Had Allah so willed He would
have Himself made His slaves recognize Him but it is His strategy that
He made us the door for His recognition and it the straight road and the
path of salvation. We are the cause of Allah whereby one can reach
Allah.

So the one who denies our Wilayat or gives preference to others over us
has strayed from the true path. Those whom people have begun to follow
are not equal to us because those non-Shias have joined muddy ponds who
commit envy upon envy and those who have come towards us have come to
such a clear springs which are always running by the order of Allah the
Lord of the universe. These springs never dry up nor ever
interrupted.[^2]

It is also narrated with reliable chains from Abu Hamza Thumali that
Imam Baqir (a.s.) told him: Whenever anyone of you goes on a journey of
even a few miles he is accompanied by a guide so that he may not go
astray. You are less aware of the heavenly paths in comparison with the
earthly roadways. So search for a guide from you for your guidance. What
is meant by the heavenly paths is that they are some beliefs and deeds
whereby man attains higher ranks near Allah and in heavens (Paradise).

Moreover, it is narrated with reliable sources that Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
was asked to explain the meaning of the holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُؤْتَ الْحِكْمَةَ فَقَدْ أُوتِيَ خَيْرًا كَثِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Who is given wisdom has been granted a great good. (Sura Baqarah
2:269)***

The Hazrat replied that what is meant by wisdom is the obedience of
Allah and the recognition of the Imam.[^3]

Moreover, it is reported with authentic chains of narrators that someone
had asked Imam Baqir (a.s.) to explain the meaning of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَمَنْ كَانَ مَيْتًا فَأَحْيَيْنَاهُ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُورًا يَمْشِي
بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ كَمَنْ مَثَلُهُ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ لَيْسَ بِخَارِجٍ
مِنْهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is the dead man whom We make alive creating a Noor (light) for him
wherein he walks among people is like the one who is in the darkness of
unbelief and ignorance wherefrom he never comes outs? (Sura Anam
6:122)***

The Hazrat replied: Here dead means the one who knows nothing and who
does not obtain the knowledge of true beliefs. The Noor (Light) in which
he walks among people is the Imam whom people follow. The man who is in
darkness is the one who does not recognize his Imam.

It is authentically narrated from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Abu Abdullah
Jadali went to Amirul Momineen (a.s.). The Hazrat told him: O Abu
Abdullah! Do you want me to explain to you the purport of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ جَاءَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ فَلَهُ خَيْرٌ مِنْهَا وَهُمْ مِنْ فَزَعٍ
يَوْمَئِذٍ آمِنُونَ. وَمَنْ جَاءَ بِالسَّيِّئَةِ فَكُبَّتْ وُجُوهُهُمْ
فِي النَّارِ هَلْ تُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever brings good, he shall have better than it; and they shall be
secure from terror on the day. And whoever brings evil, these shall be
thrown down on their faces into the fire; shall you be rewarded (for)
aught except what you did? (Sura Naml 27:89-90)***

Meaning: The one who brings good in the presence of Allah has a reward
better than it because (he gets) the higher in place of lower and the
everlasting in place of the passing, rather Allah grants him upto ten or
even upto seven hundred times more reward and such people will have no
feeling of fear and horror on the Day of Judgement. And the one who
brings forth evil and sins (many scholars say here evil means
polytheism) (should know that) such people will be thrown head down in
Hell. Will you not be given the reward of only those deeds, which you
were doing?

Abu Abdullah replied: Yes, O Amirul Momineen, may my parents be
sacrificed for you. The Hazrat said: Here ‘good’ means our Imamate and
Wilayat and also the love of we Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). And here ‘evil’ means
denial of our Imamate and Wilayat and enmity against we Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.), which drives them with disgrace from this world to Hereafter to
be thrown in Hell.

[^1]: The writer says: It is an essential part of Faith to believe in
the Prophethood of all the prophets mentioned in the Holy Quran and in
those whose Messengership is mentioned continuously in the traditions
and Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (S). One who denies even one of them is a
disbeliever. So an overall faith in all the prophets and legatees is
essential. It is not compulsory to have specific knowledge. He may
believe that all the prophets and their legatees are true.

[^2]: The writer says: The Hazrat has likened knowledge with water
because just as water keeps the body alive, knowledge is the cause of
the life of spirit (soul). Similarly he has likened the knowledge of the
opponents, because of its being defective and doubtful, with water which
is less and jammed in a pit full of mud and other impurities. This is
because they have obtained knowledge from one another among themselves
which does not reach the source of Allah, the messenger and the true
Imams who alone have the true knowledge. The Hazrat has, in his
comparison said that they are like the springs which fall into one
another and has likened the knowledge of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) with pure
water springs which flow from the Omniscient Allah because their
knowledge is definite and which flows from the source of Revelation and
divine inspiration and there is no scope for any doubt or confusion and
also because such knowledge is brought by the holy spirit (Jibraeel) and
showered on their holy souls endlessly. This will be explained further
on – Insha Allah.

[^3]: The writer says: By Hikmat is meant the true knowledge which is
related with deeds (action). Therefore, it is said that a Hakim (wise
person) is always true and of good character. Hence the Hazrat has used
the words ‘recognition of Imam’ for explaining the meaning of Hikmat
(wisdom), which is the fountainhead of every grace and the true and
definite knowledge is available only from the Imam and only it enables
obedience of Allah because the aim of obedience is to act according to
that knowledge. From this it is understood that Hikmat does not mean
those false sciences, which have been derived by wayward people from
their imperfect minds naming it as Hikmat. It is on the basis of this
false wisdom through which the Shariats (codes) of many messengers and
many divine books have been altered thus depriving people of the divine
knowledge and the traditions of the messenger and the words of Imams.
Such people have, without understanding religion and essential problems
declared themselves as Scholars and wise men.


