Part 7: No guidance except through the True Imams
=================================================

No guidance except through the True Imams who are the medium (Wasilah)
between Allah and His creation. No salvation from Divine chastisement
but through them

It is reported by Ibne Babawayh in *Majalis* and by other scholars with
reliable chains of narrators quoting Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: We
are very much worried because of the people because when we call them
towards us they do not respond and if we leave them to themselves they
do not get guidance without us.

Similarly it is mentioned in *Khisal* that the Holy Prophet (S) said to
Amirul Momineen (a.s.): There are three things which I can say on oath
that they are absolutely true. One, the knowledge of Allah (Ma’refat)
cannot be obtained but through you and through your legatees who know
Allah truly. Two, since you are those who know Allah fully no one can
enter Paradise but the one who knows you and whom you know. Third, since
you are those who know Allah fully no one can enter Hell but the one who
doesn’t know you and whom you don’t know.

It is mentioned in *Ilalush Sharai* with true chains of narrators that
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) wrote to Ishaq bin Ismail that the Lord of the
Might, through His Mercy and kindness, made some things obligatory for
you. It was not because Allah needed it. Rather it is Grace from Allah
except Whom there is no Allah for you, so that He may separate the
unholy from the holy and so that He may take your trial about the things
which are in your hearts and may make pure the things which are in your
hearts through it so that you may advance towards His Mercy and so that
He may raise your ranks in Paradise.

Therefore, He made it obligatory for you to establish Prayer and observe
fasts and to perform Hajj and Umrah and to pay Zakat and to have faith
in the Wilayat of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and He has kept a house so that
through it the duties may be made available and so that they (Imams) may
be the key to that house.

If they would not have been from Muhammad (S) and from the progeny of
his legatees, you would be, certainly, wandering like the quadrupeds and
you would have not known anything from your obligatory duties. Can you
ever enter a city but through the gate? So Allah has been kind to you so
profoundly by appointing, after His messenger, the Imams as your
commanders. He declared on the Day of Ghadeer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَأَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ
نِعْمَتِي وَرَضِيتُ لَكُمْ الْإِسْلَامَ دِينًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Today, I have perfected your Religion for you and concluded My Mercy
on you and selected for you the religion of Islam. (Sura Maida 5:3)***

We ordered you to observe some rights of Our friends so that it may be
lawful for you to keep your wives and your wealth and whatever you eat
and drink and also so that you may recognize and know Us and so that We
may grant abundance and increase in these said things so as to see who
among you is obeying His commands both openly and privately. And then He
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(O Messenger!) Tell (them that) I do not want any remuneration from
you for this Messengership except that you should love my near
relatives. (Sura Shuraa 42:23)***

So understand that whoever will be stingy in loving them will be showing
stinginess towards his own self because it (love for my relatives)
benefits only them and Allah is indeed needless and you are in dire need
of Him. So now, when the truth has been revealed clearly you may do
whatever you like. Hereafter Allah and His Messenger and the Faithful
will observe your attitude because you are surely to return to the One
Who knows every open and secret thing and who will show you your deeds
and the better consequence is for the righteous and praise be to Allah
the Lord of the worlds.

It is mentioned in *Maniul Akhbar* that Imam Baqir (a.s.) is reported to
have said that the Holy Prophet (S) said: O Ali! On the day of
Judgement, you and Jibraeel will sit on the Sirat Bridge and none will
cross it but the one who will have the order of relief from hellfire due
to you Wilayat.

Shaykh Tabarsi has, quoting Imam Sadiq (a.s.), narrated in *Majalis*
that he (Imam) said: It is we who are the medium (Wasilah) between you
and Allah.

He also has narrated from Imam Hasan (a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S)
addressed Amirul Momineen (a.s.): O Ali! You and your companions and
followers will be in Paradise.

He has also narrated from Abdullah bin Sulaiman in *Ihtijaj* that he
says: I was with Imam Baqir (a.s.) when a man from Basra told him that
Hasan Basri says that those who hide their knowledge (faith) will harm
the dwellers of Hell by their bellies. The Hazrat said: If it is so then
believer of the people of Firon will be destroyed about whom Allah has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَجُلٌ مُؤْمِنٌ مِنْ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And a believing man of Firon’s people who hid his faith (Sura Ghafir
40:28)***

Whereas Allah has praised him for hiding his belief. From the day Allah
has sent Nuh (a.s.) with Messengership the knowledge has always remained
hidden. So Hasan Basri may go either in the right or the left direction,
the truth is that, by Allah knowledge cannot be availed but from the
Ahlul Bayt (family members) of the Messenger. Therefore the Hazrat said:
It is due to only such people, that our calamity has increased. If we
call them to us they do not come and if we leave them alone they do not
get guidance.

It is narrated with true chains of narrators in *Basairud Darajat* that
Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: Allah is being worshipped due to us; it is only
due to us that people recognize Allah with His attribute of being One
and Only and the Prophet Muhammad (S) is in a veil, that is he is a
medium between Allah and His creation.

And it is reported in *Basharatul Mustafa* with reliable chains of
narrators that Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: A man who calls Allah through our
mediation (Wasilah) gets success and welfare and the one who calls Allah
without our mediation destroys himself and also others.


