Introduction
============

The intellectual renaissances all over history have been the inevitable
result of the development, prosperity, and progress of education and the
reciprocal response to the social and individual lives. People that are
supplied with the elements of conscious education will indisputably
attain their goals in the fields of society, policy, and economy. On the
other hand, people lacking such disciplines will surely retard and be
unable to catch the procession of the civilization and the coinciding
with the developed nations.

Without the availability of the conscious education, -that aims at
achieving a true composition and development of the cognizance, and
constructing the personalities- man will definitely be too short to
attain scientific maturity and social evolution. Education should not be
considered as a luxurious mark or an extra deluxe phenomenon. It is, in
consequence, a life necessity and a humane original affair that plays
the greatest role in the individuals’ general, as well as the private,
lives. With all of its schemes and issues, education is responsible for
training the individuals for associating in societies altogether with
their rules, regulations, principals, and traditions. Moreover, it
enables to socialize with others in the frame of such rules. Some
characterize the education as the mirror on which philosophy,
expectations, and goals of the societies are reflected. Human
civilization had never been a heritage that is received easily. It was
indeed a social tradition that took the greatest share of man’s
endeavors for acquiring and saving it for thousands of years. Education
has been the only course through which such an effort-exerting heritage
was conveyed to the other generations. This education carried,
trustfully, the intellectual fortunes, noble values, and esteemed habits
to the next generations. An educationist expresses that the reason
beyond the essentiality of education is the fact that babies are not
born as humans, but they become so through education.**[1]**

The educational processes, without which the individual and social lives
would extinct, propose sound plans of the growth and durability of the
social movements.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Educational cognizance and future of the Arab
countries*; 19.

John Dewey’s says that existence, as well as the continuation of
societies, depend exclusively upon the process of the cultural
conveyance which occurs only via the transference of the customs of
working, thinking, and feeling from the adults to the infants. Life
cannot continue unless the fine patterns, expectations, ambitions,
criteria, and opinions are delivered to the new comers.**[1]**

The source of the acquired psychological and social composites is,
simply, education. On that account, the necessity of education for
individuals, as well as societies, is substantiated.**[2]** “Supposing
people leave this earth without their children, and return twenty years
later, they will find them as same as cattle.”**[3]** This saying is
accurate to a great extent.

In the western north territories of India, it happened frequently that
wolves kidnapped some children and slain most of them. They, however,
pitied some and kept in safe. As some men could identify the places of
those children, they went there and could overcome the wolves and save
the children. Later, they named them the wolves’ kids or wild kids since
they followed the very same natures and habits of wolves. They also
imitated the wolves’ cries, and ate like them, and torn their clothes,
and confined themselves in isolated dark places, and behaved as if they
were real wolves. Nonsuccess was the result of every attempt of
civilizing, educating, or teaching those children how to talk.

In his ‘*Life in Indian Jungles,*’ Valentine Paul describes one of those
wild children whom was put in an orphanage in February, 4, 1867:

“That boy showed signs of idiocy; such as the lowness of the forehead,
anxiety, and disorder. He often opened his mouth just like a wild
animal. He used smelling, rather than tasting, for identifying things.
It was impossible to leave him without supervision. He used to use his
legs and hands in moving. Few months later, he could use his legs only.
He used to pause suddenly and walk unsoundly. He used to move his head
swiftly to the right and left, and gaze on things as if he was waylaid.
Until his demise, he could not change his way of life.”

Accordingly, education is an acquired matter. This is tendered in God’s
saying:

*And Allah has brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers, you did
not know anything, and He gave you the hearing and the sight and the
hearts that you may give thanks.\**

Evidently, the Quranic text emphasizes that knowledge and the
intellectual growth are obtained through acquaintance and received by
the hearing, sight, and intellectuality. In this regard, the holy Quran
has preceded the modern educationists.

Anyhow, education can be a principal base of developing humankind,
especially in the fields of intelligence, when it aims at achieving the
general boom of personalities, and cares for sowing the virtual
tendencies of spirits. Otherwise, man will certainly lose originality
and character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Democracy and Education*; 3.  
 **[2]** Refer to Social principals of education; 4-5.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Educational cognizance*; 19.

The religious education is the most considerable since it focuses on the
spiritual progression, self-discipline, and the development of
performance in addition to the regard of the virtuous conventions, the
honorable ethics, and the dignified patterns.

Psychoanalysts focus a considerable light on this topic as they affirm
that religion supports individuals with powers of faith,
intellectuality, and acuteness. These powers form the spiritual
vitalities resulting in depositing virtues in minds. This is indeed the
most favorable and decent human goal.**[1]**

Religion is the one and only restraint against irregularity and
aberrance. It controls the tendencies, manages the desires, cleans and
saves the soul from ruination, and protects against collapse and the
pollution of sins and impulses. Religion, when finds a shelter in souls,
props up a huge power that prevents from crimes and forbids aberrance,
and inspires the doing of good and the competition in the fields of
virtue.

Education that is formed on religious criteria achieves the most
victorious success of societies. It eradicates the causes of tenseness
and rebel, and authorizes the individuals to live naturally in their
environments.

Failure is the inescapable fate of any education that ignores the
religion. Such education will surely cause a great amount of disorder
and nonsuccess for those living under its shades.

Spiritual powers leave a rich influence on man’s behavior, and direct to
mental and intellectual balance. Faith, if based upon an ideology and
creed, influences the interior and exterior organs and, consequently,
calls to charitable deeds and behaviors.

Like many others, psychoanalysts have agreed unanimously that the
religion plays the greatest role in the general composition of life, and
the construction of security and settlement. They also affirmed that it
is impossible to have a respectful life of amiability, geniality, and
settlement without the existence of the spiritual education, which
creates self-improvement, governs the habits, and takes away pride and
whims.

The weakness of people’s religious conscience was the main reason beyond
the spread of crimes, immoralities, unethical principals, and the
consequent crises. This weakness caused the most terrible calamities
that overcame the societies and traveled over the intellects. It also
composed the horror and dismay that the modern man has had to face.
Involuntarily, peoples of this world have been misguided into a dead
end. Meanwhile, the great powers have been chasing each other in the
outer space and the deep oceans, using weapons of termination, such as
the atomic and nuclear bombs, for extending their supremacy and
colonialism over the powerless peoples who possessed nothing for
defending their homelands.

The prevalence of the modern culture and the increase of the scientific
renaissance could provide no help in the fields of saving man from wars
and the other arduous problems. Some people presuppose that the
promotion of sciences and cultures, as a substitute for the religious
and moral disciplines, may guarantee peace and luxury. This
presupposition is too degraded to be discussed. Science is a two-edged
weapon. Like being used for construction and reformation, it may be used
for demolishing and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Fields in Psychology: 45.

deformation. It has been turned into a crisis and an essential origin of
the international horror and fear only when politicians and rulers
neglected the religious restraint. Robert Milkan says, “The most
important matter in this life is the faith in the actuality of minds,
and the value of ethics. The decline of this belief has been the direct
reason beyond the public war. We must now exert efforts for acquiring or
bracing this faith, lest science will be worthless, and this world will
be disastrous for mankind.”**[1]**

Robert Hushance affirms, “As the material science has attained its
climax in the fields of knowledge, technology and nature, it has
attained the deepest point in the circle of policy and morality.”

In consequence, people have been recording their outstanding triumphs in
the fields of biological and geological sciences. We are living in the
competition of inventions, and there has been a magnificent progress in
the outer space and the other planets. Humanity had never even dreamt of
reaching the surface of the moon. Moreover, there are serious endeavors
to reach the other planets.

We should ask whether such explorations and inventions have achieved
good for humanity in the fields of cooperation, association, and luxury,
or not. The answer is that the contrary has occurred. Such scientific
progress has taken humanity lower and lower into the savage fighting and
the enormous disputation that carried permanent horror to mankind. It
has also taken man to the bottom of ethical worsening and sexual
confusion.

The trends of modern sciences pushed men to degrade each other. This is
clear in the United States where a racial discrimination has been the
characteristic of the legislative regulations. This discrimination is
mainly noticed in schools and universities. The authorities there ruled
that the white should possess lodging higher than that of the black.
There has been a difference in penalties, too. *Al-Ahram*, the Egyptian
journal, mentions in the issue dated on 30/8/1958, that the
international body of antiradicalism called for protesting against the
death sentence issued to Jimmy Wilson, the black American man, for the
accusation of larceny of $1.95 from a white mistress. This sentence
would be executed in September 6.

The scientific progression of the United States could not eradicate such
a wrong and transgression.

The material sciences have lacked the ability of being fair and creating
amiability and cooperation among individuals. Majority of philosophers
refuted the idea that the salvation of humanity from combats and
disasters lies mainly in the scientific progression. In addition, they
declared the falsity of this supposition. Mr. Leman says, “During the
First World War, it was believable that the salvation of humanity lied
in the scientific progression. Today, this illusion has been
unveiled.”**[2]**

Iqbal warns people firmly against such sciences. He declares, “Beware of
the studies you are receiving. They have the capability of killing the
spirit of an entire  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Islamic philosophical thinking; 174.*  
 **[2]** Refer to Education for perplexed world: 52.

nation.”**[1]** As he exposes teaching, Iqbal says, “Modern teaching is
as same as the acid that works for melting humans’ personalities and
recomposes them as it likes. Acid is more influential than any other
chemical material since it can change a high mountain into rubbish.”

At any rate, modern sciences have not been interested in developing
human behavior or leading the new generations to the accurate entrance
to the social lives and the participation in founding sound societies of
amiability and teamwork.

The material sciences have neglected the spiritualities and disdained
the mental disciplines. This has been the most serious disadvantage that
resulted in the pervasiveness of the moral defects. The gravest defects
have been the commonness of crimes, the absence of human ties, and the
release of family links and ethical rules. All the above caused the
modern man to live in a dreadful nightmare.

Neglecting any objective treatment of the educational affairs,
Christianity dedicated the activities to the invitation to the other
life, the negligence of this world, and the lessening of the value of
the earthly desires. It called for confining in temples and churches.
The Christian education, as an educationist emphasizes, dedicated its
mission to the preparation for the other life. Meanwhile, it neglected
the discussion of any worldly affair, including those aiming for
developing the acceptable tastes and intellectuals. From this cause, we
can rule that the Christian education antagonized the liberal individual
education of the Greeks, and the scientific one of the Romans.**[2]**

Priests devoted all efforts to the affairs of the other life. Willula
confirms, “The essential purpose of education is reforming what our
forefathers had ruined, by deciding on the best recognition of God and
opting for the best way of cherishing Him and committing to His path
through acquiring virtues.”**[3]**

The church stopped in the face of the intellectuals and any invitation
to progression and reformation. In the same way, it was recruited for
serving the benefits and the ill deeds of the imperialism. Merrill
Kurthy says, “The alliance of the church and the ruling authorities
reached its climax in the occupied territories, especially the states of
New England. The various religious sects exploited education, which is
surely a strategic weapon purposed for supporting the political powers
of the ruling authorities and protecting them against the competition of
principals and anti habits.**[4]**

Such states gave the missions of teaching to the churchmen exclusively.
Hence, it depended upon churchmen’s recognition.**[5]**

Churchmen courted three hundred thousand scientists, among whom thirty
two thousand were sentenced to burning penalty. Churchmen also punished
Borneo the naturalist for his opinion of the plurality of worlds. He was
burnt alive. By the same token, Galileo was sentenced to death penalty
for claiming the movement of the earth around the sun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Towards Islamic education*: 35-6.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Development of educational hypothesis*: 186-7.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Development of educational hypothesis*: 25-6.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Education and social struggle*: 12.  
 **[5]**  Refer to *Education and social struggle*: 14*.*

As a result of such struggle, the revolutionary naturalists decided that
science and religion should never come to an understanding.**[1]**

This caused the other scientific and reformist organizations to declare
war against churchmen for eradicating their fables and intolerable
regulations that antagonized the scientific and the logic rules. This
intellectual uprising brought about the French revolution that produced
the Chart of Human Rights. The most remarkable articles of this chart
were the declaration of equality, freedom, and justice among people
apart from their different nationalities and races.

In any event, the church could not issue any article referring to the
scientific or professional education. Generally, the Christian education
was subject to fables, myths, and parables of the churchmen.

Thanks to God, Islam has been using and equipping positively all powers
for finding the sound education aiming at developing the human
conscience and expanding the social and intellectual levels in the
boundaries of a single educational process upon the base of which the
individuals are formed in one mode. This formation tends to pursue the
right and justice and compete in the fields of virtue and goodness.
Unlike Christianity and Jewism, the feature of the Islamic education has
not been a sort of utter religion or utter worldly regulations, like
that of the Romans. It has been a harmonious structure of religion and
worldly customs since it aims at achieving a comprehensive renovation of
the two.

The Islamic education has taken in consideration all of the social
classes to which it has dedicated the most excellent courses based upon
the most modern means of civilization, development, progression, and
maturity of mankind. It is the only source of Muslims’ civilization and
glory all over their golden ages. An Islamic educationist says, “It is
impossible for any educationist or historian to deny the fact that the
Islamic education has been the firm ground of Muslims’ civilization. The
eminent idealities of this education comply with the modern trends.
Islam has sanctified knowledge and scholars, and elevated science to
attain the rank of worship. It has cared greatly for all types of
education in general, and the spiritual, religious, and moral in
specific. Islam has called for liberty, equality, and equal
opportunities of learning, disregarding the social classes. Moreover, it
has eradicated the classification of societies and imposed learning upon
every Muslim -male and female- after it provided every attainable means
of studying.

The portals of mosques, institutes, schools, and libraries in addition
to the scientific and literary sessions were widely open before
students. The Islamic states provided the students and scholars with
whatever they needed, including lodgings, free medical care, and
financial supports for guaranteeing good living and sparing enough time
for studying. The principals of modern education -that came forth in the
twentieth century but have not been applied yet- had been conceived and
applied by the Islamic education in its golden ages tens of years before
the modern formulation.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Perfection in Islam –Takamul Fil Islam-: 5/115.*  
 **[2]** Refer to *Islamic Education*: 3-4.

Islam has presented for all peoples on this globe the intellectual booms
that included the bases of renaissance, progress, and comprehensive
rectification involving all of the courses of life.

Generally, Islam has made knowledge the essential element of the social
composition and Muslims’ collective revival. It has encouraged the
receiving of knowledge and made it one of the doctrinal precepts.

The imperialistic powers, initially, manipulated the Islamic homeland
and divided it into small weak humble states that lack the capability of
self-defense. These small states wanted the potential of independence
since the imperialists bounded them to their wheel, and controlled them
thoroughly. The next step of imperialism was terminating Muslims’ powers
and genuineness by contending with the Islamic conscience and opposing
the doctrine and morality.

They recognized the reason that made Muslims achieve the triumphant
conquests- it was the genuine doctrine that rejects humiliation,
dishonor, and slavery. Hence, they equipped all their powers and
intelligences for opposing the Islamic conscience along with its
illumination in minds. They exercised the intellectual conflict, which
has been the fatal weapon of mentality. They also brought into play the
most modern technical means for controlling such conflicts.

The following are the most significant means of the intellectual
conflicts.

### Creating new courses of studying:

The imperialists took sure steps for changing all of the study courses
that are applied in the Islamic countries, by taking away the religious
contents. They also distorted the Islamic history, invented
fabrications, and forged lies against Muslims’ moralities and beliefs.

The British Government committed Dunlop with the mission of instituting
the teaching courses in Egypt. He showed no blemish as he founded an
exclusive policy of teaching when he banished the whole bases of the
Islamic education, and substituted with poor systems resulted in the
intellectual infertility and reversed the religious concepts.

Dunlop’s policy of teaching was grounded upon two pillars:

First, it concentrated on filling as much as possible, the students’
minds with information, and neglecting the other principals of
education. Thus, schools were required to engage the students in
surface, aimless, and profitless information.

-It applied the synchronization system. This barren system aimed at
uniting the methods, courses, and plans of education. Hence, Schools
became quite similar to each other, and their characters were destroyed.
In fact, there are environmental and social circumstances that play a
considerable role in the entity of each school.**[1]**

Such modest educational programs would certainly cancel the genuine
conscience in the minds of the new generations to turn them into
instruments that the imperialists control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Factors of education: 17-9.

In Iraq, the ruling authorities of the British occupancy looked deeply
upon the institution of the teaching courses that served their goals and
interests. They attempted to kill the religious and national spirits.
Taha al-Hashimi mentions the following incident:

Miss Bill demanded with mobilizing the retired officers, who had been
recruited in the Ottoman army. “How can such nationalists and sincere
officers be mobilized in the new Iraqi army?” a British senior official
working in the British Embassy in Baghdad exclaimed, “They will bring
forth sincere nationalist generations.” “You should never worry,” said
Miss Bill with wicked smile, “As long as Mr. () is holding the Ministry
of Education, he will be responsible for teaching the new
generations!”**[1]**

Unfortunately, the imperialists’ educational proposals succeeded, to
great extent, in taking away the religious doctrines from the Muslim
generations’ minds. St. Samuel Zoimer said, “Scholastic teaching and the
Western moral education yielded great results and beneficial effects on
the children and the youth. Once, I could persuade the Muslim pupils
that the precept of fasting in the month of Ramadhan had not been God’s,
since it was impossible to perform such a precept. I raised a ball
before them as representing the earth and focused a bright light on
it.”**[2]**

Jape also expresses proudly and arrogantly the triumph of the
imperialistic education that played the biggest role in shaking the
Islamic faith. He says, “By means of modern schools and media, cultural
and educational activities could stamp a great influence on the
unconscious Muslims. Thus, they appeared, as a general extrinsic view,
as faithless. This was surely the best fruit of the endeavors of the
West that caused Muslims to desert their civilization and Islam, as a
belief, lost some of its significance and power, but as a social
prevalent power, it lost its proper situation.”

The Imperialistic education established a great dam between Muslims and
their religion. They stopped those genuine spirits that destroyed
tyranny.

As soon as the imperialistic powers found a place in the Muslims’ body,
they killed the values, idealities, and genuineness, and made Muslims,
as exactly as they intended, follow their capricious desires and neglect
the right and justice.

The imperialistic great influence on Muslims can be obviously noticed
through the new generations that took off the moralities and became the
soldiers whose mission is achieving the expectations of the imperialism.

Imam Sharafuddin -the master scholar of Islamic ideology- presents the
catastrophic inconveniences of the imperialistic educational systems in
our schools. He says, “The imperialists could prevail on us through the
schools they established in our countries. They cheated and caused us to
send our dearest sons to their schools, which were surrounded by the
imperialistic hands. We realized that our loss had been greater than the
benefits only when the first generation was graduated. Only then, we  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Al-Manawiyat;* an essay of Mahmud Shith published in
*Al-Aqlam* magazine, second part, fourth year  
 **[2]** Refer to *Invasion on the Islamic world.*

realized that our sons had been taught without guidance, or with
misleading one. Hence, our education complied totally with the
imperialistic courses that invaded the spirits of our sons with weapons
that are deadlier than those they had used in invading our territories.
We committed suicide when we sent our sons to such poisonous institutes.
Our nation attempted to regain the past glory by educating the
individuals. Unfortunately, it was only the deceptive misapprehension
that cheated us and caused to throw those individuals in schools that
were founded in the east only for dominating on people’s religion and
fortunes. The result was the unbearable damage that the new generations
suffered, and a new loss of glory called ‘arts.’ The biggest misfortune
was that those individuals were signed up as soldiers and given the
mission of destroying our sacred principals and essences. Neither Islam
nor have the East encountered such a disaster before.”**[1]**

The wording of Sharafuddin is completely true. Neither Islam nor have
the East encountered such a calamitous educational invasion that ruined
our beliefs and ethics.

### The Missionary Campaigns

Unfortunately, the imperialists employed the missionary campaigns -that
should have conveyed the Christ’s spiritual guidance, characteristics,
asceticism, and rectitude- for threatening people and subjecting them to
impartiality and persecution. They also employed those campaigns for
deviating and straying Muslims.

The missionary campaigns were the leading instruments of the
imperialists’ predominance. The British minister of foreign affairs said
in Edinburgh Conference, “The missionaries have aided the government in
all of its tasks. Without them many obstacles would not have been
passed. On that base, the government is in need for a permanent
committee for managing the missionaries’ affairs.”**[2]**

In a report stated by the chairman of the Commerce Chamber in Hamburg,
it was said, “The growth of the imperialists’ wealth is dependent upon
those men who have visited the occupied territories. The most
significant method of achieving this expectation lies in taking the
churchmen to these territories. This is surely the first condition for
achieving such a growth, from an economic viewpoint.”

The imperialists used the missionaries for seizing peoples’ treasures
and confiscating their earnings. They worked painstakingly for
antagonizing Islam because it opposed imperialism and stood against
their illegal purposes. The following decision, issued in the German
Conference, assured this fact:

“The growth of Islam threatens a serious danger to the occupied
territories. From this cause, the Imperialistic Conference recommends
the governments to increase the supervision on *this movement* –Islam-,
and confesses of the necessity of keeping up the plan of complete
neutrality in the religious affairs. The Conference also counsels those
managing the occupied territories to resist any activity that may lead
to the expansion of Islam, and handles the missionaries’ actions that
spread out the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *A beam of light on the path of the Imamite ideology*:
134.  
 **[2]** Refer to *A beam of light on the path of the Imamite ideology*:
134.

principals of civility, especially in the fields of disciplinary and
clinical services. Because of the Islamic threat, it is necessary to
work on advancing the German Christianity for taking the required
reasonable steps in all of the countries that have not received Islam so
far”

The imperialists have used all of their powers and systems for opposing
Islam and Christianizing Muslims or taking them away from their
religion. To some extent, the missionary campaigns achieved these goals.
A good number of Muslims converted to Christianity. In Indonesia, for
instance, 250 thousand Muslims converted to Christianity. The same
occurred in other Islamic states. This was natural because Muslims had
ignored the reality of their religion; therefore, the misleading
propaganda cheated them.

At any rate, the committees of missionary campaigns have been waylaying
Muslims. The usurpation of the Islamic faith has been the job of such
committees. Monsieur Chattily -one of the major personalities in the
committee of missionary- says, “Various opinions have been said about
the results of the plan of destruction, which is the second part of the
Missionaries’ duties. The uprooting of the Islamic faith has been
permanently coinciding with the efforts that have been exerted in the
field of the Christian education. The new political map of Muslims will
surely pave the way to the application of the European civility.
Politically, such a map will vanish, but still we do not need lengthy
time to see Islam surrounded by European wires.”

The plans of missionaries have carried the signs of death and
devastation to Muslims. They have been the most dangerous means of the
eradication of Muslims’ genuineness and the submission to the
imperialistic predominance.

### Christian Schools

The third pillar of the imperialistic combat against the Islamic
conscience has been the Christian schools. Those schools have been
mainly purposed for paralyzing the Islamic movements and Christianizing
or, at least, dragging Muslims to Christianity. One of the missionaries
asserted this fact. He said, “Schools are the most favorable means of
publicizing the goals of the missionary campaigns. In Tehran, for
example, the students in a Christian school attained 115 while they were
40 only two years ago. All those students are receiving the Christian
education.”

The imperialists paid more attention to the Christian schools of girls
since they have been the only gap through which the social decline would
be more effective. In this regard, Jape says, “Christian schools of
girls are the pupils of my eyes. I had always the feeling that the
future of Syria depended upon teaching girls and women. Our school in
Beirut has just begun. Yet, a great deal of care has been arisen in the
missionaries’ media regarding this topic. The French Government paid
good attention for supervising the teaching courses.”

Christian schools are generally imperialistic headquarters that have
been founded for opposing Islam and Christianizing Muslims. In a thesis
about the Protestant Missionary Campaign, Chattily records, “France is
required to depend upon the

rulings of the intellectual education in the schools of the East. I hope
such a sort of education will be soon applied so that it will distribute
the teachings of the French faculty among Muslims.”

As some honorable Muslims intended to establish an Islamic university,
horror covered the imperialists’ media so completely that they held a
conference in Lingo. In this conference, St. R. Simon presented this
report: “Thanks to the missionary schools, the Christian education has
already poisoned the Muslims’ blood. The Government of the Netherlands
applied the courses that are earned from the principals of Christianity
for quaking the Muslims’ false expectations.”

The Christian schools have poisoned the young Muslims for pulling out
the Islamic conscience and planting bad manners and lethargy instead.

### Clinical Employment

The imperialists employed medicine as a means of invading Islam
intellectually and distributing the Christian ideas in the Islamic
homeland.

In the issue 6687, *Al-Mueyyad*, the Egyptian journal, affirms that the
publicity of the Bible and the missionary campaigns via the medical care
were the main means of accomplishing the missionary tasks. Medicine was
chosen because it would be far away from any governmental supervision,
and Muslims would push themselves to the hospitals and clinics of the
missionaries.

In the same issue, St. Klirlsral reports, “Missionaries acquired
people’s love due to the clinical activities that made the enemies
confess that Christianity has been the source of virtues. Missionaries’
means in this regard were the clinical distributions including journeys
and activities of men and women. The German missionaries approached
Muslims through schools and clinical journeys. Muslims’ chiefs received
these matters like thistles in their bodies.”

In the same issue, another report of St. Silstine regarding the clinical
activities was publicized. He reported, “In Khubi Mardan, there was a
clinical Danish missionary of women whose job was publicizing
Christianity among Muslim females. Not before a long time, they would
land to Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan. Women who came for treatment
were received hospitably since Muslims were not interested in the
activities of the she-missionaries.”

St. Lipsos asserted that the Armenian Aid Association changed its
interests into a missionary campaign. He also reported, “Interesting in
securing the Oriental Church is insufficient for achieving total changes
in the East. It is obligatory to antagonize and oppose Islam, the enemy
of the ancient Oriental Christians. Consequently, the Armenian Aid
Association was changed into the German Association of Missionary.”

Because he was the wickedest enemy of Islam, Lobos was given the
management of this association. He addressed his famous word, “It is
unsatisfactory to fight and antagonize Muslims. In fact, weapons must be
opened in their faces.”

The imperialists’ intellectual invasion has mainly aimed at usurping the
Islamic faith from Muslims’ minds, and eradicating their genuineness and
glory, which is simply the Islamic conscience. In Palestine, Roomier
spoke in a conference of

missionaries. After he had expressed the malice they had had against
Muslims, he said, “Our main concern should not be converting Muslims to
Christianity. The most important goal is taking them out of Islam and
leaving them faithless. Thereafter, you will be the first leading group
of the imperialistic convoy. May Lord bless you.”**[1]**

That was the trend of the Western imperialists. Their malice, enmity,
and revenge caused them to address missionaries to the Arab world for
removing any religious basis, and distributing immorality and depravity.
This would surely lead to the worst fate in this life. The mental powers
and the intellectual boundaries of any society will be definitely weak
if religion is disdained. Moreover, such societies will absolutely be
late and will rapidly fall in retardation and extinction.

The imperialistic powers’ dreams and plans came true when Muslims were
banished, humiliated, and deprived of their fortunes on their own lands.
The imperialists seized the Muslims’ treasures and economic potentials
to use them in constructing their peculiar scientific and economic
entities. Meanwhile, the Islamic world has lived in poverty and
scarcity, as well as ignorance. This brought about retardation in
industrial, economic, and military domains.

Israel has been the most serious menace that the imperialists left in
the Islamic world. They brought and protected Israel after they had been
rejected all over this earth. They donated weapons and uncountable
capitals, and asked them to protect their interests and strike any
Islamic or national movement.

Israel is indeed the mother homeland of imperialism, and the chief rule
of aggression. It is headquarter of the imperialists’ campaigns. They
also have used Israel for seizing peoples’ fortunes. This is quite clear
through the imperialists’ supporting, directing, and excusing the
Israeli aggressions. They have also stipulated the Israelites on
capturing more lands and combating the Arabs for dragging them to accept
objectionable matters. The Israeli politicians confirmed, “Israel has
chosen hostility as policy.” It has depended on America’s capitals for
massacring the Arabs and confiscating their lands to substitute the
Israeli Homeland with the Arab homeland. Besides, the Israeli officials
stated that the Arabs should settle in other lands since these would be
the Israelites’ lands. They claimed that the prophets had promised of
so.

The Israelis have worked for eradicating the Arabs in Palestine in such
an unprecedented savage way. Meanwhile the United States has been
cheering on such crude procedures that persecuted man’s dignity. America
has been supporting them with Phantom jets and electronic means. The
Sixth Squadron is ready for protecting Israel. In the United Nations
also, the US authorities have been there for justifying the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to the following references: *Invasion on the Islamic
world.* *Missionary and imperialism in the Arab world.* *Al-Mueyyad*
Egyptian journal. *Secrets beyond the decay of the Arab nation.*
*Al-Arabi* Magazine.  

Israeli aggressions and encouraging more expansion and “new triumphs”
while they have profited the Arab petroleum from which they gain,
annually, more than thirty million dollars. As a reward, the US
authorities have put the Arabs under the hammers of the most uncivilized
and irregular people of this world. The roles of those peoples have been
massacring, fatiguing, and startling the Arabs away from their lands. A
more catastrophic matter is the progression of the diplomatic relations
with Israel in more than one Islamic capital. The officials of such
countries have permitted the foundation of monopolist corporations whose
missions have been mainly spying and assuming the Muslims’ fortunes.

The Prophet (s), whose source was the unseen, determined that the Jews
had been an element of destroying and devastation. He also foretold that
they would waylay Muslims. Hence, he gave the orders of banishing them
from the Arab Peninsula. In the final hours of his honorable life, the
Prophet (s) assured this order determinedly. Had Muslims carried out
their Prophet’s orders, they would not have encountered such a disaster
that terrorized their entity and threatened a coming catastrophe.

Owing to its malicious intendments and wicked schemes against Islam,
Israel forms the most threatening danger against the Islamic and the
Arab worlds. The Israelis have spared no effort for eliminating the
features of Islam and extinguishing its illumination. This is clear
through their activities, such as burning the Mosque of Jerusalem, and
removing any Islamic feature there. The West has defended such
aggressions by providing them with arms because they have been the guard
of their interests. The ruling authorities in the Islamic and Arab
homeland are required to unite their word and settle their discrepancies
for saving Islam against such a gang.

The Arab countries must take initiative steps for using any means for
protecting their lands against the Israeli invasion. They should always
keep in mind the fact that Israel has been expanding in occupation, and
summoning all of the Jews on this earth to join and reside in the Arab
lands. They have been planning for founding the Israeli homeland of
which they have permanently dreamt. They are employing their diplomatic
potencies and the American aid and relief. Consequently, there should be
a united decisive situation, and the most modern arms should be
available. The Arab countries are demanded with establishing
manufactures of heavy arms on their lands so that they will not need the
foreign countries, especially those aiming for predominating on the Arab
countries.

The educational conscience should be highly esteemed in this regard. It
is also essential to nourish the new generations, in schools and
faculties, with the danger of Israel and the international Zionism. All
of the mass media -TV and radio stations and journalism- should be taken
up for this procedure. The armed forces that are the skeleton of this
nation should be given a special attention. They should receive a full
cognizance of the situation. Triumph will be theirs if they have full
acquaintance, as well as belief, with the real situation.

The Islamic world is passing through a decisive and exact stage. As the
imperialists acted so badly to Muslims, they –Muslims- were unable to
achieve any

success or progression. They were also left on crossroads where internal
and external aspects of disintegration had challenged.

It is the educationists’ role to exert all endeavors for recomposing the
Islamic belief in the minds of the new generations, and developing the
feeling of the waylaying danger of Zionism and imperialism. Ministers of
education should manage private systems that should be given the charge
of every matter relating to the operations of planning in the fields of
education and teaching. The missions of such systems should be
presenting the Islamic studies as teaching courses in all of the
academies so that the religious behavior will spread out among the
generations.

The malicious imperialistic educational systems have been the origin of
the crisis of the traditional educational systems all over the Islamic
countries. For composing young generations that believe in their country
and strive for releasing it from the imposed economic, political, and
cultural imperialism, it is obligatory to eradicate and confiscate any
feature of the Western education.

The governments of the Islamic countries should also reevaluate the
educational policies carefully and honestly, and discuss them
comprehensively. They must take in consideration that the educational
philosophy in the previous ages aimed at creating generations that are
unable to develop their countries at all. In other words, the purpose
beyond the previous philosophies of education was providing barren
governmental officials, who lack any purposeful or social attitude. On
that account, it is indispensable to examine the educational plans,
courses, and styles so that it will be possible to produce generations
that are fit enough for taking the responsibility of constructing the
society. In addition, it is binding to check all of the textbooks, for
taking out any doctrinal or ideological aberrance. It is also necessary
to eradicate all the principals and opinions that antagonize Islam.
Finally, it is obligatory to apply a firm supervision on the teaching
staff in favor of throwing away the solicitors of destructive ideas and
unworkable beliefs- such as existentialism.

Islam has presented a complete educational course that create virtuous
individuals competing in the fields of social services, and seeking to
achieve completion in their environments and societies. It has been a
distinctive course containing full aspects of vitalization, growth, and
unification. This course made Muslims, in the earliest ages, such an
unparalleled united power that conquered, dominated, constructed, and
founded the noble values that relied upon the bonds of humanity,
amiability, and cooperation.

The Islamic fascinating education could produce the choice and grand men
of humanity, such as Ammar bin Yasir, Abu Therr, Selman, and others who
built the Islamic history as they riled and denied the wrong. They
promoted the right and enlivened the spirits of sacrifice and struggle
for bracing justice and precluding unfairness and tyranny.

In the current crucial stage, Islam has been suffering a suffocating
crisis in the educational entity. Unmanliness, disrespect, and
disintegration have spread out in our society, and the notions that
provoked the right have predominated. It has become impossible to notice
any shade of the Islamic education since its elements and bases

disappeared. Hence, loyalty has vanished, and amiability and association
–on bases of God’s favor- have been lost. The social hypocrisy has
become a general phenomenon. Greed and struggle for worldly affairs have
become normal behaviors. Any boundary for earnings has been off course,
and sincerity in labor has become a myth. The doctrinal rules, such as
the precaution in treatment (*Ihtiyat*), suspension of the doubted
matters, God-fearing- all these and the like have become out of line.
There has been no compassion, no kind, and no social relations.
Accordingly, societies collapsed, and numerous social epidemics and
illnesses prevailed.

The unfortunate calamities reached the climax when some of the young
left their families to live alone. In consequence, they have given in
the total social bounds and traditions. They have not cared for the
emotional sensations that their fathers felt, and paid no attention to
their duties to their fathers, when they would become too old. Such
fathers suffered too much of the behaviors of their young sons as they
lacked custody and sympathy.

Fathers’ crisis has been seriously cruel, especially from their sons who
had received their studies in the Western capitals, and, in consequence,
acquired the Western habits and natures of leaving their families and
disesteeming their affairs or any social tradition. When young men and
women are out of their parents’ hands, -especially when they lack any
social centrality- they will surely disregard their parents increasingly
and reward them with humiliation and disrespect.

Majority of the youth, nowadays, pursues their lusts and sexual desires
since they could find the way to the cinemas and nightclubs and directed
towards filthy entertainment and the vulgar TV shows. Hence, they lost
seriousness. That was because they lost the conscious education that
protects them and supplies with the noble habits and the virtuous
ethics.

This book studies comprehensively and objectively the factors of the
imperfection and disintegration of modern education. Through this work,
a comprehensive exposition of the Islamic education and its goals that
develop the conscience and improve the intellective levels will be
exposed. An exhibition of the Islamic plans aiming at publicizing the
knowledge that depends upon believing in God and self-discipline will be
provided. The author hopes this work will contribute in developing the
Islamic conscience and serving Islam by putting on views some of the
educational magnificent ideas. Finally, this work is offered to God the
Exalted.  
  

 

**Baqir Sharif Al-Qireshi  
 Najaf  
 Safar, 27, 1391 A.H.**
