Meanings and Goals of Education
===============================

We will identify the lexical and terminological meanings of education,
show the necessity and the goals of education, and refer to its relation
to teaching, philosophy, and policy. Educationists have concerned with
the above as a whole. As a comparative study, we have to pass precisely
by all of the topics that we have recently presented. We will expose
them in the form of a preliminary introduction to the modern educational
studies as compared to the Islamic, which is the main concern of this
book.

### Lexical Meaning

In Arabic, the item ‘*Tarbiya’* –education- stands for bringing up a
child as it is mentioned in the Arabic-Arabic dictionaries of
*Tajul-Arus* and *Lisanul-Arab*.

Accordingly, education refers to bringing up and caring for a child
until attaining juvenility. This meaning comprises mental and
intellectual perceptions.

### Terminological Meaning

Educationists have paid a great attention to the explanations of the
term in order to explicate its scientific purport. Yet, they have not
presented a unanimous one. The following is a set of definitions:

The earliest definition of education is that exposed by Plato’s saying,
“Education stands for granting the souls and bodies as much as possible
an amount of aesthetes and perfection.” This definition comprises
physical and spiritual education. The former is that education which
sows corporal development and prosperity, while the latter is that which
creates perfection and virtue.

 Hubbell renders a characterization of the perfect education. He says,
“Perfect education is that conserving the physical condition and vigor
of pupils, and gives the power of controlling the mental and corporeal
powers. It also increases the rapidity of realization and the sharpness
of intelligence, and accustoms to good and precise judgment and creates
gentleness in fulfilling duties deliberately.”

For Gold Simon, “Education is the way of making the intellect a real
intellect and the heart a real heart.” This definition indicates that
education should be the device of achieving intellective growth and
nourishing souls with virtuous ethics. At any rate, it refers to the
spiritual education exclusively.

Herbert says, “Education is training man for enjoying perfect lives.”
Like the previous, this definition is exclusively restricted to the
mental education.

John Milton defines, “Perfect education is that which helps man to
fulfill any job so accurately and skillfully in peace and wars.” This
definition is dedicated to the professional education.

For Mistalotzi, “Education is developing all of the potentials of
children perfectly and properly.”

Hassle defines education as the manners of disciplining the natural
abilities of children to make them fit enough for being in charge of a
happy compartment.

Gimuel says, “Education is bringing up individuals for satisfying
themselves first, and others secondly.”

Lithery says, “Education is the activities that purpose for bringing up
a child or a young. It is a set of the acquired intellectual and manual
habits, as well as ethical features.”

We may affirm that John Dewey’s definition is the most acceptable. He
defines education as the process of adaptation between individuals and
the environment. He says, “Education is a form and composition of the
individuals’ activities, and then casting them in certain matrices, i.e.
changing the process into a social action that is welcomed by the
others.”**[1]**

Some of the previous definitions should be reviewed since they refer to
a definite category. Logicians affirm that a definition ought to be
comprehensive and inclusive to involve all of the individuals concerned.

### The Educational Purport of the Term

The term has two purports, one is general and the other is specific.

**The general purport** is so comprehensive that it includes every
intentional or unintentional action that helps in developing the
corporeal, intellective, ethical, or susceptible powers.

As a general conception, education includes heredity, environment, and
will, –the three factors of education- and their intentional and
unintentional effects in maturing the powers and the human promptness.
Every motion, activity, or aspect of the social environment that affects
man’s essence or material entity, in any stage of the physical and
mental composition, results in education in variant levels. All the
above are within the effects of the broad-spectrum education. Steward
Mill says, “Education, in its common sense, comprises all of the deeds
that we ourselves do, as well as the deeds that others do for
approximating us to our natural perfection. From this cause, education
includes the indirect effects on ethics and human powers that create
various direct purposes. As examples, we may cite laws, governmental
formulation, arts, manufacture, and the other fields of social lives.
Moreover, the effect may occur to the natural factors that are out of
man’s order, such as climate and geography.”

Education, as a common sense, includes all of the matters that influence
the process of constructing the ethics, apart from the source. Even the
natural phenomena that are out of man’s control play a role in the
processes of education and self-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to The comprehensive of general education: 12, and Spirit
of Education and Teaching: 5-6.

building. If we look at a nice influential thing, this will surely
inspire in the development of our imagination and taste. We always hear
some individuals refer to time, incidents, or events as their educators.
Of course, these matters have nothing to do with self-determination.

**The specific purport** of education stands for the generations’
exchange of the educational and cultural bases. Some educationists
delimit this purport by suggesting that it be committed to the efforts
that are purposed for disposing the youth in a definite worldly affair.
In other words, the specific purport of education is the endeavors and
efforts that the adults exert for educating the intellects of the youth
and ordering their moralities. The activities of the educationists and
the practical teachers, which are aimed for instructing the youth, are
regarded as the specific purport of education.**[1]**

John Stewart denies the common sense of education and allocates it to
the specific purport. He says, “Education, as a term, refers
restrictively to the culture that moves among the generations to provide
the youth with factors of bringing up. These factors pass on the level
of the preceding generation.**[2]**

At any rate, the majority of educationists argue that education, in its
specific purport, is too short to build personal entities unless it
coincides with the common sense, which is the social contact. T. S.
Elliot says, “Schools are ready to transfer only a part of the culture
to the students. Such transference is fruitless unless it is fully
harmonious with the external factors. We do not dedicate the external
factors to family and environment, but we extend them to comprise labor,
amusement, journalism, general views, shows, and means of entertainments
and sports.”**[3]**

### The Necessity of Education

Education is a life necessity and a genuine human concern through which
mental and social constituents are attained. It is surely man’s
distinctive feature. As well as societies, education is necessary for
individuals. An educationist says, “For individuals, education is a
process of social normalization that gives the character of humanity,
which is the distinctive feature. Everybody knows that individuals
inherit their biological roots, such as colors of eyes, hair, tallness,
and the other physical features, from their fathers and forefathers. The
mental and social constituents of personalities are gained only through
education. On that account, the basic chore of education helps in
acquiring the human features. Hence, education is necessary for
individuals and societies in an equal degree.”**[4]**

Education provides with the individual elements and habits the influence
of which remains forever. Some psychologists affirm that babies actually
rest upon others, to great extent, in the minimal needed habits, the
most significant ethical and intellective  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *The modern course in principals of education*:
1/5-7.  
 **[2]** Refer to Development of the educational theory: 23.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Teaching*: 114.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Social principals of education*: 4-5.

specifications, and the general manners of people, life, and labor.
Mostly, babies behave unfeelingly, but as soon as they learn how to
imitate gentle individuals, this ethical and emotional influence will
persist. Shortly, this imitation changes into a habit that is a second
nature. Imitation, however, is one of the two ways through which the
individual specifications are obtained, and personal ethics are
constituted.**[1]**

It is, then, a life element and a basic principal of personal perfection
since it plays the role of coinciding, developing, and maturing the
individuals. An educational analyst says, “Education is necessary for
individuals as well as societies because the newborn individuals can not
be regarded as mature social human beings. Biologically, they are human
beings, but immature since they are incapable of associating and
accommodating in societies. This fact unveils the importance of
education in helping in developing and maturing individuals and their
potentials, preparations, and skills to maximum. In like manner,
education helps in acquiring the social characters for associating and
belonging to societies. Thus, it is important for both individuals and
societies. It is a social necessity, and an individual necessity,
too.”**[2]**

Education is the one and only means of achieving maturity, and raising
the individual and social levels; therefore, it is a binding necessity
of life and a significant part in the entities of societies and
individuals.

### The Educational Goals

Education enjoys serious goals and big social responsibilities. The
specialists have exerted great efforts for explicating such goals and
responsibilities. Yet, they have had different viewpoints regarding the
question of defining those responsibilities. Some worked in the frame of
the spiritual goals while others worked in the material. A third group
looked upon the social goals, and a fourth sought the individual growth
and the personal composition.

### Spiritual Goals:

Some Islamic educationists have affirmed that the basic purposes of
education and learning are self-purity, self-chastity, and the
constructing of relations with God. This is the most elevated purpose
and the noblest intendment. Al-Ghezali says, “O youngster! Many are the
nights that you have passed with seeking knowledge and scanning books,
and you abstained from sleep. I do not know your intendment. If it has
been obtaining the concerns of this world, collecting its wreckages,
holding its positions, and ostentation before the others, then woe is
you! If your intendment is enlivening the Prophet’s practices, refining
your ethics, and violating the bad-tending soul, then many happy returns
will be yours!”**[3]**

A number of Islamic educationists specify self-purity as the provisory
of receiving knowledge. On that account, teachers used to check one’s
moralities before being  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Psychology in life*.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Education and guidance*: 10-1.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Ayyuhal Walad*: 94.

accepted as a student. The morally wrong ones were dismissed from
classes so that they would not use their knowledge in evildoings.**[1]**

Froble says that education is supposed to make the individuals feel
their internal souls, realize nature, and confide in God’s oneness.
Likewise, it must lead the individuals to the sacred pure life that is
originated by the cognition of God, nature, and the human spirit.**[2]**
He also affirms that the purpose of education should be the presentation
of a sacred pure life of sincerity and goodness.**[3]**

Master educationists have agreed upon the idea of dismissing any
edification, which does not lead to perfection and self-discipline, out
of the circle of education. Willula says, “The purpose of education is
improving what our fathers corrupted. We can achieve so by adopting the
accurate cognition of the Lord, cherishing Him, and committing ourselves
to His path through virtues.”

As he asserts the moral aspect of education, John Luke says, “Virtues
are the leading purposes of education.”

The previous opinions have focused lights on the moral and spiritual
aspects of education, ignoring the other aspects.

### Material Goals:

A group of educationists believes that the organization of the youth for
obtaining their earnings should be the main goal of education. Some
English educationists have named this goal as “bread and butter goal.”
This opinion, however, owns a value. Human beings, as they tend to live
persistently, are required to gain the earnings and seek its means that
are actually the most imperative for awarding the survival of the
individuals and the dependants. It has been said, “The learning of a
profession is a security against poverty.”

The wealthy should not rely upon their fortunes and neglect professions
and career. God has made the lands usable, and instructed us to seek the
various ways and have from His sustenance; so, we should show our sons
how to seek their earnings.**[4]**

This opinion is interested in the material aspects exclusively.

### Social Goals:

Some educationists have looked upon the matter from a social aspect.
Jean Beige says, “The most significant goal of education is the
attainment of the perfect boons of personalities, and supporting the
respect of others’ rights as well as the basic rights. Education is
responsible for substantiating the spirit of conformity and familiarity
among people, including the racial and religious groups. It is also
given the mission of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Ibn Arabi’s Adabul Muridin: 2/93.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Spirit of education and teaching*: 21.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Educating human beings.*  
 **[4]** Refer to *Modern course of principals of education* and
*Courses of teaching*: 1/33.cc

developing the activities that are practiced by the UN Organization for
keeping peace.”**[1]**

Kondrsie says, “First of all, education should act for enabling every
individual to master the personal skills, and fulfill the required
social tasks completely, and develop the makings as much as possible. In
addition, it should share out the spirits of equality among people.
Otherwise, it will not achieve the political equality that the law
declares. The social goal of education is the management of learning in
a way that produces the industrial development for achieving people’s
contentment and enabling them to act the necessary social duties.”

Islam has declared most of these goals as the basic principals of the
educational domains.

### Individual Development:

Some educationists believe that the main goal of the educational
processes is the achievement of the individuals’ perfect growth
according to their predispositions and capabilities. The cultural
heritage is regarded as one of the educational means. Such a heritage
should be organized psychologically for fitting the various stages of
development.**[2]**

Other educationists added the estimation of the ethics, the good
behavior, and the activities in labor to the educational processes. They
also added self-will, self-reliance, and the rectification of desires,
respecting people’s rights, good relation with the society, forbidding
evil, presenting the environmental factors, and working for developing
the human societies, to the goals of the educational processes.**[3]**

Plato supposes that one of the educational goals should be releasing the
ignorant individuals from the bonds of unawareness, and taking them from
the world of gloom to that of illumination and freedom. The highest
mental natures should be elevated to the ranks of practicing good deeds
in this world.**[4]**

### More Goals

Philosophers of education state more goals that achieve the individual
development and self-assertion. They are the well being, the emotional
and social duties, and the recognition of the natural world.

Other philosophers expose ten goals as the most important in the
education in secondary schools.

1.        The development of the accurate ways of thinking

2.        The founding of useful habits that are related to labor and
lessons

3.        The development of the social trends

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *People’s right of education and learning*, quoted from
the International Declaration of Human Rights.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Social principals of education*: 65.  
 **[3]** Refer to *The modern course in principals of education*: 1/9.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Plato’s republic*.

4.        The providing of a set of suitable tendencies

5.        The development of the artistic and aesthetic aspects

6.        The development of social senses

7.        The development of individual-social concurrence

8.        The presentation of the principal information

9.        The development of physical conditions

10. The development of a steady philosophy of life**[1]**

### Teaching and Education

The general purport of education, as it has been already cited,
comprises all of the categories of activities that influence the
development of individuals, predispositions, and behaviors. It is not
peculiar to the activities that persons themselves do, or those done by
others. The purport of education covers every modification and
reformation practiced on ethics and behavior. It also includes the
indirect factors, such as laws, the ruling authorities, the manners of
living, the traditions and the social habits and conventions et al.

Such indirect factors, in addition to the material and natural
environments and conditions such as climates and geographical locations,
have effects on education. Finally, all of the circumstances that help
in the formation of the human beings are included in the factors
influencing the processes of education.

From the above we conclude that education comprises every development or
formation that does with individuals’ powers, predispositions, and
behavioral aspects tending to guidance.

Teaching, on the other hand, stands for the transference of information
from a teacher to a student for delivering knowledge. Hence, teaching is
confined in this frame while education enjoys a more elevated and
comprehensive meaning since it includes every positive progress and
maturity of the individuals’ capabilities.

Education, in its common sense, takes account of the whole physical,
intellectual, and ethical aspects of personalities. Teaching stands for
the process of transferring knowledge to individuals. This process is
one of the educational means. The positivity of teaching is estimated
according to the obtained knowledge.

Knowledge may influence the individuals’ lives only when being sentient
and accordant to the actuality that it can be consumed in the
behavior.**[2]**

The imperfect knowledge leaves no effect at all in the individual
composition. It creates the suspension of the practical life.

### Philosophy and Education

Philosophy and education have a firm relation. Fichte affirms this
relation in the essays he wrote to the German. He said, “Without the
benefit of philosophy, education cannot attain a state of perfect
clarity. There is an interrelation between the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Psychology and teaching*: 49.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Planning for education and teaching*: 90, and
*Development of educational theory*: 24.

two any of which will be imperfect and ineffectual without the other.”
John Dewey exceeds this point. He says, “The classical philosophy would
not have been existent without the pressure of the educational questions
on the intellectualities. The foremost naturalists were a single chapter
in the history of science. The educational affairs obliged Sophists and
their opposites on philosophizing. Their educational wording led them to
instigate the philosophic theories.”**[1]**

Hobart Spencer says, “The accurate education can be practical through
the accurate philosophy only.”

### Psychology and Education

Psychology could find a way to the educational affairs when it has taken
in all of the materials of education. It has analyzed such materials to
the preliminary elements that involved the potentials and the
intellective processes. There have been psychological analyses for the
educational courses such as reading, writing, mathematics, languages,
and composition. Likewise, arts and the practical materials of painting,
carving, and ornamentation have been psychologically studied and
analyzed into the preliminary matters, whether intellectually or
manually. Such studies and analyses enabled teachers to select the most
appropriate method that meets the pupils’ predispositions, taking in
consideration the age and the grade. In addition, teachers could use
such studies in choosing the most adequate courses.

Psychology is regarded as the major guide of teaching and educational
processes.**[2]**

### The Educational Development

In the initiation of the history of humanity, houses were the only means
of education. The preliminary tribe had individually the mission of
educating the children physically, intellectually, and ethically, by
arranging the means of the life preparations. This continued until the
opening of the ancient ages. The Roman families, in their oldest ages,
had full and exclusive supervision on bringing up and educating their
children in the various aspects according to distinctive systems that
were independent from any public authority. Education was one of the
responsibilities of houses. Such educational efforts were confused with
other indifferent activities to the degree that education was seen as an
unintentional process. Afterward, houses began to look upon the
educational affairs intentionally. After the invention of
writing**[3]**, education depended upon the familiarity with the experts
of the previous generations, thanks to the recordings of the explored
facts. This added a new household job, which is teaching in the meaning
of private tutorials.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Development of the educational theory*: 17.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Psychology: Principals and educational applications*:
23-4.  
 **[3]** Few thousands of years ago, writing was invented. Before so,
the experts of the generations were transferred orally. After the
invention of writing, man could record and add to the knowledge. This
matter facilitated the procedure of gathering and adding to the cultural
elements. From this cause, it is said that the invention of writing is
the most momentous event of the history of mankind. The previous is
excerpted from *Sociology*: 274.

Fathers, kinsmen, and the elder members of families and tribes did this
job to the children.**[1]** With the shining of the illumination of
Islam, a great change occurred in all of the aspects of life, including
education. Islam paid the greatest attention to education. Muslims have
been encouraged on learning so that they would review the references of
knowledge and culture for improving their lives and raising their
levels.

### Policy and Education

Each political system needs the support of an educational system. The
political and social revolutions paid a great attention to education and
teaching for keeping up the ruling and explaining their philosophy. An
educationist says, “Social dominance through education comes to surface
evidently when a political, martial, or social revolution occur. When
such a revolution achieves success in the political objectives, it
should turn to education to use it as an instrument of achieving the
social objectives. Without education, revolutions are narrowed in a
scope that is isolated from the society and the individuals. Time will
not be too long for terminating the isolated revolutions that lack the
social publicity of their goals.”

Reliance upon education is one of the most significant means of the
modern systems that believe that education and knowledge should be the
slogans of the cultural revolutions. Communism used all means for the
propaganda of their ideology, and founding units in the educational and
teaching institutes to betake the students as soldiers that support such
ideologies and combat the collapsing camp of capitalism.

At any rate, policy, in its common sense, used education as a method.
Education should be an inevitable necessity if such policies tend to
survive and continue.

FACTORS OF EDUCATION
--------------------

Generally, education is an essential base of the behavioral results if
it depends upon the factors that influence its structure and
composition. Without the reasons that lead to the foundation of
education, the fruits will be absent. Summarily, the reasons of the
educational foundation are as follows:

### Heredity:

Psychologists ascribe individuals’ intelligence and idiocy to heredity.
“Directly, intelligence and idiocy lean on heredity,” they said, and
added that intelligent children will easily receive the educational and
teaching systems. Besides, intelligence is one of the most significant
elements of the intellective growth and the scientific maturity. In the
same way, idiot children will encounter difficulty in receiving the
educational and teaching methods entirely. Hence, methods do nothing in
the progression and prosperity of such children. It is seemingly
necessary to have a look on heredity for its  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Factors of education*: 6-8.

being one of the most significant means in the process of structuring
the educational entities.

### Definition of Heredity:

Heredity is defined as the branches’ natural tendency to imitate the
origins in the physical composition and physiology. Other hereditists
define it as the branches’ copying the origins.

### Scientific analysis:

The scientific analysis of genetics implies that human beings being a
single small cell called gamete, which is the most marvelous,
mysterious, and minute in the universe. It refers to the immense potency
of the Creator. This cell is arisen from a process of fecundity of two
diminutive cells, which are the ovum**[1]** and the spermatozoon.**[2]**

The union of these two cells produces the nucleus of a new individual.
In that very moment, it is determined whether this individual will be
male or female, short or tall,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Ovum is a minute elliptical compartment encompassed by a
shell having a hydrous substance called protoplasm.    
 **[2]** The many spermatozoa burst forth the ova for fecundation. As
soon as those ova feel the rush, they prepare for selecting the most
giant, powerful and active. Then the ovum shows a small puff on the
surface from the side facing the most active spermatozoon. The shell
therefore begins to be tender and tender so that the spermatozoon will
hit from that puff and pierce with the head to penetrate to the center.
As the spermatozoon’s tail is still outside, the ovum shrinks and
shrivels till it excises that tail and the spermatozoon combines with
the nucleus inside the ovum. Accordingly, the process of fecundation is
achieved. After a while, the ovum descends to the uterus where it
shrinks to one of its inner edges and begins to grow and move in its
phases. In that period, the tissues and the organic devices compose, and
the limbs, stems, and head emerge gradually. These progresses mostly
occur in the second month of pregnancy. Then a compact membrane, called
placenta -the function of which is protecting and nurturing the fetus
via its capillaries spreading all over its walls- covers all of the set.
These capillaries absorb the mother’s blood, which was menstruation
before pregnancy. This nutrition is done through a marvelous chemical
operation similar to the process of the plant roots’ absorbing water
from the ground. As the placenta is perfectly formed, a faint yellow
liquid called laminose is originated inside the placenta. This liquid
comes from the hydrous leakage of the uterus and the encompassing
membranes. The functions of this liquid, which encompasses the fetus in
the uterus, are protecting the fetus against any shock or impact
suffered by the mother. It also keeps the temperature proper to the
fetus, expands the uterus neck at delivery, purifies and sterilizes the
way for the fetus just before the delivery, and saves the fetus from the
uterus pressure at travails in addition to many other functions. After
the formation of the placenta, the liquid and the frame of the fetus,
the navel rope, which is half a meter -or more- long, emerges next to
the umbilicus. Its function is transferring the mother’s blood to the
fetus for nurturing, and then it returns the blood to meet the mother’s
in the blood circulation. The previous was the process of the fetus
composition in the uterus. God the Exalted elaborates upon these
processes by saying: *And certainly, We created man of an extract of
clay. Then We made him a small seed in a firm resting-place. Then We
made the seed a clot, then We made the clot a lump of flesh, then We
made in the lump of flesh bones, then We caused it to grow into another
creation, so blessed be Allah the best of the creators.*

intelligent or idiot, or blue or honey-colored eyed. All of the
descriptions are decided unchangeably in this cell. Heredity then is a
set of specifications that concentrate in the fecundated ovum.

### Laws of Heredity:

Laws of heredity are within the involuntary matters that coincide with
the individuals all over the life phases.

One of the clearest and most familiar laws of heredity is the branches’
copying the origins in the extrinsic appearances and the private
specifications. This fact is quite evident in all of the creatures.
Seeds of cotton yield nothing but cotton, and seeds of a flower produce
nothing but flowers that copy the mother in colors and characters. This
copying is more obvious in animals. A small cat is being like its
parents in shape and other characters. For human beings, babies bear
resemblances to their parents in the general, as well as the most
diminutive, characters. The black give birth of black ones and the white
give birth of white. In a like manner, intelligence and idiocy are
inherited characters. This is because –as hereditists decide- human
beings enjoy private qualitative parts, called germ plasma, that never
expire but extend in the offspring. Wiseman says, “A baby is his
father’s half brother since each has a mother. In the very moment at
which the ovum is fecundated, it divides into two parts. One keeps the
father’s qualities to move to the new generation, and the other is
consumed during the processes of growth till it changes into a fetus.”
Byron says, “It is true that my son is mine, but I see his forefathers
have hands in this darling thing. They deform his self-purity and bother
his integrity with the unknown evil tendencies that they bore in their
hidden, and he had to receive by heredity.”

Copying heredity is classified into three parts.

### 1. Heredity by partiality:

It stands for the branches’ copying one of the two origins in all, or
most, of the qualities. Boys who bear almost all of the physical and
mental qualities of their fathers are examples of the heredity by
partiality.

### 2. Heredity by coalition:

It implies that the branches oppose the origins’ qualities. When a man
from the east, for instance, marries a lady from the west, the son will
not bear the same physical qualities of the parents.

### 3. Heredity by association:

It means that the branch copies one of the origins in definite qualities
and copies the other in others. A child may receive the intelligence and
tallness from the father, and the colors of hair and eyes from the
mother. Asserting this point, Mendel says, “Majority of the genetic
qualities move from one or both origins to the new generation without
any separation or changeability.”

Individuals may receive the forefathers’ physical and mental qualities.
Dr. Alexis Karl says, “Time extends just like the extension in emptiness
beyond physical edges. Individuals’ boundaries are not more accurate or
firmer than their extensive boundaries are. Individuals are connected to
the past and the future through the essences that cannot extend to the
present. As everybody knows, our individualities are brought forth when
the spermatozoa find a place in the ova. The elements of essence are
existent before that process. They are scattering in the tissues of our
parents and forefathers because we are made from the cell materials of
our forefathers and foremothers. Those materials stopped in the past on
unanalyzed organic states. In our souls, we carry diminutive pieces of
the precedents’ bodies. Our qualities and defects are the extension of
our precedents’ qualities and defects.”

This view states openly that sons and grandsons inherit most of the
forefathers’ mental and physical qualities unwillingly and
involuntarily.

### Heredity and Environment:

The roles of the environment in the mental composition are still
ambiguous. There is also a prevalent belief that the environmental
changes influence heredity. Through many thirty-year experimental
studies on plants, animals and human beings, hereditists could subvert
this thought when they proved that the environment is no more than a
secondary factor of heredity. The environment can decide the emergence
and extents of the qualities and their growth. Therefore, heredity
selects the constant factors, while the environment selects the
changeable.

The environment would never produce matters that are contrary to
heredity because it is not subjected to the factors of changeability and
variableness.**[1]**

### Islam and Laws of Heredity

Islam preceded the psychologists and the geneticists in referring to
many effects and phenomena of heredity, proving its positive role in the
individuals’ sound composition.

The Prophet (s) said, “The knave have been knave since they have been in
their mothers’ abdomens, and the auspicious have been auspicious since
they have been in their mothers’ abdomens.”

This prophetic saying indicates that the genetic elements give the
fetuses either fortune -when the fathers’ virtuous qualities and
tendencies are available- or ill fate in case their qualities and
natures are evil. The contingent qualities are also genetically
received. Providing the story of Noah the prophet, the holy Quran refers
to this matter. God says:

And Noah said: My Lord! Leave not upon this land any dweller from among
the unbelievers. For surely if Thou leave them they  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Man: the unknown being*: 203, *Modern education*: 267
and *The modern course in principals of education*: Quoted from Imam
As-Sadiq’s narration.

will lead astray Thy servants, and will not beget any but immoral
ungrateful children.

This Quranic text indicates that the disbelievers’ offspring, who
genetically receive their fathers’ ill qualities, will also inherit
their convictions. It is reported that a man from Ansar**[1]**
complained before the Prophet (s) that his wife -who was his cousin- had
given birth of a black baby while none of their forefathers was black.
“You have ninety nine arteries,” answered the Prophet (s), “And she has
ninety nine arteries. When these arteries combine, they will be in a
state of disorder and each asks God the Exalted to associate with its
like. This is surely your son. You may leave now. This baby must have
come from one of her or your arteries.” The man took his wife’s hand and
left.

This prophetic notice implies that sons can receive genetically even the
most minute and the deepest qualities. Many Islamic rulings are
legislated according to this fact.

**First**, Islam urges on looking upon the most accurate manners of
women before they are taken in marriage. According to Islamic rulings, a
great attention should be paid to women’s families and lineage so that
any state of anticipated mental or physical handicap or deformity would
be evaded. The Prophet (s) asserted the necessity of checking women
before marriage. He said, “O people! Beware of the green-looking.” “What
are the green-looking, God’s messenger?” some asked. “It is the
beautiful women of evil source,” answered the Prophet (s).**[2]**

He also said, “Select for your sperms. The maternal uncle is one of the
couple –in any sexual intercourse-.”**[3]** “Marry your women to the
suitable, and select for your sperms.”**[4]**

The Imams emphasized on this point demandingly. Ibrahim al-Karkhi sought
the advice of Imam as-Sadiq (a) in the question of his marriage. The
Imam said, “You should check confidently the place you are going to
choose for yourself and the one you are going to make a partner in your
assets, and show your religion and open your secrets before him. If you
insist, you then should choose a non-virgin lady that is known as moral
and well-mannered.”**[5]**

In another occasion, the Imam (a) said, “A woman is a necklace. You
should select what you will put. Neither the good nor do the evil women
have likes. The good women are not like gold and silver since they are
preferred to gold and silver. The evil women are not like dust. They are
lowlier than dust.”**[6]**

Islam dislikes men who marry idiot women in order that families will be
saved from decline. Imam as-Sadiq (a) relates Imam Ali’s saying, “Beware
of marrying  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Ansar -the supporters- are people of Yathrib who swore
allegiance and received the Prophet (s) and his companions after they
had left Mecca; their hometown.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Wasailu Shia*: 14/29.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Ibid.  
 **[5]** Refer to *Wasailu Shia*: 14/14.  
 **[6]** Refer to *Maanil Akhbar*: 47.

idiot women. The companionship of the she-idiot is an ordeal, and their
sons are waste.”**[1]**

In the same way, Islam warns against marrying insane women so that the
society will not come upon irregular and unsound individuals. Imam
al-Baqir (a) was asked whether it was appropriate to marry women after
they had been loved. “No,” answered the Imam, “It is not undesirable to
copulate with the insane bondmaid on condition that she would not have
children.”**[2]**

The Imams urged Muslims on testing and checking women before taking in
marriage, for assuring whether such women or their families are empty of
any mental or physical disability, lest such a disability will be common
in the society.

**Secondly**, Islam stresses that women should identify precisely the
men they choose as the life partners. This identification is the
responsibility of the women’s guardians. Imam ar-Rida (a) told that his
father related that the Prophet (s) said, “Matrimony is slavery. You
will be slavering your daughters when you marry them; therefore, check
the individuals you are going to give your daughters to in
slavery.”**[3]**

Islam warns against marrying the drunkard. The Prophet (s) said, “For
those who marry their daughters to the drunkards, they are cutting off
the relations of kinship.”

In modern medicine, it has been proven that sons receive genetically the
effects of the intoxicants. Dr. Brogans says, “Alcoholism causes
barrenness. Duncan reports the story of the alcoholic lady that could
not be pregnant for years while she had no physiological problem at all.
As she was treated from dipsomania for one year, she could bear a baby.
The same thing is applied to men. The reason is that the alcoholic
materials enfeeble the backbone and paralyzes the brain. The offspring
of those who are poisoned by such drugs receive genetically these
poisons. Hence, they are dangerous not only for the drunkards, but also
for their descendants, nation, and mankind. It is also emphasized that
the successors of the drunkards bear signs of structural frailty and may
suffer serious disorders that lead to insanity, general paralysis, or
barrenness. Genetic effects can kill the fetus or the newborn. Thus,
families may entirely extinct in two or three generations. Moreover, the
offspring of the drunkards may suffer painful deformities, such as skull
defects, shortness, and amentia. They may also suffer from retardation
of the mental powers, such as cenotaph defects, childishness
shortcoming, idiocy, hysteria, and others. Master physicians deemed
unlawful to marry the drunkards for the previous serious dangers that
may occur after marriage.**[4]**

The alcoholic materials that are consumed by the she-drunkards move to
the blood of the fetuses through the placentas inside the uteri. It has
been proven that the suckling babies receive the alcoholic
materials.**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Furou’ul Kafi*: 2/13.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Tahdibul Ahkam*: 6/1.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Wasailu Shia*: 14/52.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Labor and laborers’ rights in Islam*: Second edition,
149-50.  
 **[5]** Refer to *Principals of health and life*.

Psychologists say that amentia and states of hesitation may affect the
drunkards. They also advice women to test such men before combining with
them in matrimony, otherwise they will suffer many disasters and
calamities. Women are inaccurate, to great extent, if they believe they
will be able enough to change such habits after marriage. They have also
proven that maladjustment is one of the reasons of dipsomania. The male
drunkards easily push themselves to wrongdoing, and the female drunkards
are easily led to prostitution. Dipsomania incites the spouses to break
the barriers and challenge their consciences; thus, it becomes easy for
them to breach the matrimonial pledges and lead such social bonds to
failure by the corrosion of the family rules.

Islam –many years before modern science- explored and referred to this
point. It has warned against giving women in marriage to the drunkards
so that the coming generations will be saved against such disabilities
and defects.

In like fashion, Islam bans women from marrying the ill-natured ones so
that their ill manners will not move to the coming generations. Bashar
al-Wasiti sought Imam ar-Rida’s advice when an ill-natured man asked for
his daughter’s hand. The Imam told him not to give her to the
ill-natured individuals.**[1]** Books of the Islamic heritage are full
of reports that urge women on identifying the men that are expected to
be their husbands before agreeing to marriage, so as not to give birth
of evil offspring.

**Third**, as an Islamic rule, both spouses have the choice of revoking
the matrimonial contracts if any of them is proven to have a mental
irregularity, a physical disability, or other defects that the jurists
identify. Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “Matrimony is revocable in cases of
leucoderma, leprosy, insanity, and cystocele.”**[2]**

This ruling saves the Islamic society from such diseases that cause
retardation and social weakness. The jurisprudential bases of Islam
sustain the modern articles that the international health organizations
have declared. The spouses’ blood, for example, should be analyzed
before marriage for recognizing whether any of them is affected by
sexual diseases such as rrhoea, syphilis, or others that are the main
cause of the babies’ blindness or venereal diseases. The calamities of
such diseases are inherited genetically causing mental and physical
disabilities beside the other party’s misery, suffering, and other
mental problems that deprive of a content life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Men La Yahduruhul Faqih:* 2/131.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Wasailu Shia*: 14/594.

FAMILY
------

Family**[1]** is one of the principal elements of constructing
educational entities, creating processes of the social naturalization,
forming the personalities, and providing the children with the habits
that persist forever. In other words, family is the preliminary seed of
composing the individual maturity and the structure of personalities. In
most cases, children pursue their parents in habits and behaviors.
Family then is the most evident, accurate, and abundant of the other
educational elements.

### The Significance of Families

Undoubtedly, family has the great effect in the construction of the
individual behaviors and the arousing of vitality and tranquillity in
children’s minds. Through families, children acquire their language,
values and trends. Families contributed directly in the construction of
mankind civilization and the associative relations of people. It led man
to learn the principals of sociology and the rules of ethics and
moralities. It is also the reason beyond the maintenance of many
professions and career that fathers transfer to sons. It is strange to
notice that Plato’s *Republic* that glorified the roles of the
governments denied the roles of families. This denial led to the belief
that families stood as obstacles in the face of the allegiance and
loyalty to the government. For Plato, home, which enjoys a great value,
is no more than a curse and an evil. Plato shouted out “Destroy those
walls that contain nothing but a limited feeling of the domestic life.”
On the other side, one of our proverbs is that “A man’s house is his
secure fortress.”****[2]****

### Duties of Families:

Family is responsible for educating the children correctly in standard
criteria that are away from aberrance. There is a number of duties and
obligations of families.

**First**, Families are responsible for saving the factors of
settlement, amiability, and tranquillity in home, and removing any sort
of violence, malice, and antagonism. The aberrance of majority of the
aggressive children, which would lead to criminality, was the result of
the home unsettlement. An educationist says, “If we visit jails,
brothels, and insane asylums-- then visit schools for counting the
unsuccessful, the quarrel makers, the politically extremists, and the
abnormal, we will definitely notice that most of such individuals were
deprived of the family settlement. They must have been lacking tranquil
houses in which there should be compassionate fathers and kind  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For sociologists, family is a social bond comprising the
husband, the wife and their children. It also includes grandfathers and
grandsons as well as some kinsmen provided that they partake in the same
living (*Sociology*: 92). Others suppose that any matrimony without
descendants cannot be regarded as family (*Family and society*:
15-6.).  
 **[2]** Refer to *Opinions of Aristotle and Plato in philosophy of
ethics and behavior*: 143.

mothers that do not exceed in dalliance or severity. The corruption of
such houses has created such pictures of social disorder and purposeless
and unsettled generations.”**[1]**

Amiability and compassion to sons have the greatest bearing on the sound
composition of individuals. Mental complexes are the inevitable result
in case fathers pay no attention to this fact. Sons are not ready to
accept any advice or guidance unless there is a sort of sincere
amiability among the members of families. Psychologists have proven that
the complexes that emerge in the period of early childhood, especially
those complexes that are originated from the parents’ bad relations with
their sons, are the most serious and the preliminary to personal
disorders.**[2]** Mutual concordance and amiability help in creating the
intellectual maturity and the personal boons. Dr. Gilas Thomas says,
“Despite the parents’ big responsibility of guiding and training their
children, it is quite important to realize that such practices should
never replace another essential task that parents must do. This task is
the creation of an amiable mood that is shaded by care, and surrounded
by compassion and justice. If parents show dearth in reviving such a
mood in which the norms of composition are illuminated, they will
deprive the children of an uncompensated constituent. Religion, society,
and school play a remarkable role in educating the youth. However, none
of these factors can save the impressive emotions the center of which is
home, and the perfumes of which are smelt among families only.”**[3]**

The family pleasure prompts tranquillity in the children’s minds and
helps in facing the life difficulties. Salama Musa says, “The family
pleasure of children prompts tranquillity to the degree that it does not
fade away even if fathers depart the life. When the children of London
were evacuated during the raids of the Second World War, it was found
that the children who enjoyed that family pleasure could stand the
estrangement more than the others could. This proves that the family
satisfactory mood prompts tranquillity in the children’s minds. Hence,
those children could encounter the estrangement satisfactorily.
Estrangement increased for the children who were brought up in
troublesome mood. Finally, we expect the children to provide pleasure if
they are brought up in pleasant mood.”**[4]**

**Second**, families should supervise the processes of education.
Sociologists confirm this necessity. They emphasize that families must
be in charge of the processes of the social education through which the
children acquire the cultural experts and the rulings that make them
eligible for receiving more and more, and fit enough for dealing with
the society. Correspondingly, educationists confirm that parents should
afford enough compassion, sympathy, and kindness to their children for
securing them against depression and melancholy. UNESCO provided a
noteworthy report about the defects that may be suffered by the children
due to the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *House and school*: 27-8.  
 **[2]** Refer to *psychological and intellectual diseases*: B*.*  
 **[3]** Refer to *Children’s daily problems*: 48.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Your and my brain.*

deficiency of fathers’ compassion. “Children’s deprivation of their
fathers, whether temporarily or permanently, results in depression and
melancholy accompanied by feelings of sinfulness and malice. It also
causes uncontrollable rebellious tempers, self-faintness, and loss of
the feeling of family compassion. Children that are affected by the
deprivation of fathers always swim in illusive worlds, because they are
the substitutes of the actual world that they have lost. In most cases,
they dream of heroic fathers and angelic mothers. In a survey on
kindergartens, it has been noticed that defects, such as difficulty of
articulation, ill naturedness and deficiency of emotional sentiment,
occur to the children who depart their parents, despite their good
health, maturity, and accurate intentional motives.**[1]**

Association and supervision are the best ways of protecting the
children. Modern educationists affirm that the best heritage that should
be left to the children is no more than a few minutes a day.**[2]**
Sociologists who survey the juvenile delinquency have proven that the
best way of eradicating the juvenile aberrance is picking the fathers
who wander at night from the streets.**[3]**

Indisputably, fathers who fulfill their duties to their sons, such as
supervision and association, will find those sons copying their
qualities and natures. Fathers are also asked to give away the luxurious
amusement and confine on supervising their sons so that they will be
saved against degradation and negligence.

Ahmed Shawqi –An Egyptian poet- says that orphans are not those
individuals whose parents depart away and leave them alone. Real orphans
are those who have to encounter negligent mothers and busy fathers.

**Third**, some educationists believe that fathers and mothers should
apply the following steps as duties:

1.        Parents should unanimously agree upon the criteria of
behavior. One should support the other in the decisions that are related
to their sons.

2.        Fathers should put in their daily programs that they must
associate with their sons, including the babies, for a considerable
time. Such practices contribute in seeding the feelings of association
in the family.

3.        Children ought to make out that their fathers should have
enough time for personal activities and practices, such as privacy,
reading or practicing their hobbies.

4.        Fathers should make their daughters feel their femininity and
responsibility of being virtuous, chaste, and righteous.

5.        Sons are in need of masculine, powerful, and kind fathers. Any
excessive hardness and strictness may cause the sons to take shelter of
their mothers and pursue womanish behaviors.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Influences of family and society on juveniles*: 37.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Al-Mukhtar*: issue of April 1956.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Al-Hilal*: issue of May 1957, p. 18.  
 **[4]** Refer to *How to be successful father*: 39, 67 and 85.

Naturally, children enjoy spontaneous qualities, such as purity,
inexperience, sound emotions and simple mentality. Thus, parents should
direct their eyes to virtues and seed moral tendencies so that they will
yield well in the future.

### Functions of Families

1.        Families are in charge of producing and satisfying the
children with upright moods for fulfilling their biological and social
requisites. Families that only produce children have no difference with
animals.

2.        Families are responsible for training the children to
associate and identify the values and customs of societies.

3.        Families are responsible for providing the children with means
of personal composition in societies.

4.        Families are responsible for securing settlement, security,
protection, and sympathy to the children until they attain adulthood.
Families are the most proficient body that can afford so because they
receive the early children**[1]**, while any other social association
cannot replace them –the families- in this regard.

5.        Families should take on the great portion of the children’s
ethical, emotional, and religious education all over the various stages
of childhood. They are fully responsible for the children’s religious
education, whether the political regimes, such as the communists,
directly or indirectly oppose religion, or neutral in the ethical and
religious affairs, such as France. Thanks to the family life, the
individuals receive the religious spirits as well as the other family
emotions that prepare for associating in societies and homes.**[2]**

Childhood requires a good deal of care and means of mental and physical
maturity. It is quite unacceptable to hypothesize that families’ one and
only role is affording the fiscal supports. Such a hypothesis neglects
the various mental factors, such as emotion, affection, security, and
tranquillity that are essential for composing the individuals. These
factors are important for the children’s mental maturity.**[3]**

Psychologists and educationists confirm that families play the greatest
role in the process of education and the formation of personalities.
This significant role becomes more manifest when we take in
consideration the biological principal which affirms that the younger
the human being, the more increasing formation and obedience. It is also
possible to apply this principal to the mental powers in the variant
levels of maturity. Families are responsible for all of the effects that
early children encounter, since they are the basic factor of the
children’s lives and the head source of their experts. Further, families
are the genuine appearance of the children’s settlement. From this
cause, the children’s personal settlement and maturity are totally
dependent  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Humane society*: 59-60.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Family and society*: 20-1.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Educational social family*: 69-71.

upon the variant quantitative and qualitative relations of families.
Analysts find out that the children’s religious and moral values develop
in the surroundings of families.**[1]**

### Family in Islam

Islam has instituted the system of family on sound bases agreeing with
the life necessities and the individuals’ exigencies and behavior. It
has regarded the family talents that are afforded by God, as
spontaneous. God says:

*And one of his signs is that He created mates for you from yourselves
that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love and
compassion.*

This phenomenon on which mankind have been natured is one of God’s grand
portents and graces. Islam also works for arranging the Muslim families
to be good exemplars and have the elements of orthodox leadership. As
God exposes the manners of the virtuous servants, He says:

*O Our Lord! Grant us in our wives and our offspring the joy of our
eyes, and make us guides to those who guard against evil.*

The availability of good exemplars and virtuous patterns is the most
important rule in the educational processes.

In the previous surveys of genetics, we have referred to the Islamic
rule that any matrimonial bond should be first founded on test so that
the defects of any spouse would not move to the coming generations and
societies. Islam has also given fathers the guardianship on their
daughters for selecting the most appropriate husband and dismissing the
disabled who may cause misfortunes and problems. Since women generally
realize only the shells of life, they naturally show blemish in
selecting for themselves. In most cases, women are deceived by their
fiancés’ false promises and appearances. Most women lack enough
acquaintance with the deceitful licentious individuals that may speak of
the fascinating words of love and fondness and imaginary promises and
pledges. They ignore that a satisfactory marriage occurs only when the
other party enjoys noble ethics and high traits that encourage on caring
for their affairs and rights, and producing virtuous offspring that
bring pleasure and contentment in the final age. Islam stresses on this
result.

The system of families that is instituted by Islam relies upon the deep
cognizance of the elements of family contentment and bond in
physiological, mental, and social fields. It calls for satisfying each
individual with kindness, affection, moderation, and settlement.

Islam cares a lot for achieving amiability, understanding, and harmony
between spouses since their bond represents the chief core of families.
These qualities are available in the ideal spouses about whom Hammerlock
Alice said, “Ideal marriage does not rest on accordant desires. It rests
upon a chaste union that is based upon deep warmth that increases day by
day to scope all of the fields. This is the union of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *How to help sons in school*: 193.

flavors, feelings, and tendencies. It is the union of common life as it
binds to paternity burdens.”**[1]**

Islam wants the sexual bonds to be ideal and based firmly upon love and
understanding so that the educational processes will fruit effectively
and create sound societies.

Islam has legislated for attaining all of the objective courses aiming
at conciliating, developing, and leading the families to prosperity. On
that account, it paid a special attention to the role of home, and
ordered the common ethics among families and delimited the private
duties that bring about family association and have a positive influence
on the educational composition.

### Significance of Home

Home, through which the social environment achieves the children’s
educational results, plays a considerable role in the educational
processes. Children receive traditions, practices, beliefs, arts,
traits, history, and triumphs of their nations through their homes. The
social environment can attain its strong effects in education only when
home accomplishes its missions successfully. Corruption of children is
the natural and the inescapable consequence of home corruption. There is
more than one role played by home in the educational processes since it
is the natural source of affection and kindness. The way to tranquillity
passes through home.**[2]** Islam has devoted a specific attention to
home. It has ordered that love and cordiality should prevail on homes.
It also has regulated that any sorts of primness, forsaking, and
reproach may retard the children’s adaptation. Serious deviations, such
as the loss of security, self-confidence, and others, will affect the
children whose homes are too short to fulfill their missions.

THE COMMON COURSES
------------------

Islam has constituted courses that are common among family members and
called for applying them to their lives so that contentment will shade
the all.

### Love and Affiliation:

Islam has called for the predominance of love, affiliation, and
cordiality among the family members who are required to avoid any
concern that may confuse the purity of the living. Women should meet
this liability in the first place since they can turn a home into a
paradise -by fulfilling the duties, considering the morals, and being a
unique believer- or into a hell. A man told the Prophet (s) of his
wife’s customs, “She receives me as I enter the house, and sees me off
as I leave, and alleviates my cares if she notices any. She used to say,
‘You should care about nothing. If you care for the livings, this is the
mission of other than you. If you are caring for a  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Sexual education*: 28.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Elements of education*: 90, *Teaching*: 87 and
*Society*: 19.

paradisiacal matter, Allah, then, may increase your care.’” The Prophet
declared his great admiration of that lady, “Tell your lady that she
will be abiding in the Paradise.  She is truly one of God’s veritable
servants.”**[1]**

When wives take care of their husbands by fulfilling their duties,
affiliation will be prevalent. Furthermore, a tie of deep adoration will
be established among the family members, and this will lead to the
successful education.

### Cooperation:

Islam has called for the spouses’ collaboration in the living affairs
and the management of the home affairs. It has called for living
associatively in mutual affiliation and relationship. This is the task
of the paterfamilias. Islam has bound the householders with attending to
their wives and taking part in the home affairs. The Prophet (s) used to
participate with his wives in the house affairs and say, “Partaking
wives in the house affairs is a sort of alms.” Imam Ali (a) was wont to
help Fatima az-Zahra (a), the veracious and the mistress of women of the
worlds, in the housekeeping and the home management. These acts will
surely establish a spirit of noble empathy -which is the most
significant element of the sound education- in the sons’ essences.

### Mutual Respect:

Islam has urged on mutual respect and abidance by morals among the
family members. The older must feel for the younger, and the younger
should reverence the older. The Prophet (s) said, “The old should be
sympathetic to the young, and the young should reverence the old.”
Abidance by morals erects a sense of good virtues and values. It
correspondingly enjoins the maturity of perfect behavior in the
children’s minds, and incites to fling in the field of collaboration
with the family and the society. Psychoanalysts have proven that the
children’s religious and moral values mature only in the family
surroundings.**[2]**

FAMILY DISORDER
---------------

The family members -chiefly the children- will suffer mental defects,
nervous disorders, loss of sound behavior, and aberrance if the family
is characterized by inharmony and disorder. Modern educational surveys
show that family disorder and unsettlement is the biggest elements of
aberrance.**[3]** Crises that lead to deviation are the results of
family clutter. Consequently, it is essentially incumbent, for
protecting the juveniles from irregularity and deviation, to conserve
the family settlement by removing all of the factors of distress and
confusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Mekarimul Akhlaq*: 1/229.  
 **[2]** Refer to *How to help sons in school*: 193.  
 **[3]** Refer to *The young sinful.*

FATHERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES
-------------------------

Not only are fathers responsible for saving their dependants’ alimonies
and fiscal necessities, but also they are required to provide education,
discipline, morals, and guidance. They must ensure the high traits and
warn against evil. Imam Zeinul-abidin (a) says, “Your sons’ right is
that you should realize their being parts of you and attached to you in
good and evil. You are responsible for providing the noble traits,
conducting them to their Lord, and backing them in worshipping Him as a
compliance with you. They entirely be rewarded or punished. You should
act to your sons as seekers of the good remuneration in this world, and
justified to the Lord through the acceptable supervision and
training.”**[1]**

Imam Zeinul-abidin (a) was used to supplicating to the Lord for his son
by saying, “O Lord! Make them filial pious, godly, aware, listeners, and
obedient for Thee, and adherents and advisers for Thy saints, and
mutinous and antipathetic of Thy foes.”**[2]**

Fathers are subject to bring forth the chaste education for the sons to
guarantee their sincerity. The Imams of the Prophet’s progeny regarded
this topic highly. Imam Ali (a), the first Islamic educationist, says to
his son, Imam al-Hassan, “I consider you being a part of me, being me
all in all. Anything that strikes you is actually striking me. Death
when draws near to you is drawing to me. Your affairs are as same as
mine.”

Yes indeed, sons are not only parts of their fathers. They are truly
their fathers’ all in all. They expose their fathers’ existence and
entity. From this cause, fathers should care for their sons’ education,
edification, and perfection in order that they will take pride in them
magnificently. On the other hand, sons may be evil and mischievous to
their fathers if their education and affairs are neglected. The
following are some of the fathers’ tasks:

### 1. Custody of Sons:

Fathers should take care of their sons by granting them with affection
and tenderness, and conferring honor upon them. These matters form the
most influential effects in structuring their educational entity and
advancing their personalities and mental maturity.

The Prophet (s) had al-Hassan and al-Hussein -his grandsons- in the
greatest custody. As he was having them on his shoulders, the Prophet
(s) used to say, “These two are my single basil in this world. He
whoever loves me should love them.”**[3]** On another occasion, he said
to Fatima az-Zahra (a), “Summon my two sons.” As she presented them, the
Prophet (s) smelt and embraced them.**[4]** It is also related that
al-Aqra bin Habis, seeing the Prophet’s fondness and custody of his two
grandchildren,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Tuheful Uqoul*: 263.  
 **[2]** Refer to *As-Sahifa As-Sejjadiya*.  
 **[3]** Refer to *The Lifetime of Imam Al-Hasan*: 1/83.  
 **[4]** Ibid.

said, “I do not remember I have ever kissed any of my ten sons.” This
saying made the Prophet irate. “What can we do to a man that God has
uprooted mercy from him!”**[1]**

The Prophet (s) poured his ideal and guidance in the minds of his two
grandsons. He also dwelled his merciful tendencies on them. Therefore,
they became the excellent exemplars of perfection. Their liberal
lifetime accumulated the total aspects of magnitude and divinity as well
as whatsoever mankind boasts all over history. They achieved the
elevation in ethics and essence, and delved into the fields of grandeur
and right.

Fathers’ custody, affection, and charity to sons are the most
consequential constituents of the educational entity that consummates
the children’s personal affluence and spares the mental complexities
that are the most serious diseases. Modern educational surveys have
proved that good citizens and virtuous scientists are mostly the outcome
of the careful families.**[2]** Psychologists have asserted this fact,
too. Conversely, the sons that are unwelcomed and disregarded by their
families take aggressive paths and seem to be negative, quarreling, and
rebellious, and invent skillful trickeries for disturbing the adults.
Besides, they tend to criminal behavior.

- The aspects of the family negligence are as follows:

- Cruelty and excessive vulgarity in treating the children.

- The use of the fierce physical disciplining.

- The continuous criticizing, reproaching, and exposition of the
children’s defects before others.

- Intemperance in neglecting and accusing the children.

- The negligence of praising the children.

- Disgracing the children before the other brothers and sisters.

- Showing astonishment when others praise the children.**[3]**

Fathers should avoid the previous matters when they deal with their
sons. This will save the children’s behaviors and guard them against
irregularity and aberrance.

### 2. Equality:

Fathers should cover their sons with equal amounts of love, affection,
and custody. Many psychological complexities, jealousy, fury, and the
arising of mental passive revolts may occur to the children who notice
any distinction in the fathers’ conservation. These effects may lead to
serious psychological ailments.

The holy Quran exposes the story of Joseph the prophet when his father
favored him to the other brothers. Consequently, they plotted for an
artifice by which they threw him in a well and came to their fathers
weeping. The father –Jacob the prophet- was so regretful that his eyes
turned into white. A calamitous crisis that he had to suffer was owing
to favoring a definite son to the others. The Prophet (s) is reported to
say, “Treat your sons equally as you like to be treated fairly in
benevolence and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Mekarimul Akhlaq*: 1/252.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Education, Child, and Child psychology*: 305.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Psychological consonance*: 21-2.

kindness.” As he noticed a father of two sons kiss one and neglect the
other, the Prophet (s) reproached, “You should have treated them
equitably.”**[1]**

Equality among sons is one of the components of the Islamic education.
Fathers should never distinguish between brothers. Fathers who address
charity and benevolence at certain sons exclusively, or give the
heritage exclusively to the sons and neglect the daughters, are
definitely out of the circle of Islam. Such procedures arouse hostility
and hatred among the brothers and cause retardation in their educational
entity, and mental disorder and slowdown in the social relations. It is
proven that the sons that are deprived of paternal affection and
benevolence are stroke by psychological complexities, social antagonism,
and severe conduct. Fabrication, larceny, cruelty, evildoing, and
assaulting deeds are the effects of the children that lack paternal
affection.

“Children’s paternal hatred stops against the social conditioning. It
cancels the feelings of security and self-confidence. Modern
psychological surveys have confirmed that the most critical causes of
disquietude are the nullity of the family emotional warmth, feelings of
others’ negligence, deprivation of love, kindness, and affection, and
feelings of weakness in the aggressive world. Secondly, inequality among
brothers arises the feelings of disquietude in the children’s minds, and
kills the spirits of keenness that help in pushing the way easily and
tranquilly. Disordered men feel of depression and mental torment
everywhere.”**[2]**

Fathers should treat their sons equally, lest the sons will be affected
by such serious ailments that smash the mental entities.

### 3. Cordiality:

Fathers must cover their family members, especially spouses, with
cordiality, affection, and benevolence, and meet their needs entirely.
God has instituted this as one of the wives’ rights. It also contributes
in the children’s prudent education and personal contentment that live
in aspects that are filled with love, affection, peace, and settlement.
Islam has urged on caring for wives. The Prophet (s) said, “The best of
you are the best to their wife. I am the best to my wives.” He also
said, “Wives are the husbands’ delight. Almighty God favors those who
deal with their delight in the best way.” Imam al-Baqir (a) says, “May
God’s mercy be upon those who enjoy good relations with their wives.
Allah the Exalted gave men the wives in possession and made them their
custodians.” Imam as-Sadiq (a) says, “Fear God while you deal with the
two weak; women and slaves.”

Fathers ought not to displease or wrong their wives. The Prophet (s)
says, “The best men of my nation are those who do not encroach or wrong
their wives and those who treat them kindly.” He then recited God’s
saying:

*Men are the maintainers of women because Allah has made some of them to
excel others.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Mekarimul Akhlaq*: 1/252.  
 **[2]** Refer to *psychological consonance*: 21-2.

Fathers’ natures and manners to their family members leave the greatest
influence on the children’s consonance in the society. The children’s
personalities achieve prosperity only when their fathers’ treatments are
well. Contrariwise, children’s behaviors and intellectual maturity are
badly affected and ceased if fathers use rudeness.

### 4. Avoidance of Obscene Language:

Fathers, as paterfamiliases, are in charge of constituting the
educational entity of their families. They should avoid obscene
language, vulgarity, and any matter that injures the general manners.
Chastity and homogeneity should find a considerable place in every
house. It is obligatory upon fathers, whose words and deeds penetrate
the hearts of their sons who are influenced by their manners and morals,
to shield the family members from evil and obscene language. Children
who notice their parents’ ill deeds can never have sound education and
growth up. Similarly, children who notice their fathers say false things
will never comply with their instructions of truth and sincerity. They
pursue their fathers’ deeds and actions. On that account, fathers must
apply the noble traits and manners to their lives to be good exemplars
for their family members.

### 5. Supervising the Sons’ Behaviors:

In most cases of the ethical crimes that are committed by juveniles, the
source is heeded to be the fathers’ negligence of superintending their
sons and discounting the signals of aberrance they show. Naturally,
children whose conscience and mind are imperfect cannot distinguish
between good and evil. As children notice that no problem or reproach
occurred owing to their doing a bad deed, they will certainly keep up
doing it habitually.

Islam has urged fathers on associating and supervising the behaviors of
their early children for saving them against the pollution of crimes
that are arisen from aberrance. Nowadays, it is unfortunately noticeable
that fathers disdain this condition on which the future of their
children relies. This terrible negligence led to the young’s deviation
and moral degradation. Violence and irregularity have become the nature
of most young men’s behaviors and morals.

One of the ugliest sorts of negligence and deviation from the sound
educational courses is the unsupervised mixing of the two sexes of the
same age in schools and universities. In most cases, such mixing may
induce young women to lose chastity and avert the behavioral criteria of
probity.

Fathers are liable -before God- for supervising their sons’ behavior and
turning them aside from all of the evil tendencies. Al-Ghezali says,
“Opting for certain methods of educating is one of the most significant
and considerable tasks. A child is his father’s trust. His stainless
heart is a precious gem that is clear from any image or picture. It is
becoming to receive any image and follow any way. If a child is inured
to good, this will stick to his mind, and the pleasure of this world and
the Hereafter will be amassed for him. Parents, tutors, and trainers of
children have a share in his

rewards. Inversely, if a child is inured to evil, and neglected like
animals, nonsuccess and loss will be the result. The guardian will
undergo the sin of misguidance. God the Exalted says:

*O you who believe! Save yourselves and your families from a fire whose
fuel is men and stones; over it are angels stern and strong, they do not
disobey Allah in what He commands them, and do as they are commanded.*

Fathers should save their children against the hell-fire and that of
this world. Fathers’ salvation is educating, disciplining, and leading
their children to the noble traits and keeping them against associating
with the evil. Fathers should avoid inuring their children to luxurious
living, otherwise the sons will spend their lives looking for such
things, and this will definitely cause damage. Fathers’ supervision
should be initiated with the children’s early years. It is also
essential for fathers to choose chaste and religious wet nurses and
nursemaids. Women’s milk is unblessed unless it is produced from legal
earnings. Children who are brought up on such illegitimate food will
tend to evil and illegal matters.”**[1]**

The previous opinion of Al-Ghezali is, to great extent, exact. Modern
educational surveys have accepted this opinion. Early supervision,
encouragement on the noble traits, and the avoidance of the evil
tendencies; all these are the matters that incite prosperity of this
world and the Hereafter. In like fashion, negligence and non-supervision
lead to nonsuccess and damage.

### 6. Disciplining:

Fathers should take initiative in disciplining their children as soon as
they notice a behavioral irregularity or any offense that contradicts
the religious and social traditions as well as the general manners.
Precipitation in disciplining the wrong children is a sufficient means
for removing evil and rebellious spirits. Islam has confirmed this
matter. The Prophet (s) said, “Discipline your children. This is better
for you than a daily giving of a big sum of alms.” He also said, “If you
honor and discipline your children aptly, God will forgive you.”

In most cases, irregularity that accompanies the children is the
consequence of the fathers’ negligence and failure to discipline the
children who deviate. Sheik Naraqi says, “Children that are neglected in
the earliest stages of growth up will mostly opt for ill manners. They
chiefly prefer fabrication, envy, and obstinacy, and become thieves,
traitors, and impolite. In other cases, such children may be weakling,
licentious, and profligate.”**[2]**

### 7. Taking the children away from the sexual activities:

Islam has warned spouses against copulation near their children, since
this may incite their lust and give them a motive to seek fields of
harlotry and depravity. Imam  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *History of education*: 82.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Jamiu-saadat*: 1/270-1.

al-Baqir (a) advised Jabir saying, “Avoid copulating in a place where a
boy that is able to distinguish your doing, can see you.”**[1]** Imam
as-Sadiq says, “Men should never copulate with their ladies where there
is a boy. This brings about fornication.”**[2]** The Prophet (s) said,
“I swear by the Prevailing of my soul, success will never approach boys
who see or hear even the breath of the copulating spouses. Fornication
is the result.”**[3]**

Specialists in sexual education have affirmed the necessity of taking
the children away from the sexual relations. Sir Pepsi says, “The sexual
sense is existent to every human being including babies to whom this
state begins to gush after maturity. So, it is very much important to
avoid any activity arousing this state before its proper time. Some
fathers undervalue the necessity of preventing the children from
noticing them when they strip their clothes. Such fathers go to extremes
in this regard, as they think of being intellectuals or progressists who
should give us the opportunity to see them naked. As children frequently
notice such manners, they will soon be paying great interest to the
sexual characteristics in their minds.”**[4]**

Children’s minds are quickly affected by what they notice. On that
account, it is essential to take them away from whatever stirs up the
lusts and corrupts the moralities, for guarding them against aberrance
and irregularity. As the western education paid no attention to this
regard, their sons had to encounter mental damage, many sorts of sexual
troubles, and moral downfall as well as the absence of social bonds.

### 8. Taking the children away from the ill-gotten food:

Fathers should provide legal-gotten foods to their children, and protect
them against any food that the Lord has forbidden. The forbidden foods
are the usurped, the real filthy things -such as pork-, the external
filthy things -such as foods affected by external impurities-, and the
like things that are detailed in the theses of the jurists. Fathers
should exert all efforts for habituating their children to have legal
food only since, as it has been proven through modern clinical surveys,
the sources of nutrition leave a great influence on the behavior and
maturity.

Islam is terribly sensitive to any matter that may delay the children’s
growth and personal prosperity. Ill-gotten foods have internal
aftereffects on the mental constituents. They may cause the hindrance of
the behavioral activities in a way permitting the composition of evil
tendencies, such as severity and extreme assaults. As Islam has cared
for these aspects, it issued the obligation of keeping the children
clear of the ill-gotten foods. It is related that as the Prophet (s)
noticed that Imam al-Hassan -when was a child- put a fruit of date palms
in the mouth, he disciplined,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Tibbul-ayimma*: 135.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Al-mehasin*: 317 and *Wesailus-Shia*: 7/95.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Furou-ulkafi*: 2/58.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Sexual education*: 55.

“Throw it out! Have you not known that we –the Prophet and his
household- do not have from foods given as alms?”

After the calamitous incident of Kerbala, Imam al-Hussein’s harems were
taken to Kufa as captives. As some people noticed that the accompanying
children were starving, they gave them some fruits of date palm as alms.
Ummu-Kulthoum, the Prophet’s granddaughter, reproached the children and
informed that it was forbidden for the Prophet’s household to receive
alms. Immediately, the children took the fruits out of their mouths. As
the Prophet’s household kept up this illuminative behavior in the
educational fields, they produced those unprecedented and unparalleled
young men and women who formed the greatest exemplars in veracity,
chastity, and decency.

### Mothers’ Responsibilities

Mothers are the headmost schools of structuring the children’s
personalities, and supplying them with the noble traits. Polite and
courteous mothers produce virtuous generation. Decadence and lewdness
are the outcome of the generations that are brought up by impolite
mothers.

On mothers’ shoulders lie great social liabilities. They are responsible
for the nations’ future, honesty, and progress. They are the origin
brick in the building of the educational entity. They also bear the most
momentous aspects of the education of children since they are the
builders of the bases of the children’s tendencies and moralities
through guiding to virtues, ambitions, progression, action, and
self-reliance. It is very much difficult to change totally the matters
that the children acquire before their eighth year of age. So, those
matters influence greatly the society and peoples’ lives and maturity.
It is so natural that a child --when brought up on ambition,
progression, activity, and diligence- will positively add strong pillars
to the nation for achieving the required deeds and structuring
propitious civilization.**[1]**

Mothers enjoy some motives for helping in the children’s custody and
education:

1. Mothers are more tolerant than others are in the field of educating
and keeping their children. This is because they enjoy natural
instinctive motives. God has given deep love and affection to mothers
exclusively so that they consider their children as their hearts and
souls. Without this, children would not exist and live.

2. Mothers are more aware and conscious of their children’s morals and
moods. They are also more enlightened with the soundest means of
enjoining good and forbidding evil.

3. Naturally, children respond to their mothers according to the law of
exigency. They exert all efforts for carrying out their mothers’ desires
and obtaining their satisfactions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Educational management*: 9.cc

### Mothers’ duties:

Mothers, who desire to see their sons be their future pleasure and
relic, should work hard for educating the sons and overseeing their
behaviors by sticking in their minds the good biases and the noble
idealities.

1. Mothers should endear and encourage on every good conduct by
referring to the successful outcomes.

2. Mothers should warn their children against any criminal and evil way
and custom, and should warn them against the behaviors of any party that
is incongruent to the religious and social habits. They should refer to
the consequences of such things that are injurious for families,
societies, and the children themselves.

3. Mothers should choose chastity and morality as the courses of
educating their daughters whom should be guided to the qualities of the
female exemplars. They should be warned against recklessness and being
affected by the fashions of those women who are unaware of their
chastity and dignity. Careful tutelage should be focused on daughters
and their affairs so that they will not be polluted by the libertine
conventions that, unfortunately, found their way to our Islamic
societies, and invaded our people’s intellective and doctrinal lives.
Daughters are usually more obedient -to their mothers- than sons. They
are always in need of their mothers. Hence, mothers should maintain,
manage, and train them on housekeeping. They should also make them
perceive the life’s liabilities so that they will fulfill their duties
in the future and become the good mothers of other generations.

4. Mothers should not exceed in pampering their children in order to
avoid the disadvantages that contribute in the retardation of education
and the future unbecomingness.

5. Mothers should attract their sons’ attentions to the high standards
of their fathers. They should insist on reverencing and respecting them.
This will improve the fathers’ roles in disciplining the deviate and
leading to the good behavior.

6. Mothers should never contend their husbands since this creates an
aspect of mutual malice and hatred. Consequently, such matters may lead
to the children’s disorder and anxiety as well as other mental
complexes. Islam has urged women on pleasing the husbands and neglecting
any matter that may enrage them. The Prophet (s) is reported to say,
“Allah will not accept any dissuasion, remuneration or good deed of the
wives unless they satisfy their husbands.” “Wives, who mistreat and
burden their husbands with arduous and unbearable things, will not be
rewarded for their good deeds, and God will come upon in ire.” “Wives
will not fulfill God’s rights before they fulfill their husbands’.” Imam
Abu Jafar says, “The deeds of wives, who address at their husbands that
they did not see any good from them, will be come to nothing.”**[1]**

Muslim wives are asked to satisfy, appease, and comply with their
husbands in addition to avoid whatsoever may disturb them. This is the
only way of saving good education for their children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Mekarimul Akhlaq*: 1/46-7.

7. Mothers should inform the paterfamiliases of every aberrant deed they
may notice on their sons’ behaviors. Fathers’ turn then is disciplining
and guiding the sons to the correct path. Mothers should never cover up
such deeds lest sons will have motives to keep up the incorrect manners.
Mothers are also asked not to make objections to fathers’ disciplinary
punishments lest sons’ rebel and corruption may increase.

8. Mothers should protect their sons from the streets that are full of
seductive matters and motives of antisocial behaviors. Nowadays, streets
are including, to excess, the aberrant ones and those who are morally
affected and the source of children’s being polluted and dragged to
junkyards of immoralities and serious offenses.

9. Mothers should deprive their sons of any cause or method that may
injure chastity and purity, or collapse the morals and ethics, such as
sexy books, novels and cinemas, nightclubs and the like. Such sources of
seductive media draggle to the lowest levels of whoredom and insolence.

10. Mothers should conserve chastity and good behaviors. They should
never display their charms and cast their screens. They should keep up
the Islamic conducts so that they would be the good exemplars of their
sons in fields of chastity and noble descent. Finally, they should elude
any matter that may arouse the cravings and corrupt the moralities.

Honest matrimonial relation creates the precious emotions of the husband
and incites him to believe perfectly that he should prefer his sons and
wife to his own interests. Dishonest relations, on the other hand,
eradicate the husbands’ jealousy to their wives and smash any cerebral
motive to bring up their sons honestly or care for saving good life for
them. This grand disaster affects mankind. Moral corruption of the young
is one of the consequences of that disaster. Sons who lack familiarity
with affectionate fathers who care for them will most surely opt for
immorality. Indeed, death of emotions leads to death of humanity.

### Sons’ duties:

Islam has given a great attention to sons whom are required to respect
and obey their fathers absolutely. Thus, impiety to parents is one of
the grand sins for which God has threatened the hell-fire. God’s Book
refers to the obligation of benefaction and obedience to parents in more
than one position. God has attached the obedience of parents to worship
and compliance with Him. He says:

*And your Lord has commanded that you shall serve any but Him, and
goodness to your parents. If either or both of them reach old age with
you, say not to them so much as ‘Ugh’ nor chide them, and speak to them
a generous word. And make yourself submissively gentle to them with
compassion and say: O my Lord! Have compassion on them, as they brought
me up when I was little.*

Muslims should treat their parents according to this straight course
that represents Islam’s genuineness and constancy in education and
teachings. Muslims should also

meet their parents with thorough travails of service and charity, and
dedicate all of the deeds to the parents’ use until they are emotionally
satisfied. Besides, the spirits of contentment and acceptance should be
dispersed in the parents’ mentalities. Any single word of boredom or
annoyance should not be said to the old parents who lack the ability of
managing their affairs. In such cases, it is insistently imperative to
serve and superintend them. It is quite obligatory to use leniency with
them and supplicate to God for their good and meet them with the best
forms of dignifying and honoring since these acts leads to God’s
forgiveness. Reports of confirmations of the Prophet and the Imams on
the commitment to benevolence and piety in treating parents are
uninterruptedly existence in the reference books of hadith and history.

Imam As-Sadiq (a) narrated: “O God’s messenger!” a man addressed at the
Prophet, “I have the desire to participate in jihad.” “Yes,” said the
Prophet, “You should strive for God’s sake. If you are killed, you will
be divinely alive and rewarded with earnings. If you die, God will be
rewarding you. If you come back safe, your sins will be totally condoned
as same as the day on which your mother had given birth of you.” “O
God’s messenger!” said the man, “I have aged parents who claim they feel
at ease with me and disagree to my departure.” “Then,” said the Prophet;
“You are to settle with your parents. By the Prevailing of my soul I
swear, one day’s ease you provide to your parents is more preferable to
a year participation in jihad.”

Hence, we notice that sons’ piety to their parents is more rewardful
than jihad, which is one of the portals of the Paradise.

Zakaria Bin Ibrahim said: I had been Christian before I converted to
Islam, performed the ritual pilgrimage and came to Abu Abdillah (Imam
as-Sadiq) and told of my conversion to Islam. “What have you noticed in
Islam distinctively?” asked the Imam. I referred to God’s saying:

*You had not known what is the Book or the believing. But, We made it a
light by which We raise whom We desire.*

The Imam raised his hands upwardly supplicating to God for my good and
guidance. “My father and mother, who is sightless, are Christians,” said
I, “I usually accompany them and eat from the same saucer.” “Do they
have the pork?” asked the Imam. “Never,” I answered, “They do not even
touch it.” The Imam instructed, “Never mind. You should be pious to your
mother. If she dies, none other than you should make her funeral
ceremonies. You should manage her affairs.”

As I was back hometown, I began to implement the Imam’s instructions of
piety of my mother that she wondered the reason beyond my extraordinary
supervision. “O son!” she pondered, “When you were on my religion, you
did not do this to me. As you converted to Islam after your immigration,
I noticed this fantastic piety to me, what is this?” “A man, who is one
of our Prophet’s descendants, instructed me,” I answered. “Is he a
prophet?” asked she. “No,” I answered, “He is a prophet’s descendant.”
“These are certainly the prophets’ instructions,” she expressed, “Your
religion is really the best.” She then Islamized.

Islam is grounded on rewarding the well doers and piety to parents as
much as possible.

Islam asserts on mothers’ piety specifically more than fathers’. This is
because mothers’ rights upon sons are more abundant than fathers’ are.
On the authority of Imam as-Sadiq, a man asked the Prophet which of his
parents he should treat more benevolently. “Your mother is,” said the
Prophet. “Who’s next?” asked the man. “Your mother is,” confirmed the
Prophet. “Who’s next?” reasked the man. “Your mother is,” said the
Prophet. “Who’s next?” reasked the man. “Then comes your father,” worded
the Prophet.**[1]**

Sons are responsible -before Allah- for supervising and honoring their
mothers by saving whatever they need. It may be a part of rewarding the
burdens and difficulties that they stood and exerted in educating their
sons. As a man was shouldering his mother to perform the ritual
circumambulating of the precept of pilgrimage, he asked the Prophet
whether he had fulfilled her duty. “No at all,” asserted the Prophet,
“You have not met even a single sigh.”

The filial piety and obeying the parents -by serving them- are
fundamental constituents of the Islamic education that aims at
establishing social ties that should be based upon true amiability and
association.

MODERN FAMILY
-------------

Today’s problems of families are seriously impending. Owing to the
social variances, modern families have left many functions they had met
before. This caused the dissociation and collapse of family bonds. An
educationist says, “As a matter of fact, one of the serious and main
threats of modern society is the dwindling of the natural roles of
families. This occurred because many other associations seized most of
the roles of families. This is unfortunately anticipated to make
families lose that effective role which is the most important power of
social settlement.”**[2]**

It is inadmissible to regard the feckless opinion of calling to the
negligence of the family affairs and the laxity of any discussion or
thesis in this regard, since this plays no single role in the social
development. Moreover, Marxism, in its first stage, declared that family
affairs are one of the sources of exploitation that should be destroyed.
They claim paterfamiliases’ capitalizing on their wives and sons to use
as productive means.**[3]** It is to add that Engels confirms, “The
individual families do not work in transferring the means of production
into a public ownership which is the society’s economical unit. Private
home management is similarly changed into a craft, and children’s
supervision and education are changed into a public issue. The society
should charge the mission of educating the children including those who
are not due for marriage. All those will surely eliminate the feeling of
abashment that girls feel  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Usoulul Kafi*: 2/161-2.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Teaching*: 87.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Statement of Communist Party*: 96.

because of some reasons related, in this time, to the most important
economical and ethical factors that impede girls from subjecting freely
to the one they love.”**[1]**

Communism has conceded many of its decisions because it collided with
the factuality of people all over history; family is an indispensable,
constant, and unchanging system. Thus, the Russian project has directed
to elevate the family affairs and work for protecting the state for the
good of children and mothers. It has also legislated the law of granting
the pregnant working women vacations before and after giving birth with
full stipends.**[2]**

At any rate, it is significant to have a short prospect on the terrible
damages that families encountered under the shades of the modern
materialist civilization.

### Women’s Conceding Education

In the past, women settled in their houses for supervising their sons
and looking after their husbands’ requirements. In association with men,
women used to play the role of the instructors to their sons. In the
present day, women went out for practicing men’s jobs. Home affairs
became secondary tasks for women most of whom, in many countries,
conceive that giving birth of children contradicts their jobs;
therefore, birth control and negligence of giving birth floated on the
surfaces.

It is quite understandable that women are singly responsible for
contriving the social and mental spheres for achieving perfect and sound
growth up of children. Numerous disadvantages were the outcome of
women’s secluding their basic functions. Family collapse has been the
main pitfall of this misdeed. Women began to meet their husbands and
children in concise periods. For many of them, family has been something
similar to a locanda that is vacant of any social or mental tie, which
constantly calls for putting the family interests in the top.**[3]**

Women’s being outdoors has deprived the children of enjoying the
motherly affection since mothers practiced their outer jobs and left
their children most of time. Artificial nutrition and wet nurses can
never supplant mothers’ affection and kindness. Experiments have proved
that mothers’ milk is not the sole source of children’s maturity.
Mothers’ affection and tenderness, which is the natural and mental
nutrition that is received through their breasts, share the same
significance of natural nutrition in the fields of sound maturity and
growth up. This is the main reason beyond favoring mothers’ nutrition to
the artificial. In other words, mothers’ milk gives physical and
affectionate maturity, while the artificial may contribute in the
physical only since it is empty of the natural love and tenderness.
Mothers whose babies are nurtured artificially are recommended, by
pediatrists, to embrace their babies frequently.**[4]** As a rule, sound
maturity is attainable only through the reception of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Origin of family* 81. For more information in this
regard, it is recommended to refer to *Communism*: 50.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Soviet constitution*: 72.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Social bases*: 72.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Bases of mental health*: 75.

acceptable amount of mothers’ love and affection. Mothers who leave
their houses and babies will lose love and affection. Many
educationists, economists and psychologists reproach women’s secluding
their houses. Let us refer to some of these wordings and leave any
comment. A grand philosopher says, “As women began to practice general
jobs, families began to dispel. Tests have proved that women began to
revolt against the traditions of familiar ethics.”**[1]** John Simon the
economist says, “Nowadays, women have been weavers and typists. The
governments employed women in factories. They earned some money, but
razed the pillars of their families thoroughly. It is yes that husbands
benefit by their wives’ earnings, but their own earnings have been
reduced because women began to compete with them.”**[2]** August Cant,
the sociologist, said, “If women’s manners in the social structure are
kept up in the way they desire, expiry is their fate. They will be
captive bondwomen.”**[3]** Annie Rod says, “It is quite preferable and
less disastrous for our girls to work as maids in houses to joining the
factories where they are polluted with profanities that rub out their
glamour for good. I wish our countries were like those of Muslims in
reserve, chastity and purity. Maids and servants there lead a life of
ease and comfort and are treated as same as family members without any
sort of abuse. It is dishonorable for the country of the English that
our girls became models of vice due to association with men. I wonder
why we decline to make our girls practice the jobs that accord their
natural characters, such as the home affairs. For protecting our girls’
honor, we should lead them to avoid men’s jobs.”**[4]**

Shafiq Jibri says, “Women in America are leaving their nature when they
began to compete with men in their jobs. This participation will soon
demolish the rules of their social lives. How can a woman work and
supervise her children and manage her home affairs at the same time? The
American women drifted in this course so excessively that a sort of
vying with men will be the result.”**[5]**

Samuel Smiles says, “Systems that decide women’s working in factories
for saving the national fortune are arising lethal results that destroy
the structure of the house lives. Such systems are raiding at the
frameworks of houses, demolishing the family pillars, and unknotting the
social ties.”**[6]** Ms. Amina Saeed says, “Ignorance is still
widespread among women. The present family decrees should be discussed
in the parliaments more than other issues. As much as I conceive, a
house is an unparalleled paradise. Women’s settlement in their houses
equates thousands of political rights.”**[7]**

When women left their houses to enter to the factories and compete with
men in jobs and economy, they became too short to fulfill their house
missions completely. They also show shortage in the task of educating
the early young. When the working  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Islam and Western Civilization*: 17.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Majalletul Mejallat*: 17.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Wagdi Encyclopaedia*: 8/605-6.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Al-Menar* Magazine: 4/486.  
 **[5]** Refer to *Land of Sorcery*.  
 **[6]** Refer to *Hypothesis of sexual relations in the Quran*: 94-5.  
 **[7]** Refer to *Allamatni –She taught me-*: 24.

women return home, they are encumbered with an exhausting state. How can
such women then provide a sound education for their children? Naturally,
this forms a menacing danger on the generations that could be affected
by several mental defects and behavioral unsettlement, as educationists
and psychologists affirm.

### DIMINUTION OF MATRIMONIAL PROPORTIONS

The diminution and extreme reduction of the matrimonial proportions is
the most threatening exposure that forebodes the family entities. Modern
materialist civilizations has offered women as a low-priced and trite
stock that most of the youth abstain from marriage since they could
easily have the sexual carnality. They also lost any motive to be
involved in marriage and its accompanying liabilities. Sheik Behi
al-Khuli says, “The young men refrain from marriage since it prevents
them from getting the accessible renewed desires. The motives of modern
developments have brought about the expansive freedoms regarding ideas,
wording, beliefs, and private behaviors, in most of the western
societies. It has also established material goals in assets, utilities,
and sensual desires that contradicted the spiritual goals and the
criteria of honor and chastity. Thus, everyone had the private extensive
freedom through which he could do whatever he liked without any legal or
traditional barrier. Traditions and social attitudes urged the
individuals daringly on doing whatever they want. The result was the
triumph of sex worship. The mania of lusts became too prevalent to
exclude any. Hence, matrimony became a manacle that restrains the
freedom of obtaining the desires. Each individual would leave his friend
to find another at whom he can renew the flaming desires.

This would indisputably lead to the reduction of the population and the
weakness of the nations in their mental and material components. Ten
years ago, some European societies showed the disadvantages of such
moral disintegration. Unfortunately, it is got bigger and bigger to
include many other countries.

Sociologists are ringing the tocsins and warning again the coming
misfortunes of the negligence of family. They are also alarming against
the ethical collapse, the destruction of social ties, and the extinction
of generations. It was thoroughly true when the French Marshal Petan
called his people to virtue on that day when the German forces occupied
France in the Second World War. He said, “Weigh your steps. They are
surely hefty in the balance. You have disdained the virtues as well as
the total spiritual principals. You have rejected the children,
relinquished the family affairs, and pursued the libidos.”

The Islamic states are required to attend to the establishment, conduct,
and the guaranty of the security of families. They should also improve
the economic, cultural, and political circumstances that may influence
family systems. Like alimentation, teaching, and defense, the Islamic
states are fully responsible of managing families in the most
appropriate manner. As a matter of fact, there are many alike purposes
that

should never be left in the individuals’ hands because they are the
governments’ missions.”**[1]**

### Sexual deviation

The reduction and diminution of the matrimonial proportions exuded the
disadvantages that threatened the destruction and disintegration of
family entities and individuals’ behavioral disorder. One of the most
critical disadvantages was the predominance of abuse. It is clearly
notable that nothing should be more menacing and fatal than the
commonness of abuse, which is behind the confusion of lineage and the
collapse of the moral rules. God has counted fornication with
polytheism, and compared it with those who commit homicide. They are
threatened of immortality in the hell-fire. God says:

*And they who do not call upon another god with Allah and do not slay
the soul, which Allah has forbidden except in requirements of justice,
and who do not commit fornication and he who does this shall find a
requital of sin. The punishment shall be doubled to him on the day of
resurrection, and he shall abide therein in abasement.*

Islam has instituted many dams and obstacles against fornication. It has
ordered women of concealing their charms. God says:

*And do not display their ornaments except what appears thereof.*

It is also forbidden for women to attract the attentions and leading to
their beauties and decorations. God says:

* And let them not strike their feet so that what they hide of their
ornaments may be known.*

Men are forbidden from associating with women except the family members.
The Prophet says, “You are not permitted to meet women separately except
those enjoying a degree of prohibition.”**[2]** It is also illegal to
touch women other than the family members. The Prophet (s) said,
“Stabbing with an iron pin is quite preferable to touching a
non-consanguineous lady.”**[3]** The rewards of the women’s prayers that
are performed in their houses are as same as those performed in mosques.
This Islamic ruling intends to guard women against mixing with men and
being pushed in depravities and losing dignity, nobility, and honor.

Islam has used all devices and potentials for contesting the sexual
deviation and the libidinous anarchy, and struggling all of the means
that cause women to fall in depravities. Islam has also called for
elevating women to the maximal levels that make them good housewives,
educators, and gentle. It has intended to cause them to be encompassed
by dignity and honor. The modern materialist civilization has  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Human rights*: 115-6.  
 **[2]** Refer to *al-Bukhari’s Sahih*.  
 **[3]** Refer to al-Beihaqi’s *Sunan*.

cheated women and driven them to sins and licentiousness. Hence, women
left the bright field into a mean life of humility, meekness, and
qualms.

Horrible waves of perversion have crept into the western world due to
which women lost the meanings of chastity, dignity, coyness, and
honesty, and lacked any knowledge of the genuine meaning of existence
except saturating their sexual libidos. Prostitution has been common in
clubs, institutes, and public locations in such a horrible way that it
embarrasses humanity. People have no longer counted the prostitution
with the ugly socially deniable matters. They have to agree upon
encouraging and admitting it. Paula Bierro says, “Nowadays, prostitution
has turned into a well-structured system comprising officials,
hirelings, writers, publishers, speakers, instructors, physicians,
midwives, and commercial tourists. The most up-to-date means of
publications, shows, and advertisements substituted for this regard.”
George Askan says, “Adultery, inchastity, and opting for vulgar manners
have became one of the red-hot livings for the present girls.”

The daily and political mass media of the West have been suffocated with
topics that drive women to strip the dresses of chastity and purity.
This caused women’s unconcern, pollution, and running behind lustful and
libidinous falsities, changing the boyfriend whenever they feel bored.
This led to the corruption of the family affairs and the disorder and
aberrance of the family members.

Prostitution is a grand epidemic that affects the societies. It is also
one of the most significant motives that smash the social entities and
eradicate its genuineness and cohesion. Diseases, such as chancroid,
syphilis, and leukorrhea prevail on societies that are affected by the
epidemic of prostitution. Likewise, these diseases eliminate the public
health, cause serious ailments, eradicate the personal integration, and
dismiss all of the moral and ethical sources.

These epidemics have affected many territories around this world.
Hospitalities and clinics have received great waves of the diseased
everyday. Despite the modern medications, these epidemics prevailed
hugely on people and led to other mental diseases such as hysteria.
Lunatic asylums were suffocated with the diseased of hysteria, which is
the outcome of the sexual diseases. Thus, the numbers of the victims of
such diseases increased horribly. Meanwhile, such diseases thwart
economical developments and progression on which the prosperity of
health depends. Finally, they have been wasting a great international
wealth as disbursements of the medications of the diseased by such
epidemics.

The outbreak of the contraceptive tablets among the prostitutes who fear
pregnancy is one of the humiliating aspects of the sexual deviation.
These tablets have been greatly widespread among the students of the
Western colleges and institutes where the states of abortion and
miscarriage have been intensely common. Such states should naturally
leave an extreme influence on women’s health and lethargy, and play a
great role in the processes of birth control. The prodigality of
foundlings has also been one of the results. In the capitals of the
Western countries, this phenomenon has occupied a great area. This has
caused the governments there to establish refuges and orphanages for
receiving the great numbers of those afflicted individuals who have

originally lost the paternal affection and undergone a great deal of
mental complexities, as psychologists assure. Ill manners, natures, and
social impression are the most menacing dangers affecting such
individuals. These were only a part of the dangers of the sexual
anarchy, which threatens waves of dominating sins over the family
structure and leads to decline.

### Sons’ impiety

Another aspect of the modern family disintegration has been the sons’
isolating their parents distinctively in opinions, beliefs, and
tendencies. The modern education has used all of its material potencies
for doubting and reducing the parents’ customs and ideas. Thus, the new
generations cursed their fathers’ idealities and values. This created an
ideological and mutinous struggle against the (antiquated) social
traditions. A violent and intense combat between sons and their fathers,
who continually complained the sufferings of their sons’ impiety,
disobedience, and ill manners, was has been come up. They reported
various stories of the sons’ crudeness, inchastity, severity, and
depravity. John Dewey the educationist says, “It is inutile to mourn for
those old days that carried the sons’ good manners, chastity, respect,
and obedience. Mourning will never regain the past, however. Modern
changes are the outcome of the natural edicts that should be solved only
by a sufficient amount of disciplining.”

Dewey’s opinion is very true. Modern changes on family, educational, and
social systems have been the main cause of the sons’ mutiny and extreme
disobedience. It is impossible to regain the former nature without
reeducating the natures and desires, and seeding virtuous tendencies in
spirits.

### DISINTEGRATION AND LOOSENESS

Terrible sorts of disintegration and looseness have affected most of the
modern families. Exaggeration in using the various sorts of pleasures
and plural of prohibitive matters led to moral downfalls and behaviors.
Running behind amusement causes incoherent generations that lack the
meanings of human and social values and idealities. Children, when
notice their parents addicted to the intoxicants and other vices, will
surely have ill behaviors and misguidance. An educationist says, “Family
has generally become a humble sphere of education. Modern parents have
exceeded the borders in their naivete, agitation, weakness, or
awkwardness. Most of such parents may convey those defects to their
children. Most children receive the ill manners, corruption, quarreling,
and addiction to intoxicants through their houses and families. Others
may receive such manners through their friends. So, it is not
exaggerative to decide that most of the modern parents ignore the proper
ways of education disregarding their social class. Schools have fallen
behind in fulfilling their duties. Teachers’ behaviors are not much
different from those of parents.”**[1]**

In most cases, the aberrance of the early young is based upon the family
disintegration and looseness. It is correct to affirm that the family
reformation is  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Child between genetics and education*: 1/289-90.

preceded to the other educational factors. Family is the first school
that has a direct influence on behaviors and guidance.

### School:

School is one of the educational elements that help in composing the
children and amending their education. Schools, when enjoy good
intendments and sound courses that are managed by a sincere teaching
body, will produce conscious generations that believe in their national
goals. On the other side, when schools neglect their duties and
liabilities, the national values will collapse and the generations will
be affected in their behaviors and intendments. It seems important to
have a brief look on schools.

### Prominence of schools:

Schools have an eminent access to man’s progress and development. They
are the sources of the ideological illumination and the scientific
maturity. In addition, they are the most significant principle of saving
people from ignorance and vice. An educationist says that the
establishment of a school is the demolishing of a prison.

Shakespeare says that science is the wing by which we fly in skies. A
French author records, “This world is keeping successfully on
approaching to thinking in humanity. It is impracticable for any nation
to elevate by any means other than the generalization of teaching.
Science is the only manner of protecting people against ignorance.”

The spread of schools and science is an essential provision of any
national renaissance, attainment, and elevation. It is also a basic
element in the structure of the educational entity and the children’s
acquiring a sound personality and behavior. Some educationists decide
that schools are more influential than families are in the field of
education. They say, “For their positions, schools are the national
means of the educational management. I oppose those who threw the
burdens of the ethical education on the shoulders of families. I decide
schools’ roles in the children’s ethical composition must be on great
importance since the most significant part of the moral culture cannot
be received through any aspect other than schools. Family may have the
ability of arising and developing the house clemencies that are
essential for moral lives and based upon simple individual relations.
Yet, families are still unable to be the most virtuous means of
preparing the children for performing their duties in the social life
soundly.”**[1]**

Mental life in early childhood is usually weak. Sentimental life in the
same period is too naïve to allow the psychological state to compose the
life elements without the existence of schools. From that cause,
educationists care much for schools and reckon with the most significant
educational portions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Ethical education*: 19.

### Teaching:

For educationists, teaching is not merely how to write and read. It is a
comprehensive meaning for all means of preparing the individuals to
participate in their environments. It also gives an adequate amount of
study to make them conscious citizens that are competent for serving
themselves and their societies.

### Goals of teaching:

Educationists are disposed to the goals and purposes resulted from
teaching. They are as follows:

### Development of the Cognizance:

The chief function of teaching is the development and guidance of the
conscience and the tendencies in such a prudent way that agrees with the
good of the individuals and societies. The teaching staffs are in charge
of managing this guidance and developing the feelings of serving people.
It also functions for plunging into the positive undertaking for others’
good. This is the very point to which Islam has referred. “You should
long to others the same things you long to yourselves, and hate to
others the same things you hate to yourselves.” This is a prophetic
saying indicating the topic involved. On the composition of this noble
tendency, Islam has built its creative education that aims at serving
the societies and developing the means of elevation on the bases of
mutual association and advice.

Psychologists affirm that the leading mission of schools is the orderly
influence in the individual behavior that is directed by the society.
The main function of schools must be directed to the children’s
behavior. The scope of changing is the actual measurement of schools’
success in conducting the generations’ comportment. Schools should seek
the help of all of the humanitarian sciences for achieving this success.
This fact provoked on the establishment of a department in psychology
devoted to solving the educational problems. It is named educational –or
teaching- psychology.**[1]**

### Publicity of the Educational Conscience:

The general criterion of peoples’ progress all over the stages of
humanity depends upon the amount of teaching opportunities that are
provided for the individuals. This is the greatest fortune that nations
may possess.

Teaching must purpose for publicizing the cultural conscience that
relies upon the individuals’ realizing the encompassing circumstances
and the ability of improving them. The educational and teaching
institutes should work for stretching the scientific spirits and using
the modern scientific means in the private or the general life. This
achieves the life prosperity and the prevalence of scientific conscience
all over the country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Educational psychology*: 8.

### Identification of the Social Problems:

It is imperative for the teaching processes to identify exclusively the
social questions and problems. As much as we conceive, the imperialism
is the most menacing danger that the Islamic nation had to face. It
executed Muslims’ dignity and rent asunder their nation into weak small
countries. It also rooted Israel in the heart of the Arab nation,
supported with armament, protected, and favored its aggression and
assaults against the Arabs. Israel has been playing the role of
humiliating the Arabs and Muslims, seizing their territories and
banishing them. The imperialists’ purpose has been replacing the Arab
homeland with the Israeli so that the sources of the Arabs’ great wealth
would be in their hands. Thus, it is quite urgent for the teaching
staffs to attract the early generations’ attention to the dangers of
Zionism and imperialism, and create a revolutionary spirits that are
based upon antagonizing the imperialism. This is surely the greatest
service that the teaching staff may provide for their countries.

### DUTIES OF TEACHERS

The teaching message is not limited to enlightening the pupils with
information. In fact, the teachers’ tasks are more comprehensive.
Besides teaching and stuffing the pupils with knowledge, teachers should
prepare them soundly to associate and establish their own lives in the
various fields. Teachers should also provide for empowering the pupils’
talents, disciplining their morals, undertaking their desires and
tendencies, planting virtues in their hiddens, and educating them
according to the systems that confirm their societies’ traditions for
making them good citizens. Moreover, the teaching staffs are responsible
for founding the bonds of cooperation with the pupils so that they can
identify their problems and behaviors. They should never misuse their
positions. They should show their students a fraternal spirit to lead
them to the right and establish in their minds the immunity against
falling in crooked paths.

“Teachers are playing the role of the pupils’ pioneers and their
guardians’ guides and masters. This is the base of composing sound
societies.” Teachers can prepare virtuous and orthodox generations in
the society only when they fulfill their educational missions so aptly
and seed the ties of confidence and love with the pupils. Teachers
should evade alignments and defects since these restrain the pupils’
individual and social activities. They are also required to describe the
most significant gaps that hinder the pupils’ scientific development.
Islamic educationists refer to other duties that the teachers ought to
care and undertake.

-Teachers should provide a detailed study of the Islamic civilization
and its values and developments. The influences of the Islamic
civilization on the other civilizations should be focused, too.

-Teachers should provide a study of the current Islamic society for
familiarizing the elements of the ceaseless modification and identifying
the aspects of its power and weakness. Pupils should have full
acquaintance with all of the parts of the

participation in establishing a perceptive, powerful, and united Islamic
society aiming for achieving justice, raising the levels of livelihood,
and securing the individuals and the society.

-Teachers should present the geographical and cultural connections of
the parts of the Islamic homeland, which is completely perfected and
reciprocally coupling.

-Teachers should provide a comparative study of the teaching and the
educational systems all over the Islamic countries.

-Teachers and pupils should visit the Islamic countries, and contact the
educational and teaching institutes there.

-Teachers should arouse the Islamic sense in the pupils’ spirits by
providing them with the spirits of taking pride in their religion so
that this may reflect on the whole sorts of the aspects of individual
and social behaviors.

-Teachers should provide a detailed study of the Islamic history and
geography for identifying the Muslims’ past glories and present
interests.

-Teachers should unveil the grand Islamic personalities in the various
fields of the human civilization.

-Teachers should guide the pupils to their national duties in the social
and political fields.

-Teachers should immunize the citizens against the foreign ideological
invasion that intend to pervert the Islamic spirit.

-Teachers should enlighten Muslims of the threatening dangers of the
imperialism and Zionism.

-Teachers should encourage Muslims on the positive activities that aim
at liberating the territories that are seized by the Zionist gang.

-Teachers should provide the Islamic behavior that comprises the bases
of common cooperation, responsibility, feelings, and sacrificing for the
publics.

-Teachers should study the courses that lead the pupils to their duties
to their parents and families.

### Qualifications of teachers

A teacher is the nation’s pioneer and the generations’ instructor who is
bound with the greatest social responsibilities. The following are some
qualities that teachers should carry:

- Teachers should be acquainted with a suitable amount of knowledge and
science as supports in identifying the nature of the human behavior,
reasons, and results lying behind this behavior.

- Teachers should acquire a set of skills helping in practising definite
sorts of activities.

- Teachers should acquire a set of virtuous tendencies that help in a
successful interaction with the pupils.

- Teachers should be punctual and capable of conducting and taking in
consideration the various circumstances and situations.

- Teachers should supervise accurately their functions and use the best
fruiting acts in the fields of performance.

Teachers are successful only when they contribute in rendering good
citizens who serve their nations consciously and faithfully. Nations
would collapse and the social progression would be hindered if teachers
neglect these goals and stop at filling in the pupils’ minds with
information only. Unfit teachers publicize psychological disorders among
the pupils as if an infectious disease has affected them.**[1]** At any
rate, the real education requires the teaching staff’s powers of
working, intelligence, and endowing with the righteous customs, virtuous
moralities, self-reliance, and consciousness. They are also asked to
fulfill the principals that are required by the genuine education. These
principals are as follows:

- The attainment to perfection.

- Benefiting by and guiding the children’s natural talents.

- Educating the desires and encouraging them on doing well.

- Caring for the pupils’ senses, bodies, and mentalities.

- The utility of the children’s personal activities for enabling them to
benefit by the talents God has gifted and the virtuous tendencies they
have inherited.

- Granting the children the opportunities of training on acquiring the
best of customs and ethics.**[2]**

Teachers should master the materials they teach. They also must have
full acquaintance with the principals of psychology, education,
sociology, and physiology. These principals qualify them to acquaint the
children’s physical and mental potentials along with their natures,
functions, and growth. Likewise, teachers should have familiarity of the
most current surveys and norms of educationists. Teachers should apply
and exploit these studies in the processes of educating the children.
Finally, teachers should be good exemplars in personality and
behavior.**[3]**

### Teachers’ Responsibilities:

Teachers carry serious responsibilities and excellent duties. They are
responsible -before God- for educating the young generations correctly
and guaranteeing their future so that they will be their fathers’ relief
and their nations’ representatives. Abul-Hassan an-Nadawi says, “I do
not know a trust more responsible, serious, and influential in the
nations’ future and present than education and teaching are. Any flaw in
these fields may lead the nation to the deepest hallow, and may lead to
evanescence, degeneracy, and anarchy in morals, sociology, policy,
teaching, non-religiousness, and atheism. Education is the one and only
means through which the guidance of the intellectualities and
mentalities, the new national establishment, and the excellent future
are achieved.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Mental and intellectual disease*: B.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Spirit of education and teaching*: 19.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Elements of education*: 16.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Towards virtuous Islamic education*: 24-5.

Teachers are in charge of any ideological or doctrinal aberrance that
may affect the nation. They are also responsible for any mental maturity
and cerebral disciplining of people. Gilbert Hyte compares between the
professions of teaching and medicine. He makes the process of teaching
more important than that of medicine. People may leave the insufficient
physicians, but the little pupils do not realize their teachers’
negligence, and fathers do not accompany their children for exploring
the real states of the teachers. Even if they do, they would not be able
to realize the very reality of the teachers’ doing their jobs properly.
It is easy for people to leave the insufficient physicians, while the
little pupils cannot choose another teacher. Therefore, the
responsibility of teachers is more serious than that of the
physicians.**[1]** It is said, “If you want to seek the reason beyond a
people’s development, you should search for their teachers.” An
educationist says, “If we believe that the development and expansion of
the children’s intellects, tendencies, and faculties is the school’s
responsibility, the teaching they should receive before joining schools
must be more exalted.”**[2]** John Luke believes that the human
intellect is purely white when a child carries it to school. The school
fills in its sides with human heritage and experiments. This means that
the teachers’ processes of teaching have the greatest part in the
composition of personal behaviors and supporting with potentials that
are essential for achieving good success, noble living, and social true
association.

Psychologists confirm that teachers are responsible for prompting the
educational development. Societies have given the teachers the trust of
contriving the children’s experts and inducing their talents and
inclinations. They are also responsible for managing and guiding such
development in such a good way that becomes the interests of the society
and the individuals.**[3]**

### Concernment of the Teaching Staff

The teaching body is the inception of the country’s mental illumination.
On that account, the ministries of education should pay more attention
to the teachers by identifying their problems and providing the binding
succor. They are gainful. It is also obligatory upon those ministries to
encourage teachers on exerting all efforts in their jobs. Ministries are
also asked to alleviate the teachers’ fatigue, show them engrossment,
cooperate with them in the management of teaching, raise their levels,
disperse the spirits of sincerity among them, and eradicate the elements
of retardation, abrasion, and defect. All these would participate in
saving the teachers’ dignity. Paying attention to teachers is one of the
general life affairs in the developed countries, regarding them as the
centers of guidance and the sources of the scientific progression and
advancement. Thus, it is important to care for and cooperate with
teachers in the total fields of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Art of teaching*: 9.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Studies in teaching organization in Egypt*: 26.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Educational Psychology*: 26.

### Concernment of the Students

The teaching process cannot accomplish its goals unless the students’
economic lives reach an acceptable level. Students will not be able to
keep on and devote to learning if they lack such circumstances in which
the institutes of teaching and education should interfere and contribute
in aiding the poor students. Actually, poverty eliminates the talents
and aptitudes as well as the other human potentials. The governments
should assist the free physical checkup and the essential nutrition.
This does not mean that the administrations of schools are in charge of
doing this alone, but they may promote in it as much as possible.
Providing aids for the poor students, whose poverty impedes them from
continuing in receiving teaching, is a principal upon which the equality
of the teaching opportunities is reliable.

FAILURE OF TEACHING
-------------------

A tremendous failure has affected the teaching process in most provinces
of this world. Hence, the teaching process fell behind to achieve its
educational mission that aims for disciplining the ethics, reforming the
spirits and devoting to virtuous customs and noble traits.

### Negligence of the Moralities

Modern education has not been based upon the principals of teachings and
ethics. Most of the teaching media has paid no attention to this matter.
An educationist says, “Teachers do not engage themselves in treating the
pollution that affect the children. They think only of scholastic tests
and success. Moralities are totally neglected, none thinks of rectifying
the ethical faults.”**[1]** The outcome of this neglect has been the
moral anarchy that is situated in the youth’s spirits. Owing to
miseducation and ignorance, some began to regard such looseness as a
good behavior. Harris Man the educationist says, “The real education is
neglected since schools, unfortunately, care only for stuffing the
memories. Teachers are interested in the abundance of news and chat.
Speaking a lot has never been a sort of education or teaching. The
teachers’ tasks are not addressing information only. The actual tasks of
teachers are the real multi-sided education. Teachers ought to be
educators; they should join education to teaching.”**[2]**

The teaching has failed to establish generations that are conscious,
developing, believing in the national goals, and working positively for
the good of mankind and homeland. An educationist says, “It is not a
sort of exaggeration to say that the teaching has failed in composing
mature personalities that are marked by an intellectual and mental
equanimity and capable of enjoying a free life of kind humanitarian
bonds. The reason is very evident. It is that the teaching has not taken
in consideration the relations between schools and societies. The
managers of teaching  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Spirit of education and teaching: 79.*  
 **[2]** Refer to *Spirit of education and teaching*: 17.

pretend to forget the fact that the responsibility of schools is
preparing the youth through the experts, learning of the social life,
and associating in the societies that are ruled by independence and
cooperation. These two matters are surely the qualities that are most
essential for modern being. Scholastic authorities tend to pour
information in the pupils’ minds rather than composing their moralities.
This gives triumph to the non-educational innovation.”**[1]**

Mr. Lehman criticizes the American education. He stresses that it does
not create a culture, a common set of principals, or an ethical and
mental disciplining.**[2]**

Failure is the inevitable fate of any teaching process that disdains the
moral structure and the mental disciplining. Successful teaching is
exclusively that which proposes the mental reformation and the sensible
amendment. Aristotle says, “There is no instructed lesson or acquired
habit more meaningful than true judgment and jubilating over noble
traits and estimable deeds.”**[3]**

The negligence of morals and the unconcern of behaviors lead to many
disadvantages such as the prevalence of arrogance, rashness, looseness,
and concern**[4]** among students.

### Negligence of the Good Manners

It is unfortunately noticeable that the current schools are uninterested
in the students’ good manners outer schools. Fathers are also detached
in their sons’ aberrance and irregularity. They care only for the
scholastic success that their sons achieve in the final exams. This has
resulted in the youth’s mutiny and loss of most of their ethics and
social traditions. An educationist says, “Fathers who are careless to
their sons are interested only in the scholastic success they achieve in
the final exams. For the officials, the successful schools are only
those providing the maximal number of successful students. Education and
care for behaviors are matters uninterested for the majority. This
negligence of the educational aspects in home and schools is the main
cause of the big disparity between sons and fathers and the immensity of
struggle. It also has established that independent, purposeless, and
aimless generation that walks randomly and ignores the past
bonds.”**[5]**

Serious social dangers, the most important of which is the demolishing
of the family entities and the social structure, are the results of such
negligence.

### Absolute Teaching:

Modern schools have been interested in the absolute teaching, which
supplies the pupils with no experts or social interaction. Filling up
the pupils’ minds with sciences  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Trends in education and teaching*: 12.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Education for puzzled world*: 31.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Politics.*  
 **[4]** Concern is a state of intense cryptic fear that affects man
causing a great deal of depression, bigotry and pain.  
 **[5]** Refer to *Home and school*: 33.

and knowledge is powerless on the individuals’ lives unless it accords
their factualities. Unfortunately, the majority of schools is
uninterested in this course since they have been caring for finishing
the teaching courses in any form, and the students’ most interesting
matter is passing the scholastic tests successfully. Surveys on the
graduated students have proven that passing the tests successfully has
not been an adequate proof of a student’s success in the practical life.
Plenty of academically successful students failed in their practical
life because of the educational defects. Thus, the conscious education
underrates the absolute knowledge that is obtained via inanimate or
negative processes of teaching. It also devaluates the knowledge that is
disconnected to the environment or the general life.

The processes of teaching should be totally streamed in the children’s
powers that ought to be discovered for training, developing, and guiding
suitably so that a pupil would earn beneficial mental, physical, and
social habits and skills that condition his behavior according to the
varying circumstances. As well, education ought to pour on the pupils’
response, tastes, and emotions to compose lively spirits of right and
justice. The actual education and teaching are the means of organizing
man’s capabilities of acquiring behaviors that are congruous to the
social systems in a way warranting the individuals’ good manners and
aptitude of conditioning with the social world.

The knowledge that the teachers provide for their students demarcates
the process of teaching. Those students gain such knowledge in the scope
of acquisition. Knowledge is not a triumph unless its meanings and
purports are perceived and utilized, individually and collectively, in
the life and behaviors. This is inapplicable unless the teaching
processes care for the learners’ intellectualities, tendencies,
activities, powers, and behavior in an aspect that is positively
materialized in the current and future actions.****[1]****

### Coeducation

Many educationists have agreed that the coeducation is the hindrance of
the development and prosperity of teaching. They have also confirmed the
necessity of sexual separation in the teaching processes. They provided
the following proofs:

-Girls cannot compete with boys in the mental processes because the two
sexes do not have equal health, power, and intelligence.

-The atmosphere of combining girls and boys in the same classes is unfit
for benefiting by the sources of intelligence and the opportunities of
teaching completely. Sexual separation in the stages of pre-teenage, and
teenage in specific, is the only method of creating the educational
aspect that fits the sound teaching.

-The dangerous moral and emotional results of the coeducation are quite
harmful especially in early childhood and teenage. Before the little
individuals catch enough time for gaining a mental understanding and a
wakening sensitivity, they lose the vitality and frankness due to the
coeducation. For the little girls, they lose delicacy,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Planning for education and teaching*: 91-2.

viscosity, and modesty due to being mixed with the other sex. Sexual
agitations that injure love and matrimony in the age of adulthood may
be, in most cases, the consequence of the meeting of male and female
teenagers.

-There is a big difference between the two sexes in the fields of the
professional and social guidance. Hence, it is impossible to constitute
a special program fitting the exigencies of the two sexes in the same
time in any scientific institute. Both sexes will lose the educational,
as well as the other, aspects.

-Girls’ maturity is speedier than boys’ is. This fact creates an
unsolvable trouble in the classes of the teenage and pre-teenage pupils.
The coeducation obliges both to be in the same class for several hours a
day, and practice common operations in a stage of unlike physical,
exciting, and social points.

The problems of the coeducation result in mental retardation of the
pupils and maturity of the sexual mutual tendencies in addition to many
other troubles and difficulties.**[1]** It indisputably leads to a moral
deadlock and the collapse of ethical rules. Some conceive that there is
no harm in the coeducation. They describe the matter as naïve and far
away from profanity and aberrance. As a matter of fact, The bearers of
such ideas do not regard man’s nature, components, and impulses. From
early creation, man is molded on gushing to sexual desires, smashing
every obstacle. God relates the story of Joseph the prophet and with the
chief’s wife. He says:

*And Thou turn not away their device from me, I will yearn towards them
and become one of the ignorant.*

Joseph the prophet was one of God’s apostles. How should ordinary people
practice then? God has exposed that man’s soul is cast on gashing to
impulses. He says:

*Most surely man’s self is wont to command him to do evil.*

It is now clear that the strong young can hardly be screened against the
lusts and against perpetrating fornication. Sheik Mohammed Zeinuddin
says, “Before a glutton hungry, fetch an appetizing banquet that is
filled with the various colors of mouth-watering food. Let him enjoy by
gazing at it for an hour or more so that you will be assured of the
accuracy of this proof. Let that hungry gratify his eyes with each dish
singly, inhale the smells, gaze at each, count the fruits, and repeat
the same process. After a couple of hours, you may ask him whether he is
still hungry or not. His hunger will never keep its same state after
filling the eyes with those various colors of food. Neither the joy of
the eye with appetizing food, the joy of the hearing with speech, nor
can any other sense supplant the gourmands of sex and stomach. Anyone
who may repudiate this fact is belying himself and the intellectual
postulation.”**[2]**

This opinion discloses the life factuality and the sound nature on which
God has created the human beings. People’s rushing voraciously towards
their sexual desires is the sound nature that never changes. The press
media have reported tens of the sins and dishonors of this mixing of the
male and female students in universities and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Education and child psychology: 94-5.*  
 **[2]** Refer to *Chastity between positivity and negation*: 69-70.

faculties. *Alittihad al-Qawmi* –a magazine- reported, “Mixed schools in
America resulted in ugly consequences. Boys and girls have been wholly
engaged in philandering, chasing, and practicing the sexual relations
instead of studying. Thus, students of the two sexes left their study
courses totally. Educationists there decided sexual isolation in primary
and secondary schools.” *As-Sha’b*, the Egyptian newspaper, wrote, “The
waves of sexual disintegration have been terribly increasing in the
United States.

Schools and universities have become the most fertile grounds of the
sexual irregularity. Male and female pupils have become addict drunkards
and assassins. Pistols, blades, and knives are noticed in the male
pupils’ pockets, while cigar boxes and tablets of contraceptive are in
the females’. As these phenomena attained an unbearable level, a
judiciary body began to survey the pupils’ crimes in New York. It
recommended that a policeman should stop on the gates of each school for
hindering the activities of the pupils’ gangs. Some judges have
anticipated that policemen may drift in the pupils’ limitless clamor!”
Lindsey, the American judge, guesses that about 45% of the girls of
schools profane their honors before graduation. This proportion is
greatly higher in the advanced stages of teaching.**[1]**

Educationists have understood completely the necessity of the sexual
isolation in all of the stages of teaching after they had noticed the
frightful injuries of the coeducational system, which led to the
cessation of the teaching development and the informality of the
students’ disintegration and corruption.

### Contrast of Teaching:

The mixture of contrasting opinions and principals that the teachers
pose has affected the teaching processes. A teacher may introduce
special ideas in the class, and incite the students to accept them.
Another teacher may come to the same class with another contrary idea
that he favors and encourages. This would create the students’ ordeal.
An educationist says, “For imagining the scope of the hazardous hardship
and hesitation, you may picture the students’ nerves and ideas when they
receive a contrary mixture of opinions and principals everyday. Yet,
they are obliged to accept and embrace them all. The teacher of religion
exposes this universe from a religious viewpoint, but the teacher of
sociology denies this opinion totally. Both teachers want the students
to believe in their opinions. A third teacher may demolish the
hypotheses of the two and keeps on building a new idea in the
mentalities of those poor students. Like the opinion of the universe,
the theses of ethics, history, economy, and metaphysics can be
contrarily opposite and different.”

This sort of discord has fixed an ideological disorder and contrastive
tendencies in the students’ minds. It is sorrowful that the teaching
faculties have been the mart of foreign ideas that antagonize our
nationality and religion.

Some schools in the Islamic world have failed acutely in conveying their
missions. From that cause, an undiscerning generation that ignores the
religious and national  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Hypothesis of sexual relations in the Holy Quran*:
111-2.

goals and submits to the imperialistic rumors, has come forth. The
imperialists have depended upon such individuals in publicizing their
ideas and goals. If the officials intend to treat this failure, they
should concern with identifying and devoting the lessons to the
religious education in all of the stages of teaching. The youth then
will recognize the creative systems that Islam has brought for
developing the social behavior and installing the spirits of virtues and
noble tendencies in the minds.

ENVIRONMENT
-----------

Environment is one the most eminent effects of education. Children
pursue their environments unfeelingly. The environment plants instincts
and habits in the children’s minds easily and readily. The youth follow
the environmental effects in good and bad circumstances. However,
internal and external factors, that interact and receive medial
influences to bring about the moralities and habits, affect the human
beings directly.

### Signification of Environment:

Educationists have unanimously agreed that the social surroundings are
within the most significant elements on which education depends in the
formation of human personalities and the achievement of the individuals’
desires within the general frame of civilization. They also contribute
in consummating a high degree of social perfection. At the same time,
the surroundings reduce the tensions and aspects of aberrant behaviors,
and this creates the individuals’ collective combination and loyalty to
the goals and values of the society.**[1]**

### The Environmental Responsibilities:

The social surroundings are responsible for any degradation or
retardation that affects the educational values since their role is
elevating the levels of the national scientific and ethical ambitions.
They are also asked for establishing the competent means of promoting
the culture and illuminating the intellectualities with science. A deep
look into the social surroundings all over the various historical eras
will expose that the surroundings of a considerable progression and
civilizing had performed their duties of urging the officials on
developing the conscience and broadcasting the scientific waves among
the various social classes. This is one of the immense goals that are
intended in the Prophet’s saying, “You all are supervisors and you all
are responsible for your subjects.” Hence, all Muslims are in charge of
demanding their governments with founding the means of development and
outgrowth for contributing in the constructing of the human
civilization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]**Refer to *Social principals of education*: 49.

### The Environmental Settlement:

The settlement of the social surroundings and the family order has a
substantial pertinence in the rectitude of the behaviors and the
mansuetude of the youth. UNESCO has discussed the unnatural effects on
the children’s mentalities. After a comprehensive inspection, the
following report was submitted:

“The surroundings’ psychological settlement and the families’ mutual
amiability are the bases on which the children’s emotional conditioning
and the satisfactory social relations are grounded. In case these
surroundings deform the children’s piety to parents, it will be so
arduous for them to associate socially.”**[1]**

The environmental settlement is really one of the causes that contribute
in the coherence and prosperity of the children’s personalities, and in
avoiding the elements of concern. Psychologists decide that the
environmental disorder and the accompanying perplexities and
depravities; all these cause the children to feel weak in the face of a
world of cheating, trickery, treason, and envy.**[2]**

### Categories of Environment

Educationists determine that there are two sorts of environments in
which the human beings live.

### One: The Natural Environment:

The natural environment comprises all of the natural surroundings. The
earth along with all of what is above or beneath in addition to the
powers and energies; all these are the components of the natural
environment. The natural sciences beginning with simple information
given to the pupils up to biology, chemistry, and physics are related to
the natural environment that the students must understand, totally or
partially, so that they can condition themselves.

### Two: The Social Environment:

The social environment is the society of mankind and the relations
between the individuals and groups. Economical, political, professional,
cultural and psychological relations are the components of the social
environment. Besides, the social sciences, such as history, geography,
education, economics and politics, relate to the social environment. On
that account, it is preferable for the students to have enough
acquaintance with these sciences in order to be able of conditioning
socially. The spiritual and mental values play a considerable effective
role in the social environment through educating and raising the levels
of the early youth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Family and social effects on juveniles*: 35.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Psychological conditioning*: 22.

### The Environment in Islam:

Islam has been intensely concerned with the environment since it is an
effective element in the educational and social composition. Good
environments support the nation with the best and the most proficient
individuals who progress in great steps in the fields of virtue and
reformation. In like fashion, evil environments bring about the vile
licentious individuals who distribute their mental defects among people.

Islam has identified the whole devices and powers of reforming and
evolving the environment for achieving justice, right, and equality, and
eradicating the elements of lag, retardation, injustice, wronging, and
stinginess. It has been also purposed for achieving security and
settlement, and eliminating the seditious and disorderly affairs. The
Islamic environment has produced those great, excellent, intelligent,
and virtuous reformers who were the best of mankind, all over history,
in believing in God, inciting to the right, and exerting efforts for the
sake of justice.

It is noticeably important to discern that Islam has actually been
concerned with the private environments. It has recognized the most
significant aspect of raising the individuals’ reactions in acquiring
customs and moralities. This aspect is friendship, which is the most
powerful educational element that transfers the individuals’ traits and
tendencies. Sociologists have affirmed the point by saying, “The social
life is the life of influence and perception. Every individual
influences and perceives from the surroundings.” This meaning is also
asserted through proverbs and literary sayings that prove the
individuals’ being influenced by their friends.

Islam has emphasized on associating the virtuous, godly, noble,
honorable, and straight individuals, through whom good manners and noble
traits are acquired. Imam al-Hassan (a) says in his everlasting words of
advice:

“When you need to associate with men, you should choose those whose
friendship graces you and guards in troubles. You should choose those
who assist you in exigencies, and believe your discourse, and back you
in charges, and participate in virtues. It is they who cover up your
flaws, and regard your favors, and give when you need, and chatter in
silence, and console in misfortunes, and save from troubles, and do not
misguide or disappoint in calamities, and prefer in litigation”**[1]**

By those golden words, the Imam has assigned the Islamic duties of
friendship that obligate mutual supervision, amiability, and cooperation
among friends.

Friendship lead to the acquisition of customs and the interaction with
the friends’ ethics, tendencies, and trends. Therefore, Islam has warned
against befriending the morally and mentally defected individuals.

Imam Ali (a), the great educator, instructs his son Imam Al-Hassan:

“O son! Beware of associating with the idiot. They harm when they intend
to benefit. Beware of associating with the misers. They deprive you of
the very things that you need. Beware of associating with the
licentious. They vend you with valueless. Beware of associating with the
liars. They look like a mirage that shows the remote as close and the
close as remote.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Lifetime of Imam Al-Hasan*: 2/474.

Many damages that cause the loss of the behavioral balance result in
associating with such individuals. The reference books of hadith are
full of many prophetic and imamic sayings regarding the qualities and
influences of friends. The Prophet (s) says, “Man pursues his friend’s
religion.”**[1]**

The youth that accept their religion and doctrine are advised to be
careful of the individuals that are defected morally and behaviorally,
since such ones lead to sinning and depravity. The youth should also
avoid those who bear weak principals, such as existentialism and the
like, that call for disintegration and the prevalence of the jungle law.

Unfortunately, the Islamic society has been affected by many of those
deviants who do not possess any Islamic or national conscience, and
ignore any upright social purport. Hence, they worked poisonously for
dishonoring this nation’s social and spiritual divines and values. The
faithful youth should be careful of such individuals and should never
associate with them so that they would not be misguided.

### The Environment in the Present Ages

Modern social surroundings have attained a great scale of merging and
similarity because of the new means of communication that approximated
the nations and peoples by mutual transference of habits and traditions.
This has naturally created the unprecedented extensive reciprocity of
ideas. Most people then participated in the same tendencies, traditions,
and habits.

The social environments all over this world have painfully had to
encounter fears, horrors, and insecurity because of the greed of the
politicians who rule the great powers. They have competed with each
other on invading, occupying, and subjecting the weak peoples. They have
also struggled for distributing their principals. This brought the
destroying wars that broke out in some countries and caused the disorder
of the social environments and the individuals’ fear and horror.

Modern man is living nervously after the loss of the future
expectations. Man anticipates ambiguous future and evils of the great
powers that tend misguidedly to wars and destroying by using their
entire economic, military, and diplomatic devices for aggressions and
massacre. Nothing but the news of termination and massacre are reported
every news agency all over this world. The great powers have exploited
their people’s wealth in the fields of developing their armament. They
have coerced the scientists on inventing in this field exclusively.
Hence, the development of such weapons has been highly formidable and
fascinating. Satellites and electronic devices have been put in the
service of exploring the others’ strategic situations and means of
defense and power. The most horrible invention in this regard has been
the nuclear weapons that had the ability of destroying any country in
few hours. Thus, fear and horror have predominated on the inhabitants of
this planet.

These are definitely exhausting and arduous crises and difficulties that
people have had to face. Everybody ignores the time in which those gods
of evil click on the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Ussulul-kafi*: 2/642.

buttons of these terminating weapons to demolish this life thoroughly
and handle the keys of this planet to the Creator. All these dangers
have indisputably been the outcome of the lack of conscious education in
the interiors of the politicians and leaders of this world. Had they
enjoyed a single particle of human conscious, they would have saved this
world from such a gigantic hazard and exerted their efforts in the
fields of man’s luxury, indulgence, and settlement.
