The Cultural Planning in the Modern Educational Processes
=========================================================

The modern regimes have paid special attention to the teaching affairs,
considering them as the natural right of every citizen under the
responsibility and supervision of the governments. Ministries and
several committees have been dedicated to the teaching processes. The
missions of these bodies are concerning, developing, and advancing the
teaching processes. Teaching federations have been also established for
noticing and guarding the teachers’ affairs. The great powers have
devoted grand assets of the public budget to expand the scopes of
teaching. This has created the many schools, faculties, and universities
that provide studies in various fields of sciences and arts. The
tremendous ideological developments of inventions and industrials have
been the outcome of this concern. Man could invade the outer space,
reach the moon and dispatch satellites that pictured every situation
they passed by and sent these pictures to the earth. Man could also
repair any defect in those satellites from the headquarters on the
earth. Those satellites have automatically recorded the information of
the climate and the universal rays they pass by in their orbits. Science
is going on more developments, and man is going on achieving greater
triumphs. Nevertheless, each political regime in this world has adopted
a special philosophy in judgment and policy and has benefited by science
for publicizing its principals and political ideas.

THE TEACHING COURSES IN THE WEST
--------------------------------

The teaching systems in the Western states, as well as other places,
have depended upon the development, crystallization, and expansion of
the material sciences. People have been competing with each other in the
fields of science and knowledge since these two are within the life
necessities. They have also believed that the processes of illumination
and growth are obtained through the publicity of science only. Adam
Smith says, “Any people that are ruled by an organizing government
should never leave any individual uneducated.”**[1]**

The criterion of peoples’ progress all over history has been based upon
the scope of the nation’s possession of teaching opportunities, which
are the real wealth through which noble lives and mastership can be
achieved.

In the past, the West was moaning in the chains of ignorance after it
had degraded  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Wealth of peoples.*

socially and mentally, and lost any power of progress and science.
Myths, illusions, and weak customs and traditions controlled the west
for centuries. This feeling of defect and retardation induced the people
there to communicate with the Islamic world for excerpting the elements
of renaissance and growth. Hence, they quoted mathematics, chemistry,
medicine, philosophy, and astronomy in addition to other legislative and
social methods. Hundreds of Islamic scientific books were translated
into their languages that many Islamic terms are still noticed. The West
burst forth in founding faculties and schools and itemizing each science
and art. Yet, many flaws that led to the loss of a conscious education
have influenced the teaching courses there.

### The expelling of Moralities

The Western teaching courses paid no attention to the moralities. They
expelled ethics from the factuality of the studying life. An
educationist says, “The Western teaching systems are no more than a
cabal against religion, ethics, and magnanimity.**[1]** They have been
also unconcerned with the conscious education that aims at planting
liberal and elevated traits and tendencies in the spirits. The grand
educationists agree that teaching is meaningless unless it leads to
perfection. Froble says, “Precisely, the purpose of teaching is the
presentation of a scarified life which is full of sincerity and
perfection.”**[2]** Mr. Lehman says, “The American education does not
create any common culture or set of principals or ethical
disciplining.”**[3]** A Western educationist says, “Teaching has been
empty of situating the bases of reciprocal love and cooperation. Hence,
it is not strange that humanity among individuals is eliminated.”**[4]**

School is the nonesuch means that the human society has innovated for
guiding sons uprightly so that their behavior fits the habits and
customs that the society defines. Unfortunately, the Western school was
inconsiderate and unconcerned with this meaning. This has decreed many
disadvantages, the most significant of which was the collapse of the
human values, demolishing of the principal cooperation among the society
members, and the circulation of egotism, greed, fabrication, and
trickery. George Friland says, “Sociologists confirm that the
individuals’ right citizenship and good ethics are the basic criterion
of the values of the human civilization. On this account, education
should have carried the heaviest burden of saving the civilization
against retrogradation. H. G. Wells, the great author, who says that
civilization is a competition between education and collision, perceived
this situation.”**[5]**

The source of the ethical crisis that is suffered by the Western
teaching courses and their adopters has been the studying courses’
avoiding the spiritual and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Zarbu Kuleim*: 85.  
 **[2]** Refer to Education of man.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Education for perplexed world*: 52.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Teaching and life meaning*: 10.  
 **[5]** Refer to *Methods of modern education*: 11.

humanitarian systems and values. Scientific institutes cannot contribute
perfectly in structuring the individuals’ personalities unless their
courses are based upon a correct religious cognizance. As the American
authorities experienced the new generations’ spiritual privation, they
allowed the churches to establish private schools named, “sectarian
schools.” The management has been in the hands of the Catholic Church
that enjoys a broad system of primary schools and an increasing number
of secondary schools. The Lotharios church also manages a great number
of primary and secondary schools. Other religious foundations grant
exclusive periods at which the representatives of churches teach
religious questions in the institutes and faculties other than those
subjected by churches. The authorities there urged children on joining
these churches for receiving religious teachings.**[1]** Christianity
has not possessed sound courses in the educational fields, and has not
been sufficient enough for performing a comprehensive life and an
individual reformation. It refers only to the refuge to churches and
worldly abstinence. This has created many mental perplexities and
alienation against the religion.

Christianity has been too short to manage the affairs of life and
constitute reformatory programs. Weakness and delicacy have affected
Christianity because the churchmen have insinuated slanders and myths
that contradict logic and antagonize the mental powers. It is not
unfamiliar that Christianity fails in preparing a developing and sound
education that is marked by composure and cooperation in constructing
the human society.

At any rate, the Western teaching systems have been unsuccessful in
performing their educational missions, and failed in achieving
generations of sound and conscious behavior. Inversely, they produced
generations that are defected in their morals and tendencies searching
for harlotry, frivolity, and impudence and hounding impulses, amusement,
and disintegration in the fields of values and ethics.

THE TEACHING SYSTEMS IN THE COLONIES
------------------------------------

The Western imperialists have taken initiative in affecting private
teaching courses in the colonies. These courses aim at killing the
conscience and spreading the objective and spiritual poverty. They
affirmed that teaching should associate the military conquests. This is
intended to persist on their control and lead the occupied countries to
miss the cognizance of liberation and salvation from colonialism.

The old imperialist plans of teaching were negative. They propose to
reduce or eradicate the educated individuals. When a revolution broke
out against the Spanish colonialism in South America, in early 1800, the
general commander raised a note to the king telling of their armies’
triumph. He also told that he treated the educated ones with an ultimate
severity. Thus, as he expressed, he uprooted the idea of mutiny and
rebellion. In North America, the black were interdicted from learning
writing and reading. Detention and whipping were the punishment of the
white that intend to teach any black how to read and write. This policy,
however, failed. The imperialists  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Sayings about teaching in America*: 31.

realized their fault when they needed the economic conveniences of those
people that require teaching the early youth for preparing them for
certain jobs. Only then, they constituted teaching faculties but with
special courses inciting to cherish the imperialists and embrace their
ideological trends. Lord McAllen declared this fact in a report he wrote
when was the chairman of the Teaching Committee in 1835 that decided
English as the teaching language. He said, “A group works as translators
between the millions of our subjects and us. This group should be Indian
in color and blood, but English in taste, opinion, language, and
thinking.**[1]**

On the same account, France constituted the teaching courses in Algeria.
As an article of that decision, it is recorded, “France has protected
the Algerians and constituted justice to their country, and publicized
security on their lands, and provided them with teaching and
civilization. All these imply the Algerians’ duties to France. They
should respect those who manage their country in the name of France.
They should also show respect to the French flag.”**[2]**

This policy could not achieve its objects since teaching in colonies
stirred up the spirits of struggle and revolt against the colonialists
and demanding with liberty and independence. That caused the masters of
the imperialist policy to hold a conference and decide changing the
teaching courses in addition to the following findings:

“We must teach, not culture, the sons of the colonies. We must teach
them practical affairs that make them good instrumentality in factories,
stores, and farms without expanding the horizons of views and ideas to
more than the required.”**[3]**

This was the last conclusion that the imperialists could attain for
solving the problem of teaching in the colonies. Hence, teaching became
barren and imperfect since it lacked the elements of vital edification
by which the ideological life achieves advancement. Such a restricted
teaching will cause harsh injuries to the citizens because it hinders
the mental maturity and the march of the social development.

THE COMPREHENSIVE DEVASTATION
-----------------------------

The Western teaching carried the signals of terminating and devastating
all of the genuine values from which the nation drives its conceptual
and social aspects. It also targeted this nation’s vital constituents so
as to take it away from its factuality. Furthermore, the Western
teaching doped this nation totally to make it unaware of the
excruciating strikes that drove the elements of disintegration and
collapse all over its parts. The following are the most hideous effects
of this teaching invasion:

### Exclusion of Islam:

The Western teaching systems spared no efforts for excluding Islam and
eradicating any of its trace in the teaching entity. They tried to
expose a brief picture that does not denote its goals or betrays its
factuality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *History of teaching*: 80.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Opinions and sayings*: 154.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Opinions and sayings*: 155.

Teaching has neglected the affairs of this great religion that treated
all of the problems of mankind and posed sound courses for the
reformation. Teaching did not refer to the procedures that were applied
during the reign of the Islamic State. The constructive policy, which
was grounded upon the pure right and sheer justice, was the distinctive
feature of those procedures. They are surely the honorable all over
history. The Islamic policy granted people the extensive freedoms in the
fields of doctrine and ideology as well as deeds and words. It also
presented that fantastic equity in which prerogatives and patronage had
no place. All people are equal before the law and the right.
Furthermore, the Islamic policy rendered justice in its entire concepts
and enormity and burdened the government with the liability of
protecting and guarding it since it is a personal human right that
everyone should enjoy.

The Islamic economy had no single gesture in the Western teaching. As a
matter of fact, this economy appeases the development and achieves the
general economic life as it eradicates poverty and deprivation. In the
Islamic economic system, it is the governments’ responsibility to wipe
out poverty and its ghost, which is the equivalent and the match of
atheism. Governments are also asked to get labor and prepare its
opportunities equally among people. They must open the doors to the
social security the mission of which is supervising and meeting the
needs of the sick, the handicapped, and the poor whose daily income is
insufficient. The monition on markets and the eradication of monopoly
and exploitation are the governments’ duty according to the Islamic
economy. The Western teaching neglected also the rules of the Islamic
education that achieve the social coherence, development, disciplining,
cooperation, and protection against irregularity and aberrance. Besides,
it neglected the Islamic great activities in the fields of the
individual education and reformation and being endowed with high traits
and noble ethics. It also neglected the Islamic social systems that care
for the comprehensive unity of Muslims. This unity comprises the
unification of feelings, emotions, fate, and trends.

The Western teaching has neglected all of the Islamic opinions in the
life aspects. Moreover, it threw dense screens on the Islamic
illumination and guidance, and showed it in a shape and frame other than
that revealed from God. The Imperialist systems confessed that their
teaching methods tried to loosen the Islamic ties. St. Wales says, “The
Western education is a means of releasing the Islamic ties.”**[1]**
Steward Grover declared, “The Western education made Muslims quote from
the Christian principals and be ready to convert to Christianity
inadvertently.”**[2]**

The imperialist powers made use of all of their teaching and political
media for the purpose of expelling Islam out of the life factuality
since it threatened their interests and cupidity. The following is
quoted from the decisions of the German Imperialist Conference: “The
development of Islam threatens an immense danger on the maturity of our
colonies. The conference recommends the government of multiplying the
supervision and monition over the phases of this movement. The  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Al-Mueyyed* the Egyptian newspaper: issue 6696.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Raid on the Islamic world.*

imperialist conference recommends resisting any activity that leads to
the expansion of Islam, removing the obstacles that lie in the paths of
Christianity, and benefiting by the missionaries’ activities that
distribute the principals of civilization. Yet, it confirms the
necessity of maintaining the plan of extrinsic neutrality in the
religious affairs,”**[1]**

William Geofford Balcard says, “When we see the Quran and Mecca go away
from the Arabs, only then we can make the Arab individuals slip in our
civilization from which Mohammed and his book have taken him away.”

Anyhow, the imperialism has been ceaselessly plotting against Islam for
eradicating and expelling it.

### Imposing the Imperialists’ Language

The colonialists imposed their language in the teaching systems and made
it a part of the studying programs on which success and failure depend.
The French made their language the pivot of the total lessons. They
said, “First of all, schools should be acting as institutes for learning
French.”**[2]**

The English also imposed their language in their colonies and gave it a
specific lesson. They opted for their language as the main tongue in the
institutes of medicine, chemistry, and physics in addition to the Arabic
literature and the Islamic history. Each Muslim who desires to obtain a
certificate should study in the European institutes or their graduates.
Mohammed Saeed Al-Urfi comments, “It is definitely the ugliest, the most
terrible, and the nastiest shame that the Arabs receive the arts of
their language of that glorious honor and ancient civilization from the
enemies of their religion and language. This is surely the evident
deviation. We have never heard that the arbiters and references of any
elevated or humble language are other than its sons. Unfortunately, the
present Arab nation is excluded. History has never referred to a nation
receiving its language from its waylaying enemies.”**[3]**

Imposing the imperialists’ language in schools and institutes serves
only their nationality, language, interests, and cupidity, and establish
a permanent relation between those scientific institutes and the
imperialists. Mohammed Saeed says, “These foreign languages are the main
reason beyond the publicity of the foreign propaganda and the vile part
of their civilization. They are the paths through which the West could
seize the Arab countries as well as those in the east. It made this
nation forbear the traditions and lose the religion, language, fashion,
and everything related to the past. The most unfamiliar matter is that
the foreign languages are dissatisfied in equating the Arabic in the
shares of studying, consideration, and success. They excelled it in all
these shares. Mastery of one foreign language is sufficient for
obtaining a certificate even if the Arabic is unmastered. Therefore, the
governments are highly concerned with teachers of European languages by
picking  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Opinions and sayings.*  
 **[3]** Refer to *Secret of the Arab nation’s disintegration*.

the most masterful teachers for this mission even in primary schools.
Hence, pupils are brought up on cherishing the foreign languages as they
notice the governments and nation care for this manner, and notice the
teachers’ ability, authority, respect and distinctive payment. All these
make pupils waste their national spirits.”**[1]**

The grand intellectuals and educationists denied imposing English
languages in schools and institutes since it hinders mental growth and
impedes the general course of studying in the country since students are
not familiar with it. Ghandi says, “English language has stopped against
conveying plurality of knowledge to the masses. The increasing interest
in English language has burdened weighty things on teaching and
interdicted children’s mentalities from enjoying natural life. Moreover,
it has made them strange in their lands and homes.”**[2]**

Ghandi forbade English language in Indian schools for its great damages.
He issued a decision that; “We will not permit teaching English because
we realize that most of children’s time are wasted uselessly in
memorizing English words and statements. Even if they are permitted to
memorize and repeat these words and statements, they are unable of
translating them into their mother language. They are also disable of
benefiting by lessons of their teachers.”**[3]**

Islamic and Arab countries are able of expelling this language, which is
one the imperialist residuals, and translate the textbooks into Arabic
for the purpose of making the students’ tasks easier since this foreign
language is overexerting them. Likewise, this process may enliven the
Arabic that the imperialists attempted strenuously to kill and enervate.
At any rate, mastering of more than one language is preferable and
required according to doctrinal instructions. The Prophet (s) ordered
Zeid bin Thabit of mastering the Hebrew. As an Arab proverb, it is said,
“He whoever master a language of a people, will secure their evils.”
Therewith, demanding with expelling the English languages from our
scientific institutes is not an encouragement on restricting to the
mother tongue. The solicitors of Islam are more required to master
foreign languages than others so that they will broadcast solicitation
to God and refute the suspected matters arisen against Islam.

### Debilitation of the Arabic

Imperialist cadres use their powers entirely for enfeebling the standard
Arabic, in which the Quran was revealed, and enlivening the colloquial.
They aim at dragging the Muslims away from the huge conceptual wealth
and masking the marvelous eloquence that draws people’s attention
towards the Quran. Mohammed Saeed says, “The most important purpose
beyond the colonialists’ opposing the Islamic education and preventing
the new generations from reaching it, is their intendment to construct
barriers between the generations and the Quran. They want these
generations to misunderstand and misstate the Quran and its eloquence.
Then they would affirm that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Principal education*: 21-2.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Principal education*: 33.

the nowadays generations refute eloquence and heaviness of the ancient
heritage; therefore, they need renewal and simplification. This renewal
and simplification is the very hole from which the imperialists intend
to push their daggers into the body of Arabic language. Hence, the last
hope of this generation’s return to the Quran and its guidance would be
unattainable.”**[1]**

Satti al-Hissari poses another reason:

“The imperialists conceived that the standard Arabic has been the only
means of the Arabs’ communication through which ideas and tendencies are
transferred among the Arab countries. They also though that when the
movements of publicizing the standard Arabic in the Arab countries are
aborted and supplanted by others supporting the colloquial accents, only
then each country would have its own accent. This would remove the idea
of independence or any notion calling for unity of the Arab countries.
English and French assemblies favored this thought and began to
broadcast colloquial accents in the Arab countries especially the
independent. A good number of famed personalities and Orientalists
supported the thought that incited some Arabs on publicizing it ignoring
its origin source and intendment and menacing consequences.

Some European individuals called for this idea and claimed that wireless
radiobroadcasting, parties of singing, theatre and the cinema would
sustain centers of colloquial accents all over the Arab countries since
they communicate more than the standard. They also claimed that plays of
colloquial accents attract more audience. All these elements will
finally give victory to the colloquial accent to overcome the
standard.”**[2]**

This is the teaching and educational trend of the Western colonialists
who have spared no efforts for executing this nation and eradicating its
conceptual and mental constituents.

THE COMMUNIST TEACHING COURSES
------------------------------

Communism had its own policy of teaching. They conceive that scientific
movement should be brought up on bases of Marxism only. All of the
scientific and teaching institutes are required to identify the students
of instructions of Marx, Angeles and Lenin in universal and social laws
in addition to changing from capitalism into socialist communism. They
also intend to identify the students of the Russian revolution of
October, policy of the communist party and the pressure of workers in
capitalist states.

In truth, the most important goal of communist teachings is seeding the
Marxist beliefs in mentalities of the coming generations for forming the
pupils’ trends and tendencies in such a way according the international
communist viewpoint. Now, we should survey their teaching courses and
their constructive criticism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Experiment of Islamic education*: 76.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Opinions and sayings*: 158-9.

### Study of the Constitution

Students of the tenth grade are obliged on studying the Soviet
constitution, as a try to convince them that communism is the most
elevated of the democratic regimes. It is also purposed for introducing
the triumphs the Soviet Union has achieved thanks to wholeness of
socialist systems that are the first stage of shifting into communism.
In this program, students should study the regulations and the role of
communist party in governing the country as well as the Soviet citizens’
duties.**[1]** They selected this age for this study so that the youth
would construct Marxism in their mentalities for believing in their
objects and sacrificing for their principals.

### Atheistic Tendency

The Communists’ main concern is planting atheism and the eternity of the
cosmos in the students’ mentalities, and teaching them that no eternal
being has created the universe. They also teach that materials are not
negative or static that receive their movements from the soul, but they
are energetic beings that enjoy self-governing and independent from the
soul. Furthermore, they teach that materials are passing through
ceaseless historical developments, and the universe is infinite with no
creator or life donator. Politzer and his companions say, “The idea of
God wasted its content totally. Disputation on the existence and
nonexistence of God has no longer arisen thanks to the non-Marxist naïve
trend. God became a useless hypothesis, as Laplas affirms. Ideal
objective trend cannot distinct the solution of God’s existence problem
and that of God’s existence in people’s minds.”**[2]** Lenin says,
“Hypothesis of Heraclitus, the ancient philosopher who surmised that the
world is one and not created by a god or a man, and will ceaselessly
remain as a lively spark that flames and extinguish according to certain
laws, is a fantastic exposition of the principals of the atheist dialect
tendency.”**[3]**

Refuting Hegel’s hypothesis of pre-earth existence, Angles says, “
Hypothesis of the pre-earth existence is mere residuals of the illusion
of believing in the creator of this earth. The only reality is actually
that material world we can realize and belong.”**[4]**

Science, ancient and modern philosophical studies have nullified the
atheist hypothesis. It has been proven that every possible necessitates
to an existing cause for composing and existing. This cause makes and
transfers the possible from nonexistence to existence. It is
impracticable that a caused can be existed without the act of an
existing. In a like manner, no reason can be without reasoning. The
existing cause should inevitably be having active ability and firm will
of existing and composition lest it is impossible for composition and
creation to exist since the wanting cannot grant its long-sought aim.
Everything in this universe is a witness on  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Comparative studies of courses*: 43-4.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Principals of Marxist philosophy*: 2/206.  
 **[3]** Refer to Lenin’s *Philosophical notebooks* and Stalin’s
*Dialectic and historical material*: 17.  
 **[4]** Refer to Engeles’s *Lodvic Fiorbach*: 17.

God’s existence, competence and almightiness. As we analyze and study
any of the universal phenomena, even by means of deduction, we do
nothing more than noticing God’s traces and eminence. We can see God’s
portents in our souls, as well as every single particle in this
existence.”

They screened their intellectualities against gazing at these planets
spreading in the space and counting hundreds of millions. Modern science
has discovered stars too innumerable to need less than seven hundred
years to attain the number if 1500 stars are counted per minute. The
ratio of the earth to these stars is as less as a point on a letter in a
library containing more than half a million volumes.

It is most naturally that serendipity was not the source of such a
system. Serendipity is too short to manage and create such worlds. “It
is impossible to find reasonable explanation for the claim that such a
schematization in the universal phenomena, along with those causative
relations, perfection, assumptions, coincidence, and counterpoise. The
other prodigies disposed such systems whose effects are constant in the
various ages. It is unattainable to understand that there is no creator
and manager of this marvelous creating.” John William Cotes says, “The
universe in which we’re living is too dexterous and complicated to be
the product of serendipity. It is fascinatingly filled up with miracles
and complicated structures that necessitate a manager and can never be
ascribed to a blind fate. Sciences have indisputably helped us in
increasing the understanding and estimation of phenomena of this cosmos.
Correspondingly, our recognition of God has augmented.”**[1]**

Using their satellites, spaceships and all of the scientific devices,
the great powers tried to identify the factuality of stars and explore
whether they are suitable for life or not. They spent thousand millions
of their people’s riches, but they did not turn their mentalities and
intellects to exploring the creator of these stars. They turned their
heads aside, engaged themselves in gloomy anarchy, and insisted on
denying Him intentionally while He has shown facts people’s intellects
and mentalities can see obviously. They did not involve their minds in
these stars that rotate in a fascinating and orderly system that is too
elevated to be realized by mentalities. God says:

Neither is it allowable to the sun that it should overtake the moon, nor
can the moon outstrip the day, and all float on in a sphere.

Hours, minutes, and seconds cannot measure the circulations of the earth
and the sun as well as the other planets. They are measured by the speed
of rays that cover 186 thousand miles a second. The cosmos has proceeded
in such an accurate order with regular affairs and overflowing results.
Any error in these courses causes the planets’ stroke and worlds’
combustion.

They did not apply assiduously in the planet we are living on. It is
hanged in the space and its pivot rotates once per twenty-four hours.
The speed of its movement is one thousand miles per hour. It levitates
around the sun once a year. This creates the consecution of the four
seasons. Supposing its speed is one hundred miles per hour, length of
night and day will be tenfold, and the sun will be burning all the
plants in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Allah is unequivocal in age of science*: 48.

summer and every being will be freezing in the cold nights. In the same
way, supposing the sun approaches the earth, the rays will be increasing
in such a way obliterating life on its surface. The opposite will occur
if the sun is little remoter from the earth. Supposing the earth is as
large as moon, it will be too short to reserve the encompassing hydrous
and atmospheric covers. As well, temperature will be too high to live.
Supposing the earth’s diameter is twofold, the gravity will be
consequently twofold. This will reduce the aerial cover and increase the
atmospheric pressure. Supposing the earth is as large as the sun,
gravity will be reach 150 folds. This will cause reduction of the aerial
cover, each animal will weigh 150 folds of its present weight, and man’s
mental life will be generally absent.

God has given the earth another quality; that is the gaseous cover the
density of which is 800 km. This cover preserves temperatures suitable
for life. It also carries the vapor of waters of oceans into remote
distances inside the continents where they condense to form the rainfall
with which derelict lands are invigorated. This cover is also the reason
that precludes the fatal fireballs from arriving at the earth.
Correspondingly, it is the way through which sun heat reaches the earth
moderately, enabling plants and animals to live on its surface. Some
planets lose such a cover; therefore, life there is absent. Mars, for
instance, has slender gaseous cover that is empty of oxygen. So, it is
unlivable.

Competence of Almighty God is clear in every creature. Intellects are
too stunted to identify Him.

Ibn abil-Hadid composes two verses of poetry in which he says:

In Thy, marvel of the cosmos, the intellect has been ailed

Thou has perplexed the sound-minded and befuddled the intellects

When my conception approaches Thee a span, it absconds a mile

Fleeing and stumbling in purblind enigma and losing the right path.

Atheists had inaccurate, unconscious, surface and idiot look on this
existence; hence, they established a conventional frame grounded upon
denial of the Almighty Creator whose competence has been obvious in
everything. They have not looked upon their bodies and the spectacular
systems there; all of that do refer to God’s existence. The eye with
which they see comprises telescopic and microscopic designs. They eye
enjoys 130 million light receptive that are the extremities of sight
nerves. The eyebrow that holds the cilia protects and guards the eye day
and night from dusts and particles and reflects sunlight and installs
that encompassing liquid known as tears with its unintentional movement.
Besides, tears are the most effective antiseptics and sterilizers. In
addition, there are tens of such microscopic devises in the eye all of
that states the existence of the Almighty Creator.

Let us take a look on the hearing sense. It is one of the most
complicated devises of human body. It contains a system about which
Corthi the scientist says, “This system contains a sort of channels
between spiral and half-circulated. In the spiral part there are four
thousand small arcs connected to the hearing nerve in the head.”

How long is each arc? How big are they? How were they constructed? They
are surely astounding and mind-boggling. Were these composed
serendipitously? Or was

it the purblind nature that created it? Adopters of such opinions are
degrading to bass levels of ignorance.

The smelling sense is also spectacular. Its center is a restricted area
of embodied mucous membrane having several olfactory long and slim cells
the function of which is conveying the effect to the brain in a part of
the nose, which is the main entrance to the respiratory system.

Human body has also the osteal tract that consists of 206 bones
connected to each other by the knuckles. These bones form the factory of
life in the body since they compose the white and red corpuscles about
130 millions of which expire every minute as they defend human body
against the coming microbes. Likewise, bones are the store in which
residuals are kept. Fatty and albumin materials are reserved inside the
bones while calcic outside.

Human body has other accurate tracts such as the nervous, genital,
lymphatic and muscular systems that are amazingly regulated.

How is it acceptable to conceive that these systems are created
serendipitously or randomly?

Souls’ safes, inspiration, interaction and agitations are totally
comprehending conflicting elements and opposite qualities such as
illumination and gloomy, mercy and severity, toleration and ire and the
like. Allama Samawi poetizes:

O soul! Like the cosmos, you have light and dark

You are war and peace, and it is war and peace

Whenever a regime dominates in you, another is ruined

Is it not unity of justice that decreed what is unknown?

Like the sun, you have rise and set on the cosmos

You are the core of the cosmos if union and incarnation are fit

Brains shined in you and others deviated

On the midway of doubt sat those who do not know.

How can the deaf nature or serendipity create such worlds living in the
mental world? Believers in such unacceptable thoughts do never have any
amount of illumination and ideology. Unfortunately, fog of atheism has
found a way in the mentalities of many Muslim young whose minds have
been filled up with doubts and illusion as the outcome of ignorance and
conscious education. Marxist, and other, ideologies that are based upon
ultimate belief of materialism and denial of God and considering Him as
fable and restrictive illusion, have invaded those youth’s minds.

The conceptual frame of Marxism is surely one of the comics and trivial
delusion of human ideology. It will soon diminish and remove before the
logic and evidence. Except the deviants who lack genuineness of
personality and counterpoise in behavior and thinking, none adopts such
ideology.

Communism insists on holding fast to their beliefs of denying the
Almighty Creator. It poses a dialectical material explanation for every
fact. This non-scientific base, it grounded its teaching courses.

### Mathematics

For the communists, mathematics develops the dialectical thinking of the
children’s mentalities. They ascribed the mathematical studies to the
qualities and basic laws of matters. In other words, the material world
forms a subjective depiction that is isolated from perception. On this
account, they expressed that the natural matter supports the complicated
phenomena such as atomic energy. They also discussed that matter and
energy are immortal, and energy can be modified into other types. The
result of so is that the natural matter has a big significance in the
composition of the materialist dialectical hypothesis.**[1]**

The ancient, as well as modern, scientific studies have nullified
oldness, immortality and non-creation of matters. The philosophical
conference, held in Russia, has proven that matters necessitate the
existing cause. They have also evidences that every possible in this
universe must have had an active cause that grants life and
survival.**[2]**

### History

The communists have regarded history as the grand substance of seeding
the communist ideas and principals. Kariov says, “History is the strong
arm of the communist education. It supports with scientific answers that
guide in the path of the human development, and provides means of
growth. It helps in assuaging birth of the new society and making the
pupils understand the basic facts in addition to revealing the classes
struggle. The history of the Soviet Union enjoys a special significance
since it helps the pupils comprehend the deeds of the inestimable
socialist revolution. It also helps in appreciating the wars of heroism
that their fathers and forefathers waded for the sake of freedom.
Teachers of history guide the pupils to sustain the victory of the
revolution and develop the desire of using all powers for achieving the
efforts that their fathers exerted for constructing the communist
society in the Soviet Union. It also brings up loyalty to the interests
of the working classes, and the discordance with all of the reactionary
powers.”**[3]** For the communists, the interpretation of history is
mere economic. Marx looked in history and tried to identify the powers
that formed it in the present picture. Conclusively, he opted for the
material or the economical interpretation. This viewpoint determined
that the reference of all of the historical events and incentives was
the economy.

Marx has regarded the matter as the chief motive of history that
controlled its development. The other elements can be demarcated through
matter only because they are not independent in composition and form.
The material circumstances that are connected to the production means
and the reciprocal relations of the social classes influence the
existence and formation of these elements. On the other hand,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Comparative studies of courses*: 44.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Islamic ruling and management system*: 129.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Comparative study of courses*: 45-6.

Hegel considers that the material fact along with its economical,
political, and social situations is only a material reflection of
absolute concepts the source of which is the intellect.

For Hegel, substances are formed according to intellectual influences.
Yet, Marx did not change his mind. He expressed that dialectical
development is propelled by influences of matter or production means and
art. Hegel affirms that concept is the base of development and the
former of factuality.

Marx said, “Judicial, social, political, technological and philosophic
as well the other intellectual aspects cannot be merely understandable
since they combine and shape according to influences of material or
economic elements. Economic situations are the basic pivot around which
the general situations entirely circulate. I wonder what that
overdeveloping material phenomenon that governs history of mankind is.
It is neither the geographical nor massiveness of population that does
not change. It is fundamentally the development of production means.
Economic elements work for maturing society of mankind. Human beings
spend most of their times in work for securing their food, clothes and
house. Each uses certain devices in their jobs. Development of these
devises improves man’s mutual relations and creates the discord of
social relations and contrariety of ideologies. Economic factors control
all these. On this account, history develops. Feudal society is the
outcome of hand mills, while the capital industrial society is the
outcome of vapory mills.”

Communists pose material explanations for all of the historical events.
Engels says, “Like the natural, active social powers work aimlessly with
demolishing power we could not understand and estimate. As soon as we
understand and comprehend their deeds, trends and effects, then it is
our concern to subject them. We can achieve our objectives through such
powers. As we understand natures of these powers, they change in the
producers’ hands from crude masters into obedient servants.”**[1]**

Communists believe that matter is the main explainer of historical
events and generations’ march and generate the social forms that copy
the individual relations in societies. Marx says, “It is not obligatory
to search for the historical clue in people’s minds, opinions and
concepts. This clue should be searched in production means and
subjective laws of economy that work separately away from people’s
wills.”

The logic Marxism uses in educing and searching for this phenomenon is
actually sectarian, not methodical since it does not depend upon
scientific studies related to accurate statistic and sound comparisons.
It subjects history to singly to the economic elements without referring
to any trace of human conscience and mental, family and emotional
cognizance in addition to any other tendencies. It is most naturally
that such factors have the effective authority in development of mankind
societies and progression. Reformers went on reforming the general
situations and advancing life means without being incited by any
economic or material motive.

A great deal of activists contributed acutely in erecting civilizations
of mankind. They instituted the preeminent idealities and opened noble
horizons for their people;  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Soviet Manifesto*: 32.

any material aspect did not induce all these activities. The only
objective has been reformation and fancy of general rectitude.**[1]**

### Literature

The communists paid no attention to literature. They picked up only
those topics that praise Marxism and the economic elements or those
satirizing capitalism. This was, for them, the highest level that takes
the authors to the top, even if the writings are affected by valueless
style and idea. The reason that they cited was that the economic
elements had been the principal rule of literature as well as other
arts. This is most surely unreal. Literature is an emotional state that
is irrelevant to any economic factor since its resource is man’s
feelings and surrounding circumstances. The elegies of the morose
emotional poetry that vibrates the codes of spirits to arouse the warmth
of grief and dolor, and those poems that cite pictures of this nature
and universal views were not originated by materialism. Only those who
had no idea of the factuality of literature that is grounded on mere
emotions and feelings, which are far away from material influences; only
those may declare such false opinions.

### Textbooks

Communism has paid great attention in choosing definite textbooks. The
officials, hence, have checked the books accurately and sweepingly, to
empty them from any idea antagonizing Marxism. In February 12, 1933, the
Central Committee of Communist Party issued a decision decreeing that
each word and definition –in the books of study- should be concordant to
the communist principals. This was the reaction of their past unconcern
with the studying courses.

Under the government’s supervision, the studying books have been
arranged and edited so that it would include the required basic
information that reflect the viewpoints of the ruling
authorities.**[2]** Such firm procedures resulted in the generations’
deprivation of detecting the other scientific values that contribute in
constructing a scientific personality and the prosperity of the
conceptual movements.

The previous exposition of the cultural frames of capitalism and Marxism
has shown that they dedicated their teaching efforts to the industrial
sciences that developed man in such an unexpected astonishing way. Yet,
they have neglected the spiritual aspects and used the axe of
demolishing for eradicating all of the distinctive human values. Hence,
they have wasted the shades of mercy, mutual relations, family and
social ties and exalted the standards that play a considerable role in
creating man’s behavior and equanimity.

Primarily, the cultural planning of the modern education, whether in
capitalism or communism, aims at inciting the youth to obtain the
certificate through which they save their living. Most of the youth have
disdained knowledge, thrown the book, and embarked voraciously on their
desires and impulses as soon as they got a job.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Islamic* *ruling and* management systems: 112-4.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Comparative studies of courses*: 58-9.

Most of the graduates forget their scholastic information as soon as
they leave the teaching institutes. This is because of the velocity of
teaching. Many psychological surveys of teaching have proven that 50% of
the students disremembered the scholastic information they had received
in the colleges in one year. Eighty percent of the information have been
disremembered two years later.**[1]** These disadvantages have been the
outcome of the speedy teaching and the seeking of studies for purposes
other than obtaining knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Fundamentals of courses*: 166.
