The Cultural Planning in the Programs of the Islamic Education
==============================================================

Islam has acceded to science and its creative capability of developing,
maturing, and achieving the social prosperity. It has also believed that
any society that rejects science is reactionary and its mental powers
and conceptual ties are weak. Such societies, according to the Islamic
viewpoint, must leave the caravans of life and illumination.

The Prophet (s) said, “My nation’s expiry occurs when they disdain
knowledge.”

Since its earliest stages, Islam declared war against ignorance and
indolence. It has adopted positively the advocacy to knowledge and the
florescence of the conceptual horizons. It has considered it as an
essential element of forming the social, as well as the individual,
lives and the motive behind the cultural, economical, and social
renaissance of the nation. Finally, Islam has regarded the seeking of
knowledge as one of the precepts and the most significant elements of
constructing the society and designing the civilization.

The West claimed that Islam combats conceptions and eradicates the
freedom of opinions and interdicts the seeking of knowledge. Pierre Lute
refutes this opinion. He says, “We, the European, look at Islam as the
religion of the conceptual gloom that prevents from enlightenment. We
also suppose that Islam calls to extremity and poses many obstacles in
the path of progression. First, this proves the Western people’s
ultimate ignorance of the Prophet’s instructions. It is also regarded as
an ignorance of the historical witnesses. Since its early centuries,
Islam went on developing and proceeding in variant fields. We can
realize the prompt elevation that the first caliphs did to
Islam.”**[1]**

We have not seen any accusal weaker and cheaper than the previous. A
look to the factuality of this great religion will easily prove the
falsity of such an accusal. Islam has cited the seeking of knowledge on
the top of its precepts and projects. It has also alluded at the big
differences between the educated and the ignorant and established
amounts of professions and knowledge as the criteria of people’s
variance and preference. Imam Ali (a), the pioneer of wisdom and
objectivity on this earth, says, “People are evaluated according to what
they master.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Death of Fill*e: 83.

MERITS OF KNOWLEDGE
-------------------

Islam has paid a considerable attention to knowledge. It has acclaimed
its elevation and considered it as an essential matter of the conceptual
renaissance.

### Knowledge in the Quran:

The Quran praises the merits of knowledge and the exaltation of the
scholars’ statuses in more than one Verse. God says:

*Allah will exalt those of you who believe, and those who are given
knowledge in high degrees.*

*Say: Are those who know and those who do not know alike?*

*Ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not know.*

*Nay! These are clear communications in the breast of those who are
granted knowledge.*

*Those of his servants only who are possessed of knowledge fear Allah.*

Besides, many Quranic texts indicate the great significance of knowledge
and the virtues of the scholars who are the source of illumination and
the root of conception on this earth.

### Knowledge in Hadith:

The Prophet (s) said: “Seeking studies is a precept that is imposed upon
every Muslim. God likes the seekers of knowledge.” “God prefers a single
errand for seeking knowledge to the participation in one hundred
battles.” “People of knowledge and jihad are the closest to the degree
of prophecy.” “I advise the seekers of the worldly affairs to adhere to
knowledge, and advise the seekers of the Hereafter to adhere to
knowledge, and advise the seekers of both to adhere to knowledge.” “You
should learn. Learning for God’s sake is a grace. Its study is a divine
praise, and seeking for it is as same as struggling for God’s sake, and
its pursue is worship, and its teaching is alms, and its publicity is
offering to God.” “Seek knowledge even in China.**[\*]**”

The reference books of hadith include many other sayings that expose the
merits and status of knowledge. Those sayings incite people to proceed
in the scientific fields and dismiss the ghosts of ignorance out of
their society since it is the source of retardation and disintegration.

Imam Ali (a) says, “O people! You should realize that the perfection of
the religion is seeking and applying knowledge. Seeking studies is more
necessary than seeking livelihood. The Just, who will surely fulfill the
promise, divides and secures the livelihood. Knowledge is stored at its
people and you have been ordered of seeking it from its people. You
should carry out.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[\*]**China refers to the remotest place in which the harshest
lethargies of traveling is expected.  
 **[1]** Refer to *Usulul-Kafi*: 1/31.

As he speaks with Kumeil bin Ziad, his student, about the merits of
knowledge, Imam Ali (a) says, “O Kumeil! Knowledge is preferable to
wealth, for it guards you while you guard wealth, which is reduced by
expenditure and knowledge betters the almsgiving. The made of wealth
vanishes with the vanishing of wealth. O Kumeil! The cognition of
knowledge is an adopted creed with which God grants obedience in this
life and remembrance after death. Knowledge is ruling while wealth is
ruled. O Kumeil! The collectors of wealth are dead in their lives, and
the scholars are as same as time in its persistence. Their essences are
missed, but their exemplars are existing in hearts.”**[1]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “Seek knowledge and attach tolerance and
veneration to it.”**[2]**

The Prophet’s progeny called and urged on seeking knowledge, educating,
crystallizing the concepts, and adorning with awareness and ethics. This
is quite evident through the numerous uninterrupted reports.

TRANSMITTED SAYINGS
-------------------

Masters of the Islamic conceptual movements could not hide the
encouragement on seeking knowledge.

Abul-Aswed ad-Dueli said: Nothing is more powerful than knowledge. Kings
are people’s rulers, and knowledge is the kings’ ruler.**[3]**

Mussab bin az-Zubeir instructed his son: Seek knowledge. It is the
beatitude of those lacking beatitude and the wealth of those lacking
wealth.

Al-Ghezali said: Without scholars, people would have been like animals.
Knowledge transfers them from savagery to humanity.

Al-Jahiz said: I do not seek knowledge for achieving a definite purpose
and attaining a certain purport. I seek it for getting a thing the
ignorance of which is unallowable, and the sane should never disdain.

Ibn abdil-Berr said: Seek knowledge, because it distinguishes the kings
and enlivens the publics.

THE GRAND GOALS
---------------

The purpose beyond seeking knowledge, from the Islamic viewpoint, is not
attaining narrow material objectives or gaining personal earnings that
are unrelated to the factuality of spirits and disciplining. Actually,
the goals, we will refer to some hereinafter, are nobler and more
elevated.

Activities of the seekers of knowledge should be purely intended for
God’s sake, away from any material benefit. The oppressive efforts--
including the turmoil and the hard striving of continuous nights- that
the students encounter for receiving knowledge  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Nahjul Balagha*: revision of Mohammed Abduh:
3/186-7.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Usulul-Kafi*: 1/36.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Tethkiretus-sami*: 10.

should never be exerted for a worldly affair, which leads to nonsense.
Such efforts must achieve a great triumph the resources of which should
spread over the society as a whole. Nothing is more beneficial and
widespread than working for God’s sake and satisfaction. The sect of
Ikhwanus-safa has dedicated the goals of learning to the work for God’s
sake. They said, “O brethren! You should realize that every item of
knowledge or art that does not lead to the Hereafter will be a loss and
an argument on the Resurrection Day.”**[1]** Al-Ghezali also dedicated
the processes of learning to this aspect. He said, “O youngster! Many
are the nights that you have passed with seeking knowledge and scanning
books, and you have abstained from sleep. I do not know your intendment.
If it has been obtaining the concerns of this world, collecting its
wreckages, and holding its positions and ostentation before the others,
then woe is you! If your intendment is enlivening the Prophet’s
practices, refining your ethics, and violating the bad-tending soul,
then you will get many happy returns!”**[2]**

The Prophet (s) repudiated all of the material intendments that are
pursued by those faithless ones. He said, “He should find himself a
place in the hell-fire that whoever seeks knowledge for disputing with
the ill-minded and showing off before the scholars and attracting
people’s attentions.” On this bright rule, Islam has encouraged people,
by all means, on committing to knowledge. An Islamic educationist says,
“The seekers of knowledge ought to dedicate their acts to God and the
Hereafter. They ought to intend to eradicate ignorance of people, as
well as themselves, enliven the religion, and perpetuate Islam.
Knowledge is surely the only means of perpetuating Islam.”

The incentive of seeking studies should be spreading knowledge and
God-fearing among people. Islam has urged groups on having religious
erudition and rulings, and disposing them among people. God says:

Why should not then a company from every party from among them go forth
that they may apply themselves to obtain understanding in religion?

The seeking of knowledge in Islam is significant only when it aims for
disciplining people and raising their levels to take them away from the
total sorts of irregularity and deviation. Such seekers of knowledge are
definitely the prophets’ heirs and the masters of the pious and the
virtuous.

In any event, the propagation of the Islamic doctrine, the introduction
of the conventional rulings to people, habituating them to the noble
morals, and taking them away from ill manners and vile moralities; these
are the most important incentives of the religious teaching.

We may mention the creation of the social conscience and leading people
to cooperation, heart purity, and spiritual fineness with the goals with
which Islam has concerned. The development of the feeling of
responsibility, the encouragement on the conceptual and scientific
maturity, and the improvement of the general life for  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Epistles of Ikhwanus-safa*.  
 **[2]** Refer to Ayyuhal Walad: 94.

avoiding poverty, ailment, and ignorance; all these are included with
the goals involved. The Islamic teaching has not been mere religious nor
mere material. It has accommodated between the religious and the worldly
affairs since it has prepared people to act positively in this world and
the Hereafter. The holy Quran refers to this point. God says:

And seek by means of what Allah has given you the future abode and do
not neglect your portion of this world.

The Prophet (s) stated, “The best of you are not those who neglected the
worldly affairs for the Hereafter or the affairs of the Hereafter for
the worldly. It is surely they who take from both.”

The propagation of the political conscience, the compaction of the
social conceptions, and the expansion of the general mentalities before
the public interests along with the supervision of the political affairs
are in reach of the goals of the Islamic teachings. These are the very
objects that are intended by the prophetic saying, “You all are wardens,
and you all are responsible for your wards.”

Such a sort of conscience can be consummated in the Islamic society only
when the conceptual and scientific life is affluent. The prevalence of
ignorance induces a total destruction of such conscience. The menacing
crises affecting the Islamic world in most of the life stages have been
the direct results of the conceptual and social disintegration.

Knowledge achieves the nation’s attachment and unification, and
eradicates dissidence and corruption. Muslims as a whole are one body
gathered by the ties of faith that are more inherent than the ties of
lineage. Virtuous spirits can be attainable through the publicity of the
Islamic sciences and Muslims’ realizing the factuality of their great
religion. The goals of the Islamic teaching are not devoted to religious
affairs. They are comprehensive and comprising all of the sciences
through which social and economic, as well as other, aspects develop. An
educationist says, “Teaching -for Muslims- achieves four purposes-
religious, social, material, and rational.”**[1]**

THE OBLIGATION OF TEACHING
--------------------------

The distinctive feature of Islam is the collective obligation of
obtaining knowledge that systematizes the life. Obtaining the religious
knowledge is an individual obligation upon Muslims by either extraction
or pursuance. The excuses of the uneducated are inadmissible. The
Prophet (s) said, “On the Resurrection day, the servants, who will
excuse of ignorance, will be told that they should have learned.”

Al-Ghezali divided knowledge into two parts; one is collective and the
other is individual. He said, “People has different opinions regarding
knowledge that is imposed on Muslims. They were of twenty sects- each
explained the obligation of knowledge according to its own opinions.
Theologians estimated theology with which monotheism is realized.
Jurists referred to jurisprudence with which people can  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Education of the Arabs*: 152-3.

recognize the precepts including the legal and illegal matters.
Exegesists -of the holy Quran- and hadithists suppose that the knowledge
of the Quranic and prophetic texts are obligatorily learned. Others
suppose other opinions.”**[1]**

Al-Qabisi assumes that it is obligatory upon boys to learn. He refers to
the obligation of learning as his proof. The Quranic knowledge is also
obligatory since it is necessary for performing the prayers correctly.
Fathers are assigned to teach their sons the knowledge of the Quran and
prayers. They may send them to the tutorials and pay for teachers. In
case fathers are too poor to meet the costs of teaching, their relatives
should pay them. Finally, teachers may teach the boys freely for God’s
sake or receive their stipends from the public treasury. This hypothesis
was highly considerable for jurists that issued the verdicts of the
obligation of receiving knowledge on all of the Muslims.**[2]**

As Ibn Wahab was attending the classes of Malik, the time of a prayer
commenced. He prepared himself for performing it. “The lessons you have
attended are not less obligatory than the prayer you are preparing for,”
said Malik.

In any case, Islam has incited to obtain religious, and other,
knowledges for achieving development and avoiding ignorance, which is
the one and only source of retardation.

### Compulsory Teaching:

According to the Islamic legislation, governments are responsible for
playing a positive role in breaking the bonds of illiteracy and sparing
no efforts for spreading science and knowledge among people.

Omar bin al-Khattab, once, asked a Bedouin whether he could recite the
Quran. “Yes, I do,” said the man. “Well,” expressed Omar, “Recite the
mother of the Book.” The Bedouin worded, “I do not know the daughter.
How can I then recite the mother?”

Omar whipped and sent him to the tutorials. He could no longer tolerate;
hence, he escaped.

Teaching is one of the life necessities. It is a significant element in
the social progress and development. Therefore, Islam had made it a
basic rule for the social structure and paid special attention to
obtaining religious knowledge. Imam as-Sadiq said, “I wish I could lash
our acquaintances on the heads for the sake of receiving knowledge.” He
also said, “I do not want the youth to be in other than two states-
either teaching or receiving knowledge. Otherwise, they will neglect.
The negligent always misspend and then sin. I swear by Him who sent
Mohammed with the right, the sinners’ fate will be the hell-fire.”

The period of youth represents power, determination, diligence, and hard
working. It is the phase in which powers are perfect and tendencies are
ready; therefore, all of the abilities should be spent on knowledge,
personal disciplining, and excellence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Ihiau-ulumiddin*.  
 **[2]** Refer to Ibn Rushd’s *Muqeddima*t: 14-5.

### Stipend of Teaching:

Jurists had various opinions regarding the permissibility of the
teachers’ receiving stipends. Some disallowed while others legalized.
Each had their own arguments recorded in the books of jurisprudence. The
unanimous fact is that the virtuous and the religious teachers refused
to receive wages for teaching. They offered their efforts to God’s sake
and the Hereafter. They understood that the process of teaching is God’s
guidance; therefore, it is unfit to take wages for it since the prophets
did not ask for wages. Ad-Dehak bin Muzahim and Abdullah bin al-Harith,
for instance, refused to receive wages for the teaching they had
provided for children. Moreover, they forbore from accepting the
presents offered by their pupils’ fathers.**[1]** Once, Abdurrahman
as-Salami, who was teaching in Kufa Mosque, refused a present offered by
one of his pupils’ father, and wrote to him, “We do not teach the Quran
for wages.”**[2]**

Hajji Khalifa says, “The purpose beyond the publicity of knowledge is
not securing the life affairs. It is purposed for showing facts and
disciplining moralities. Those who receive knowledge for obtaining a
profession are not scholars. They are semi-scholars. The Eastern master
scholars referred to this point. When they are informed of the
establishment of schools in Baghdad, they held consolation ceremonies
for the knowledge. They said, “The masters of elevated concerns and
dignified personalities were engaged in knowledge intending to attain
honor and perfection. They become the scholars of useful knowledge and
personalities. The lowly and the lazy come to knowledge when stipends
began to be received for teaching.”**[3]**

People spent big riches for obtaining knowledge for purposes other than
improving their livelihood. Abu Bakr an-Nisapuri said, “I spend one
hundred thousand dirhams for obtaining the knowledge of hadith by which
I benefited no single dirham.” With the development of the Islamic state
and the scientific movement during the Abbasid reign, knowledge became a
path taken for reaching the ruling regimes and securing a good
livelihood. Since then, stipends were received for teaching. Ibn
Khuldoun said, “Knowledge became one of the professions. The extremists
took it as a way of gaining leading positions; therefore, individuals
other than its real people took this position to change it into a
profession. The wealthy and the officials disdained knowledge.”**[4]**

The grand religious universities of Najaf and Qum are still practicing
the free education since all of the knowledges given there are free and
offered to God’s sake exclusively.

### Age of Teaching:

Islam has noticed all of the aspects originating the prosperity of
education and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Ibn Quteiba’s *Al-Meaarif*.  
 **[2]** Refer to Ibn Sa’d’s *Tabaqat*.  
 **[3]** Refer to Keshfud-dunoun: 1/53.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Muqeddima*.

teaching. One of these aspects was the age of teaching that is defined
according to children’s mental maturity. It is the seventh year of age.
Imam as-Sadiq, the pioneer of the Islamic mental and scientific
movement, is reported to say, “A child should play for seven years, and
learn at schools for other seven years, and acquire legal and illegal
questions for other seven years.” He also said, “Let your son play for
seven years and be disciplined for other seven years. He will then
thrive lest he will be valueless.”**[1]**

Islam had declared this fact before the modern studies of psychology of
teaching that decided the seventh year as the age of acquiring
teachings. UNESCO also affirmed this matter within the educational
regulations. Children who join school before this age may undergo
lethargy, suffering, and cessation of the mental maturity.
Unfortunately, numerous fathers send their sons to schools before
attaining this age. An educationist says, “One of the painful states in
this age is the drastic competition for acquiring knowledge to the
degree that parents often forget that their sons, who have limited
mental and physical potentials and specific tendencies and desires,
should enjoy their childhood. They hurried in taking their sons to
schools before attaining the five or six-year-old, and deem excessive
six years of primary school. They try to reduce the period by fatiguing
their sons in special tutorials that exhaust their powers and
incapacitate their mental maturity.”**[2]**

Al-Abdari says, “The virtuous ancestors used to send their
seven-year-old sons to the tutorials since they are asked to teach their
sons the ritual prayers and good manners and traits in this age. Now,
children are joining schools in an early age. Teachers should beware of
teaching such children the principals of reading lest they are exhausted
physically and mentally. As a matter of fact, fathers are sending their
sons to school in an early age for getting rid of their home troubles,
not teaching them.”**[3]**

Laziness, sloth, and cessation of mental maturity are within the
disadvantages of sending the early children to schools.

Islam has referred to another nonesuch matter that is the necessity of
feeding the children with religious spirits so that the atheistic
ideologies will not affect. Imam Ali said, “Teach your sons useful
knowledge so that the atheists will not overcome them.”**[4]**

The children’s minds are the most fertile for receiving the religious
advocacy and embracing the virtues and guidance of Islam. The children’s
religious advocacy purifies their souls against deviation and aberrance,
and guides to a brighter future.

Children are the recipients of every idea. Imam Ali says, “The like of
the juveniles’ minds is the vacant land that receives whatever is
seeded.” This fact should be utilized for directing the children to the
virtuous bearing of honesty and good manners. Unfortunately, the
educators and fathers have shown shortage in this regard. They did  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Wesailus-Shia*: 7/194-5.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Entrance to the holy Sharia*: 2/163.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Planning for education and teaching*: 88.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Wesailus-Shia*; 7/197.

not immunize their sons against the lethal diseases, such as
existentialism and the like, that gushed into the Muslim countries and
affected many individuals. Such individuals went on imitating the
fashions and styles of the aimless and the corruption of the
existentialists. They have lost all of the criteria of human values and
distinction between good and evil.

### Categories of Sciences:

Islam has ordered of plunging into all of the classes of sciences
especially those achieving social and mental growth. Furthermore, it is
obligatory upon Muslims to receive some sciences such as medicine,
pharmacology, and other industrial sciences and arts. Modern sciences
and specialization are given an exclusive intention for their being the
bases of people’s development and renaissance. The Islamic world has
collapsed and been rent asunder because of ignorance and the conceptual
slowdown in industries, and falling behind the developed countries that
built their civilization on the grounds of science and arts. All these
made the Islamic homeland the target of the imperialists who hurried for
usurping its riches and economic resources.

Islam has not restricted science to certain categories, but it urged on
using all of its categories and arts. The imams, who are the Prophet’s
heirs and the repositories of his wisdom and secrets, have cleft the
portals of most of sciences. They tackled the various classes of mental
and reported science through their lectures and theses. They recorded
their attendance in jurisprudence, hadithology, Quranic exegeses,
medicine, and chemistry et al. Imam As-Sadiq grasped the grand portion
of the crystallization of mental life and the expansion of science
scopes that contributed in constructing the Islamic civilization. Sayyid
Mir Ali al-Hindi says, “It is quite acceptable to state that the
sciences of that time helped in unlocking the restricted mentalities.
Philosophic discussions became public all over the Islamic world. It is
worthy mentioning that the chief of this movement was the grandson of
Ali bin abi Talib, known as Imam Jafar whose nickname was As-Sadiq. He
enjoyed expansive mental horizons and intellectual far-thee-well. He had
full and complete familiarity with the sciences of his age. He was
surely the founder of the well-versed philosophic schools in Islam. His
classes were not dedicated to those who became, later on, founders and
masters of the sects, but they were attended by the grand philosophers
and the students of philosophy all over the Islamic state.”**[1]**

Mohammed Sadiq Nashat says, “The house of Jafar as-Sadiq was a
university decorated permanently with the grand masters of hadith,
exegesis, wisdom, and theology. The number of the attendants was
attaining two thousand in most times. It could reach four thousand all
are famed scholars.”**[2]**

The main topic of the previous exposition is to prove that Islam has
constituted the conceptual life on the bases of enlightenment and
development of the general, not specific, classes of knowledge. Al-Aqqad
says, “Islamic science is too comprehensive  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Jafar bin Mohammed*: 59.  
 **[2]**Refer to *Lifetime of Imam Musa bin Jafar*: 1/81.

to leave any topic. It is more significant than teaching how to perform
the ritual precepts. It is surely the best worship by which man is led
to the Lord’s secrets of creation as well as the personal and
surrounding facts.”**[1]**

Islam has concentrated on the necessity of acquiring religious teachings
and Shariite rulings since they regulate the social relations and
achieve the equanimity of personal behavior and manners. At any rate,
such teachings include transactions such as contracts, pledges, blood
money, and doctrinal provisions besides the rituals. They also involve
social, political, and economic affairs in addition to those related to
ethics and moralities.

THE BANNED SCIENCES
-------------------

### Sorcery:

Sorcery causes terrible damages to the society since it attracts people
to fables and false matters and believing in illusions and mirages. From
this cause, Islam has banned the teaching and learning of sorcery, and
likened it to atheism and polytheism. The Prophet said, “The sorcerers
are atheists.” “He is converting to atheism that whoever learns any
amount of sorcery, unless he repents.” “Three classes of people will not
be in the Paradise- the drunkards, the sorcerers, and the violators of
relations of kinship.”**[2]**

Those who practice this art are ruled as apostates since it is an
instrument of demolishing and deviation and a source of frivolity and
sedition. A number of naïve, simple, and ordinary people accepted
sorcery completely; hence, they used to act upon the words and
directions of sorcerers for revealing what they ignore. For instance,
people seek the help of sorcerers for revealing the perpetrator of a
murder. In many cases, sorcerers accuse innocent persons, arouse
sedition, and disorder in the society.

### Astronomy:

Astronomy causes to believe in the influence of the planets in the
events and independent impression in composing and establishing certain
occurrences. It also indicates the planets’ managing and founding this
cosmos. This will certainly lead to denial of God’s existence and His
relinquishing in the earthly affairs after creation of these stars.
Islam has warned against learning or believing in astronomy. The Prophet
said, “He whoever believes in wording of astronomers or fortune-teller
is denying what has been revealed to Mohammed.”

As Imam Ali was about to begin his journey, an astronomer said, “If you
choose this very time for traveling you will not win your intendment.
This is the astronomy.” The Imam gazed at him and said, “Do you claim
you lead to the very hour that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]**Refer to *Thinking is an Islamic precept*: 86.  
 **[2]**Refer to Sheik Al-ansari’s *al-Mekasib*. In his
*ar-Rawdetul-behiya*, Ashahid says, “Teaching sorcery is prohibited, and
taking it as profession is a sort of ill-gotten properties. Legalizers
of sorcery should be sentenced to death penalty. 

discharges the evil and the one that brings about the vile? Believing in
you is belying the Quran and disdaining God’s help in obtaining the wish
and evading the abominated. O People! Beware of learning astronomy
except in cases of direction. Astronomy leads to fortune telling.
Fortune-tellers are the like of sorcerers. Sorcerers are the like of
atheists. Atheists will be in the hell-fire.”**[1]**

This is the logic of Islam aiming at believing in God and engaging all
of the events to His will and determination. Stars have nothing to do
with events except those regarding climate, lunar and sonar eclipses and
the like. Those predictions do not confront the religion and its
factuality and guidance.

Those banned sciences cripple the conceptual movement, deaden the
cognizance and enliven believing in delusions and fables.

### Teaching Women:

Islam has not dedicated teaching to men. As a matter of fact, women had
a good share of teaching. Islam has aroused the spirit of knowledge
among women of Muhajirs and Ansar**[\*]** and encouraged them on
learning reading and writing in addition to religious affairs.
Al-Bukhari records that women asked the Prophet to assign a day on which
he might meet and teach them and the Prophet did. Al-Belathiri counts
the ladies who were teachers of writing and reading among whom were
Hafsa the Prophet’s wife, Ummukulthoum bint Awaba and Aisha bint Sa’d
who said, “My father taught me reading and writing.”**[2]** Easa bin
Miskin used to gather his sons and nieces for teaching reading and
writing.**[3]**

Al-Jahiz affirms, “Women should not be taught writing and poetry. They
should learn the Quran, especially sura of Nur.”**[4]** Al-Qabisi banned
women’s learning to avoid depravity. He said, “It is more secure for
women to evade learning reading.”

In fact, such opinions lack scientific genuineness and resist the
Islamic spirit and guidance. Islam has persistently used all methods and
powers for eradicating ignorance and illiteracy, and regarded the
acquisition of knowledge as an individual right of every male and
female. It has also burdened the governments of arranging equal
opportunities of obtaining knowledge apart from race, nationality, and
social class. It has declared that every human being should enjoy the
right of the expansive participation in the scientific and conceptual
activities.

The Islamic mission is based upon knowledge and believing in its being
an important element of social progress of individuals and communities
since it is not devoted to men exclusively. Women, whose roles in
establishing the humane society and life prosperity and maturity have
been distinctively and highly praised and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Sheik Al-ansari’s *al-Mekasib*.  
 Muhajirs are people of Mecca who embraced Islam and immigrated to
Yathrib, Al-Madina later on, with the Prophet. Ansar are people of
Yathrib who received and welcomed the Prophet and the Meccan migrants.  
 **[2]**Refer to *Futuhul*-*buldan*: 458.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Adabul*-*muellimin*: 22.  
 **[4]** Refer to *al-Beyanu wet-Tebyin*: 2/2.

estimated in Islam, are also included because they form the basic ground
upon which family structure is built. How is it acceptable that Islam
that gave women unprecedented respect and granted them as much as
possible rights in scopes of general, as well as individual, relations
with governments and societies has prevented them from obtaining
knowledge, which is the guide to social and conceptual maturity and
progress?

It is impossible for women to attain and rank of elevation and
perfection unless they construct their lives on bases of knowledge and
religion. It is yes that Islam banned women from mixed learning and
warned against grooming since these matters push them into depths of
disintegration and corruption and nullify their chastity and dignity.
Islam aims for preserving women’s dignity and protecting them against
slipping in humble levels. Women should be the mistresses of their
class, and should manage and supervise the education and guidance of
their likes for being active members in this life.

### Status of Teachers:

Islam has paid considerable attention to teachers for their being the
first brick in the structure of social development and perfection and
the cause of guiding and developing behaviors and mentalities of
individuals and communities. The Prophet cared for teachers and showed
their elevated standings. Once, he passed by two circles of people; the
first was supplicating to God while the other listening to a teacher. He
commented, “The first is begging God who may or may not give them. The
second was learning. I have been sent as teacher.” Hence, he joined the
second. This is the best example of the Prophet’s encouraging education
and teaching.

### Teachers are exemplars:

Teachers are indisputably their pupils’ none such exemplars. Pupils
acquire the good traits and sound trends, as well as the virtuous
behavior and equanimity, from their teachers whose guidance and conducts
penetrate to their hearts. On that account, teachers must overdiscipline
themselves and train on virtuous and noble morals and manners to be the
best exemplars of their pupils.

As a caliph appointed a teacher for his son, he instructed, “The
reformation you will provide to my son should be a part of your
self-reformation. Flaws of pupils are totally related to yours. They
will deem good only what you deem good and deem evil only what you deem
evil.”**[1]**

An educationist states, “Teachers are the good exemplars to whom the
pupils refer inadvertently.”**[2]** Another educationist says, “Majority
of people are pursuing states of the speakers. Those who are not are
very rare. Hence, teachers should care for themselves more than
improving their ways of teaching.”**[3]** It is said that admonitions  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *ad-Durrun-Nadhid*: 138 and Ibn Quteiba’s
*Uyunul-Akhbar*: 2/166.  
 **[2]** Refer to *ad-Durrun-Nadhid*: 138  
 **[3]** Refer to *Miftahus-saada*: 1/43.

of masters that neglect applying them are being very unstable in hearts.

Abul-Aswed ad-Dueli composed a couple of verses in which he said:

O, man that teaches others! You should have taught yourself first

Warn not against a manner while you are doing

This is the great shame on you

Begin with yourself in interdicting sins

If you do it then you are truly wise

Only then, your admonition will be acceded

And your words will be ensued and teaching be useful.

Self-disrespect and immorality of some teachers have been the cause that
resulted in the present youth’s irregularity and deviation from the
social traditions.

### Teachers’ Rights:

Teachers enjoy abundant rights on their pupils since they are sources of
their perfection and familiarity with life experts. They are also
sources of their mentalities’ illumination. Therefore, teachers’ rights
are preferable to fathers’. Pupils are required to show their teachers
the highest pictures of respect and reverence. Imam Zeinul-abidin says,
“The right of your instructor is dignifying him and committing to
solemnity in their classes and good listening and attending. You should
provide for your instructor with mental presence and conceptual
attendance and heart retaining and sight propinquity. The way of all
these is laxness of desires and confine of lusts. You must understand
that you are the emissary of what you have been received to the ignorant
you may meet. Then, you should convey properly and never breach the
mission if you should perform.”**[1]**

These golden words have been definitely suffocated with teachers’ rights
that bring about the nation’s guidance in behavior and morals.

Teaching stuff should enjoy the most remarkable rights not only on the
students, but also on the nation. This is because teachers’ being the
source of illumination and cognizance from which we recover elements of
our renaissance and development. Teachers’ efforts are the source of
establishment of civilizations and prosperity of life characters as well
as achievements of the great expectations for which the nation yearns.

### Teachers’ Qualities and Responsibilities:

The ancient Muslim educationists referred to a number of qualities and
responsibilities that the teachers should apply on their teaching life.
These qualities may participate in making the teachers the noble
exemplars and achieving the prosperity of education and teaching for
creating a generation of equanimity and good manners. The following is
an exposition of these qualities:

- Teachers should offer their disciplinary activities for God’s sake.
Their acts must aim at reforming the Muslim young generations. They
should avoid thinking of riches  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Tuheful-uqul*: 260

or positions. Deviation is the inevitable fate of any teacher that
intends to gain good livelihood or high positions through his missions.
Sufian bin Uyeina says, “I had been gifted the understanding of the
Quran, but when I received those riches from Abu Jafar I lost the
understanding totally.”

- Teachers should be of extraordinary faith in God the Exalted, and
should perform the rituals for showing the Islamic norms and destroying
the seditious. They should also acquire noble traits so that God will
cast understanding in their minds. Ibn Masud said, “Knowledge is not the
abundance of narration. It is an illumination that God casts in minds.”

- Teachers should avoid humble professions, such as cupping or tanning,
during the rest hours.

- Teachers should clean their bodies and practice the other ablutionary
activities such as clipping the nails and avoiding malodors.

- Teachers should economize in their clothing, food, and lodging.
Ashafii said, “I have not been saturated for sixteen years.”

- Teachers should keep themselves away from the ruling authorities as
much as possible. Al-Awzaii said, “Nothing is more hateful to God than
the scholars’ visiting the viziers.”

- Teachers should copy the virtuous and pious men among the Prophet’s
companions and their followers.

- Teachers should be concerned with the serviceable knowledges and avoid
the useless and disputable.

- Teachers should be concerned with the knowledges that take to the
affairs of the Hereafter. Shaqiq al-Belkhi asked his student, Hatem
al-Asem about the questions he had learned. “How long have you been with
me?” asked the teacher. “They have been thirty three years,” answered
the student. “What have you learned all these years?” asked the teacher.
“I have learnt eight questions,” replied the student. The teacher
expressed his sorrow and said, “I have finished my years with you, but
you have learnt eight things only!” “That is it,” expressed the student,
“ I do not want to lie.” “Well,” said the teacher, “Let me hear.” “They
are the fondness of the good deeds, shoving the caprices away, decency
and god-fearing, befriending the right, antagonizing the devil, adhering
to obedience, leaving the humiliation of seeking earnings to people, and
depending on God,” counted the student. The teacher expressed his great
admiration and esteem and said, “O Hatem! God may prosper you. As I
looked in the Torah, the Bible, the Psalms, and the Quran, I found these
eight questions be the pivot of these Books.” 

- Teachers should not engage themselves in positions higher than their
abilities until they accomplish their profession and grant the
certificate of master teachers. As-Shibli says, “He whoever has the
front before attaining suitability is meeting his shame.”

- Teachers should discipline the pupils with their accounts and deeds in
addition to words and admonition.

- Teachers should love their pupils and guard them against harm. Abu
Abbas said,

“The most respectful -for me- is my student who leaves all people to
come to me. I protect him to the degree that I exert my efforts for
preventing even the flies from reaching him.”

- Teachers should pardon and acquit the pupils who make mistakes. They
should use intimation in attracting their attentions to their faults. If
they do not conceive, teachers then may state the fault openly. Then
comes the reproach. The Prophet (s) said, “Teach without chiding.
Teachers are preferable to the scolders.” He also said, “Use leniency to
those whom you teach and those who learn you.”

- Teachers should welcome the attendant pupils and ask about the absent.

- Teachers should not answer questions they ignore. They may confess
they do not know. Ibn Masud said, “O people! He, whoever is familiar
with something, should say it, otherwise he should say: Allah is the
most knowledgeable. This saying is a part of knowledge.”

- Teacher should realize the levels of the pupils and offer to them
according to their understandings. They should intimate to the smart,
elucidate for others, and repeat for the unintelligent.

- Teachers should refer to the unchanging rules and the exceptions of
the materials they teach. They should also urge them on working and ask
them to repeat the matters they had to memorize, and chide the negligent
and praise the good retainers. They should also ask them for testing
their understandings and order them of moderation especially when signs
of physical or mental fatigue are shown. They should recommend the bored
ones of rest and relaxation.

- Teachers should not ask for intolerable matters that do not fit the
students’ minds and age. They should not ask the students of reading
books that are mentally unattainable. They should test before referring
to a subject to be perceived. After test, teachers may refer to books
that accord the pupils’ minds. They should not engage the pupils with
several subjects at the same time.

- Teachers should not teach when they are annoyed or complaining an
illness, hunger, or anger since these states may harm the students and
themselves.

- Teachers should neither prolong nor shorten the lessons unacceptably.
Likewise, they should neither raise nor reduce their voices
inadequately.

- Teachers should allot certain times to receiving the scope of the
pupils’ memorized items. In the ancient times, teachers allotted
Wednesday night and Thursday morning to recalling. Friday was the day
off.

- Teachers should treat the pupils equally and avoid any sort of
discrimination. The Prophet is reported to say, “Teachers who have three
students- of different social classes- and do not treat them equally,
will be in the line of the traitors on the Resurrection Day.”

-  Teachers should supervise the pupils’ tendencies and mental desires
so that the suitable subject is chosen. They should lead the pupils who
seek another subject to the correct direction. Avecinna says, “Not every
desired profession is possible and attainable for boys. They should be
fit enough for conforming it. If all of the professions and knowledges
were responsive, none would lack arts and professions,

and people would have the same arts and professions or the opposite.
Wardens who intend to select a profession for the wards should first
test the nature and suitability. Hence, professions should be selected
on the bases of suitability and capability.”

- Teachers should reward the hard-working pupils and praise them before
the mates. Ibn Maskub said, “Pupils should be praised and rewarded for
any good manner and favorable act they show.”

- Teachers should be accurate in treating the pupils. They should count
their breaths and account their entire movements and activities.

The desires of seeking knowledge should be evolved in the pupils’ minds.
Teachers should refer to the most significant matters that advance them
and their societies plentifully. Pupils will surely pursue knowledge
resolutely if this noble tendency is sewn in their minds and,
consequently, the conceptual and scientific life will be prosperous in
the country.**[1]**

Because they applied those programs, the teachers of the early eras of
Islam could produce those virtuous generations of such high traits and
perfect maturity, and achieve the most remarkable scientific renaissance
the sparks of which have covered all of the ages.

TEACHING METHODS
----------------

The ancient Muslim educationists adopted a special method of teaching
that promotes the recipients of knowledge. The following are some
articles of the teaching methods:

### Forsaking Tension

Teachers ought to treat their pupils leniently and kindly and avoid any
tension and cruelty since these two things impede the mental growth and
author serious psychological complexes. Ibn Khuldun says, “Tensional
teaching injures the pupils, especially the children and the harshly
educated.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to the following reference books from which these
qualities are quoted: Ibn Abdun’s *al-Wathiqa*: 213.  
 Malik’s *al-Mudewwana*: 4/26.  
 An-Nawawi’s *Tedribur-rawi*: 128.  
 Al-Gezali’s *Ihiaul-ulum* (Disciplining of  
 moralities): 3/62. Ibn Jumaa’s *Tethkiretus-sami*: 30.  
 *Adabul-muellimin*: 43.  
 al-Bekri’s *Nudumul-qilada*: 99.  
 Ibn Arabi’s *Adabul-muridin*: 3.  
 *Tuheful-uqul*.  
 *Educational cognizance*: 48.  

### Physical Discipline

Pupils of irregular behavior and negligence should be disciplined if
they ignore the advice. The ancient Muslim teachers used to beat and
detain even the kings’ sons. Abu Merriam, the educator of al-Amin and
al-Mamun**[\*]**, caned them so harshly that one’s arm was injured.
Before his father, the boy showed his hand, and the teacher was
summoned. “What for did Mohammed –al-Amin- complain you?” asked
ar-Rashid. “He is full of naivete and slyness,” answered the teacher.
The caliph then said, “You may kill him! His death is better than being
dull.”**[1]**

In his instructions to al-Ahmer, one of his sons’ educators, ar-Rashid
said, “You should first reform him by means of kindness and lenience. If
he refuses, then you should use tension and coarse.”

Fathers used to say to the educators of their sons, “Your share is the
flesh while ours is the bones.”

Beating and tormenting were the most important means of education. This
is incorrect indeed since it is undecided to Islam that regards mercy,
kindness, and lenience as the most matters on which education should
settle. All of the crooked ways should be avoided in the educational
processes. Teachers should not exceed in disciplining the irregular and
deviant pupils since it creates mental complexes and impedes the
maturity and prosperity of education and personality. Ibn Khuldoun says,
“If the educator uses coercion, this will distress the pupil and confine
his delighted spirit and urge on indolence and lead to lie and
malignancy for avoiding more coercion. In addition, this coercion will
teach the pupil trickery and fraud, and the pupil may take them as
customs and qualities forever. The educator, whether teacher or father,
should not exaggerate in disciplining the sons.”**[2]** The Prophet (s)
said, “Teach without chiding. Teachers are preferable to the scolders.”
Ibn Quteiba said, “Teachers are recommended not to use tension or
pride.”**[3]**

Teachers are compared to the compassionate father. It is said, “Teachers
are the substitutes of fathers.”**[4]** It is also said, “Teachers ought
to care for the students’ interests and treat them like the dearest sons
with kindness, courtesy, benevolence, and patience on probable
alienation. Teachers should apprise of their flaws by means of advice
and sympathy, not chiding and crudeness.”**[5]** Al-Qabisi, one of the
master educators of the fourth century –of Hegira-, was asked whether it
is recommended for teachers to use coarseness or lenience with students,
he answered, “Disciplining should never occupy the good teachers’
lenience and mercy to the pupils. Teachers are the substitutes of their
fathers. It is discommended for teachers to be always frowning.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[**[\*]**]** Al-Amin and al-Mamun are two Abbasid caliphs and sons of
ar-Rashid, the Abbasid caliph.  
 **[1]** Refer to *Muhadaratul-udeba*: 1/30.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Muqeddima*: 540.  
 **[3]** Refer to al-Bubkani’s *Course of learning*: 83.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Uyunul-akhbar*.  
 **[5]** Refer to al-Qabisi’s *Manners of the learners and rulings of
the teachers*: 54.

This will make the pupils disrespect them.”**[1]**

Teachers’ roughness originates mental troubles and leads to the
students’ refusing the lessons.

### Suggestive Rebuke

Muslim educationists believe that the insinuative rebuke should be
within the teaching methods in case pupils show irregular behavior or
imperfect work since this method is more impressive than expression.
They said, “Teachers who notice an irregularity or a crooked behavior
should not state it directly to the pupils. They should insinuate within
their common speech by referring to the disadvantages of such a
behavior. This will achieve the intended convention.”**[2]**

This method, in fact, is more useful than direct reproach, which may
lead to rebellion and insistence on the wrong. Islam has asserted this
topic in the fields of education and teaching. It is related that Imams
al-Hassan and al-Hussein, the grandsons of the Prophet, once noticed an
old man perform the ritual ablution incorrectly. They avoided stating to
him directly; hence, they agreed on making him the arbiter who should
rule of the most accurate ablution. As they performed the ablution
before him, the old man said, “O masters! You both have performed the
very accurate ablution, but it seems that the old man can master
nothing.”

Islam has adopted this necessary practice since it saves the deviant
from irregularity and aberrance and takes him back to the truth and
right. Educationists said, “The pupil that is not amended by insinuative
impression, owing to lack of understanding and perception, secret
expression and frank warning should be used. If this method is
unsuccessful, the teacher may warn openly and reproach. If this is also
unsuccessful, the teacher then may dismiss and leave the pupil till he
returns.”**[3]**

THE LEARNERS’ MANNERS
---------------------

Muslim educationists have been greatly concerned with the learners’
affairs. They constituted the considerable methods that aim at
disciplining and acquiring the virtuous ethics and noble manners.

- Learners should seek knowledge for God’s sake purely, neglecting any
worldly interest or valueless purpose. God will surely raise the
respects of such learners, facilitate the difficulties, grant perception
and intelligence, and combine the welfare of this world and the
Hereafter.

- Learners should carry out the religious instructions and precepts as
well as the noble morals and ritual practices. They should fear God in
their hiddens as well as their appearances and purify their hearts
against discommended qualities such as envy, ostentation, pride, and
arrogance since these characters are the vilest and the most  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Tethkiretus-sami*: 49.  
 **[2]** Refer to al-Qabisi’s *Manners of the learners and rulings of
the teachers*: 54.  
 **[3]**Refer to al-Qabisi’s *Manners of the learners and rulings of the
teachers*: 54.

unassuming. An educationist says, “Prayers are invalid without extrinsic
purification. Likewise, heart worship that is seeking knowledge is
invalid unless the hearts are purified from ill manners and immoral
qualities. Knowledge is not the abundance of narration. It is an
illumination that is cast in hearts.”

- Learners should enjoy self-possession and sedateness. The Prophet (s)
said, “Seek knowledge and convey to people. Use composure, tranquility,
and modesty to those from whom you learn and those to whom you convey.
Do not be the despotic of knowledge.”**[1]** Imam as-Sadiq said, “Seek
knowledge and use self-possession, composure, and modesty to those from
whom you learn. Do not be the despotic of knowledge, otherwise the wrong
will remove your right.” Students of such perfect moralities will
naturally be the exemplars of others and influence positively in the
people’s behavior and ethics.

- Learners should exert all efforts for seeking knowledge since it is
not inspirational. Knowledge is acquirable. It depends upon the scope of
the efforts that lead to obtaining scientific fortune. Learners should
respect time as well as their lessons. Any tardiness will waste the
classes and cause the teachers’ carelessness.

- Learners should not exaggerate in studying lest their powers and
energy will be exhausting and the mental maturity be impeded. It is
essential for learners to have sufficient time for rest and physical
relaxation. Men should regard the rights of their bodies. Al-Ghezali
said, “It is essential to give the pupils sufficient time for acceptable
amusement and relaxation after the fatigue of teaching. Preventing the
pupils from entertainment after the exhausting teaching will deaden
their hearts stupefy their minds. This will also cause a life
disturbance and oblige them to look for trickeries for the sake of
getting rid of such a disturbance.”

- Learners should not ask rigor questions otherwise they lose prosperity
owing to disrespecting the knowledge and dishonoring the teachers whose
approval should precede everything else.

- Learners should respect their teachers who should enjoy rights that
are preferable to the fathers. Ashafii said, “I used to reverence my
teacher, Malik, to the degree that I skimmed over the books so slightly
so that he will not hear the sounds of the papers.” Learners should also
esteem their teachers in their presence or absence, use various styles
of honoring and veneration, neglect using their names, and stand their
flaws and roughness. Ashafii reported, “People informed Sufian bin
Uyeina that some people, who had come from distant districts, would
leave him because of his harshness.” He said, “They are surely ignorant
if they leave their advantages because of my ill manners.” Learners
should also be in the class before their teachers, sit in front of them,
not lean to a wall or a pad, and not turn the back before them. All
these affairs  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to the following reference books:  
 al-Elmawi’s *al-Mabad*: 13.  
 *Usulul-kafi*: 1/36.  
 *Education and teaching in Islam*: 74-6.  
 al-Farabi’s *A thesis of policy*: 29.

contradict the teachers’ rights. They should also listen heedfully to
their teachers and save them against repeating the teaching materials.
Moreover, learners should avoid yawning, eructing, laughing, mocking, or
practicing any deed that dishonors the teachers.

- Learners should not combine two subjects of study at the same time,
lest their minds will be exceedingly disturbed. Ibn Khuldoun says,
“Learners must not mix two matters of knowledge at the same time, lest
they will be too deficient to obtain any of them since this causes mind
confusion and leaning to one on the account of the other.”

- Learners should not associate with other than the hard-working
students so that they receive the good behaviors. It is said that the
social life is influential and being influenced. Each individual gives
and takes from the surroundings. Lazy and slender individuals will
surely convey their qualities to their associates.

- Primary learners should not involve themselves in discrepancies and
ambiguous opinions of the master scholars especially in conceptual
theses, lest these variant opinions will weaken their mentalities and
natures.

- Learners should not move to another lesson before they master the
earlier. Negligence will surely cause tardiness and skillessness.

### PROSPERITY OF THE SCIENTIFIC LIFE

Islam has overthrown totally all of the concepts of Jahilism**[\*]**
including ignorance, fables, and submission to delusions and
hallucination. It brought about a genuine conscience and a tremendous
development in the conceptual and scientific fields. It has also used
all means to crystallize the concepts, publicize science, and eradicate
all of the social aimless and unconscious traditions.

The Islamic culture has covered all of the territories that became under
its control. Ibn Hazm said, “When the Prophet was deceased, Islam was
prevailing on the Arabian Peninsula entirely from the –Red- Sea passing
by all of the Yemeni coasts to the –Persian- Gulf upward to the
Euphrates to Syria. The cities of this area, such as Yemen, Bahrain,
Oman and Najd to Mecca, converted to Islam and established mosques.
Every single village recited and recorded the Quran and conveyed it to
their boys, men, and women. When Omar came to power after Abu Bakr,
Persia, Syria, the Peninsula, and Egypt were entirely conquered. Every
city there established a mosque, and copied and learned the
Quran.”**[1]**

The great Islamic Empire saved equal opportunities of teaching.
Knowledge became the commonest matter. Mosques, institutes, and
faculties of knowledge and wisdom opened their portals before everybody.
The Islamic State also provided all of the alimony that the seekers of
knowledge may need.**[2]**

Besides teachers, students, and librarians, the cultural and scientific
cognizance –in the early ages of Islam- was common among Muslims. It is
related that a young man  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[\*]** Jahilism is the pre-Islamic era.  
 **[1]** Refer to *Education in Islam*: 263-4.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Islamic education*: 3-4.

intended to return home after he had accomplished his study in Baghdad.
As he was in his way back, he listened to a scientific discussion
between two of the shopkeepers there. He was highly admired and
affected; hence, he returned the pack animal he had hired to its owner
and declared, “It is quite inappropriate to leave a country the
shopkeepers of which enjoy such a scholastic rank.”

People also confined themselves to reading to excess that they used to
reject any summon during reading. It is related that a caliph sent his
servant to summon a scholar for communication. As the servant reached
there, he saw that many books encompassing the scholar who was reading.
“Tell the caliph that I am engaged with many wise now. I will attend if
I finish,” answered the scholar after he had received the caliph’s
invitation. The servant conveyed this answer to the caliph who asked him
about those wise ones. “In fact,” said the servant, “I saw none with
him.” The caliph ordered of fetching that man in any case. The man was
present before the caliph who asked, “Who were those wise ones that you
had accompanied.” The scholar worded:

They are the sitters that we do never feed up with their conversation

Honest and confident in presence and absence

In our oneness, they are the best of their talks are

Helping in eliminating the whole grief

We benefit by their past information

Morals, disciplining, opinions, and honor

We anticipate neither doubt nor bad association

Nor fear their tongues or fists

I do not lie if I say they are dead

Nor am I a fabricator if say they are alive.

The caliph understood that the man was referring to the books;
therefore, he did not blame.

They also were unduly concerned to their books. Except in conditions of
harsh neediness, the personal books were not vended at all. Historians
also related that Sharif al-Murteda purchased a copy of Ibn Dureid’s
*al-Jamhara* from a man –named Abu Ali bin Ahmed al-Fali-, and found the
following poetry written with the handwriting of the vender on one of
their pages:

These books have been my pleasure for twenty years. Then I vended

After them, my anxiety and longing have been dragging

I have never thought I would vend them

Even if my debts will lead me to life imprisonment

But for weakness and poverty, and children

Little and on them my affairs are based

And I said while I could not control my tears

The saying of heart-burnt and sad

It happens that exigencies take out the honorable from their tenacious
lord.

The Sayyid returned the books to their owner and granted him the
price.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *al-Kuna wel-Alqab*

They also decided the abomination of sitting to shopkeepers except the
booksellers.

In any case, the scientific life and conceptual movements were highly
prosperous in the Islamic ages. Associations and the caliph sessions in
addition to public circles used to discuss scientific questions and
theological and philosophic schools as well as the other sorts of high
culture.

CENTERS OF THE ISLAMIC CULTURE
------------------------------

Yathrib, the place of Hegira, was the public center of the Islamic
education, and the midpoint from which the scientific and cultural
movement extended to the other points of the Islamic and Arab world. The
Prophet’s Mosque was the higher institute of receiving scientific and
religious affairs. It was also the center of managing governmental
affairs and political and military issues. For many Islamic eras, this
mosque has been the center of Muslims. The Imams of the Prophet’s
progeny used to deliver their considerable lectures that covered a great
deal of sciences and knowledges. Imam as-Sadiq made it the center of his
grand university that contained four thousand students including the
founders of the Islamic sects such as Abu Hanifa, Malik, and Sufian bin
Uyeina. Imam Musa bin Jafar also delivered his lectures and scientific
lessons in that mosque. Qeba Mosque was also the center in which
delegations gathered for holding scientific circles. It is the place
where the Prophet instructed his companions, sent them to call to Islam,
and taught the people of the Arabian Peninsula the good deeds and
forbade the evil.

Mosques were the public teaching faculties. They were spreading all over
the Islamic State. For instance, Kufa Mosque was exclusively significant
since the master graduates of the school of Imam as-Sadiq joined it.
They were about nine hundred. Al-Hassan bin Ali al-Wesha said, “I saw in
Kufa Mosque nine hundred teachers, each says: Jafar bin Mohammed
told”**[1]**

Al-Maqdisi counted 110 scientific sessions in the Grand Mosque of
Cairo.**[2]** Al-Mansur Mosque in Baghdad was the most famed teaching
center in the Islamic kingdom in which Ibrahim bin Mohammed –known as
Naftawayih- delivered lectures for fifty years.**[3]**

The first Islamic scientific foundation is Darul-Quran in which some
readers lived for receiving knowledge. Dies, the Oriental, says, “Since
the early era of Islam, it seems there have been places in which Muslims
gathered for receiving and studying the Quran. These places must have
been like primary schools that provided the principals of reading and
writing, as al-Wahidi asserts and mentions that Abdullah bin Uummi
Mektum lodged in Darul-Quran in Al-Medina.”**[4]**

Mosques were not dedicated to religious studies. Sessions of literature,
linguistics,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Lifetime of Imam Musa bin Jafar*: 1/81.  
 **[2]** Refer to *al-Maqdisi*: 205.  
 **[3]** Refer to Yaqut’s *al-Irshad*: 1/308.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Islamic encyclopaedia*: 3/401.

and poetry had a good share in these studies.**[1]** Moreover, the other
conceptual sciences such as theology, philosophy, medicine, and botany
were discussed there. With the expansion of the scientific movement, the
Islamic governments established many faculties and schools all over the
Islamic State. Sharif ar-Radi established a school named Darul-Elm
(House of knowledge) in which students lodged and received their
alimony.**[2]** There was a huge library comprising all sciences in
every school or faculty. Scholars used to dedicate their books in the
mosques.**[3]** Ibn Heyan- the judge of Nisapur- established a teaching
house, library, and lodging for the foreign students. He also saved
their alimony.**[4]**

The teaching institutes and cultural centers contributed in spreading
sciences and arranging conceptualities and progressions of Muslims.

EMIGRATION FOR KNOWLEDGE
------------------------

Islam has called to emigrate and travel for obtaining knowledge. God
says:

Why should not then a company form every party from among them go forth
that they may apply themselves to obtain understanding in religion, and
that they may warn their people when they come back to them that they
may be cautious.

Muslims all over the ages responded to this original call, then many
groups of them emigrated to the various Islamic provinces for joining
the teaching institutes there. They also spent most of their ages
enduring the pains of dreariness, and traveling for nothing other than
seeking knowledge and God’s favor. As soon as Imam Jafar as-Sadiq
established his grand university, the students all over the Islamic
provinces hurried to join it. A. Al-Ahl said, “People of Kufa, Basra,
Wasit, and Hijaz sent their sons and dearest among all of the Arab
tribes especially sons of al-Harith bin abdil-Muttelib and al-Hassan bin
Ali in addition to great groups of the free and sons of the slaves and
the non-Arabs among the celebrities of the Arabs and Persia, and Qum in
specific.”**[5]**

The Islamic countries, as a whole, participated in sending their sons to
the University of Imam as-Sadiq for acquiring his sciences and receiving
the religious rulings from that grandson of the Prophet (s). The Islamic
society achieved a scientific renaissance, the shining waves of which
extended to all of the ages.

The celebrities of Muslims embarked upon the seeking of knowledge,
disregarding the sufferings of traveling. Ibn Isaac says, “Makhul said:
I wandered this earth for seeking knowledge. In Egypt, I missed no
single knowledge. Then I came to Syria and garbled their sciences.”
Saeed bin al-Museyab said, “I was traveling for several days  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Adults teaching and principal education*: 12.  
 **[2]** Refer to Diwan of sharif ar-Radi: 3.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Wefiyatul-ayan*: 1/55.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Islamic civilization*: 1/311.  
 **[5]** Refer to *Jafar bin Mohammed*: 59.

and nights for the sake of studying a single hadith.”**[1]** It is also
related that an-Nisai listened to the hadiths in Khorasan, Iraq, Hijaz,
Egypt, Syria, and the Arabian Peninsula.

As Abut-Teyib at-Tabari intended to emigrate for learning from Mohammed
bin Ayub ar-Radi, his wife prevented him. When he knew of ar-Radi’s
decease, he moaned, tore his clothes, smeared in dust, and shouted, “I
have been informed of the death of the man that you had prevented me
from joining him.” Hence, his wife consoled him and permitted to
emigrate for learning.

Abdullah bin al-Mubarak said, “I examined the scholars and checked the
Syrian, Iraqi, Persian, and Hijazi people, but I could not find
literature but with three men; Ibn Awn whose impulse is literature, and
abdul-Aziz bin Dawud, whose profession is literature, and Wahab
al-Maliki who was born with the literature.”**[2]**

Muslims in the golden age were competing with each other on learning and
recording the hadiths. They used to welcome and receive the scholars
warmly for listening and coming by their information. When Imam as-Sadiq
arrived in Kufa, people crowded around him to ask for fatwas and
religious rulings. Mohammed bin Maruf al-Hilali reported, “I traveled to
Hira for meeting Jafar bin Mohammed –as-Sadiq-, but I could not reach
him for the crowds that encompassed him. On the fourth day, he saw me
and asked to approximate him. Hence, people left. I followed when he
went to the tomb of Imam Ali. I heard his words while I was accompanying
him.”**[3]**

Historians relate that people of Baghdad welcomed Abu Bakr Jafar bin
Mohammed, the famous scholar, before he reached the land. He promised he
would deliver a lecture in a certain place. Thirty thousand individuals
attended the lecture and 316 were dictating.**[4]**

Ali bin Mohammed al-Basri related: As we attended the session of Abu
Isaac Ibrahim bin Ali for receiving the knowledge of hadith, he was
sitting on his house and people were filling the street to excess. I
intended to take a good place; hence, I went there in the dawn, but I
found some people had preceded me. There must have been more than thirty
thousand persons who attended these lectures.”**[5]**

Abdullah bin al-Mubarak was asked what he should do if he realizes he
would die a few hours later. He said, “I will take initiative to
learning.”**[6]**

This highly considerable spirit is one of the Islamic inspirations and
illumination. They prove the fact that Muslims were greatly concerned
with learning. Circumstances that helped in the emigration for learning
were the extension of the Islamic State and the unity of the formal
language, which was the Arabic, in addition to the nonexistence of
foreign languages in studies or courses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Tethkiretul-huffaz*: 3/151.  
 **[2]** Refer to Art of dictation: 2.  
 **[3]** Refer to *the lifetime of Imam Musa bin Jafar*: 1/82-3.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Tarikhu Baghdad*: 12/248.  
 **[5]** Refer to *Art of dictation*: 17.  
 **[6]** Refer to *History of* *the* *Islamic education*: 74.

### Specialization

Muslims of the first ages competed with each other on specialization in
the conceptual and reported sciences. Many of them came into sight.
Husham bin al-Hakam, Husham bin Salem, Muminuttaq, Mohammed bin Abdullah
at-Teyar, and Qeis bin al-Masir; those master scholars majored in
philosophy and theology. Those magnificent masters were the choice of
the graduates of the University of Imam as-Sadiq. Zurara bin Ayun,
Mohammed bin Muslim, Jamil bin Derraj, Yazid bin Muawiya, Isaac bin
Ammar, Ubeidullah al-Halabi, Abu Basir, Eban bin Teghlib, al-Fadl bin
Yesar, Abu Hanifa, Malik bin Anas, Mohammed bin al-Hassan as-Sheibani,
Sufian bin Uyeina, Yahia bin Saeed, and Sufian at-Thawri; all those
majored in the field of jurisprudence. Al-Mufeddal bin Ammar specialized
in the wisdom of existence and the secrets of creation. Jabir bin Hayan
al-Kufi specialized in chemistry. It is to mention that this man was the
most famous chemist in the Arab world, as Vandyke affirmed. He invented
many fascinating discoveries that are mentioned in the books involved,
like the non-incendiary papers and those shining at night under the
supervision of his great master, Imam as-Sadiq (a). Abdurrahman Badawi
says, “Searchers of the Islamic history can never observe a personality
stranger than Jabir bin Hayan. He was so ambiguous and encompassed with
secrets to the degree that he was about to be a legend. He was also a
high thinker that bewilderment will be the feature of everybody who
notices his deep scientific and philosophic vital viewpoints. He also
enjoyed a general spirit that is covered by the essence of illumination
and human trend tending to unveil all of the secrets.

Scientific, theological, and civilizing researches can never contain
this personality in any means. On the contrary, such efforts are being
remoter whenever they delve into the personality whose amount increases
whenever the sides are stroked. Today, we are the furthest from
realizing this personality and cognizing the main lines and the guiding
currencies.”**[1]**

Precisely, Islam preceded modern faculties in founding the
specialization of scientific studies.

### Freedom of Study:

Students of religious, as well as other, fields –in Islam- enjoy perfect
freedom in selecting the materials they desire to study. No regulation
might define a certain age of teaching. Likewise, no provision might
restrict the propriety of pursuing certain sciences. The students’
desires, which were offered to God, were the only motive beyond
studying.

The students of the Religious University of Najaf, as well as others,
hold perfect freedom of discussing the teachers. This characteristic
proves the students’ superiority and perception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Atheism in Islam*: 189.

### Recording and Compilation:

It is quite sure that Islam, since its first stages, adopted the
invitation to record and convey the sciences since recording and
conveyance influence greatly the development of the scientific and
cultural life. The Prophet (s) said, “Record the knowledge.” Some
companions asked him the method of recording. “Write it down,” tutored
the Prophet.**[1]**

Narrators also related that a man complained before the Prophet of his
ill retaining. “Seek the help of your right hand,” said the Prophet who
referred to writing.**[2]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) also urged oftentimes his students on recording the
lessons and lectures that covered mostly all of the arts and sciences.
Abu Basir narrated:

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said to me, “What prevents you from writing down? You
will not memorize before you write. A group of people of Basra have just
left me after they had recorded the answers of their questions.” He also
said, “You should write down. You will not memorize before you write.”

The Imam’s students responded to the illuminative instruction that
carries the spread of knowledge to people. Thus, they competed with each
other on obtaining knowledge. Eban bin Teghlib, for instance, compiled
the following books:

*Maanil Qur’an* (Meanings of the Quran)

*Al-Qira’at* (The recitals)

*Al-Fedhail* (The virtues)

*Al-Usul fir-Riwaya* (Principals of narration)

*Gharibul-Qur’an* (The allegorical of the Quran)**[3]**

Mohammed bin Ali al-Kufi –known as Muminuttaq- compiled the following:

*Al-Imama* (The imamate)

*Al-Marifa* (The knowing)

*Ithbatul-Wasiya* (Proof of the will)

*Ar-Reddu Elel-Mutezila Fi Imametil-Mafdul* (Refutation the Mutazilites
in the matter of the preceded leader.)

*Amru Talha, az-Zubeir and Aisha* (Affairs of Talha, az-Zubeir and
Aisha)

*If’al Wela Taf’al* (Do and do not)

*Al-Munazara ma’a Abu Hanifa* (Disputation with Abu Hanifa)**[4]**

Al-Mufeddal bin Omar compiled *at-Tawhid* (Monotheism), which is one of
the most remarkable Islamic writings discussing the topics of creating
and composing the human beings along with the secrets of creation. The
book also provides many medical searches.**[5]** Husham bin
al-Hakam -one of the honorable students of Imam as-Sadiq- compiled
seventeen books regarding various sciences and arts.

Jabir bin Hayan compiled a thousand-page book of chemistry including the
five  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Biharul-anwar*: 1/108.  
 **[2]** Refer to at-Tirmithi’s *Sahih*  
 **[3]** Refer to *the lifetime of Imam Musa bin Jafar*: 1/84.  
 **[4]** Refer to Sheik at-Tusi’s Feherest: 121.  
 **[5]** Refer to *the lifetime of Imam Musa bin Jafar*: 1/85.

hundred theses of the Imam.**[1]** Those theses were the most fertile
sources of chemistry. Muslim and Oriental scholars, as well as
scientists, praised Jabir since he equipped the Islamic society with the
most abundant scientific wealth he had received from his master, the
Imam and the pioneer of the Islamic conceptual and scientific movement.
In addition, there is a great deal of other students who compiled
volumes in various sciences and arts, such as Zurara bin Ayun, Abu
Basir, Ismail bin abi Khalid, and others. Agha Buzurg, the late grand
master of Islam, exposed two hundred volumes compiled by the Imam’s
students.**[2]**

Scientists were encompassing Imam Musa bin Jafar. They used to carry
clays and writing instruments so that they would record any single
letter that the Imam would utter.**[3]** Hence, the Islamic scientific
movement was widely spreading in the Islamic districts, and the scholars
transferred the Islamic heritage to the next generations.

### Fading of Teaching

The illumination of teaching was extinguished when Hulagu, the tyrant,
seized Baghdad the capital of the Islamic caliphate in 765. The
Mongolians caused the ever most terrible sufferings to the Islamic
people.

When the Western powers rent asunder the Islamic homeland into small
states, the scientific and conceptual life began to dwindle gradually
until it disappeared. The intellectual indolence and the mental slump
subdued the Islamic provinces totally. The West then went on
implementing their horrible policy of castrating the mental prosperity
and intellectual outburst. This policy also aimed at killing the
cognizance and publicizing humiliation and ignorance. An Arab
educationist says, “In the early twentieth century, schools were
moveless. They included a few students who were unaware of their
surroundings or interiors. They were of one composing, cultural, and
unproductive matrix. This was the outcome of the outer control of
knowledge. Hence, it is not strange for us to earn such a humble
collapse that threatens the aspects of our life wholly. The controller
of our education was a foreign element that aimed at producing humble
and unprolific generations, who should never contribute in opinions and
be unable to overcome the life difficulties. Hence, teaching was far
away from discussing and exposing such difficulties.”**[4]**

Nowadays, the conceptual renaissance began to flow all over the Islamic
homeland, and Muslims began to remove away the dust of ignorance and
retardation to join the developed countries that held fast on the
caravans of life and light. The current governments are required to
utilize this phenomenon and provide, first of all, the necessary experts
of teaching in schools and faculties, and create moralities -in the
spirits of the youth- in addition to self-reliance, systemization,
caring for the home affairs, and sacrificing for the protection and
independence of their homeland. The  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to az-Zerkeli’s *al-A’lam*: 1/186 and *Mir’atul-jinan*:
1/304.  
 **[2]**Refer to *az-Zeria*: 6/301-74.  
 **[3]** Refer to *al-Anwarul-Bahiya*: 91.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Education and life purport*: 8.

governments are also advised of arousing the hatred of the imperialists
and Zionists in the minds of the youth by proving and referring to the
menacing dangers of those powers that have been plotting the Islamic and
Arab homeland. This is surely one of the most significant social
liabilities that the governments of the Islamic countries should
concern.

The Islamic society has had to encounter various sorts of calamities and
dangers from the imperialists and their agents. The imperialists have
created the causes of discrepancies and enmity besides the dispersion of
the spirits of frenzy, egotism, and negativity. They have spared no
efforts for screening the heritage of the Muslims’ great religion for
depriving them of the constituents of dignity and elevation. From that
cause, the new generations should be brought up on antagonizing and
abhorring the colonialists by means of dispensing with their educational
systems that impede our march of progress, prosperity, and national
investment of our riches. It is also obligatory to show the great powers
of Islam in the fields of education, policy, and sociology as well as
the whole fields and affairs of life. Those powers should be within the
teaching methods since they are the best way of achieving the Muslims’
renaissance and development.

ISLAMIC MENTAL AND SPECULATIVE EDUCATION
----------------------------------------

Islam has betaken man’s conscience, as well as the mental and
speculative powers, as the chief ground of constructing the educational
entity. Thus, it dedicated the grand powers to the reformation of
impulses, the maturity of the noble tendencies, and the incapacity of
the evil ones so that man would be actually God’s representative in this
earth through constituting the right and enjoining justice and seeking
the good.

Islam has focused its concernment on the mental frames in order to save
them from disintegration, collapse, and frailty, and saturate with the
spirits of faith, willpower, and self-determination. In fact, Islam has
applied this excellent education to the life. The old men were rushing
to the battlefields for the sake of guarding the principals of their
grand religion. The youth were also armored with powers of belief and
struggle for the sake of right. They attained the top of loyalty when
they left their fathers and brothers who tarried in the battle of
Tabuk**[\*]**. However, the Prophet asked them to associate with their
families later on.

The Islamic education overflowed with immense spiritual powers that are
kept in the first Muslims whose feelings and emotions were totally
captured by Islam. They formed a single body that was tied by religious
emotions and single words and trends. The powers of belief, which is the
most fastening than any other bond, tied these trends.

### Speculative education:

Using all of its methods and powers, the Islamic education aims at
maturing and releasing the human speculations from the chains of
ignorance and blind imitation. It  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[\*]** Battle of Tabuk is one of the Prophet’s battles against the
foes of Islam.

also purposes to teach through the providing of the historical examples
and events. It arouses the deep thinking in the universal precision and
systemization so that man will believe in the Creator. This belief
should be provable through argumentation and evidenced certitude. Only
then, the illuminations of the conscious belief, which encourages on
competing in the fields of virtue and good, will be shining in the
minds.

Islam has been greatly concerned with the intellects; therefore, it
called for an intellectual liberation and prosperity, and decreed of
using the judgments of the intellects. Uninterrupted reports have
related that the Imams confirmed that the intellects are the intrinsic
argument of men and the means by which the Beneficent Lord is
worshipped, and the wisdom is attained. They also affirmed that the
intellects’ judgments are the messages of the intrinsic apostles.**[1]**
The Imamite Shias decide that the intellectual judgments are within the
four evidences, according to which the jurists can elicit shariite
rulings. Furthermore, the intellects are the master judge of the
questions of contrary narratives -narratives that are intellectually
accepted should be grasped only.

The holy Quran condemns those who neglect their intellectual talents.
God says:

*Surely, the vilest of animals, in Allah’s sight, are the dear, the
dumb, who do not understand.*

*Or do you think that most of them do hear of understand? They are
nothing but as cattle; nay, they are straying father off from the path.*

God has also stated that the reason beyond the torture that would
inflict the atheists is that they screened their intellects against
thinking in God’s affairs:

And they shall say: Had we but listened or pondered, we should not have
been among the inmates of the burning fire.

Islam has surely glorified the headmost basis of believing and wisdom.

### Thinking in the Universal System:

Truthful meditation and deep thinking in the universal phenomena fill in
the heart with shining and believing in God. Islam has encouraged on
this matter. God says:

*Do they not then look up to heaven above them how we have made it and
adorned it and it has no gasps. And the earth we have made it plain and
cast in it mountains and we have made to from therein of all beautiful
kinds. To give sight and as a reminder to every servant who turns
frequently to Allah.*

The human beings will surely strengthen their relations with the Lord
through exposing the fines of this universe and thinking in its
miracles, from which the most accurate essences of wisdom, excellence,
and creation are perceived. Islam calls for wakening the mentality and
guiding to look upon the universal portents: God says:

Most surely, in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day there are signs for men who
understand. Those who remember Allah standing and sitting and lying  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *eraidul-Usul*.

their sides and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth;
Our Lord! Thou hast not created this in vain! Glory be to thee; save us
then from the chastisement of the fire.

Looking deeply in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and
thinking in the alternation of day and night; all these fill in the
mentalities with faith and confidence in Allah the Creator. None would
think of these matters except the sound-minded individuals who use their
conscious mental powers in a serious thinking of the marvelous creation.
They mention God permanently and say with pure tones of certitude and
imploring, “O our Lord! Thou hast not created all this in vain. Glory be
to thee! Save us against the chastisement of fire.”

Thinking in God’s kingdom is the perfect course of the speculative
education since it release the minds from every deviation, and negates
any doubt or suspect to lead them to the locations of believing in God.
People will surely and indisputably believe in God if they look
accurately in the fascinating and excellent systems of this universe. It
is quite impossible that such systems be the origin of serendipity that
is, according to absolute scientific conceptions, the most nonsensical.
Lablabs says, “This mind-perplexing system, within the movements of the
stars from which the solar system is composed, can never be presupposed
to be the outcome of serendipity. In fact, serendipity is logically
nonexistent in the language of science. Serendipity is absent and
nonexistent in this world all of whose components are subduing to the
laws of equanimity and statistics that are assigned by an unseen will
and an ultimate wisdom. The thing we are naming serendipity is the very
result of the unseen powers that we ignore their influences totally.
Likewise, we lack knowledge of their existence while they are
surrounding us. On that account, it is not possible to regard the order
we are noticing in the solar system as a serendipity. We must confess of
the existence of an origin and general matter that organizes this
system.”**[1]**

Eckersie Morrison says that the nonfinite systems, without which the
life is impossible, are the evidence on the Creator’s existence. Man’s
existence on this earth and the excellent aspects of his intelligence
are only a part of the program that is implemented by the Creator of
this universe.**[2]**

Islam pushes the conceptual powers to think and perceive the mysteries
of this universe so that people will believe in God sincerely and,
thereafter, constitute their lives on bases of equanimity.

### Pondering over the Creation of Man:

Islam has encouraged on pondering over the creation and composition of
man. God says:

*So, let man consider of what he is created. He is created of water
pouring forth, coming from between the back and the ribs. Most surely,
he is able to return him to life. On the day, the hidden things shall
be*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Quotations of religion and science*: 21.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Science*

*made manifest. He shall have neither strength nor helper.*

*O people! If you are doubt about the raising, surely we created you
from dust, then from a small seed, then from a clot, then from a lump of
flesh, complete in make and incomplete, that we may make clear to you.
And we cause what we please to stay in the wombs till an appointed time.
Then we bring you forth as babies, then that you may attain your
maturity. And of you is he, who is brought back to the worst part of
life, so that after having knowledge he does not know anything.*

Men’s realizing themselves, as well as looking upon the worlds and the
mysteries there, is within the matters that incite to believe in God
without doubt. Afif abdul-Fettah says, “The Evidences on God’s
existence, which are lying in man’s essences, are innumerable. With the
extension of the scientific scope, these evidences grow more acceptable
and plentiful. All these evidences verify that this fantastic creature
should have a Wise Lord. Which of the man’s aspects are not astonishing
and amazing?

Are man’s phases in the uteri not one of God’s portents?

The digestive system dissolves the food into variant balanced materials.
Each material directs to the place where it fulfills its function while
the unusable is emitted. Are these not one of God’s portents?

The system of blood distribution is responsible for taking the blood
from its main center, which is the heart, to all of the body directions
via uncountable arteries, then returns to the heart through the blood
circulation and the passage of air that is brought by aspiration. This
process aims at reforming the polluted blood and bettering the body. Is
this system not one of God’s portents?

Man’s hearing, sight, articulation, and feelings, including oblivion,
grief, delight, familiarity, and ignorance; all these are within the
grand evidences that refer to the Creator’s existence.”**[1]**

The modern microscopic devises and labs could realize a tiny part only.
All these refer to the Creator’s excellence and power.

### Pondering over the creatures:

Islam has encourages on looking upon the creatures, including the
plants. God has given each plant an exclusive quality, arranged it so
aptly that it absorbs only the matters it needs for maturity, and
prepared it for the purpose of creation. God says:

*Then let man look to his food. We pour down the water, pouring it down
in abundance. Then we cleave the earth, cleaving it asunder. Then we
cause to grow therein the grain and grapes and clover and the olive and
the palm and thick gardens and fruit and herbage. A provision for you
and for your cattle.*

*And a sign to them is the dead earth; we give life to it and bring
forth from it grains so they eat of it. And we make therein gardens of
palms*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Spirit of Islam*: 62.

*and grapevines, and we make springs to flow forth into. That they may
ear of the fruit thereof and their hands did not make it; will they not
then be grateful.*

*He it is who sends down water from the cloud for you; it gives drink,
and by it grow the trees upon which you pasture. He caused to grow for
you thereby herbage, and the olives, and the palm trees, and the grapes,
and of all the fruits. Most surely, there is a sign in this for a people
who reflect.*

If man looks deeply upon the creation of animals with their countless
classes and remarkable making, he will certainly believe in God. Newton
says, “How were the bodies of these animals composed in such a gorgeous
creation? What for were their numerous parts designed? How is it
rational to believe that eyes and ears are originated without full
acquaintance with the origins of sight and audition laws? How are the
animal’s movements renewed intentionally? What is the source of this
natural familiarity of these animals?

These creatures, along with their most splendid and perfect formation,
refer to the existence of an incorporeal god. This god should be
everliving and wise and existent in everyplace, and should be realized
by the factuality of everything.”**[1]**

The holy Quran invites man to look deeply in the striking creation of
animals. God says:

*Do they not see the birds, constrained in the middle of the sky? None
withholds them but Allah; most surely there are signs in this for a
people who believe.*

*Will they not then consider the camels, how they are created?*

God has created the animals for that people would use and benefit by
them. He says:

*And your Lord revealed to the bee saying: Make hives in the mountains
and in the trees and in what they build. Then ear of all the fruits and
walk in the ways of your Lord submissively. There comes froth form
within it a beverage of many colors, in which there is healing of r men.
Most surely, there is a sign in this for a people who reflect.*

*And Allah has made for you of what he has created shelters, and he has
given you in the mountains places of retreat, and he has given you
garments of preserve you from the heat and coats of mail to preserve you
in your fighting. Even thus does he complete his favor upon you that
haply you may submit.*

Thinking in God’s creatures leads to believing and removes any delusion
or suspect. It is surely the best of worship. The Prophet said, “A
one-hour thinking is preferable to a seventy-year worship.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Man is not alone*.

### Reflecting manners of the past nations:

For awakening the minds and maturing their acquisitions, the manners of
the past nations, people, history, and affairs should be considered. A
group of these nations took the right path that saved them from all of
the sorts of irregularity and aberrance. They gained the regal life of
amiability, security, and settlement. The other group went astray. They
abandoned the path of right and justice; therefore, they vanished, and
lost their existence. This carries lessons and examples for every
conscious and free man, and saves against the elements of ruining and
elapse and clinging to the equanimity and straightness. Imam Ali  (a)
says:

“Beware of the consequences of the past nations due to their ill deeds
and wrongdoing. Remember their worthy and vile manners, and beware of
being their likes. If you look upon the variance of their two –good and
evil- manners, then you should cling to matters that dignified them,
scavenged their enemies, elongated their healthiness, submitted their
graces, and connected them to nobility. These matters represent the
avoidance of discrepancy and acceding, urging, and recommending of
amiability. They shunned every matter that breaks their backs and
weakens their intentions, like the heart malice, the mind malevolence,
the spiritual rancor, and the power frustration.

Look upon the affairs of the past believers and study their behaviors in
the manners of testing and examination. Were they not the most
antagonized, the most examined, and the most distressed? The tyrants
enslaved, showed the worst of torment, and coerced them to swallow the
bitterest. They were kept up in this state of humiliation, expiration,
and persecution of mortification. They could not be availed with a plan
of refutation or a way of defense. As God noticed their serious
toleration that they offered for His favor, and their harsh endurance
that they chose for His fearing, He relieved them after the hard
examination. He substituted dignity for the humiliation and security for
the vacillation. They became kings and rulers. God has made to them what
they did not expect.”**[1]**

The Imam (a) keeps on exposing the vigorous pictures of the past nations
that coincided with the paths of right and justice and achieved the most
significant states of dignity, nobility, honor, and custody. The holy
Quran is filled up with the repetitive calls to count the results of the
pious that God has appointed in the earth and fortified their religion
that He pleased. The Quran is also stifled with the calls to attend to
the consequences of the tyrants and the beliers who averted the right
path; hence, God devaluated their triumphs and deadened their affairs.

### Result of the pious:

The Quran declared that victory should be the share of the pious and the
virtuous ones:

*Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that he
will*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Nahjul-Balagha*: 3/175-7.

*most certainly make them rulers in the earth as he made rulers those
before them. And that he will most certainly establish for them their
religion, which he has chosen for them. And that he will most certainly,
after their fear, give them security in exchange; they shall serve me,
not associating aught with me, and whoever is ungrateful after this,
these it is who are the transgressors.*

God has granted those pious servants with this noble standing in this
world, and bestowed upon them by immortalizing their mentioning and
making their lives as exemplars. In the Hereafter, God will lodge them
in the Paradise and the permanent felicity.

### Consequence of the tyrants:

God has pledged of destroying the tyrants and the despots who disbelieve
the social rights and people’s souls and dignities. In various positions
in the holy Quran, God exposes the story of Pharaoh who tyrannized and
bullied; consequently, God fisted him strongly and revengefully. God
says:

*Surely, Pharaoh exalted himself in the land and made its people into
parties, weakening one party from among them. He slaughtered their sons
and let their women live. Surely, he was one of the mischief-makers. And
we desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in the
land, and to make them the imams, and to make them the heirs. And to
grant them power in the land, and to make Pharaoh and Haman and their
hosts see from them what they feared.*

Mortification and torment were the result of Pharaoh because of his
having denied God’s elegance and averting the straight path in addition
to tyranny and arrogance.

The holy Quran has also called for considering the manners of those that
wronged or trampled; therefore, God tortured them, and none could guard
them against His punishment. God says:

*Have they not traveled in the earth and seen how was the end of those
who were before them? Mightier than these in the land, but Allah
destroyed them for their sins, and there was not for them and defender
against Allah.*

*And certainly, we did destroy generations before you when they were
unjust, and their apostles had come to them with clear arguments, and
they would not believe; thus do we recompense the guilty people. Then we
made you successors in the land after them so that we may see how you
act.*

God cursed the wrongdoers and prepared for them a painful torment. God
says:

*Now surely the curse of Allah is on the unjust, who turn away from the
path of Allah and desire to make it crooked. And they are disbelievers
in the Hereafter. These shall not escape in the earth, nor shall they
have any guardians besides Allah. The punishment shall be doubled for
them. They could not bear to hear and they did not see.*

God has decreed to punish the wrongdoers all over history. When God’s
discipline and punishment inflict the wrongdoers, their economic and
military powers will not protect them since God makes all these in vain.

By the exposition of the wrongdoers’ manners, the Quran intends to
provide lessons and admonitions for people to convince them of giving up
the vile qualities, such as aggression and insulting people.

### Releasing the intellects from imitation:

Islam has called for releasing the minds from the bonds of imitation.
The source of such an imitation is ignorance and bigotry. The Quran
reproached the imitators whose words are expressed by His saying:

*Thus, We did not send before you any warner in a town, but those who
led easy lives in it said: surely, we found our fathers on a course, and
surely, we are followers of their footsteps.*

The Quran alienated the question of resting upon the chiefs and leaders
who avert the guidance, and ruled that those chiefs, along with their
imitators, will share the same punishment. God says:

*Those who were followed shall renounce those who followed them, and
they see the chastisement and their ties are cut asunder.*

Islam antagonizes any baseless trend that depends upon unfounded
imitation and pursuance. This is an invitation to discipline the minds
and release the ideas from the bonds of imitation.

### Verification of matters:

Within the courses of its speculative education, Islam insisted upon the
verification of matters and obtaining certitude before judging. God
says:

*And follow not that of which you have not the knowledge; surely the
hearing and the sight and the heart; all of these shall be questioned
about that.*

On that account, God forbade depending upon surmise. God says:

*They do not follow anything but conjecture, and surely conjecture does
not avail against the truth at all.*

The baseless surmise leads to incorrect delusion and many fatal
troubles. Fatalists depended upon such surmise when they denied the
existence of God as well as the Resurrection. God says:

*And they say: There is nothing but our life in this world. We live and
die and nothing destroys us but time. And they have no knowledge of
that. They only conjecture.*

Fatalists deviated to such a lowly foot only because they depended upon
conjecture in the conventional fields.

Islam has also banned relying upon the reports of the licentious lest
sedition and ignorance will be prevalent. God says:

*O you who believe! If an evildoer comes to you with a report, look*

*carefully into it, lest you harm a people in ignorance, then be sorry
for what you have done.*

### Opting for the best:

Islam has urged on clinging to a certain opinion. Muslims should opt for
the best of opinions since this expresses sincerity to the right and
disciplines the intellects. God says:

*Those who listen to the word, then follow the best of it. Those are
they whom Allah has guided, and those it is who are the men of
understanding.*

God has ordered Muslims of scrutinizing every sect and avoiding
rejecting, owing to fanaticism, any opinion before checking. Muslims are
also advised of opting for the best. God describes those who follow this
method as the guided and owners of right minds and shining
mentalities.**[1]**

MENTAL EDUCATION
----------------

The Islamic education achieves sufficient potentials in the mental
fields that impede from irregularity and deviation, and mature the noble
tendencies and the virtuous habits. They also establish a spiritual
coherence and perseverance against occurrences and create equanimity
that covers all of the mystical horizons in order that man will achieve
a unique entity of behaviors, trends, tendencies, and emotions. Thus,
any mental aspect will not influence the spiritual, and man will not be
enslaved be any capricious or vile inclination. The Islamic mental
education drives men to prudent, self-control, and perfect mastery of
impulses and trends. We should stop at the aspect of the Islamic mental
education.

### Conscientious Guidance

Using all of its powers, the Islamic education strives for composing the
religious deterrent in the depths of the soul, so that this deterrent
will overcome the mental motives and hold the leadership and the
guidance.

The only protector against deviation and tyranny is the alert conscience
that is full of the spirits of belief and conviction. As a matter of
fact, the conscience is the greatest deterrent that guards against
falling in the holes of vices and forbidden matters. Islam is trying to
compose and reform the aware conscience so as to control the lusts, and
guide to the bright fields that achieve God’s satisfaction and please
the conscience. This is the reason beyond the genuineness of the Islamic
education that succeeded in achieving its goals. Some French generals,
who have been the rivals of Islam, confessed of the existence of this
remarkable phenomenon.  They said, “We must not underestimate Islam and
Muslims. Surely, Islam is a marvelous belief that has persisted on this
globe. We have tried all of the economic, capitalist, and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Spirit of Islam*: 29.

administrative laws, but we failed. The very element in which we have
failed was the equality of distribution and monition. In Islam, this
monition is not an individual or official duty. It is the fear of God
and the maturity of the religious conscience. This is adequately a
potential power in Islam. Unfortunately, Muslims do not understand or
appreciate their religion, which has been the only element that kept and
conserved them. Our mission is precisely eliminating the aspects of this
religion by impoverishing them in addition to massacring and depriving
them of knowledge and fortune.”**[1]**

There is a divine gift in each individual’s mentality. Yet, there are
numerous effective and sharp satanic tendencies. Each man has a violent
incentive and a potent stimulus to the world of the uncounted and
uncontrolled lusts. Islam has considered all these things deeply and
comprehensively; thus, it used ultimate accuracy in paralyzing the vile
activities of impulses for uprooting and delimiting them. It also
brightened the noble powers for controlling the spirits. Hence, Islam
went on promising the righteous of permanent bounty. The Quran is filled
up with magnificent pictures of the rewards and prizes of the pious. God
says:

*Most surely, the righteous shall be in bliss, on thrones they shall
gaze. You will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss.*

*Other faces on that day shall be happy, well-pleased because of their
striving. In a lofty garden wherein you shall not hear vain talk.
Therein is a fountain flowing. Therein are thrones raised high. And
drinking-cups ready place, and cushions set in a row, and carpets spread
out.*

*On thrones decorated, reclining on them, facing one another. Round
about them shall go youths never altering in age. With goblets and ewers
and a cup of pure drink. They shall not be affected with headache
thereby, nor shall they get exhausted. And fruits such as they choose.
And the flesh of fowl such as they desire. And pure beautiful ones, the
like of the hidden pearls. A reward for what they used to do.*

*Surely, as for those who believe and do good deeds, their place of
entertainment shall be the gardens of paradise, abiding therein. They
shall not desire removal from them.*

Such an abounding reward will release from all of the arts of
irregularity and deviation, and support with the great powers of virtue
and illumination.

God has also described the horrible punishment that will be cast upon
the pursuers of their lusts and impulses. God says:

*These are two adversaries who dispute about their Lord. Then as to
those garments of fire; boiling water shall be poured over their heads.
With it shall be melted what is in their bellies and their skins as
well. And for them are whips of iron. Whenever they will desire to go
forth from it, form grief, hey shall be turned back into it, and taste
the chastisement of burning.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Experiment of* *Islamic education*: 45-6.

*Lay hold on him, then put a chain on him. Then cast him into the
burning fire. Then thrust him into a chain the length of which is
seventy cubits. Surely, he did not believe in Allah the Great. Nor did
he urge the feeding of the poor. Therefore, he has not here today a true
friend. Nor any food except refuse, which none but the wrongdoers eat.*

*Is this better as an entertainment or the tree of Zaqqum? Surely, it is
a tree that grows in the bottom of the hell. Its produce is as it were
the heads of the serpents. Then most surely they shall eat of it and
fill their bellies with it. Then most surely they shall have after it to
drink of a mixture prepared in boiling water.*

The Quran refers to many horrifying texts that fill in the minds with
tense hazard and fear of God’s castigation. Such texts will absolutely
establish barriers against disobeying God and perpetrating evil and
sinful deeds.

The world of expectancy and fear is the most effective for achieving
self-control completely. Through this splendid method, Islam has
obtained conscience monition and constituted a controller, which
inhibits and impedes the leaps, on the other mental impulses.

### MENTAL VIRTUES

Owing to the great concern of Islam in the mental virtues, it has
dedicated a specific course leading to personal adhesion and abnormality
besides the marks of every honorable tendency and virtuous quality.
Herewith, we will refer precisely to some of such virtues.

CHASTITY
--------

Ethicists define chastity, as the self-control and equanimity of the
inclinations to desires including the bodily, like eating and the like,
and the mental, like agitations and emotions. The quality of chastity is
applied to those who are moderate in all of these states. This virtue
aims at achieving people’s self-restraint away from being the slaves of
lusts and inclinations. The reports of the Imams regarding this virtue
have been uninterrupted. Imam Ali said, “Chastity is the best of
worship.” Imam al-Baqir said, “No worship is preferred to the chastity
of the abdomen and the genitals.”

This virtue saves man from a great deal of mental and physical diseases
and ill manners, such as gluttony, fornication, greed, squandering,
rage, hatred, blabber, and many others.

Chastity pushes man to a general rectitude. It dismisses the quality of
overeating that brings about many diseases and causes repetitive visits
to clinics. The holy Quran encouraged on adhering to the virtue. God
says:

*Eat, drink and be not extravagant.*

Besides, the extravagant abstinence and avoidance of the good matter
that God has deemed lawful are excluded from chastity, which is merely
the moderation. God says:

*Say: Who has prohibited the embellishment of Allah, which He has*

*brought forth for His servants and the good provisions? Say: These are
for the believers in the life on this world, purely theirs on the
resurrection day.*

Chastity requires self-restraint and guardianship against full release
of the whole mental lusts, the intemperance of which corrupts the life,
enfeebles the spirituality, and leads to failing. Ethicists said, “Lusts
are infinite. If time is extended, lusts will surely lead to others and
so on. Finally, man will be the captive of endless lusts and the slave
of untold caprices. Virtue is not the associate of such men.”**[1]**
Chastity requires man’s full dominion of trends and lusts, and
moderation in passions, and temperance in eating and drinking. For
instance, man is advised of avoiding excessive grief in cases of
calamities.

### Means of developing chastity:

Ethicists mention several means leading to chastity. They are:

- Moderation in inclination to lusts

- Avoidance of associating with the evil who exaggerate and decorate the
vices

- Acceding to the virtuous and the religious individuals who advance to
moralities and warn against evil-doing

- Avoidance of reading erotic books that deconstruct the structures of
virtue and perfection, and leaving the places of immoral entertainment

- Using self-control in states of wrath, which is a short-termed
insanity.

- Retreating the unwelcomed customs such as arrogance and self-esteem
since they lead to excite for any valueless matter because of the
illusion of indignity

- Avoidance of thinking in vile and violation because such a thinking is
the pioneer of will and work. The prolixity of licentious imaginary and
vile misgiving lures on falling in the depths of vices.

- Avoidance of carrying irate and pessimistic thoughts, and agreement
with those who disregard this life and disassociate with people

- The exploitation of the legal and acceptable provisions of the mundane
affairs**[2]**

God says:

*And seek by means of what Allah has given to you the future abode, and
do not neglect your portion of this world.*

WILLPOWER
---------

Willpower and self-determination are primary intendments of Islamic
mental education. First, Islam has been concerned with establishing a
firm will, a constant determination, and a fixed spirit in the minds in
order to save from drifting with the trends of occurrences, and
challenge the seditious events. Islam has scorned extremely the languid
and described them as dead. God says:

*You do not make the dead hear, and do not make the deaf hear the call.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Ethics of world and religion*.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Perfect ethics*: 4/202-3.

Islam bestows man with huge powers of determination and will to protect
against the elements of weakness and fear. The Prophet (s) was the true
exemplar of willpower and immense determination. He stood in firmness
during struggling and resisting for the sake of his principals and
goals. He behaved according to the Lord’s instructions, ignoring the
problems and catastrophes. One hand was holding fast on the pennon of
monotheism, while the other held the axe of destroying and ruining the
ideas, customs, and traditions of Jahilism. Meanwhile, he was calling
out to man’s dignity and rights. At the same time, all of the powers of
polytheism and atheism were standing against him in one hand. He had no
single supporter except Abu Talib his uncle --the believer of Quraish
and the protector of Islam. The Quraishi chiefs threatened and menaced
Abu Talib if the Prophet would not stop his advocacy. The Prophet
answered his uncle who carried the chiefs’ words to him, “O uncle! If
they position the sun in my right hand and the moon in the left for
leading me to leave this advocacy, I will not respond till I perish or
God will triumph.”

By such a giant willpower and great determination, the Prophet (s)
overcame all of the problems. He demolished the pagans, ended the
potentials of polytheism, and blasted the cells of Jahilism, and raised
God’s word aloft on the earth and established a new life of firm right
and strict justice.

The Prophet fed his companions with this remarkable trend to change
their few numbers into mountains of dignity and fortification. They
resisted the huge parties and defeated the armies of polytheism. They
did never abscond in the battlefields until they conquered the countries
and raised the Islamic banner on most of the provinces on this earth.

This handsome will was represented by the higher commander of Islam and
the door of the Prophet’s city of knowledge- Imam Ali (a), the champion
of the great conquests. He decapitated the polytheists, and overcame and
subjected the Jews. He said, “I will never abscond even all of the Arabs
collaborated against me.”

This giant willpower is a part of God’s will that rejects subduing,
humiliation, slavery, and surrender. This will was visibly manifested by
Imam al-Hussein (a)- the Prophet’s grandson and the father of the noble
ones. He stood on the land of Kerbala despite the scantiness of
supporters, and faced the armies of polytheism and deviation to dictate
his will on them. He said, “I will not give you with my hand like the
humble, nor will I submit to you like the slaves. I certainly consider
death as happiness, and consider living with the wrongdoers as
discontent.”

He then walked to the field of death, along with the virtuous men of his
household, to deliver the best lessons of willpower, hard belief, and
sacrifice for God’s sake to the world entirely.

Man’s value lies in his willpower, without which humanity is lost. A
French philosopher says, “Nothing is more sticking to man’s personality
than will.”

Willpower influences completely man’s composition and immortality. The
weak-willed can never achieve any individual or social aim. Emerson
says, “Willpower is the secret of success which is the goal of
existence. The willpower of the famous personalities, such as Napoleon,
Crenate and Alexander, was the reason beyond their

immortality. Other personalities were known of their situations of
humiliation because of their hesitation and ill self-determination. It
is impossible to participate in the life conflict and expect triumph
without the possession of willpower.”**[1]** It is an aspect of
independent personality that contributes in making the human history and
ignores impossibility. Napoleon answered, when he was told of the
existence of the Alps in his way, “There will not be Alps there.” The
worst words Napoleon hated to hear were ‘Impossible’ and ‘I cannot.’

It is worthy mentioning in this regard that Islam has specified
willpower and giant self-determination as terms of selecting the rulers.
The weak-willed are prevented from managing Muslims’ affairs since they
may cause dangers, vanish the prestige of leadership, and cause mutiny
and disobedience.

### Lack of willpower:

Individuals that lack willpower will surely waste their personalities
and their fancies will overcome. They will surely yield to their lusts
and fling in lowly fields of vices such as consuming intoxicants,
gambling, and committing all of the colors of sins. They will also
relinquish to laziness and sloth that result in many problems and
calamities.

### Maturity of willpower:

Ethicists affirm that the treatment of the lack of willpower is the
commitment to hard and arduous works that empower and help in overcoming
the difficulties. Within the factors that increase the willpower is the
exertion of all efforts. Hence, we should never show any delinquency in
any duty that we should act. Islam has also called for this quality. God
says:

*And if you determine, rely upon God.*

As well, considering the deeds of the great men of history is a means of
arousing willpower, since those men could not achieve their success and
change the history unless they enjoyed a high willpower that incited to
do virtues.

### Free will:

Islam has granted each individual the free will that enables in
controlling all of the desires and achieving all of the expectations.
Islam has banned from obstructing the individual wills except those that
are used for sinning and perpetrating illegalities or harming others.
Such wills should be interdicted and resisted for the sake of preserving
the publics. In our *‘Political system in Islam’*, I have referred to
this point in detail.

COURAGE
-------

Courage is one of the significant constituents of the conspicuous
personality because it provokes on self-control and endurance in states
of dangers, and saves  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Orison Sweet Martin’s *Willpower*.

against collapsing in calamities. Islam has spared no efforts for
seeding this quality in the souls and caring for it in the thorough
mental and educational aspects. Thus, it has driven Muslims to the
battlefields and the terrains of sacrifice and offertory to the right,
for guarding their principals and goals. In the first eras of Islam,
Muslims showed no dearth in joining the battles with consonant
determination and giant will that qualified them, despite of their
little number, to defeat the powers of polytheism. The Islamic history
has abounded with the unparalleled championship. Imam Ali  (a) cited the
most engaging example of courage. None of the ancient and modern history
considered a man more courageous and consonant than him. He was the star
of the celebrated situations and the distinguished standings in the
battles of Badr, Uhud, Ahzab, and Khyber. No single hair of him was
terrified by such nauseous situations when he strove for God’s sake
consistently and recorded that file of heroism in struggling the
atheists in their lands and opposed them openly. He said, “The great
numbers of the surrounding people will not increase my fortification,
and their dissension will not make me desolate. I will not submit even
all of the people let me down.”

Imam Ali’s heroic situations comprised the languages of this world.
Thence, he was the founder of the most splendid pictures of courage in
the whole world. Imam al-Hussein, being a copy of his father, has
elevated in this bright field. He has become the leader of the Islamic
liberal and combative movements. He received spears and swords while he
was standing like an exalted mountain to deliver to the generations the
lessons of dignity, haughtiness, and self-denial. He disregarded those
heartbreaking catastrophes that resulted in the massacre of his sons,
brothers, and darlings, in addition to the horrible adversities of harsh
thirst and the screams of his harem and children. All these tear-jerking
distresses did not hinder his striving and struggle. He kept on fighting
invariably until he met the Exalted Lord with full endurance. The Imam’s
great attitude recorded the greatest triumphs of Islam that remained
lively and illuminative to open the paths of struggle for freedom and
independence to people.

### Aspects of courage:

The most important natural aspects of courage are as follows:

- The preservation of the natural state and equanimity, and the
avoidance of hesitation during disputations and exchanging opinions and
defending the beliefs

- Overcoming the countering difficulties and taking steps in the path of
reforming the faults of people’s lives and beliefs

- Declaring the right and the bravery in the face of the evils for the
sake of exalting the wording of the right

### Ethical courage:

Ethical courage stands for declaring the right bravely. It also stands
for the self-denial. Islam has adopted this very meaning in its
educational aspects. Muslims are required to express the right under any
circumstance. The Prophet said, “Say the truth

even if it injures your own personality.” “Care not for any blame in the
field of saying the truth.” Within his precepts to Imam al-Hassan his
son, Imam Ali says, “Engage in the right wherever it is.” the Prophet
(s) warned the nation against concealing the truth before the tyrants
and the unjust. He said, “My nation will be vilipended if they fear of
declaring the wrong deeds of the unjust.”

Abu Therr al-Ghefari was the most famous in the field of declaring the
right and criticizing the evil. Induced by the revelation of the Islamic
doctrine, he went on denying the Umayyad policy when they deviated and
went astray. He used to threaten Othman and call for revolting against
him.

Abu Therr’s call was originated from a heart that cognized Islam
thoroughly and understood its goals and factuality. He denied Othman’s
policies of acting fraudulently in the nation’s destiny when he usurped
its fortune to provide them to the celebrities and the rich individuals
while starvation attacked people all over the state. Sayyid Qutb says,
“Abu Therr’s call was one of the Islamic thrusts that the
corrupt-hearted denied. Presently, the likes of such individuals –such
as the packs of the colonialists- are still denying the calls of right.
It was a call of arousing the consciences that are uncontrolled by greed
in front of the harsh inflation of the riches in a way of classifying
Muslims into various categories and demolishing the bases that Islam
came for reforming.”**[1]**

Abu Therr conducted very bravely when he showed his intense denial and
indignation on Othman who exiled him to Rabatha where he was deceased
due to starvation. Meanwhile, Othman grasped the riches to spend them
generously on the Umayyads and the sons of Muit, and withheld from this
notable companion, who was likened, by the Prophet, to Jesus (a) in
guidance and straightness.

Shiite leaders also possessed such huge amount of bravery and audacity.
They did not submit to the persecution and severity of the unjust ruling
authorities. They pushed forwardly for exalting God’s word and
renouncing corruption and evil. Abdullah bin Afif al-Azdi, the
acquaintance of Imam Ali, revolted against Ubeidullah bin Ziad, the
tyrant murderer, when the latter addressed a speech after the killing of
Imam al-Hussein, the Prophet’s grandson. Before Ubeidullah had finished
his speech, the man answered him with words sharper than new swords. He
said, “The liar is most surely you and your father, and that who
appointed you and his father. O, you slave of the barbarous! You killed
the sons of the prophets, and ascended on the Muslims’ pulpits. Where
are the sons of Muhajirs and Ansar to revenge you and your tyrant
chief-- the cursed and son of the cursed? –He refers to Yazid and
Muawiya whom were cursed by the Prophet (s)-”

Al-Kumeit bin Ziad, the poet, was another example of the revolution
against the wrongdoers. He satirized roughly the Umayyad kings and
praised the Alawids. He said:

“They –the Alawids- are chiefs unlike those who see no difference
between leading people and leading sheep. They are unlike Abdul-Melik,
al-Walid, Suleiman  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Social justice*: 211.

and Husham**[\*]**.”

He also satirized Husham the tyrant as well as the Umayyad kings. He
said, “His words are the prophets’, while his deeds are the
Jahilites’**[\*\*]**.” “Tell the Umayyads wherever they were, though you
fear swords: May God starve those whom you feed, and saturate those whom
you starved due to your injustice.”

Those kings exceeded in persecuting and oppressing our poet, but he was
exceeding in adhering to his belief and principals.

On the theatre of Shism, another poet emerged. He was al-Farazdaq, who
criticized and reprimanded the Umayyads and upheld the Prophet’s
progeny --the real people of the Islamic right and justice. The most
remarkable situation of this poet was praising Imam Zeinul abidin and
denigrating Husham bin Abdul-Melik, the Umayyad king, who pretended he
had not known the Imam. Al-Farazdaq said, “This is the one whose steps
are realized even by the deserts. The holy House, the legality, and the
precincts realize him, too. This is the son of the best of God’s
servants. This is the pious, the pure, the sanitary, and the master.
Your asking about his personality does by no means prejudice him. The
Arabs and the non-Arabs know him.”

The poet went on praising the Imam in such an unprecedented wording.
Consequently, he had to encounter the Umayyads’ irritation and
punishment. Nevertheless, this persecution did not stop him. He
satirized Husham and kept on referring to the Umayyads’ defects. He
said, “He is nodding the head which has never been a master’s head. He
has a crossed eye of manifest defects.”

Diibil al-Khuzai was surely the poet of the persecuted and the wronged
ones. He declared the right and criticized the kings after they had
exceeded in wronging and persecuting people. He satirized ar-Rashid,
al-Amin, al-Mamun, al-Mutassim, and Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi. The most
influential and consonant poetry was that addressed at al-Mutassim. He
said, “Then came an unguided leader who lacked intellectuality and mind.
The Abbasid kings are seven as it was predicted in the ancient books. No
single book has referred to an eighth one. This is similar to the people
of the cave, who were seven individuals. They were virtuous. Their
eighth was their dog. I exalt their dog to you, because you are sinful
while it was not.”

This giant man used the notable religion and the belief that he embraced
for antagonizing the unjust rulers, who wrung from this nation’s
affairs, persecuted, and debasing people. None could declare the right
word and defend the miserable and the deprived except Diibil and his
faithful brothers who stood against the ferocious waves to declare God’s
word in the most horrible and suffering circumstances.

Women also had notable roles in the field of the moral courage. They
contributed in supporting the right and conflicting the social injustice
and oppression.

Suwada bint Imara-- the mistress of the Iraqi women- was the best
example in this regard. As she was before Muawiya for complaining the
injustice of the governor, the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[\*]** These are names of the Umayyad kings.  
 **[\*\*]** Jahilites are the pre-Islamic people.

man realized her. He said, “It was you who said in the battle of
Siffin**[\*]**, ‘O son of Imara! Fight like your father on the days of
fighting and the meeting of opponents. Support Ali, al-Hussein, and
their party, and combat Hind**[\*\*]** and her son degradingly. The
Imam, who is the Prophet’s brother, is surely the sign of guidance and
the minaret of believing. Lead the armies and walk under his pennon with
your sharp sword and spear.’ You said these words, did not you?”

She embarked upon Muawiya with highly firmness and said, “Yes, by God.
It was I. I do never disdain the right and provide false excuses.” This
answer surprised Muawiya who asked for the reason that incited her to
say that wording. “It was the love of Ali and the pursuance of the
right,” she replied. “But I do not notice the effects of that love,”
said Muawiya. “The head was deceased and the tail was amputated. You had
better leave remembering the forgotten and repeating the past,” she
worded, and cited her problem of the injustice that her people and she
had to encounter due to the oppression of their governor. She then
expressed, “May the Lord bless that body in that grave in which the
justice was buried. He allied nothing but the right; hence, he was
permanently mentioned with the right and belief.” “Who is that?”
wondered Muawiya. “That was Ali bin abi Talib,” she answered. “What did
he do to you to occupy such a situation in your heart?” asked Muawiya.
The woman storied, “Ali was performing a prayer when I came to him to
complain the tax-collector that he had appointed on our province. He
finished his prayer and asked about my demand. When I told him the whole
story, the Imam wept and supplicated to God, ‘O, Allah, thou know that I
did not instruct them of wronging your servants or deserting the right.’
He then took a piece of skin out of his pocket and wrote down, ‘In the
Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. *An evidence from your Lord
has come to you. Give full measure and weight fairly, and defraud not
men their things, and do not act corruptly in the lands, making
mischief. What remains with Allah is better for you if you are
believers, and I am not a keeper over you.* As soon as you read this
missive, you should keep what is in your hands until a man that receives
the position will arrive.’”

The story shocked Muawiya completely. He could not control his nerves
when he said, “Son of abi-Talib suffused you with bravery and inveigled
you by his saying, ‘If I am the doorkeeper of a paradise, I will surely
welcome the people of Hamdan warmly.’”**[1]**

The memorable situation of this noble mistress was one of the gifts of
the Islamic spirit that never subdue to affronts and subjugation, and
never succumb to wronging and injustice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[\*]** Battle of Siffin occurred in the reign of Imam Ali  (a) when
Muawiya and people of Syria mutinied against him.  
 **[\*\*]** Hind is Muawiya’s mother.  
 **[1]** Refer to *Balaghatun-nisa*: 30, and *A’lamun-nisa*: 2/663.

ENDURANCE
---------

Endurance is one of the factors that result in the coherence and
equanimity of personalities. Islam has paid specific attention to this
quality and urged Muslims on acceding to it. God’s reward will be highly
considerable for the tolerant. God says:

*Only the patient will be paid their reward in full without measure.*

*And we will most certainly give to those who are patient their reward
for the best of what they did.*

*And reward them, because the were patient, with garden and silk.*

*And we made of them imams to guide by our command then they were
patient, and they were certain of our communication.*

*Surely we found him patient; most excellent the servant! He was
frequent in returning to God.*

Endurance, without which the minds would topple and the powers would
retreat, is one of God’s gifts that the faithful individuals should
accept. In addition, they should meet the hardship with a compatible
rigidity and serene reasoning. Islam has called for hanging on
endurance, for it is the most significant moral virtue. It was mentioned
in seventy situations in the Quran. It is greatly notable and a source
of the social erecting. The impatient nation is unable to resist the
calamities and difficulties. Endurance, likewise, stirs up the virtuous
tendencies that thoroughly lack it. The Imams brightened endurance and
prompted on sticking to it. Imam al-Baqir (a) said, “Difficulties and
endurance encompass the Paradise. He, whoever tolerates the worldly
difficulties, will be in the Paradise. Lusts and desires encompass the
hell-fire. He, whoever submits to the lusts and desires, will be in the
hell-fire.” Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “Endurance represents the head of
believing. With the fading of the head, the body will be valueless. In
the same manner, when endurance vanishes, the believing will be
valueless.”

Endurance is the remedy of the hearts that are injured by calamities and
wronged by the mishaps. It is the consolation of the grievous souls when
attacked by the currencies of obsessions and distresses, and the delight
of the excruciated ones who are suffering anguishes and mistreatments.
Under the shades of endurance, the anguished ones may find tranquility,
rest and settlement.

### Categories of endurance:

Ethicists define certain categories of endurance:

- Endurance against evildoing, caprices, lusts, and every act that may
mar man’s dignity and value

- Endurance of catastrophes through tolerating the misfortunes, pains,
the missed interests, and the worldly benefits

- Endurance in the situations of danger and horror, especially in
defending the right and the honor

- Relinquishment to adversities and slowdown in resisting them, using
all of the legal means

Subjection to poverty and rest, as well as expecting the matters of
earnings, is not included with endurance. It is obligatory upon
everybody to exert all efforts for obtaining good livelihood.
Unemployment is illicit since it is a sort of ignorance and sloth and an
entrance to sinning and vices.

At any rate, Islam has called to endurance and considered it the most
notable mental virtues and the most beneficial for both individuals and
societies. It is said that the most dignified and elevated people are
those whom are described of endurance, steadfastness, and tenacity in
hazardous and menacing situations. Those people face the calamities with
full preparations and means to be saved against difficulties and
inutilities.

COMPOSURE
---------

Composure is one of the divine names and attributes that helps to win
the best opportunities and adhere to virtues. God has given composure
exclusively to the prophets and the godly. God says:

*Most surely, Abraham was forbearing, tenderhearted and oft-returning to
God.* *Take to forgiveness, enjoin good, and turn aside from the
ignorant.*

Composure is one of the most renowned mental virtues that achieve
board-heartedness, high self-determination, and virtuous moralities.
Many narratives refer to the adherence to this trait.

The Prophet (s) said, “O Allah! Richen me with knowledge and adorn with
composure.” “God will never support by ignorance or humiliate by
composure.”

Imam Ali (a) said, “The abundance of fortunes and sons is not the
goodness. The real goodness is the abundance of knowledge and the
munificence of composure.”

Imam Ali bin al-Hussein (a) said, “Men, whose composure overcomes their
wrath, admire me.”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “Composure is a sufficient support.”

The Imams were highly ascribed with composure. Imam al-Hassan, the
Prophet’s grandson, was the exemplar of composure by the testimony of
his enemies. Marwan bin al-Hakam tried to participate in the ceremonies
of Imam al-Hassan’s funeral, but Imam al-Hussein said to him, “Do you
intend to carry his funeral while you were one of his ultimate enemies
who raged him to excess?” The man said, “I did this to the man whose
composure was as huge as mountains.”

Imam Musa bin Jafar was also one of the most self-possessed and
broad-hearted. He was named al-Kadim, which means ‘the self-possessed.’
God praised the carriers of such elevated qualities. He said:

*And those who restrain their anger and pardon men, and Allah loves the
doers of good to others.*

Composure settles numerous problems and enmity, spreads mutual
amiability and association, and takes away from malice and hatred. From
this cause, Islam has paid thorough attention for concentrating
composure in Muslims’ mentalities.

MODESTY
-------

Modesty is a noble quality that the Islamic education cares for seeding
it in the mental horizons. It eradicates arrogance and destroys its
affection. It elevates man in this world and approaches to God.
Uninterrupted reports have assured that the Prophet (s) had said, “He
whoever behaves modestly to God, will surely be raised.” He once asked
his companions, “Why do I not notice the beauty of worship?” “What is
the beauty of worship?” they wondered. “It is modesty,” asserted the
Prophet.

He also said, “There are four matters that God will not grant to other
than those He likes. They are silence, which is the headmost of worship,
and reliance upon God, and modesty, and abstinence in this world.”

The Imams applied the full meaning of modesty when they delivered
fascinating lessons. Historians relate that once a man and his son were
the guests of Imam Ali, who welcomed them and served a plate of food. As
they finished their food, the Imam hurried to fetch a pitcher of water
to pour it on the guest’s hand. The man abstained. “Sit down and let me
help in washing your hands,” said the Imam, “The Exalted Lord sees you
when your brother, who does not outclass you, serve you especially when
he aims at gaining the Paradise.” The man kept on abstaining but the
Imam abjured him by his right; hence, the man had to accept. As he
finished, the Imam handled the pitcher to Mohammed, his son, and ordered
of pouring water on the son’s hands. He explained, “I would pour water
on this son’s hands if he was not accompanying his father. God, the
Elevated, rejects to equate between fathers and sons when they are in
the same situation.” Mohammed carried out his father’s order.

This is the very spirit due to which the Islamic education has been
prevalent and exalted in the instructions and moralities.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) discussed the quality of modesty. He said, “Modesty is
the origin of every choice honor and eminent rank. If it were a tongue
perceived by people, it would speak out the facts of the hidden
outcomes. Modesty is only that intended for God’s sake, lest it is
arrogance. He, whoever used modesty for God’s sake, God will raise and
prefer him to great numbers of the servants. The Modest enjoy marks that
are realized by the people of the heavens; the angles, and the people of
the earth; the spiritualists. God says:

*And on the most elevated places there shall be men who know all by
their marks.*

 The origin of modesty is honoring, esteeming, and reverencing the Lord.
It is the door to the rituals that God accepts and receives. Except
God’s intimate servants, who realize the deepest purport of monotheism,
none can identify the very meaning of modesty. God says:

*And the servants of the Beneficent God who walk on the earth in
humbleness, and then the ignorant address them, the say: Peace.*

The Lord urged the best of His creatures and the master of people,
Mohammed (s), on using modesty. God says:

*And be kind to him who follows you of the believers.*

It is the homestead of submission and god-fearing. Veneration and
pudency are parts of modesty. The actual and perfect honor is unsound
unless it offers modesty for God’s sake.

The Imam’s wording has referred to the actuality of modesty for which
God rewards and requites, provided that all of the material tendencies
are abandoned and it is offered to God’s sake purely.

PARDON AND CONDONATION
----------------------

The Islamic education has been concerned with the noble characteristics
of pardoning the aggressive and condoning the wrongdoers. God has urged
on pardoning and condonation in many Quranic texts. He says:

*And if you pardon and forbear and forgive, then surely Allah of
Forgiving, Merciful*

God has also ordered of treating the wrongdoers benevolently and pushing
the evil away by means of altruism. God says:

*And not alike are the good and the evil. Repel evil with what is best,
when lo! He between whom and you was enmity would be as if he were a
warm friend.*

Books of hadith contain a great deal of narratives encouraging on
adhering to this titled tendency. The Prophet (s) said, “May I inform
you of the best traits of this world and the Hereafter? It is condoning
those who wrong you, and associating with those who breach relations
with you, and using benevolence to those who maltreat you, and granting
those who deprive you.”**[1]** “Cling on pardon. It elevates the
dignity. Condone and God will dignify you.”**[2]**

Imam al-Baqir (a) said, “There are three matters by which God dignifies
increasingly. They are condoning the wrongdoers, giving those who
deprive, and constructing good relations with those who breach.”**[3]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “There are three matters that are within the
virtues of the world and the Hereafter. They are condoning those who
wrong you, and relating those who breach you, and using composure to
those who ignore you.”**[4]**

The Prophet (s) represented this quality most honorably when he pardoned
and condoned those who maltreated him. He also pardoned the Quraishi
polytheists who mistreated, injured, expatriated, and instigated all
powers of polytheism against him. When he conquered Mecca, he gathered
them and asked, “What do you think I am going to do to you?” “We expect
the good, since you are the magnanimous and the son of the magnanimous,”
they all answered. He then said, “Go off! You are released.”

Anas bin Malik related: I was accompanying the Prophet (s), who was in a
cloak of a hard margin, when a Bedouin pulled him from the cloak
fiercely and said in harsh  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/107-9.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Ibid.

and irate tone, “O Mohammed! Carry on my two camels with God’s riches
that you keep. They are neither yours nor your fathers.” The Prophet
kept silence for a while, and then said, “The riches are God’s. I am
only His servant.” After a pause he asked, “O Bedouin! Do you not expect
to be retaliated for you deed?” “No, I do not,” answered the Bedouin.
“What for?” wondered the Prophet. “Because you do not answer the
evildoing with evil,” replied the Bedouin. The Prophet (s) smiled and
ordered of giving him barley and dates as much as his camels bear.

The Prophet (s) used benevolence, goodness, and condonation with any
wrongdoing he might encounter. This nonesuch morality was stuck to the
tendencies of the Imams by which they preceded the others.

Historians mention that once a man threw showers of insults and reviling
at Imam Zeinul abidin while he was leaving the mosque. The Imam stopped
his slaves who intended to punish that man. “O you man!” addressed the
Imam; “I am more than your previous wordings. You ignore more than what
you have known about me.” The man felt shy and was embarrassed. Hence,
the Imam gave him his shirt and bestowed with one thousand dirhams. The
man then confessed, “I must declare that this is one of the Prophet’s
sons.”

A Syrian man went on reviling at Imam al-Hassan. The Imam answered him
with handsome smiling and said, “O man! We will give you what you need,
and lead you to your lost, and bestow you if you ask, and feed you if
you are hungry, and enrich you if you are destitute, and succor you if
you are fugitive.” The Imam kept gentleness with the Syrian man until
the evil was uprooted from his mind. He was highly astonished to the
Imam’s morality; therefore, he could utter no single letter. He only
worded, “God is the most knowledgeable of the fittest of conveying His
message.”**[1]**

These pictures of the Imams’ conduct incite to hold to self-denial and
freedom from hostile tendencies. Hence, they were the best examples of
God’s saying:

*And repel evil with good.*

CHARITY
-------

Charity, which stands for good doing, is the best trait and the best
fruit of existence. It results in people’s docility and collective
honoring. It also causes the illustrious mentioning after death. Islam
has positively adopted and called to charity. God says:

*Surely, Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good to
others and the giving to the kindred, and He forbids indecency, and evil
and rebellion.*

He defines it as the best quality:

*And whoever submits himself wholly to Allah and he is the doer of good
to others, he indeed has taken hold of the firmest thing upon which one
can lay hold.*

He also urges on doing charity, and promised of rewarding what is
better:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Lifetime of Imam al-Hassan*: 1/293.

*Whoever brings good, he shall have better than it, and they shall be
secure from terror on that day.*

He promises of rewarding the good doing tenfold:

*Whoever brings a good deed, he shall have ten like it.*

God also promises of keeping the reward of the charitable and rewarding
them with the best:

*And be patient, for surely Allah does not waste the reward of the good
doers.*

Charity is a principal pillar of constructing the human societies and
the best means of dispersing reciprocal love and association. God
defines some parties and orders of treating them benevolently because of
the ties of relation, neighborhood or being without custody. God says:

*And serve Allah and do not associate any thing with Him. And be good to
the parents and to the near of kin and to orphans and the needy and the
neighbor of your kin and the alien neighbor, and the companion in a
journey and the wayfarer and those whom your right hands possess.
Surely, Allah does not love him who is proud, boastful.*

God compares worship with treating such parties kindly, since they are
in exigent need of kindness and charity. These parties are:

- The parents: Custody and kind treatment to the parents are the
tightest matters of family attachment. We have previously referred to
this point.

- The near of kin: They are the brothers, paternal and maternal uncles,
and their sons in addition to the other kinsmen and kinswomen. Using
charity to these individuals disperses love among the family members.
Family is surely the first brick in the social structure.

- The orphans: They are those who lost their parents. The nation
entirely is responsible for caring and educating the orphans as a form
of the social solidarity that Islam has imposed. It has also decreed of
meeting the needs of the handicapped, the weak, and the orphans.

- The poor: They are the paupers who are unable to meet their annuity.
Hence, Islam has ordered the nation of saving the needs of the poor.
Islam has also given them exclusively a good deal of social obligations
and a portion in the poor rate, so that they will get rid of poverty,
which should be eradicated totally from the Islamic society.

- The neighbors, whether the near of kin or the alien: God orders of
treating the neighbors kindly in order to achieve firm bonds of love and
association among people of the same quarter. This is surely one of the
reasons of the social connection and attachment.

- The wayfarers: They are those who lose all their fortune before they
arrive in their hometowns. Islam has ordered of attending to them
carefully and meeting their needs until they reach their homes. In
addition, a portion of the poor rate is allotted to them.

- The slaves: Islam has urged on doing good to the slaves by manumitting
them and treating them kindly and avoiding intruding them to heavy
duties.

Charity and benevolence to those parties creates amiability and empowers
the reciprocal social bonds to make people represent one hand against
their enemies.

GENEROSITY
----------

How benevolent, philanthropic, confident of God, great-spirited,
honorable, and noble are the openhanded individuals who adhere to the
codes of generosity and avoid misery and avarice!

The Islamic education cares for seeding this quality in the minds for
its being the worthiest estimable tendency that leads to social adhesion
and the harmony of the individuals’ reciprocal love and association. The
Prophet (s) called to heed this quality. He said, “Generosity is surely
a part of faith. Faith will be in the Paradise.” “God the Praised said:
I have accepted this religion. It will not be amended without generosity
and good manners. You should spare no efforts for honoring this religion
with these two matters.” “The generous are close to God, and close to
people, and close to the Paradise and remote from the hell-fire.” “Do
the favor to its deservers and to those who do not deserve. If you give
it to its people, then you have done the right. If you do not reach
them, then you are its people.”

The Imams also spoke much about generosity. Imam Musa bin Jafar (a)
said, “The courteous generous is being in God’s sustenance. God will not
leave him before He sends him to the Paradise. God did never select for
prophecy and the succession of the prophets other than the generous. My
father kept on advising me of generosity till he passed away.”

The Imams adhered to generosity. They devaluated the riches except in
cases of meeting the needs of the hungry, the needy, or the insolvent.
Imam al-Hassan, the generous of the Prophet’s household, is reported
that he had never said, “No” to any suppliant. People asked him about
this quality. He answered, “I ask God and long for His benevolence. I am
too diffident to be suppliant or reject a suppliant. God has inured me
to receive His abundant graces and I accustomed to give His graces to
people. I am afraid He will cease His habit if I cease mine. As a
suppliant come to me I say: Welcome to him whose favor is an urgent
obligation, and whose favor is imposed on every charitable. The best
days of a man are those in which his favor is asked.”**[1]**

The Imams were draining their virtues and generosity on the needy and
the orphans. Al-Kumeit, the poet, refers to this point by composing;
“They are the rainy –with charity- that became the laps of orphans when
people refrain.”

The Imams’ history is suffocated with situations of generosity and
charity.

ALTRUISM
--------

Altruism is a gentle feature that elevates man and contributes in
perfecting the personality, sobriety, and self-sacrifice for the sake of
the right and good. Islam has  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *The lifetime of Imam al-Hassan*: 1/295.

tended to this quality and praised its people. The holy Quran praised a
group of Muslims who preferred their brothers to themselves. Exegesists
report that seven Muslim warriors who had been wounded in the battle of
Uhud were harshly thirsty. A Muslim fetched them some water that was
sufficient for one person only. The first man, to whom the water was
offered, refused to drink since he suggested offering it to the other.
The other preferred the third, and so on. As the man reached the last
one, he found him dead. He returned the other and found him dead and so
on, until all of the wounded were dead. **[1]**

Islam has supplied Muslims with such a magnificent spirit, and copied
the high traits in their souls and made such a notable human perfection
all over history.

The ever most expressive, genuine, and influential picture of the
Islamic altruism was that of the Prophet’s household. A whole sura was
revealed for expressing this altruism. It is the sura of Insan –or
Addahr-. Unanimously, the exegesists –of the holy Quran- related that
the Prophet (s), with some of his companions, visited al-Hassan and
al-Hussein, who were sick. They suggested that Imam Ali, their father,
should vow a three-day fasting if they would recover their health. The
Imam, as well as their mother Fatima the veracious and Fudda their
bondwoman implemented that suggestion. When al-Hassan and al-Hussein
were healed, the group fasted. The Imam had no food at that time;
therefore, he had to borrow three measures of barley. In the first day,
Fatima the veracious milled and baked one of these measures. In the very
time**[\*]** of breaking the fast, a poor man knocked their door for a
meal. The imam gave him his share. The other entirely pursued the imam
and gave their shares. They passed that night without eating any thing.
On the second day of their fasting, Fatima the veracious milled and
backed the second measure to make some bread. An orphan complaining
hunger knocked their door in the time of breaking the fast. They
entirely offered their shares of bread and passed the second night
without eating anything. On the third day, Fatima the mistress milled
and backed the last measure and made some loaves of bread. In the very
time of breaking the fast, a prisoner complaining hunger knocked their
door asking for some food. They all offered him their shares before
having anything of it. In the fourth day, the Prophet (s) visited them
and noticed the paleness of their faces. He was highly influenced when
he shouted, “Is there a helper? Mohammed’s household is starving.”
Before he completed his words, the angel Gabriel descended with the sura
of Insan. The sura comprises the ultimate adulation and the best
wording**[2]**. God thanked their unparalleled efforts of altruism and
promised  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Majmaul-Bayan*: 5/960  
 **[\*]** Time of breaking the fast is the sunset.  
 **[2]** Refer to the following reference books:  
 Al-Fakhr ar-Razi’s book of exegesis –of the holy Quran-: 8/392.  
 *Ruhul-Bayan*: 6/546.  
 Al-Wahidi’s *Asbabunnuzul*: 331.  
 *Yanabiul-Mawadda*: 1/93.  
 *Ar-Riyadunnedira*: 2/227.

of a great reward and compensation in the Hereafter when they will be
enjoying the everlasting bliss of the Paradise. He also immortalized
their mentioning in this world and made them the imams and leaders of
Muslims.

COLLABORATION
-------------

Teamwork in the fields of charity is also one of the most notable
aspects of the Islamic education. God says:

*And help one another in goodness and piety, and do not help one another
in sin and aggression.*

This is the Islamic methodology that aims at composing the individuals
and communities on firm bases of cohesion and cooperation in the fields
of goodness and piety, not sin and aggression. The best sketches of the
moral cooperation is establishing schools, hospitals, institutes of
studying, factories, and the like matters that lead to social
development and prosperity of mental and economic life.

This noble tendency caused the predominance, maturity, and elevation of
Muslims in their early ages. With discrepancy and weakness of this
tendency, the Muslims’ affairs and word were scattered. They descended
to the depths of humiliation and ignominy to the degree that Israel,
which was the most humble nation, dared to assault them. In the Muslims’
homeland, the Israelis have founded a state for the Zionists and
humiliated the Arabs and Muslims. Had there been a sincere collaboration
among Muslims, Israel had had no ability to occupy these territories of
our homeland, banished their people, and exceeded in demeaning them.
Muslims can hear the various colors of persecution that the Palestinians
are encountering, such as massacre and displacement. The religious
zealotry has not moved their feelings to save their brethren and
liberate their usurped rights.

SINCERITY
---------

Islam has devoted great attention to truthfulness, and urged on taking
to it for its being a priority of the noble traits and the good
qualities. It is one of the four pillars of the social system. Likewise,
it is the title of the nations’ maturity and, meanwhile, the evidences
of their degradation in case people abandon.

### In the Quran:

In many Quranic texts, the importance and high-ranking of veracity are
exposed. God describes His Essence of veracity. He says:

*And who is truer of word than God is?*

*We are surely truthful.*

 He praised the prophet Samuel by saying:

*Surely, he was truthful in his promise, and he was an apostle, a
prophet.*

Truthfulness is also a quality of the pious believers. God says:

*The believers are only those who believe in Allah and His Apostle then
they doubt not and struggle hard with their wealth and their lives in
the*

*way of Allah. They are the truthful ones.*

Sincerity is also the key to success on the Resurrection day. God says:

*Allah will say, this is the day when their truth shall benefit the
truthful.*

*That Allah may reward the truthful for their truth.*

God also orders of pursuing the truthful in this world. He says:

*O, you who believe! Be careful of your duty to Allah and be with the
true ones.*

Many Quranic texts call to using and adhering to sincerity.

### In the prophetic traditions:

The Prophet and the Imams worded many sayings inciting Muslims to be
true-tongued and avoid fabrication.

The Prophet (s) said, “Hold fast on sincerity. It guides to the
benevolence that guides to the Paradise. Man is still saying and
inspecting the truth until he is recorded as a veracious to Allah.
Beware of untruth. It leads to licentiousness that leads to the
hell-fire. A man is still lying and inspection fabrication till he is
recorded as a liar to Allah.”**[1]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “Regard not the elongation of the genuflection
–Rukuu- and prostration –Sujoud-. This may be a habit, without which one
may feel bored. You should regard the truthfulness and the fulfillment
of trusts.”**[2]** “God the Elevated had never sent a prophet but with
truthfulness and fulfillment of trusts to the pious and the
licentious.”**[3]**

Advising his adherents, Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “Be solicitors to good
doing with means other than your tongues so that people will notice your
solemnity, veracity, and piety.”

### Necessity of sincerity:

Sincerity is the individual component and the genuine affair on which
the systems and equanimity of the cultural and economic life depend.
International economy is managed by truthful transactions. National and
individual capitals, banks, and commerce are proceeding on the light of
sincerity and factuality that are within the peculiar elements of the
transactional processes and effects. Sincerity is the pivot of the
international economic movement. It is impossible for the fraudulent and
duplicitous economic movements to develop.

Sincerity is a basic component in the cultural life, too. Culture is
grounded upon the method of factuality and sincerity. It will be vain
and meaningless if students and teachers are untruthful in their tests,
courses, and lessons.

The same thing can be said about the political life. Policy is being
continuous and valid only when it is fixed upon sincerity. Insincere
policy will eventually fail. The  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muslim and al-Bukhari record this hadith.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/104-5.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/104-5.

best example in this regard is the behavior of Imam Ali, the pioneer of
the right and justice on this earth, to the Kharijites after they had
discovered Muawiya’s fraudulence in the question of the arbitration.
They insisted on demanding the Imam with declaring the repentance from
(the guilt) of accepting the arbitration. The Imam declined since he had
originally not committed any guilt. They perpetrated that guilt. Had the
Imam accepted their demand, he would have been saved against the mutiny
of his army. He rejected the political life that is based upon
fabrication, cheating, and fraudulence. He pursued the completely sound
path. Similarly, had the Imam kept abreast with Abdurrahman bin Awf, who
specified pursuing God’s Book, the Prophet’s practice, and way of the
Sheiks –Abu Bakr and Omar-, as the condition of holding the position of
leadership after the death of Omar bin al-Khattab. Had the Imam accepted
that condition, he would have saved the Islamic nation from Othman bin
Affan, the chief of the Umayyads-- the real foes of Islam. The Imam,
however, insisted on veracity disregarding the results. He preferred
God’s satisfaction to everything. Thus, he rejected to pursue the course
of the two Sheiks and insisted on the fact that the Islamic policy and
management should be grounded upon God’s glorious Book and the Prophet’s
practices.

### Categories of sincerity:

The categories of sincerity are elevated and honorable:

### Honesty:

Honesty is one of the firmest pillars on which the sound society rests.
It is the guide to all of the virtues and moralities, and comprises
God’s rights, including precepts, obligations, and the abandonment of
illegalities. It also contains the respect of the publics’ rights by
preventing from using the deposits, cheating, defrauding in measures,
and pursuing people’s flaws. People’s rights are guiding them,
testifying, and conveying the missions completely in addition to many
others. God ordered of fulfilling the trusts to their owners. God says:

*Surely, Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners.*

He also reckons honesty with the qualities of the pious believers. He
said:

*And those who are keepers of their trusts and their covenant*

The Prophet (s) said, “Honesty brings subsistence. Dishonesty brings
poverty.”

Advice is a sort of honesty. In fact, the seekers of advice entrust the
advisers.” “The individuals that are asked for advice are entrusted.
Those who are asked for an advice should provide the best as if they
were the doers of that act.” “He, whoever advises of a matter other than
the accurate, is defrauding the seeker.”

Likewise, keeping the others’ secrets is a sort of honesty. People, who
unveil their secrets before others, should trust one another because
they have presumed each other without any form of concern or care. Both
are warned against deceiving through conveying the secrets. The Prophet
(s) said, “The two associates communicate each other by the trust of
God. It is illegal for them to unveil the secrets.”

The Prophet (s) affirmed that the safety and continuance of this nation
is kept only

when people care for their trusts, apply it to the factuality, and take
it out of their benefits. He said, “My nation is still secured as long
as people do not regard the trusts as profits and the almsgiving as
debts.”

### Keeping the covenant:

Keeping the covenant is a notable aspect of the Islamic education. Islam
has called to this quality. God praised Samuel the prophet by saying:

*And mention in the Book Samuel. Surely, he was truthful in his promise,
and he was an apostle, a prophet.*

The pledge is a recorded document; hence, it must be fulfilled. God
says:

*O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not do? It is most
hateful to Allah that you should say that which you do not do.*

*And fulfill the covenant of Allah when you have made a covenant, and do
not break the oaths after making them fast, and you have indeed made
Allah a surety for you.* *And fulfill the promise. Surely, every promise
shall be questioned about.*

The Prophet (s) said, “The signs of the hypocrites are three, even if
they perform the prayers and fast and claim being Muslims. They lie when
they speak, and breach when they promise and cheat when they are
trusted.”

As he was asked about the signs of the hypocrites, the Prophet (s)
answered, “They breach when they pledge.”

The fulfillment of promises is a social necessity upon which the life
course and system depend. Islam has confirmed the necessity of
fulfilling the promises and compelled Muslims with it even if the other
party was an enemy. In his will to Malik al-Ashtar, Imam Ali says, “If
you tie with your enemy a knot or dress him your covenant, you should
encompass this covenant with fulfillment and keep your pact by honesty.
Make yourself an armor of what you have given. Nothing -of God’s
precepts- is more agreeable, despite people’s discrepant caprices and
varying opinions, than the glorifying of the fulfillment of pledges.
This commits the polytheists, not Muslims, among them due to there
regarding the consequences of breaching as great woes. Do not breach by
your humility, infringe your covenant, or violate your enemies. Only the
rascal ignorant do venture God after He had made His pledge and
rectitude the security that should be publicized among His servants by
His mercy, and the shelter and vicinity to which the servants harbor and
rest.”

This is the pure Islamic attitude to pledges and promises. It has
decreed obligatorily the fulfilling of the pledge and promise even to
the foes and the rivals of Islam.

GOOD WORDING
------------

The Islamic education has exerted all efforts for habituating to the
good wording and avoiding the bad. God says:

*To Him do ascend the good words. And the good deeds lift them up.*

The good wording ascends to the Lord to reward it and bless its sayer.
Islam has

emphasized on this matter in many occasions. God also orders the
servants of speaking only the best wording. God says:

*And say to My servants that they speak that which is best. Surely, the
Shaitan sows dissensions among them.*

*And you shall speak to men good words.*

Good wording achieves the good reputation and saves from numerous
problems and difficulties, the source of which is the evil wording that,
in most cases, arouses spites and draws approaching damages.

Lowering the voice and avoiding noises are within the Islamic
instructions. God says:

*And lower your voice. Surely, the most hateful of voices is braying of
the asses.*

Imam Musa al-Kadim (a) narrated that the Prophet (s) liked the
low-voiced and hated the sonorous.

The loud-toned speech refers to the ill manners and the degraded
behaviors and ethics of the speaker.

The previous noble traits are surely the brands of God’s illumination
and the gifts of His mercy. They push to the good manners, aspire to
good doing, and preclude from irregularity and deviation.

THE EVIL TENDENCIES
-------------------

The evil tendencies that lie in the mental horizons stimulate to evil
and sinning, and occlude against the straight path. If they are left
free, they will overcome and appropriate the virtuous traits and noble
morals by which the human beings differ from animals. Islam has posed
the sound bases of uprooting and ceasing the activities of such evil
tendencies so that mankind will be saved against vices and sins. Muslim
ethicists have studied these tendencies on the light of the Quranic and
prophetic texts.

RAGE
----

Rage is the vilest mental defect that introduces the behavioral
aberrance and irregularity.

### Definition of rage:

Ethicists define rage as a psychical action due to which the blood in
the heart is excited. Hence, it spreads in the arteries and reaches the
top of the body and makes the brain as same as a cave in which fire is
flared to blacken its sides and cause that little torch to extinguish.
Thus, the face and eyes are reddened.**[1]** They added that the blood,
when tensed, makes a violent movement that fills the brain, as well as
the other nerves, with darkening smokes. Such smokes screen the
intellective illumination and enfeebles the actions of the brain;
therefore, any admonition or advice will be invalid.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Perfect morality*: 4/386.

Sometimes, coarseness and intensity may be added to the manners of the
angry.

Other ethicists define rage as a firebrand of God’s flaming fire that
prospects only the hearts, and lies in the bottom like the fire’s lying
under ash. The zeal of religion takes it out from the believers’ hearts.
The zeal of the screened arrogance and ignorance in the tyrants’ hearts
has a connection to the Satan who said, “You created me from fire and
created him from mud.”

These definitions reveal the vile factuality of this hateful tendency
that usurps man’s equanimity and intellective components.

### Reasons of rage:

The following are the reasons of rage:

- The intellective weakness and laxity, that occur due to sinking in
boons and luxury. This brings about the influence of any affect.

- The mental sensation, that is aroused due to the feelings of insult,
and the perception of the appearances without thinking or
deliberateness.

- Disease and physical fatigue that consume the intellective powers.

- Engrossment in working and the continuation of staying up and engaging
the mind with greed that sow the seeds of rage.

### Disadvantages of rage:

Rage has many disadvantages that cause many risks. It is the most
influential element of criminality and retorting. Rage has caused
numerous misfortunes and opened many jails, gallows, and fire. It has
also cut off the bonds of relations between kinsmen, fathers, sons, and
friends. Tongues uttered insults and revilement because of rage that
unveiled hatred and schadenfreude, and induced to beat and wound, and
aroused the feelings of malice and enmity. An ethicist says, “Rage
causes the mind to confuse, the body to thrill, the lips to shrink, the
voice to hoarse, the breath to accelerate, the face to flare up, the
veins to puff, the hands to shrivel, the nerves to confuse, the hear to
pulse, the blood to boil, the mouth to froth, and the eyes to throw
evil. When all these are noticed on the angry, it will be surely
adjudged that the insane are sounder and nearer to bettering than the
angry are. If the angry look in the mirror to see that disgusting mien,
they will surely feel shameful and be embarrassed.”

At any rate, rage is one of the vilest the most injurious manners since
it causes variable misfortunes and calamities and inflicts the greatest
difficulties and dilemmas.

### Warning against rage:

Islam has warned against rage, which is a nefarious quality. It has
counted it as a danger and risk. Many narratives have been reported in
this regard. The Prophet (s) said, “Rage corrupts faithfulness like the
vinegar when rots honey.” He also regarded self-striving and
self-possession in the states of rage as signs of heroism. He said, “The
hero is not that who overcomes in fighting. The real hero is that who
possesses himself in rage.” Imam Ali  (a) said, “Fury is a sort of
madness.” Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “My father used to say: Which matter
is more intense than rage? In the states of rage, a man

may kill the innocent, and slander the honorable matrons.” He also said,
“He whoever lacks control on his rage, will not control his mind.” “Rage
eliminates the minds of the wise.”**[1]**

Islam has also added the pardon in the states of rage to the believers’
qualifications. God says:

*And when they rage, they surely forgive.*

Islam has warned Muslims against being submitted to rage that leads to
disintegration and failing in this world and the Hereafter.

### Precautionary methods

Ethicists refer to several means that protect against the evil of rage:

- The recall of vileness and remembering the bad results of rage that
brings about problems and desolation.

- Considering the advantages of composure, such as the good reputation.

 It is also recommended to remember that the angry disputants may be
changed into close friends by means of self-possession and pardon. God
says:

*Repel evil with what is best, when lo! Be between whom and you was
enmity would be as if he were a warm friend.*

- Regarding God’s might, which is the most powerful. The revenge that is
directed at the other party, especially when he is weak, is always less
powerful than God’s. Aggression, however, overtakes the doom and
negligence of God’s mercy.

- Remarking that rage is a sign of mind imperfection and psychic defect.
The angry are estimated as same as the valueless idiot. This remark may
guard the enraged from sticking such descriptions to themselves, since
self-esteem and conservation of entity and reputation are personal
matters.

- Remarking the defects and the diseases of nervous collapse and
disorder that is originated from ire and rage.

- Remarking the physical state of the angry and the ill-spoken
statements they would utter.

- Avoiding curiosity, inquisitiveness, and sycophancy.

- Hiding and devaluating the ill wording. God says:

*And when they pass by what is vain, they pass by nobly.*

- The observance of the physical health and cleanness, and practicing
sports. In most cases, rage occurs to the diseased.

FEAR
----

The Islamic education exerts all efforts for the sake of eliminating the
ghost of fear to achieve tranquil and settled life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/203-4.

### Reasons of fear:

Islam has antagonized the several factors that originate fear, and
called to release them. They are:

### Fear of death:

Fear of death is a natural phenomenon. Man always avoids any
circumstance that may cause danger, and tries to take any available
means that keep the life and oppose termination. The adherence to the
lifeline may cause humiliation and mortification. Islam has rejected
humiliation and regarded it as a sort of self-weakness since fear of
death will never postpone or change what God has prescribed to man, who
definitely be led to death in the very limited time. God says:

*And Allah does not respite a soul when its appointed term has come.*

Any effort of respiting death is void. God says:

*Every soul shall taste of death.*

*Whenever you are, death will overtake you, though you are in lofty
towers.*

Matters that prevent from performing the national duties, especially
opposing the unjust rulers, will never change in any means the
factuality of death that is imposed on everybody.

### Fear for subsistence:

God the Elevated has entrusted man’s earnings to His will and volition.
God grants whomever He wills. He says:

*Allah makes abundant the means of subsistence for whom He pleases of
His servants, and straitens them for whom he pleases.*

*Surely, Allah is the Bestower of sustenance, the Lord of Power, the
Strong.*

*Seek the sustenance from Allah, serve Him, and be grateful to Him.*

The holy Quran asserts this fact in many texts so that man will be
released from the ill delusions that relate the sustenance and earnings
to the creatures, not the Creator, so that they may be betaken as gods.
God says:

*Surely, they whom you serve besides Allah do not control for you any
sustenance.*

By means of such a creative education, Islam has canceled all of the
sorts of fears that may prevent from delving in the various the aspects
of sustenance, which is the most dangerous. Thus, it has committed the
earnings to God, and vacated any role of the creatures in this process.
This regulation paves the way of dignity, freedom, and honor so that
people would not take any course to slavery and misfortune.

### Fear of the coming:

The anticipation of coming problems is a natural phenomenon. Islam has
released men from this bond and attached whatever inflicts people to
God. God says:

*Say: Nothing will afflict us save what Allah has ordained for us. He is
our Patron, and on Allah let the believers rely.*

*Say: I do not control any benefit or harm for my own soul except as
Allah pleases.*

The individuals, who believe that they will be inflicted by matters that
God has ordained, will surely live in tranquility and beatitude, away
from anxiety, disorder, submission, and humiliation.

Islam has fought all of the factors and incentives of fear so that the
whole horizons of life will be used thoroughly.

### The factual incentives of fear:

### God-fearing:

Islam has emphasized on fear of God. God says:

*But do not fear them and fear Me if you are believers.*

*That Allah might know who fears Him in secret.*

God-fearing, when settled in the mind, will certainly prevent from
committing crimes or sins, and prompts the good and virtuous doing.

### Fear of disobedience:

Fear of disobedience and sins is the actual fear because it takes away
from vices and forbidden matters, and warns the punishment of the
Hereafter. God the Elevated mentions the pious believers who fear Him
and escape from disobedience. He says:

*Say, surely, I fear, if I disobey my Lord, the chastisement of a
grievous day.*

The Prophet said, “One must not fear other than his guilt.”

Before we commit a sin, we must remember and fear God, Who will punish
in this world and the Hereafter.

### Fear of the Resurrection Day:

Man should fear the terrors and difficulties of the Resurrection Day, by
avoiding any matter that God has forbidden, and clinging to the precepts
and obligations. The holy Quran exposes the horrifying terrors of the
situation on the Resurrection Day. God says:

*The day on which a man shall fly from his brother and his mother and
his father and his spouse and his son. Every man of them shall on that
day have an affair, which will occupy him.*

*Surely, the violence of the hour is a grievous thing. On the day when
you shall see it, every woman giving such shall quit in confusion what
she suckled, and every pregnant woman shall lay down her burden, and you
shall see men intoxicated, and they shall not be intoxicated but the
chastisement of Allah will be severe.*

The Quran also exposes the horrible chastisement that the tyrants and
murderers

will encounter on that day. God says:

*Lay hold on him then put a chain on him. Then cast him into the burning
fire. Then thrust him into a chain the length of which is seventy
cubits. Surely, he did not believe in Allah the Great. Nor did he urge
the feeding of the poor. Therefore, he has not here today a true friend.
Nor any food except the wrongdoers’ eats.*

It is obligatory upon every individual, who possesses a mentality, to
shun any sort of sinning, and to fear God. Naturally, such a high
education will achieve a bright and pure mentality

ENVY
----

Envy is the virulent disease that affected men all over history and
caused many distresses and difficulties. Islam has warned against envy
and reproached the envious and called for prompting against it.

### Reality of envy:

The ill-favored envy**[\*]** stands for the wish that the amenities were
to lapse. In other words, the evil envy is the intendment of ruining and
destroying. The desire of getting the same amenities of somebody else
has nothing to do with envy. This is the emulation. In most cases, the
feeling of obtaining others’ good qualities is being favorable since it
encourages doing well. The Prophet said, “The faithful believer
emulates, but does never envy.” Likewise, envy is different from the
competition that stands for striving for copying others’ good deeds. It
is the main incentive of the industrial and commercial progression.
Islam has urged on competing with each other in the fields of good and
benevolence. God says:

*And for that let the aspirers aspire.*

### Warning against envy:

Islam has paid a great attention to protect Muslims against the
insalubrious disease of envy because it causes social disunion and
spreads enmity. It has also criticized and rebuked the envious.

Several Verses deny and malign the envious. God says:

*Many of the followers of the Book wish that they could turn you back
into unbelievers after your faith, out of envy from themselves.*

*Or do they envy the people for what Allah has given to them of His
grace?*

God also exposes the nature of envy. He says:

*If good befalls you, it grieves them, and if an evil afflicts you, they
rejoice at it.*

The Prophetic texts are also filled up with many indications to the ill
manner of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[\*]** The Arabic root, /h-s-d/, that is intended here, refers to two
meanings; envy and emulation.

envy. The Prophet (s) said, “Envy consumes the good deeds like fire when
consumes wood.”**[1]** “Poverty is about to be atheism, and envy is
about to overcome God’s act.”**[2]** “The malady of the past nations has
crept to you. It is malice and envy, which is shaving. It shaves of
religion, not hair. By the Prevailing of Mohammed’s soul, you will not
be believers before you love each other. May I lead to a matter after
which you will certainly love each other? Propagate salutation among
you.”

Imam al-Baqir (a) said, “Man may convert to atheism when he commits an
ill manner in case of rage. Envy surely consumes faith like fire when
consume the wood.”**[3]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “The plague of the religion are envy,
self-esteem, and arrogance.”**[4]**

Besides, there are many texts warning against envy, which is an epidemic
that corrodes the entity and change the envious into victim of pains and
infliction.

### Incentives of envy:

Ethicists referred to a number of incentives that originate envy:

- The origin of envy is the mental evilness and avarice. It takes the
souls to the bottoms. Such souls are annoyed when they notice God’s
amenities and charities widespread over people, and rejoice when they
notice distressed persons. This is the most evil sort of envy. The
Prophet (s) said, “God’s amenities have enemies. They are those who envy
people for receiving God’s charities.”

- Envy is originated from enmity and malice. The enemies and the
malicious are pleased when they see others sink in grief and sorrow.
They feel depressed as they notice them live in luxury.

- It is also originated from the desire of exceeding others. The bearers
of such desires are dejected when others excel them, and think they will
obtain comfort if they excel others.

- It is also originated from the anticipation of missing opportunities
and interests. This feeling is generally stuck to craftsmen. It extends
with the narrowness of the province. The big cities may lack this sort
of envy because of the engrossment of crafts.

- It is also originated from arrogance and pride. The arrogant may fear
of others’ excelling them if their elegance is increasing.

- It is also originated form contempt. The envious, who contempt others,
wish the fading of others’ amenities. This sort comprises the atheists’
envying the prophets for being given the Lord’s mission exclusively.
Those atheists used to say to the prophets, as the Quran exposes, “*Your
are naught but mortals like ourselves*.” This envy also incites those
atheists to accuse the prophets and apostles falsely. Anyhow, these  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]**Refer to al-Gezali’s *Ihiaul-Ulum*: 3/186.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/307.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/306.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/307.

accusations would change into the publicity of those apostles’ virtues
and elevation.

Abu Temmam, the famed poet, referred to this meaning when he composed a
couple of verses in which he asserted that God uses the tongue of the
envious when He wills to arouse an unseen virtue.

### Misfortunes of envy:

Numerous misfortunes and calamities are originated from envy. The
envious may be inflicted by ceaseless grief and sorrow because they
suffer if any amenity is granted to a mortal. God’s amenities, however,
are incessant. Thus, the envious are in continual regret. Consequently,
this will affect the physical health. Ibnul-Mutaz says, “Envy is the
epidemic of the body.” A spiritualist says, “I have never seen such
wrong people who are as same as the wronged. They consider the amenity
as their calamity.” The envious are the rejecters of God’s act. In most
cases, this may lead them to atheism and disbelief. Accordingly, the
Prophet said, “Envy consumes the good deeds like fire when consumes
wood.”

The reduction in the social ranks of the envious is one of the
misfortunes involved. People usually abandon the envious, since they
cause the rupture of relations in addition to other defects, such as
fabrication, backbiting, tattling, perfidy, treason, calumny, killing,
and larceny besides other sins and evil-doings.

### Treatment of envy:

Ethicists have cited some treatments for this disease:

- The envious are prescribed of acceding to the ethics of Islam and
considering God in every action since this precludes and trains on
leaving this vile habit.

- The envious should regard that this ill quality is a perishing disease
that results in falling in this world and failing in the Hereafter. The
envious will surely leave this habit if they look curiously upon this
fact. Self-love is one of the inveterate human qualities. Man will
definitely avoid any matter that may lead to expiration. For the
envious, when they esteem that envy will never harm the others, they
will think of giving up this habit.

- Within the matters that help in quitting envy is looking to those who
are in lower states, so that God’s graces and amenities will be
realized. The Prophet said, “Looking to the more should be followed by
looking to the less.”**[1]**

The envious are prescribed of considering the results of envy that
brings the ill manners as well as misadventures and vices.

AVIDITY
-------

Avidity is a mental vice that the Islamic education has tended to uproot
and eradicate. Its source is the excessive engagement in the earthly
affairs, the greedily coveting of collecting money and the complete
negligence of death. The Prophet (s)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to al-Bukhari’s *Sahih*.

referred to this phenomenon by saying, “Had son of Adam had two valleys
of riches, he would have wished of obtaining a third. Nothing fills his
interior but dust.”**[1]** “Richness is not the abundance of items. It
is the self-contentment.”**[2]**

The Prophet (s) also warned against the excessive avidity. He said, “O
people! Calm down in seeking your livelihood. Man will never obtain more
than the decreed, and will never leave this world before receiving the
decided.”**[3]** Imam al-Hassan (a) said, “Avidity is the enemy of
mentalities. Adam was expelled from the Paradise because of avidity.”

Avidity urges unheedingly on obtaining riches. Man is inconsiderate that
earnings and sustenance are in God’s hand that He bestows to whomever He
desires and prohibits from whomever He desires. Man’s excessive
endeavors will never change anything of the limited sustenance. Ibn
Zureiq the poet assures this meaning. He affirms that God had already
distributed the individuals’ earnings; hence, it is nonsense to exert
excessive efforts for gaining and profiting.

Avidity draws to many sufferings and pitfalls, seduces to strive and
work hard, deprives of rest and settlement, and arouses grief and pains.
The best way of getting rid of this ill manner is the contentment to
God’s decree and contemplating that these riches will surely inherited
by others. Hence, if the riches are ill-gotten, then the sin will be
stuck to the collector while their benefits will be the inheritors’.

PARSIMONY
---------

Parsimony is a vile quality and an ill manner. It is one of the fruits
of adhering to the worldly affairs, as ethicists affirm.

### Reality of parsimony:

For ethicists, parsimony is the stinginess in the situations of the
necessary giving. It is the preference of abstinence in any matter. Imam
al-Hassan (a), when was asked about the meaning of parsimony, expressed,
“It is to consider any spending as a loss.”**[4]** This is the most
accurate definition of parsimony.

### Warning against parsimony:

Islam has struggled and warned against this aspect. The Quran and the
prophetic traditions refer to this topic in many texts. God says:

*Those who are niggardly and bid people to be niggardly and hide what
Allah has given to them out of His grace.*

*And let not those deem, who are niggardly in giving away that which
Allah has granted them out of His grace, that it is good for them. Nay,
it*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to al-Bukhari’s *Sahih*.  
 **[2]** Refer to al-Gezali’s *Ihiaul-Ulum*: 3/238.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Refer to *the lifetime of Imam al-Hassan*: 1/319.

*is worse for them. They shall have that whereof they were niggardly
made to cleave to their necks on the resurrection day.*

Many prophetic texts condemn parsimony.

The Prophet (s) said, “The parsimonious is remote from God and remote
from the Paradise.”**[1]** “Parsimony is a tree rooted in the hell-fire.
Only the parsimonious will be in the hell-fire.”**[2]** “Beware of
niggardliness. It wiped out the past nations. As they responded to
niggardliness, they killed each other, violated the forbidden, and cut
off their relations.”**[3]** “Niggardliness and faith do never combine
in a Muslim’s heart.”**[4]** Imam al-Hassan (a) said, “Parsimony
comprises all of the vices and defects and weeds out the heart
amiability.”

Many other texts warn Muslims against this evil trend that is the head
of every lechery and blotch.

### Protection against parsimony:

The best way of protecting against this disease is considering
deliberately the bad consequence of adhering to it, especially after
departing this world. Every man will be surely asked about the money he
leaves in this world. Punishment will fall upon those who collect
ill-gotten riches and those who collect the riches legally, but care for
them excessively. Besides, the parsimonious are socially degraded and
scorned. Sheik an-Naraqi says, “The best way of treating parsimony is
dissecting its causes, which is the fond of riches. The reason is surely
the fondness of the lusts that are gotten through money only. The
excessive hope is another reason. If a man expects he will leave this
life soon, he will never think of collecting money parsimoniously and
saving it for the descendants.”**[5]**

MALICE
------

Malice is a vile tendency and a state of rage that may destroy and
terminate since it is hidden in the minds. Islam cares for purifying the
mentalities from the vices and evils of malice. The Prophet said, “The
faithful believer should not be malicious.”

Envy is the source of malice that ruptures the relations, leads to
animosity, and drives people into tremendous evils. Slander and
schadenfreude are within the outcomes of malice. Malice may result in
other bad consequences, such as mockery and other illegal matters that
create dishonor and corrupt the religion. Disorder and depression
usually affect the malicious since they live in incessant and unsettled
grief, pains, and animosity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Jamiusaadat*: 2/109.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Perfect morality*: 4/470.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Jamiusaadat*: 2/109.  
 **[5]** Refer to *Jamiussaadat*.

### Protection against malice:

- The malicious should consider that the internal animosity takes away
from faithfulness and approached to the hypocrites and the deviants.

- The malicious should remark that malice brings about pains and
suffering without gaining any profit.

- The malicious are advised of looking upon the courses of the great men
of history whom were described of good behavior and virtuous moralities.
Imam Ali  (a) says, “If you overcome your enemy, you should consider
pardoning him as the gratitude for the overcoming.”

People went on supplicating to God against the unknown larcener that
thieved some dirhams of Abdullah bin Masud, the grand companion of the
Prophet (s). Abdullah answered, “O Allah! If it was an exigent need that
drove that man to thieve those dirhams, then I implore thee to bless
him. If he thieved due to intending to commit a sin, then I implore thee
to make it the last of his sins.”

A wise man said, “If you are told that somebody was reviling at you, you
should answer: He must have been unaware of my defects totally, lest he
would not utter only these words.”

ARROGANCE
---------

Islam has warned against arrogance and self-conceit that create egoism
and tyranny. They are also the indications of ignorance and pride. God
said:

*Do not attribute purity to your souls. He knows him best who guards
against evil.* *Therefore, enter the gates of hell, to abide therein. So
certainly evil is the dwelling place of the proud.*

The Prophet said, “Three matters are annihilating. They are the obeyed
niggardliness, the pursued fancy, and self-esteem.”**[1]** “Arrogance
consumes the good deeds like fire when consumes wood.”**[2]** Imam
as-Sadiq (a) said, “Doom is the outcome of arrogance.”**[3]**

Islam has antagonized the evil tendency of arrogance that is originated
from ignorance, pride, and rashness.

### Blights of arrogance:

Arrogance causes serious mental blights, the most notable of which are
as follows:

- Arrogance generates pride, self-esteem, and precedence.

- It results in the oblivion of sinning and the abandonment of God and
the Hereafter.

-It perverts the deeds that are offered purely to God. As he was asked
about the arrogance that perverts the good deeds, Imam Musa (a) said,
“Arrogance is of different  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/313.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Perfect morality*: 4/475.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/313.

classes. A class makes the ill deeds seem to be good and admiring.
Another class secures, falsely, from God; hence, the bearers of such an
arrogance think they do favor to God, while the truth is that God is
doing favors to everybody.”**[1]**

- It arouses self-esteem. The arrogant thinks of being guarded against
God’s acts and punishment, and thinks he have many rights that are
mandated upon God because he performs some rites.

-It leads to boasting and trespassing.

- It results in dictation and challenging the right.

### Types of arrogance:

There are several types of arrogance. They are as follows:

- The vanity about richness and amenities. God said:

*And he possessed much wealth; so, he said to his companion, while he
disputed with him: I have greater wealth than you, and am mightier in
followers.*

 As the Prophet (s) noticed a rich man roll his clothes while he was
associating with a poor man, he said, “What! Do you anticipate that his
poverty will affect you?”

- The vanity about the abundance of wealth and the power of the family.
The holy Quran refers to this phenomenon. God says:

*And they say: We have more wealth and children, and we shall not be
punished.*

- The vanity about power. The holy Quran exposes the story of the tribe
of Ad who said, “Who is more powerful than we are?” This sort of vanity
creates wars and seizure. The powers that are admired of their arms will
tend to overcome the less powerful.

- The vanity about lineage and nationalities. Islam has antagonized such
an ill quality and ruled of combating anyone that may call to it,
because this racism disunites Muslims and promotes the variant trends.
According to the Islamic viewpoint, Muslims should be one body of equal
organs.

- The vanity about ill opinions. God says:

*What! Is he whose evil deed is made fairseeming to him so much so that
he considers it good?*

*They think that they are well versed in skill of the work of hands.*

 This is the compound ignorance.

- The vanity about knowledge. The students may esteem themselves and
despise others. This is the most influential disease that deconstructs
knowledge and takes away from God. The Prophet said, “The blight of
knowledge is self-complacency.”

- The vanity about deeds and worship. This sort of arrogance nullifies
the worship and creates pride.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *the lifetime of Imam Musa bin Jafar*: 1/281.

### Protection against arrogance:

The best way of guarding against arrogance is the thorough
self-consideration. Man is the target of various calamities and
misfortunes especially when none can realize or predict the coming.
After death, man will not be more than an obscure thing and a mass of
valueless dust. What for should man be arrogant? Any consideration and
judgment will remove the elements of arrogance and takes back to the
right.

OSTENTATION
-----------

Ostentation is a serious sin. It indicates mental vices. The
ostentatious do not have any relation with God. Islam has warned against
exhibitionism and ordered Muslims of purifying themselves from its
germs. The holy Quran, also, exposes and warns against ostentation. God
says:

*Surely, the hypocrites strive to deceive Allah, and He shall requite
their deceit to them, and when they stand up to prayer, they stand up
sluggishly. They do it only to be seen of men and do not remember Allah
save a little.*

*Whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do good deeds, and not join
any one in the service of his Lord.*

*Woe to the praying ones who are unmindful of their prayers, who do good
to be seen and withhold the necessaries of life.*

The reports that deal with and warn against the ostentation are
uninterrupted.

The Prophet (s) said, “The most dangerous thing that I warn you against
is the minor polytheism It is the ostentation. On the Resurrection Day,
God will say to the ostentatious: I reward the servants for their deeds.
Go to those whom you were showing in the world. Will they reward
you?”**[1]** “God will not admit any deed that possesses a bit of
ostentation.”

Imam Ali  (a) said, “Fear God exhaustively, and work for Him without
seeking any reputation. He, whoever works for other than God, will be
attached to those for whom he works.”**[2]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “Dedicate your affairs to God’s sake. Do not
make them for people’s sake. Whatever is intended to God, goes to God,
and whatever is intended to people will never ascend to God.”

Imam ar-Rida (a) said, “You should work for other than ostentation or
reputation. He, whoever works for other than God, will be attached to
those for whom he works.

Ostentation is rebuked and considered as a sort of polytheism that never
ascends to God.

### Incentives of ostentation:

Incentives of ostentation are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Jamiussaadat*: 2/370.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*: 2/289.

- Showing off piety and virtuousness for winning people’s respect and
veneration.

- Showing off for holding some religious positions, the terms of which
are piety and religiousness, such as judiciary and imamate,

- Showing off for winning people’s confidence, and planning for
embezzling their trusts, or the like.

Only those who sacrifice the Hereafter for worldly affairs may take the
path of ostentation. The ostentatious individuals, in fact, worship
others besides God, and dress piety as a means of achieving the narrow
aims.

### Ostentation invalidates worship:

Muslim Jurists affirm unanimously that ostentation invalidates the
worship. There is no difference in the rule whether such a state of
ostentation occurs in the first of the ritual, in the middle or in any
part of it. Likewise, ostentation invalidates the rites even if it is
intended in some parts that are out of the obligatory ritual. For
instance, the prayer is invalid when the performer shows off by joining
a collective prayer, or choosing a definite mosque, imam, time or
place.**[1]**

The actual worship is engaged in the sincerity to God. When ostentation
occurs, the rituals will be invalid and should be repeated.

### Treatment of ostentation:

Ethicists mention a number of matters that eliminate this virulent
defect.

- The ostentatious should clear the incentives of ostentation, such as
the fondness of praise and greediness in people’s amenities.

- The ostentatious should regard the blights and calamities that are
resulted from ostentation, such as the corruption of the deeds and God’s
scorn.

- The ostentatious should consider that people’s praise and confidence
would not improve the livelihood, since sustenance is God’s concern, and
that whoever seeks sustenance from other than God will gain nothing but
humility and decline.

- The ostentatious should concern the grief and the lack of tranquility
that affect them because of presuming people’s emotions and trends. They
should also remark that nothing would please people who have
contradicting opinions and tendencies. This will surely bring about the
most intolerable suffering and heartache and deprive of any profit.

- The ostentatious should consider that God will sooner or later divulge
the ill intendments and unveil the actuality in this world or in the
Hereafter. Thus, no profit is gained from the deceptive efforts.

The ostentatious will surely get rid of their ill habits if they
consider these treatments carefully.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Al-Hakim’s *Minhajussalihin*: 1/101.

CONCEIT
-------

Conceit is one of the mental defects that the Islamic education has
treated and purified the mentalities from its germs.

### Reality of conceit:

Ethicists mention that the reality of conceit is the minds resting to
what accords the fancies confusedly and conceitedly. He is deceitful
that whoever esteems his present or fated success. They also disclose
that deceit is composed of two matters:

First: esteeming the vile as good.

Second: the fondness of lusts and rage.**[1]**

### Warning against conceit:

Islam has warned against conceit because it ruins the minds and causes
sufferings and leads to commit the forbidden matters. God says:

*Let not this world’s life deceive you, nor let the arch-deceiver
deceive you in respect of Allah.*

*But you caused yourselves to fall into temptation, and you waited and
doubted and vain desires deceived you till the threatened punishment of
Allah cane, while the arch-deceiver deceive you about Allah.*

The Prophet (s) said, “How excellent the sleep and the nature of the
courteous are! They excel the staying up and the efforts of the idiot. A
bit of piety and certitude is preferable to the conceited even if it is
as much as this earth.”**[2]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “The conceited people are poor in this world and
grieved in the Hereafter. They sold the best for the worst. Do not be
conceited by yourselves. Your riches and health may allure you, thinking
you will persist. The long age, the children, and the associates will
not save you. Your beauty, wish, and gaining the target may allure you,
assuming your being sincere and true. Your remorse for delinquency in
worship may allure you, while God realizes that your heart has the
opposite. You may undertake excessively for adoration while God wants
mere sincerity. You may take pride in your knowledge and lineage while
you are unaware of the unseen damages. You may imagine that you
supplicate to God while you are supplicating to someone else. You may
think you are advising people while you intend your own interests. You
may reproach yourself while you are actually praising.”**[3]**

This saying indicates all of the incentives and causes of deceit. The
Imam warned against all sides of conceit and called to purify the
mentalities against its deviation and sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Jamiussaadat*: 3/3-4.  
 **[2]** Ibid.  
 **[3]** Ibid.

### Protection against conceit:

The eradication of fondness of lusts and fancies is the best protective
way against conceit. It is essential to cognize that we will leave this
world to the world of the right. Looking upon these facts may take back
to the straight path.

MENDACITY
---------

Mendacity is the origin of every vice and the source of every defect. It
is a hateful quality. The honorable and the virtuous are remote from
such an ill manner that Islam has opposed.

### Censure of mendacity:

Islam has warned against this ill characteristic. God says:

*Only they forge the lie who do not believe in Allah’s communications,
and they are the liars.*

*So, He made hypocrisy to follow as a consequence into their hearts till
the day when they shall meet Him because they failed to perform towards
Allah what they had promised with Him and because they told lies.*

The Prophet (s) said, “Beware of fabricating. It leads to
licentiousness, which leads to the hell-fire.”**[1]** “May I inform you
of the grandest sin? It is polytheism and impiety to parents and telling
lies.**[2]**

Imam Ali  (a) said, “The servants –of God- will not find the good taste
of faithfulness before they quit intentional and unintentional
fabrication.”

Imam Ali bin al-Hussein (a) said, “Beware of insignificant, influential,
unintentional, and intentional lies. Fibs lead to fabrication.

Imam al-Baqir (a) said, “God the Praised has made locks for the vices.
He made the consuming of intoxicants the keys of these locks. Mendacity
is viler than consuming intoxicants.”

Imam al-Askari (a) said, “All of the vices were confined in a house the
key of which is mendacity.”

Moreover, many other narratives forbid this evil quality and declare
God’s punishment to those who commit this depravity.

### Reasons of mendacity:

Many causes that are originated from self-weakness and disloyalty to God
incite to commit mendacity. They are as follows:

- Fabricating lies for gaining a delusive profit or guarding against an
anticipated damage. This anticipation is dictated by the soul, which is
the incessantly demanding with evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Jamiussaadat*: 2/317.  
 **[2]** Ibid.

- Fabricating lies for profiting by a good livelihood or approximating
the profitable wealthy. The source of such mendacity is self-degradation
and humiliation. The comic mendacity is also a repulsive feature. It
stands for forging lies for the sake of making others laugh. This
property drags to illegal matters without gaining any benefit.

- Fabricating lies for disturbing and wreaking the enemies. These
matters incite to describe false questions and revile by inaccurate
accusals.

- The most notable incentive of mendacity is the lack of piety and
religiousness. Those who fear God never commit mendacity.

Mendacity may be an irremovable habit if it controls the mind. It is
said that if suckling of mendacity is found sweet, it will be very
difficult to wean. The mendacious are socially disrespected and any said
lie will be naturally imputed to them.

### Sorts of mendacity:

The sorts of mendacity are as follows:

- Forging lies against God and the Prophet. This stands for the
intentional ascribing unsaid statements to God and the Prophet. Some of
the companions, who merchandized with their religion and sold their
Hereafter to Muawiya, such as Samara bin Jundub, Abu Hureira, and Amr
bin al-As, purposed to forge lies against the Prophet. Muawiya bestowed
them abundantly; therefore, they counterfeited the prophetic traditions
and falsified the sayings of censuring the Prophet’s infallible
household and praising others for gaining Muawiya’s gold and power. That
was the most calamitous damage that Islam had to encounter, since such
false reports corrupted Muslims’ doctrinal lives and deformed the
religion’s signs and rulings. For Shias, forging lies against God and
the Prophet invalidates the ritual fasting of the month of Ramadhan.

- Perjury, which wastes people’s property, honors, and souls. It is
surely the most horrendous crime that eradicates justice and systems.
The Prophet (s) said, “May I inform you of the grandest sins? They are
polytheism, impiety to parents and –emphatically- perjury.” Perjury in
insignificant or grand matters is indifferent. Judiciaries should
chastise and distrust the perjurers.

- Mendacity for mocking people. This is also an ugly forbidden matter
since it stands for abusing others. Islam, however, protected people’s
dignities and forbade debasing and deriding them.

Mendacity brings about God’s ire and scorn, and causes the mendacious to
lose lechery and the failing of justice and trustfulness.

### Warrants of mendacity:

Islam has permitted mendacity in cases of attaining some social benefits
when the way of telling the truth is blocked. These cases are as
follows:

- Telling lies is permitted when it is intended for saving a Muslim from
the unjust ruler’s fist. When a tyrant intends to kill, usurp, or
dishonor a Muslim, it becomes obligatory to tell false things, if there
is no other way, for saving that individual. In

this case, “the vice of mendacity retreats because the obligation of
salvation is effective,” as scholars of jurists affirm.

- Telling lies is permitted when it is intended for refitting ruptured
relations. In case the reuniting of ruptured relations relies upon a fib
or telling untrue things, it is not unacceptable to fib or invent a
matter, provided that there is no other solution, that re-gathers the
hearts of the adversary parties at odds and dislodges the spirits of
rivalry and animosity. The Prophet (s) said, “He is not a liar that who
makes peace between two rivalry parties when he says good wording or
publicizes good deeds.”**[1]** Abu Kahil reported: As two of the
Prophet’s companions were engaged in discrepancy, I came to one of them
and told, falsely, that the other party used to praise and applaud him.
I went to the other party and did the same thing. Hence, I could make
peace between them. Then, I considered that I had made peace between
those two, but violated my own personality due to telling lies. I came
to the Prophet (s) and cited the problem. “O Abu Kahil!” said the
Prophet, “Make peace between people even by means of” He referred to
fabrication.

Islam has greatly concerned with making peace and reconciliation between
discrepant parties, and preferred this process to the general rituals of
prayers and fasting. Rivalry opens the door to evils, ruptures the
united word, and spreads the spirits of animosity and contest among
Muslims.

- Telling lies is permitted when it is intended for winning a battle.
War depends upon trickery. If Muslims’ triumph and the foes’ defeat rely
upon fabrication, it becomes obligatory to lie. The Prophet (s) said,
“Every fabrication is forbidden except telling lies in wars, since wars
depend upon trickery.”

- Telling lies is permitted when it is intended for reconciliation among
the fellow wives. Polygamous husbands are required to deceive each wife
that he loves her more than he loves the others, for relieving them and
saving from rivalry and quarrels.

Unfortunately, people have opened the portals of mendacity as wide as
possible. They have stuck to it so adhesively that they got used to it.
Deceptive flattery, which is surely a sort of mendacity, has become a
habit. For instance, when an individual tries to get rid of the
embarrassment of breaching a promise, he may cite falsely an ailment as
his excuse. Fathers also used to instruct their sons to tell those who
visit them of their absence in order to avoid the visitors. These sorts
of social hypocrisy have been prevalent nowadays that even some poets
recommended of sticking to them in the social relations. This flattery
is surely a social defect that is originated from cowardice, timidity,
and lack of mental disciplining.

It is strange that some writers, especially the Orientals, have purposed
to forge lies in their writings. For instance, the *Islamic Encyclopedia
Britannica* is filled up with intrigues, inventions, and lies especially
in matters pertaining to Islam and some leaders. We have referred to
many examples of their forged lies that are intended defame Islam and
wrong the Imams.

By the same token, the books of Dr. Ahmed Amin and Dr. Ahmed Shibli that
are  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Perfect Morality*: 4/449.

pertaining to Shias and some of their doctrinal beliefs are filled up,
shamelessly, with lies and fabrications.

At any rate, people used to fabricate and lie. Indisputably, this deadly
defect destroys all of the moral virtues. Degradation and collapse will
be the inescapable fate of any nation that takes fabrication as a
course.

### Protection against mendacity:

The following are the ways of protection against mendacity:

- Deliberate concern of the ceaseless chastisement that God threatened
the liars who gain nothing from mendacity.

- Considering the ordeals and distresses, the most important of which is
the social degradation and distrust that is originated from mendacity.

- Avoiding associating with the evildoers, who do not refrain from
forging lies, and clinging to the virtuous and the religious ones so
that their deeds, habits, and morals may influence and help in uprooting
the evil customs.

Educators are required to activate their notable roles for extirpating
this malignant disease and saving the new generations by citing the
terrible damages of mendacity that leads to degradation and ruin.

BACKBITING
----------

Backbiting is a lethal defect and evil that unveils envy, oppression,
and lack of faith. Unfortunately, people hanged to the bad manner of
backbiting that became a general custom and a fruit in which they have
fun. They used to place each other on the table of slicing to reveal the
flaws and imperfections of one another openly.

### Reality of backbiting:

Backbiting stands for mentioning the others’ affairs that they detest,
whether frankly, metonymically, indicatively, symbolically, or
literally. It also comprises the mentioning of religious affairs, such
as accusing of larceny, treason, negligence of prayers, impiety to
parents, or the like, and worldly affairs, such as accusing of ill
manners or loquacity or mocking the way of dressing or the like.

### Illegality of backbiting:

Islam has banned backbiting since it arouses malice and animosity. God
says:

*And do not spy nor let some of you backbite others. Does one of you
like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor it.*

Hence, God considers the backbitten as a brother, considers his honor as
the flesh, and considers backbiting him, while he is unaware, as his
death.**[1]** God also says:

*Surely, as for those who love that scandal should circulate respecting
those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in this
world*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Sheik al-Ansari’s *al-Mekasib*.

*and the hereafter. And Allah knows, while you do not know.*

The Prophet (s) said, “Backbiting is more serious than fornication. God
may forgive the fornicators if they repent, while He will not forgive
the backbiter before the backbitten forgives.” “He whoever keeps on
backbiting and unveiling his brother, will be kept on in hell-fire, and
God will unveil his flaws before the creatures.” “Sessions in which
backbiting is prevalent are ruining the religion. Prompt your hearings
from listening to backbiting. The deliverer and the receiver are parties
of the sin.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “He whoever declares what he notices and hears
about his faithful brother, is with those who are intended in God’s
saying:

*Surely, as for those who love that scandal should circulate respecting
those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in this world
and the hereafter.*”

Backbiting is a grand sin for which God will chastise and interrogate on
the Resurrection Day.

### Incentives of backbiting:

Ethicists mention a number of incentives of backbiting. They are as
follows:

- Mocking and ridiculing encourages backbiting others.

- Jocularity incites to backbite others.

- Faulting others and self-love causes backbiting.

- Associating, flattering, and consenting to individuals that are
accustomed to exposing people’s defects cause backbiting.

- If it is expected that somebody will sooner or later backbite, this
may lead to take initiative in backbiting him.

Backbiting is a sign of the ingenuity of mentalities that is irrelevant
to virtue and morals.

### Penance of backbiting:

The penance of backbiting is seeking the backbitten’s satisfaction and
acquittal. Numerous narratives assert this indication. It is related
that backbiting will not be forgiven unless the backbitten forgives. The
Prophet (s) said, “Those against whom there is a complaint of honor or
assets, should seek the acquittal before the coming of that day on which
there will not be any dirham or dinar. On that day, the good deeds of
the charged will be added to the complainants. If there is no good deed,
the evils of the complainants will be added to the charged.”

Jurists have issued that the repentance due to which God forgives and
pardons does not omit the chastisement of backbiting because it is
people’s, not God’s, rights.

### Protection against backbiting:

- A deliberate concern of the ceaseless chastisement that God has
threatened the backbiters for debasing, dishonoring, and wronging the
others, is a protective method against this malignant disease.

- The consideration of the worldly vices that are originated from
backbiting, especially when it reaches the backbitten and arouses or
increases animosity and may creates harm, insult, and aggression, may
encourage avoiding backbiting.

- Removing and treating the incentives of backbiting will save against
going on backbiting others.

TATTLING
--------

Tattling is as evil element and a door to arousing sedition. It unveils
ignobility and villainy.

### Reality of Tattling:

Tattling stands for informing others of the ill wording that is said
about them. It is a sort of divulging the secrets and exposing the
screens. It comprises the conveyed words and deeds, whether they were
acceptable or unacceptable. In other words, tattling stands for the
broadcasting of any kept secret affair.

### Censure of tattling:

The holy Quran censures the malevolent quality of tattling. God says:

*And yield not to any mean swearer, defamer, going about in slander.*

*Woe to every slander, defamer.*

The Prophet (s) said, “The most beloved of you to Allah are the best of
moralities and the modest. They are those who like others’ company and
others like them. The most hateful of you to Allah are those going in
slander, driving wedges between the associates, and searching for the
innocents’ flaws.”**[1]** “For those who refer to a Muslim’s flaw for
tattling, they will be in the hell-fire in the Hereafter.”**[2]**

Imam al-Baqir (a) said, “The Paradise is interdicted from the backbiters
and those going about in slander.”**[3]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “Those who convey a deed of a Muslim for the
purpose of debasing and dishonoring, God will dismiss them from His
guardianship to the Satan’s. The Satan will reject them, too.”**[4]**

### Incentives of tattling:

- The will of stirring up discord, evil, and malice against the
slandered causes tattling.

- The will of approximating and favoring those about whom a word was
said, for obtaining their confidence, is another incentive of tattling.

- The will of rupturing relations and creating sedition between the
slanderer and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Mustedrakus-Wasail*: Kitabul-Hajj: 111.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Jamiussaadat*: 2/271.  
 **[3]** Refer to *Usulul-kafi*.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Jamiussaadat*: 2/271.

the slandered is another incentive of tattling.

### Protection against tattling:

- A deliberate consideration of the sedition and the evil that is
created from tattling may save against adhering to it. Tattling is a
means of destroying and corruption that is possessed only by the
faithless.

- Looking upon the chastisement that God will subject upon the tattlers,
whose deeds reach to no profit at all, may remove this ill quality.

- Tattlers should regard that their deeds debase them, and make people
distrust and belie them.

MOCKERY AND SARCASM
-------------------

Islam has called to the mutual respect and esteem. According to the
Islamic education, it is illicit to mock or debase others whether by
words, deeds, or indication in order not to arouse animosity and
discrepancy. God says:

*O, you who believe! Let not one people laugh at another people
perchance they may be better than they, nor let women laugh at other
women, perchance they may better than they. And do not find fault with
your own people nor call one another by nickname. Evil is a bad name
after faith. And whoever does not turn, these it is that are the
unjust.*

Mockery, carping, and defamation bring on heart malice, rupture the
bonds of mutual association, amiability and disobedience, and occasion
God’s scorn. Mockers are surely wronging themselves and approaching
God’s chastisement and castigation.

SCHADENFREUDE
-------------

Schadenfreude stands for the enjoyment obtained from others’ troubles.
It suggests ignobility and meanness. Experiments have shown that those
who are enjoyed for others’ misfortunes would eventually be inflicted by
similar misfortunes. Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “He whoever expresses glee
for others’ misfortunes will not leave this world before being inflicted
by a misfortune.”**[1]** Schadenfreude originates spites and animosity
among people.

GARRULITY
---------

Islam has called to avoid garrulity and ill wording and the like matters
since they waste time uselessly. More than one Quranic text refers to
this ill manner. God says as He mentions some qualifications of the
favorable servants:

*And when they hear idle talk they turn aside from it and say: We shall
have our deeds and you shall have your deeds. Peace be upon you, we do
not desire the ignorant.*

*And when they pass by what is vain, they pass by nobly.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Jamiussaadat*: 2/283.

Garrulity comprises all of the sorts of idle talk that arouses lusts and
corrupts moralities.

Islam has worked for disciplining and purifying the mentalities against
defects and misfortunes, for saving people against the moral and mental
blotches that lead to irregularity and deviation from the straight path.

The Islamic education solves the problems of the speculative elements
that arouse dangerous sorts of psychic struggle. It also influences
positively the general behavior, and elevates to high levels of the
human culture and the sound cognizance that help in achieving the
productive activities of developing the social life. In fact, the
Islamic education is not devoted to disciplining and reforming the
mentalities only.  It aims at achieving social amendment and
comprehensive guidance in all of the life aspects. Naturally, this
nonesuch education will not achieve reformative and disciplinary
predominance on the national maturity and composition unless it affects
the mentalities, and finds a place in all of the fields of man’s
behavior.
